Keeping the Breath in Mind
&
Lessons in Sam›dhi
by

Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo
(Phra Suddhidhammaraºsı
Gambhıramedh›cariya)

Translated from the Thai
by

≥h›nissaro Bhikkhu
(Geoffrey DeGraff)
FOR FREE DISTRIBUTION

ii

Contents
Translator’s Foreword

Keeping the Breath in Mind
Introduction
Preliminaries
Method 1
Method 2
Jh›na

Lessons in Sam›dhi
Groundwork — July 30, 1956
The Art of Letting Go — August 17, 1956
At the Tip of Your Nose — August 26, 1957
The Care & Feeding of the Mind — May 7, 1959
‘Just Right’ Concentration — October 4, 1960
Appendix
Glossary
Chant for the Dedication of Merit

iii

Translator’s Foreword
This is a ‘how to’ book. It teaches the liberation of the mind, not as a mindboggling theory, but as a very basic skill that starts with keeping the breath in
mind.
The teachings here are drawn from the works of Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo
(1906-61), one of Thailand’s most renowned teachers of Buddhist meditation
practices. Ajaan Lee was a forest monk—one who prefers to live in the seclusion
of the forest and makes meditation the central theme of his practice—so his
teachings grow out of personal, practical experience, although he also makes a
point of relating them to standard Buddhist doctrine.
The book is in two parts: The first is a basic guide to the techniques of breath
meditation—Ajaan Lee’s specialty—and gives two methods that he developed at
separate points in his career. The second part consists of excerpts from five of his
talks dealing with the issues that tend to arise in the course of meditation.
If you want to begin your practice of meditation immediately and fill in the
details later, turn to Method 2. Read over the seven basic steps until you have
them firmly in mind, and then start meditating. Take care, especially at the
beginning, not to clutter your mind with extraneous ideas or information.
Otherwise, you might spend too much time looking for things in your
meditation, and not see what is actually there. The rest of the book can wait until
later, when you want help with a particular problem or—what is often the same
thing—when you want an over-all perspective on what you are doing.
The purpose of this book is to suggest possibilities: to direct your attention to
areas you may have overlooked, to suggest approaches that otherwise might not
have occurred to you. What you actually see is purely an individual matter.
Don’t try to force things. Don’t be worried if you have experiences that aren’t
covered in the book. Don’t be disappointed if you don’t have experiences that
are.
Signs and visions, for example: Some people experience them, others don’t.
They are an individual matter, and not really essential to the meditation. If you
experience them, learn how to use them wisely. If you don’t, learn how to use
what you do experience. The important point is to keep the basics in mind and to
stay observant.
Meditation, like carpentry, sailing or any other skill, has its own vocabulary
that to the beginner is bound to seem like a code. One of the challenges in using
this book will be in breaking its code. Part of the difficulty is that some of the
terms are literally foreign: They’re in Pali, the language of the oldest extant
Buddhist texts, colored by shades of meaning they’ve picked up from Thai. This
problem, though, is relatively minor. Most of these terms are explained in the
text, and the glossary at the back of the book gives definitions for any that aren’t,
plus additional information on many that are.

iv
A greater challenge lies in getting a feel for the author’s point of view. In
meditation, we are dealing with the body and mind as experienced from the
inside. Ajaan Lee practiced meditation most of his adult life. He had long
experience in viewing the body and mind from that perspective, and so it is only
natural that his choice of terms should reflect it.
For example, when he refers to the breath or breath sensations, he is speaking
not only of the air going in and out of the lungs, but also of the way breathing
feels, from the inside, throughout the entire body. Similarly, the ‘elements’
(dh›tu) of the body are not the chemical elements. Instead, they are elementary
feelings—energy, warmth, liquidity, solidity, emptiness, and consciousness—the
way the body presents itself directly to inner awareness. The only way to get past
the strangeness of this sort of terminology is to start exploring your own body
and mind from the inside, and to gain a sense of which terms apply to which of
your own personal experiences. Only then will these terms fulfill their intended
purpose—as tools for refining your inner sensitivities—for the truth of
meditation lies, not in understanding the words, but in mastering the skill that
leads to a direct understanding of awareness itself.
You might compare this book to a recipe. If you simply read the recipe, you
can’t—even if you understand all the terms—get any flavor or nourishment from
it. If you follow the first few steps and then give up when it starts getting
difficult, you’ve wasted your time. But if you follow it all the way, you can then
set it aside and simply enjoy the results of your own cooking.
My hope is that this book will be helpful in your personal exploration into the
benefits that come from keeping the breath in mind.
≥h›nissaro Bhikkhu
(Geoffrey DeGraff)
METTA FOREST MONASTERY
PO BOX 1409
VALLEY CENTER, CA 92082

v

Introduction
This book is a guide to the practice of centering the mind. There are two
sections: The first deals almost exclusively with the mind. But because the wellbeing of the mind depends to some extent on the body, I have included a second
section [Method 2] that shows how to use the body to benefit the mind.
From what I’ve observed in my own practice, there is only one path that is
short, easy, effective and pleasant, and at the same time has hardly anything to
lead you astray: the path of keeping the breath in mind, the same path the Lord
Buddha himself used with such good results. I hope that you won’t make things
difficult for yourself by being hesitant or uncertain, by taking this or that
teaching from here or there; and that, instead, you’ll earnestly set your mind on
getting in touch with your own breath and following it as far as it can take you.
From there, you’ll enter the stage of liberating insight, leading to the mind itself.
Ultimately, pure knowing—buddha—will stand out on its own. That’s when
you’ll reach an attainment trustworthy and sure. In other words, if you let the
breath follow its own nature, and the mind its own nature, the results of your
practice will without a doubt be all that you hope for.
Ordinarily, the nature of the heart, if it isn’t trained and put into order, is to
fall in with preoccupations that are stressful and bad. This is why we have to
search for a principle—a Dhamma—with which to train ourselves if we hope for
happiness that’s stable and secure. If our hearts have no inner principle, no
center in which to dwell, we’re like a person without a home. Homeless people
have nothing but hardship. The sun, wind, rain, and dirt are bound to leave them
constantly soiled because they have nothing to act as shelter. To practice
centering the mind is to build a home for yourself: Momentary concentration
(kha˚ika sam›dhi) is like a house roofed with thatch; threshold concentration
(upac›ra sam›dhi), a house roofed with tile; and fixed penetration (appan›
sam›dhi), a house built out of brick. Once you have a home, you’ll have a safe
place to keep your valuables. You won’t have to put up with the hardships of
watching over them, the way a person who has no place to keep his valuables
has to go sleeping in the open, exposed to the sun and rain, to guard those
valuables—and even then his valuables aren’t really safe.
So it is with the uncentered mind: It goes searching for good from other areas,
letting its thoughts wander around in all kinds of concepts and preoccupations.
Even if those thoughts are good, we still can’t say that we’re safe. We’re like a
woman with plenty of jewelry: If she dresses up in her jewels and goes
wandering around, she’s not safe at all. Her wealth might even lead to her own
death. In the same way, if our hearts aren’t trained through meditation to gain
inner stillness, even the virtues we’ve been able to develop will deteriorate
easily, because they aren’t yet securely stashed away in the heart. To train the
mind to attain stillness and peace, though, is like keeping your valuables in a
strongbox.

vi
This is why most of us don’t get any good from the good that we do: We let
the mind fall under the sway of its various preoccupations. These preoccupations
are your enemies, because there are times when they can cause the virtues
you’ve already developed to wither away. The mind is like a blooming flower: If
wind and insects disturb the flower, it may never have a chance to give fruit. The
flower here stands for the stillness of the mind on the path; and the fruit, for the
happiness of the path’s fruition. If our stillness of mind and happiness are
constant, we have a chance to attain the ultimate good we all hope for.
The ultimate good is like the heartwood of a tree. Other ‘goods’ are like the
buds, branches, and leaves. If we haven’t trained our hearts and minds, we’ll
meet with things that are good only on the external level. But if our hearts are
pure and good within, everything external will follow in becoming good as a
result. Just as our hand, if it’s clean, won’t soil what it touches, but if it’s dirty,
will spoil even the cleanest cloth; in the same way, if the heart is defiled,
everything is defiled. Even the good we do will be defiled, because the highest
power in the world—the sole power giving rise to all good and evil, pleasure and
pain—is the heart. The heart is like a god. Good, evil, pleasure, and pain come
entirely from the heart. We could even call the heart a creator of the world,
because the peace and continued well-being of the world depend on the heart. If
the world is to be destroyed, it will be because of the heart. So we should train
this most important part of the world to be centered as a foundation for its
wealth and well-being.
Centering the mind is a way of gathering together all its skillful potentials.
When these potentials are gathered in the right proportions, they’ll give you the
strength you need to destroy your enemies: all your defilements and unskillful
mental states. You have discernment that you’ve trained and made wise in the
ways of good and evil, of the world and the Dhamma. Your discernment is like
gunpowder. But if you keep your gunpowder for long without putting it into
bullets—a centered mind—it’ll go damp and moldy. Or if you’re careless and let
the fires of greed, anger, or delusion overcome you, your gunpowder may flame
up in your hands. So don’t delay: Put your gunpowder into bullets so that
whenever your enemies—your defilements—make an attack, you’ll be able to
shoot them right down.
Whoever trains the mind to be centered gains a refuge. A centered mind is
like a fortress. Discernment is like a weapon. To practice centering the mind is to
secure yourself in a fortress, and so is something very worthwhile and important.
Virtue, the first part of the Path; and discernment, the last, aren’t especially
difficult. But keeping the mind centered, which is the middle part, takes some
effort because it’s a matter of forcing the mind into shape. Admittedly, centering
the mind, like placing bridge pilings in the middle of a river, is something
difficult to do. But once the mind is firmly in place, it can be very useful in
developing virtue and discernment. Virtue is like placing pilings on the near
shore of the river; discernment, like placing them on the far shore. But if the
middle pilings—a centered mind—aren’t firmly in place, how will you ever be
able to bridge the flood of suffering?

vii
There is only one way we can properly reach the qualities of the Buddha,
Dhamma, and Sangha, and that’s through the practice of mental development
(bh›van›). When we develop the mind to be centered and still, discernment can
arise. Discernment here refers not to ordinary discernment, but to the insight that
comes solely from dealing directly with the mind. For example, the ability to
remember past lives, to know where living beings are reborn after death, and to
cleanse the heart of the fermentations (›sava) of defilement: These three forms of
intuition—termed ñ›˚a-cakkhu, the eye of the mind—can arise for people who
train themselves in the area of the heart and mind. But if we go around searching
for knowledge from sights, sounds, smells, tastes and tactile sensations mixed
together with concepts, it’s as if we were studying with the Six Masters, just as
the Buddha, while he was studying with the Six Masters, wasn’t able to gain
Awakening. He then turned his attention to his own heart and mind, and went
off to practice on his own, keeping track of his breath as his first step, and going
all the way to the ultimate goal. As long as you’re still searching for knowledge
from your six senses, you’re studying with the Six Masters. But when you focus
your attention on the breath—which exists in each of us—to the point where the
mind settles down and is centered, you’ll have the chance to meet with the real
thing: buddha, pure knowing.
Some people believe that they don’t have to practice centering the mind, that
they can attain release through discernment (paññ›-vimutti) by working at
discernment alone. This simply isn’t true. Both release through discernment and
release through stillness of mind (ceto-vimutti) are based on centering the mind.
They differ only in degree. Like walking: Ordinarily, a person doesn’t walk on
one leg alone. Whichever leg is heavier is simply a matter of personal habits and
traits.
Release through discernment begins by pondering various events and aspects
of the world until the mind slowly comes to rest and, once it’s still, gives rise
intuitively to liberating insight (vipassan›-ñ›˚a) clear and true understanding in
terms of the four Noble Truths (ariya-sacca). In release through stillness of mind,
though, there’s not much pondering involved. The mind is simply forced to be
quiet until it attains the stage of fixed penetration. That’s where intuitive insight
will arise, enabling it to see things for what they are. This is release through
stillness of mind: Concentration comes first, discernment later.
A person with a wide-ranging knowledge of the texts—well-versed in their
letter and meaning, capable of clearly and correctly explaining various points of
doctrine, but with no inner center for the mind—is like a pilot flying about in an
airplane with a clear view of the clouds and stars but no sense of where the
landing strip is. He’s headed for trouble. If he flies higher, he’ll run out of air. All
he can do is keep flying around until he runs out of fuel and comes crashing
down in the savage wilds.
Some people, even though they are highly educated, are no better than
savages in their behavior. This is because they’ve gotten carried away, up in the
clouds. Some people—taken with what they feel to be the high level of their own
learning, ideas and opinions—won’t practice centering the mind because they

viii
feel it beneath them. They think they deserve to go straight to release through
discernment instead. Actually, they’re heading straight to disaster, like the
airplane pilot who has lost sight of the landing strip.
To practice centering the mind is to build a landing strip for yourself. Then,
when discernment comes, you’ll be able to attain release safely.
This is why we have to develop all three parts of the path—virtue,
concentration, and discernment—if we want to be complete in our practice of the
religion. Otherwise, how can we say that we know the four Noble Truths?—
because the path, to qualify as the Noble Path, has to be composed of virtue,
concentration and discernment. If we don’t develop it within ourselves, how can
we know it? If we don’t know, how can we let go?
Most of us, by and large, like getting results but don’t like laying the
groundwork. We may want nothing but goodness and purity, but if we haven’t
completed the groundwork, we’ll have to keep on being poor. Like people who
are fond of money but not of work: How can they be good, solid citizens? When
they feel the pinch of poverty, they’ll turn to corruption and crime. In the same
way, if we aim at results in the field of the religion but don’t like doing the work,
we’ll have to continue being poor. And as long as our hearts are poor, we’re
bound to go searching for goodness in other areas—greed, gain, status, pleasure
and praise, the baits of the world—even though we know better. This is because
we don’t truly know—which means simply that we aren’t true in what we do.
The truth of the path is always true: Virtue is something true, concentration is
true, discernment is true, release is true. But if we aren’t true, we won’t meet
with anything true. If we aren’t true in practicing virtue, concentration and
discernment, we’ll end up only with things that are fake and imitation. And
when we make use of things fake and imitation, we’re headed for trouble. So we
have to be true in our hearts. When our hearts are true, we’ll come to savor the
taste of the Dhamma, a taste surpassing all the tastes of the world.
This is why I have put together the following two guides for keeping the
breath in mind.
Peace.
Phra Ajaan Lee Dhammadharo
Wat Boromnivas
Bangkok, 1953

9

Preliminaries
Now I will explain how to go about the practice of centering the mind. Before
starting out, kneel down with your hands palm-to-palm in front of your heart,
and sincerely pay respect to the Triple Gem, saying as follows:
Arahaª samm›-sambuddho bhagav›:
Buddhaª bhagavantaª abhiv›demi. (bow down)
Sv›kkh›to bhagavat› dhammo:
Dhammaª namass›mi. (bow down)
Supa˛ipanno bhagavato s›vaka-saºgho:
Saºghaª nam›mi. (bow down)
Then, showing respect with your thoughts, words and deeds, pay homage to
the Buddha:
Namo tassa bhagavato arahato samm›-sambuddhasa. (three times)
And take refuge in the Triple Gem:
Buddhaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Dhammaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Saºghaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Dutiyampi buddhaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Dutiyampi dhammaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Dutiyampi saºghaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Tatiyampi buddhaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Tatiyampi dhammaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Tatiyampi saºghaª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Then make the following resolution: ‘I take refuge in the Buddha the Pure
One, completely free from defilement; and in his Dhamma doctrine, practice and
attainment; and in the Sangha the four levels of his Noble Disciples from now to
the end of my life.’
Buddhaª jıvitaª y›va nibb›naª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Dhammaª jıvitaª y›va nibb›naª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Saºghaª jıvitaª y›va nibb›naª sara˚aª gacch›mi.
Then formulate the intention to observe the five, eight, ten, or 227 precepts
according to how many you are normally able to observe expressing them in a
single vow:
Im›ni pañca sikkh›pad›ni sam›diy›mi. (three times)
(This is for the observing the five precepts, and means, ‘I undertake the five
training rules: to refrain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual misconduct,
from lying and from taking intoxicants.’)
Im›ni a˛˛ha sikkh›pad›ni sam›diy›mi. (three times)

10
(This is for those observing the eight precepts, and means, ’I undertake the
eight training rules: to refrain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual
intercourse, from lying, from taking intoxicants, from eating food after noon and
before dawn, from watching shows and from adorning the body for the purpose
of beautifying it, and from using high and luxurious beds and seats.’)
Im›ni dasa sikkh›pad›ni sam›diy›mi. (three times)
(This is for those observing the ten precepts, and means, ‘I undertake the ten
training rules: to refrain from taking life, from stealing, from sexual intercourse,
from lying, from taking intoxicants, from eating food after noon and before
dawn, from watching shows, from adorning the body for the purpose of
beautifying it, from using high and luxurious beds and seats, and from receiving
money.’)
Parisuddho ahaª bhante. Parisuddhoti maª buddho dhammo saºgho dh›retu.
(This is for those observing the 227 precepts.)
Now that you have professed the purity of your thoughts, words and deeds
toward the qualities of the Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha, bow down three
times. Sit down, place your hands palm-to-palm in front of your heart, steady
your thoughts, and develop the four sublime attitudes: goodwill, compassion,
empathetic joy, and equanimity. To spread these thoughts to all living beings
without exception is called the immeasurable sublime attitude. A short Pali
formula for those who have trouble memorizing is:
“Mett›” (benevolence and goodwill, hoping for your own welfare and that of
all other living beings.)
“Karu˚›” (compassion for yourself and others.)
“Mudit›” (appreciation and empathetic joy, taking delight in your own
goodness and that of others.)
“Upekkh›” (equanimity in the face of those things which should be let be.)

11

Method 1
Sit in a half-lotus position, right leg on top of the left leg, your hands placed
palm-up on your lap, right hand on top of the left. Keep your body straight, and
your mind on the task before you. Raise your hands in respect, palm-to-palm in
front of the heart, and think of the qualities of the Buddha, Dhamma, and
Sangha: Buddho me n›tho—The Buddha is my mainstay. Dhammo me n›tho —The
Dhamma is my mainstay. Saºgho me n›tho —The Sangha is my mainstay. Then
repeat in your mind, buddho, buddho; dhammo, dhammo; saºgho, saºgho. Return
your hands to your lap, and repeat one word, buddho, three times in your mind.
Then think of the in-and-out breath, counting the breaths in pairs. First think
bud- with the in-breath, dho with the out, ten times. Then begin again, thinking
buddho with the in-breath, buddho with the out, seven times. Then begin again: As
the breath goes in and out once, think buddho once, five times. Then begin again:
As the breath goes in and out once, think buddho three times. Do this for three inand-out breaths.
Now you can stop counting the breaths, and simply think bud- with the inbreath and dho with the out. Let the breath be relaxed and natural. Keep your
mind perfectly still, focused on the breath as it comes in and out of the nostrils.
When the breath goes out, don’t send the mind out after it. When the breath
comes in, don’t let the mind follow it in. Let your awareness be broad and open.
Don’t force the mind too much. Relax. Pretend that you’re breathing out in the
wide-open air. Keep the mind still, like a post at the edge of the sea. When the
water rises, the post doesn’t rise with it; when the water ebbs, the post doesn’t
sink.
When you’ve reached this level of stillness, you can stop thinking buddho.
Simply be aware of the feeling of the breath.
Then slowly bring your attention inward, focusing it on the various aspects of
the breath—the important aspects that can give rise to intuitive powers of
various kinds: clairvoyance, clairaudience, the ability to know the minds of
others, the ability to remember previous lives, the ability to know where
different people and animals are reborn after death, and knowledge of the
various elements or potentials that are connected with, and can be of use to, the
body. These elements come from the bases of the breath. The First Base: Center
the mind on the tip of the nose, and then slowly move it to the middle of the
forehead, The Second Base. Keep your awareness broad. Let the mind rest for a
moment at the forehead, and then bring it back to the nose. Keep moving it back
and forth between the nose and the forehead—like a person climbing up and
down a mountain—seven times. Then let it settle at the forehead. Don’t let it go
back to the nose.
From here, let it move to The Third Base, the middle of the top of the head,
and let it settle there for a moment. Keep your awareness broad. Inhale the
breath at that spot, let it spread throughout the head for a moment, and then

12
return the mind to the middle of the forehead. Move the mind back and forth
between the forehead and the top of the head seven times, finally letting it rest
on the top of the head.
Then bring it into The Fourth Base, the middle of the brain. Let it be still for a
moment, and then bring it back out to the top of the head. Keep moving it back
and forth between these two spots, finally letting it settle in the middle of the
brain. Keep your awareness broad. Let the refined breath in the brain spread to
the lower parts of the body.
When you reach this point you may find that the breath starts giving rise to
various signs (nimitta), such as seeing or feeling hot, cold or tingling sensations in
the head. You may see a pale, murky vapor, or your own skull. Even so, don’t let
yourself be affected by whatever appears. If you don’t want the nimitta to
appear, breathe deep and long, down into the heart, and it will immediately go
away.
When you see that a nimitta has appeared, mindfully focus your awareness
on it—but be sure to focus on only one at a time, choosing whichever one is most
comfortable. Once you’ve got hold of it, expand it so that it’s as large as your
head. The bright white nimitta is useful to the body and mind: It’s a pure breath
that can cleanse the blood in the body, reducing or eliminating feelings of pain.
When you have this white light as large as the head, bring it down to The
Fifth Base, the center of the chest. Once it’s firmly settled, let it spread out to fill
the chest. Make this breath as white and as bright as possible, and then let both
the breath and the light spread throughout the body, out to every pore, until
different parts of the body appear on their own as pictures. If you don’t want the
pictures, take two or three long breaths, and they’ll disappear. Keep your
awareness still and expansive. Don’t let it latch onto or be affected by any nimitta
that may happen to pass into the brightness of the breath. Keep careful watch
over the mind. Keep it one. Keep it intent on a single preoccupation, the refined
breath, letting this refined breath suffuse the entire body.
When you’ve reached this point, knowledge will gradually begin to unfold.
The body will be light, like fluff. The mind will be rested and refreshed—supple,
solitary and self-contained. There will be an extreme sense of physical pleasure
and mental ease.
If you want to acquire knowledge and skill, practice these steps until you’re
adept at entering, leaving and staying in place. When you’ve mastered them,
you’ll be able to give rise to the nimitta of the breath—the brilliantly white ball or
lump of light—whenever you want. When you want knowledge, simply make
the mind still and let go of all preoccupations, leaving just the brightness. Think
one or two times of whatever you want to know—of things inside or outside,
concerning yourself or others—and the knowledge will arise, or a mental picture
will appear. To become thoroughly expert you should, if possible, study directly
with someone who has practiced and is skilled in these matters, because
knowledge of this sort can come only from the practice of centering the mind.

13
The knowledge that comes from centering the mind falls into two classes:
mundane (lokiya) and transcendent (lokuttara). With mundane knowledge, you’re
attached to your knowledge and views on the one hand, and to the things that
appear and give rise to your knowledge on the other. Your knowledge and the
things that give you knowledge through the power of your skill are composed of
true and false mixed together—but the ‘true’ here is true simply on the level of
mental fabrication, and anything fabricated is by nature changeable, unstable
and inconstant.
So when you want to go on to the transcendent level, gather all the things you
know and see into a single point—ekaggat›ramma˚a, the singleness of mental
absorption—and see that they are all of the same nature. Take all your
knowledge and awareness and gather it into the same point, until you can clearly
see the truth: that all of these things, by their nature, simply arise and fall away.
Don’t try to latch onto the things you know—your preoccupations—as yours.
Don’t try to latch onto the knowledge that has come from within you as your
own. Let these things be, in line with their own inherent nature. If you latch onto
your preoccupations, you’re latching onto stress and pain. If you hold onto your
knowledge, it will turn into the cause of stress.
So: A mind centered and still gives rise to knowledge. This knowledge is the
path. All of the things that come passing by for you to know are stress. Don’t let
the mind fasten onto its knowledge. Don’t let it fasten onto the preoccupations
that appear for you to know. Let them be, in line with their nature. Put your
mind at ease. Don’t fasten onto the mind or suppose it to be this or that. As long
as you suppose yourself, you’re suffering from ignorance (avijj›). When you can
truly know this, the transcendent will arise within you—the noblest good, the
most exalted happiness a human being can know.
To summarize, the basic steps to practice are as follows:
1. Eliminate all bad preoccupations from the mind.
2. Make the mind dwell on good preoccupations.
3. Gather all good preoccupations into one—the singleness of meditative
absorption (jh›na).
4. Consider this one preoccupation until you see how it’s aniccaª, inconstant;
dukkhaª, stressful; and anatt›, not yourself or anyone else—empty and void.
5. Let all good and bad preoccupations follow their own nature—because
good and bad dwell together, and are equal by nature. Let the mind follow its
own nature. Let knowing follow its own nature. Knowing doesn’t arise and it
doesn’t fall away. This is santi-dhamma—the reality of peace. It knows goodness,
but the knowing isn’t goodness, and goodness isn’t the knowing. It knows evil,
but the knowing isn’t evil, and evil isn’t the knowing. In other words, knowing
isn’t attached to knowledge or to the things known. Its nature is truly
elemental—flawless and pure, like a drop of water on a lotus leaf. This is why it’s
called asaºkhata-dh›tu: the unfabricated property, a true element.

14
When you can follow these five steps, you’ll find marvels appearing in your
heart, the results of having practiced tranquility and insight meditation. These
results fall into the two classes already mentioned: mundane, providing for your
own physical well-being and that of others throughout the world; and
transcendent, providing for the well-being of your heart, bringing happiness that
is calm, cool, and blooming, leading all the way to Liberation (nibb›na)—free
from birth, aging, illness, and death.
This has been a brief explanation of the main principles of breath meditation.
If you have any questions or encounter any difficulties in putting these principles
into practice, and you wish to study directly with someone who teaches along
these lines, I will be happy to help you to the best of my ability so that we can all
attain the peace and well-being taught by the religion.
Most people will find that Method 2, which follows, is easier and more
relaxing than Method 1, outlined above.

Method 2
There are seven basic steps:
1. Start out with three or seven long in-and-out breaths, thinking bud- with the
in-breath, and dho with the out. Keep the meditation syllable as long as the
breath.
2. Be clearly aware of each in-and-out breath.
3. Observe the breath as it goes in and out, noticing whether it’s comfortable
or uncomfortable, broad or narrow, obstructed or free-flowing, fast or slow, short
or long, warm or cool. If the breath doesn’t feel comfortable, change it until it
does. For instance, if breathing in long and out long is uncomfortable, try
breathing in short and out short.
As soon as you find that your breathing feels comfortable, let this comfortable
breath sensation spread to the different parts of the body. To begin with, inhale
the breath sensation at the base of the skull and let it flow all the way down the
spine. Then, if you’re male, let it spread down your right leg to the sole of your
foot, to the ends of your toes, and out into the air. Inhale the breath sensation at
the base of the skull again and let it spread down your spine, down your left leg
to the ends of your toes and out into the air. (If you’re female, begin with the left
side first, because the male and female nervous systems are different.)
Then let the breath from the base of the skull spread down over both
shoulders, past your elbows and wrists, to the tips of your fingers and out into
the air.
Let the breath at the base of the throat spread down the central nerve at the
front of the body, past the lungs and liver, all the way down to the bladder and
colon.
Inhale the breath right at the middle of the chest and let it go all the way down
to your intestines.
Let all these breath sensations spread so that they connect and flow together,
and you’ll feel a greatly improved sense of well-being.
4. Learn four ways of adjusting the breath:
a. in long and out long,
b. in short and out short,
c. in short and out long,
d. in short and out short.
Breathe whichever way is most comfortable for you. Or, better yet, learn to
breathe comfortably all four ways, because your physical condition and your
breath are always changing.

16
5. Become acquainted with the bases or focal points for the mind—the resting
spots of the breath—and center your awareness on whichever one seems most
comfortable. A few of these bases are:
a. the tip of the nose,
b. the middle of the head,
c. the palate,
d. the base of the throat,
e. the breastbone (the tip of the sternum),
f. the navel (or a point just above it).
If you suffer from frequent headaches or nervous problems, don’t focus on
any spot above the base of the throat. And don’t try to force the breath or put
yourself into a trance. Breathe freely and naturally. Let the mind be at ease with
the breath—but not to the point where it slips away.
6. Spread your awareness—your sense of conscious feeling—throughout the
entire body.
7. Unite the breath sensations throughout the body, letting them flow together
comfortably, keeping your awareness as broad as possible. Once you are fully
aware of the aspects of the breath you already know in your body, you’ll come to
know all sorts of other aspects as well. The breath, by its nature, has many facets:
breath sensations flowing in the nerves, those flowing around and about the
nerves, those spreading from the nerves to every pore. Beneficial breath
sensations and harmful ones are mixed together by their very nature.
To summarize: (a) for the sake of improving the energy already existing in
every part of your body, so that you can contend with such things as disease and
pain; and (b) for the sake of clarifying the knowledge already within you, so that
it can become a basis for the skills leading to release and purity of heart—you
should always bear these seven steps in mind, because they are absolutely basic
to every aspect of breath meditation. When you’ve mastered them, you will have
cut a main road. As for the side roads—the incidentals of breath meditation—
there are plenty of them, but they aren’t really important. You’ll be perfectly safe
if you stick to these seven steps and practice them as much as possible.
Once you’ve learned to put your breath in order, it’s as if you have everyone
in your home in order. The incidentals of breath meditation are like people
outside your home—in other words, guests. Once the people in your home are
well behaved, your guests will have to fall in line.
The ‘guests’ here are the signs (nimitta) and vagrant breaths that will tend to
pass within the range of the breath you are dealing with: the various signs that
arise from the breath and may appear as images—bright lights, people, animals,
yourself, others; or as sounds—the voices of people, some you recognize and
others you don’t. In some cases the signs appear as smells—either fragrant, or
else foul like a corpse. Sometimes the in-breath can make you feel so full
throughout the body that you have no sense of hunger or thirst. Sometimes the

17
breath can send warm, hot, cold, or tingling sensations through the body.
Sometimes it can cause things that never occurred to you before to spring
suddenly to mind.
All of these things are classed as guests. Before you go receiving guests, you
should put your breath and mind into good order, making them stable and
secure. In receiving these guests, you first have to bring them under your control.
If you can’t control them, don’t have anything to do with them. They might lead
you astray. But if you can put them through their paces, they can be of use to you
later on.
To put them through their paces means to change them at will, through the
power of thought (pa˛ibh›ga nimitta)—making them small, large, sending them
far away, bringing them up close, making them appear and disappear, sending
them outside, bringing them in. Only then will you be able to use them in
training the mind.
Once you’ve mastered these signs, they’ll give rise to heightened sensory
powers: the ability to see without opening your eyes; the ability to hear fardistant sounds or smell far-distant aromas; the ability to taste the various
elements that exist in the air and can be of use to the body in overcoming feelings
of hunger and desire; the ability to give rise to certain feelings at will—to feel
cool when you want to feel cool, hot when you want to feel hot, warm when you
want to feel warm, strong when you need strength—because the various
elements in the world that can be physically useful to you will come and appear
in your body.
The mind, too, will be heightened, and will have the power to develop the eye
of intuition (ñ›˚a-cakkhu): the ability to remember previous lives, the ability to
know where living beings are reborn after they die, and the ability to cleanse the
heart of the fermentations of defilement. If you have your wits about you, you
can receive these guests and put them to work in your home.
These are a few of the incidentals of breath meditation. If you come across
them in your practice, examine them thoroughly. Don’t be pleased by what
appears. Don’t get upset or try to deny what appears. Keep your mind on an
even keel. Stay neutral. Be circumspect. Consider carefully whatever appears, to
see whether it’s trustworthy or not. Otherwise, it might lead you to mistaken
assumptions. Good and evil, right and wrong, high and low: All depend on
whether your heart is shrewd or dull, and on how resourceful you are. If you’re
dull-witted, even high things can become low, and good things evil.
Once you know the various aspects of the breath and its incidentals, you can
gain knowledge of the four Noble Truths. In addition, you can relieve physical
pains as they arise in your body. Mindfulness is the active ingredient in the
medicine; the in-and-out breath is the solvent. Mindfulness can cleanse and
purify the breath. A pure breath can cleanse the blood throughout the body, and
when the blood is cleansed, it can relieve many of the body’s diseases and pains.
If you suffer from nervous disorders, for example, they’ll completely disappear.

18
What’s more, you’ll be able to strengthen the body so that you feel a greater
sense of health and well-being.
When the body feels well, the mind can settle down and rest. And once the
mind is rested, you gain strength: the ability to relieve all feelings of pain while
sitting in meditation, so that you can go on sitting for hours. When the body is
free from pain, the mind is free from Hindrances (nıvara˚a). Body and mind are
both strong. This is called sam›dhi-balaª—the strength of concentration.
When your concentration is strong like this, it can give rise to discernment:
the ability to see stress, its cause, its disbanding, and the path to its disbanding,
all clearly within the breath. This can be explained as follows: The in-and-out
breath is stress—the in-breath, the stress of arising; the out-breath, the stress of
passing away. Not being aware of the breath as it goes in and out, not knowing
the characteristics of the breath, is the cause of stress. Knowing when the breath
is coming in, knowing when it’s going out, knowing its characteristics clearly—
i.e., keeping your views in line with the truth of the breath—is Right View, part
of the Noble Path.
Knowing which ways of breathing are uncomfortable, knowing how to vary
the breath; knowing, ‘That way of breathing is uncomfortable; I’ll have to breathe
like this in order to feel at ease’: This is Right Resolve.
The mental factors that think about and correctly evaluate all aspects of the
breath are Right Speech.
Knowing various ways of improving the breath; breathing, for example, in
long and out long, in short and out short, in short and out long, in long and out
short, until you come across the breath most comfortable for you: This is Right
Action.
Knowing how to use the breath to purify the blood, how to let this purified
blood nourish the heart muscles, how to adjust the breath so that it eases the
body and soothes the mind, how to breathe so that you feel full and refreshed in
body and mind: This is Right Livelihood.
Trying to adjust the breath until it soothes the body and mind, and to keep
trying as long as you aren’t fully at ease, is Right Effort.
Being mindful of the in-and-out breath at all times, knowing the various
aspects of the breath—the up-flowing breath, the down-flowing breath, the
breath in the stomach, the breath in the intestines, the breath flowing along the
muscles and out to every pore—keeping track of these things with every in-andout breath: This is Right Mindfulness.
A mind intent only on issues related to the breath, not pulling any other
objects in to interfere, until the breath is refined, giving rise to fixed absorption
and then liberating insight: This is Right Concentration.
To think of the breath is termed vitakka, directed thought. To adjust the breath
and let it spread is called vic›ra, evaluation. When all aspects of the breath flow
freely throughout the body, you feel full and refreshed in body and mind: This is
pıti, rapture. When body and mind are both at rest, you feel serene and at ease:
This is sukha, pleasure. And once you feel pleasure, the mind is bound to hold

19
fast to a single preoccupation, and not go straying after any others: This is
ekaggat›ramma˚a, singleness of preoccupation. These five factors form the
beginning stage of Right Concentration.
When all these parts of the Noble Path—virtue, concentration, and
discernment—are brought together fully mature in the heart, you gain insight
into all aspects of the breath, knowing that ‘Breathing this way gives rise to
skillful mental states. Breathing that way gives rise to unskillful mental states.’
You aren’t caught up with the factors—the breath in all its aspects—that fabricate
the body, the factors that fabricate speech, the factors that fabricate the mind,
whether for good or for ill. You let them be, in line with their inherent nature:
This is the disbanding of stress.
Another, even briefer way to express the four Noble Truths is this: The inand-out breath is the truth of stress. Not being aware of the in-breath, not being
aware of the out-breath: This is the cause of stress—obscured, deluded
awareness. Seeing into all aspects of the breath so clearly that you can let them
go with no sense of attachment is the disbanding of stress. Being constantly
mindful and alert with regard to all aspects of the breath is the path to the
disbanding of stress.
When you can do this, you can say that you’re correctly following the path of
breath meditation. Your awareness is unobscured. You have the skill to know all
four Truths clearly. You can attain release. Release is a mind that doesn’t cling to
low causes and low effects—i.e., stress and its cause; or to high causes and high
effects—the disbanding of stress and the path to its disbanding. It’s a mind
unattached to the things that cause it to know, unattached to knowledge,
unattached to knowing. When you can separate these things, you’ve mastered
the skill of release—in other words, when you know what forms the beginning,
what forms the end, and what lies in between, letting them be as they are on
their own, in line with the phrase,
sabbe dhamm› anatt›
All phenomena are not-self.
To be attached to the things that cause us to know—the elements, aggregates,
the senses and their objects—is termed clinging to sensuality (k›mÒp›d›na). To be
attached to knowledge is termed clinging to views (di˛˛hÒp›d›na). To be
unacquainted with pure knowing in and of itself (buddha) is termed clinging to
habits and practices (sılabbatÒp›d›na). And when we cling in this way, we’re
bound to be deluded by the factors that fabricate the body, speech, and the mind,
all of which arise from ignorance.
The Buddha was a complete master of both cause and effect, without being
attached either to low causes and low effects, or to high causes and high effects.
He was above cause and beyond effect. Stress and ease were both at his disposal,
but he was attached to neither of them. He fully knew both good and evil, was
fully equipped with both self and not-self, but wasn’t attached to any of these
things. He had at his disposal the objects that can act as the basis for the cause of
stress, but wasn’t attached to them. The Path—discernment—was also at his

20
disposal: He knew how to appear either ignorant or shrewd, and how to use both
ignorance and shrewdness in his work of spreading the religion. And as for the
disbanding of stress, he had it at his disposal, but didn’t cling to it, wasn’t
attached to it, which is why we can truly say that his mastery was complete.
Before the Buddha was able to let go of these things in this way, he first had
to work at giving rise to them in full measure. Only then could he put them
aside. He let go from abundance, unlike ordinary people who ‘let go’ out of
poverty. Even though he let these things go, they were still at his disposal. He
never dismissed the virtue, concentration, and discernment he had worked at
perfecting up to the day of his Awakening. He continued using every aspect of
virtue, concentration, and discernment to the day he entered total Liberation
(parinibb›na). Even the moment he was about to ‘nibb›na,’ he was practicing his
full command of concentration—in other words, his total Liberation occurred
when he was between the form and formless levels of jh›na.
So we shouldn’t dismiss virtue, concentration, and discernment. Some people
won’t observe the precepts because they’re afraid of getting tied to them. Some
people won’t practice concentration because they’re afraid of becoming ignorant
or going insane. The truth of the matter is that normally we’re already ignorant,
already insane, and that to practice centering the mind is what will end our
ignorance and cure our insanity. Once we’ve trained ourselves properly, we’ll
give rise to pure discernment, like a cut jewel that gives off light by its very
nature. This is what qualifies as true discernment. It arises for us individually,
and is termed paccattaª: We can give rise to it, and know it, only for ourselves.
Most of us, though, tend to misunderstand the nature of discernment. We
take imitation discernment, adulterated with concepts, and use it to smother the
real thing, like a man who coats a piece of glass with mercury so that he can see
his reflection and that of others, thinking he’s found an ingenious way of looking
at the truth. Actually, he’s nothing more than a monkey looking in a mirror: One
monkey becomes two and will keep playing with its reflection until the mercury
wears off, at which point it becomes crestfallen, not knowing what the reflection
came from in the first place. So it is when we gain imitation discernment,
unwittingly, by thinking and conjecturing in line with the things we think we’ve
perceived: We’re headed for sorrow when death meets us face-to-face.
The crucial factor in natural discernment comes solely from training the mind
to be like a diamond that gives off its own light—surrounded by radiance
whether in dark places or bright. A mirror is useful only in places already welllit. If you take it into the dark, you can’t use it to see your reflection at all. But a
cut jewel that gives off its own light is brilliant everywhere. This is what the
Buddha meant when he taught that there are no closed or secret places in the
world where discernment can’t penetrate. This jewel of discernment is what will
enable us to destroy craving, clinging, and ignorance, and to attain the highest
excellence: Liberation—free from pain, death, annihilation, and extinction—
existing naturally through the reality of deathlessness (amata-dhamma).
By and large, we tend to be interested only in discernment and release: At the
drop of a hat, we want to start right in with the teachings on stress, inconstancy,

21
and not-self—and when this is the case, we’ll never get anywhere. Before the
Buddha taught that things are inconstant, he had worked at knowing them until
they revealed their constancy. Before teaching that things are stressful, he had
turned that stress into pleasure and ease. And before teaching that things are notself, he had turned what is not-self into a self, and so was able to see what is
constant and true, lying hidden in what is inconstant, stressful, and not-self. He
then gathered all of these qualities into one. He gathered all that is inconstant,
stressful, and not-self into one and the same thing: fabrications (saºkh›ra) viewed
in terms of the world—a single class, equal everywhere throughout the world.
As for what’s constant, pleasant, and self, this was another class: fabrications
viewed in terms of the Dhamma. And then he let go of both classes, without
getting caught up on ‘constant’ or ‘inconstant,’ ‘stress’ or ‘ease,’ ‘self’ or ‘not-self.’
This is why we can say he attained release, purity, and Liberation, for he had no
need to latch onto fabrications—whether of the world or of the Dhamma—in any
way at all.
This was the nature of the Lord Buddha’s practice. But as for our own
practice, most of us act as if we have everything figured out beforehand, and
have succeeded even before we start. In other words, we want simply to let go
and attain peace and release. But if we haven’t laid the full groundwork, our
letting-go is bound to be lacking: Our peace is bound to be piecemeal, our release
is bound to be wrong. Those of us who sincerely mean well and want only the
highest good should ask ourselves: Have we laid the proper foundation? If we
don’t lay the proper foundation for release and letting go, how will we ever be
free?
The Buddha taught that virtue can overcome common defilements, the gross
faults in our words and deeds; that concentration can overcome such
intermediate defilements as sensual desire, ill will, torpor, restlessness, and
uncertainty; and that discernment can overcome such subtle defilements as
craving, attachment, and ignorance. Yet some people whose discernment is
sharp, who can clearly explain subtle points of doctrine, can’t seem to shake off
the more common defilements that even virtue can overcome. This shows that
something must be lacking in their virtue, concentration, and discernment. Their
virtues are probably all on the surface, their concentration splotchy and stained,
their discernment a smeared-on gloss—like the glass coated with mercury—
which is why they can’t attain the goal. Their actions fall under the old saying:
Keeping a sword outside the scabbard— having a way with words and theories, but
no center for the mind; laying an egg outside the nest—looking for goodness only
outside, without training the mind to be centered; resting a foundation on the
sand—trying to find security in things of no substance. All of this is bound to
bring disappointment. Such people have yet to find a worthwhile refuge.
So we should lay the groundwork and put the causes into good working
order, because all the attainments we hope for come springing from causes.
Attan› codayatt›naª
pa˛imaºse tamattan›

22
Rouse yourself. Train your own heart.
Start judging your own in-and-out breath.

Jh›na
Now we will summarize the methods of breath meditation under the
headings of jh›na.
Jh›na means to be absorbed or focused in a single object or preoccupation, as
when we deal with the breath.
1. The first jh›na has five factors: (a) Directed thought (vitakka): Think of the
breath until you can recognize it clearly without getting distracted. (b) Singleness
of preoccupation (ekaggat›ramma˚a): Keep the mind with the breath. Don’t let it
stray after other objects. Watch over your thoughts so that they deal only with
the breath to the point where the breath becomes comfortable. (The mind
becomes one, at rest with the breath.) (c) Evaluation (vic›ra): Gain a sense of how
to let this comfortable breath sensation spread and coordinate with the other
breath sensations in the body. Let these breath sensations spread until they all
merge. Once the body has been soothed by the breath, feelings of pain will grow
calm. The body will be filled with good breath energy. (The mind is focused
exclusively on issues connected with the breath.)
These three qualities must be brought together to bear on the same stream of
breathing for the first jh›na to arise. This stream of breathing can then take you
all the way to the fourth jh›na.
Directed thought, singleness of preoccupation, and evaluation act as the
causes. When the causes are fully ripe, results will appear—(d) rapture (pıti): a
compelling sense of fullness and refreshment for body and mind, going straight
to the heart, independent of all else. (e) Pleasure (sukha): physical ease arising
from the body’s being still and unperturbed (k›ya-passaddhi); mental contentment
arising from the mind’s being at ease on its own: unperturbed, serene, and
exultant (citta-passaddhi).
Rapture and pleasure are the results. The factors of the first jh›na thus come
down simply to two sorts: causes and results.
As rapture and pleasure grow stronger, the breath grows subtler. The longer
you stay focused and absorbed, the more powerful the results become. This
enables you to set directed thought and evaluation (the preliminary groundclearing) aside, and—relying completely on a single factor, singleness of
preoccupation—you enter the second jh›na (magga-citta, phala-citta).
2. The second jh›na has three factors: rapture, pleasure and singleness of
preoccupation (magga-citta). This refers to the state of mind that has tasted the
results coming from the first jh›na. Once you have entered the second level,
rapture and pleasure become stronger because they rely on a single cause,
singleness of preoccupation, which looks after the work from here on in: focusing
on the breath so that it becomes more and more refined, keeping steady and still

23
with a sense of refreshment and ease for both body and mind. The mind is even
more stable and intent than before. As you continue focusing, rapture and
pleasure become stronger and begin to expand and contract. Continue focusing
on the breath, moving the mind deeper to a more subtle level to escape the
motions of rapture and pleasure, and you enter the third jh›na.
3. The third jh›na has two factors: pleasure and singleness of preoccupation.
The body is quiet: motionless and solitary. No feelings of pain arise to disturb it.
The mind is solitary and still. The breath is refined, free-flowing, and broad. A
radiance—white like cotton wool—pervades the entire body, stilling all feelings
of physical and mental discomfort. Keep focused on looking after nothing but the
broad, refined breath. The mind is free: No thoughts of past or future disturb it.
The mind stands out on its own. The four properties—earth, water, fire, and
wind—are in harmony throughout the body. You could almost say that they’re
pure throughout the entire body, because the breath has the strength to control
and take good care of the other properties, keeping them harmonious and
coordinated. Mindfulness is coupled with singleness of preoccupation, which
acts as the cause. The breath fills the body. Mindfulness fills the body.
Focus on in. The mind is bright and powerful, the body is light. Feelings of
pleasure are still. Your sense of the body feels steady and even, with no slips or
gaps in your awareness, so you can let go of your sense of pleasure. The
manifestations of pleasure grow still, because the four properties are balanced
and free from motion. Singleness of preoccupation, the cause, has the strength to
focus more heavily down, taking you to the fourth jh›na.
4. The fourth jh›na has two factors: equanimity (upekkh›) and singleness of
preoccupation, or mindfulness. Equanimity and singleness of preoccupation in
the fourth jh›na are powerfully focused—solid, stable, and sure. The breath
element is absolutely quiet, free from ripples and gaps. The mind, neutral and
still, lets go of all preoccupations with past and future. The breath, which forms
the present, is still, like the ocean or air when they are free from currents or
waves. You can know distant sights and sounds because the breath is even and
unwavering, and so acts like a movie screen, giving a clear reflection of whatever
is projected onto it. Knowledge arises in the mind: You know but stay neutral
and still. The mind is neutral and still; the breath, neutral and still; past, present
and future are all neutral and still. This is true singleness of preoccupation,
focused on the unperturbed stillness of the breath. All parts of the breath in the
body connect so that you can breathe through every pore. You don’t have to
breathe through the nostrils because the in-and-out breath and the other aspects
of the breath in the body form a single, unified whole. All aspects of the breath
energy are even and full. The four properties all have the same characteristics.
The mind is completely still.
The focus is strong; the light, aglow.
This is to know the great frame of reference.
The mind is beaming and bright—
like the light of the sun,

24
which unobstructed by clouds or haze,
illumines the earth with its rays.
The mind sheds light in all directions. The breath is radiant, the mind fully
radiant, due to the focusing of mindfulness.
The focus is strong; the light, aglow… The mind has power and authority. All
four of the frames of reference are gathered into one. There is no sense that,
‘That’s the body… That’s a feeling… That’s the mind… That’s a mental quality.’
There’s no sense that they’re four. This is thus called the great frame of reference,
because none of the four are in any way separate.
The mind is firmly intent,
centered and true,
due to the strength of its focus.
Mindfulness and alertness converge into one: This is what is meant by the one
path (ek›yana-magga)—the concord among the properties and frames of reference,
four in one, giving rise to great energy and wakefulness, the purifying inner fire
(tapas) that can thoroughly dispel all obscuring darkness.
As you focus more strongly on the radiance of the mind, the power that
comes from letting go of all preoccupations enables the mind to stand alone.
You’re like a person who has climbed to the top of a mountain and has the right
to see in all directions. The mind’s dwelling—the breath, which supports the
mind’s freedom—is in a heightened state, so the mind is able to see clearly the
locations of all Dhamma fabrications—i.e., elements, aggregates (khandha), and
sense media (›yatana). Just as a person who has taken a camera up in an airplane
can take pictures of practically everything below, so a person who has reached
this stage (lokavidÒ) can see the world and the Dhamma as they truly are.
In addition, awareness of another sort, in the area of the mind—called
liberating insight, or the skill of release—also appears. The elements or
properties of the body acquire potency (k›ya-siddhi); the mind, resilient power.
When you want knowledge of the world or the Dhamma, focus the mind heavily
and forcefully on the breath. As the concentrated power of the mind strikes the
pure element, intuitive knowledge will spring up in that element, just as the
needle of a record player, as it strikes a record, will give rise to sounds. Once
your mindfulness is focused on a pure object, then if you want images, images
will appear; if sounds, sounds will arise, whether near or far, matters of the
world or the Dhamma, concerning yourself or others, past, present, or future—
whatever you want to know. As you focus down, think of what you want to
know and it will appear. This is ñ›˚a—intuitive sensitivity capable of knowing
past, present, and future—an important level of awareness that you can know
only for yourself. The elements are like radio waves going through the air. If
your mind and mindfulness are strong, and your skills highly developed, you
can use those elements to put yourself in touch with the entire world, so that
knowledge can arise within you.
When you have mastered the fourth jh›na, it can act as the basis for eight
skills:

25
1. Vipassan›-ñ›˚a: clear intuitive insight into mental and physical phenomena
as they arise, remain, and disband. This is a special sort of insight, coming solely
from training the mind. It can occur in two ways: (a) knowing without ever
having thought of the matter; and (b) knowing from having thought of the
matter—but not after a great deal of thought, as in the case of ordinary
knowledge. Think for an instant and it immediately becomes clear—just as a
piece of cotton wool soaked in gasoline, when you hold a match to it, bursts
immediately into flame. The intuition and insight here are that fast, and so differ
from ordinary discernment.
2. Manomayiddhi: the ability to use the mind to influence events.
3. Iddhividhı: the ability to display supra-normal powers, e.g. creating images
in certain instances that certain groups of people will be able to see.
4. Dibbasota: the ability to hear distant sounds.
5. Cetopariya-ñ›˚a: the ability to know the level—good or evil, high or low—of
other people’s minds.
6. Pubbeniv›s›nussati-ñ›˚a: the ability to remember previous lifetimes. (If you
attain this skill, you’ll no longer have to wonder as to whether death is followed
by annihilation or rebirth.)
7. Dibbacakkhu: the ability to see gross and subtle images, both near and far.
8. fisavakkhaya-ñ›˚a: the ability to reduce and eliminate the fermentations of
defilement in the heart.
These eight skills come exclusively from the centering the mind, which is why
I have written this condensed guide to concentration and jh›na, based on the
technique of keeping the breath in mind. If you aspire to the good that can come
from these things, you should turn your attention to training your own heart and
mind.

Lessons in Sam›dhi

GROUNDWORK
July 30, 1956
If, when you’re sitting, you aren’t yet able to observe the breath, tell yourself,
‘Now I’m going to breathe in. Now I’m going to breathe out.’ In other words, at
this stage you’re the one doing the breathing. You’re not letting the breath come
in and out as it naturally would. If you can keep this in mind each time you
breathe, you’ll soon be able to catch hold of the breath.
*

*

*

In keeping your awareness inside your body, don’t try to imprison it there. In
other words, don’t try to force the mind into a trance, don’t try to force the breath
or hold it to the point to where you feel uncomfortable or confined. You have to
let the mind have its freedom. Simply keep watch over it to make sure that it
stays separate from its thoughts. If you try to force the breath and pin the mind
down, your body is going to feel restricted and you won’t feel at ease in your
work. You’ll start hurting here and aching there, and your legs may fall asleep.
So just let the mind be its natural self, keeping watch to make sure that it doesn’t
slip out after external thoughts.
When we keep the mind from slipping out after its concepts, and concepts
from slipping into the mind, it’s like closing our windows and doors to keep
dogs, cats, and thieves from slipping into our house. What this means is that we
close off our sense doors and don’t pay any attention to the sights that come in
by way of our eyes, the sounds that come in by way of our ears, the smells that
come in by way of our nose, the tastes that come in by way of our tongue, the
tactile sensations that come in by way of the body, and the preoccupations that
come in by way of the mind. We have to cut off all the perceptions and
concepts—good or bad, old or new—that come in by way of these doors.
Cutting off concepts like this doesn’t mean that we stop thinking. It simply
means that we bring our thinking inside to put it to good use by observing and
evaluating the theme of our meditation. If we put our mind to work in this way,
we won’t be doing any harm to ourself or to our mind. Actually, our mind tends
to be working all the time, but the work it gets involved in is usually a lot of fuss
and bother without any real substance. So we have to find work of real value for
it to do—something that won’t harm it, something really worth doing. This is
why we’re doing breath meditation, focusing on our breathing, focusing on our
mind. Put aside all your other work and be intent on doing just this and nothing
else. This is the sort of attitude you need when you meditate.

27
The Hindrances that come from our concepts of past and future are like
weeds growing in our field. They steal all the nutrients from the soil so that our
crops won’t have anything to feed on and they make the place look like a mess.
They’re of no use at all except as food for the cows and other animals that come
wandering through. If you let your field get filled with weeds this way, your
crops won’t be able to grow. In the same way, if you don’t clear your mind of its
preoccupation with concepts, you won’t be able to make your heart pure.
Concepts are food only for the ignorant people who think they’re delicious, but
sages don’t eat them at all.
The five Hindrances—sensual desire, ill will, torpor & lethargy, restlessness &
anxiety, and uncertainty—are like different kinds of weeds. Restlessness &
anxiety is probably the most poisonous of them, because it makes us distracted,
unsettled, and anxious all at the same time. It’s the kind of weed with thorns and
sharp-edged leaves. If you run into it, you’re going to end up with a stinging
rash all over your body. So if you come across it, destroy it. Don’t let it grow in
your field at all.
Breath meditation—keeping the breath steadily in mind—is the best method
the Buddha taught for wiping out these Hindrances. We use directed thought to
focus on the breath, and evaluation to adjust it. Directed thought is like a plow;
evaluation, like a harrow. If we keep plowing and harrowing our field, weeds
won’t have a chance to grow, and our crops are sure to prosper and bear fruit.
The field here is our body. If we put a lot of thought and evaluation into our
breathing, the four properties of the body will be balanced and at peace. The
body will be healthy and strong, the mind relaxed and wide open, free from
Hindrances.
When you’ve got your field cleared and leveled like this, your crops are sure
to prosper. As soon as you bring the mind to the breath, you’ll feel a sense of
rapture and refreshment. The four bases of success (iddhip›da)—the desire to
practice, persistence in the practice, intentness and circumspection in your
practice—will develop step by step. These four qualities are like the ingredients
in a health tonic. Whoever takes this tonic will have a long life. If you want to
die, you don’t have to take it, but if you don’t want to die, you have to take a lot.
The more you take it, the faster the diseases in your mind will disappear.

28

THE ART OF LETTING GO
August 17, 1956
When you sit and meditate, even if you don’t gain any intuitive insights, make
sure at least that you know this much: When the breath comes in, you know.
When it goes out, you know. When it’s long, you know. When it’s short, you
know. Whether it’s pleasant or unpleasant, you know. If you can know this
much, you’re doing fine. As for the various thoughts and concepts (saññ›) that
come into the mind, brush them away—whether they’re good or bad, whether
they deal with the past or the future. Don’t let them interfere with what you’re
doing—and don’t go chasing after them to straighten them out. When a thought
of this sort comes passing in, simply let it go passing on. Keep your awareness,
unperturbed, in the present.
When we say that the mind goes here or there, it’s not really the mind that
goes. Only concepts go. Concepts are like shadows of the mind. If the body is
still, how will its shadow move? The movement of the body is what causes the
shadow to move, and when the shadow moves, how will you catch hold of it?
Shadows are hard to catch, hard to shake off, hard to set still. The awareness that
forms the present: That’s the true mind. The awareness that goes chasing after
concepts is just a shadow. Real awareness—’knowing’—stays in place. It doesn’t
stand, walk, come, or go. As for the mind—the awareness that doesn’t act in any
way coming or going, forward or back—it’s quiet and unperturbed. And when
the mind is thus its normal, even, undistracted self—i.e., when it doesn’t have
any shadows—we can rest peacefully. But if the mind is unstable and uncertain,
it wavers: Concepts arise and go flashing out—and we go chasing after them,
hoping to drag them back in. The chasing after them is where we go wrong. This
is what we have to correct. Tell yourself: Nothing is wrong with your mind. Just
watch out for the shadows. You can’t improve your shadow. Say your shadow is
black. You can scrub it with soap till your dying day, and it’ll still be black—
because there’s no substance to it. So it is with your concepts. You can’t
straighten them out, because they’re just images, deceiving you.
The Buddha thus taught that whoever isn’t acquainted with the self, the body,
the mind, and its shadows, is suffering from avijj›—darkness, deluded knowledge.
Whoever thinks the mind is the self, the self is the mind, the mind is its concepts—
whoever has things all mixed up like this—is lost like a person lost in the jungle.
To be lost in the jungle brings countless hardships. There are wild beasts to worry
about, problems in finding food to eat and a place to sleep. No matter which way
you look, there’s no way out. But if we’re lost in the world, it’s many times worse
than being lost in the jungle, because we can’t tell night from day. We have no
chance to find any brightness because our minds are dark with avijj›.
The purpose of training the mind to be still is to simplify things. When things
are simplified, we can see. The mind can settle down and rest. And when the

29
mind has rested, it’ll gradually become bright, in and of itself, and give rise to
knowledge. But if we let things get complicated—if we let the mind get mixed up
with sights, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile sensations, and ideas—that’s darkness.
Knowledge won’t have a chance to arise.
When intuitive knowledge does arise, it can—if you know how to use it—
lead to liberating insight. But if you let yourself get carried away by knowledge
of the past or future, you won’t get beyond the mundane level. In other words, if
you dabble too much in knowledge of physical things, without gaining wisdom
with regard to the workings of the mind, it can leave you spiritually immature.
Say, for example, that a vision arises and you get hooked: You gain
knowledge of your past lives and get all excited. Things you never knew before,
now you can know. Things you never saw before, now you see—and they can
make you overly pleased or upset. Why? Because you take them all too seriously.
You may see a vision of yourself prospering as a lord or master, a great emperor
or king, wealthy and influential. If you let yourself feel pleased, that’s indulgence
in pleasure. You’ve strayed from the Middle Path. Or you may see yourself as
something you wouldn’t care to be: a pig or a dog, a bird or a rat, crippled or
deformed. If you let yourself get upset, that’s indulgence in self-affliction—and
again, you’ve strayed from the path. Some people really let themselves get
carried away: As soon as they start seeing things, they begin to think that they’re
special, somehow better than other people. They let themselves become proud
and conceited—and the true path has disappeared without their even knowing
it. If you’re not careful, this is where mundane knowledge can lead you.
But if you keep one principle firmly in mind, you can stay on the right path:
Whatever appears, good or bad, true or false, don’t let yourself feel pleased,
don’t let yourself get upset. Keep the mind balanced and neutral, and
discernment will arise. You’ll see that the vision or sign displays the truth of
stress: it arises (is born), fades (ages), and disappears (dies).
If you get hooked on your intuitions, you’re asking for trouble. Knowledge that
proves false can hurt you. Knowledge that proves true can really hurt you. If what
you know is true and you go telling other people, you’re bragging. If it turns out to
be false, it can backfire on you. This is why those who truly know say that
knowledge is the essence of stress: It can hurt you. Knowledge is part of the flood
of views and opinions (di˛˛hi-ogha) over which we have to cross. If you hang onto
knowledge, you’ve gone wrong. If you know, simply know and let it go at that.
You don’t have to be excited or pleased. You don’t have to go telling other people.
People who’ve studied abroad, when they come back to the rice fields, don’t
tell what they’ve learned to the folks at home. They talk about ordinary things in
an ordinary way. They don’t talk about the things they’ve studied because (1) no
one would understand them; (2) it wouldn’t serve any purpose. Even with
people who would understand them, they don’t display their learning. So it
should be when you practice meditation. No matter how much you know, you
have to act as if you know nothing—because this is the way people with good
manners normally act. If you go bragging to other people, it’s bad enough. If
they don’t believe you, it can get even worse.

30
So whatever you know, simply be aware of it and let it go. Don’t let there be
the assumption that ‘I know.’ When you can do this, your mind can attain the
transcendent, free from attachment.
*

*

*

Everything in the world has its truth. Even things that aren’t true are true—
i.e., their truth is that they’re false. This is why we have to let go of both what’s
true and what’s false. Once we know the truth and can let it go, we can be at our
ease. We won’t be poor, because the truth—the Dhamma—will still be there with
us. We won’t be left empty-handed. It’s like having a lot of money: Instead of
lugging it around with us, we keep it piled up at home. We may not have
anything in our pockets, but we’re still not poor.
The same is true with people who really know. Even when they let go of their
knowledge, it’s still there. This is why the minds of the Noble Ones aren’t left
adrift. They let things go, but not in a wasteful or irresponsible way. They let go
like rich people: Even though they let go, they’ve still got piles of wealth.
As for people who let things go like paupers, they don’t know what’s
worthwhile and what’s not, and so they let it all go, throw it all away. And when
they do this, they’re simply heading for disaster. For instance, they may see that
there’s no truth to anything—no truth to the khandhas, no truth to the body, no
truth to stress, its cause, its disbanding, or the path to its disbanding, no truth to
Liberation. They don’t use their brains at all. They’re too lazy to do anything, so
they let go of everything, throw it all away. This is called letting go like a pauper.
Like a lot of modern-day sages: When they come back after they die, they’re
going to be poor all over again.
As for the Buddha, he let go only of the true and false things that appeared in
his body and mind—but he didn’t abandon his body and mind, which is why he
ended up rich, with plenty of wealth to hand down to his descendants. This is
why his descendants never have to worry about being poor.
So we should look to the Buddha as our model. If we see that the khandhas
are worthless—inconstant, stressful, not-self, and all that—and simply let go of
them by neglecting them, we’re sure to end up poor. Like a stupid person who
feels so repulsed by a festering sore on his body that he won’t touch it and so lets
it go without taking care of it: There’s no way the sore is going to heal. As for
intelligent people, they know how to wash their sores, put medicine and
bandages on them, so that eventually they’re sure to recover.
In the same way, when people see only the drawbacks to the khandhas,
without seeing their good side, and so let them go without putting them to any
worthwhile or skillful use, nothing good will come of it. But if we’re intelligent
enough to see that the khandhas have their good side as well as their bad, and
then put them to good use by meditating to gain discernment into physical and
mental phenomena, we’re going to be rich. Once we have the truth—the
Dhamma—as our wealth, we won’t suffer if we have money, and won’t suffer if
we don’t, because our minds will be transcendent.

31

AT THE TIP OF YOUR NOSE
August 26, 1957
If feelings of pain or discomfort arise while you’re sitting in meditation,
examine them to see what they come from. Don’t let yourself be pained or upset
by them. If there are parts of the body that won’t go as you’d like them to, don’t
worry about them. Let them be—because your body is the same as every other
body, human or animal, throughout the world: It’s inconstant, stressful, and
can’t be forced. So stay with whatever part does go as you’d like it to, and keep it
comfortable.
*

*

*

The body is like a tree: No tree is entirely perfect. At any one time it’ll have
new leaves and old leaves, green leaves and yellow, fresh leaves and dry. The
dry leaves will fall away first, while those that are fresh will slowly dry out and
fall away later. Some of the branches are long, some thick, and some small. The
fruits aren’t evenly distributed. The human body isn’t really much different from
this. Pleasure and pain aren’t evenly distributed. The parts that ache and those
that are comfortable are randomly mixed. You can’t rely on it. So do your best to
keep the comfortable parts comfortable. Don’t worry about the parts that you
can’t make comfortable.
It’s like going into a house where the floorboards are beginning to rot: If you
want to sit down, don’t choose a rotten spot. Choose a spot where the boards are
still sound. In other words, the heart needn’t concern itself with things that can’t be
controlled.
You can compare the body to a mango: If a mango has a rotten or a wormy
spot, take a knife and cut it out. Eat just the good part remaining. If you’re foolish
enough to eat the wormy part, you’re in for trouble. Your body is the same, and
not just the body—the mind, too, doesn’t always go as you’d like it to.
Sometimes it’s in a good mood, sometimes it’s not. This is where you have to use
as much thought and evaluation as possible.
Directed thought and evaluation are like doing a job. The job here is
concentration: centering the mind. Focus the mind on a single object and then,
giving it your full attention, examine and reflect on it. If you use a meager
amount of thought and evaluation, your concentration will give meager results.
If you do a crude job, you’ll get crude results. If you do a fine job, you’ll get fine
results. Crude results aren’t worth much. Fine results are of high quality and are
useful in all sorts of ways—like atomic radiation, which is so fine that it can
penetrate even mountains. Crude things are of low quality and hard to use.
Sometimes you can soak them in water all day long and they still don’t soften up.

32
But as for fine things, all they need is a little dampness in the air and they
dissolve.
So it is with the quality of your concentration. If your thinking and evaluation
are subtle, thorough, and circumspect, your ‘concentration work’ will result in
more and more stillness of mind. If your thinking and evaluation are slipshod,
you won’t get much stillness. Your body will ache, and you’ll feel restless and
irritable. Once the mind can become very still, though, the body will be
comfortable and at ease. Your heart will feel open and clear. Pains will disappear.
The elements of the body will feel normal: The warmth in your body will be just
right, neither too hot nor too cold. As soon as your work is finished, it’ll result in
the highest form of happiness and ease: nibb›na—Liberation. But as long as you
still have work to do, your heart won’t get its full measure of peace. Wherever
you go, there will always be something nagging at the back of your mind. Once
your work is done, though, you can be carefree wherever you go.
If you haven’t finished your job, it’s because (1) you haven’t set your mind on
it; and (2) you haven’t actually done the work. You’ve shirked your duties and
played truant. But if you really set your mind on doing the job, there’s no doubt
but that you’ll finish it.
*

*

*

Once you’ve realized that the body is inconstant, stressful, and can’t be
forced, you shouldn’t let your mind get upset or excited by it. Keep your mind
normal, on an even keel. ‘Inconstant’ means that it changes. ‘Stressful’ doesn’t
refer solely to aches and pains. It refers to pleasure as well—because pleasure is
inconstant and undependable. A little pleasure can turn into a lot of pleasure, or
into pain. Pain can turn back into pleasure, and so on. (If we had nothing but
pain we would die.) So we shouldn’t be all that concerned about pleasure and
pain. Think of the body as having two parts, like the mango. If you focus your
attention on the comfortable part, your mind can be at peace. Let the pains be in
the other part. Once you have an object of meditation, you have a comfortable
place for your mind to stay. You don’t have to dwell on your pains. You have a
comfortable house to live in: Why go sleep in the dirt?
We all want nothing but goodness, but if you can’t tell what’s good from
what’s defiled, you can sit and meditate till your dying day and never find
nibb›na at all. But if you can set your mind and keep your mind on what you’re
doing, it’s not all that hard. Nibb›na is really a simple matter, because it’s always
there. It never changes. The affairs of the world are what’s hard, because they’re
always changing and uncertain. Today they’re one way, tomorrow another. Once
you’ve done something, you have to keep looking after it. But you don’t have to
look after nibb›na at all. Once you’ve realized it, you can let it go. Keep on
realizing, keep on letting go—like a person eating rice who, after he’s put the rice
in his mouth, keeps spitting it out.
What this means is that you keep on doing good but don’t claim it as your
own. Do good, and then spit it out. This is vir›ga-dhamma: dispassion. For most

33
people in the world, once they’ve done something, it’s theirs—and so they have
to keep looking after it. If they’re not careful, it’ll either get stolen or else wear
out on its own. They’re headed for disappointment. Like a person who swallows
his rice: After he’s eaten, he’ll have to defecate. After he’s defecated he’ll be
hungry again, so he’ll have to eat again and defecate again. The day will never
come when he’s had enough. But with nibb›na, you don’t have to swallow. You
can eat your rice and then spit it out. You can do good and let it go. It’s like
plowing a field: The dirt falls off the plow on its own. You don’t need to scoop it
up and put it in a bag tied to your water buffalo’s leg. Whoever is stupid enough
to scoop up the dirt as it falls off the plow and stick it in a bag will never get
anywhere. Either his buffalo will get bogged down or else he’ll trip over the bag
and fall flat on his face right there in the middle of the field. The field will never
get plowed, the rice will never get sown, the crop will never get gathered. He’ll
have to go hungry.
Buddho, our meditation word, is the name of the Buddha after his Awakening.
It means someone who has blossomed, who is awake, who has suddenly come to
his senses. For six long years before his Awakening, the Buddha traveled about,
searching for the truth from various teachers, all without success. So he went off
on his own and on a full-moon evening in May sat down under the Bodhi tree,
vowing that he wouldn’t get up until he had attained the truth. Finally, toward
dawn, as he was meditating on his breath, he gained Awakening. He found what
he was looking for—right at the tip of his nose.
Nibb›na doesn’t lie far away. It’s right at our lips, right at the tip of our nose,
but we keep groping around and never find it. If you’re really serious about
finding purity, set your mind on meditation and nothing else. As for whatever
else may come your way, you can say, ‘No thanks.’ Pleasure? ‘No thanks.’ Pain?
‘No thanks.’ Goodness? ‘No thanks.’ Evil? ‘No thanks.’ Attainment? ‘No thanks.’
Nibb›na? ‘No thanks.’ If it’s ‘no thanks’ to everything, what will you have left?
You won’t need to have anything left. That’s nibb›na. Like a person without any
money: How will thieves be able to rob him? If you get money and try to hold
onto it, you’re going to get killed. If this thief doesn’t get you, that one will. Carry
‘what’s yours’ around till you’re completely weighed down. You’ll never get
away.
In this world we have to live with both good and evil. People who have
developed dispassion are filled with goodness and know evil fully, but don’t
hold onto either, don’t claim either as their own. They put them aside and let
them go, and so can travel light and easy. Nibb›na isn’t all that difficult a matter.
In the Buddha’s time, some people became arahants while going on their
almsround, some while urinating, some while watching farmers plowing a field.
What’s difficult about the highest good lies in the beginning, in laying the
groundwork—being constantly mindful, examining and evaluating your breath
at all times. But if you can keep at it, you’re bound to succeed in the end.

34

THE CARE & FEEDING OF THE MIND
May 7, 1959
The breath is a mirror for the mind. If the mirror is abnormal, it gives
abnormal reflections. Say you look into a convex mirror: Your reflection will be
taller than you are. If you look in a concave mirror, your reflection will be
abnormally short. But if you look into a mirror that’s flat, smooth, and normal,
it’ll give you a true reflection of yourself.
*

*

*

Knowing how to adjust the breath, putting it in good order, is tantamount to
putting the mind in good order as well, and can give all kinds of benefits—like a
good cook who knows how to vary the foods she serves, sometimes changing the
color, sometimes the flavor, sometimes the shape, so that her employer will
never grow tired of her cooking. If she fixes the same thing all year around—
porridge today, porridge tomorrow, porridge the next day—her employer is
bound to go looking for a new cook. But if she knows how to vary her offerings
so that her employer is always satisfied, she’s sure to get a raise in her salary or
maybe a special bonus.
So it is with the breath. If you know how to adjust and vary the breath—if
you’re always thinking about and evaluating the breath—you’ll become
thoroughly mindful and expert in all matters dealing with the breath and the
other elements of the body. You’ll always know how things are going with the
body. Rapture, pleasure, and singleness will come on their own. The body will be
refreshed, the mind content. Both body and mind will be at peace. All the
elements will be at peace, free from unrest and disturbances.
It’s like knowing how to look after a small child. If the child starts crying, you
know when to give it milk or candy, when to give it a bath, when to take it out
for some air, when to put it in a playpen and give it a doll to play with. In no
time at all, the child will stop crying, stop whining, and leave you free to finish
whatever work you have to do. The mind is like a small, innocent child. If you’re
skilled at looking after it, it’ll be obedient, happy, and contented, and will grow
day by day.
*

*

*

When the body and mind are full and content, they won’t feel hungry. They
won’t have to go opening up the pots and pans on the stove or pace around
looking out the windows and doors. They can sleep in peace without any
disturbances. Ghosts and demons—the pains of the khandhas—won’t come and
possess them. This way we can be at our ease, because when we sit, we sit with
people. When we lie down, we lie down with people. When we eat, we eat with
people. When people live with people, there’s no problem; but when they live

35
with ghosts and demons, they’re sure to squabble and never find any peace. If
we don’t know how to evaluate and adjust our breathing, there’s no way our
meditation will give any results. Even if we sit till we die, we won’t gain any
knowledge or understanding at all.
There was once an old monk—70 years old, 30 years in the monkhood—who
had heard good things about how I teach meditation, and so came to study with
me. The first thing he asked was, ‘What method do you teach?’
‘Breath meditation,’ I told him. ‘You know—bud-dho, bud-dho.’
As soon as he heard that, he said, ‘I’ve been practicing that method ever since
the time of Ajaan Mun—buddho, buddho ever since I was young—and I’ve never
seen anything good come of it. All it does is buddho, buddho without ever getting
anywhere at all. And now you’re going to teach me to buddho some more. What
for? You want me to buddho till I die?’
This is what happens when people have no sense of how to adjust and
evaluate their breathing: They’ll never find what they’re looking for—which is
why adjusting and spreading the breath is a very important part of doing breath
meditation.
*

*

*

Getting to know yourself—becoming acquainted with your body, your mind,
the elements [earth, water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness], knowing what
they come from, how they arise, how they disband, how they’re inconstant,
stressful, and not-self: All of this you have to find out by exploring on your own.
If your knowledge simply follows what’s in books or what other people tell you,
then it’s knowledge that comes from labels and concepts, not from your own
discernment. It’s not really knowledge. If you know only what other people tell
you, you’re following them down a road—and what could be good about that?
They might lead you down the wrong road. And if the road is dusty, they might
kick dust into your ears and eyes. So in your search for the truth, don’t simply
believe what other people say. Don’t believe labels. Practice centering the mind
until you gain knowledge on your own. Only then will it be insight. Only then
will it be trustworthy.

36

‘JUST RIGHT’ CONCENTRATION
October 4, 1960
When you meditate, you have to think. If you don’t think, you can’t meditate,
because thinking forms a necessary part of meditation. Take jh›na, for instance.
Use your powers of directed thought to bring the mind to the object, and your
powers of evaluation to be discriminating in your choice of an object. Examine
the object of your meditation until you see that it’s just right for you. You can
choose slow breathing, fast breathing, short breathing, long breathing, narrow
breathing, broad breathing, hot, cool, or warm breathing; a breath that goes only
as far as the nose, a breath that goes only as far as the base of the throat, a breath
that goes all the way down to the heart. When you’ve found an object that suits
your taste, catch hold of it and make the mind one, focused on a single object.
Once you’ve done this, evaluate your object. Direct your thoughts to making it
stand out. Don’t let the mind leave the object. Don’t let the object leave the mind.
Tell yourself that it’s like eating: Put the food in line with your mouth, put your
mouth in line with the food. Don’t miss. If you miss, and go sticking the food in
your ear, under your chin, in your eye, or on your forehead, you’ll never get
anywhere in your eating.
So it is with your meditation. Sometimes the ‘one’ object of your mind takes a
sudden sharp turn into the past, back hundreds of years. Sometimes it takes off
into the future and comes back with all sorts of things to clutter your mind. This
is like taking your food, sticking it up over your head, and letting it fall down
behind you—the dogs are sure to get it; or like bringing the food to your mouth
and then tossing it out in front of you. When you find this happening, it’s a sign
that your mind hasn’t been made snug with its object. Your powers of directed
thought aren’t firm enough. You have to bring the mind to the object and then
keep after it to make sure it stays put. Like eating: Make sure the food is in line
with the mouth and stick it right in. This is directed thought: The food is in line
with the mouth, the mouth is in line with the food. You’re sure it’s food and you
know what kind it is—main course or dessert, coarse or refined.
Once you know what’s what and it’s in your mouth, chew it right up. This is
evaluation: examining, reviewing your meditation. Sometimes this comes under
threshold concentration—examining a coarse object to make it more and more
refined. If you find that the breath is long, examine long breathing. If it’s short,
examine short breathing. If it’s slow, examine slow breathing—to see if the mind
will stay with that kind of breathing, to see if that kind of breathing will stay
with the mind, to see whether the breath is smooth and unhindered. This is
evaluation.
When the mind gives rise to directed thought and evaluation, you have both
concentration and discernment. Directed thought and singleness of
preoccupation fall under the heading of concentration; evaluation, under the

37
heading of discernment. When you have both concentration and discernment,
the mind is still and knowledge can arise. But if there’s too much evaluation, it
can destroy your stillness of mind. If there’s too much stillness, it can snuff out
thought. You have to watch over the stillness of your mind to make sure you
have things in the right proportions. If you don’t have a sense of ‘just right,’
you’re in for trouble. If the mind is too still, your progress will be slow. If you
think too much, it’ll run away with your concentration.
So observe things carefully. Again, it’s like eating. If you go shoveling food
into your mouth, you might end up choking to death. You have to ask yourself:
Is it good for me? Can I handle it? Are my teeth strong enough? Some people
have nothing but empty gums and yet they want to eat sugar cane: It’s not
normal. Some people, even though their teeth are aching and falling out, still
want to eat crunchy foods. So it is with the mind: As soon as it’s just a little bit
still, we want to see this, know that—we want to take on more than we can
handle. You first have to make sure that your concentration is solidly based, that
your discernment and concentration are properly balanced. This point is very
important. Your powers of evaluation have to be ripe, your directed thought
firm.
Say you have a water buffalo and tie it to a stake. If your buffalo is strong, it
just might walk away with the stake. You have to know your buffalo’s strength.
If it’s really strong, pound the stake so that it’s firmly in the ground and keep
watch over it. In other words, if you find that your thinking is getting out of
hand, going beyond the bounds of mental stillness, bring the mind back and
make it extra still—but not so still that you lose track of things. If the mind is too
quiet, it’s like being in a daze. You don’t know what’s going on at all. Everything
is dark, blotted out. Or else you have good and bad spells, sinking out of sight
and then popping up again. This is concentration without directed thought or
evaluation, with no sense of judgment: Wrong Concentration.
So you have to be observant. Use your judgment—but don’t let the mind get
carried away by its thoughts. Your thinking is something separate. The mind
stays with the meditation object. Wherever your thoughts may go spinning, your
mind is still firmly based—like holding onto a post and spinning around and
around. You can keep on spinning and yet it doesn’t wear you out. But if you let
go of the post and spin around three times, you get dizzy and—Bang!—fall flat
on your face. So it is with the mind: If it stays with its one object, it can keep
thinking and not get tired, because your thinking and stillness are right there
together. The more you think, the more solid your mind gets. The more you sit
and meditate, the more you think. The mind becomes more and more firm until
all the Hindrances (nıvara˚a) fall away. The mind no longer goes looking for
concepts. Now it can give rise to knowledge.
The knowledge here isn’t ordinary knowledge. It washes away your old
knowledge. You don’t want the knowledge that comes from ordinary thinking
and reasoning: Let go of it. You don’t want the knowledge that comes from
directed thought and evaluation: Stop. Make the mind quiet. Still. When the
mind is still and unhindered, this is the essence of all that’s skillful and good.

38
When your mind is on this level, it isn’t attached to any concepts at all. All the
concepts you’ve known—dealing with the world or the Dhamma, however many
or few—are washed away. Only when they’re washed away can new knowledge
arise.
This is why you should let go of concepts—all the labels and names you have
for things. You have to let yourself be poor. It’s when people are poor that they
become resourceful. If you don’t let yourself be poor, you’ll never gain
discernment. In other words, you don’t have to be afraid of being stupid or of
missing out on things. You don’t have to be afraid that you’ve hit a dead end.
You don’t want any of the insights you’ve gained from listening to others or
from reading books, because they’re concepts, and therefore inconstant. You
don’t want any of the insights you’ve gained by reasoning and thinking, because
they’re concepts, and therefore not-self. Let all these insights disappear, leaving
just the mind, firmly intent, leaning neither to the left, towards being displeased;
nor to the right, towards being pleased. Keep the mind still, quiet, neutral,
impassive—set tall. And there you are: Right Concentration.
When Right Concentration arises in the mind, it has a shadow. When you can
catch sight of the shadow appearing, that’s vipassan›: insight meditation.
The knowledge you gain from Right Concentration doesn’t come in the form
of thoughts or ideas. It comes as Right Views. What looks wrong to you is really
wrong. What looks right is really right. If what looks right is really wrong, that’s
Wrong View. If what looks wrong is really right, again—Wrong View. With
Right View, though, right looks right and wrong looks wrong.
To put it in terms of cause and effect, you see the four Noble Truths. You see
stress, and it really is stressful. You see the cause of stress arising, and that it’s
really causing stress. These are Noble Truths: absolutely, undeniably,
indisputably true. You see that stress has a cause. Once the cause arises, there has
to be stress. As for the way to the disbanding of stress, you see that the path
you’re following will, without a doubt, lead to Liberation. Whether or not you go
all the way, what you see is correct. This is Right View. And as for the
disbanding of stress, you see that there really is such a thing. You see that as long
as you’re on the path, stress does in fact fall away. When you come to realize the
truth of these things in your heart, that’s vipassan›-ñ›˚a.
To put it even more simply: You see that all things, inside as well as out, are
undependable. The body is undependable, aging is undependable, death is
undependable. They’re slippery characters, constantly changing on you. To see
this is to see inconstancy. Don’t let yourself be pleased by inconstancy. Don’t let
yourself be upset. Keep the mind neutral, on an even keel. That’s what’s meant
by vipassan›.
As for stress: Say we hear that an enemy is suffering. ‘Glad to hear it,’ we
think. ‘Hope they hurry up and die.’ The heart has tilted. Say we hear that a
friend has become wealthy and we become happy; or a son or daughter is ill and
we become sad. Our mind has fallen in with suffering and stress. Why? Because
we’re unskilled. The mind isn’t centered—i.e., it’s not in Right Concentration. We

39
have to look after the mind. Don’t let it fall in with stress. Whatever suffers, let it
suffer, but don’t let the mind suffer with it. The body may be in pain, but the
mind isn’t pained. Let the body go ahead and suffer, but the mind doesn’t suffer.
Keep the mind neutral. Don’t be pleased by pleasure—pleasure is a form of
stress, you know. How so? It can change. It can rise and fall. It can be high and
low. It can’t last. That’s stress. Pain is also stress: double stress. When you gain
this sort of insight into stress—when you really see stress—vipassan› has arisen
in the mind.
As for anatt›, not-self: Once we’ve examined things and seen them for what
they really are, we don’t make claims, we don’t display influence, we don’t try to
show that we have the right or the power to bring things that are not-self under
our control. No matter how hard we try, we can’t prevent birth, aging, illness,
and death. If the body is going to be old, let it be old. If it’s going to hurt, let it
hurt. If it’s going to die, let it die. Don’t be pleased by death, either your own or
that of others. Don’t be upset by death, your own or that of others. Keep the
mind neutral. Unruffled. Unfazed. This is saºkh›rÒpekkha-ñ›˚a: letting
saºkh›ras—all things fashioned and fabricated—follow their own inherent
nature.
This, briefly, is vipassan›: You see that all fabrications are inconstant,
stressful, and not-self. You can disentangle them from your grasp. You can let go.
This is where it gets good. How so? You don’t have to wear yourself out, lugging
saºkh›ras around.
To be attached means to carry a load, and there are five heaps (khandhas) we
carry: attachment to form, to feelings, to concepts and labels, to mental
fabrications, and to consciousness. We grab hold and hang onto these things,
thinking that they’re the self. Go ahead: Carry them around. Hang one load from
your left leg and one from your right. Put one on your left shoulder and one on
your right. Put the last load on your head. And now: Carry them wherever you
go—clumsy, encumbered, and comical.
bh›r› have pañcakkhandh›
Go ahead and carry them. The five khandhas are a heavy load,
bh›rah›ro ca puggalo
and as individuals we burden ourselves with them.
bh›r›d›naª dukkhaª loke
Carry them everywhere you go,
and you waste your time suffering in the world.
The Buddha taught that whoever lacks discernment, whoever is unskilled,
whoever doesn’t practice concentration leading to liberating insight, will have to
be burdened with stress, will always be loaded down. It’s a pity. It’s a shame.
They’ll never get away. Their legs are burdened, their shoulders burdened—and
where are they going? Three steps forward and two steps back. Soon they’ll get
discouraged and then after a while they’ll pick themselves up and get going
again.

40
Now, when we see inconstancy—that all fabrications, whether within us or
without, are undependable; when we see that they’re stressful; when we see that
they’re not our self, that they simply whirl around in and of themselves: When
we gain these insights, we can put down our burdens, i.e., let go of our
attachments. We can put down the past—i.e., stop dwelling in it. We can let go of
the future—i.e., stop yearning for it. We can let go of the present—i.e., stop
claiming it as the self. Once we’ve let our burdens fall, we can walk with a light
step. We can even dance. We’re beautiful. Wherever we go, people will be glad
to know us. Why? Because we’re not encumbered. Whatever we do, we can do
with ease. We can walk, run, dance, and sing—all with a light heart. We’re
Buddhism’s beauty, a sight for sore eyes, graceful wherever we go. No longer
burdened, no longer encumbered, we can be at our ease. This is vipassan›-ñ›˚a.

41

Appendix
The earliest editions of Keeping the Breath in Mind contain a version of Step 3 in
Method 2 that Ajaan Lee later shortened and revised to its present form. Some
people, though, find the original version helpful, so here it is:
3. Observe the breath as it goes in and out, noticing whether it’s comfortable
or uncomfortable, broad or constricted, obstructed or free-flowing, fast or slow,
short or long, warm or cool. If the breath doesn’t feel comfortable, change it until
it does. For instance, if breathing in long and out long is uncomfortable, try
breathing in short and out short. As soon as you find that your breath feels
comfortable, let this comfortable breath sensation spread to the different parts of
your body. For example, when you breathe in and out once, think of an
important part of the body, as follows:
As you let the breath pass into the bronchial tubes, think of it going all the
way down the right side of your abdomen to the bladder.
As you take another in-and-out breath, think of the breath going from the
main arteries to the liver and heart on down through your left side to the
stomach and intestines.
As you take another in-and-out breath, think of the breath going from the base
of the throat all the way down the internal (front) side of the spine.
As you take another in-and-out breath, think of letting the breath go from the
base of the throat down the front of your chest through to the tip of the
breastbone, to the navel, and out into the air.
As you take another in-and-out breath, inhale the breath into the palate down
to the base of the throat, on through the middle of the chest to the large intestine,
the rectum, and out into the air.
Once you’ve completed these five turns inside the body, let the breath flow
along the outside of the body:
As you take an in-and-out breath, think of inhaling the breath at the base of
the skull and letting it go all the way down the external (back) side of the spine.
Now, if you’re male, think first of your right side, both with the legs and with
the arms. As you take an in-and-out breath, think of the right buttock and of
letting the breath run all the way down the right leg to the tips of your toes.
As you take another in-and-out breath, think of the left buttock and of letting
the breath run all the way down the left leg to the tips of your toes.
As you take another in-and-out breath, think of the base of the skull and of
letting the breath run down your right shoulder, along your right arm to the tips
of your fingers.
As you take another in-and-out breath, inhale the breath into the base of the
skull and let it run down your left shoulder, along your arm to the tips of your
fingers.

42
As you take another in-and-out breath, inhale the breath into the area inside
your skull, thinking of your ears—eyes—nose—mouth. (Men should think of the
right side first, with each part of the body: the right eye, right ear, right nostril,
right arm, right leg, etc.; women: the left eye, left ear, left nostril, left arm, left leg,
etc.)
Once you’ve finished, keep careful watch over your breath. Make the breath
refined, light, and free-flowing. Keep the mind steady and still in this breath. Be
thoroughly mindful and alert. Let the various breath sensations join and
permeate throughout the body. Let the mind be neutral, impassive, and wellcomposed.

43

Glossary
arahant: A Worthy One or Pure One, i.e., a person whose heart is freed from
the fermentations of defilement and is thus not destined for further rebirth. An
epithet for the Buddha and the highest level of his Noble Disciples.
ariya sacca: Noble Truth. The word Noble (ariya) here can also mean ideal or
standard, and in this phrase carries the meaning of objective or universal truth.
There are four: stress, its cause, its disbanding, and the path of practice leading to
its disbanding.
›sava: Fermentation; effluent—mental defilements (sensuality, states of
becoming, views, and ignorance) in their role as causes of the flood of rebirth.
avijj›: Ignorance, obscured awareness, counterfeit knowledge.
›yatana: Sense medium. The inner sense media are the eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, body, and intellect. The outer sense media are their corresponding
objects.
buddha (buddho): The mind’s quality of pure knowingness, as distinct from
the themes with which it is preoccupied and its knowledge about those
preoccupations.
dhamma: Event; phenomenon; the way things are in and of themselves; the
basic principles that underlie their behavior. Also, principles of behavior that
human beings ought to follow so as to fit in with the right natural order of
things; qualities of mind they should develop so as to realize the quality of
Liberation. By extension, Dhamma refers also to any doctrine that teaches such
matters. To view things—mental or physical—in terms of the Dhamma means to
view them simply as events or phenomena, as they are directly perceived in and
of themselves, seeing the regularity of the principles underlying their behavior.
To view them in terms of the world means to view them with regard to their
meaning, role, or emotional coloring—i.e., in terms of how they fit into our view
of life and the world.
dh›tu: Element; potential; property; the elementary properties that make up
the inner sense of the body and mind: earth (solidity), water (liquidity), fire
(heat), wind (energy or motion), space, and consciousness. The breath is
regarded as an aspect of the wind property, and all feelings of energy in the body
are classed as breath sensations. According to ancient Indian and Thai
physiology, diseases come from an aggravation or imbalance in any of the first
four of these properties. Well-being is defined as a state in which none of them is
dominant: All are quiet, unaroused, balanced, and still.
ekaggat›ramma˚a: Singleness of preoccupation or object.
jh›na: Meditative absorption in a single notion or sensation.
khandha: The component parts of sensory perception; physical and mental
phenomena as they are directly experienced: rÒpa (form, physical sensations,
sense data), vedan› (feelings of pleasure, pain, or neither pleasure nor pain), saññ›

44
(labels, names, concepts), saºkh›ra (mental fabrications, thought constructs),
viññ›˚a (consciousness).
lokavidÒ: An expert with regard to the cosmos—an epithet normally used for
the Buddha.
magga-citta: The state of mind that forms the path leading to the
transcendent qualities culminating in Liberation. Phala-citta denotes the mental
state that follows immediately on magga-citta and experiences its fruit.
nibb›na (nirv›˚a): Liberation; the unbinding of the mind from greed, anger
and delusion, from physical sensations and mental acts. As this term is used to
refer also to the extinguishing of fire, it carries connotations of stilling, cooling,
and peace. (According to the physics taught at the time of the Buddha, the
property of fire in a latent state exists to a greater or lesser extent in all objects.
When activated, it seizes and adheres to its fuel. When extinguished, it is
unbound.)
nimitta: Mental sign, theme, or image.
nıvara˚a: Hindrance. The mental qualities that hinder the mind from
becoming centered are five: sensual desire, ill will, torpor & lethargy, restlessness
& anxiety, and uncertainty.
p›li: The name of the most ancient recension of the Buddhist canon now
extant and—by extension—of the language in which it was composed.
sam›dhi: Concentration; the act of keeping the mind centered or intent on a
single preoccupation. The three levels of concentration—momentary, threshold,
and fixed penetration—can be understood in terms of the first three steps in the
section on jh›na: Momentary concentration goes no further than step (a);
threshold concentration combines steps (a) and (c); fixed penetration combines
steps (a), (b), and (c) and goes on to include all four levels of jh›na.
saºgha: The community of the Buddha’s followers. On the conventional
(sammati) level, this refers to the Buddhist monkhood. On the ideal (ariya) level, it
refers to those of the Buddha’s followers—whether lay or ordained—who have
practiced to the point of gaining at least the first of the transcendent qualities
culminating in Liberation.
saºkh›ra: Fabrication—the forces and factors that fabricate things, the
process of fabrication, and the fabricated things that result. As the fourth
khandha, this refers to the act of fabricating thoughts, urges, etc., within the
mind. As a blanket term for all five khandhas, it refers to all things fabricated,
compounded, or fashioned by nature. Saºkh›rÒpekkha-ñ›˚a refers to a stage of
liberating insight in which all saºkh›ras are viewed with a sense of equanimity.
vipassan› (-ñ›˚a): Liberating insight—clear, intuitive discernment into
physical and mental phenomena as they arise and disappear, seeing them for
what they are in terms of the four Noble Truths and the characteristics of
inconstancy, stress, and ‘not-selfness.’
*

*

*

45

If anything in this translation is inaccurate or misleading, I ask forgiveness of
the author and reader for having unwittingly stood in their way. As for whatever
may be accurate, I hope the reader will make the best use of it, translating it a
few steps further, into the heart, so as to attain the truth to which it points.
The Translator

sabbe satt› sad› hontu
aver› sukha-jıvino
kataª puñña-phalaª mayhaª
sabbe bh›gı bhavantu te
“May all living beings always live happily,
free from animosity.
May all share in the blessings
springing from the good I have done.”

