

Swami Gambhirananda 


^ n 

□ 

14 


TJ 

3 






rl 

W 114 

u 

1 4 


if 1 

1 -1 














PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

Sri Sarlkaracarya's great commentary on the Brahma-Sutras had been 
translated into English twice. But the non-availability of these translations 
or their high price raised the need for a fresh dependable translation at a 
moderate price. The present publication admirably meets this demand. 

The translator, Swami Gambhirananda, has to his credit a number of 
publications of the Ramakrishna Order. His latest work, a translation of 
Sadkara's commentary on eight principal Upani$ads, published by us five 
years back, was well received and has been in constant demand ever since. 
He completed the translation of the Sutra-Bharya three years ago, but owing 
to various difficulties we had to postpone its publication. 

The present publication has its own special features. The translator has 
given the word-for-word meaning of each aphorism under its Sanskrit text, 
followed by a running translation, with additional words in brackets for 
clarification. In the translation of the commentary, the texts setting forth 
doubts, the opponent's views, objections on the latter, and the Vedantin's 
answers have been shown separately, to facilitate easy comprehension. The 
translation is generally based on the Ratnaprabad, though the Nyaya- 
nirnaya and the Bhamati have been consulted occasionally. Sanskrit words 
have been printed with diacritical marks. In quoting from the Upani$ads, 
the translator has used Swami Madhavananda's translation of the 
Brhadaranyaka Upmi,wad and his own translation of the Eight Upanisads 
referred to above. The other texts are translated afresh. He has also added 
notes to elucidate difficult passages. The contents have been divided topic- 
wise, and an index of sutras in Sanskrit has been added 

We have made every effort to make the publication an attracts tive one, 
and hope that it would be welcome to all lovers of Vedanta philosophy. A 
part of its sale proceeds will be spent for the public library run by us in 
Calcutta. 

Swami Vivekananda's Birthday, January 23, 1965 



PUBLISHER 


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 

This work is being reprinted after seven years. Our thanks go to the eminent 
Vedantin Dr. T. M. P. Mahadevan, Director, Centre of Advanced Study in 
Philosophy, University of Madras for writing a valuable foreword. 

January 26, 1972 


PUBLISHER 




The three basic texts of Vedanta are the Upani$ads, the Bhagavad-gita, and 
the Brahma-sutra. Together they are referred to as the prasthana-traya, triple 
canon of Vedanta. The Upani$ads constitute the revealed texts (Sruti- 
prasthana); they mark the summits of the Veda which is Sruti (the heard, the 
revealed). They are the pristine springs of Vedintic metaphysics; Vedanta is the 
name given to them because they are the end (aim as well as concluding parts) 
of the Veda (Veda + anta). The Bhagavad-gita comes next only to the 
Upani$ads. It is given a status which is almost equal to that of the Upani$ads. 
As embodying the teachings of Sri KMa, and as constituting the cream of the 
Epic Mahabharata, the Bhagavad-gita occupies a unique place in the Vedantic 
tradition. A popular verse compares the Upani$ads to the cows, the Bhagavad- 
g-lta to the milk, Sri Yuma to the milkman, Arjuna, the Paudava hero, to the 
calf, and the wise people to the partakers of the milk. Sri Saiikara describes the 
Bhagavad-gita as the quintessence of the teaching of the entire Veda (samasta- 
vedartha-sarasangraba-bhutam). As this text forms a part of the Mahubharata 
which is a Smrti (the remembered, i.e. a secondary text based on the Veda), it is 
called Smrti-prasthana. The third of the canonical texts is the Brahmasutra 
which is regarded as Nyaya-prasthana, because it sets forth the teachings of 
Vedanta in a logical order. This work is known by other names also: Vedanta- 
sutra, since it is the aphoristic text on Vedanta; Sdriraka-sutra, since it is 
concerned with the nature and destiny of the embodied soul; Bhikyu-sutra, 
since those who are most competent to study it are the sannyasins; 
Uttaramirnamsa-sutra, since it is an inquiry into the final sections of the Veda. 

The author of the Brahma-sutra is Badarayama whom Indian tradition 
identifies with Vyasa, the arranger or compiler of the Veda. A verse in the 
Bhdmati which is Vacaspati Migra's commentary on Sri Sarikara's commentary 
on the Brahma-sutra, describes Vyasa as the incarnation of Vi$pu's cognitive 
energy (Jftdnaakti-avatara). In the Brahma-sutra, Badarayaoa-Vyasa strings 



together the leading concepts of Vedanta in an ordered manner. The Sutra is an 
exquisite garland made out of Upani$adblossoms. It is divided into four 
chapters (adhyayas); each chapter consists of four parts (padas); each part has a 
number of sections, (adhikaranas); and each section has one or more aphorisms 
(sutras). According to Sarkara, the number of sections is 192. The total number 
of aphorisms is 555. 

In the first chapter which is on 'harmony' (Samanvaya), Badarayaraa teaches 
that the Vedantic texts, taken as a whole, have for their purport Brahman, the 
non-dual Reality. Those passages of the Upanisads where express mention is 
made of Brahman or Atman do not present any difficulty. But there are other 
passages in which other terms are used-terms which do not normaly mean 
Brahman-Atman. In such cases, the meaning should be construed from the 
context For instance, aka.£a means 'ether'. But in a text where it is stated that 
all things come out of dkafa and get resolved into it, the expression akafa 
obviously means Brahman, which is the ground of the universe (B.S. I. i. 22). 
Similarly, in the Chandogya text, "Which is that deity? He said: Prana" (I. xi. 
4-5), the term prang means not the vital air, but Brahman, because all beings 
are said to merge in It (B.S. I. i. 23). The same is true in regard to other terms 
such as mans or manomaya. In the Chandogya text where this term occurs, 
there is the commencing statement "All this, indeed, is Brahman" (III. xiv. 1-2), 
and also the manomaya is taught as the object of meditation. This can only be 
Brahman, and not the individual mind or soul (B.S. I. ii. 1). In all such cases, 
what determines the meaning of a term is not the ordinary usage, but the 
context, (Prakaranac-caiB.S.I.ii.lO), and the construed meaning of the related 
texts (Vakyanvayat:B.S.I.iv.l9). Thus Badarayai a shows that the Vedantic texts 
harmoniously teach Brahman as the plenary reality, the world-ground which is 
of the nature of existence-consciousness-bliss, which is the supreme object of 
meditation, and which is the final end to be realized. 

In the second chapter which is entitled 'non-conflict' (Avirodha), Badarayaua 
discusses the objections that may be raised against the metaphysics of Vedanta. 
The principal objector is the follower of the Samkhya system. Great attention is 
paid to the Samkhya because it comes very close to Vedanta. If the Samkhya 
view is shown to be untenable, it follows that the other views which are more 
remote are unacceptable. For instance, it is declared (B.S. II. i. 3) that the view 
of the Yoga of Patafijali stands refuted when it has been shown that the 



Samkhya view is unsound. Taking its stand on logic, the Samkhya argues that 
Pradhana or Prakxti is the cause of evolution. Employing the same logic, the 
Vedantin shows that Pradhina cannot account for the world-evolution. There is 
observed design in the world. This would be inexplicable if Pradhana were to 
be the cause. How can the inert Pradhana have a sense of design, or even the 
will to create? Also, why and how it begins to evolve, and why and how it 
ceases from evolving, it is not possible to say; for, since Pradhana is not- 
intelligent, there should be either perpetual evolution or dissolution. And, any 
intelligent purpose is out of place; there would be only a blind process or 
movement without an end (B.S. II. ii. 1-6). The Vaii;e$ika system traces the 
world to primary atoms, posits adrga as the unseen power responsible for 
bringing the atoms together or for separating them. This view fares even worse 
than the Samkhya theory. Whether as located in the atoms or in the souls, the 
unseen potency cannot move the atoms because it is unintelligent even as the 
atoms are. There are other attendant defects in the system which cannot be 
remedied. The most serious of these difficulties is that the Vai§e$ika believes 
that from the partless atoms, the things of the world with parts arise (B.S. II. ii. 
11-17). There are realistic as well as idealistic schools in Buddhism. All things 
are aggregates, according to Buddhism: there is nothing like substantiality. For 
the realistic schools, there are two kinds of aggregates, the internal and the 
external. But, consistent with the other Buddhist doctrine of momentariness, 
how aggregation can take place at all passes one's understanding. There is a 
processor of successive moments: but how are the moments related? What 
connection is there between what precedes and what succeeds? These questions 
remain unsolved (B.S. IT. ii. 18 ff). For the Buddhist idealist, there is no extra¬ 
mental reality; ideas are things; what is real is a series of momentary ideas. 
This view also is untenable. The appearance of ideas is sought to be explained 
as brought about by residual impression. But, how can there be residual 
impression if there are no external things. So, says Badarayaia, the Buddhist 
view is totally unintelligible (Saruathd-anupapattih:B.S.II.ii.32). The Jaina 
philosophy seeks to combine opposites such as permanence and change, 
identity and difference. The obvious criticism of such a view would be: how 
could one and the same thing possess contradictory attributes? There are other 
doctrines, too, of Jainism which are unacceptable, e.g. that the soul has variable 
size. And so, the Jaina position has to be rejected (B.S. II. ii. 33 ff). 



According to Vedanta, as we have seen, Brahman is the worldground, the 
sole and whole cause of the world. Some theistic schools do not subscribe to 
this view. They hold that God is only the efficient cause who fashions the 
world out of extraneous matter which is co-eternal with him. This view is not 
sound, because God would then become limited and Unite (B.S. II. ii. 37); and 
a limited God is no God at all. The world appears from Brahman, stays in it, 
and gets resolved into it. This does not involve any effort on the part of 
Brahman. The so-called creative activity is like sport (B.S. H. i. 33). The milk- 
turninginto-curds example (B.S. II. i. 24) is useful for realizing that there is no 
need for an external agency for world-appearance, that creation is not 
production de novo. A better analogy would be to compare the non-evolution 
and evolution of the world to the folded and spread out states, respectively, of a 
piece of cloth (B.S. H. i. 19). The truth is that the world is not separate from 
Brahman; it has no independent existence. The effect is non-different from the 
cause. In other words, the effect is appearance, the cause alone is real (B.S. II. 
i. 14). 

What is the status of the individual soul? Is it a product of Brahman? The 
view of the Pancaratra school that the soul is produced from God is rejected by 
Badarayana. The soul which is eternal cannot he what is originated (B.S. II. ii. 
42). The soul is to Brahman as reflection is to prototype (B.S. II. iii. 50). It is 
the soul that is the subject of transmigration, the agent of action, the enjoyer of 
the fruit of action, the being that strives for release and eventually gains it. 

In the third chapter of the Brahma-sutra, Badarayaia discusses the means to 
release, sadhana. The Carvaka view that there is no soul apart from the body is 
unsound. If consciousness is an attribute of the body, why is it that a dead body 
is not conscious (B.S. III. iii. 53-54). So, one must admit that the soul is non¬ 
material, non-physical, which does not perish with the decease of the body. 
After physical death, the soul may go along either the path of the gods 
(devayana) or the path of the fathers (pitryana), carrying along with it the 
subtle parts of the elements and the sense-organs, etc., that had formed the 
ingredients of its constitution. If the soul had performed the appropriate 
meditations, it goes along the path of the gods and reaches Brahma-loka. If it 
had done the necessary sacrificial rites, it goes along the path of the fathers. 
There is also a third place mentioned in the gastras : the souls that are not fit to 
pursue either of the two paths referred to attain the status of tiny, continually 



revolving creatures which are born and which die (B.S. III. i. 17). The souls 
that are bound for the other two paths also except in the case of those which 
have realized Saguna (Qualified) Brahman, have to return to the world of 
mortals, as soon as their merit is exhausted. Similarly, the souls which go to the 
nether worlds have to come back after their evil deeds have been accounted for. 
The texts describe the process by which all this happens. They give details 
regarding the re-entry of the soul into the mother's womb and its re¬ 
embodiment. The various states through which the embodied soul passes are 
also explained: states such as waking, dream, and deep sleep. The migration of 
the soul goes on until it gets released through the realization of the non-dual 
Brahman. 

Brahman in itself is devoid of attributes, devoid of any form (Arupavad- 
evahitat-pradhanatvat:B.S.III.ii.l4). In some passages of the Upani$ads, it is 
true, attributes are ascribed to Brahman. But this ascription is for the sake of 
meditation (upasana). Just as light which has no form appears to be endowed 
with different forms because of the objects which it illumines, Brahman which 
has no attributes appears as if endowed with attributes on account of the 
limiting adjuncts (B.S. III. ii. 15). Brahman is the non-dual pure consciousness. 
It appears as if many, even as the one sun gets reflected diversely in the 
different vessels containing water (B.S. III. ii. 18). When the adventitious 
conditions fall off, it will be realized that Brahman is the nondual Absolute. In 
itself it is unconditioned and unsullied. In order to convey this truth, the 
Upani$ads adopt the negative mode of instruction (B.S. III. ii. 22-23): 
Brahman is "not thus; not thus" (Br. II. iii. 6). 



The soul is nou-different from Brahman. Because of nescience, 
it imagines that it is different. When nescience is removed 
through knowledge, the soul realizes the truth of non-difference 
(B.S. III. ii, 26). Scripture also denies difference (Pratisedbac-cn; 
B,S. III. ii. 30). And it prescribes meditation known as vidyfis 
for enabling the soul to realize its non-difference from Brahman. 
The meditations, although many, have one and the same purpose 
(B.S. III. iii. 1). What the nature and content of a particular 
meditation arc should be determined carefully with reference 
to the context in which it is taught. In two different Upanijads, 
for instance, the name may be the same, but the meditations may 
be different, In some other cases, the names may be different, 
but the meditation may be the same. In regard to some medita¬ 
tions, the details may be given in bits in different places. The 
sadkka must piece them all together in order to be guided in 
his practice. And it is not necessary that one should practise all 
the Vidyis, Any one of them will be enough for gaining the goal 
(B.S, III, iii, J9), The vidyis are meditations on the Sngmr 
Brahman. Therefore, the one who practises them goes, after 
death, along the path of the gods, and eventually secures release 
(B.S, III. iii. 29), It is only the knower of Nirgim (Non-quali- 
fied) Brahman that does not go along any eschatological path; 
he attains Brahman here. 



Sannyasa is a recognized aframa; it is prescribed even as the other three are. 
The sannyasins have no need to perform ritual; they are eligible to pursue the 
path of knowledge. They have no other obligation such as tending the sacred 
fires (B.S. III. iv. 25). The sacrificial rites are intended only for those who have 
studied the Veda and are instructed in the ritual techniques, and who have not 
yet gained eligibility for knowledge. Works, when performed with some end in 
view, bring in their respective results. These results may pertain to this world 
and to the next. But, when duties are done without any motive for fruits, they 
serve to purify the mind and make it fit for pursuing the path of knowledge. 
The seeker after knowledge must endeavour to possess such virtues as 
calmness, equanimity, self-control, etc. (B.S. III. iv. 27). These virtues are 
necessary for turning the mind inward in search of the true Self. Endowed with 
the cardinal virtues, one follows the path of knowledge and gains the goal 
which is release, moksa (B.S. III. iv. 1). Moksa is not a post mortem state. It is 
the eternal nature of the Self, and is realized the very moment the veil of 
ignorance is lifted. So, what is required is the removal of the obstacle that bars 
the way (B.S. III. iv. 51). In mok;a itself there are no differences of grade or 
kind. What is referred to as the state of release is nothing but Brahman (B.S. 
III. iv. 52). 

The last chapter of the Brahma-sutra is on 'the fruit', Phala. The one who 
meditates on Saguna Brahman, as was mentioned earlier, goes along the path 
of the gods, after physical death, carrying along with him the subtle body 
which lasts till release is gained (B.S. IV. ii. 8). The soul of the one who has 
realized Saguna Brahman reaches the region of the heart, and then departs 
through the surumnd-nali (B.S. IV. ii. 17). Leaving the body, the soul travels 
along the rays of the sun, and goes to Brahma-loka (B.S. IV. ii. 18). During this 
journey, various deities take charge of the soul, and conduct it along the path of 
the gods. After reaching Brahma-loka, the soul gets identified with Saguna 
Brahman. And, when that loka is destroyed at the end of the kalpa, the soul 
realizes Nirguna Brahman, which is release (B.S. IV. iii. 10). As we have 
already seen, the one who follows the path of knowledge gains release in this 
very life. His prams do not depart; they get resolved even here (B.S. IV. ii. 12). 
On Brahman-realization, one is freed from all sin (B.S. IV. i. 13). The one who 
is released in this life is called a Jivan-nrukta. His body continues till the 
Prarabdha lasts. Prarabdha is the karma which has begun to fructify and is 
responsible for the present body. That the body of the Jivan-mukta continues 



till Prarabdha lasts is stated only from the standpoint of those who are yet 
unreleased. The truth is that for the mukta there is no body at all. The knower 
of Brahman realizes the absolute non-difference from Brahman (Avibhagah : 
B.S. IV. ii. 16). When one has gained release, there is no more involvement in 
saksara, no more return to the cycle of birth and death (Anavrttih : B.S. IV. iv. 
22 ). 

We have now had a conspectus of the teaching of the Brahmasutra in the 
light of Satkara's commentary thereon. Satkara's bad;ya is the earliest extant 
commentary on Badarayaz a's text. It is celebrated for its lucidity and depth 
(prasanna-gathbhlra). There must have been commentaries before Sankara; but 
none of them has come down to us. Several commentators came after Sankara. 
Among them are Bhaskara, Yadavapraka§a, Raminuja, Ke§ava, Nilaka%ha, 
Madhva, Baladeva, Vallabha, and Vijnana Bhikgu. They differ from Sankara 
on certain moot points. But all of them have been influenced, knowingly or 
unknowingly, by Sadkara's commentary which has served as the model. In the 
Sankara tradition itself there have appeared several commentarial works. On 
Satikara's bha~ya, Vacaspati wrote the Bhamati, which was followed by the 
Kalpataru, and the Parimala. Similarly, Padmapada wrote the Pancapddikd on 
Satkara's bha,cya; and this was followed by the Vivarana, and the Tattvadipana. 
These are but a few of the annotations and glosses on Sar kara's great bh4ya. 

Padmapada, one of the direct disciples of Sankara offers this obeisance to his 
master and the bhasya: 



praij mmmkba-vkitm cyMri figs 

tan bMtpvimhgim prsijsto'mi mrdbnl 



"I bow my head before Sri Sankara, the preceptor of the humble disciples who 
are renowned for their knowledge of the bhacya and who drink the nectar 
flowing from the bha~ya-lotus which owes its origin to the manasa-lake of Sri 
Sarikara's mouth and who, like the bees, are eagerly lifting up their faces from 
all quarters." 

Appayya Dik-ita sings the praise of the great teaching thus: 

dhi^mbbida p&rvmympetya sahmdM 
Mridwtt mMhcdm rnpnpp mipadodgm, 

jmmahmfi sitktih bubiidvdpikpmpp, 

"The great teaching which issues from the lotus-face of the Bhagavatpada, 
which has the non-dual Brahman as its primary import, which destroys 
phenomenal existence and which, while admitting of several interpretations by 
the (numerous) ancient preceptors, exists in all its grandeur, in the same way as 
the river Ganga which, issuing from the foot of Vi$nu, assumes different 
courses on reaching different lands." 

There are a few English translations available of the Brahmasutra with 
Sadkara's commentary. The earliest to appear was the one by George Thibaut. 
The merits of the present translation have been pointed out in the Publisher's 
Preface to the first edition. That a second edition has been called for itself 
shows how useful Swami Gambhiranandaji's translation has been. This is a 
faithful and helpful rendering of a work which is of perennial and profound 
interest. The second edition will be welcomed, like the first, by the students of 
Vedanta in the English-speaking world. 


January 5,1972 



T. M. P. Mahadevan 


Director, Centre of Advanced Study in Philosophy, University of 

Madras 



CONTENTS 

Preface 

Foreword 

List of Abbreviations 
Key to Transliteration and Pronunciation 
CHAPTER I 

SAMANVAYA-RECONCILIATION THROUGH 
PROPER INTERPRETATION 
SECTION I 

Preamble 

1. Deliberation on Brahman 

2. Ori g in etc, of the Universe 

3. Scripture as Source of Knowled g e of Brahman 

4. UnaniSads Reveal Brahman 

5. The First Cause Possessed of Consciousness 

6. The Blissful One 

7. The Bein g Inside 


















8. Space 

9. Praia 

10. Li ght 

11. Pratardana 

SECTION II 

1. The Entity Known Everywhere 

2. The Eater 

3. The Two in the Cavity of the Heart 

4. The Person in the E ve 

5. The Internal Ruler 

6. The One That Is Unseen etc. 

7. Vai § vanara 

SECTION III 

1. The Abode of Heaven . Earth , etc. 

2. Bhuman ( Infinite . Plenitude ) 

3. Immutable 

4. The Ob j ect of Seein g 

5. Dahara ( The Small Space ) 

6. Actin g in Accordance 

7. The Measured One 
































8. Gods 


9. Pseudo-Sudra 

10. Vibration 

11. Li g ht as Declared in the UpaniSad 

12. Space Is Brahman , Bein g Different from Name and Form 

13. Sleep and Death 

SECTION IV 

1. The Inferred Entit y 

2. The Bowl 

3. Statement of Number 

4. Causalit y 

5. Balaki 

6. Correlation of Passa ges 

7. Brahman as Material Cause 

8. Explanation of Everythin g 

CHAPTER II 

A V IRODH A-NON-CONTRADICTION 
SECTION I 

1. Conflict with Smrti 

2. Refutation of Yo ga 

























3. Difference in Nature 


4. Non-acceptance bv the Wise 

5. Brahman Becomin g an Experiencer 

6. Ori gin 

7. Non-performance of Good 

8. Creation without Materials 

9. Wholesale Transformation 

10. Possession of All Powers 

11. Need of Motive 

12. Partiality and Cruelt y 

13. Propriety of All the Characteristics 

SECTION II 

1. Samkhva View Refuted 

2. Vai a ika Ob j ection Refuted 

3. Atoms Not the Cause of Universe 

4. Refutation of Buddhist Realists 

5. Buddhist Idealism Refuted 

6. Jaina View Refuted 

7. God Is Not a Mere Superintendent 

8. Bha g avata View Refuted 
































SECTION III 


1. Ori g in of Space 

2. Ori g in of Air 

3. Ori g in of Brahman Denied 

4. Ori g in of Fire 

5. Ori g in of Water 

6. Ori g in of Earth 

7. Creation from God's Deliberation 

S. Reverse Order of Dissolution 

9. The Ori g in of Mind and Intellect 

10. Birth and Death 

11. Ori g in of the Soul 

12. Eternally Conscious Soul 

13. Soul's Dimensions 

14. Soul as A g ent 

15. The Soul under Two Conditions 

16. Soul's A g entship Derived from God 

17. Relation of Soil and God 

SicrcoN IV 
1. Ori g in of the Pri as 

































2. Number of Pripas 

3. Atomic Prias 

4. Chief Prima: Its Creation 

5. Nature of Pra a 

6.. Prioa Is Atomic 

7. Presidin g Deities 

8. Priw and Pri oas 

9. Creation of Gross Ob j ects 

CHAPTER III 

SADHANA-SPIRITUAL PRACTICE 
SECTION I 

Introduction 

1. Departure from the bod y 

2. Return of the Souls 

3. Fate of Evil-doers 

4. Similarity with Space etc, durin g Descent 

5. Intervenin g Period of Descent 

6. The Souls in Plants and Thereafter 

SECION11 
1. Dream State 

























2. The Soul in Deep Slee p 

3. The Same Soul Returns from Slee p 

4. Soul in Swoon 

5. The Nature of Brahman 

6. Unconditioned Brahman and Soul 

7. Brahman One without a Second 

8. Fruits of Action 

SECTION III 

1. Sameness of Meditation 

2. Combination of Traits 

3. Difference of Meditations 

4. Specification of Om 

5. Sameness of the Meditation on Praraa 

6. Combination and Non-combination of Attributes of Brahman 

7. PuruSa as the Hi g hest in KaTha 

8. The Supreme Self in Aitare va 

9. Acamana and Meditation on Praia 

10. Same Meditation in the Same Branch 

11. No Combination in Meditation on Satva-Brahman 

12. Attributes of Brahman in Raiavaniva Not to be Combined Elsewhere 



























13. Puru$a-Vidva in Chando g va and Taittiri va 
14: Non-combination of Disparate Traits 

15. Re j ection and Reception of Merit 

16. Discardin g Virtue and Vice at Death 

17. Paths of Those Who Know Or Do Not Know the Qualified Brahman 

18. The Path of Gods Is for All Worshi p pers of Qualified Brahman 

19. People with a Mission 

20. Conceptions of the Immutable 

21. Same Conception in Mura4aka and Katha 

22. The Inmost Self in Brhadaranvaka 

23. Reciprocity of Conceptions 

24. Satva-Brahman in Brhadaaranvaka 

25. Combination of Traits in Brhadararnvaka and Chando gva 

26. A g nihotra to Prar p 

27. Meditations Connected with Rites Are Not Obli g ator y 

28. Meditations on Pra4a and Va vu 

29. Fires in A g ni-Rahasva Not Parts of Sacrifice 

30. The Self Distinct from Bod y 

31. Meditations Connected with Accessories of Rites 

32. Meditation on Vaiivanara as a Whole 











































33. When Meditations Differ 


34. Alternative Meditations 

35. Meditations Yieldin g Worldly Results 

36. Meditations Based on Subsidiaries 

SECrloN IV 

1. Knowled g e not a Subsidiary of Rites 

2. Sannvasa Prescribed bv Scriptures 

3. In j unctions for Meditation Not Eulo g istic 

4. UpaniSadic Stories 

5. Sannvasins Free from Rituals 

6. Rituals etc. Needed for Knowled ge 

7. Restrictions about Food 

8. Duties of Orders of Life should he Fulfilled 

9. Knowled g e for People outside Orders 

10. Defection from Monasticism 

11. Expiation for Trans g ression of Celibac y 

12. They are to be Excommunicated 

13. Meditations Connected with Rites 

14. In j unction about Meditativeness 

15. The Childlike State 







































16. Time of Fruition of Knowled ge 

17. Liberation is Uniform Everywhere 

CHAPTER IV 
PHALA-RESULT 
SECrioN I 

1. Repetition of Meditations etc. 

2. Identity of the Self with Brahman 

3. No Self-identitv with Symbols 

4. Superimposition of the Hi g her on the Lower 

5. Subordinate parts of Rites As the Sun etc. 

6. Meditation in a Sittin g Posture 

7. No Restriction of Place 

8. Meditation till Death 

9. Knowled g e Destroys all Results of Actions 

10. No Remnant of Virtue Even 

11. Past Accumulated Results are Destroyed 

12. A g nihotra etc. 

13. Rites Unaccompanied by Meditation 

14. Experience of the Active Merit and Demerit 


SECTION II 


































1. At Death the Or g ans Mer g e in Mind 

2. Mind Mer g es invPrana v 

3. Praia Mer g es into the Soul 

4. Departure of the Enli g htened and the Unenli g htened 

5. Relative Mer g er of Fire etc. 

6. No Departure for a Knower of Brahman 

7. The Or g ans of the Knower Mer g e in Brahman 

8. Absolute Absorption of the Constituents.. 

9. Departure of one who knows the Qualified Brahman 

10. The Soul follows the Ravs of the Sun 

11. Soul's Journey durin g the Sun's Southern Course 

SECTION III 

1. Only One Path to the World of Brahman 

2. The Departin g Soul Reaches Air after Year 

3. The Soul proceeds from Li g htnin g to Varuia 

4. Guidin g Deities 

5. The Path Leads to the Conditioned Brahman 

6. Worship with and without Symbols 

SECTION IV 


Nature of Lreedom 














































2. Liberated Soul Inseparable from Brahman 

3. Characteristics of the Liberated Soul 

4. Fulfilment of Desire throu g h Will 

5. Body after Reachin g Brahma-loka 

6. Entry into many Bodies 

7. Acquisition of Divine Powers 















LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 

Ai. 

Aitareya Upaiiijad 

ALL .. 

,, Aitareya Araijyaka 

Ai, Br, ,. 

Aitareya BrahmaQa 

Ap. 

Apastamba Dharma-Sutra 

B.S, 

,, Brahma-Sutra 

Bf. 

Bjliadarapyaka Upanijad 

Ch, 

,, Chandogya Upanijad 

Is. 

Isa (vasya) Upani$ad " 

Ja, 

,, Jabala Upani?ad 

Jai. Sii. .. 

., Jaimini-Sutra 

Ka. 

Ka(ha Upanijad 







I I 


ha¬ 

lt 

m. 

Mbh, 

Mu. 

N.S. 

Pa, Su. 
Pr, 

R.V, 

$,B, 

Sv, 

Tai. 

Tai. A. 
Tai Br. 
Tai. S. 
Vai. Su. 


* K 


+ s 


t 


I 


+ 


i 


* > 


Kau$itaki Upani$ad 
Kena IJpanisad 

Migdukyi Upani?ad 

Mahabharata 

Munijaka Upanijad 

Nyaya-Sutra 

Pai?ini-Sum 

Prasna Upanijad 

Flg-Vcda 

Satapatha Brihraatja 
SvetaSvatara Upanijad 
Tairtiriya Upani?id 
Taittiriya Aranyaka 
Taittiriya Bralimam 
Taittiriya Saihhiti 
Vai$e$ika-Sfaa 




KEY TO TRANSLITERATION 

AND PRONUNCIATION 



S&urtds like 


3T SL 

3ft a 

^ i 

^ i 

^ u 

u 



^ ai 
sft o 
au 

^ k 
U kH 

*T £ 

=T 

^ n 
^ c 
u^ ch 

^ j 

"*R jh 
ar fi 

3 t 
3 th 


o In J 4 A 
a m jTwyfer 
i in // 
ee in 
n in 

oo in £oof 
somewhat bewcen 
r and ri 
a in 
y in jry , 1 
o in o/t 
ow in naze* 
k 

ckli in 
^ (hard) 
gh in 

ch {nor Ic) 
chh in c/rffA him 

j 

dgeh In 
n (somewhat) 
t 

tk in 



S&untfs like 



<L 

d 


dll 

dh in 


n 

n in under 

g - 

t 

French c 


th 

th in thumb 


a 

th irk t/ien 


dh 

theh in breath# fitrre 


T\ 

n 

*T 

P 

P 



ph in lan/t^Aol# 


b 

b 

■ST 

bh 

bh in abfiar 

*T 

m 

m 

*r 

v 

y 


r 

r 


I 

1 

^r 

V 

v in .* 2 fe?rf 

tt 

£ 

sh 


£ 

■- 

sh in show 

TT 

S 

5 


H 

h 


ill 

ng 

’ 

h 

half b 





SAMANVAYA—RECONCDLIATION THROUGH 

PROPER INTERPRETATION 


SECTION I 

Preamble: It bein g an established fact that the ob i ect and the sub j ect . ' that are 
fit to be the contents of the concepts "you” and "we" ( respectivel y), and are b v 
nature as contradictory as li g ht and darkness , cannot lo g ically have an y 
identit y, it follows that their attributes can have it still less.s Accordin gly, the 
su perimposition of the ob j ect , referable throu g h the concent "you" , and its 
attributes on the sub j ect that is conscious by natures and is referable throu gh 
the concept "we" ( should be impossible ), and contrariwise the superimposition 
of the sub j ect and its attributes on the ob j ect should be impossible. 
Nevertheless , owin g to an absence of discrimination between these attributes . 
as also between substances , which are absolutely disparate , there continues a 
natural human behaviour based on self-identification in the form of 'T am this” 

or "Tins is mine' 1 .5 'This behaviour has for its material cause an. unreal 

nescience and man resorts to .it b v mixin g u p reality with unreality as a result of 
su perimposin g6 the things themselves or their attributes on each other. 

If it be asked . "What is it that is called superimpositi.on?"the answer is: It is 
an awareness , similar in nature to memor y, that arises on a different ( forei gn) 
basis as a result of some past experience.' With re g ard to this , some sav that it 
consists in the superimposition of the attributes of one thin g on another.8 But 
others assert that wherever a superimposition on anythin g occurs , there is in 
evidence only a confusion arisin g from the absence of discrimination between 



















































































them.s Others say that the superimposi Lion of anythin g on any other 
substratum consists in fanc ying some o p posite attributes on that very basis.10 
From every point of view, however, there is no difference as regards the 
appearance of one thing as something else. And in accord with this, we find in 
common experience that the nacre appears as silver, and a single moon appears 
as two. 

Op ponent: How , ag ain , can there be any superimposition of any ob j ect or its 
attributes on the ( inmost ) Self that is o p posed to the non-Self 11 and is never an 
obj ect (of the senses and mind ) ? For everybody superimposes somethin g else 
on what is perceived by him in front : '2 and you assert that the Self is opposed 
to the non-Self and is not referable (objectively) by the concept "you". 

The answer (of the Vedantin ) is: The Self is not absolutclv beyond 
ap prehension , because It is a p prehended as the content of the concept "I" : and 
because the Self , op posed to the nonSelf . is well known in the world!3 as an 
immediately perceived (i.e. self-revealing) entity. Nor is there any rule that 
something has to be superimposed on something else that is directly perceived 
through the senses; for boys superimpose the ideas of surface (i.e. concavity) 
and dirt on space (i.e. sky) that is not an object of sense-perception. Flence 
there is nothing impossible in superimposing the non-Self on the Self that is 
opposed to it. 

This superimposition , that is of this nature , is considered bv the learned to be 
avid va. nescience .'4 And the ascertainment of the nature of the real entit y bv 
se paratin g the superimposed thin g from it is called vidva ( illumination ) . This 
bein g so . 15 whenever there is a superimposition of one thing on another, the 
locus is not affected in any way either by the merits or demerits of the thing 
superimposed. All forms of worldly and Vedic behaviour that are connected 
with valid means of knowledge and objects of knowledge start by taking for 
granted this mutual superimposition of the Self and non-Self, known as 
nescience; and so do all the scriptures dealing with injunction, prohibition, or 
emancipation. 

Op ponent: How , ag ain , can the means of valid knowled ge, such as direct 
perception as well as the scriptures , have as their locus a co g nizer who is 
sub j ect to nescience? 16 





































































The (Vedamin's) answer is: Since a man without self-identification with the 
body, mind, senses, etc., cannot become a cognizer, and as such, the means of 
knowledge cannot function for him; since perception and other activities (of a 
man) are not possible without accepting the senses etc. (as his own); since the 
senses cannot function without (the body as) a basis; since nobody engages in 
any activity with a body that has not the idea of the Self superimposed on it; 
since the unrelated Self cannot become a cognizer unless there are all these 
(mutual superimposition of the Self and the body and their attributes on each 
other); and since the means of knowledge cannot function unless there is a 
cognizership; therefore it follows that the means of knowledge, such as direct 
perception as well as the scriptures, must have a man as their locus who is 
subject to nescience. 

Moreover, there is no difference (of the learned) from the animals (in regard 
to empirical behaviour). Just as animals and others turn away from sound etc. 
when these a p pear to be unfavourable after their ears etc, come in contact with 
them , and they move towards these when they are favourable : and j ust as b v 
noticin g a man a p proachin g them with a raised stick , they be g in to run awa y 
thinkin g. ''Tins one wants to hurt me ,! . and they a p proach another carr ying 
g reen g rass m his hands , similarly even the wise are repelled bv the presence of 
stron g, uproarious people with evil looks and upraised swords , and are 
attracted bv men of o p posite nature. Therefore the behaviour of men with 
reg ard to the means and ob j ects of knowled g e is similar to that of animals. And 
it is a familiar fact that the animals use their means of perception etc, without 
discrimination (between the body and the Self ) . From this fact of similarit y, the 
conclusion can be drawn that so far as empirical behaviour is concerned , the 
use of the means of perception bv the wise is similar to that of lower animals , 
( it bein g a result of superimposition ) . Of course , it is a fact that a man actin g 
intelli g ently does not acquire the competence for scriptural duties unless he has 
a knowled g e of the relationship of his soul with the next world. Still ( a 
knowled g e of ) the absolute Realit y, that is the Self , is not a prerequisite for 
such a competence : for It (i.e. Realit y) has no relevance here , and It is o p posed 
to such competence . !7 inasmuch as It is beyond hunger and thirst, free from 
such differentiation as Brahmaua, K$atriya, 'etc., and is not subject to birth and 
death. And the scriptures, which are operative before the dawn of the real 
knowledge of the Self, cannot transgress the limits of their dependence on 
people groping in ignorance. To illustrate the point: Such scriptural injunction 


















































































as "A Brahmana shall perform a sacrifice" can become effective only by taking 
for granted various kinds of superimposition of caste, stage of life, age, 
condition, etc. And we said that superimposition means the cognition of 
something as some other thing. Thus in accordance as one's wife, children, or 
other relatives are hale and hearty with all their limbs intact, or as they suffer 
from the loss of those limbs, one thinks, "I myself am hale and hearty" or "I 
myself am injured"; thus one superimposes external characteristics on the Self. 
Similarly one superimposes the characteristics of the body when one has such 
ideas as "I am fat", "I am thin", "I am fair", "I stay", "I go", or "I scale". So also 
one superimposes the attributes of the senses and organs when one thinks, "I 
am dumb", "I have lost one eye", "I am a eunuch", "I am deaf", or "I am blind". 
Similarly one superimposes the attributes of the internal organ, such as desire, 
will, doubt, perseverance, etc. In the same way, one first superimposes the 
internal organ, possessed of the idea of ego, on the Self, the witness of all the 
manifestations of that organ; then by an opposite process, one superimposes on 
the internal organ etc. that Self which is opposed to the nonSelf and which is 
the witness of everything. Thus occurs this superimposition that has neither 
beginning nor end but flows on eternally, that appears as the manifested 
universe and its apprehension, that conjures up agentship and enjoyership, and 
that is perceived by all persons. In order to eradicate this source of evil and in 
order to acquire the knowledge of the unity of the Self, is begun a discussion 
(after the study) of all the Upani$ads. We shall show in this discussion about 
the nature of the embodied soul, that this is the purport of all the Upani$ads. 

TopicI: DELIBERATION ON BRAHMAN 

This is the first aphorism in the scripture which deals with the ascertainment 
of the meaning of the Upani$ads and which is sought to be explained by us. 

slfftlOT II \ II 

aM Thereafter sTc ' i: hence Wg-fignr"r a deliberation on Brahman. 



1. Hence (is to be undertaken) thereafter a deliberation on Brahman. 

The word atha (thereafter) is used in the sense of "sequence", and not 
"commencement"; for brabma-jijndsa is not a thing that can be commenced-18 
And the meanin g "auspiciousness" cannot enter syntactically into the pur port 
of a sentence. Besides , the word atha . even when used in some other sense . 
serves the purpose of auspiciousness from the very fact of its bein g heard. 19 If 
it implies the anticipation of somethin g comin g later bv somethin g broached 
earlier , then this does not differ in effect from causalitv20 (He. sequence). 

The meaning of "sequence" being taken for granted, one has to mention that 
earlier thing which is a prerequisite for a deliberation on Brahman, just as 
much as a deliberation on religious rites (or deeds) depends invariably on an 
earlier study of the Vedas. The mere fact of the study of the Vedas cannot be 
the prerequisite sought for here, since this is a common factor (in both the 
cases of deliberation on Brahman and religious rites). 

Opponent: A previous understanding of the religious rites can be accepted 
here as the special factor (leading to the deliberation on Brahman). 

Vedirntin: Not so . since lit is lo g icall y possible for a man who has studied the 
U paniSads to undertake a deliberation on Brahman, even without deliberation 

on the reli g ious rites. And no sequence is meant here between these two like 
the procedural arran g ement in the matter of takin g u p the heart etc. , where an 
order is sou g ht to be en i oined : 21 for there is no proof either establishin g an y 
relation between these two like that between the whole and its parts , or 
showin g any derivative competence li.e. competence in one thin g derived from 
the competence in somethin g else ) .22 Moreover , the deliberations on virtuous 
deeds28 and Brahman differ as re g ards results and ob j ects of inquiry. Virtuous 
deeds have secular prosperity as their results : and these depend on the 
performance (of some rites etc. ) . But the knowled g e of Brahman has 
emancipation as its result , and it does not depend on any other performance. 
Besides , a virtuous deed that has to be inquired into is a thin g still to be 
accomplished , and it is not present at the time of its acquaintance ( from 
scriptures etc. ), for it has to depend on human effort for its emer g ence. On the 
other hand , the Brahman to be inquired into here is a pre-existin g entit y: and It 
is not dependent on human effort , since It is eternall y present. Besides , there is 
a difference in the mental reactions aroused bv the Vedic texts ( in both the 






































































































cases ) . The Vedic texts impartin g knowled g e about virtuous deeds make their 
purport clear to people while en gaging their attention to the deeds en j oined .24 
whereas the Vedic texts speakin g of Brahman g ive rise only to Its knowled ge. 
Since knowled g e is not a product of in j unctions , a man is not impelled to know , 
j ust as for instance , he is not in his acquisition of knowled g e throu g h a contact 
of the eve with some ob j ect .25 

Therefore something has to be pointed out as the prerequisite after which it 
is taught that the deliberation on Brahman can proceed. 

The answer is: They are discrimination between the eternal and the non¬ 
eternal; dispassion for the enjoyment of the fruits (of work) here and hereafter; 
a perfection of such practices as control of the mind, control of the senses and 
organs, etc.; and a hankering for liberation. Granted the existence of these, 
Brahman can be deliberated on or known even before or after an inquiry into 
virtuous deeds, but not otherwise. Therefore by the word atha is enjoined the 
succession to a perfection of the practices mentioned here. 

The word atah (hence) implies causality. Since in such texts as, "To illustrate 
the point, just as the enjoyable things earned through work get exhausted in this 
world, so also do the enjoyable things in the other world that are earned 
through merit" (Ch. VIII. i. 6), the Vedas reveal that the Agnihotra sacrifice 
etc., which are the means for the achievement of higher things, have 
evanescent results; and since in such texts as, "The knower of Brahman attains 
-the Highest" (Tai. II. i), the Vedas show in a similar way that from the 
realization of Brahman follows the highest human objective (viz liberation), 
therefore one should undertake a deliberation on Brahman after a perfection of 
the practices mentioned earlier. 

Brahma- iii nasa means a deliberation on Brahman.26 And Brahman is that 
which will he defined hereafter as "That from which the universe has .its birth 
etc." (B. S. L i. 2 ) . Hence there should be no misinterpretation of the word in 
the sense of the Brahmar ) a caste etc. The sixth case-endin g occurrin g after 
Brahman (when the compound is split u p) is used in the accusative sense , and 
not in the sense of mere relation : for a wish to know presu p poses a thin g 
wanted to be known . 27 and no other thing to be inquired into has been 
indicated. 




















































Opponent: Even if the sixth case-ending be taken in the sense of relation, it 
does not rule out the fact of Brahman's being the object of deliberation, for a 
general relation includes all special relations (e.g. of an object to its verb). 

Veddntin: Even then it involves a useless effort to give up Brahman as a 
direct object and fancy It to be so through a general relationship. 

Opponent: Not useless, because it is sought to imply thereby that a 
deliberation on everything associated with Brahman is kept in view. 

Veddntin: Not so . because when the chief factor is taken in hand , the 
subsidiaries present themselves bv implication.28 Since Brahman is the ob j ect 
most desired to be comprehended throu g h knowled ge.29 It must be the chief 
factor. When that chief factor is taken up as the object of deliberation, all other 
factors, without an inquiry into which the deliberation on Brahman remains 
unaccomplished, become implied pari passu; and hence they need not be 
mentioned separately as the import of this aphorism. This is just like saying, 
"There goes the king", where from that very statement it follows that the king 
is going with his retinue. And this has to be accepted in order that it may 
accord with the Vedic texts. The Vedic text starting with, "That from which 
these beings take birth, (that by which they are sustained after birth, and that 
towards which they proceed and into which they get merged)", directly reveals 
Brahman as an object (of deliberation) by saying, "Wish to know that, that is 
Brahman" (Tai. III. i). And that Upanisadic text will be in line with the 
aphorism if the sixth case-ending is interpreted in the accusative sense. 
Accordingly, the sixth case-ending is used in the accusative sense. 

Jij nasa means "a wish to know". And the knowled g e culminatin g in direct 
realization30 ( of Brahman ) is the ob i ect of "wish" implied bv the suffix san (in 
iii ndsd ); for a desire aims at its result , the desire bein g that Brahman be 
realized (i.e. uncovered ) bv that knowled g e81 which is a valid means of 
apprehension. And the realization of Brahman is the highest human objective; 
for it completely eradicates all such evils as ignorance etc. that constitute the 
seed of transmigration. Therefore Brahman should be deliberated on. 

Opponent: Is that Brahman, again, familiar or unfamiliar? If It be familiar, It 
need not be deliberated on for the sake of knowledge. Again, if It be 
unfamiliar, It cannot be deliberated on. 




























The answer (of the Vedantin) is: As to that, Brahman does exist as a well- 
known entity-eternal, pure, intelligent, free by nature, and all-knowing and all- 
powerful. For from the very derivation of the word Brahman, the ideas of 
eternality, purity, etc, become obvious , this bein g in accord with the root 
brnh.82 Besides , the existence of Brahman is well known from the fact of Its 
bein g the Self of all : for everyone feels that his Self exists , and he never feels . 
'T do not exist”. Had there been no g eneral reco g nition of the existence of the 
Self , everyone would have felt . "I do not exist”. And that Self is Brahman.88 

Opponent : If Brahman be well known in the world as the Self, then It being 
already known, there arises the difficulty again that It is not to be deliberated 
on. 

Vedantin : No , for there is a conflict about Its distinctive nature. Ordinar y 
people as well as the materialists of the Lokavata school reco g nize the bod y 
alone to be the Self possessed of sentience. Others hold that the mind is the 
Self. Some sav that it is merely momentar y consciousness. Others sav that it i~ 
void. Still others believe that there is a soul , separate from the bod y, which 
transmi g rates and is the a g ent ( of work ) and the experiencer ( of results ) . Some 
sa v that the soul is a mere experiencer34 and not an a g ent. Some sav that there 
ns a God who is different from this soul and is all-knowin g and all-powerful : 
others sav that He is the Self of the experiencin g individual. Thus there are 
many who follow o p posite views by dependin g on lo gic, texts and their 
semblances. If one accepts any one of these views without examination , one is 
liable to be deflected from emancipation and come to g rief. Therefore86 
starting with the presentation of a deliberation on Brahman, here is commenced 
an ascertainment of the meaning of the texts of the Upanisads with the help of 
reasoning not opposed to the Upani$ads themselves, for the purpose of leading 
to emancipation (through knowledge). 

Topic 2 : ORIGIN ETC. OF THE UNIVERSE 

Op ponent : It has been said that Brahman is to be deliberated on. What . 

ag ain , can be the definition of that Brahman?” 


Vedantin : Hence the venerable aphorist says: 





































































(That)tj: from which (are derived) Wqrfk birth etc. arfq of this (universe). 

2. That (is Brahman) from which (are derived) the birth etc. of this 
(universe). 

Janmadi can he split up thus: That of which i anma . birth , is the adi , first. In 
the phrase j anmddi we have that class of Bahuvrihi compound where the 
subj ect presented is a p prehended alon e with its attributes.37 The compound 
implies birth, continuance, and dissolution. The mention of birth first is in 
accord with the statements in the Vedic texts and the nature of things. The 
Vedic assertion is this: "That from which these beings take birth" (Tai. III. i) 
where origin, continuance, and dissolution are revealed in an order. As for the 
nature of things, a thing that has come to exist through birth can have 
continuance and disintegration. By the word idam (this), occurring as a 
constituent of the word asya (of this), is indicated the entity (viz the universe) 
that is presented immediately by perception etc. And the sixth case-ending (i.e. 
"of") in it is meant for indicating the relation of that entity with birth etc. By 
the word yatah (from which) is indicated a cause; and the clause "that is 
Brahman" has to be added at the end to complete the sentence. (So the meaning 
of the whole aphorism is): That ominiscient and omnipotent source must be 
Brahman from which occur the birth, continuance, and dissolution of this 
universe that is manifested through name and form, that is associated with 
diverse agents and experiences, that provides the support for actions and 
results, having well-regulated space, time, and causation, and that defies all 
thoughts about the real nature of its creation. 

Birth , continuance , and dissolution only are mentioned here , since the other 
modifications that thin g s are heir to are included in them.88 Had the six 
modifications listed bv Yaska in the words . "It ori g inates , exists , g rows . " etc, 
been accepted there ). it mi g ht lead to the doubt that the ori gin, existence , and 
destruction of the universe from the primary source (Brahman ) are not referred 
to. these modifications bein g possible only durin g the continuance of the 















































universe.39 In order that this doubt may not arise, the origin that takes place 
from Brahman, and the continuance and merger that occur in That Itself are 
referred to. 

A part from God , possessed of the qualifications already mentioned , the 
universe , as described , cannot possibly be thou g ht of as havin g its ori g in etc, 
from any other factor , e.g . Pradhana (primordial Nature ) which is insentient , or 
from atoms , or nonexistence , or some soul under worldly conditions ( viz 
Hiram vag arbha ) . Nor can it ori g inate spontaneousl y: for in this universe . 
people (desirous of products ) have to depend on specific space . time , and 
causation.40 Those who stand by God as the cause (e.g . the Nai va vikas ) rel y 
on this very inference alonedl for establishin g the existence etc .42 of God as 
distinguished from a transmigrating soul. 

Op ponent : Is not this very inference presented here bv the aphorism startin g 
with . "That from which" etc.? 

Vedantin : No : for the aphorisms are meant for strin ging to g ether the flowers 
of the sentences of the UpaniSads : for it is precisely the sentences of the 
U pani$ads that are referred to and discussed in these aphorisms. The 
realization, of Brahman, results from the firm conviction.43 arisin g from the 
deliberation on the ( Vedic ) texts and their meanin g s'44 but not from other 
means of knowled g e like inference etc. When , however , there are Upani Sadie 
texts speakin g of the ori g in etc, of the world , then even inference , not runnin g 
counter to the Upani$adic texts , is not ruled out in so far as it is adopted as a 
valid means of knowled g e reinforcin g these texts : for the Upani$ads 
themselves accept reasonin g as a help. For instance , there is the text . "( The Self 
is) to be heard of . to be reflected on"45 ( Br. II. iv. 5 ) . And the text . "A man . 
well-informed and intelli g ent , can reach the country of the Gandharas ; 
similarly in this world , a man who has a teacher attains kmowled g e"46 (Ch. VI. 
xiv. 2), shows that the Vedic texts rely on the intelligence of man. 

So far as the deliberation on Brahman is concerned, the direct texts . 
indicatory marks , etc, are not the sole means of the valid knowled g e of 
Brahman , as they are when reli g ious duties are deliberated on. But in the 
former case , the Vedic texts , personal experience . 47 etc, are the valid means as 
far as possible; for the knowledge of Brahman culminates in experience,48 and 
it relates to an existing entity. Since in the case of rites etc. that have to be 



























































































































undertaken, there is no dependence on direct experience (the rite etc. being still 
in the womb of futurity), the direct texts etc. alone are authoritative here. 
Besides, an act to be performed becomes what it is through human effort. 
Worldly or Vedic activities may or may not be undertaken, or they may be dealt 
with otherwise; as for instance, a man can walk, ride, proceed otherwise, or 
need not move at all. Similarly (there are the passages): "In the sacrifice (with 
Soma juice) called Atiratra, the vessel (containing the Soma juice) called 
$odasi is taken up" and "In the Atiratra sacrifice the $oda§i' is not taken up" 
(Tai.S. VI. vi. 2.4). "(In the Agnihotra sacrifice) the oblation is offered before 
sunrise", and "The oblation is offered after sunrise". These injunctions and 
prohibitions are meaningful here (in a context of rites), as also are the 
alternatives, general rules, and exceptions. But a thing cannot be judged 
diversely to be of such a kind and not to be of such a kind, to be existent and 
nonexistent (simultaneously). Options depend on human notions, whereas the 
valid knowledge of the true nature of a thing is not dependent on human 
notions. On what does it depend then? It is dependent on the thing itself. For an 
awareness of the form, "This is a stump, or a man, or something else", with 
regard to the same stump cannot be valid knowledge. In such a case the 
awareness of the form, "This is a man or something else" is erroneous, but 
"This is a stump to be sure" is valid knowledge; for it corresponds to the thing 
itself. Thus the validity of the knowledge of an existing thing is determined by 
the thing itself. This being the position, the knowledge of Brahman also must 
be determined by the thing itself, since it is concerned with an existing reality. 

Opponent : If Brahman be an existing reality, It must be the object of other 
means of valid knowledge, so that any deliberation on the Upani$adic texts (for 
the knowledge of Brahman) becomes meaningless. 

Veddntin : Not so : for Brahman's relation with anythin g cannot be g ras ped. It 
bein g outside the ran g e of sense-perception. The senses naturally comprehend 
obj ects , and not Brahman. Had Brahman been an ob j ect of sense-perception . 
knowled g e would have been of the form . "This product is related to ( i.e. 
produced b v) Brahman."99 Again, even when the mere effect (i.e. universe) is 
cognized, one cannot ascertain whether it is related to Brahman (as its cause) or 
to something else. Therefore the aphorism, "That from which" etc., is not 
meant to present an inference. 


For what is it then? 
























For presenting an Upani$adic text. 


Which, again, is that Upani$adic text that is sought to be referred to by the 
aphorism? 

(It is this): Starting with, "Bhrgu, the well-known son of Varuna approached 
his father Varuna with the request, '0 revered sir, teach me Brahman'," the 
Taittiriya Upani$ad states, "Seek to know that from which all these beings take 
birth, that by which they live after being born, that towards which they proceed 
and into which they merge; that is Brahman" (Tai. III. i). And the answer 
settling the question is: "From Bliss certainly all these beings originate; they 
live by Bliss after being born; and towards Bliss they proceed, and into Bliss 
they g et mer g ed" ( Tai. Ill, vi ) . Other fexts60 too of the same class are to be 
quoted (in this connection), which speak of a cause that is by nature eternal, 
pure, and free, and intrinsically omniscient. 

TOPIC 3 : SCRIPTURE AS SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE OF BRAHMAN 

In the course of showing that Brahman is the source of the universe, it was 
implied in passing that Brahman is omniscient. By way of confirming this, the 
aphorist says: 



.;q)fTq Because of being the source of the scriptures. 

3. (Brahman is omniscient) because of (Its) being the source of the 
scriptures. 

Brahman is the yonj_( i.c. the material and efficient cause ) of g reat scriptures 
(fdstrac) like the 1+t g -Veda etc, which are su p plemented bv other script ures61 
that are themselves sources ( of various kinds ) of knowled ge, which reveal all 





















thin g s like a lam p, and which are almost omniscient.52 For scriptures like the 1 
gVeda, possessed of all good qualities as they are, cannot possibly emerge from 
any source other than an all-knowing One. For it is a well-recognized fact in 
the world that the person from whom the scriptures dealing with multifarious 
subjects emerge is more well informed than the scriptures themselves; for 
instance, grammar etc., emanating from Par3ini and others, represent merely a 
part of the subject known to them. It goes without saying that, that great Being 
has absolute omniscience and omnipotence, since from Him emerge the lZg- 
Veda etc .-divided into many branches and constituting the source of 
classification into gods, animals, men, castes, stages of life, etc., and the source 
of all kinds of knowledge-and since the emergence of these Vedas from that 
Being occurs as though in sport and without any effort like the breath of a man, 
as is stated in the Vedic text, "Those that are called the 1 g-Veda, (Yajur-Veda, 
etc.) are but the exhalation of this great Being (Br. II. iv. 10). 

Or the aphorism means: 

Sincethe scripturesare Itsvalidmeans (of knowledge). 

3. (Brahman is not known from any other source), since the scriptures are 
the valid means of Its knowledge. 

The scriptures, viz the Itg-Veda etc., just enumerated, are the valid means of 
knowing (yoni) the real nature of this Brahman. The idea implied is that 
Brahman is known as the source of birch etc. of this universe from the 
scriptures alone that are a valid means of knowledge. The scriptural text, "That 
from which all these beings take birth" etc. (Tai. III. i) was quoted under the 
previous aphorism. 

Opponent : What need is there again of this aphorism, since by quoting such 
scriptural texts under the previous aphorism itself, it was shown that Brahman 
is to be known from the scriptures? 

The answer (of the Vedantin) is: Since the scriptures were not explicitly 
alluded to by the previous aphorism, it might be suspected that an inference 
alone had been presented (as the means of knowing Brahman) by the previous 
aphorism, "That from which" etc. (B. S. I. i. 1). In order to eliminate that 




doubt, this aphorism says, "(Brahman is not known through any other means), 
since the scriptures are the valid means of Its knowledge." 

TOPIC 4: UPANIpDS REVEAL BRAHMAN 

Op ponent : How is it a g ain asserted that Brahman has the scriptures alone as 
Its valid means of knowled g e? For in tthe aphorism of Jaiminf ). "Since the 
Vedas are meant to en j oin action , those portions of them which have not this 
purpose in view are useless" (Lji. 1 ). it has been shown that the scriptures are 
concerned with action. Therefore the Upani$ads are useless , as they do not 
enj oin action. Or they may form part of an in j unction about action by wa v of 
revealin g the a gent, the deit y, etc, of that action ; or they may be meant for 
enj oinin g some other kind of action such as meditation ( on g ods and others ). 
For there is no possibility of the Upani$ads bein g the valid means of knowin g a 
thin g already in existence , since an existin g thin g is known throu g h direct 
perception etc .68 And just because no human objective is gained through the 
revelation of something that is neither acceptable nor rejectable, it has been 
said, "Since the corroborative statements (Arthavdda)64 can be combined with 
some injunction to form a single idea, they become a valid means of 
knowledge (of virtuous deeds) by way of eulogizing the (duties enjoined by 
the) injunctions" (Jai. S(i. I. ii. 7). This has been stated thus, so that such 
sentences as "He wept"(Tai.S. II. v. 11 ) may not become meanin g less , but ma y 
serve some purpose bv wav of eulo g izin g . As for the mantras such as "lie tva" 
( T. S. I. i. 1 ) etc, they have been shown to be connected with action bv virtue of 
their speakin g about some duty or its means. Nowhere is a Vedic sentence seen 
to serve an y purpose without some connection with an in j unction , nor can it 
reasonably do so. Moreover , an in j unction is not possible with re g ard to 
somethin g already accomplished , for an in i unction is concerned with action. 
Therefore the Upanipds become su p plementary to in j unctions b v revealin g the 
nature of the a g ents and the deities needed in some action.55 Or if this be not 
accepted out of fear of i g norin g the context . 66 still the Upani$ads may relate to 
the meditations expressed by their own texts. Hence Brahman is not (validly) 
presented (as an object of knowledge) by the scriptures. 

This contingency having arisen, the answer is being given: 


































































































But that Brahman qAvqql-q being the object of full import. 

4. But that Brahman (is known from the Upanisads), (It) being the object of 
their fullest import. 

The word to (but) is meant to rule out the opponent's point of view. Tat 
(That) means Brahman, which is omniscient and omnipotent, which is the 
cause of the origin, existence, and dissolution of the universe, and which is 
known as such from the Upani$ads alone. 

How? 

Samanvaydt, because of being the object of their fullest import; for in all the 
Upani$ads the texts become fully reconciled when they are accepted as 
establishing this very fact in their fullest import. (As for instance): "0 amiable 
one , this universe , before its creation , was but Existence , one without a second" 
I Ch. VI. ii. 1 ). "Before creation this universe was but the Self that is one" (Af. 
I. i. 1 ). "That Brahman is without prior or posterior , without interior or exterior 
l i.e. homo g eneous and without a second ) . This Self , the perceiver of 
everythin g, is Brahman" fBr. II. v. 19 ). "All that is in front is Brahman , the 
immortal" (Mu . II. ii. 11 ). etc. Besides , when the words in the Upani g adic 
sentences become fully ascertained as but revealin g the nature of Brahman , it is 
not proper to fancy some other meanin g: for that will result in re j ectin g 
somethin g established bv the Vedas and accentin g some other thin g not 
intended by them. And it cannot be held that those words have for their 
ultimate purpose onl y a delineation of the nature of the a g ent ( viz the 
performer of the rites ), for there are such Vedic texts as " ( But when to the 
knower of Brahman everythin g has become the Self ) then ... what should one 
see and throu g h what?" (Br. II. iv. 14 k which deny action , instrument , and 
result. Nor is Brahman an ob j ect of perception , even thou g h It stands as an 
established , positive entit y, for the unity of the Self and Brahman , as stated in 











































































"That thou art" ( Ch. VI. viiit. 7 ). cannot be known otherwise than from the 
scriptural texts. As for the ob j ection that instruction about Brahman is useless 
inasmuch as It Ls neither acceptable nor re i ectable . that is nothin g dama ging; 
for the attainment of the hi g hest human g oal ( of freedom ) becomes an 
accomplished fact only when the total eradication of all sorrows comes about 
as a result of the realization of the Self as Brahman bevond acceptance and 
rej ection. As for the presentation of the deities etc, for the sake of meditation 
contained in the Upani$adic texts themselves , that raises no difcultv.51 (The 
absolute) Brahman cannot even in that way become a factor in any injunction 
about meditation; for when unity is achieved , it is but reasonable that all ideas 
of dualit y, involvin g action , accessories , etc., should be eradicated , because 
( the absolute ) Brahman is neither acceptable nor re i ectable. Not that the 
perception of duality can crop up a g ain (from past impressions ) even after 
bein g ( wholl y) uprooted bv the realization of non-dualitv. If that were a 
possibilit y, then alone could it be shown that Brahman becomes involved in 
an y in j unction about meditation. Althou g h Vedic texts are not seen elsewhere 
to have any validity without bein g construed with in j unction , still in the face of 
the fact that the knowled g e of Brahman does culminate in its result ( viz 
emancipation ), the validity of the scriptures dealin g with the means of that 
emancipation cannot be set aside.58 Nor is the validity of the Upani$ads to be 
established bv inference , in which case alone it would have been necessary to 
cite analo g ous cases .59 Therefore it is proved that Brahman is known from the 
scriptures alone. 

Others t e.g . Vrttikara ) stand up here in o p position ( and sa v) : Thou gh 
Brahman is known from scriptures alone , still It is presented as a factor 
involved in the in j unction about meditation , j ust like the sacrificial stake and 
the Ahavaniva fire , which thou g h unknown in ordinary life , are presented b v 
the scriptures as factors in in j unctions. How can this be so j 80 (This can be so) 
because the scriptures have in view either persuasion for or dissuasion from 
activities, as is declared by those who know the import of the scriptures: "The 
obvious purport of the Vedas is to generate knowledge about duties" (Sabara- 
Bha,sya, I. i. 1); "By injunction is meant a sentence impelling one to duty (ibid. 
I. i. 2); "An instruction (i.e. an injunctive sentence like v He shall sacrifice') is 
that which imparts the knowledge of these (virtuous deeds)" (Jai. Su. I. i. 5); 
"There (in the Vedas) words standing for established realities should be uttered 
with verbal terminations etc." (ibid. I. i. 25); "Since the Vedas are meant for 











































































































enjoining duties, all (the sentences) that do not have that purport are 
meaningless" (ibid. I. ii. 1). Therefore the scriptures become meaningful by 
either persuading a person to act for a particular object or dissuading him from 
action for some other; other sentences (e.g. Arthavdda) have their usefulness as 
forming parts of these. And since the Upani$adic texts have a similarity with 
those Vedic texts, they should be purposeful in that way alone. It being granted 
that the Upanisadic sentences have injunctions in view, it stands to reason that 
just as such means as the Agnihotra sacrifice are enjoined for one who desires 
heaven, so also the knowledge of Brahman is enjoined for one who hankers 
after immortality. 

Objection : Has it not been pointed out that here (in the Phrvs and Uttars 
Mlmdtfrsds) there is a difference of the objects inquired into? In the section 
dealing with rites etc., the things to be inquired into are the religious acts that 
have still to emerge into being, but here (in the section on knowledge) the 
object inquired into is Brahman that is an established reality, existing for ever. 
As between these two, the result of the knowledge of Brahman should be 
different from the result (heaven etc.) of the knowledge of virtuous deeds 
depending on performance. 

Op ponent ( i.e. Vrttikira ) : It cannot be so . for Brahman is presented here as a 
factor in an in i unction about some action. For there are such in j unctions ( about 
meditation ) as . "The Self , m v dear , is to be seen" ( Br. II. iv. 5 ). "That Self that 
is free from sin.... is to be sou g ht for , is to be inquired into" t Ch. VIII. vii. 1 ). 
"The Self alone is to be (profoundl y) meditated on" IBr I. iv. 7 ). "One should 
meditate only on the world of the Self" (Br. I. iv. 15 ). "One who wants to 
become Brahman shall meditate on Brahman"' IMu. ITT, ii. 9). As a result of 
such texts the question arises, "What is that Self? What is that Brahman?" And 
all such Upani$adic terms as, "Eternal, omniscient" (G. II. 24), "ever satisfied" 
(G. IV. 20), "even pure, intelligent, and free by nature" (Nr. U. 9), "Brahman is 
con sciousness and bliss" (Br. IN. ix. 28), and so on, serve a purpose by 
presenting the characteristics of the Self and Brahman. From Its worship will 
accrue the result, viz liberation, which is revealed in the scriptures, but is not 
known from any other source. But if the Upani$adic sentences do not form 
parts of injunctions about actions and they refer merely to an entity, there will 
be no possibility of acceptance or rejection, so that they will become certainly 
































useless like such sentences as, "The earth consists of seven islands", "There 
goes that king", and so on. 

Objection : Even a simple statement about an entity as in such sentences, 
"This is not a snake, it is a rope", is seen to serve some purpose by removing 
the fear occasioned by the error. Similarly here also the Upani~adic sentences 
will, by virtue of their imparting instruction about the transcendental Self, 
serve the purpose of removing the error of thinking oneself as a transmigrating 
soul. 

Op ponent : This can be so if . like the removal of the error of the snake ( on a 
rope) on hearin g the nature of the ro pe, the error about transmi g ration is 
removed as soon as one hears of the nature of Brahman. But as a matter of fact . 

it is not removed , for it .is seen that even in the case of one who has heard of 
Brahman , such characteristics of a soul in bonda g e as ha p piness , sorrow , etc, 
persist i ust as before. Besides , it is seen that reflection and meditation . 
occurrin g after hearin g, are en j oined in . "The Self is to be heard of . reflected on 
and (profoundl y) meditated upon"62 (Br. II. iv. 5). Therefore Brahman is to be 
accepted as having been presented by the scriptures (for meditation) in a 
context of injunction about meditation. 

Vedintin: With re g ard to this we :!: sav: Not so ; for the results of action and 
the knowled g e of Brahman are different. By virtuous deeds are meant those 
ph ysical , vocal , and mental actions which are well known in the Vedas and 
Srm tis . and an inquiry about which has been set forth in the aphorism . "Hence 
thereafter ( should be commenced ) an inquiry about virtuous deeds"" ( Jai. Sn. I. 
i. 1 ) . Even vices like in jur y are to be inquired into with a view to shunnin g 
them , for they too are revealed in the Vedic sentences expressin g prohibition. 
Hap piness and sorrow are the results of these two-of virtue and vice , consistin g 
of g ood and evil-with re g ard to which the Vedic texts ( of in j unction and 
prohibition ) are authoritative ; and these results , arisin g from the contact of 
senses and ob j ects , are familiarly experienced by all creatures ran ging from 
Brahma to the motionless (trees etc. ) . The g radation of ha p piness amon g 
embodied bein g s startin g from men and endin g with Brahma is known from the 
U pani$ads ( Tai. II. viii . Br. IV. iii. 33 ) . From that a g ain is known a g radation in 
its cause which is virtue. From a g radation of virtues is known a g radation 
amon g the persons qualified ( for them ) . It is a familiar fact that competence is 
evaluated in terms of aspiration and ability. As for instance , the performers of 










































































































sacrifices etc, proceed alon g the Northern Course ( after death ) in accordance 
with the excellence in their meditation and concentration of mind , whereas the y 
move alon g the Southern Course , startin g from smoke , as a result of 
performin g igfa. pftrta . and datta.04 There again (in the world of the Moon), a 
gradation of happiness and the means of its attainment is known from the text, 
"Residing there as long as the result of action, producing the enjoyment, lasts 
(they come back)" (Ch. V. x. 5). Similarly the little happiness, existing in a 
graded order among creatures ranging from men to the immobile and hellish 
ones, is known to be the product of virtuous deeds themselves about which the 
Vedic texts are authoritative. So also from a perception of a gradation of sorrow 
among higher and lower embodied beings, it becomes clear that there is a 
gradation in their causes which are the vicious deeds prohibited by the 
authoritative Vedic texts, and that there is also a gradation among the 
performers of those deeds. Thus it is well known from the Vedic texts, Sm;tis, 
and reasoning that this transient world is constituted by a gradation of 
happiness and sorrow, that this gradation occurs to persons who are subject to 
such defects as ignorance, and that it comes to them after their birth and in 
accordance with the gradation of their virtuous and vicious deeds (in earlier 
lives). In support of this there is the Vedic text, "For an embodied being there 
can be no eradication of happiness and sorrow to be sure" (Ch. VIII. xii. 1), 
which is a corroborative restatement (anuvdda, f.n. 54) of the nature of the 
world described earlier. And from the denial of any contact with happiness and 
sorrow as contained in the text, "Happiness and sorrow do not touch one who is 
definitely bodiless" (ibid.), it follows that it is with regard to emancipation, 
which is the same as bodilessness, that the denial is made of its ever being the 
result of virtuous deeds of which the Vedic texts are the only means of 
knowledge. For if it be a product of virtuous deeds (e.g. meditation), there can 
.be no denial of its contact with happiness and sorrow. 

Opponent : Unembodiedness (i.e. the state of not being identified with the 
body) can itself be the product of virtuous deeds. 

Veddntin : Not so; for unembodiedness is inherent in the Self in accordance 
with such Vedic texts as, "Having meditated on the Self as bodiless in the midst 
of bodies, as permanent in the midst of the impermanent, and as great and 
pervasive, the wise man ceases to grieve" (Ka. I. ii. 22), "For that Puru$a 
(infinite Being) is without vital force (i.e. organs of action) and mind (i.e. 

















organs of perception)" (Mu. II. i. 2), "For this infinite Being is unattached" (Br. 
IV. iii. 15). Hence it is proved that the unembodiedness, called liberation, is 
eternal and different from the results of works that have to be performed. 
Among things permanent, some are changefully permanent, with regard to 
which the idea; "That very thing is this one", does not get sublated even though 
the thing goes on changing, as for instance the earth according to those who 
say that the world is permanent, or the three constituents of matter (sattva, 
rajas, and tamas) according to the Samkhyas. But this one is unchangingly 
permanent in an absolute sense; It is all-pervasive like space, devoid of all 
modifications, ever content, partless, and selfeffulgent by nature. This is that 
unembodiedness, called liberation, where the idea of the three periods of time 
does not exist and virtuous and vicious deeds cease along with their effects 
(happiness and sorrow), as stated in the Vedic text, "Speak of that thing which 
you see as different from virtue and vice, different from cause and effect, and 
different from the past and the future" (Ka. I. ii. 14). (Since liberation is 
different from the result of work, it being unrelated to virtue and vice), 
therefore liberation is the same as Brahman about which this deliberation is 
started. Had liberation been spoken of (in the scriptures) as being 
supplementary to action and had it been asserted as a thing to be achieved, it 
would become impermanent. In that case liberation would become some sort of 
an excellent product amidst a horde of above-mentioned products of work 
standing in a graded order. But all who believe in liberation admit it to be 
eternal. Thus (since liberation is the same as Brahman), it is not proper to talk 
of Brahman as though it formed a factor in some action. Besides, the 
(following) texts show liberation as coming immediately after the knowledge 
of Brahman; and thereby they deny any activity in the interval: "Anyone who 
knows Brahman becomes Brahman" (Mu. III. ii. 19), "When that Brahman, the 
basis of all causes and effects, becomes known, all the results of his (i.e. 
aspirant's) actions become exhausted" (Mu. II. ii. 8), "One who knows the Bliss 
(that is the very nature) of Brahman, ceases to have any fear from anything" 
(Tai. II. ix), "0 Janaka, you have certainly attained (Brahman that is) 
fearlessness" (Br. IV. ii. 4), "It knew only Itself as, V I am Brahman', thereby It 
became All" (Br. I. iv. 10), "Then what delusion and what sorrow can there be 
for that seer of unity?" (I§. 7), and so on. So also one should refer to the 
following text for the denial of any duty in between the realization of Brahman 
and becoming All: "While realizing this (Self) as that Brahman, the seer 
Vamadeva knew, V I was Manu and I was the sun'" (Br. I. iv. 10). This is just 



like the sentence, "Standing there he sings", where it can be understood that the 
man has no other activity in between his standing and singing. And the 
following and similar other texts show that the result of the knowledge of 
Brahman is nothing but the removal of the obstacles to liberation: "You indeed 
are our father who have ferried us across nescience to the other shore" (Pr. VI. 
8), "For it has been heard from the adorable ones like yourself that the knower 
of the Self goes beyond sorrow. Sir, such as I am, I am sorrowful. May you, 0 
venerable sir, ferry me across nescience" (Ch. VII. i. 3), "The adorable 
Sanatkumara showed the other shore of nescience to him (i.e. to Narada) who 
had become free from defects" (Ch. VII. xxvi. 2). There is also in evidence the 
aphorism of the great teacher Gautama, supported by reasoning: "Liberation is 
possible since the earlier ones in the series of sorrow, birth, impulsion (to virtue 
and vice), defects (e.g. attachment, repulsion, delusion, etc.), and false 
knowledge, get destroyed (in the reverse order) on the destruction of the 
immediately succeeding ones" (N. S. I. i. 2). And the removal of false 
ignorance follows from the knowledge of the unity of the individual Self and 
Brahman. 

But this knowled g e of the unity of the Self and Brahman is not a kind of 
meditation , called Sampad , e5 as in "The nnnd is certainly infinite , and the 
Visvedevas are infinite. Throu g h this meditation one wins an infinite world" 
(B: . Ill, i., 9 ) . Nor is it a form of meditation called Adhvasa . e9 as in "One 
should meditate thus: 'The mind is Brahman’ " (Ch. III. xviii. 1) and "The 
instruction is: 'The sun is Brahman’" (Ch. III. xix. 1), where the idea of 
Brahman is superimposed on the mind, the sun , etc. Nor is it a meditation 
based on some special activit y, as in . "Air is certainly the place of mer g er" . 
"The vital force is certainly the place of mer g er" (Ch. IV. iii. 14 1 .87 Nor is it a 
kind of purification of some factor in some (Vedic ) rite , as for instance the act 
of lookin g at the oblation (b v the sacrihcer’s wife for its purification ) .68 If the 
Knowled g e of the unity of the Self and Brahman is accepted as a kind of 
Sampad etc. , then it will flout the ascertainable meanin g eQ of all the words 
occurring in such sentences and establishing the unity of the Self and Brahman 
as, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), "1 am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), "This Self is 
Brahman" (Br. II. v. 19). Besides, thereby will be set at nought such sentences 
as, "The knots of the heart are untied and all doubts are resolved" (Mu. 11. ii. 
8), in which one hears of the result (of knowledge) consisting in the cessation 
of nescience. Furthermore, from the point of view of Sampad etc., such 











































sentences as, "One who knows Brahman becomes Brahman" (Mu. III. ii. 9), 
which speak of unity, with Brahman, cannot be fully justified. Therefore the 
knowledge of the unity of the Self and Brahman is not a kind of Sampad or 
anything of that sort. Hence the knowledge of Brahman is not dependent on 
human action. 

On what does it depend then? 

It is dependent on the thin g itself , as in the case of the knowled g e of a thin g 
g ot throu g h such valid means as direct perception. B~- no stretch of 
ima g ination can such a Brahman or its knowled g e be brou g ht into contact with 
work. Nor can it be held that Brahman has some association with work b y 

virtue of Its bein g the ob j ect of the act of knowin g; for in the text . "It is 
different from the known and a!so different from the unknown"70 (Ke. I. 4), as 
also in the text, "Through what should one know that owing to which all this is 
known?" (Br. II. iv. 14), Brahman is denied to be an object of the act of 
knowing. So also there is the denial of Its being the object of the act of 
meditation. For in the text, "That which is not uttered by speech, that by which 
speech is revealed", it is first declared that Brahman is not an object, and then it 
is said, "Know that alone to be Brahman and not what people worship as an 
object" (Ke. I. 5). 

Opponent : If Brahman be not an object (of knowledge), It cannot logically 
be presented by the scriptures (as stated in B. S. I. i. 3). 

Vedantin : Not so, for the scriptures aim at the removal of the differences 
fancied through ignorance. Not that the scriptures seek to establish Brahman as 
an entity referable objectively by the word "this". 

What do they do then? 

By presentin g Brahman as not an ob j ect on account of Its bein g the inmost 
Self fof the knower ). they remove the differences of the "known" , the 
"knower" . and the "knowled g e" that are fancied throu g h i g norarce.71 In 
support of this are the texts, "Brahman is known to him to whom It is 
unknown, while It is unknown to him to whom It is known. It is unknown to 
those who know and known to those who do not know" (Ke. II. 3), "You 
cannot see that which is the witness of vision,... you cannot know that which is 


































the knower of knowledge" (Bt. III. iv. 2), and so on. Therefore there can be no 
question of liberation becoming impermanent, for in it is revealed the reality of 
the eternally free Self, after eliminating from the Self the idea of Its being 
under the bondage (of birth and death), fancied on It through ignorance. But 
from the standpoint of one who believes that liberation is a product, it is but 
logical that there should be a dependence on activity-mental, vocal, and 
physical. The position becomes the same if liberation be a transformation of 
something. From either point of view, liberation must of necessity be 
impermanent; for neither curd that is a modification, nor a jar that is a product 
is seen to be permanent in this world. And no dependence on work can be 
proved by assuming liberation to be a thing to be acquired; for it being 
essentially one with one's very Self, there can be no acquisition. Even if 
Brahman be different from oneself, there can be no acquisition, for Brahman 
being all-pervasive like space, It remains ever attained by everybody. 
Liberation cannot also be had through purification, so as to be dependent on 
action. Purification is achieved either through the addition of some quality or 
removal of some defect. As to that, purification is not possible here through the 
addition of any quality, since liberation is of the very nature of Brahman on 
which no excellence (or deterioration) can be effected. Nor is that possible 
through the removal of any defect, for liberation is of the very nature of 
Brahman that is ever pure. 

Opponent : May it not be, that though liberation is inherent in oneself, it 
remains covered and it becomes manifest when the Self is purified by action, as 
the brilliance of a mirror does when cleaned by the act of rubbing? 

Vedantin : No, since the Self cannot reasonably be the sphere of any action, 
for no action can take place without bringing about some change in its locus. 
But if the Self changes through action, It will be subject to impermanence, and 
that will militate against such texts as, "It is said to be immutable" (Gita, II. 
25). And that is undesirable. Hence the Self can have no action occurring on 
Itself. And action, taking place on something else, cannot purify the Self, 
which is not an object thereof. 

Opponent : Is it not a matter of experience that the embodied soul is purified 
by such activities occurring on the body as bath, rinsing of the mouth, wearing 
the sacrificial thread, etc.? 



Veddntin : Not so. It is the soul , co g nized throu g h i g norance . 72 as 
constituting a factor in the assemblage of body etc., that can he purified; for 
bath, rinsing of the mouth, etc. are directly perceived as associated with the 
body. It is reasonable that something associated with the body and cognized as 
the Self through ignorance should he purified by the actions taking place on the 
body. Just as that very entity gets the result of being cured, which is conjoined 
with the body, which identifies itself with the body, and on which arises the 
idea, "I am cured", consequent on the establishment of the balance of the 
constituents of the body (phlegm, bile, and wind), through a treatment of the 
body, so also that entity is purified to which occurs the idea, "1 am purified", as 
a result of such actions as bathing, rinsing the mouth, or wearing the sacrificial 
thread; and that entity certainly remains bound up with the body. For all actions 
are surely performed and the fruits thereof enjoyed by that entity which has the 
idea, "I am the doer", stemming out of the idea of "I", and which cognizes 
everything, as stated in the mantra, "One of the two enjoys the fruits having 
(various) tastes, while the other looks on without enjoying" (Mu. III. i. 1), as 
also the text, "The wise people call that the enjoyer which is associated with 
body, organs, and mind" (Ka. I. iii. 4). So also there are the texts: "The one 
deity remains hidden in all bein g s. He is allpervasive . the indwellin g Self of all . 
the re g ulator of all actions , the su p port of all bein gs, the witness . 
consciousness , non-dual , and without qualities" ( Sv. VI. 11 ). and "He is 
omnipresent , efful g ent , without bod y, wound , and sinews , pure and untouched 
b v sin" ( IS. 8 ) . These two mantras show that Brahman is bevond the imputation 
of all kinds of excellence f or inferiorit y), and It is ever pure. Liberation is the 
state of identity with Brahman , and hence it is not to be achieved throu gh 
purification. Besides , a part from these . 78 nobody can show any other mode 
whereby liberation can be associated with action. Accordingly, apart from 
knowledge alone, there cannot he the slightest touch of action here. 

Opponent: Is not knowledge a kind of mental action? 

Vedantin : Not so, because there is a difference. An action is in evidence 
where the injunction about it occurs independently of the nature of the thing 
concerned, and where it is subject to the activities of the human mind, as for 
instance in such sentences as, "When the priest (called Hota) is about to utter 
(the mantra) vaurat, he shall meditate mentally on the deity for whom the 
libation is taken up (by the Adhvaryu)" (Ai. Br. XI. viii. 1), "One should 












































mentally meditate on (the deity identified with) evening" (ibid). Though 
meditation, that is but thinking, is a mental action, yet it can be done, not done, 
or done otherwise by a man; for it is dependent on man. But knowledge arises 
from its valid means (e.g. perception, inference, etc.); and the valid means 
apprehend the things just as they are. Hence (valid) knowledge is not 
something to he done, not done, or done otherwise, for it is entirely determined 
by things, and neither by injunctions nor by man. Hence though knowledge is a 
mental act, it has a great difference. For instance, the thinking of a man or a 
woman as fire in, "0 Gautama, a man is surely a fire" (Ch. V. vii. 1), "0 
Gautama, a woman is surely a fire" (Ch. V. viii. 1), is certainly an act, since it 
arises from injunction alone and it is dependent on man. But the idea of fire 
with regard to the familiar fire is neither dependent on injunction nor on man. 

What is it then? 

Since it is determined by a thing coming within the range of perception, it is 
surely knowledge and not action. Thus also it is to be understood in the case of 
all objects coming within the range of valid means of knowledge. That being 
so, the realization of the unity of Brahman and the Self (that is never sublated) 
is also a kind of knowledge and it is not determined by injunction. Though 
verbs in the imperative mood etc. are seen (in the Upanisad) to be used with 
regard to this know - ledge, they become infructuous like the sharpness of razor 
etc. striking against stone etc., for they are aimed at something beyond the 
range of human effort inasmuch as that knowledge has for its object something 
(i.e. Brahman) that is neither acceptable nor rejectable. 

Opponent : Why are there then texts like "The Self, my dear Maitreyi, 
should be realized, should be heard of" etc. (Br. II. iv. 5), which have a 
semblance of injunction? 

Veddntin : We say that the y are meant for weanin g one back from ob i ects 
towards which one inclines naturally. For a man hankerin g after the hi g hest 
human g oal and en gaging in outward ob j ects under the idea . "Ma y g ood come 
to me . may not evil befall me" , but failin g to achieve thereby the hi g hest 
human g oal , there are such texts as . "The Self , mv dear Maitre vi. should be 
realized". These turn him back from the ob j ects , naturally attractin g his bod y 
and senses etc, towards them , and then they lead him alon g the current of the 
indwellin g Self.74 And for him, when he engages in the search of the Self, is 








































presented in the following texts the reality of the Self, that is beyond all 
acceptance and rejection: "All these are but that Self" (Br. II. iv. 6), 'But when 
to the knower of Brahman everything has become the Self,... what should one 
know and through what? ... Through what, 0 Maitreyi, should one know the 
knower?" (Br. IV. v. 15), "The Self is Brahman" (Br. II. v. 19), and so on. As 
for the criticism that a knowledge of the Self that does not combine with some 
action as its part cannot be meant either for acceptance or rejection, we admit it 
to be so indeed. It redounds to our credit that, on the realization of Brahman, 
there follow the attainment of full satisfaction and stoppage of all duties. In 
support of this is the Vedic text: "If a man knows the Self as 'I am this 1 , then 
desiring what and for whose sake will he suffer in the wake of the body?" (Br. 
IV iv. 12); and there is the Smrti text: "0 Arjuna, knowing this, one attains the 
highest intelligence and will have accomplished all one's duties" (Gita, XV. 
20). Therefore Brahman is not presented as a factor in any injunction about 
knowledge. 

As for the assertion of some people (viz followers of Prabhakara) that apart 
from injunctions and prohibitions and factors connected with them as 
subsidiaries, no section of the Vedas speaks of mere things as such, we say that 
this is wrong. For the all-pervasive entity, presented in the Upanisads alone, 
cannot be a subsidiary of anything else. It cannot be said that Brahman does 
not exist, nor can It be realized even though It is known from the Upani$ads as 
the all-pervasive entity beyond worldly qualities, as different from all things 
belonging to the four classes, viz those that can be produced, (purified, 
transformed, and achieved), and as occurring in Its own context (in the 
Upanigads) and hence not forming a part of anything else; because that 
Brahman is called the Self in the text, "This is the Self which has been 
described as 'Not this, not this 1 " (Br. III. ix. 26) and because the Self cannot be 
denied inasmuch as It is the Self even of one who would deny It. 

Opponent : It is not proved that the Self is known from the Upani$ads alone 
inasmuch as It is contained in the idea of "I". 

Veddntin : Not so, for this has been refuted by saving that the Self is the 
witness of that idea. Leaving aside the (erroneous) knowledge of the Self as the 
agent (of actions), as contained in the idea of "I", the (real) Self-which is the 
witness of the idea of "I", which exists in all creatd es, which is without any 
differ ence of degrees, and which is one, unchanging, eternal, and allpervasive 



consciousness-(such a Self) is not known as the Self of all by anyone in the 
section of the Vedas dealing with virtuous deeds, or in the scriptures of the 
logicians. Hence this Self cannot be denied by anyone, nor can It be taken as 
forming a part of any injunction. And because It is the Self of all, It is beyond 
all rejection and acceptance; for all mutable and impermanent things culminate 
in Puru$a (the all-pervasive Entity) as their ultimate limit .75 Since Purusa has 
no cause of destruction, He is indestructible; and since there is no cause for 
change, He is changelessly eternal; and hence He is by nature ever pure, 
intelligent, and free. Thus the text, "There is nothing higher than Purusa; He is 
the culmination, He is the highest goal" (Ka. I. iii. 11) stands justified. 
Accordingly, the distinctive reference to Purusa as being known only from the 
Upanisads, as stated in the text, "I ask you of that Puru$a who is to be known 
only from the Upanisads" (Br. III. ix. 26), becomes justifiable if Purusa is the 
primary object to be revealed by the Upanisads. Hence it is mere bravado to 
say that there is no section of the Vedas dealing with things as such. 

As for the statements of the people versed in scriptures that "The perceptible 
result of these (Vedas) is the production of the knowledge of virtuous deeds", 
and so on, since these relate to an inquiry about virtuous deeds, they are to be 
understood as referring to the scriptures dealing with injunction and 
prohibition. Besides, for those who accept in any absolute sense the aphorism, 
"Since the Vedas reveal action, those texts that do not have that purport are 
meaningless", all instructions about things as such become useless. If, however, 
it is held that, as distinct from impulsion for or repulsion from action, things 
are taught in the scriptures as accessories of actions, what reason can there be 
to assert that the unchangingly eternal entity (Brahman) is not spoken of (in the 
scriptures)? Not that a thing about which any instruction is imparted, becomes 
an action thereby. 

Opponent : Though a thing is not an action, still the instruction about a thing 
is meant for being acted on, it being a means for the action. 

Vedantin : That is no valid objection; for even when a thing is presented for 
the sake of some action, there is no denying the fact that the instruction relates 
to something having the capacity to aid some action. It may serve that purpose 
by becoming a factor in some action; but this does not amount to saying that a 
thing as such is not taught in the scriptures. 



Opponent : Granted that instruction is imparted about things, what do you 
gain thereby? 

The answer ( of the Vedantin ) is: The instruction about the unknown thin g 
called the Self is possible like those very thin gs (e.g . curd . Soma . etc.T Its 
knowled g e serves the purpose of eradicatin g the unreal nescience that is the 
cause of the worldly state. Thus in this wav its purposefulness is quite on a par 
with that of the instruction about thin g s that are the accessories of work.76 
Moreover, there is the instruction about cessation from work in such texts as, 
"As Brahmaria should not be killed". And that is neither an action nor an 
accessory of action. If the instruction of things not meant for action be useless, 
then the injunction about withholding from action in such texts as, "A 
Brahmana should not be killed", becomes useless. But that is undesirable. 
From the 'connection of the negative (na) with the meaning of the root ban (to 
kill), the meaning derived is an inactivity consisting in not undertaking the act 
of killing that might have been resorted to out of natural proclivity. Apart from 
this holding aloof from killing, no other new activity, that is not guaranteed by 
the negative, can be fancied here. For it is the very nature of the negative to 
convey the idea of the non-existence of the action with which it gets connected. 
The idea of non-existence causes inactivity, and that idea ceases to exist 
automatically like fire that has exhausted its fuel.77 Therefore we think that 
except in such cases as the "Vow of Pra ia pati" . 711 the meanin g of prohibition 
in sentences like "A Brahmana should not be killed" is mere inaction consistin g 

in not undertakin g an act for which an impulse had arisen. Therefore it is to be 
noted that the statement of the uselessness ( occurrin g in the aphorism ). "Since 
scriptures are meant for en j oinin g action , those words that are not meant for 
action are useless" fJai Su. I. ii. 1 ). relates to the corroborative statements 
(Arthavdda) like mytholo g ical stories that do not serve any human purpose. 
Althou g h it was ar g ued that a reference to any ob j ect as such , without its bein g 
connected with an in j unction about work , will be useless like the statements . 
"The earth has seven islands" , etc. , that ar g ument is demolished on the 
evidence of the usefulness of such statements of facts as . "This is a rope and 
not a snake" .79 


Opponent : Did we not say that a statement about Brahman cannot be useful 
like the statement about the nature of the rope, since it is a patent fact that even 



































































a man who has heard of Brahman continues to have his mundane life just as 
before? 

Veddntin : To this the answer is being given: For one who has realized the 
state of the unity of the Self and Brahman, it cannot be proved that his 
mundane life continues just as before; for this contradicts the knowled g e of the 
unity of Brahman and the Self arisin g from the Vedas which are a valid means 
of knowled g e. From noticin g the fact that a man can have sorrow , fear , etc, as a 
result of his identif ying himself with the body etc. , it does not follow that this 
very man will have sorrow etc, contin g ent on false i g norance , even when his 
self-identification with the body etc, ceases after the realization of the unity of 
Brahman and the Self , arisin g from the Vedas which are a valid means of 
knowled g e. Just because a householder , who had been rich and prided himself 
on that account , had been seen to be sorrowin g for the theft of his wealth , it 
does not follow that this very man will be miserable for any loss of that wealth 
even after he has become a monk and g iven up the idea of bein g wealthy. From 
the fact that a man wearin g an ear-rin g had been seen to be ha ppy b v thinkin g 
of himself as the possessor of that ear-rin g, it does not follow that he will have 
that ver y ha p piness arisin g from the possession of an ear-rin g even after he 
dissociates himself from that ear-rin g and g ives up the .idea of his bein g its 
possessor. Thus it is stated in. the Vedic text . "Ha p piness and sorrow do not 
touch one who has become definitely unembodied"80 (Ch. VIII. xii. 1). 

Opponent : Suppose we argue that this unembodiedness comes when the 
body falls, but it cannot be so for a living man. 

Veddntin : Not so, for the idea of embodiedness is a result of false nescience. 
Unless it be through the false ignorance of identifying the Self with the body, 
there can be no embodiedness for the Self. And we said that the 
unembodiedness of the Self is eternal, since it is not a product of action. 

Opponent : May it not be that embodiedness is the result of the virtuous and 
vicious deeds done by the Self? 

Veddntin : No. There can be no performance of virtuous and vicious deeds 
by the Self, since it cannot be proved that It has any relation with the body. 
Since the assertion of the relation of the Self with the body (as the cause of 
virtue and vice) and the creation of that relation bv virtue and vice leads to an 






























































arg ument in a circle , therefore it is but blind tradition that makes one stand b y 
such an eternal chain. Besides , the Self can have no a g entshi p ( of virtue and 
vice ), since It is unrelated to work.81 

Opponent: Have not kings and others an agentship by their mere proximity? 

Vedantin : No, for their agentship can be explained as resulting from the 
relation established with the servants through payment of wealth etc. But no 
such cause for any relationship of either self-identity with or ownership of (the 
body) can be imagined for the Self, that can compare with the relationship 
between the master and servant achieved through payment of money etc., while 
false self-identity is directly perceived as a cause (for the Selfs relation with 
body and action). Hereby is explained how the Self can become a sacrificer 
(through false self-identification). 

Opponent : With regard to this, they (i.e. followers of Prabhakara) say: It 
may be argued that the Self, though in fact different from the body etc. has self- 
identification with the body etc. in a secondary sense (owing to some common 
property); but this is not false. 

Ved>ntin: Not so, for it is well known that words and ideas can have primary 
and secondary senses only to a man to whom the differences of the things etc. 
are evident. To a person to whom the differences of things are obvious-as for 
instance, when he knows it well enough through the methods of agreement and 
difference that there exists a distinct animal possessing manes and distinctive 
features denoted by the word lion in the primary sense, and that there is a man 
known to be possessed abundantly of such qualities of a lion as cruelty and 
bravery then to such a person the application of the word !ion and its idea 
become possible in a secondary sense, but not so to one to whom the 
differences of the two bein g s are not a p parent. In the latter case , the a p plication 
of words and ideas to thin g s other than those implied by them is not fi g urative : 
rather it must be the result of i g norance. In li g ht darkness , the word man and its 
idea are a p plied to the stump of a tree when it is not distinctly co g nized as 
'This is a stum p”, or the word silver and its idea are a p plied all of a sudden to 
nacre. Similarly when the word "I" and its idea are suddenl y ap plied in a literal 
sense to the a ggreg ate of bod y and senses owin g to a non-discrimination 
between the Self and non-Self , how can this be said to be fi g urative? It is seen 
that even the learned , who know the distinction between the Self and the non- 












































Self , use words and have ideas im plying a non-distinction ( between Self and 
nonSelf ). j ust like the (ig norant ) shepherds and g oat-herds. Therefore the idea 
of 'T' with re g ard to the body etc. , entertained by those who believe ( from 
mediate knowled ge) in a Self , distinct from the body etc. , must be false and not 
fig urative. Thus since embodiedness is the result of a false perception , it is 
established that the enli g htened man has no embodiedness even while livin g. 
Thus about the knower of Brahman occurs this Vedic text . "Just as the lifeless 
slou g h of a snake is cast off and it lies in the ant-hill , so does this body lie. 
Then the Self becomes disembodied and immortal , becomes the Praia (fl.e. 
livin g). Brahman , the (self-efful g ent ) Lig ht" (Br. IV. tv. 7 ). as also . "Thou gh 
without eves , he a p pears as if possessed of eves : thou g h without ears , he 
ap pears as if possessed of ears : thou g h without speech , he a p pears as if 
possessed of speech : thou g h without mind , he a p pears as thou gh possessed of 
mind : thou g h without vital force , he a p pears as thou gh possessed of vital 
force.”82 There is also the Smr6 text starting with, "What is the description of 
the man of steady knowledge, merged in Samddhi?" (Gita, II. 54), which while 
setting forth the characteristic of a man of steady (well-poised) wisdom, reveals 
that in the case of an enlightened man there is a total absence of any connection 
with an y impulsion to work. Hence a man who has realized his own identit y 
with Brahman cannot continue to have the worldly state j ust as before , whereas 
the man who continues to have the worldly state j ust as before has not realized 
his identity with Brahman. ThusSS it is all beyond criticism. 

And it was stated that from the mention of reflection and profound 
meditation (nididhvasana ) after hearin g ( fl.e. understandin g of Upani$adic 
texts-Br. II. iv. 5 ). it follows that Brahman is complementary to some 
inj unction , and Its knowled g e is not meant for culminatin g in a realization of 
Its own nature. That is no valid ob j ection , for reflection and profound 
meditation ( i ust like hearin g) are meant for g ivin g rise to immediate 
knowled g e. If Brahman had been known throu g h some other source of 
knowled g e and then used in some other act or meditation , then It could have 
become a part of an in j unction. But that is not the case. For j ust like hearin g, 
reflection and meditation are also meant for knowled g e .84 Hence it cannot be 
that Brahman is known from the scriptures as a factor included in any 
injunction about worshipful meditation (upasana). Accordingly, it stands 
established that Brahman is presented as an independent entity in the 
scriptures; for as a result of the proper determination of the Upani$adic texts, 



























































































































they are seen to speak of It. And from this point of view, the commencement of 
a separate scriptural text about that Brahman with the aphorism, "Hence (is to 
be undertaken) thereafter a deliberation on Brahman" (B. S. I. i. 1) is justified. 
If, however, Brahman were to be presented as complementary to an in j unction 
about worshipful meditation ( u pisana ). then since this had been already started 
with in the aphorism . "Hence thereafter is commenced an inquiry into virtuous 
deeds" t Jai. Su. I. i. D . a separate scripture should not have been be g un. Or 
even if it were commenced , it should have been be g un with . "Hence thereafter 
is commenced a deliberation on virtuous deeds ( i.e. worshipful meditation on 
Brahman ) that had been left over (b y Jaimini )". like the aphorism . "Hence 
thereafter ( i.e. after determinin g what are the primary and subsidiary factors ) is 
commenced a deliberation on thin g s conducive to the performance of sacrifices 
and attainment of human ob j ectives"85 ( Jai. S ( i. IV. i. 1 ) , But as a matter of 
fact the knowled g e of the unity of Brahman and the Self was not premised ( in 
Jaimini's book ): therefore the commencement of this book for that purpose 
with the aphorism . "Hence thereafter is undertaken a deliberation on 
Brahman" , is j ustifiable. Accordin gly, all these in j unctions as well as all the 
other means of knowled g e have their validity till the realization . "I am 
Brahman". For once the non-dual Self , that is neither acceptable nor re i ectable . 
is realized , there can be no possibility of the persistence of the means of 
knowled g e that become bereft of their ob j ects and sub j ects,A° Moreover, they 
(the knowers of Brahman) say, "When on the realization of the Existence- 
Brahman as I, the body, son, etc. become sublated and consequently the 
secondary and false selves cease to exist, how can there be any action 
(prompted by injunction and prohibition)? The Self can be a knowing agent 
earlier than the rise of the complete knowledge of Brahman that has to be 
sought for; but (when that search has been finished), the knower, freed from the 
defect of sin, becomes one with the entity arrived at through the search. Just as 
the ideas of the body as the Self are accepted by the wise as valid postulates 
(for empirical dealings), similarly these empirical means of knowledge are 
accepted as valid till the direct knowledge of ,the Self dawns" (Su7tdarapa? 
zdya-karika). 

TOPIC 5: THE FIRST CAUSE POSSESSED OF CONSCIOUSNESS 

Thus it has been said that the UpaniSadie texts are meant for impartin g the 
knowled g e of Brahman ; that when their meanin g is fully ascertained , they have 


























































































the Self , which is Brahman , as their fullest import : and that they culminate in 
( the knowled g e of ) Brahman even without any connection with an action. It 
has also been said that the omniscient and omnipotent Brahman is the cause of 
the ori gin, continuance , and dissolution of the universe. But the Sarhkhvas and 
others hold the view that a pre-existin g entity can be known throu g h other 
means (a part from the Upanisads ) . Inferrin g Pradhana (primordial Nature ) and 
other entities as the source of the universe , they construe the texts of the 
U panisads as pointin g to these only. They also think that in all the Upani$ads . 
dealin g with creation , the cause is sou g ht to be presented throu g h the effect 
with the help of inference.87 They further hold that the contacts between the 
sentient souls ( Puru$ as) and Pradhana can always be inferred.88 A g ain from 
these very texts , the followers of Kanada infer God as the efficient cause and 
the atoms as the material cause. Similarlv there are other lo g icians ( viz 
Buddhists and others ) who stand up here in o p position with g arbled 
q uotationsR 0 and sophistry as their mainstay. That being the case, the teacher 
(Vyasa), who is versed in the valid imports of words and sentences, refutes the 
diverse ideas based on garbled quotations and sophistry by placing these in 
opposition, so as to prove that the texts of the Upani$ads aim at imparting the 
knowledge of Brahman. 

Now among these, the Sarhkhavas think that the insentient Pradhana, 
comprising its three constituents (gums- Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas), is the cause 
of the universe. They say, "The Upanipdic texts, which according to you 
(Vedantin) reveal an omnipotent and omniscient Brahman as the cause of the 
universe, can be understood equally well to imply that Pradhana is the cause of 
the universe. As for omnipotence, Pradhana can also have it well enough in 
respect of its own modifications; similarly omniscience also is logical." 

How? 

Sdnhkhya : That which you consider to be knowledge is a characteristic of 
Sattva, as is proved from the Smrti, "Knowledge springs from Sattva" (Gita, 
XIV. 17). And the Yogins, possessed of body and senses, are well known to be 
omniscient by virtue of their knowledge that is a characteristic of Sattva, it 
being a familiar fact that omniscience follows from the highest perfection of 
Sattva. For it cannot be imagined that the attributeless, all-pervasive entity 
(Puruga), that is mere consciousness without a body and senses, can have any 
knowledge of either all things or a few. But Pradhana, comprising its three 
































































constituents, has Sattva, the source of all knowledge, even in its (own 
primordial) state of Pradhana (i.e. balance of the three constituents); and 
therefore omniscience in a secondary sense is declared in the Upani$adic texts 
for this Pradhana even though it is insentient. In postulating omniscience for 
Brahman, it has to be admitted even by you that Brahman becomes omniscient 
by Its potentiality to know everything. Not that Brahman stands there actually 
knowing all things for all times. For on the assumption that Brahman's 
knowledge is eternal, Its independence with regard to the act of knowing will 
be compromised. On the contrary, if the act of knowing be impermanent, 
Brahman will cease to exist when the act of knowing ceases (or "may cease 
from the act of knowing"—according to another reading). That being the case, 
the conclusion that emerges is that omniscience follows from the potentiality to 
know everything. But your standpoint is that Brahman is devoid of any 
accessory before creation. It is not, however, logical that anyone should have 
any knowledge even in the absence of body, senses, etc. Moreover, 
modifications are possible for Pradhana that is composite by nature, so that it 
can reasonably become a material cause like earth etc., whereas Brahman, 
which is uniform by nature and non-composite, can have no modification. 

Vedantrn : As against such a contention, this aphorism is advanced: 



(The Pradhana of the Satnkhyas is) q not (the cause of the universe), (because 
it is) a q- not mentioned in the Upani$ads, (which fact is clear) ~va: from the 
fact of seeing (or deliberation). 

5. The Pradhana of the S&thkhyas is not the cause of the universe, because it 
is not mentioned in the Upariisads, which fact is clear from the fact of seeing 
(or thinking). 



In the Upani$adic texts one cannot take one's stand on the insentient 
Pradhina imagined by the S3mkhyas as the cause of the universe; for it is not 
presented in the Upaniyads. 

How is it not presented in the Upanigads? 

On account of the fact of seein g .90 

How? 

The Upani$ads teach thus: Starting with the text, "0 amiable one, before its 
creation, the universe was but Existence (Brahman), one without a second" 
(Ch. VI. ii. 1), it is stated, "That (Brahman) visualized, 'I shall become many, I 
shall be born.' That (Brahman) created fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3). In that text, the 
universe, manifested as names and forms and referable by the word "it", is first 
ascertained to be identified with Existence "before its creation"; then the text 
shows that the creatorship of fire etc., that follows the visualization of future 
creation, belongs to that very entity, called Existence, which is under 
consideration. So also elsewhere: "In the beginning this universe was but the 
one Self alone; there was nothing else whatsoever that winked. He visualized, 
'Let me create the worlds'" (Ai. I. L 1-2 ). the text speaks of creation after 
visualization. At some place the text declares thus after introducin g the PuruS a 
with sixteen hmbs:sl "He visualized , he created the vital force" ( Pr. VI. 3-4 ). 
B v the word ikrati the ( cog nate ! noun implied bv the verb ( Te. seein g) is sou ght 
to be indicated , as is the case with the word vajati.92 and not the root itself (i.e. 
to see). As a result, one can refer to the following texts and such others which 
have for their import the omniscient God as the cause (of the universe): "From 
Him who is omniscient in general and in detail, whose austerity (i.e. creative 
effort) is constituted by knowledge, emerged this Brahman (viz Hirai yagarbha) 
as well as name, form, and food" (Mu. I. i. 9). 

As for the statement that Pradhana can become omniscient through the 
characteristic of knowledge belonging to its constituent Sattva, that is not 
justifiable; for in that state (of Pradhana as such, when it has not changed 
through a loss of balance) there can be no possibility of knowledge as a 
characteristic of Sattva, because the constituents of Pradhana are then in 
balance. 





















Sanitkhya : Was it not stated that Pradhana can become omniscient by virtue 
of its potentiality for knowing all? 

V edJniin : That too cannot be proved. If during the state of equilibrium of 
the constituents, Pradhana is said to be allknowing by virtue of having the 
power to know that actually belongs to Sattva, then it can equally be said to 
have little knowledge on account of having the power of obstruction to 
knowledge that belongs to Rajas and Tamas. Besides, so long as Sattva is not 
illumined by the consciousness (of the witnessing soul), no change in Sattva 
can be called knowledge; and insentient Pradhana has no power to illumine. 
Therefore the omniscience of Pradhana is not justifiable. The all-knowingness 
of the Yogins cannot be quoted as an example, for they are conscious beings, 
so that they can become all-knowing through a perfection of their Sattva. If on 
the analogy of a heated lump of iron, burning something because of the fire in 
it, it be argued that Pradhana has the power of seeing owing to the presence of 
a witnessing entity, then it is but logical to hold that the entity, owing to which 
Pradhana has the power to visualize, is none other than the omniscient 
Brahman, and That is the cause of the universe. 

Ag ain , it has been ar g ued that even Brahman cannot have omniscience in the 
primary sense , for if It is an eternal knower. it cannot have any independence 
as re g ards the act of knowin g . The answer to this is: Now then , you have to be 
asked , sir . '‘How can one lose one's omniscience owin g to one's possession of 
the act of knowin g for ever?"93 It is a contradiction to assert that one has 
eternally the knowled g e that is capable of revealin g everythin g, and vet one is 
not omniscient. For should knowled g e be non-eternal , one may know 
sometimes and sometimes not , so that one may as well become non- 
omniscient. But this defect does not arise if knowled g e is eternal.94 

SJrkhya : If knowledge be eternal, any mention of independence about 
knowing becomes illogical. 

Vedmrtin : No, for even in the case of the sun, possessed of continuous heat 
and light, independence of action is seen to be asserted by saying, "The sun 
burns", "The sun shines". 

Smiikhya : It is only when the sun comes into contact with things to he burnt 
or illumined that one says, "It burns, it lights up". But Brahman has no contact 




































with any object of knowledge before creation; hence the illustration is inapt. 

Vedantin : No, for even in the absence of any object, it is said, "The sun 
shines", thereby ascribing agency to the sun. Similarly, even though Brahman 
had no object of knowledge, it is reasonable to ascribe agentship to It by 
saying, "It saw" Hence there is no inaptitude. If, however, the need of 
supplying an object (for the transitive verb "to know") arises, the Vedic texts 
speaking of "seeing" by Brahman become all the more logical. 

Sumkhya : What are those objects which form the content of God's 
knowledge before creation? 

Veddntin : We say that they are the unmanifested name and form which 
cannot be referred to either as different or nondifferent from Brahman , and 

which are about to become manifested.96 It goes without saying that the 
eternally pure God is ever possessed of the knowledge of creation, 
continuance, and dissolution; for it is held by the adepts in the Yoga scriptures 
that the Yogins get their direct knowledge about the past and the suture out of 
His grace. 

The further ob j ection was raised that , since Brahman has no body etc, before 
creation , no seein g is possible for It. That ob j ection can hardly be raised ; for 
like the efful g ence of the sun . Brahman has eternal consciousness by Its ver y 
nature , so that It has no dependence on the means of knowled g e. Moreover , in 
the case of a transmi g ratin g soul , sub j ect to i g norance , the rise of knowled ge 
de pends on body etc. , but not so in the case of God whose knowled g e is free 
from obstacles. And thus it is that the followin g two mantras show how God is 
not dependent on body etc. , and how His knowled g e has no coverin g : "He has 
no body and no or gan; none is seen to be either equal or superior to Him. The 
Vedas speak of His diverse supreme powers as also of His spontaneous action 
that is accomplished by His vi g our arisin g from knowled g e"96 (Sv. VI. 8); 
"Without hands and feet He grasps and moves quickly; he sees without eyes, 
hears without ears. He knows (all) that is to be known, but none can know 
Him. Him they call the first, the great, and the all-pervasive Entity" (Sv. III. 
19). 

S,bhkhya : From your point of view there can be no soul, distinct from God, 
which can transmigrate and whose knowledge can have limitations, for the 



























































Vedic text says, "There is no other witness but Him,... no other knower but 
Him" (Br. III. vii. 23). So what do you mean by asserting that for a soul under 
bondage, the rise of knowledge depends on body etc., but not so in the case of 
God? 

Veddntin : As to that, our answer is: Really speaking, there is no soul under 
bondage and different from God. Still just like the association of space with 
such conditioning factors as pots, jars, caves of mountains, etc., it is assumed 
that God has association with such limiting adjuncts as body etc. And people 
are seen to use words and ideas based on that association, as for instance, "The 
space in a pot", "The space in a jar", and so on, though these are non-different 
from space. And it is seen that by that association are created in space such 
false notions of difference as "The space within a pot". Similarly in the case 
under consideration, the idea of difference between God and a transmigrating 
soul is false, it having been created by nondiscrimination (i.e. ignorance) which 
causes the ascription of the limiting adjuncts-body and the rest. And though the 
Self (as a distinct entity) continues as before, It is seen to remain falsely 
identified with the body and the rest, the identification having arisen from a 
series of errors preceding each other. Granted such a state of bondage, it stands 
to reason that the transmigrating soul should depend on body etc. for its acts of 
seeing. 

And the ar g ument was advanced that Pradhana can be the ( material ) cause 
like clay etc. , since it is a composite thin g, but not so the non-composite 
Brahman : that was demolished bv the fact that Pradhana is outside the Vedic 
pale. How even lo g ic establishes the causality of Brahman , and not that of 
Pradhana etc. , will be elaborated under the aphorisms startin g with . "It is not 
so. for its characteristics are different"97 (II. i. 4). 

(The Saritkhyas) enter a protest here: As for the assertion that the insentient 
Pradhana cannot be the cause of the universe in the face of the Vedic reference 
to the fact of visualizing, that can be explained from another point of view; for 
in common parlance even an insentient thing is referred to figuratively as 
sentient. As for instance, it is a matter of experience that on noticing the bank 
of a river on the point of collapsing, they say, "The bank is about (lit. "wishes") 
to fall", where sentience is ascribed to the insentient bank. Similarly with 
regard to Pradhana, from which creation is imminent, there may be a figurative 
ascription of sentience by saying, "It saw". Just as somebody in ordinary life 

























first plans thus, "I shall bathe, and then eat, and go to the village in the 
afternoon by riding on a chariot", and having planned thus, he acts in that 
order, so also Pradhana transforms itself as Mahat and the rest in a regular 
order, so as to be referred to figuratively as a sentient entity. 

Objection : Why, again, should the seeing in the primary sense be discarded 
in favour of a secondary one? 

Samkhya : Because the figurative use of sentience is noticed in the cases of 
insentient things like water and fire in such sentences as, "That fire saw (or 
thought)" (Ch. VI. ii. 3), "These waters saw" (Ch. VI. ii. 4). Therefore from the 
fact of occurring in a context of secondary uses (in Ch. VI. ii. 2-4), it is to be 
understood that the "seeing" by Existence (which is but another name for 
Pradhana) is spoken of in a secondary sense. 

Veddntin : This contingency having arisen, an aphorism is presented here: 



If it be argued, (that the "seeing" is) zr}ur: in a secondary sense, then q it is 
not so, a>rq*q- owing to the use of the word Self. 

6. If it be argued that the seeing is in a secondary sense, we say, not so, 
owing to the use of the word Self. 

The assertion is wrong that the insentient Pradhana is referred to by the word 
Existence and that "seeing is ascribed to it in a secondary sense just as in the 
cases of water and fire". 

Why? 

"Owing to the use of the word Self." After the introductory sentence, "0 
amiable one, this universe, before its creation, was but Existence" (Ch. VI. ii. 
1), the creation of fire, water, and earth is stated in, "It saw.... It created fire" 



(Ch. VI. ii. 3). And then the text refers to that very seeing Existence as well as 
those fire, earth, and water by the word "deity", and the text says, "That Deity, 
that is such, saw (or thought), 'Now then let me manifest name and form by 
Myself entering into these three deities as the jiva (individual soul) that is but 
(My) Self" (Ch. VI. iii. 2). Now, if insentient Pradhana had been imagined to 
be the seer in some secondary sense, then Pradhana being the entity under 
discussion, it should have been alluded to by the text, "That Deity that is such". 
But in that case the Deity would not call the individual soul His own Self. For 
from usage and derivation the word jiva (the individual soul) means that which 
lives (i.e. has sentience), controls the body, add holds together the organs and 
senses. How can that soul be the Self of the insentient Pradhana? For the Self is 
the same as one's very essence. The insentient Pradhana cannot certainly have 
the sentient soul as its very essence. On the contrary, if Brahman, that is 
Consciousness, is accepted as the seer in the primary sense, Its use of the word 
Self with reference to the individual soul becomes justifiable. So also is the 
case with the text, "That (Existence) which is this (extremely) subtle thing, is 
the Self of all this (universe). That is Reality; That is the Self. That thou art, 0 
Svetaketu" (Ch. VI. vii. 8). By saying, "That is the Self", that text presents that 
Reality, that subtle Self, as the Self under consideration, and then in the text, 
"That thou art, 0 Svetaketu", occurs the instruction about It as the Self of the 
conscious being Svetaketu. But the "seeing" in the case of water and fire is 
secondary, since they are insentient inasmuch as they are objects of perception. 
Besides, they are mentioned as factors employed in the manifestation of name 
and form. Moreover, there is nothing like the word Self in their case to make 
their "seeing" a possibility in the primary sense. Hence it is reasonable that the 
"seeing" by them should be secondary as in the case of (the falling) of the bank 
of a river. Or the "seeing" by them too may be in the primary sense, this being 
possible from the point of view of the Reality forming their basis. But we 
pointed out that the "seeing" by Reality is not secondary because of the use of 
the word Self. 

Smizkhya : It may, however, be held that the word Self can be applied even 
to the insentient Pradhana, for it performs everything for the Self. This is just 
like using the word Self in such an expression as, "Bhadrascna is my Self", by 
a king in respect of a servant doing everything for him. As an officer serves a 
king by engaging himself in making peace, waging war, etc., so Pradhana 
serves the Self, the all-pervasive conscious Entity, by arranging emancipation 



and enjoyment for It. Or the same word Self can mean both sentient and 
insentient things, for such expressions are used in common parlance as, "The 
elements themselves", "The organs themselves", ("The supreme Self"), etc., 
just as much as the same word "jyotis" (fire) is used for a sacrifice as well as 
fire. So how can it be inferred from the use of the word "Self" that "seeing" is 
not applied in a secondary sense? 

Veddntin : Therefore the answer is being given: 


afaw II II 

RM-3Qil Because liberation is taught fgtq for one devoted to That. 

7. (Pradhdna is not the meaning of the word "Self"), because liberation is 
promised for one who holds on to That. 

The insentient Pradhana cannot be implied by the word "Self" : for the super- 
sensuous Existence , formin g the topic under discussion , is referred to in the 
text . "That is the Self" (Ch. VI. vi i . 8 ). and then bv sa ving. "That thou art" 
( ibid. ). the need of devotedness to It98 is advised for a sentient being who has 
to be liberated. Still later, liberation itself is taught in the words . "One who has 
a teacher knows. For him there is but that much delay as is needed for freedom 
t from the present bod y): then He becomes identified with Realit y" t Ch. VI. xiv. 
2) . If bv sa ving "That thou art" , the scripture should make one understand the 
insentient Pradhana to be the meanin g of the word Realit y, that is to sa y, impart 
the instruction . "Thou art insentient" , to a sentient bein g desirous of liberation . 
then the scripture , s peakin g contrariwise , will brin g evil for a man and lose its 
validity. But the scripture bein g free from defects , should not be fancied to be 
invalid. If . however the scripture , authoritative as it is . should tell an i g norant 
man , aspirin g for liberation , that the insentient non-Self is his Self , he will not 
g ive up that outlook about the Self , owin g to his faith tin the scripture ) like the 
blind man holdin g on to the tail of an ox-99 As a result , he will not know the 
Self that is different from that non-Self. And in that case he will be deflected 

from liberation and g et into trouble. Hence it is reasonable to hold, that , even as 









































































the scriptures advise about such true means as the A g nihotra sacrifice for one 
desirous of heaven etc. , so also they teach the aspirant for liberation about the 
real Self in such texts as . "That is the Self" ( Ch. VI. vti. 8 ), "That thou art . 0 
3vetaketu" ( ibid. ) . On this view the Instruction about liberation to one st.iick.rn g 
on to truth becomes j ustifiable on the analo g y of one g ettin g freed bv takin g 
hold of a heated axe .10° On the contrary, if instruction is imparted about 
something as the real Self that is but indirectly so, this will only amount to a 
form of meditation called Sampad . 101 as contained in the instruction, "One 
should meditate thus, V I am the vital force'" (Ai. A. H. i. 2.6), and its result will 
be impermanent. But to speak of it in that sense as an instruction about 
liberation becomes inconsistent. Accordingly, the word "Self" is not used in a 
secondary sense with regard to the inscrutable Reality. The use of the word 
"Self" in a secondary sense, in the case of a servant, in the sentence, 
"Bhadrasena is my Self", is justifiable since the difference between the master 
and the servant is obvious. Moreover, from the fact that something is referred 
to in a figurative sense somewhere, it is illogical to give a figurative meaning to 
something else when the only source of getting knowledge about it is verbal 
communication; for that will result in losing faith everywhere. And the 
statement is false that, on the analogy of the use of the same word "jyotis" (fire) 
for both sacrifice and fire, the word "Self" can be used for both sentient and 
insentient things; for it is wrong to assume different meanings for the same 
word (in the same context). Therefore (the real position is that) the word 
"Self", implying a conscious entity in its primary sense, is used in a figurative 
sense in such sentences as, "The elements themselves", "The organs 
themselves", by ascribing sentience to these. Even if the word "Self" be 
common to different things, it cannot be pronounced to imply either of the two 
(sentience or insentience) unless there be some determining factor like the 
context or a word prefixed. Not that any such factor can definitely decide here 
in favour of the insentient (Pradhana). As a matter of fact, the subjec* under 
consideration is Existence that visualizes. Besides, Sveta ketu, a conscious 
being, is near at hand. And we said that it i. not possible that the insentient 
should be the Self of the sentient Svetaketu. Hence the conclusion arrived at is 
that the word "Self" here refers to the sentient. Even the word "jyotis" implies 
by common usage that (fire) which illumines; but from the similarity of 
illuminating, arrived at by some eulogistic fancy (Arthavdda), it is applied to a 
sacrifice: thus the illustration has no cogency. 

























Or the aphorism can be interpreted differently. The explanation will be that, 
in the previous aphorism itself, the un-Vedic Pradhana was explained away as 
beyond the possibility of being meant by the word "Self" in any secondary or 
generic sense. And so in the present aphorism, "...because liberation is 
promised for one who holds on to That", an independent reason is offered for 
refuting Pradhana as the cause of the universe. Thus the insentient Pradhana is 
not the meaning of the word "Existence" (Sat). 

For what additional reason is Pradhana not meant by "Existence"; 


II5 ll 

-TqBecause of the absence of any mention of rejection, a as also (another 
reason). 

8. (Pradhana has not been spoken of even indirectly), because there is no 
subsequent mention of its rejection, and (because that militates against the 
assertion at the beginning). 

Supposing that Pradhana, though it is not the Self, is meant here by the word 
"Existence" and is taught in the texts, "That is the Self" (Ch. VI. vii. 8) and 
"That thou art" (ibid.), the Upani$ad (or teacher), seeking to teach the primary 
Self, should have spoken later on that Pradhana is to be rejected, so that after 
hearing that (eai lier) instruction the aspirant may not cling on to that Pradhana 
as the Self, owing to his not having been enlightened about the (true) Self. This 
can be illustrated thus: A man desirous of pointing out the (tiny star) 
Arundhati, first shows a nearby big star indirectly as the Arundhati itself. And 
then he discards it and shows subsequently the Arundhati itself. Similarly (here 
also) the text should have said, "This is not the Self." But it has not been done 
so. Rather it is seen that the Sixth Chapter (of the Chandogya Upani~ad) 
terminates by clinging on to the knowledge of Existence. 




The word "and" (in the aphorism) is used to point to an additional reason, 
viz that the assumption of Pradhana runs counter to the assertion started with. 
Granted even that there is a subsequent denial , there arises thereby the 
contin g ency of contradictin g the initial premise. The premise started with is 
that everythin g becomes known on knowin g the cause : for at the start of the 
conversation we hear: "(Gautama sa vs). Did you . 0 Svetaketu . ask about that 
( entity which is known from ) instruction (alone , and ) throu g h which the 
unheard becomes heard , the unthou g ht becomes thou g ht (manna ), and the 
unmeditated becomes meditated ( nididhvasana ) ?' (Svetaketu ) : v How can that 
entity be possibly known from instruction alone?' As after knowin g a lump of 
clay. 0 amiable one , everythin g made of clay is known , since all modifications 
have speech as their ori g in and exist in name onl y, clay alone bein g the realit y 
( Ch.VI.i.3 ). ... thus . 0 amiable one , is this Reality known from instruction 1 " ( Ch. 
VI. i. 2 - 6 ) . Besides , even if Pradhana . the so-called Existence which is the 
cause of all ob j ects of experience (i.e. en jo vment and sufferin g), be known 
either as an acceptable or re j ectable thin g, those entities comin g under the 
cate gor y of experiencers (i.e. sub j ects ) will still remain unknown . 102 for the 
experiencing subjects as a class are not modifications of Pradhana. Therefore 
Pradhana is not referred to by the word "Existence". 

What further reason is there to show that Pradhana is not referred to by the 
word "Existence"? 



fq-a ~[ Because of the merger into one's Self. 

9. Because of the merger of the individual into his own Self. 

With regard to the very cause, called "Existence", it is heard from the Vedic 
text: "0 amiable one, when in the state of sleeping thus, the individual gets the 
















































































epithet of svapiti (he sleeps), then he becomes unified with Existence, he 
becomes apita (merged) svam (into his own Self). Therefore they call him 
svapiti (he sleeps), for he becomes unified in his own Self" ( Ch. VI. viit. 1 ). 
This text g ives the derivative meanin g of the name svapiti of the individual , as 
it is well known in the world. The Self is meant here bv the word sva. The 
meanin g is that he finds himself arrived at . that is to sa v. he becomes absorbed 
into that which is bein g considered here under the name "Existence". The root i 
( meanin g "to go"), when preceded bv the prefix a pi. is familiarly known to 
mean mer ger, for it is seen that ori g in and dissolution are referred to bv the 
phrase prabhava-a pva vau. The individual soul keeps awake so lon g as it is 
under the influence of ' the characteristics of those ob i ects of sense-perception 
which it a p prehends as a result of its contact with the conditionin g factors 
constituted bv the diverse manifestations of the mind.103 It assumes the name 
of mind while seein g dreams under the influence of the impressions of the 
experiences of the wakin g state. And when these two conditionin g factors 
become inactive in the state of slee p, it a p pears to be mer ged, as it were , in the 
Self , owin g to the absence of particularization created bv limitin g ad j uncts : and 
hence it is said to have become mer g ed in its own Self. 104 This is like the 
Upani$adic derivation of the word hrdaya (lit. heart) shown in, "That Self 
exists verily v in the heart' (hrdi). This indeed is its etymological meaning, 'Hrdi 
ayam (in the heart it is)'. Therefore it is called hrdayam" (Ch. VIII. iii. 3). Or 
this is like the showing of the root meaning underlying the use of the words 
asandya and udanya in, "It is dpah (waters) indeed that nay ante (digest) the 
asita (eaten food)", (and hence water is called asanaya (Ch. VI. viii. 3), "It is 
fire indeed that nay ate (dries up) what is drunk (i.e. udaka)", (therefore fire is 
called udanya) (ibid.). Similarly with the help of derivation, the text shows the 
meaning of the term svapiti, viz that the individual gets merged in his own Self 
called Exist ence.105 Furthermore, the sentient soul cannot attain the insentient 
Pradhana as its very reality. Even if it be argued that Pradhana itself is referred 
to by the word sva (its own Self), because it belongs to the soul, still it will 
amount to a contradiction to say that the sentient merges in the insentient. And 
there is this other Upani$adic text which reveals the merger of the individual 
into a conscious entity in the state of sleep: "Being completely embraced by the 
conscious Self, it does not know anything external or anything internal" (Br. 
IV. iii. 21). Accordingly, that in which all sentient creatures merge is a 
conscious entity called "Existence", which is the cause of the universe. But 
Pradhana is not so. 





























































How, again is Pradhana not the cause of the universe? 



gfff- -q Because the knowledge is the same. 

10. Because the knowledge (gathered from the various Upanisads) is the 
same (as regards Consciousness being the cause). 

If the cause were diversely apprehended even in the Upani$ads, just as it is 
in the schools of the logicians-if Brahman were the cause somewhere, while 
somewhere else it were the insentient Pradhana, and still at other places 
something else-then the Vedic mention of "hearing" etc. could have been 
interpreted at times in a way to conform to the theory of Pradhana as the cause. 
But no such difference of apprehension occurs. In all the Upani$ads, 
Consciousness is apprehended uniformly as the cause, as for instance in the 
texts: "As from a burning fire, the sparks fly diversely in different directions, 
similarly from this Self all the senses and organs originate in their respective 
loci. After the senses originate their presiding deities, and after the deities 
emerge the sense-objects" (Kau. III. 8), "From that very Self, that is such, 
originated space" (Tai. II. i), "From the Self indeed came all this" (Ch. VII. 
xxvi. 1), "From the Self emerges this vital force" (Pr. III. 3), etc., where all the 
Upani$ads reveal the Self as the cause. And we said that the word "Self" 
implies a conscious entity. This also is a great proof of the validity of the 
Upani$ads, that just like the eyes etc., imparting the same kind of knowledge 
about colour etc., the Upani$ads also impart the same kind of knowledge about 
the Selfs being the cause of the universe. Hence it follows from the uniformity 
in the trend (of the meaning imparted) that omniscient Brahman is the cause of 
the universe. 

What more reason is there to prove that Brahman is the cause of the 
universe? 




;q And because revealed in the Upani$ads. 

11. And because (Brabnaan is) revealed (as such) in the Upanisads. 

In the very words of the Svetasvatara Upani$ad, Brahman is presented as the 
cause of the universe. Having introduced the all-knowing God, the 
Svetasvatara Upani$ad says, "In this universe He has no master, no ruler; nor 
has He any distinguishing sign. He is the cause and the ordainer of the masters 
of the organs. He has no originator and no ordainer" (Sv. VI. 9). Therefore it is 
proved that omniscient God is the cause of the universe, and not Pradhana or 
anything else. 


Topic 6: THE BLISSFUL ONE 

Opponent : It has been established with the help of logic that the Upani$adic 
texts, referred to by the aphorisms starting with, "That from which the birth etc. 
of this are derived" (I. i. 2) and ending with, "Because revealed in the 
Upani$ads" (I. i. 11), aim at proving that omniscient and omnipotent God is the 
cause of the origin, continuance, and dissolution of the universe. And by 
asserting that the same kind of knowledge is gathered from all the Upanisads, it 
has been explained that all the Upani$ads speak of a conscious entity as the 
cause. What then is the idea of proceeding with the remaining portion of the 
book? 

The answer t of the Veddntin ) is: Brahman is known in two aspects-one as 
possessed of the limitin g ad j unct constituted bv the diversities of the universe 
which is a modification of name and form , and the other devoid of all 
conditionin g factors and o p posed to the earlier. There are many texts like the 
followin g which , bv makin g a division between the sub i ectmatters of 




















knowled g e and i g norance , show in a thousand wavs these two aspects of 
Brahman: "Because when there is dualit y, as it were , then one sees 
somethin g .... But when to the knower of Brahman everythin g has become the 
Self , then what should one see and throu g h what?" ( B: . IV. v. 15 ), "That is the 
infinite (absolute Brahman ) where ( the illumined ) one does not see anythin g 
else , does not hear anythin g else , does not know anythin g else : while that is the 
finite ( q ualified Brahman ) where one sees somethin g else , hears somethin g 
else , knows somethin g else. That which is infinite is verily immortal , while that 
which is finite is mortal" (Gh. VII. xxiv. 1 ). 'The supreme Self , which after 
creatin g all forms and then g ivin g them names , ( enters into them as individual 
souls and ) continues to utter those names" ( Tah A. Ill, xii. 7 ). "It is without 
parts , action , chan ge, defect , and virtue and vice : It is the supreme brid ge 
leadin g to immortalit y, and It is like fire that has burnt out its fuel" ( Sv. VI. 19 ). 
"Not this , not this” fBr. II. iii. 6 ). "It is neither g ross nor minute , neither short 
nor lon g” t Br. TTT. viii. 8 ). '’That which is different from the Absolute is finite : 
that which is different from the Qualified is the Absolute”. That bein g the case . 
it is in the state of i g norance that Brahman can come within the ran g e of 
empirical dealin gs, comprisin g the ob j ect of ( worshipful or notional ) 
meditation , the meditator , and so on. Of such meditations , some are conducive 
to the attainment of hi g her states and some to liberation by sta ges, and some to 
the g reater efficacy of actions. 106 These differ in accordance with the qualities 
or conditionin g factors involved.'07 Although the one God, the supreme Self, is 
to be meditated on as possessed of those qualities, still the results differ in 
accordance with the quality meditated on, as is stated in the Vedic texts: "One 
becomes just what one meditates Him to be", "After departure from this world, 
a man becomes what he had willed to be (i.e. meditated on)" (Ch. III. xiv. 1). 
This is also borne out by the Sm;ti, "Remembering whatever object, at the end, 
he leaves the body, that alone is reached by him, 0 son of Kunt3" (Gita, VIII. 
6). Although it is the same Self that remains hidden in all beings-moving or 
stationary-still in the text, "He who meditates on the Self, manifested in a more 
pronounced way, attains It" (Ai. A. II. iii. 2.1), one hears about the Self¬ 
unchanging and ever homogeneous though It is -that there is a difference in the 
degrees of Its manifestation of glory and power, that being caused by the 
gradation of the minds by which It becomes conditioned. In the Sm;ti also there 
is the text: "Whatever being there is great, prosperous, or powerful, that know 
thou to be a product of a part of splendour" (GYta, X. 41), where it is enjoined 
that wherever there is an excess of greatness etc. it is to be worshipped as God. 







































































































Similarly here also it will be stated that the effulgent all-pervasive entity, 
residing in the solar orb, must be the supreme Self, for (the mention of) the 
transcendence by Him of all.sins is an indication to that effect (B. S. I. i. 20). 
This also is the line of interpretation that is noticeable in the aphorism, "The 
word akasa (lit. space) is used in the sense of Brahman, for Brahman's 
indicatory mark is in evidence" (I. i. 22), etc. Thus also it is a fact that, 
although the knowledge of the Self results in instantaneous liberation, yet its 
instruction is imparted with the help of some relationship with some 
conditioning factor. Accordingly, although the relationship with the 
conditioning factor is not the idea sought to be imparted, still from the 
reference to the superior and inferior Brahman the doubt may arise that the 
knowledge refers to either of the two; and this has to be decided upon by taking 
into consideration the trend of the sentences. The present aphorism itself, "He 
who is full of Bliss (i.e. the Blissful One) is Brahman, because there is a 
repetition (of Bliss)" may be quoted as an illustration. The remaining portion of 
the book is proceeded with in order to show that although Brahman is one, It is 
spoken of in the Upanisad as either to be meditated on or known (respectively) 
with or without the help of Its relation with the limiting adjuncts. Moreover, the 
refutation of any other insentient thing as the cause (of the universe) that was 
made by the aphorism, "Because the knowledge (gathered from the various 
Upanisads) is the same" (I. i. 10), is being elaborated in the remaining text, 
which, while explaining other sentences as speaking of Brahman, refutes any 
other cause opposed to Brahman. 

Doubt : After presenting successively the selves made of food (Tai. 11. i. 2), 
vital force (Tai. II. ii. 2), mind (Tai. II. 6ii. 2), intelligence (Tai. II. iv. 1), it is 
stated, "As compared with this self made of intelligence, there is another inner 
self full of Bliss" (Tai II. v. 2). Here the doubt arises: Is the supreme Brahman, 
presented in "Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite" (Tai. II. i), spoken of 
here by the word "Blissful One" (Anandarnaya), or is it some entity like the 
seifs constituted by food etc., which is other than Brahman? What should be 
the conclusion here? 

Opponent (i.e, Vrttikm)\ The Blissful One must be a 
secondary self other than Brahman. 



Why? 


Because He is included in the series of the secondary seifs constituted by 
food etc. 

Objection : Even so, the Blissful One must be the primary Self, He being the 
inmost of all. 

Opponent : It cannot be so, for He possesses such limbs as joy etc. and 
because the Upani$ad refers to His embodiedness. If the Blissful Self were the 
primary Self, It could not have possessed (the limbs) happiness etc. But in this 
context the Upanisad says, "Of Him, joy is verily the head" (Tai. II. v), and so 
on. Embodiedness is also mentioned in, "Of that preced ing (intelligent) Self, 
this One (i.e. the Blissful One) is the embodied self" (Tai. II. iii). The meaning 
of this is: "Of the preceding one", i.e. of the intelligent self, "this One is the 
embodied Self", "which" is this One full of Bliss. And it is not possible to deny 
the touch of joy and sorrow so long as one has a body. Therefore by the term 
"full of Bliss (or Blissful)" is meant the transmigrating soul. 

Veddntin : This being the position, it is said: 



WRKR4: The Blissful One TtIT'jc on account of repetition. 

12. The Blissful One is the supreme Self on account of repetition. 

The supreme Self alone can be the "One full of Bliss" (Blissful One). 

Why? 

Because of repetition; for it is in reference to the supreme Self alone that the 
word "Bliss" is repeated many times. After introducing the Blissful One, and 
speaking of Him as Bliss in the text, "He is Bliss to be sure" (Tai. II. vii. 1), it 



is stated, "For one (i.e. the individual) becomes happy by coming in contact 
with Bliss. Who indeed would inhale or exhale if this Bliss were not there in 
the supreme space (within the heart)? For this One indeed delights people" 
(Tai. II. vii), "This is an evaluation of Bliss" (Tai. II. viii. 1), "He attains this 
self full of Bliss" (Tai. II. viii. 5), "The enlightened man is not afraid of 
anything after realizing the Bliss of Brahman" (Tai. II. ix. 1), and "He knew 
Bliss as Brahman" (Tai. III. vi). In another Upani$ad also the word Bliss is 
seen to be used for Brahman Itself in the sentence, "Knowledge, Bliss, 
Brahman" (Br. III. ix. 28.7). Thus from the repeated use of the word Bliss for 
Brahman, it is understood that the Blissful (Anandarnaya) Self is Brahman. 

As for the criticism that the Blissful One is also a secondary self because of 
His occurrence in the chain of secondary seifs, counting from the one 
constituted by food, that creates no difficulty, the Blissful One being the 
innermost of all. Being desirous of instructing about the primary Self, the 
scripture follows the line of understanding of common people. Thus it (first) 
adopts as the Self the body constituted by food and known as the Self to the 
extremely dull people. And then the scripture lets the successive ones, which 
are really non-Selves, to be grasped as the seifs of the earlier ones, being 
successively inner than and similar to the earlier ones, like the images formed 
by pouring molten copper etc. into moulds. By following such a process for 
easy comprehension, the scripture teaches about the Blissful One, who is the 
Self in the real sense. This is the more logical interpretation. As in the case of 
showing the star called Arundhati (B. S. I. i. 8), the real Arundhati happens to 
be the one mentioned last, after the indication of many stars which are assumed 
to be Arundhati, similarly here also the Blissful One must be the primary Self, 
He being the inmost of all. 

And the objection was raised that for the primary Self it is illogical to fancy 
joy etc. as Its head etc. But that fanciful ascription of limbs occurs not because 
of the nature of the Blissful Self, but because of the presence of the penultimate 
limiting adjunct (intellect) immediately before. Therefore the objection is 
groundless. The embodiedness of the Blissful One too is spoken of in a context 
of the successive embodiedness of the food-self and the rest; and hence, unlike 
the individual soul, the Blissful Self has no real embodiedness. Accordingly, 
the Blissful One is the supreme Self. 



fkWig Owing to the use of a word denoting modification 9' not so, Off4q if it 
be argued thus, (then) 9' not (so); because of Aillg abundance. 

13. If it be argued that (the Blissful One) is not Brahman, owing to the use of 
a word (suffix) denoting modification, we say no, for the word is used in the 
sense of abundance. 

Here the opponent says: The Blissful One cannot be the supreme Self. 

Why? 

Because of the use of the word may at (as a suffix) denoting modification. 
The phrase "Blissful One" (Anandamaya, formed from a combination of 
inanda, Bliss, and may at, made of) is to be understood as denoting a 
modification, as distinguished from the original word (Bliss) itself; 108 for 
may at conveys the idea of modification here. Therefore the word Anandamaya 
(made of Bliss), like the words annamaya (made of food) etc., conveys the 
sense of modification. 

Veddntin : No, for in the Sm;ti (i.e. Par~ini's grammar V. iv. 21) it is 
mentioned that (the suffix) mayaf has also the sense of abundance. Thus in the 
aphorism, "Hence nwyaf is used when the intention is to convey an abundance 
of the basic idea (contained in the word prefixed)", it is shown that may at is 
used to indicate abundance. As in the illustration, "Annamayo yajno bhavati- 
The sacrifice must have an abundance of food", annamaya means an abundance 
of food, so also Brahman, having an abundance of Bliss, is called anandamaya 
(full of Bliss). And the plenitude of the Bliss of Brahman follows from the fact 
that (in the course of a graded evaluation of Bliss in the Taittirtya Upani$ad), 
the start is made from the human plane, and then it is shown that the Bliss in 
each subsequent plane is a hundredfold of the preceding one, the Bliss of 
Brahman being unsurpassable (II. viii). Hence mayaf has the sense of 
abundance. 



W And dcj—ucct Owing to the indication as the source of that. 

14. For the further reason that Brahman is indicated as the source of Bliss. 

The suffix mayat is used in the sense of abundance for the further reason that 
the Upani$adic text, "For this One indeed enlivens people" (Tai. II. vii. 1), 
declares Brahman as the source of Bliss. The word anandayati (in this text) 
means the same as dnandayati. One who delights others is known to be 
possessed of an abundance of Bliss, just as in the world a man who makes 
others rich is known to be abundantly rich. Thus since mayaf can be used in the 
sense of plenitude as well, the Blissful One must be the supreme Self. 

r p hW N ^ M ii \n 

a And igfafjR4 the very one spoken of in the mantra 4tZ is declared. 

If. And the very Brahman spoken of in the mantra is declared in the 
brahmana (portion explaining the mantra). 

The Blissful One must be the supreme Self for this additional reason: After 
commencing with the sentence, "A knower of Brahman attains the Highest" 
(Tai. II. i. 1), the very Brahman that was introduced in the mantra text, 
"Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite" (ibid.), as distinguished by such 
characteristics as "truth, knowledge, infinity", is spoken of in the brdhmana 
portion. That very Brahman from which the elements, counting from space, 
emanate, that Brahman which creates the beings and then entering into them 
dwells in their hearts as the inmost Self of all, that Brahman for the sake of 



whose know - ledge a topic has been pursued by saying "another internal self", 
"another internal self", and so on (Tai. II. ii-v)-that very Brahman is declared in 
that mantra portion, and that very Brahman is spoken of in the brdhmana 
portion by the text, "There is another self called the Blissful One who is inside 
this" (Tai. II. v. 2). It is proper that the mantra and brdhmana (portions) should 
bear the same meaning, for they are never contradictory. Otherwise it will lead 
to the fault of abandoning the topic under discussion and starting with 
something not under consideration. Not that any self is mentioned as dwelling 
inside the Blissful One as is done in the case of the food-self etc. And "that 
knowledge gathered by Bh;gu and imparted by Varuua" (Tai. III. vi) relates to 
this only. Therefore the Blissful One must be the supreme Self. 



9 Not cam: the other one i94vv: because of illogicality. 

16. The other is not the supreme Self, because that is illogical. 

For this additional reason, the Blissful One, and not the other, must be the 
supreme Self. "The other" is the transmigrating being which is different from 
God, that is to say, the individual soul. The individual soul is not meant by the 
term Blissful One. 

Why? 

Because of illogicality. Relating to the Blissful One, it is stated in the 
Upaniyad, "He wished, 'Let me become many, let me be born'. He undertook a 
deliberation. Having deliberated, He created all this that exists" (Tai. II. vi. 1). 
The deliberation before the creation of body etc., the non-difference of the 
things created from the creator, and the creation of all the modifications 
mentioned in that text cannot be justifiable for any one other than the supreme 
Self. 



Q And -WqTTcr because of the assertion of difference. 

17. And because of the assertion of the difference (between the individual 
soul and the supreme Self). 

For this further reason the Blissful One is not a transmigrating soul. In the 
context dealing with the Blissful One, the individual soul and the Blissful One 
are mentioned separately in the text: "He is Bliss (rasa) indeed. For one (i.e. the 
individual) becomes happy by getting that Bliss" (Tai. II. vii. 1). Not that the 
acquirer can be the thing acquired. 

Opponent: In that case how can there be these Vedic and Sm;ti texts, "The 
Self is to be sought for", "There is nothing higher than the attainment of the 
Self"? For it has been said that there can be no attainer (of one's own Self) as 
such. 

Veddntin : Quite so. Still in the case of ordinary people, it is seen that, 
though the Self ever retains Its true nature of being the Self, there is a false 
self-identification with the body etc. which are non-Self. Accordingly, for the 
Self that has become the body etc., such assertions are possible as: "The Self 
remains undiscovered and has to be sought for"; "It is unattained and has to be 
attained"; "It is unheard of and has to be heard of"; "It is unthought of and has 
to be thought of"; "It is unknown and has to be known"; and so on. But from 
the highest point of view, any witness or hearer other than God is denied in 
such texts as, "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23). God is 
different to be sure from the one imagined through ignorance to be embodied, 
the agent, the experiencer, and called the Self conditioned by the intellect, the 
difference being made in the same sense that the magician standing on the 
ground is fancied to be different from the magician holding sword and shield in 
hands and climbing up by a rope to the sky, though in reality the first is the 



very essence of the latter; or it is so in the sense that the space, unlimited by 
any conditioning factor, is different from the space delimited by such 
conditioning factors as a pot etc. Taking for granted such a difference between 
the supreme Self and the Self identified with the intellect, it has been said, "The 
other is not the supreme Self, because that is illogical", and "And because of 
the assertion of difference". 



Q And iiiii , owing to wish if no g-af4STl reliance on inference. 

18. There can be no reliance on inference (for arriving at Pradhana) owing to 
(the mention of) desire. 

Besides, in the context of the Blissful One there is a mention of wishfulness 
in the text, "He wished, 'Let me become many, let me be born"' (Tai. II. vi. 1). 
Therefore the insentient Pradhana, fancied by the Samkhyas through inference, 
is not to be relied on as representing either the Blissful One or the cause of the 
universe. Although Pradhana was refuted under the aphorism, "Because of the 
attribution of thinking, the one not taught in the Upani$ads is not the cause of 
the universe" (I. i. 5), still with a view to elaborating how the texts concur in 
imparting the same kind of knowledge, it is being refuted over again as a side 
issue in connection with the wishfulness (Tai. II. vi. 3) mentioned in the text 
referred to by an earlier aphorism (I. i. 16). 

ft II 

'W And 3TIffff the scripture teaches the absolute identity 3i of this one eflf~ 
with this One. 




19. Moreover, the scripture teaches the absolute identity of this one with this 
(One). 

The phrase Blissful One is not used to mean either Pradhina or the individual 
being, because the scripture enjoins the identity of this one, i.e. the enlightened 
individual being, with this, i.e. the Blissful One, the Self under consideration. 
Tadyoga means union in absolute identification, becoming one with that, that is 
to say, liberation. That union is taught by the scripture in, "Whenever the 
aspirant gets fearlessly established in this unseen (i.e. changeless), bodiless, 
inexpressible, and unsupporting One, he reaches the state of fearlessness. 
Whenever the aspirant creates the slightest difference in this One, he is smitten 
with fear" (Tai. II. vii). The idea implied is this: He does not become free from 
the fear of transmigration so long as he sees in this (Blissful) One the slightest 
difference consisting in nonidentity (with the Self). But he becomes freed from 
the fear of transmigration as soon as he gets established in absolute identity 
with this Blissful One. This is possible if the supreme Self be the same as the 
Blissful One, but not so if either the individual being or Pradhina be meant. 
Therefore it is proved that the Blissful One is the supreme Self. 

Sanzkara's Correction : But we have to say this in this connection. There is a 
series of uses of the suffix mayat in the sense of modification in the following 
passages: "That man, such as he is, is a product of the essence of food" (Tai. II. 
i. 1); "As compared with this self, made of the essence of food (annamraya), 
there is another inner self which is made of air (prdnamaya-made of vital 
force)" (Tai. II. ii); "As compared with this self, there is another internal self 
constituted by mind (manomaya)" (Tai. II. iii. 1); "As compared with this, there 
is another internal self constituted by valid knowledge (vijndnamaya)" (Tai. II. 
iv). That being so, how can one suddenly jump to the conclusion that mayat, 
occurring in 4nandamaya (Blissful One) alone implies abundance or that the 
Blissful One is Brahman? For this would be like fancying an old hag as having 
her one half young. 

Opponent : Because it is the topic of Brahman as presented by the mantra 
("Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite"). 

Sa»tkara : Not so, for in that case the food-self etc. would also become 
Brahman. 



Here the Opponent (Vrttikara) says: It is but proper that the seifs made of 
food etc. should not be Brahman, since other seifs are mentioned for them 
which are successively more internal. But in the case of the Blissful One, no 
internal self is mentioned. Thereby the Blissful One becomes Brahman. A 
contrary supposition will lead to the fault of giving up something under 
consideration and adopting some other thing not under discussion. 

Sathkara : To this we say: Although unlike in the cases of the food-body etc., 
the Upani$ad does not mention here any inner self for the Blissful One, still the 
Blissful One cannot be Brahman, inasmuch as this text occurs in regard to the 
Blissful One: "Of Him joy is verily the head, enjoyment is the right side, 
hilarity is the left side, bliss is the self (i.e. the trunk of the body), Brahman is 
the tail that stabilizes (or is the pedestal)" (Tai. II. v. 2). That being the case, the 
Brahman spoken of in the words of the mantra is here presented in the words, 
"Brahman is the tail that supports". It is in order to make that known that the 
five sheaths, counting from the food-self and ending with the Bliss-self are 
imagined. So how can there be the fault of giving up something relevant and 
taking up something besides the point? 

Opponent : Is it not a fact that in the text, "Brahman is the tail that supports" 
(Tai. II. v. 2), Brahman is spoken of as a limb of the Blissful One just as it is 
said in, "This is the tail that supports" in the cases of the food-self and the rest? 
That being so, how can it be known that Brahman appears here as an 
independent entity in Its own right? 

Sarirkara : We say that this is known since Brahman forms the topic of 
discussion. 

Opponent : No harm accrues by way of Brahman ceasing to be the topic 
even if Brahman is known as a limb of the Blissful One; for the Blissful One is 
Brahman. 

Sa,hkara : To this we say: That will involve an illogicality inasmuch as the 
very same Brahman will become the whole Self, viz the Blissful One, and 
again It will become a part, viz the supporting tail. If either of the two has to be 
accepted, then it is reasonable to uphold the view that Brahman is referred to in 
this very text: "Brahman is the rail thai supports", for the word Brahman is 
present there; but it is not to be sought for in the sentence presenting the 



Blissful One, for we miss the word Brahman there. Besides, after the statement, 
"Brahman is the supporting tail", it is said, "Apropos of this, here is a verse: 'If 
anyone knows that Brahman is non-existent, then he himself becomes non¬ 
existent. If anyone knows that Brahman does exist, then they consider him to 
be existing by virtue of that knowledge'" (Tai. II. vi). Since in this verse the 
merit and demerit of believing in the existence and nonexistence of Brahman 
alone is mentioned without bringing in the Blissful One, it can he understood 
that Brahman appears in Its own right in the text, "Brahman is the supporting 
tail". And it is not logical to entertain any doubt about the existence or non¬ 
existence of the Blissful One; for as characterized by joy, enjoyment, etc., he is 
well known in the world. 

Opponent : An independent entity as that Brahman is, why should It be 
presented as a limb of the Blissful One in the text, "Brahman is the supporting 
tail"? 


Samkara : That is no defect. The purpose is not to imply that Brahman is a 
limb, but to show that the Bliss, that Brahman is, is like a tail; It serves the 
purpose of a stabilizing (or support ing) tail. What is sought to be taught is that 
the Bliss, that Brahman is, is the acme and sole repository of all human joys, as 
is shown in another Upani$ad, "On a particle of this very Bliss other beings 
live" (Br. IV. iii. 32). Besides, if the Blissful One be Brahman, then a qualified 
Brahman, conditioned by such limbs as happiness etc., has to be accepted. But 
at the end of the text the absolute Brahman is heard of, It being spoken of as 
beyond speech and mind (in the verse): "The enlightened man is not afraid of 
anything after realizing that Bliss of Brahman, failing to reach which, words 
turn back along with the mind" (Tai. II. ix). Furthermore, the assertion of an 
abundance of Bliss implies the existence of sorrow as well; for in the world, 
abundance is dependent on the presence of a little of its opposite. And if that be 
admitted, then it will contradict the denial of anything except Itself in the 
infinite Brahman, as is stated in the text, "That is the Infinite where one sees 
nothing else, hears nothing else, and knows nothing else" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1). 
Besides, from the difference among the various degrees of happiness in each 
body, it follows that the Blissful One (inside those bodies) is also different. But 
Brahman does not differ in different bodies, since the Upani$ad declares Its 
infinitude in, "Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite" (Tai. II. i. 1); another 



Upanigad also says, "The same Deity, that is allpervasive and the soul of all, 
remains hidden within all beings" (Sv. VI. 11). 

Ag ain , in the UpaniSads it is not the repetition of the Blissful One that is met 
with , but rather the various synonyms of the substantive portion of the phrase 
( viz Bliss ) : "He is verily the rasa ( source of joy): for one becomes ha ppy by 
comin g in contact with that source of jo v. Who indeed will inhale or who will 
exhale , if this Bliss be not there in the supreme space ( within the heart ) ? This 
One indeed enlivens people 1 ' ( Tai. II. vif ). "This then is an evaluation of Bliss" 
( Tai. 11. viii ). "The enli g htened man is not afraid of anythin g after realizin g that 
Bliss of Brahman"los (Tai. U. ix), "He knew Bliss as Brahman" (Tai. M. vi). 
Had the phrase "Blissful One" been definitely ascertained to mean Brahman, 
then one could fancy the repetition of the "Blissful One" even in the 
subsequent uses of the word Bliss alone. But the Blissful One, as pointed out 
by us, is not Brahman, because He has joy etc. as His head etc., and there are 
other reasons. Accordingly, from the use in another Upani$ad of the 
substantive portion Bliss as a synonym for Brahman in the text, "Knowledge, 
Bliss, Brahman" (B;. M. ix. 28.7), it follows that the word Bliss in such texts 
as, "if this Bliss be not there in the supreme space" (Tai. II. vii), refers to 
Brahman. But it is to be understood that the word Bliss is not a repetition of the 
phrase "Blissful One". 

It was argued that the word ananda (Bliss) is repeated together with the 
suffix mayat in, "He attains the Blissful self" (Tai. IT. viii). But this Blissful 
self does not refer to Brahman; for it occurs in a context of a succession of 
attainable seifs which are constituted by food etc. 

Op ponent : If the Blissful self to be attained be not Brahman , then the result 
accruin g from the attainment of BrahmanVO will remain unspecified for the 
enlightened man. 

Samkara : That is no defect; for from the mention of the attainment of the 
Blissful One, the result achievable by the enlightened man, viz the attainment 
of the Brahman described as the stabilizing tail, becomes stated ipso facto. 
Besides, this result is elaborated by such texts as, "Expressive of this, there 
occurs this verse" (Tai. IT. ix). And the text, "He wished, 'Let me become 
many, let me be born"’ (Tai. II. vi. 2), occurring in the proximity of the Blissful 
One, was quoted by you. But this does not lead to the comprehension of the 









































Brahmanhood of the Blissful One; for that text gets connected with the more 
proximate word Brahman, present in "Brahman is the supporting tail". And 
since the subsequent texts, as for instance, "That is verily the rasa (source of 
joy)" (Tai. IT. vii), stem out of this text, they do not have the Blissful One as 
their purport. 

Opponent : It is unjustifiable that "He" (sah, used in the masculine gender) in 
the text, "He wished" (Tai. II. vi. 2), should stand for Brahman (which is 
neuter). 

gamkara : That is not damaging; for in the text, "From that Self was born 
space" (Tai. H. i. 2), Brahman is referred to by the word Self (atma) which has 
the masculine gender. On the contrary, in the section of the Taittirlya called 
"The knowledge received by Bhrgu and imparted by Varur)a" (III. vi), it is 
stated, "He knew Bliss as Brahman" (ibid.), where the suffix mayat is not used, 
and joy etc. are not mentioned as the head etc. Hence it is but proper that Bliss 
should be Brahman. Accordingly, Brahman in Itself cannot reasonably have joy 
etc. as Its head etc. without assuming some conditioning factor, however 
tenuous it be. Nor is it the intention here to reveal the conditioned Brahman, for 
there is the text showing the transcendence of speech and mind (Tai. II. ix. 1), 
Accordingly, the mayat in anandamaya is used to imply modification just as 
much as in annamaya etc., but it is not used to imply plenitude. 



So the aphorisms are to be explained thus: 

12. (Brahman is referred to in) arriil: the Blissful One (etc.), Ull owing 
to the repetition (of the word Bliss). 

Doubt : Is it the intention of the text, "Brahman is the tail that stabilizes" 
(Tai. II. v), to present Brahman as a limb of the Blissful One or as an 
independent entity? 

Opponent : The use of the word tail leads to the conclusion that It is 
intended as a limb. 

Saihkara : This being the position, it is said, Anandamayo'bhyasat. (This 
means that) in the text, "The Blissful Self" etc., Brahman is referred to as an 
independent entity by saying, "Brahman is the tail that stabilizes". This is 
gathered from the repetition; for the absolute Brahman alone is referred to in 
the verse: "He becomes non-existing" etc. (Tai. II. vi. 1), which is a 
concluding reaffirmation (of what was started with). 

13. The interpretation of Vikarasabdanneticenna pracuryat is this: 

d TAT.{Tc( Not so owing to the use of a word denoting limb llFci-c if this 
be the objection, (then) 9 not so, Ig (that word) having been used owing to 
continuous presence. 

Your ar g ument was that "Brahman is not an independent entit y, because a 
limb is meant bv the word vikara." 1 Because the word tail, implying a limb, 
is used, Brahman cannot be an independent entity." That position has to be 
refuted. With regard to this we say: That is nothing damaging; for a word 
implying a limb can be justified from the standpoint of pracurya, which 
means the continuous presence (of an idea in the mind), that is to say, the 
persistent occurrence of the word in a context in which the limbs are 
predominantly in evidence. After describing the food-self etc., from the head 
to the tail, the turn came for the enumeration of the head and other limbs of 
the Blissful One; and the idea of limbs being predominant in the mind, the 
text said, "Brahman is the tail that stabilizes". This was not done from any 








motive of showing Brahman as a limb (but as a matter of habit), which fact 
becomes obvious from the affirmation of Brahman as an independent entity 
on the ground of repetition. 

14. The aphorism, Taddhetuvyapadesacca, is to be explained thus: 

W And cc-43-Tt owing to the presentation (of Brahman) as the cause of 
all that (creation, including the Blissful One). 

In the text, "He created all this that there is" (Tai. H. vi), Brahman is 
shown as the cause of all modifications inclusive of the Blissful One. Not 
that Brahman, which is the cause of Its own modification, viz the Blissful 
One, can be the latter's limb in any primary sense. 

The other aphorisms are also to be understood, as far as possible , as 
s peakin g of Brahman present in the sentence about the tail. 1 12 

Topic 7: THE BEING INSIDE 

Doubt : It is stated in the Upanipd: "Now, again, He, the Puru$a that is 
seen in the sun is golden in colour; His beard is golden, hair is golden, 
everything up to the tip of the nails is golden. His eyes are like the pink lotus 
that is itself as pink as the seat of a monkey. His name is ut (uprisen). This 
Purina, that is such, remains lifted above all sins. Anyone meditating thus 
does certainly rise above sins" (Ch. I. vi. 6-8); "This is the meditation on the 
divine plane" (ibid.); "Then follows the meditation on the bodily plane. He, 
the Puru$a, that is seen in the eye" etc. (Ch. I. vii. 5-8). Here arises a doubt: 
Is the Puru$a (lit. person), who is to be worshipped in the sun and the eyes, a 
human being who had attained a high eminence on account of the perfection 
of his meditation and action, or is He the ever existing God? What is the 
conclusion to be arrived at? 

Opponent: He must be a transmigrating soul. 

Why? 






Because the Upani$ad mentions his form. For instance, such a form as 
possession of golden beard is mentioned for the person in the sun. For the 
person in the eye also we get that very form by a process of extension shown 
in, "Of this One that is such, the form is the same as of that One" (Ch. I. vii. 

5) . Not that the supreme Lord can reasonably have any form, for the 
Upani$ad says, "Soundless, touchless, formless, undiminishing" (Ka. I. iii. 
15). This conclusion is supported by the mention of a place of residence in 
the texts: "He that is in the sun" (Ch. I. vi. 6), "He that is in the eye" (Ch. I. 
vii.). No residence can be asserted for the supreme Lord who is without any 
support, exists in His own glory, and is all-pervasive. There are also these 
Vedic texts in support: "On what, 0 venerable sir, is He seated? On His own 
glory" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), "He is allpervasive like space and is eternal". There 
is this additional reason, that a limit to His glory is specified in the texts, " 
(He the Purina in the sun) rules over the worlds that are above the sun and 
also over the things enjoyable to the gods" (Ch. I. vi. 8), where a limit is set 
to the majesty of the person in the sun; and "He, who is such, rules over the 
worlds below the eyes as also over the things enjoyable to men" (Ch. I. vii. 

6) , where a limit is set to the majesty of the person in the eye. But it is not 
reasonable that God's majesty should have any limitation, since it is spoken 
of without any reservation in the text, "This One is the lord of all, this One is 
the ruler (i.e. Death) of all beings, this One is the protector (i.e. Indra and 
other gods) of all beings; this One is like a dam that impounds so that these 
worlds (i.e. castes and stages of life etc.) may not get mixed up and 
destroyed" (Br. IV. iv. 22). Therefore it is not the supreme Lord that resides 
in the sun and the eyes. 

Veddntin : Such being the position, we say: 

ii ii 

3M: The One inside (is God), ffe—3gbM for His qualities are taught. 




20. The Being inside is God, His qualities having been taught. 


The PuruSal I s of whom the Upanigad speaks thus, "He who is in the sun, 
He who is in the eye" (Ch. I. vi, I. vii), must be God Himself, and not any 
transmigratory soul. 

Why? 

Because His qualities are taught. For it is God's qualities that are taught 
here. Thus having revealed the name of the Person in the sun by saying, "His 
name is ut (the uprisen)" (Ch. I. vi. 7), the derivation of that name is shown 
as arising from the fact of .remaining free from sin, in the text, "This Puru$a 
that is such, remains lifted above all sins". And that name, of which the 
derivation has been shown, is extended to the Person in the eye by saying. 
"He has the same name as the other One has" (Ch. I. vii. 5). Freedom from 
all sins is declared about the supreme Self alone in, "That which is the Self 
beyond all sins" (Ch. VIII. vii), and such sentences. Similarly in the text, 
"He (the Person in the eye) is the Rk-mantra, the Selma-mantra, the uktha (a 
kind of hymn), the Yajur-mantra, the three Vedas" (Ch. I. vii. 5), the 
Upanisad points out the identity of the Person in the eye with Rk, Selma, 
etc.; and that is possible only in the case of the supreme Lord, it being 
reasonable that He should be everything by virtue of His being the source of 
all. Again, commencing with the Rk and Selma mantras that are the same as 
the earth, fire, and so on, in the divine context, and speech, vital force, and 
so on, in. the physical context, it is said, "Of Him the Rk and Selma mantras 
are two bodily joints. This is in the divine context" (Ch. I. vi. 8). Similarly in 
the bodily context, "He (the Person in the eye) has the same two joints as the 
Person in the sun" (Ch. I. vii. 5). This becomes proper only if He is the Self 
of all. And the text, "Therefore when these people play on the Vied (lute), 
they sing of Him; and hence they become prosperous" (Ch. I. vii. 6), shows 
how He is present as music even in the human songs. This can be so if God 
is accepted as that Person, as is shown in the Bhagavad-Giza, "Whatever 
being there is great, prosperous, or powerful, that know thou to be a product 
of a part of My splendour" (X. 41). Besides, the absolute power of ruling 
over the worlds and desires that is mentioned in the Upanipd, points to God. 
In answer to the objection that the reference in the Upani$ad to such forms 




as the possession of golden beard etc. does not befit God, we say: Even for 
God there may be forms created at His will out of Maya for the sake of 
favouring the aspirants, as is declared in the Smrti, "0 Narada, it is a Maya, 
created by Me, thatyou see Me in this form possessed of all the substances 
and qualities. You must not understand Me thus". On the contrary, when the 
divine aspect bereft of all qualities is spoken of, then the relevant text runs 
thus: "Soundless, touchless, formless, and undiminishing" (Ka. I. iii. 15), 
and so on. But since God is the cause of everything, He is sometimes spoken 
of, for the sake of adoration, as possessed of certain mundane qualities, as in, 
"He is possessed of all (good) action, all (good) des;res, all (good) smell, all 
(good) tastes" (Ch. III. xiv. 2), and so on. In the same way there can be the 
mention of His golden beard. As for the criticism that He cannot be God, 
since a residence is mentioned, we say, even for the One who is established 
in His own glory, there can be an instruction about some seat for the sake of 
adoration; for being all-pervasive like space, He can very well dwell inside 
everything. The mention of the limitation to His majesty also occurs with 
reference to the bodily and divine contexts for the sake of worship. 
Therefore God Himself is spoken of as residing within the eye and the sun. 



W And iM-Wqowing to the mention of difference fit: different. 

21. And God is different (from the individual being) owing to the mention 
of difference. 

God, the internal Ruler, does exist as an entity different from the 
individual souls identifying themselves with the bodies of the sun etc.; for 
their dissimilarity is stated in another Upanis.ad, in these words: "He who 
inhabits the sun, but is within it, whom the sun does not know, whose body 
is the sun, and who controls the sun from within, is the internal Ruler, your 
own immortal Self" (Br III. vii. 9). By saying, "within the sun" and "whom 



the sun does not know", it is clearly shown that the internal Ruler is different 
from the sun which is the knower and which is an individual soul identifying 
itself with the intellect.! 14 It is but reasonable from the similarity of the 
Upani$ads that this very entity (of Br. III. vii. 9) should be the Person 
mentioned here (in Ch. I. vi. 6-7) as inside the sun. Therefore it is proved 
that God Himself is spoken of here. 

Topic 8: SPACE 

Doubt : The Chandogya Upani$ad states thus: "(Salavatya asked): 'What 
is the goal of this world?' He (Pravahana Jaivali) answered, 'Space. For all 
things certainly originate from Space; and they merge by moving towards 
Space. For Space is certainly greater than all these, Space is their supreme 
goal 1 " (Ch. I. ix. 1). With regard to this the doubt arises: Does the word space 
mean the supreme Brahman or the material space? 

Why does the doubt arise? 

Because the word is used in both senses. The word space is well known to 
be used in the sense of natural space in the Vedas and common parlance; and 
at times it is found to be used for Brahman also, as for instance in such 
places as the following, where Brahman stands out as the well determined 
meaning from the text that follows or from the mention of some 
distinguishing characteristics: "If this Space that is Bliss (i.e. Brahman) had 
not been there" (or "If this Bliss were not there in Space") (Tai. II. vii), 
"Space indeed is the accomplisher (of the origin and continuance) of name 
and form. That in which they exist is Brahman" (Ch. VIII. xiv). Hence this 
doubt. What is the reasonable conclusion here? 

Opponent: It must be the material space. 

Why? 

For that occurs to the mind instantaneously, owing to more familiar use; 
and this word space cannot be understood to imply both these equally, for 
that will lead to its having many meanings. Therefore the word space must 
have a secondary meaning when it is applied to Brahman, Brahman being 



similar to space as regards many such qualities as pervasiveness. Moreover, 
when a primary meaning is admissible, any secondary meaning is not to be 
accepted; and here it is possible to accept space in the primary sense. 

Objection : If the material space be the meaning, the complementary 
portion of the passage becomes illogical, which runs as follows: "All things 
certainly originate from Space" etc. (Ch. 1. ix. 1). 

Opponent : That is no fault; for even material space can become the cause 
(of all) by evolving into air etc. in succession; for it is known (from the 
Upani$ad), "From the Self, that is such, originated space, from space arose 
air, from air fire" (Tai. II. i), and so on. As for being greater and the ultimate 
goal, that is possible even for the material space with relation to the other 
elements. By the word space, therefore, the material space is meant. 


Veddntin : Such being the position, we say: 



aficuigi: Space (is Brahman), cr -NTrT owing to the indicatory mark of 
that. 

22. Space (dkdsa) is Brahman, for Brahman's indicatory mark is in 
evidence. 

By the word Space here we should understand Brahman. 

Why? 

Because a mark indicating Brahman is in evidence in, "For all things 
originate from Space to be sure" etc. (Ch. I. ix. 1). For it is an established 
fact in the Upani$ads that all things originate from the supreme Brahman. 



Opponent : Space, the element, has also been shown as becoming the 
cause by evolving through a succession of air etc. 

Vedantin : Yes, it has been shown. Yet if Brahman be not taken into 
account as the origin, the emphasis in the phrase "certainly from Space" and 
the word "all" as a qualification of "things" cannot be reconciled. So also 
"They merge by moving towards Space" is an indicator of Brahman. And the 
fact of bein g g reater and the ultimate g oal is stated in . "For Space is certainl y 
g reater than these , and Space is their ultimate g oal" ( ibid. ) . For absolute 
g reatness is declared about the supreme Self alone in . "Greater than the 
earth , g reater than the sk y, g reater than heaven , g reater than all these worlds" 
f Ch. Ill, xiv. 3 ) . Similarly the fact of bein g the supreme g oal is more in 
accord with the supreme Self . It bein g the ultimate cause. In su p port of this 
is the UpaniSadic text: "Knowled ge. Bliss . Brahman , the supreme g oal of the 
distributor of wealth as well as of him who has realized Brahman and lives 

in It" ( Br. Ill, ix. 28.7 ) . Moreover . Jaivali , who condemns Salavatva's 
position b v pointin g out the defect of limitation , resorts to Space with a view 
to speakin g of somethin g unlimited. And then attributin g the similarity of 
S pace to Ud g itha . he sa vs. ' 11& Ud g itha t i.e. its part Om t is this Space , and 
it is g reat and hi g her than all that is hi g h. 115 This One that is si. h is infinite" 
(Ch. I. ix. 2). That infinity is also an indication of Brahman. As for the 
argument that the material space occurs to the mind because of familiar use, 
we say that though it may occur to the mind first, it cannot be accepted after 
noticing the characteristics of Brahman evident in the complementary 
portion. We showed that the word space occurs to signify Brahman as well, 
as for instance in, "Space indeed is the accomplisher (revealer) of name and 
form" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1). Similarly it is seen that the synonyms of space are 
also used for Brahman in such places as, "The Vedas are the authoritative 
revealers of the absolutely immutable Vyoman (Sky, Brahman) on which all 
the gods subsist" (It. V. I. clxiv. 39), "This is that knowledge received by 
Bhrgu, which is established in the supreme Vyoman" (Tai. III. vi), "Om Kam 
(i.e. Bliss) is Brahman, Kham (Space) is Brahman" (Ch. IV. x. 5), "Om is 
that Kham (Space)-the eternal Space" (Br. V. i). Even the word space 
occurring at the beginning of the senter_ce should be understood to signify 
Brahman, owing to the trend of the complementary portion of the text. For 
such a word as fire occurring in the statement, "The fire reads the hymn", at 



































































the beginning of a text, is seen to mean a brilliant boy reading the hymn. 
Hence it is concluded that the word Space means Brahman. 

Topic 9: PRANA 

In the course of discussin g the meditation on Ud g itha . it is noticed in the 
U paniSad that , after startin g with . "0 chanter of Prastava (i.e. an introductor y 
part of Sama son g), should you chant it in m y presence without knowin g the 
deity thereof , vour head will fall" 116 tCh. I. x. 9), the question (by Cakrayat 
a) occurs, "Which is that deity?" And "He (USasti) replies, 'It is Prdna (lit. 
vital force), for all these things proceed towards and merge in Prdna and 
from Prdna they emerge. This is that deity that is intimately associated with 
Prastava 1 ", (Ch. I. xi. 4-5). The doubt arising from this and its solution are to 
be understood in accordance with the earlier pattern. 

Doubt : The word Prdna is found to be used in the sense of Brahman in 

such texts as . "0 amiable one , the mind is tethered to Praia" 117 f Ch. VI. viii. 
2). "Praza of Pran g " 118 tBr. IV. iv. 18). But the more familiar use in the 
world as well as in the Vedas is in the sense of the vital force that is a form 
of air (i.e. energy). Therefore the doubt arises here as to which of the two 
should be reasonably accepted here. 

Opponent : It is proper to accept the modification of air called the vital 
force having a fivefold function, for it was pointed out that the word Prdna is 
more familiarly known to imply that. 

Objection : Here also it is proper to accept Brahman, for Its characteristics 
are in evidence just as before. Here also the entry and emergence of all the 
elements, noticeable in the complementary portion, bear witness to God's 
activity. 

Opponent : Not so, for even in case of the chief vital force ( in the mouth ). 
the entry and emer g ence of all the elements are noticeable in . "When a man 
is in deep slee p, then speech enters into Prdna . the eye enters into Praha , the 
ear enters into Praha , the mind enters into Prdna. When he wakes up a gain. 
they reemer g e from Pran g itself" 119 (S. B. X. iii. 3.6). It is a fact of common 
experience that the functions of the senses and organs get merged in the vital 








































function that does not get lost in sleep; and at the time of waking, they rise 
out of Praia. And because the senses and organs are the quintessence of the 
elements, it is nothing contradictory that the trend of the complementary 
portion of the text should point to the entry and emergence of the elements 
into and out of the vital force. Moreover, the Sun and Food, who are the 
deities of Udgitha and Pratihara (portions of the Sama song) respectively, are 
mentioned after Praha. Not that they have Brahmanhood. Because of this 
similarity with them, Praha also is not Brahman. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the aphorist says: 

ara w 5ITC I! \\ II 

Wd: 'd On that very ground Alai: Praha. 

23. On that very ground, Praha (is Brahman). 

The reason "Because Brahman's indicatory mark is in evidence" was 
advanced under the earlier aphorism. "On that very ground" of the presence 
of the indicatory mark of Brahman, the word Prdna also should mean the 
supreme Brahman. For the association of Prdna with the characteristics of 
Brahman is met with in the text, "All the things proceed towards and merge 
in Prdna and from It they emerge" (Ch. I. xi. 5), where the mention of the 
origin and dissolution of all things, stated to be proceeding from Prdna, 
proves that Praha is Brahman. 

Opponent : Did we not say that the mention of the entry and emergence is 
reconcilable even if the chief Prana be accepted, this being a matter of 
experience during sleep and waking. 

To this we (Vedantins) say: During sleep and waking we notice only the 
entry and the emergence of the senses and organs into and out of Prdna, but 
not of all the elements, whereas the entry and the emergence of all the 




things, presided over by the individual souls, along with the bodies and 
senses, are spoken of here, as is seen in the text, "All these things certainly" 
etc. (Ch. I. xi. 5). Even if this text, mentioning all things, signifies the 
elements, the characteristics of Brahman are found to be fully in accord. 

Opponent : Is it not a fact that in the following text we come across the 
entry and emergence, during sleep and waking, of the senses together with 
their objects into and out of Praha?-"When a sleeping man has no dream 
whatsoever, and he becomes one with this Prdna, then into that Praha enters 
speech together with all the names" (Kau. III. 3). 

Vedantin : Even there the word Prdna means Brahman , for the 
characteristic of Brahman is in evidence. 120 


And the ar g ument is baseless that Prdna is not Brahman owin g to the use 
of the word in association tor in the proximity of ) Food and the Sun : for 
mere proximity counts for nothin g when the obvious meanin g of Praha is 
known to be Brahman from the trend of the complementary text. And the 
arg ument was advanced that the more usual meanin g of Praha is the vital 
force havin g a fivefold function ; that has to be met in the same wav as in the 
case of the word Space.121 Therefore it is concluded that the Deity of 
Prastava is Brahman. 

Some people think that this aphorism alludes to the texts, "Praha of Praha" 
(Vital force of vital force) (Br. IV. iv. 18), and "0 amiable one, the mind is 
tethered to Prdna (Ch. VI. viii. 2). That too is unjustifiable, since there is no 
reasonable scope for doubt (in these two texts) in the face of the differ ence 
in words and the force of the context. Just as in the use, "The father of the 
father", it is clear that the grandfather who is indicated by the nominative 
case is different from the one indicated by the sixth case (with of); so also in 
"the Vital force of the vital force" it becomes apparent from the difference in 
words, that some Vital force, different from the familiar one, is referred to; 
for the very same thing cannot be indicated to be different from itself by 
saying: "He is his". Moreover, it is to be understood (from the context) that if 
something is referred to by a different word in its own context, it must be 
itself alone that is thus spoken of. For instance, when under the topic of the 
Jyotistoma sacrifice it is stated: "In every spring one should perform the 





























Jyotis sacrifice", the word Jyotis must mean Jyoti Loma. Similarly in a 
context in which the supreme Brahman comes under discussion, it is stated: 
"0 amiable one, the mind is tethered to Prdna". This being the case, how can 
this Prana mean a mere modification of air? Accordingly, since there is no 
scope for doubt, the above passages are not to be alluded to (in this 
connection). But the doubt does arise about the Prana which is the deity of 
Prastdva; and the relevant doubt and its solution have been shown above. 

Tonic 10: LIGHT 

II II 

IfcT: Light (is Brahman) az9r-31fiRI-lla owing to the mention of feet. 

24. Light is Brahman because of the mention of feet. 

Doubt: The Upani$ad says: "Then that (Light) that shines in the excellent 
unsurpassable worlds above this heaven, above all beings, and above all the 
worlds, is this same Light that is within a human being" (Ch. III. xiii. 7). 
With regard to this the doubt arises: Does the Light here refer to the Light of 
the sun etc. or does it mean the supreme Self? It has been said that though 
the connotation of a word be different, it may refer to Brahman if 
Brahman's.- characteristics are in evidence. This discussion relates to 
whether those characteristics themselves exist here or not. What should be 
the conclusion? 

Opponent : The conclusion is that the light of the sun etc. is meant by the 
word light. 

Why? 


Because of familiar use. It is well known that the two words light and 
darkness refer to opposite things. Nocturnal gloom etc., hindering the 



functioning of the eye, are known as darkness; and the solar rays etc. that 
help vision are called light. Similarly the word "shines" in the text is in 
vogue with regard to the sun etc. Brahman, devoid of colour etc., cannot 
answer to the text "shines" in the primary sense. And an additional argument 
is the reference in the text to heaven as a limit. For Brahman, the source of 
all that moves and does not move, and the Self of all (i.e. the all-pervasive 
entity), cannot have heaven as a limit, whereas any light that is a product (of 
Brahman) can have heaven as its limi -. And the text in the brahmana 
(explanatory) portion in the Upani$ad says, "the light above this heaven". 

Objection : Heaven as a limitation is irreconcilable even with the created 
light, for it is experienced everywhere. So let this mean the first-bom 
unmixed fire. 

Op ponent: No . for the unmixed li g ht serves no purpose.122 

Objection : The mere fact of becoming an object of (notional) meditation 
is the purpose that it serves. 

Op ponent : No . for the sun etc, are en j oined as ob j ects of meditation onl y 
when they serve some other purpose (a part from bein g - an ob j ect of 
meditation ) . Besides , the UpaniSad speaks ( of all the elements ) without an y 
reservation in the text: "Let me make a threefold mixture of each one of 

them (i.e. li ght, water , and earthV'123 tCh. VI. iii. 3). And it is not a familiar 
fact that even the unmixed fire has heaven as its limitation. So let the mixed 
fire itself be the meaning of the word light. 

Objection : Did we not point out that the (mixed) light of fire etc. is met 
,*h even below heaven? 

Opponent : That creates no difficulty, for though the (gross) light spreads 
everywhere, it is nothing contradictory to accept for meditation a certain 
portion of it spreading above heaven. But it is not proper to imagine any 
specific place for the partless Brahman. Besides, the mention of many places 
of residence in the text, "that which shines in the excellent, unsurpassable 
worlds, above all the worlds" (Ch. III. xiii. 7), is more in keeping with the 
created light. Moreover, in the text, "This is the same light that is within a 






























human being" (ibid.), it is seen that the supreme light is superimposed on the 
fire in the stomach; and superimpositions are possible in cases of similarity, 
as for instance in, "Of this Being who is in the solar orb, the syllable bhtir is 
the head, for the head is one, and this syllable is one" (Br. V. v. 3). It is a 
well-known fact that the fire in the stomach is not Brahman, for it is 
mentioned as possessed of heat and sound in the Upani$adic texts, "Of this 
Being, this is the perceptual evidence (that one feels this bodily heat by 
touch)", "Of this Being this is the audible evidence (that one hears a sound 
like bellowing inside, by plugging the ears)" (Ch. III. xiii. 7). Furthermore, 
there is the Upani$adic text, "This entity, that is such, should be meditated 
on as seen and heard" (ibid.). Again, this is not Brahman, because the result 
stated in, "He who meditates thus becomes a cynosure and a famous man" 
(ibid.), is insignificant, whereas the meditation on Brahman is intended for 
some great result. Unlike what is found in the case of Prdna and Space, there 
is nothing here in the context of light itself that can be a characteristic of 
Brahman. Nor is Brahman pointed out in the previous text, "Gayatri is surely 
all these beings" (Ch. III. xii. 1), the metre Gayatri being mentioned there by 
name. Even if it be conceded somehow that Brahman is presented in the 
previous text, still the identity is not recognizable here; for heaven occurs as 
a habitation in the earlier sentence, "His three feet are in heaven" (Ch. III. 
xii. 6), whereas it occurs as a limitation in, "the light shining above heaven" 
(Ch. III. xiii. 7). Accordingly, the natural light has to be accepted here. 

Vedamin : This contingency having arisen, we say, Brahman is to be 
understood here by the word Light. 

Why? 

"Because of the mention of feet."24 For in the previous text, Brahman was 
shown as possessed of four feet in the mantra, "That much (i.e. the whole 
creation) is His glory; but Puru$a is greater than that. All things constitute 
only one of His feet. His three feet that are immortal are in heaven" (Ch. III. 
xii. 6). Those very three feet of that four-footed Brahman, that are immortal 
and were shown in the mantra as constituting that aspect of Brahman 
associated with heaven, can be recognized here also as spoken of in 
association with heaven. Should any one give that up and resort to natural 



light, one will be open to the charge of rejecting something under discussion 
and taking up something extraneous. Not only is the topic of Brahman 
continued in the passage about Light, it will be pursued even in the 
succeeding meditation called the Sandilya-vidya (Ch. III. xiv). Therefore 
Brahman is to be understood here from the word Light. 

As for the contention that the words light and shine are more in vogue in 
connection with the created light, that is nothing damaging. For once we 
arrive at Brahman with the help of the context, those two words, used here 
without any specific exclusion of Brahman, can refer to Brahman indicated 
figuratively by the shining, created light. Besides, there is the mantra text, 
"Lighted up by whose effulgence the sun shines" (Tai. Br. III. xii. 9.7). Or it 
may be said that this word Light is not used to mean the light favouring the 
act of seeing, for it is found to be used in other senses as well as in, "It is 
through the light of speech (i.e. words of mouth) that he sits, (goes out, 
works, and returns)" (in deep darkness) (Br. IV. iii. 5), "The mind becomes a 
light to those who drink ghee" (Tai. Br. I. vi. 3.3). Accordingly, whatever 
reveals other things is referred to by the word light. Hence Brahman, which 
is consciousness by nature, can also be referred to by the word Light in that 
sense, inasmuch as It reveals the whole universe. This is also borne out by 
the Upani$adic text: "He shining, everything shines accordingly; by His 
effulgence all this shines diversely" (Mu. IT. ii. 10), "Upon that immortal 
Light of all lights the gods meditate as longevity" (Br. IV. iv. 16). 

There, w.is the objection that it is improper for Brahman to have heaven 
as a limitation. To this we say: Even in the case of the omnipotent Brahman, 
it is nothing incongruous to assume a certain location for the sake of 
worship. 

Opponent : Did we not say it is impossible to fancy any locus for 
Brahman that has no parts? 

Ved;ntin : That defect does not arise; for it is reasonable to assume a locus 
for Brahman owing to association with limiting adjuncts. Accordingly, we 
find in the Upani$ads certain meditations on Brahman in association with 
certain places as in, "in the su:i" (Ch. I. vi. 6), "in the eye" (Ch. I. vii. 5), "in 



the heart" (Ch. III. xiii. 7). Hereby is explained the plurality of abodes as in 
"above all beings" (ibid.). 

Ag ain , it was ar g ued: The li g ht above heaven must also be this natural 
light, because it is superimposed on the natural fire that can be inferred to be 
existin g in the stomach on the g round of the perception of its heat and sound. 
That too is unreasonable , since even for the supreme Brahman , the fire in the 
stomach can be as g ood a symbol as name etc. As for the facts of bein g seen 
and heard of ( i.e. famous ) mentioned in . "It is to be meditated on as the seen 
and the heard of" , that too is from the point of view of symbolic worship. 125 
And the ar g ument was advanced that the Li g ht is not Brahman , because the 
result ( of meditation as stated above ) is mea g re. That too is b2seless . for 
there is no reason for any such hard and fast rule that Brahman is to be 
resorted to for certain definite results and not for others. 126 Only one kind of 
result (viz liberation) is to be understood where the supreme Brahman, 
devoid of contact with all kinds of distinctions, is taught as the Self. But 
where Brahman is taught as having certain qualities or certain symbols, then 
are mentioned many results, high and low, which are included within this 
world as is shown in such texts as "(The great birthless Self is) the eater of 
food and the giver of wealth (i.e. fruits of work). He who knows It as such, 
receives wealth" (Br. IV. iv. 24). Although the Light in the sentence under 
consideration has nothing specifically characteristic of Brahman, still the 
characteristic, as seen in the previous text, has to be accepted. That is why 
the aphorist says, "Light is Brahman, because of the mention of feet". 

Opponent : How, again, can it be proper that the passage about Light 
should be tom out of its own context and misapplied just because it occurs in 
the proximity of Brahman mentioned in another sentence? 

Vedantin : That fault does not arise; for the pronoun "that" has the force of 
calling up to the mind something which preceded it. So the word "that" 
occurring at the very beginning in "That (Light) that shines above this 
heaven" (Ch. III. xiii. 7) becomes connected with Brahman in the previous 
text (Ch. III. xii. 6) on account of a common reference to heaven. When 
Brahman becomes known thus, the word Light also comes logically to refer 
to Brahman by implication. So Brahman is to be understood here by Light. 










































to m totsWpiw (? m{ ii \x 11 

9 Not (Brahman) 8:-3TN9'T91 because a metre is mentioned ~4- if this be 
said, I not so, i:-aTgui-frTTc for the dedication of mind is taught cMT in that 
way; f for ffgTi;ifii similar instances are found. 

25. If it be objected that Brahman is not spoken of, because the mention is 
about a metre, we say, no, for the dedication of the mind is taught in that 
way; for similar instances are found elsewhere. 

Opponent : It was asserted that Brahman is not spoken of even in the 
earlier text, for the metre Gayatri is mentioned there in "Gayatri is indeed all 
these things that there are" (Ch. III. xii. 1). 

Veddntin : That objection has to be met. How, again, can it be maintained 
that just because a metre is mentioned, Brahman is not spoken of here, when 
Brahman with four feet is presented in the Ilk mantra, "That much is His 
glory" (Ch. III. xii. 6)? 

Opponent : That cannot be so. The metre Gayatri is introduced in the text, 
"Gayatri is verily all this" (Ch. III. xii. 1), and that very Gayatri is explained 
as identical with all things, earth, body, heart, speech, and vital force. And 
then with regard to that very Gayatri, as explained, it is said, "That Gayatri 
that is such, has four feet and it is sixfold. This fact is revealed in the Rk 
mantra, 'That much is His glory'" etc. Having thus been quoted about that 
very Gayatri, how can this mantra suddenly speak of Brahman with four 
feet? Even the word Brahman, used there in the text, "That which is this 
Brahman" (Ch. III. xii. 7), refers to the metre only, for the metre is under 
consideration. In the text, "He who knows this secret teaching of Brahman 
(i.e. Veda)" (Ch. Ill xi. 3), it is explained that the secret teaching of the 
Vedas is under reference. Accordingly, may it not be argued that inasmuch as 
the metre is spoken of, Brahman is not under discussion? 

Vedirntin : That is not valid, for. "the dedication of the mind is taught in 
that way". "The dedication of the mind"-the concentration of the mind in 
Brahman; "in that way"-with the help of the metre Gayatri, in which 



Brahman inheres, is taught by this text of the brahma.na portion, "Gayatri is 
verily all this" (Ch. III. xii. 1). Gayatri as a mere assemblage of letters 
cannot possibly be the Self of everything. Therefore Brahman, which is the 
cause of the universe and inheres in Its effect, the Gayatri, is spoken of here 
as "all this", just as it is done in, "All this is verily Brahman" (Ch. III. xiv. 1). 
And under the aphorism, "It has non-difference from that Brahman, since 
terms like origin etc. are met with" (II. i. 14), we shall point out that the 
effect is non-different from its material cause. Similarly, meditation on 
Brahman with the help of natural mediums is met with elsewhere also, as in, 
"The followers of the Rg-Veda meditate on this very supreme Self as 
inhering in the hymn called the great Uktha; on this the followers of the 
Yajur-Veda meditate as inhering in fire; and on this the followers of the 
Sama-Veda meditate as inhering in the sacrifice called IMahavrata" (Ai. A. 
III. ii. 3.12). Hence, even though a metre be mentioned (by the word 
Gayatri) in the earlier text, still Brahman with four feet is spoken of there. 
And that very Brahman is alluded to in the text about Light, this being done 
with a view to enjoining a fresh meditation. 

Others sav that Brahman is directly referred to bv the word Gavatri 
throu g h a similarity of numbers. Gayatri is possessed of four feet , each 
consistin g of six letters. So also Brahman has four feet.]21 Similarly it is 
found elsewhere that words denotin g metres are used to si g nify somethin g 
else throu g h a similarity of number. This can be illustrated thus: The start is 
made with the statement . "These fair , fire , etc. ) that are five in one context 
( viz divine ) and these ( vital force , s peech , etc. ) that are five in another 
context ( viz bodil y) combine to form ten and thus become that ( dice called ) 
Krta" . and then it is said . "And this is the same as Viidt ( the metre ) which is 
the eater of food" ( Ch. IV. iii. 8 1 .128 From this point of view, Brahman Itself 
is spoken of (directly) and not the metre (Gayatri). From either point of 
view, the Brahman under discussion is present in the previous text as well. 

li ft II 













































W And —TTf—4TZ-4T-3~ because the representation of all the things etc. 
as a foot becomes possible, qq;q this must be so. 

26. And this must be so, because this makes possible the representation of 
all the things etc. as a foot. 


This has to he admitted to be so for this further reason: Brahman is the 

sub j ect-matter of the earlier text , since all thin g s etc, are mentioned as a foot. 
Thus after mentionin g the thin gs, the earth , bod y, and heart , it is said . "That 
Gavatri of this description has six aspects and four feet" (Ch. Ill, xii. 5 ) , For 
unless Brahman is taken into account , a mere metre cannot have all the 
thin g s etc, as its foot. Besides , without reference to Brahman , this Itk 
mantra . "That much is His g lory" etc. ( Ch. Ill, xii. 6 ). becomes incon g ruous. 
Brahman becomes the sub j ect-matter of this mantra when it is taken in its 
literal sense , for Brahman alone can have the omnipresence spoken of in . 
"All these thin g s are but one of His feet. His three other feet , which are 
immortal , are in heaven" ( ibid. ) . In the Puru . raShkta also , this Rk mantra 
occurs by wav of presentin g Brahman. And the Snil*ti presents such a form 
of Brahman in . "I exist su p portin g this whole universe by a portion of 
M yself" tGiza . X, 42T Moreover , the reference tto Brahman ) made in the 
words . "That which is that Brahman" 149 t Ch. Ill, xii. T ). can be possible in 
the primary sense , only if this point of view be accepted. Furthermore , the 
use of the phrase . "The men (i.e. the g atekeepers ! of Brahman" , with 
reference to the live openin g s of the heart , as found in the text . "These live . 
described thus , are the men of Brahman" ( Ch. Ill, xiii. 6 ). can be j ustified 
only if a relationship with Brahman is the meanin g implied. 180 Therefore it 
follows that Brahman is the subject matter of the earlier text; and hence the 
conclusion is this: That very Brahman, called up to the mind by Its 
relationship with heaven, is referred to in the text about Light. 



3qt-tcj On account of the difference in instruction not so, 4q if this be the 
contention, then q not so arfkTtqTq because of absence of contradiction 



































































































3tfRIatfq in either case. 


27. If it be argued that Brahman (of the earlier text) is not referred to here 
on account of the difference in the instruction, we say : No, because there is 
no contradiction in either case. 

And the criticism was advanced that in the earlier text, viz "His three feet 
which are immortal are in heaven" (Ch. III. xii. 6), the word heaven, used in 
the locative case, indicates a habitation, whereas in the text here, "That 
(Light) which shines above this heaven", the word used in the ablative case 
("above heaven"), indicates a limitation. Hence owing to the difference in 
the (form of the) instruction, the Brahman of the previous text is not called 
to mind here. That criticism has to be met. 

To this we (Veddntins) say: That is no valid objection. For there is no 
contradiction in either case. In both the places, irrespective of whether the 
instruction is through an ending in the locative case or the ablative case 
(after heaven), the identification suffers nothing. As in common usage we 
find that a hawk associated with the top of a tree, is referred to either as, 
"The hawk on the tree top" or "The hawk above the top of the tree", 
similarly Brahman, though existing in heaven, is taught as existing above it. 
Others say: Just as a hawk, not in actual contact with the top of a tree (but 
hovering over it), is referred to either as "The hawk on the tree top" or "The 
hawk above the top of the tree", similarly Brahman, though above heaven, is 
taught as existing in heaven. So it can be well recognized that the Brahman, 
mentioned in the earlier text, is alluded to here (in the latter text). Hence it is 
proved that the supreme Brahman Itself is referred to by Light. 

Toe 11: PRATARDANA 

snwwroi; ii $ ii 

ATQ1: Praia is Brahman UW 31TriTcZowing to such comprehension. 



28. Praha is Brahman, because it is comprehended thus. 

Doubt : In the Kau$itaki Upani$ad occurs the story of Indra and 
Pratardana, which starts with, "The well-known Pratardana, son of Divodasa, 
went to Indra's beloved palace through war and valour." There we read, "I 
(i.e. Indra) am Praha, identified with Consciousness. You meditate on me, 
who am of such stature, as life and immortality" (III. 2). Similarly, there 
occurs this text at a later stage, "Now then, it is Praha Itself, identified with 
Consciousness, that takes hold of the body and raises (i.e. animates) it up" 
(III. 3), as well as, "One should not inquire about speech, one should know 
the speaker" (III. 8), and so on. At the end again it is said, "That one is 
surely this Prmur, identified with Consciousness, which is bliss, ageless, and 
deathless" (III. 8), and so on. With regard to this, the doubt arises: Is the 
mere vital force signified here by the word Praha, or is it some divine soul, 
or an individual being, or the supreme Brahman? 

Objection : Was it not shown under the aphorism, "Prdna is Br::lunan for 
that very reason" (I. i. 23), that the word Prdna is used in the sense of 
Brahman? Here also the characteristics of Brahman are in evidence, viz 
"Bliss, ageless, deathless" etc. How can there be any possibility of doubt 
here? 

Doubter : We say that the doubt arises from noticing the characteristics of 
many. Not that the indicatory marks of Brahman alone are present here; 
there are marks indicating others also. Indra's words, "Know me alone", are 
indicative of a divine soul. "Taking hold of this body, it raises it up" points to 
Prina (i.e. vital force). "One should not inquire about speech, one should 
know the speaker" etc. presents the individual being. Hence the doubt is 
justifiable. 

Opponent : In that passage, the well-known vital force is referred to by 
Pram. 

Vedr ntin : Such being the case, it is said: The word Prana is to be 
understood in the sense of Brahman. 


Why? 



Because it is comprehended thus. To explain: When the text is discussed 
in the context of what precedes and what succeeds, the words are seen to 
lead to an understanding of Brahman. Turning to the commencement, we 
find that, when told by Indra, "Ask for a boon", Pratardana thus spoke of the 
highest objective that a man may aspire to: "You yourself choose for me that 
boon which you think to be the most beneficent for men" (III. 1). When 
Prdnna is taught to him as the most beneficent, how can It be other than the 
supreme Self? For a man can attain the most beneficent thing from nothing 
but the knowledge of the supreme Self, as declared in the Vedic text, 
"Knowing Him alone one goes beyond death; there is no other path to go by" 
(Sv. III. 8), and others. Moreover, the text "The world (viz liberation) 
achieved by the man who knows me is not certainly injured by any act- 
neither by theft nor the killing of a foetus" (Kau. III. 1), becomes justifiable 
only if Brahman is accepted, for it is well known from such Vedic texts as 
the following that all the results of works are eradicated on the dawn of the 
knowledge of Brahman: "When He that exists as the superior and inferior 
Brahman is known, all the results of one's actions get eradicated" (Mu. II. ii. 
8). And the fact of Prana being one with Consciousness becomes proper only 
if Brahman is the meaning. For the insentient vital force cannot be one with 
Consciousness. Similarly such words as, "Bliss, ageless, deathless" (III. 8), 
occurring at the end, cannot fully apply to anything but Brahman. There are 
also the texts, "He does not become greater by virtuous deeds, nor any the 
less by vicious deeds. It is He who makes one do good deeds whom He 
would raise above these worlds, and Hg again makes one do evil deeds 
whom He would cast below these worlds", "This One is the ruler over the 
worlds, this One is the protector of the worlds, this One is the lord of the 
worlds" (Kau. III. 8), which all can be understood only if the supreme 
Brahman is resorted to, and not the chief vital force. Therefore Prdna is 
Brahman. 



Not so WT-M-MR11 the teaching being about own self 9: of the teacher 
Oaq if this be the objection, (then not so) fk for here occurs al~Tc—Q- an 



abundance of reference to the inmost Self. 


29. If it be argued that Prdna is not Brahman, since the instruction is about 
the speaker's own self, (then we say, no), for here is an abundance of 
reference to the inmost Self. 

Opponent : The assertion that Prdna is Brahman is being refuted. The 
supreme Brahman is not the meaning of the word Praha. 

Why? 

Because the instruction is about the speaker himself. For some embodied 
deity, called Indra, is the teacher, who speaks of himself to Pratardana in the 
first person in the introductory sentence, "Know me alone" (Kau. III. 1) and 
in the sentence, "I am Prdna, identified with Consciousness" (Kau. III. 2). 
How can this Praia, taught as the speaker himself, be Brahman? For 
Brahman cannot be a speaker, as it is denied in the Vedic texts, "without the 
vocal organ or mind" (Br. III. viii. 8), etc. Similarly in such sentences as, "I 
killed (Vi§varapa) the threeheaded son of Tva$ta; I threw to the wild dogs 
the hermits averse to the Vedas" (Kau. III. 1), Indra praises himself through 
qualities that fit in with a body, but not with Brahman. And it is logical that 
Indra should be one with Prdna by virtue of his possession of strength; for 
we come across such a text as, "The vital force is strength" (Bt. V. xiv. 4). It 
is also well known that Indra is the presiding deity of strength, for even 
ordinary people assert, "Whatever vigorous effort there may be, it is the 
work of Indra". Oneness with Consciousness too is possible for a divine 
being by virtue of his unobstructed knowledge; for they say, "The deities 
have unobstructed knowledge". Once it is thus established that the teaching 
is about some divine being, such facts as the instruction about the most 
beneficent thing etc. have to be interpreted in the best possible way as 
referring to that being. 

Veddntin : Thus on the strength of the fact that Indra, the speaker, talks of 
himself, it is first denied that Praia can be Brahman; then the refutation of 
that is stated in, "for here is an abundance of reference to the inmost Self". 
"Here", in this chapter, we find "an abundance of reference to the inmost 
Self". The text, "Life lasts so long as Praha lives in this body" (Kau. III. 2), 



shows that it is Prdna alone, one with Consciousness and existing as the 
indwelling Self, and not any external deity (coming to exist after It), that has 
independence in the matter of granting life and ending it. Similarly the text, 
"When Prdna exists, the senses and organs exist" (ibid.), shows that Praha, 
as the indwelling Self, is the support of the senses and organs. So also the 
text, "It is Praha, identified with Consciousness, that takes hold of the body 
and lifts it up" (Kau. III. 3), (shows that Praha, as the indwelling Self, 
supports the body). And starting with, "One should not inquire about speech, 
but should know the speaker (i.e. Prdna)" (Kau. III. 8), it is said, "To 
illustrate the point: As the rim of a wheel is fixed on the spokes of a chariot 
and the spokes are fixed on the nave, so are these (five) elements and (five) 
sense-objects fixed on the (five) sense-perceptions and (five) senses, and 
these latter are fixed on Praia" (ibid.); "That very Praha, as described, is one 
with Consciousness" (Kau. III. 8); "Bliss, ageless, deathless" (Kau. III. 8). 
All these texts present the inmost Self as their only object which remains 
unaffected by the contacts between senseobjects and senses. And the 
conclusion with the words, "One should know, 'He is my Self", becomes 
justifiable if the inmost Self is accepted, but not if any external being (e.g. a 
god born later on) is taken up. In support of this, there occurs a sentence in 
another Upani$ad, "This Self, the perceiver of everything, is Brahman" (Br. 
II. v. 19). Therefore, from the abundance of reference to the inmost Self, it 
follows that this Praha is Brahman. 

Why then does the speaker teach about himself? 

II H 

I But Zq~q: the instruction 4T1{'TI proceeds from a seer's vision agreeing 
with scriptures VR~M as in the case of Vamadeva. 

30. But the instruction proceeds from a seer's vision agreeing with 
scriptures, as in the case of Vamadeva. 



Indra, a divine being, who had through a seer's (natural) vision, agreeing 
with the scriptures, realized his own Self as the supreme Self thus, "I am 
surely the supreme Brahman", imparted the instruction, "Know me alone" 
(Kau. III. 1). This is just like what is read .in, "The sage Vamadeva, while 
realizing this (Self) as ,That (Brahman), knew, l was Manu and the sun'" 
(Br. 1. iv. 10); for the Upani$ad declares, "And whoever among the gods 
knew this became That" (ibid.). The criticism also has to be met that after 
declaring, "Know me alone", Indra praises himself with such characteristics, 
suggestive of embodiedness, as the killing of the son of Tvata. In answer it is 
said: It is not by way of eulogizing Indra, who is to be known, that such facts 
as the killing of the son of Tva$Ta and so on are presented, conveying 
thereby this idea, "Since I am a performer of such deeds, therefore you 
worship me". Why are they spoken of then? It is for the sake of eulogizing 
the knowledge of Brahman. This being the end in view, the daring acts like 
the killing of the son of Tva$Ia are first introduced and then these are 
connected with the praise of knowledge thus: "For me, while engaged in 
such (cruel) deeds, not a hair was lost. Of one who knows me, no acquired 
merit is adversely affected by any act whatsoever" (Kau. III. 1). The idea 
expressed is this: As I have become identified with Brahman, and hence I do 
not lose so much as a hair, even though engaged in such cruel deeds, 
therefore for anyone else, too, who knows me, there can be no injury to his 
acquired merit by any act whatsoever. The real entity to he known, however, 
is Brahman which will be presented later in, "I am Pra~ta, one with 
Consciousness" (Kau. III. 2). Therefore this is a statement about Brahman. 

AfMI \\ II 


-(Ai9fJk On account of the indicatory marks of the individual soul and 
chief Prdna 9 not so, Ift W[ if such be the objection, (then) 9 not so 
'ZqT—tAf j because this will lead to a threefold meditation; al iq, because of 
acceptance; here cilZ- because of the presence of those characteristics (of 
Brahman). 


31. If it be argued that Brahman is not spoken of here on account of the 
indications of the individual soul and the chief vital force, then that cannot 



be so, since this 'will lead to a threefold meditation. (Besides, Prdna) is 
accepted (elsewhere) as meaning Brahman (because of the presence of 
Brahman's characteristics), (and these are) in evidence here. 

Opponent : Although it follows from the frequency of reference to the 
inmost Self that the instruction is not about any (subsequently bom) external 
divine being, still this text does not relate to Brahman. 

Why? 

Because there are the characteristic marks of the individual soul and the 
chief Prdna. As for the characteristic mark of the individual soul, it is clearly 
in evidence in this sentence: "One should not inquire about speech, but 
should know the speaker" (Kau. II. 8), and so on. For the individual soul, 
engaged in the use of the vocal and other organs and presiding over the 
assemblage of body and senses, is spoken of here as an entity to be known. 
So also there is the indication of the chief vital force: "Now, then, it is Prdna, 
one with Consciousness, that takes hold of the body and lifts it up" (Kau. III. 
3); and the keeping up of the body together is the function of the vital force. 
For in the anecdote of Prdna it is heard about the other prams, viz the organs 
of speech etc.: "To them the chief Prdna said, 'Do not be deluded; for it is I 
who hold this body together by dividing myself in five ways' " (Pr. II. 3). 
The meaning (of the Kau$itaki text quoted above), according to those who 
read "imalit sariram parigrhya", (imaih "this" being used in the masculine in 
place of idmn in the neuter), the explanation will be this: "Taking hold of 
this individual soul or this assemblage of body and senses, it lifts up the 
body." Identity with Consciousness too is justifiable in the case of the 
individual soul on the ground of its intelligence. And this is justifiable in the 
case of the chief vital force also, since it supports the other organs (called 
pranas) which are the instruments of perception. Even if both the individual 
soul and the vital force he meant, still it is reasonable to mention them as one 
from the standpoint of the coexistence of the conscious soul and Praha; and 
yet they can be mentioned separately from their own individual standpoints, 
as in, "That which is Prn?ra is intelligence, and that which is intelligence is 
Pralla" (Kau. Ill 3), "These two reside together in the body, and they leave 
this body together" (Kau. III. 3). If Brahman be accepted as the meaning (of 



Prina), then which one will differ from the other? Therefore let either the 
individual soul or Praha, or even both be the meaning, but not Brahman. 

Vedantin : Not so, for that involves a threefold meditation. On that 
supposition we shall be faced with three kinds of meditation-meditation on 
the individual soul, meditation on the chief Prima, and meditation on 
Brahman. But such a meaning is inadmissible for a single sentence. For from 
a consideration of the beginning and complementary portion of the passage, 
a unity of idea becomes obvious. After starting with, "Know me alone" 
(Kau. III. 1), and declaring, "I am Prana, one with Consciousness. Worship 
me as life and immortality" (Kau. Ill. 2), it is said at the end, "That very 
entity that is Prana is one with Consciousness" (Kau. III. 8), "Bliss, ageless, 
deathless" (III. 8), where we find that the start and the finish are of the same 
pattern. That being so, it is reasonable to understand a unity of purport. 
Besides, it is not possible to apply the characteristics of Brahman to anything 
else, for the ten forms of elements and the ten forms of intelligence (i.e. five 
elements and their qualities, and five senses and five forms of sensation) 
cannot be merged in anything but Brahman. "Moreover, it is admitted". 
Since from the presence of the characteristics of Brahman, the word Prana is 
admitted elsewhere to mean Brahman (B.S. I. i. 23), and since here also is in 
evidence the presence of such characteristics as being the most beneficent 
and so on, it is understood that this is an instruction about Brahman. 

And it was argued that the text, "Taking hold of this body, lifts it up" 
(Kau. III. 3), is an indication of the chief vital force. But that is wrong. For 
even the functions of the vital force are dependent on Brahman, and can thus 
be ascribed (figuratively) to the supreme Self, as is done in the Upani$adic 
text, "No mortal being lives through exhaling and inhaling, but through some 
other entity on which these two rest" (Ka. II. v. 5). Even the interpretation of 
the text, "One should not inquire about speech, but should know the speaker" 
(Kau. III. 8), as presenting a sign of the individual soul (that is shown by the 
opponent) cannot rule out the acceptance of Brahman. For what is known as 
the individual soul is not entirely different from Brahman; for the texts, 
"That thou art" (Ch. VI. viiixvi), "I am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), and so on 
demolish this view. Though the individual soul is Brahman in reality, it is 
called an agent or an experiencer on account of the distinctions created by 



such limiting adjuncts as the intellect. In order to make one turn towards the 
inmost Self, it involves no contradiction to say, "One should not inquire 
about speech, but should know the speaker" (Kau. III. 8), which is meant to 
divest the individual soul of the distinctions created by conditioning factors 
and to show it as Brahman, which is its true nature. And another Upani$adic 
text, "That which is not uttered by speech, that by which speech is uttered- 
know that to be Brahman, and not this thing that they worship objectively" 
(Ke. I. 5), shows that the soul, engaged in such activities as speaking, is but 
Brahman. 

Another objection was that the perception of difference between Praha 
and the Self identified with Consciousness, as stated in, "for they both reside 
in this body together and they leave the body together" (Kau. III. 4), cannot 
be maintained by one who sticks to Brahman. That is not a valid objection. 
For it is possible to indicate a difference between the intellect and Praha, as 
constituting the two limiting adjuncts of the indwelling Self and forming the 
bases of the power of knowing and acting. But the indwelling Self, that is 
conditioned by the two, has no difference in Itself. Hence the identification 
stated in "Prdna is one with Consciousness" involves no contradiction. 

Or the portion of the aphorism, "Nopasatraividhyat asritatvat iha 
tadyogat", has this other meaning (according to Vrttikara): There is no 
contradiction even if we meet with the characteristics of the individual soul 
and the chief vital force this context dealing with Brahman, in 

Why? 

For there is a threefold meditation. Three kinds of meditation on Brahman 

are meant here-with the help of the qualities of Prdna . intelli g ence , and 
Brahman Itself. Of these the qualities of Prdna are mentioned in: "Meditate 
as life and immortalit y: life is Prd?la" (Kau. III. 2 ): "Takin g hold of this 
bod y, lifts it up" tKau. III. 3 ): and therefore "One should meditate on it as 
Uktha"181 ( Kau. 111. 3 ) , The qualilies of the intellect (i.e. soul ) are stated 
thus: Startin g with . "Now we shall explain how all these thin g s become 
unified in that intellect'"! .12 ( Kau. III. 4 1. it is stated . "The vocal or g an itself 
fills up onehalf of its ti.e. intellect's ! bod y, names , expressed (throu gh eve 
etc. l as the ob j ects perceived , become its other half"188 tKau. III. 5 ). 















































"Ridin g on the vocal or g an throu g h the intellect , it (i.e. the conscious soul ) 
reaches all the names" 134 (ibid.). Here the qualities of the intellect are 
indicated. And the qualities of Brahman are shown in, "These ten elements 
and their enjoyable qualities are dependent on the ten senses and sense- 
perceptions; and the senses and sense-perceptions are dependent on the 
elements and their qualities. Had not the elements and qualities been there . 
the senses and sensations would not have been there ; and had not the senses 
and sensations been there , the elements and their qualities would not have 
been there. From neither of them is any ru pa. ap pearance , possible ; nor are 
they different. To illustrate this point: As the rim of a chariot wheel is fixed 
on the spokes and the spokes are fixed on the nave , so are these elements and 
their en jo yable qualities fixed on the senses and sensations , and the senses 
and sensations are fixed on the elements and their en jo vable qualities. This 
Prana , that is such , is surely one with Consciousness" ( Kau. 111. 8 ). 
Accordin gly, this is a sin g le meditation on Brahman , s poken of as threefold 
b y basin g it on Brahman's own qualities and the qualities of Its two 
conditionin g factors. Elsewhere also meditation on Brahman is resorted to . 
as for instance , with the help of such identification with the qualities of the 
conditionin g factors as "havin g identity with the mind" , as "havin g Prana as 
the bod y" ( Ch. Ill, xiv. 2 ). and so on. That a p plies here also , for the unity of 
purport is understood from the be g innin g and the end of the text and because 
we g et here the marks indicative of Prana , the intellect , and Brahman. 135 
Hence it is proved that this text propounds Brahman. 

SECTION II 

Introduction : In the first section, it was stated under the aphorism, "That 
from which are derived the birth etc. of this", that Brahman is the cause of 
the birth of the whole universe starting with space (B. S. I. i. 2). Thereby it 
was stated ipso facto that Brahman, as the cause of the universe, is possessed 
of such characteristics as omnipresence, eternality, omniscience, 
omnipotence, identity with all, and so on. And it was shown with the help of 
reason, that certain words, familiarly meaning other things, are used in the 
Upani$ads in the sense of Brahman; it was thereby ascertained that though 
the meanings of certain sentences, bearing clear indications of Brahman, 
were under doubt, yet they meant Brahman. With regard to some other 






































































sentences, having indistinct indication of Brahman, the doubt again arises as 
to whether they establish the supreme Brahman or some other entity. The 
second and third sections are started for ascertaining this: 


Topic 1: THE ENTITY KNOWN EVERYWHERE 

m stefcns \\\ 

MM Everywhere (in all the Upani$ads) Si-,6*llj the well known entity 
having been taught. 

1. (Brahman is the object to be meditated on), since 'that which is well 
known everywhere is taught (here in this Chandogya Upani~ad-lll. xiv. 1- 
2). 

Doubt : This is stated in the Upani$ad: "All this is but Brahman, because 
it originates from that (Brahman), merges in that, and is sustained by that. 
One should meditate by becoming calm. Now then, a man is a product of his 
resolves. After departing from this world, a man becomes just as he wills 
(i.e. according to what he meditates on) here. He should have resolution. He 
who is identified with the mind, whose body is Prdna (subtle body), and 
whose nature consists of light (i.e. intelligence)" (Ch. Ill. xiv. 1-2). With 
regard to this the doubt arises: Is the embodied soul, possessed of such 
characteristics as identification with the mind, set forth here for meditation, 
or is it the supreme Brahman? What would be the conclusion arrived at? 

Opponent: It must be the embodied soul. 

Why? 


Because in its case, the relation with the mind etc. is a wellknown fact, 
whereas it is not so in the case of the supreme Brahman, as stated in, 



"Because He is pure and without vital force and mind" (Mu. II. i. 2), and 
other texts. 

Objection : Such statements as "bigger than the earth" (ibid. xiv. 1), 
Brahman is presented by name. So how can the doubt arise that the entity to 
be meditated on here is the embodied soul? 

Opponent : That raises no difficulty. This sentence is not an injunction 
about Brahman. 

About what is it then? 

It is meant for en j oinin g calmness , as is evident from the statement . "All 
this is but Brahman , because it ori g inates from that , mer g es in that , and is 
sustained by that. One should meditate by becomin g calm" ( Ch. Ill, xiv. 1- 
2) . The idea implied is this: Since all this creation is but Brahman , because it 
ori g inates there , mer g es there , and subsists there , and because attachment 
etc, are not possible when all thin g s are the same , therefore one should 
meditate by becomin g calm. And if this sentence is meant to en join 
calmness , it cannot at the same time be construed to en i oin a meditation on 
Brahman.' The meditation itself is enjoined in the sentence, "He should have 
a kratu", where kratu means resolution, that is to say, meditation. And for 
stating an object of that meditation, the text says, "identified with the mind 
and having the vital force as his body" (ibid.). Now, this is a sign of the 
individual soul. Therefore we say that this meditation relates to the 
individual soul. And the text, "performer of all actions, possessor of all 
desires" etc. (Ch. III. xiv. 2), that we come across, becomes applicable to the 
individual being from the standpoint of its progressive realization (of these 
in different births). Again, for the individual soul, of the size of the tip of a 
goading stick (Sv. V. 8), and not for the infinite Brahman, can be thought of 
such residence in the heart and minuteness, as stated in, "Within the heart is 
this Self of mine which is smaller than a grain of paddy or barley" (Ch. III. 
xiv. 3). 

Objection : Such statements as "bigger than the earth" (ibid.) cannot be 
thought of in connection with the limited soul. 





































Opponent : As to that, we say: Both minuteness and vastness cannot be 
applied to the same entity, for that is contradictory. And if one of the two has 
to be accepted, it is more reasonable to take up minuteness, mentioned 
earlier. But vastness can be mentioned from the standpoint of the soul's 
becoming Brahman. The definite meaning being the individual soul, the 
mention of Brahman at the end in the words, "This Brahman" (Ch. III. xiv. 
4), relates to the individual soul itself, for that text is meant as a reference to 
a subject already being discussed. Therefore the individual being is to be 
meditated on as possessed of the qualities of being identified with the mind 
etc. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: The supreme Brahman Itself is 
to be meditated on as possessed of the characteristics of identification with 
the mind etc. 

Why? 

Because it is but reasonable that the source of the universe, connoted by 
the word Brahman, well known in all the Upani$ads, and declared in the 
words, "All this is but Brahman", in the present text at the very start, should 
be taught as possessed of the characteristics of being identified with the 
mind, and so on. On this interpretation we avoid the fault of giving up the 
topic under discussion and turning to something extraneous. 

Opponent.: Did we not say that Brahman is presented at the beginning for 
the purpose of enjoining calmness, but not for Its own sake? 

Veddntin : With regard to this, we say that, although Brahman be 
presented in connection with the injunction for calmness, still when such 
qualities as identity with the mind etc, are tau ght. Brahman ha p pens to be 
nearer to them ( than the .individual soul h whereas the individual soul is 
neither . near at hand2 nor is it presented throu g h any of its own synonyms .3 
Here lies the difference. 















a And faaf8-7-3q"': because the intended qualities fit in. 

2. And this follows from the fact that the intended qualities are justifiable 
(in the case of Brahman). 

The vivak . citdh are those that are intended to be expressed. Althou g h the 
Vedas have no author , and hence in the absence of a speaker ( i.e. author ) the 
idea of intention is inadmissible , still the word intention can be used 
fig uratively in the sense of "resultin g in bein g accepted".4 In common 
experience also, any sense expressed of a word, that is acceptable, is said to 
be its intended meaning, and what is not acceptable is said to be unintended. 
Similarly in the case of the Vedas, the intended meaning is known from the 
fact of its being presented as acceptable and the unintended meaning is that 
which is unacceptable. Acceptability or unacceptability, again, is determined 
from what is or is not the meaning of a Vedic text. Therefore those intended 
qualities that are enjoined here for being taken up during the meditation, viz 
true resolve and so forth, fit in with the supreme Brahman; for true resolve 
can be thought of only in the case of the supreme Brahman, It being 
possessed of absolute power in the matter of creation, continuance, and 
dissolution. And the phrases, "possessing true desire and true resolve", are 
found in association with the qualities of the supreme Self, mentioned in the 
text starting with, "The Self that is free from sin" etc. (Ch. VIII. vii. 1). By 
the phrase, akasatma (Ch. III. xiv. 2), which is derived in the sense of "that 
which has its Self (i.e. nature) like space", it is shown that Brahman has 
similarity with space owing to Its qualities of all-pervasiveness etc.; and this 
is also shown in the text, "Greater than the earth" (Ch. III. xiv. 3). Even if the 
earlier phrase (akasatma) be explained in the sense of "that which has space 
as its Self (i.e. body)", still it is possible for Brahman, the source of the 
whole universe and the Self of all as It is, to have space as Its body. For the 


















very same reason, It can be the performer of all actions. Thus here also, the 
qualities intended for meditation fit in with Brahman. 

It was argued that "identified with the mind and having the vital force as 
the body" presents an indicatory mark of the individual being, and hence this 
text cannot apply to Brahman. We say that even this is applicable to 
Brahman; for Brahman is the Self of all, so that the quality of being 
identified with the mind, which belongs to the individual, comes to be 
related to Brahman. Thus it is that there are such Vedic and Snirti passages 
about Brahman as: "You are a man; you are a young man; or again a young 
woman. You are the old man tottering along on his stick. It is you who 
become multi-faced after being born" (Sv. IV. 3); and "He has His hands and 
feet everywhere, His eyes, heads, and mouths everywhere and He has His 
ears everywhere in this world. He exists pervading everything" (Sv. III. 16, 
Gita, XIII. 13). But the distinction is that, the text, "He is without vital force 
and mind, and He is pure" (Mu. II. i. 2), relates to the unconditioned 
Brahman, while the present text, "identified with the mind and having the 
vital force as His body", relates to the qualified Brahman. Accordingly, it can 
be understood that since the intended qualities are justifiable, it is the 
supreme Brahman that is taught here. 

* wk: \\\ ii 

Because (the qualities) do not fit in, therefore IMT+C: surely the 
embodied soul is not (meant). 

3. And the embodied individual soul is not surely meant, because the 
qualities do not fit in with it. 

The preceding aphorism spoke of the aptness of the intended qualities in 
Brahman. This one speaks of their inapplicability to the embodied soul. The 
word to is used to signify emphasis. According to the reasons adduced, it is 



Brahman alone that is possessed of the qualities of being identified with the 
mind, and so on. The individual soul cannot have those qualities, the reason 
being this: "Having true resolve, having space as the body" (Ch. III. xiv. 2), 
"without speech, without any attachment" (ibid.), "greater than the earth" 
(Ch. III. xix. 3), and such other qualities do not properly fit in with the 
individual being. The word sariri meanF c:_isting in the body. 

Opponent: Does not Gcd also exist in the body? 

Vedantin : True, He exists in the body, but not in the body alone; for the 
Upani$ad declares His pervasiveness in, "Greater than the earth, greater than 
the interspace" (ibid.), and "He is all-pervasive like space and eternal". But 
the individual being exists in the body alone; for it does not exist anywhere 
else apart from the body, which is the seat for its experiences. 



a-VQ-iii And because there is mention of the and the subject, object 

4. And because there is reference to the ohjee~ and subject. 

The embodied being is not the one possessed of such qualities as being 
"identified with the mind" for this further reason that there is an assertion of 
an object and a subject (i.e. something attained and somebody attaining it) in 
the sentence, "Departing from here I shall attain this one" (Ch. III. xiv. 4). 
By the term "this one", the Self to be meditated on, as possessed of the 
qualities of being identified with the mind, is referred to as an object to be 
attained. Abhisambhavitdsmi, meaning "I shall attain", refers to the 
embodied being, the meditator, as the agent of the attainment. When a more 
reasonable standpoint is possible, it is not proper to refer to the same entity 
as both the subject and object. Similarly the relationship between the object 



meditated on and the agent meditating is based on difference. For this reason 
also, the embodied being is not the one possessed of such qualities as "being 
identified with the mind". 



S. Owing to the difference in the (case-endings of the two) words. 

The one possessed of such characteristics as identity with the mind and so 
on must be different from the embodied bein g for this additional reason that 
a difference in the case-endin g s of the words occurs in a similar contexts in 
another Vedic text: "Just as a g rain of paddy or barley or fvamdka tcanar v) 
or a seed of fvdmdka is ( very small ), so is the efful g ent Puru$a ti.e. the 
conscious all-pervasive Entit y) inside the ( individual ) soul tantardtman V 1 tS. 
B. X. vh 3. 2. ) . Here the word Puru$ a. used in the sin g ular number . 
nominative case , means the Self endowed with the qualities of bein g 
identified with the mind and so on ; and this word is different from the term 
antardtmane which is used with a seventh case-ending and refers to the 
embodied soul. Therefore their difference becomes obvious (so that the one 
identified with the mind is not the individual soul). 







































6. (This follows) from the Smnrti also. 

The embodied soul and the supreme Self are shown differently in the 
Smrti also: "The Lord, 0 Arjuna, dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing 
all beings by His Maya to revolve, (as if) mounted on a machine" (Gita, 
XVIII. 61). 

Here the opponent puts in: What is this entity, called the embodied soul 
different from the supreme Self, which is denied by the aphorism, "The 
individual soul is not certainly referred to, because the qualities do not fit in 
with it" (I. ii. 3) etc.? As a matter of fact, the Vedic texts, as for instance, 
"There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23), deny any Self other 
than the supreme Self. So also do the Smxti texts, as for instance, "Me do 
thou also know, 0 descendant of Bharata, to be the knower of the kgetra (i.e. 
body) in all the k,etras" (Gita, XIII. 2). 

Vedcntin : To this we say: It is quite true that the supreme Self Itself, as 
delimited by the conditioning factors-body, senses, mind, intellect, etc.-is 
spoken of in a roundabout way as the embodied soul by the ignorant. The 
case is similar to the appearance of space, undivided though it is, as if 
divided owing to such conditioning factors as a pot, a jar, etc. And before 
obtaining the instruction about the unity of the Self as in, "That thou art" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 7), it is nothing incongruous to talk from that point of view in 
terms of such differences as are implied by subjects and objects. But once 



the unity of the Self is accepted, there will surely be an end to all empirical 
dealings, involving notions of bondage, liberation, etc. 

aiWwtipnfcp ^ fircwaiN 11 & n 

ariW-at ccTc On account of the smallness of the abode W and cT~c*znq 
on account of its being designated as such 1 not so hi 4c if this be the 
objection, 9 not so; [nff"TWM7 for this is so for the sake of contemplation 
W and W (this is) analogous to space. 

7. If it be objected that the supreme Self is not taught here, because of the 
s7:tallness of the abode and because of its being referred to as such, then we 
say : No, for this is done for the sake of contemplation, as is seen in the case 
of space. 

Arbhaka means small (tiny), and okas means nest (abode). It was argued 
that because the inmost Self has a limited abode, as stated in, "This is my 
Self within the heart" (Ch. III. xiv. 3), and because the Upani$ad mentions 
its subtleness in clear words in "subtler than a grain of paddy or barley" 
(ibid.), the em bodied soul of the size of the tip of a goading rod (Sv. V. 8), 
must have been taught here, and not the all-pervasive supreme Self. That 
criticism has to be refuted. With regard to this we say: That is no defect. 
While it is impossible from every point of view to assert all-pervasiveness 
for something that is spatially limited, it is possible in the case of the 
omnipresent One to speak of limited presence in some sense because of 
existence everywhere, just as a king ruling over the whole earth can be 
referred to as the king of Ayodhya. 

Opponent : From what standpoint, again, is omnipresent God, spoken of 
as having a tiny abode and minuteness? 

Veddntin : We say that this is declared thus for the sake of being 
contemplated on. That God, possessed of a set of such qualities as 
subtleness, is taught to be meditated on there in the lotus of the heart, just as 
(the Lord) Hari is taught to be worshipped on a Salagrdma (stone symbol). A 
certain state of the intellect, (brought about by the Upani$adic instruction), 



catches a glimpse of Him there. God, though omnipresent, becomes gracious 
when worshipped there. And this is to be understood on the analogy of 
space. Just as space, though allpervasive, is referred to as having a limited 
habitation and minuteness from the point of view of its association with the 
eye of a needle, so also is the case with Brahman. Thus the limited habitation 
and subtleness being declared for the sake of meditation, these do not belong 
to Brahman in any real sense. Hereby is set at rest the doubt that might arise 
in this matter that, since Brahman has the heart as Its habitation, since the 
hearts differ in different bodies, and since parrots and others, having 
different habitations, suffer from the defects of being many in number, 
limited by bodies, and impermanent, therefore Brahman too will incur those 
faults. 


II * II 

MR)IMfi: Experience (of happiness and sorrow) will be His lot Ufa t if 
such be the objection, not so, Eicc ' because of difference. 

8. If it be objected that God will be subject to the experience (of happiness 
and sorrow as a result of unity), we say, not so, for there is a difference. 

Opponent : Since Brahman is connected with the hearts of all beings on 
account of Its all-pervasiveness like space, and since It is non-different from 
the embodied soul owing to Its nature of Consciousness, therefore the 
conclusion may be drawn that Brahman will experience happiness and 
sorrow just like others. And this must bg so because of oneness. For apart 
from the supreme Self, there is no transmigrating soul, as is denied in such 
Vedic texts as, "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23). Hence It 
is the supreme Self Itself that undergoes transmigration. 

Veddntin : No, "since there is a difference". To explain: Just because 
Brahman has some relationship with the hearts of all beings, it does not 
follow that Brahman experiences happiness and sorrow like the embodied 




souls; for there is a difference. There is forsooth a difference between the 
embodied soul and the supreme God. The one is an agent, an experiencer (of 
happiness and sorrow), a source of merit, demerit, etc., and possessed of 
happiness and sorrow, while the other is just the opposite, being possessed of 
such qualities as freedom from sin, and so on. Because of this distinction 
between the two, the one has experiences, but not the other. If from the mere 
fact of proximity, and without any reference to the intrinsic nature of things, 
a causal relation with some effect is postulated, then space, for instance, can 
as well become burnt, (it being connected with fire). And this objection has 
to be met and refuted equally by all those who hold the view that the souls 
are many and all-pervasive. 

There was the argument, that since Brahman is non-dual, no other Self can 
exist; and hence there is the possibility that when one Self has any 
experience, Brahman too must have it. In refutation of this we say: Apropos 
of this, you have to be asked, "a favourite of the gods" (i.e. a fool) that you 
are, how do you cling to the view that there is no other soul? 

Opponent : On the authority of such texts as, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 
7), "I am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. 
III. vii. 23). 

Vedantin : In that case , the meanin g of the scripture should be interpreted 
in the wav it should be . and you cannot resort to anythin g here analo g ous to 
an old ha g with her one half youn g ( and the other old ) ,7 Now while the 
scriptural text, "That thou art", teaches that the Brahman possessed of the 
qualities like freedom from sin, and so on, is the Self of the embodied being, 
it also denies thereby any experience for the embodied Self Itself. So how 
can there be any talk of any experience accruing to Brahman from that of the 
embodied Self? On the contrary, so long as the aspirant has not understood 
the oneness of the embodied Self with Brahman, the experience of happiness 
and sorrow by the embodied being is a result of false ignorance, and 
Brahman, the highest Reality, cannot be touched by it. For the sky does not 
really become possessed of a surface (i.e. concavity) or tainted by dirt etc. 
which the ignorant fancy on it. That fact is stated in, "Not so, for there is a 
difference". Not even, owing to the fact of unity, is Brahman affected by any 

















experience undergone by the embodied soul; for there is a difference, 
inasmuch as true knowledge differs from false ignorance etc. The experience 
of happiness etc. is cooked up by false ignorance, while unity is seen 
through real knowledge. And it is never a fact that a thing perceived through 
real knowledge is affected by any experience under false ignorance. 
Accordingly, it is not possible to fancy the slightest touch of the experience 
of happiness and sorrow in God. 

Topic 2: THE EATER 

W £ I! 

W1 The eater 't-T"-i T on account of the appropriation of the movable and 
immovable. 

9. The eater (is God), on account of the appropriation of all that moves 
and does not move. 

Doubt : We read in the Kalhopani$ad: "How can one know thus as to 
where It (the Self) is, for which both the Brahmai a and the Kptriya become 
rice (food) and for whom death takes the place of a curry (or ghee etc. 
poured on rice)?" (I. ii. 25). Here we are apprised of some eater indicated by 
the mention of rice and its adjunct (curry). Now who can this eater be? Is it 
fire or the individual soul, or is it the supreme Self? This is the doubt, for no 
conclusive distinction is in evidence, and it is seen in this book that 
questions are put (to Death by Naciketas) with regard to three entities-Fire, 
individual soul, and the supreme Self. What should be the conclusion then? 

Opponent: The eater is Fire. 

Why? 



Because this is gathered from the familiar use in such texts as, "Fire is the 
eater of food" (Br. I. iv. 6), as well as common parlance. Or the individual 
soul may be the eater, for there is the text, "One of them eats the fruits of 
divergent tastes (sweet or sour)" (Mu. III. i. 1). But it cannot be the supreme 
Self, for there is the text, "The other looks on without eating" (ibid.). 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: The eater here should be the 
supreme Self. 

Why? 

Because of his appropriation of all that moves and does not move. For all 
movable and immovable things appear here as the eatable thing with death 
as its (pouring) adjunct. None but the supreme Self can consume such a food 
fully. As for the supreme Self, it is quite possible to assert that He devours 
all, inasmuch as He withdraws everything into Himself during dissolution. 

Opponent : But the appropriation of all that moves and does not move is 
not stated here. How can then the appropriation of all movable and 
unmovable things be accepted as an established fact to be advanced as a 
ground (for inferring God)? 

Veddntin : That creates no difficult y, because when Death is mentioned as 
the curr v. all bein gs present themselves alon g with it.8 and because the 
Brahmataas and K$atriyas are cited by way of suggesting (all beings), they 
being the chief among them. 

As for the argument that even the supreme Self cannot be the eater in the 
face of the Upani$adic revelation, "The other looks on without eating" (Mu. 
III. i. 1), we say: This revelation is meant to deny the enjoyment of the fruits 
of action, for that is near at hand (to the text). That is not a denial of the 
dissolution of all things (figuratively denoted by eating), inasmuch as 
Brahman is well known in all the Upani$ads as the cause of creation, 
sustenance, and dissolution. Therefore the supreme Self alone can be the 
devourer here. 









10. And (this follows) from the context. 

For this additional reason it is the supreme Self alone that can be the eater 
here; for this topic, starting with, "The enlightened (or knowing) One is 
neither born nor does He die" (Ka. I. ii. 18), is of the supreme Self. And it is 
proper that the entity constituting the subject of the context should be 
accepted as the eater. The difficulty about "knowing" (the Self) as stated in, 
"How can one know thus?" (Ka. I. ii. 28), is also a pointer to the supreme 
Self. 


TOPIC 3: THE Two IN THE CAVITY OF THE HEART 

tfqwiCHi'il II II 

RA16 The two that have entered ~$T into the cavity RURFft (are) the two 
Selfs k because f-iil that is what is seen. 

11. The two who have entered into the cavity (of the heart) are the 
individual Self and the supreme Self, for that is what is seen (in other texts). 

Doubt : In the Katha Upani$ad itself we read: "The knowers of Brahman, 
the worshippers of the five fires, and those who perform the Ndciketa 
sacrifice thrice, compare to shade and light, the two drinkers of rta 
(inevitable results) of one's work, who have entered into the body, into the 
cavity (of the heart) which is the supreme abode of the Most High" (I. iii. 1). 
With regard to this the doubt arises: Are the intellect and the individual soul 
mentioned here, or the individual soul and the supreme Self? If the intellect 



and the soul be referred to, then the text establishes that the soul is different 
from the assemblage of body and organs in which the intellect predominates. 
That soul also has to he presented here, for it has been sought for in the 
question, "The doubt that arises, consequent on the death of a man, some 
saying that he exists and others that he does not-I would know this under 
your instruction. This is the third of the three boons" (Ka. I. i. 20). If, 
however, the soul and the supreme Self he referred to, then it is the supreme 
Self, distinct from the individual soul, that is propounded here. And that roo 
has to he expounded, It having been inquired into through the question, "Tell 
me of that which you see as different from virtue, different from vice, 
diffcicnt from these cause and effect, different from the past and the future" 
(Ka.I.ii. 14). 

With regard to this the opponent says: Neither of these two alternatives is 
admissible. 

Why? 

The phrase "drinking of rta" (Ka. I. iii. 1) implies the experiencing of the 
fruit of works, for there is an indicatory mark of this in "the result of one's 
own work in this body" (ibid.); and that is possible for a sentient being aware 
of the body, but not for the insentient intellect. Beside:,, by the word 
pibantau, in the dual number, the Upanisad points to the drinking by both. 
Accordingly, it is not possible to side with the soul and the intellect; and for 
this very reason it is not possible to side with the individual soul and the 
supreme Self, for it is impossible even for the conscious supreme Self to 
enjoy the fruits of work, this having been denied in the mantra text, "The 
other looks on without eating" (Mu. III. i. 1). 

In answer the doubter says: That raises no difficulty. It is seen that in the 
statement, "The people with umbrella are going", a single possessor of an 
umbrella (viz a lcin<g) gives the figurative epithet of "people with umbrella" 
to a whole group. Similarly, from the fact that one experiences, both may be 
said to be experiencing. Or it may be thus: The individual being alone 
experiences and God makes him experience. And because He causes the 
experience, He is said 'to be experiencing on the analogy of the familiar fact 
that one who makes others cook is said to be cooking. It is also possible to 



accept the intellect and the individual soul, there being a figurative use of 
agentship in the case of the instrument (viz intellect), for such an expression 
as, "The fuel cooks", is possible. And in a context of the body, no other pair 
of experiencers of the fruit of works is possible. Hence this doubt. Should 
they be either the intellect and the individual soul or the individual soul and 
the supreme Self? What should be the conclusion here? 

Opponent: They must be the intellect and the individual soul. 

Why? 

Because there is the qualification, "have entered into the cavity". Whether 
the word cavity means the body or the heart, in either case it stands to reason 
that the intellect and the individual soul have entered into that cavity. 
Besides, if an alternative explanation is possible, it is not proper to fancy any 
particular location for the omnipresent Brahman. Moreover, the expression, 
"of the result of one's own work in the body", shows the non-transcendence 
of the limits of the results of work. The supreme Self is not confined within 
the limits of merit and demerit, as shown in, "it neither increases nor 
decreases through work" (B;. IV. iv. 23). And the terms light and shade point 
to the sentient and insentient, they being opposed to each other like light and 
shade (Ka. I. iii. 1). Therefore the intellect and the individual soul are to be 
accepted as spoken of here. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: The individual Self, identified 
with the intellect, and the supreme Self have been spoken of here. 

Why so? 

Because both these are Selfs as well as conscious and have the same 
nature. For it is a matter of experience, that in a case of enumeration, people 
take it for granted that units of the same class are being told off. When 
somebody says, "A second one to (i.e. a companion for) this cow has to be 
sought for", a cow alone is sought out, but neither a horse nor a man. 
Similarly in the present case, when, after the individual Self, identified with 
the intellect, has been ascertained with the help of the indicatory mark of 



experiencing the fruits of work, a search for a second entity starts, the 
supreme Self which is of the same nature comes within our ken. 


Opponent : Did we not say that after noticing the fact of remaining in the 
cavity, the supreme Self cannot be cognized? 

Vedantin : We say: The supreme Self is to be cognized from the very fact 
of remaining in the cavity; for the fact of remaining within the cavity is very 
often declared in the Vedas and the Smttis with regard to the supreme Self 
Itself, as in, "The enlightened one gives up happiness and sorrow by 
developing concentration of mind on the old Deity who is inscrutable, 
lodged inaccessibly, located in the cavity (of the heart), and seated in the 
midst of misery" (Ka. I. ii. 12), "He who knows the supreme One, seated in 
the supreme space within the cavity (of the heart)" (Tai. II. i), "Seek for the 
Self that has entered into the cavity", and so on. And we stated earlier that it 
involves no contradiction to teach about any place as suitable for the 
realization of Brahman, omnipresent though It is. As for the existence amidst 
the well earned results of work, although this is possible for one only, it can 
be asserted for both on the analogy of the "people with umbrella". The 
expression "light and shade" is also reconcilable; for the transmigrating Self 
and the transcendental Self arc poles asunder like shade and light, for 
transmigration is a re -ilt of ignorance, while transcendence of 
transmigration is the sul -reme reality. Therefore the soul identified with the 
intellect and the supreme Self are to be recognized as the two who have 
entered into the cavity. 

For what additional reason are the soul identified with the intellect and the 
supreme Self to be accepted? 




12. And because there is a specification. 


And the specification (made in the Upanigad) applies to the soul identified 
with the intellect and the supreme Self alone. In the subsequent text 
commencing with, "Know the Self to be the rider of the chariot, but the body 
to be the chariot" etc. (Ka. I. iii. 3), which calls up the imagery of the chariot 
and the rider of the chariot, the Self identified with the intellect is imagined 
as the rider of the chariot who has to reach either the worldly state or 
liberation. And the supreme Self is imagined as the goal to be reached in, 
"He attains the end of the road, and that is the supreme state of Vim" (Ka. I. 
iii. 9). In the preceding text also these two are specified as the thinker and 
the object of thought in the verse, "The intelligent man gives up happiness 
and sorrow by developing concentration of mind on the Self and thereby 
meditating on the old Deity who is inscrutable, lodged inaccessibly in Maya, 
located in the intellect, and seated in the midst of misery" (Ka. I. ii. 12). 
Besides, this is the topic of the supreme Self. And the expression, "The 
knowers of Brahman say" (Ka. I. iii. 1), which posits a special class of 
speakers, becomes justifiable if the supreme Self is accepted. Therefore it is 
to be admitted that the individual Self and the supreme Self are spoken of 
here. 

This line of approach has to be adopted with regard to "Two birds, ever 
associated and having similar names (cling to the same tree)" (Mu. III. i. 1, 
Sv. IV. 6), and such other texts. There also the ordinary birds are not spoken 
of, since the topic centres round the soul. In the text, "Of these two, the one 
eats the fruits of divergent tastes" (ibid.), the individual Self is to be 
understood on the strength of the indicatory marks of eating. And in, "The 
other looks on without eating" (ibid.), the supreme Self is to be understood 
on the strength of noneating and consciousness. In the succeeding mantra 
also these two are specified as the seer and object seen: "On the same tree, 
the individual soul remains - drowned (i.e. stuck), as it were; and so it 
moans, being worried by its impotence. When it sees thus the other, the 
adored Lord, and His glory, then it becomes liberated from sorrow" (Mu. III. 
i.2). 



Others say: The mantra "Two birds" etc. (Mu. III. i. 1) does not agree with 
the conclusion arrived at under the present topic. For in the Paingi-rahasya- 
brdhma?ia it is explained thus -"The expression, 'Of these two, the one eats 
the fruits of divergent tastes', refers to the sattva, and 'the other looks on 
without eating' means the jna (lit. knower) who witnesses without eating. So 
the sattva and ksetrajna (lit. knower of the field or body) are meant." It may 
be argued that the word sattva means the individual soul and ksetrajna means 
the supreme Self; but that is wrong, because the words sattva and ksetrajna 
are well known as meaning the internal organ (mind) and the embodied soul, 
and because the explanation is given in that very text thus: "That thing is 
sattva by which one sees dreams, and that which is the embodied witness is 
the ksetrajna; these two are the sattva and ksetrajna." 

Vedantin : And yet this cannot be said to be opposed to the present topic, 
for the embodied Self, called the kgtrajiia, is not presented here (in the 
Paii7gi-Brahnnana) as endowed with such worldly qualities as agentship and 
enjoyership. 

How is it presented then? 

It is presented as free from all worldly qualities and identical in nature 
with Brahman Itself-with pure Consciousness-as stated in," 'The other looks 
on without eating' means, 'the knower who witnesses without eating'." And 
this is supported by such Vedic and Smtti texts as, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. 
viii. 7), "Me do thou also know to be the ksetrajna" (GYta, XIII. 2). The 
conclusion made thus with that much (i.e. the explanation, of the mantra) 
only, in the words, "The two are the sattva and ksetrajna. Ignorance has no 
effect on a man of such knowledge" etc., becomes justifiable only on this 
assumption (that the individual soul is spoken of as Brahman). 

Opponent: From such a point of view, how can enjoyership be ascribed to 
the insentient mind by saying, "'One of them eats the fruits of divergent 
tastes' means the sattva (i.e. the internal organ)"? 

The answer is: This Vedic text does not start with the idea, "I shall speak 
of the enjoyership of the insentient." 



What is the idea then? 


The idea is: "I shall show that the sentient individual is not the 
experiencer, but it is Brahman by nature." It is for this purpose that 
enjoyership is attributed to the mind which is subject to worldly moods like 
happiness and sorrow etc. For these states of being an agent and experiencer 
. are fancied on the soul and the mind, owing to a non-discrimination 
between their natures. In reality these are possible in neither of them; for the 
mind is insentient and the soul is changeless. This is all the more impossible 
in the mind, it being a creation of ignorance. In support of this here is a 
Vedic text: "Because when there is difference, as it were, then one sees 
another" (Br. IV. v.. 15), where it is shown that dealings based on agentship 
etc. can be possible only within the range of ignorance in the same sense as 
it is possible to deal with elephants etc. present in a dream. And by the text, 
"But when to the knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, then 
what should one see and through what?" (ibid.), are denied for the 
discriminating man such dealings based on agentship etc. 

TOPIC 4: THE PERSON IN THE EYE 

5RR II \\ II 

R: The one inside 3'i: for that is logical. 

13. The One inside (is God), for that is logical. 

Doubt : We read in the Upanigad: "He (viz Satyakama Jabala) said (to 
Upakosala) 'The One, the Person (Puru$a) seen in the eye, is the Self. This 
One is immortal, fearless; this One is Brahman. Accordingly, if clarified 
butter or water be poured on it (i.e. the eye), it flows down to the eyelids" 
etc. (Ch. IV. xv. 1). Now the doubt arises here: Is a shadowy being, reflected 



on the eye, indicated here? Or is it the individual soul identified with the 
intellect? Or is it some divine being presiding over the eye? Or is it God? 
What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent: It is a shadowy being, a reflection of some person (on the eye); 
for that is well known as an object of perception, and because it is taught as 
a familiar thing in, "The being that is seen in the eye" (ibid.). Or this may 
properly be an instruc tion about the soul identified with the intellect. For it 
is this being that comes nearest to the eye when perceiving colour through it, 
and the word Self becomes apposite in this case. Or the being in the sun that 
helps the eye is to be cognized here, because the Upaniadic text states, "He 
(i.e. the being in the sun) rests on the latter (i.e. the right eye) through the 
rays" (Br. V. v. 2), and because immortality etc. can somehow be averred of 
the divine being (in the sun) as well. But that being is not God, since a 
particular locality is indicated. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say, God Himself is taught here as 
the being in the eye. 

Why? 

Because that stands to reason; for the number of qualities taught here can 
logically belong to God. Of these, the fact of beings the Self applies to 
Brahman in the primary sense, for the Upanigad says, "He is the Self. That 
thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7). And immortality and fearlessness are frequently 
declared about Brahman in the Upanigads. Similarly, this eye as a seat is 
appropriate for God. Just as God is untouched by all blemishes, His freedom 
from sin etc. having been spoken of in the Upani$ads, so is the eye presented 
as a place untarnished by any blemish in the text, "Accordingly, if clarified 
butter or water be poured on it, it flows down to the eyelids" (Ch. IV. xv. 1). 
And the instruction about such qualities as being the "resort of all blessings", 
(as stated in the following text), fits in with Him: "They call Him the 'goal of 
the results of actions', for all the results of actions proceed towards Him" 
(Ch. IV. xv. 2); "This One is certainly the carrier of all good results, for it is 
this One that carries all good results of works (to their recipients)" (Ch. IV. 
xv. 3); "This One is certainly the 'ordainer of all effulgence', for it is this 



One that shines in all the worlds" (Ch. IV. av. 4). Therefore the One inside is 
God, for that is logical. 




q And Tq-Miff-aggkWq from the mention of the place etc. 

14. And (this follows) from the mention of place etc. 

How again can it be logical for Brahman, omnipresent as It is like space, 
to have a tiny seat like the eye? 

With regard to this it is said: This illogicality would have been there if it 
had been the only place indicated for Brahman. But as a matter of fact, there 
are other places like the earth, which are indicated for It by the text, "He who 
inhabits the earth, but is within it" etc. (Br. III. vii. 3). Among these places, 
the eye too is counted: "He who inhabits the eye, but is within it" etc. (Br. 
III. vii. 18). What is implied in the aphorism by the use of "etc." in "the 
mention of place etc." is this: The mention of location alone for Brahman is 
not the only irreconcilability. 

What else is irreconcilable? 

Name and form etc. Though Brahman is without name and form, such 
things are seen to be ascribed to It in, "His name is Ut" (Ch. I. vi. 7), "His 
beard is golden" (Ch. I. vi. 6), and so on. And it has been already said that 
though Brahman is without qualities, still for the sake of meditation, It is 
presented in those respective places as a qualified entity, possessed of the 
characteristics associated with name and form. It has also been stated that 
even for the omnipresent Brahman it is nothing incongruous to have certain 
special places for meditation like the . alagrama (stone symbol) for Vimu. 








15. And this is so for the further reason that the One possessed of bliss is 
referred to (in the Text, "The One that"). 

Moreover, there should certainly be no quarrel here as to whether 
Brahman is spoken of here in this sentence or not. For from the very fact that 
the one possessed of bliss is mentioned by the text, "The One that" etc. (Ch. 
IV. xv. 1-4), it follows that Brahman is meant; for Brahman is possessed of 
bliss. The very entity introduced at the commencement of the text, viz 
"Prdna is Brahman, bliss is Brahman, space is Brahman" (Ch. IV. x. 4), is 
spoken of here (in "The One that"); for it is reasonable to accept that which 
is under discussion. Besides , this must be the conclusion , because the 
instruction about the course (followed after death ! was alone promised to be 
s poken of in . "But the teacher will tell you of the course"9 tCh. IV. xiv. 1). 

Opponent : How again is it known that Brahman, possessed of bliss, is 
spoken of at the commencement of the text? 

Vedamin : The answer is: Hearing these words of the Fires, "Prdna is 
Brahman, bliss (kam) is Brahman, space (kham) is Brahman" (Ch. IV. x. 5), 
Upakosala said, "I know that Pram is Brahman; but I do not know bliss 
(kam) or space (kham)" (ibid.). To that, this is the reply (of the Fires): "That 
which is bliss (loan) is space (kham), and that which is space (kham) is bliss 
(kam)" (ibid.). Of these the word space (kham) is familiar as a synonym of 
the material space. Had not the word kam, meaning bliss, been used to 
qualify kham, it would have seemed that the word Brahman is applied to the 














mere material space in order to present space as a symbol like name etc. 
Similarly, the word kam is familiarly in use with regard to the defective 
(worldly) happiness, arising from the contact of objects and senses. If it had 
not been qualified by kham (space), the idea gathered would have been that 
the empirical happiness is Brahman. But the words bliss and space, having 
qualified each other, lead us to the comprehension of Brahman which is Bliss 
Itself. Then again, if a second word Brahman had not been used, that is to 
say, if (instead of "kam Brahma kham brahmd') the sentence ran thus, "kam 
kham brahma-bliss space is Brahman", then having been used merely as an 
adjective (of khan), bliss (as an aspect of Brahman) would not have become 
an object of meditation. To avert that possibility, both the words bliss and 
space precede the word Brahman (separately) in (bliss is Brahman, space is 
Brahman). For the intention is that the aspect of bliss should be as much an 
object of meditation as the entity qualified by it. Thus it is that at the 
commencement of the text, Brahman possessed of bliss is spoken of. And 
each of the Fires-Garhapatya and others-first speaks of his personal glory; 
and then they all conclude with the words, "0 amiable one, thus is imparted 
to you the knowledge about us as also about the Self" (Ch. IV. xiv. 1), 
thereby suggesting that Brahman (Self) had been referred to earlier. The 
statement, "The teacher will tell you of the course" (ibid.), holds out a 
promise of the instruction about the course only, and thus precludes the 
intention of speaking on an additional topic. Moreover, the statement, "As 
water does not stick to a lotus leaf, so also sin does not cling to one who 
knows thus" (Ch. IV. xiv. 3), while speaking of the ineffectiveness of sin 
against one who knows the Puru$a residing in the eye, shows that the Purina 
in the eye is Brahman. It is thus that the Upanisad first speaks of the 
residence of Brahman in the eye and Its possession of such virtues as being 
the resort of all blessings, and so on. Then with a view to speaking of the 
course, starting with light, that a man with that kind of knowledge has to 
follow, the Upanisad goes on: "He said, 'The One, the Person that is seen in 
the eye, is the Self etc. (Ch. IV. xv. 1). 



16. And because the course to be followed by one who has heard the 
secret teaching is spoken of. 

For this additional reason, the Person in the eye is God: The course known 
as the Path of the Gods is followed by one who has heard the Upanipd, the 
knower of Brahman who has received, the secret knowledge that is well 
known in the Vedic text, "Again, by searching for the Self through the 
control of the senses, brahmacarya (continence), faith, and meditation, they 
conquer the sun by proceeding along the Northern Course. This Brahman is 
the resort of all that lives : this is indescribable : this is fearless , this is the 
hig hest goal: 10 for from this they do not come back" (Pr. I..10). This is well 
known in the Smrti also: "(The deities of fire, light, day-time, the bright 
fortnight, the six months of the northern course of suntaking this path, the 
knowers of Brahman go to Brahman" (Gita, VIII. 24). That very Path is seen 
to be declared for one who knows the Person in the eye. Starting with, 
'Whether they perform his funeral rites or not, he (the meditator on the Self) 
attains (the deity of) fire, (and then proceeds along day-time etc.)", it is said, 
"He proceeds from the sun to the moon, from the moon to lightning. Some 
superhuman being, coming from the world of Hirai}yagarbha, leads those 
who arrive there (i.e. lightning) to Brahman. This is the Path of the Gods, 
this is the Path to Brahman. Those who attain (the conditioned Brahman) by 
proceeding along this Path, do not return to this cycle of birth and death, to 
this creation of Manu" (Ch. IV. xv. 5). From all this (talk about the) well- 








known Course followed by the knower of Brahman, it becomes established 
that the Person in the eye is Brahman. 




alffc: On account of impermanence a and ar uWq on account of 
impossibility, c$T:: none other can be (the Person). 

17. None other can be the Person in the eye on account of impermanence 
and impossibility. 

It was argued that the Person in the eye may be a shadowy being, or the 
individual Self, or some divine being. With regard to this, we say: None 
among the shadowy being and the rest can be accepted here. 

Why? 

Since it is transitory. To take up the shadowy self first, it is not possible 
for it to reside permanently in the eye. When a man is right in front of an 
eye, the image of the man is seen in it; but when he moves away, it cannot be 
seen. The text, "The One, the Person, that is there in the eye" (Ch. IV. xv. 1), 
teaches the worship of the Person present in the eye just because He is near 
at hand; and it is not proper to fancy that at the time of meditation, the 
meditator places some person near him to produce an image in the eye, and 
then he meditates on it. For the text, "This one gets destroyed in accordance 
with the death of this body" (Ch. VIII. ix. 1), shows the impermanence of the 
shadowy being. Besides, this is impossible; for such qualities as immortality 
cannot be found in that shadowy being. So also for the individual soul. 
Inasmuch as this soul is in general contact with the body and senses as a 
whole, it is not possible to speak of its existence in the eye alone. But for 
Brahman, all-pervasive though It is, Its association with special places like 
the heart for the sake of meditation is met with in the Upanisads. Equally 
impossible is the presence of such qualities as immortality in the soul 
identified with the intellect. Though as a matter of fact, the individual Self is 



the same as the supreme Self, still mortality and fear are superimposed on 
the former through ignorance, desire, and action; and hence immortality and 
fearlessness do not fit in with it. And such qualities as being the repository of 
all good attributes are also inappropriate for it, since it has no divine majesty. 
As for any divine being, though such a god exists in the eye in accordance 
with the Vedic text, "The former (the being in the sun) rests on the latter (the 
being in the right eye) through the rays" (Br. V. v. 2), still that god cannot be 
the Self, since he exists externally. Immortality etc. are also out of place, 
since the Vedas mention the birth and death of gods, the immortality of the 
gods being spoken of only from the standpoint of their long life. Their 
majesty too is dependent on God and is not intrinsic, for the mantra says, 
"Out of His fear the wind blows; out of fear the sun rises; out of His fear Fire 
and Indra remain active, and Death, the fifth, hurries on (to the dying)" (Tai. 
II. viii. 1). Therefore it is to be understood that God is the Being in the eye. 
From this point of view, the use of the word "seen (in the eye)" (Ch. IV. xv. 
1) in a familiar sense, is to be explained as arising out of the scriptural 
outlook, and as referring to the vision of the enlightened man, the whole 
thing being meant as a praise for inducing the aspirants (to this meditation). 

Topic 5: THE INTERNAL RULER 

OT&iRi IIEII 

The internal Ruler aTfNjar-arrfq in the divine and b other contexts -q*-at 
because the characteristics of that are spoken of. 

18. The internal Ruler in the divine and other contexts (is the supreme 
Self), since the characteristics of that (supreme Self) are spoken of. 

Doubt : Starting with, "the One who controls this and the next life and all 
beings from within" (Br. III. vii. 1), it is stated in the Upani$ad, "(He) who 
inhabits the earth but is within it, whom the earth does not know, whose 
body is the earth, and who controls the earth from within, is the internal 
Ruler, your own immortal Self" (Br. III. vii. 3). Here-in the contexts of the 



gods, the worlds, the Vedas, the sacrifices, the creatures, and the bodies-we 
hear of an internal Ruler who resides inside and exercises control. Is he some 
divine being, identifying himself with things in the divine and other 
contexts; or some Yogin who has acquired the mystic power of becoming 
subtle and so on; or the supreme Self; or some other entity? This doubt arises 
from noticing this peculiar term (antarydrmin). What is then the true 
meaning acceptable to us? 

Opponent: Since the term is uncommon, the entity named should be 
something uncommon and indeterminate. Or since it is not possible to assert 
the existence of any other indeterminate thing and since the term internal 
Ruler, conveying the (etymological) sense of controlling from inside, is not 
altogether unfamiliar, therefore some deity identifying himself with the earth 
etc. must be the internal Ruler. For in accord with this is the text, "(He 
knows truly who knows that being) whose abode is the earth, whose 
instrument of vision is lire, whose light is mans (mind), (and who is the 
ultimate resort of the entire body and organs)" (Br. III. ix. 10). Since by 
being possessed of body and organs, he rules by residing inside the earth 
etc., this rulership can justifiably belong to a divine being. Or this rulership 
can belong to some perfected Yogin who rules by entering into all. But the 
supreme Self does not come within our purview, since It is not possessed of 
body and organs. 

VedJntin : This being the position, it is said: The internal Ruler, heard of 
in the divine and other contexts, is the supreme Self and none else. 

Why? 

"Because Its characteristics are spoken of-the characteristics of the 
su preme Self Itself are found mentioned here. It is the characteristic 

rulership of the supreme Self that becomes obvious from the fact of rulin g 
all created thin g s bv enterin g into the earth and other thin g s differentiated 
into the divine , ( worldl y. Vedic ). and so on : for It can reasonably have 
omnipotence bv virtue of Its bein g the source of all creation. And the 
Selfhood and immortality mentioned in . "this is the internal Ruler , vour own 
immortal Self" tBr. Ill, vii. 3 ). are j ustifiable in the case of the supreme Self 
understood in the primary sense. By referrin g to the internal Ruler as bein g 




































unknown to the deiltv of the earth in the text , "whom the earth does not 
know" ( ibid. ), it is shown that the internal Ruler is different from the divine 
bein g . For the deity of the earth can know himself as "1 am the earth". 
Similarl y, the use of the words , "unseen" , "unheard" (Br. ITT, vii. 23 ). fits in 
with the supreme Self . It bein g devoid of form etc. The ob j ection is not valid 
that the supreme Self cannot possibl y have any rulership owin g to Its lack of 
body and or g ans. For It can very well come to own bodies and or g ans owin g 
to the presence of these in those whom it controls. On this view we do not 

land into an infinite re g ress by havin g to assume a separate ruler for that 
ruler of that individual bein g: for there is no difference ( between the two ). 
Infinite re g ress is possible only if there be a difference." 









And not FBTT;I the one mentioned in the Smrti a cf irfff3rriq qualities not 
belonging to it having been spoken of. 

19. Neither Pradhana, known from the (Samkhya) Smrti, is the internal 
Ruler, for qualities that do not belong to Pradhana are spoken of. 

Opponent : Perchance the qualities of being unseen etc. may fit in with 
Pradhana (primordial Nature) as conceived of in the Smrti of the Sirhkhyas, 
for by them that Pradhana is postulated to be without form etc. They mention 
in their Smrti, "Beyond reason, inscrutable, and as if in deep sleep 
everywhere" (Manu I. 5). That Pradhana can even be the ruler, since it is the 
source of all modifications. Accordingly, the term internal Ruler denotes 
Pradhana. Although Pradhana was refuted under the aphorism, "Because of 
the attribution of seeing, the one (i.e. Pradhana of the Samkhyas) which is 
not taught in the Upani$ad is not the cause of the universe" (B. S. I. i. 5), 
still it forms the subject-matter of the doubt here, since the qualities of not 
being seen etc. can be imputed to it. 















































Veddntin : Therefore the answer is being given: The Pradhana of the Smtti 
cannot be meant by the term internal Ruler. 

Why? 

"Because the qualities that do not belong to Pradhana are spoken of." 
Although the qualities of being unseen and so on are ascribable to Pradhana, 
not so are the qualities of being the witness and so on; for Pradhana is 
admitted by them to be insentient, while the complementary portion of the 
text here runs thus: "He is never seen, but is the witness; He is never heard, 
but is the hearer; He is never thought, but is the thinker; He is never known, 
but is the knower" (Br. III. vii. 23). Besides, Pradhana can never be the Self 
(as stated in, "your own immortal Self"-ibid.). 

Opponent : If Pradhana cannot be the internal Ruler owing to. the 
impossibility of its being the Self and the witness, then let the individual soul 
be so; because the embodied soul is a conscious entity, and as such, it 
becomes the witness, hearer, thinker, and knower. And it is also the Self, 
being the inmost. It must be immortal, too, to make the reaping of the fruits 
of good and bad works possible. It is also a well-known fact that the 
embodied soul is possessed of the characteristics of not being seen and so 
on. For it is opposed to facts that the acts of witnessing etc. should have as 
their object the agent itself (of witnessing etc.), as shown in, "You cannot see 
that which is the witness of vision" (Br. III. iv. 2), and other texts. And that 
soul has the capacity of controlling the assemblage of body and senses from 
within; for it is the experiencer (of the fruits of its own actions). Thus the 
embodied soul is the internal Ruler. Veddntin : The answer to this is: 

II II 

(Not) qT: the embodied soul q also; fk for 3!Osii r both ate' read qvK of 
this one as different. 



20. The embodied soul also (is not the internal Ruler); for the followers of 
both the recensions read of this one as different. 

The word "not" has to be supplied from the previous aphorism. The 
embodied soul is not intended as the internal Ruler. 

Why? 

Although it is possible for the embodied soul to be the witness and so on, 
still, being limited by conditioning factors, like space in pot, it cannot, in the. 
fullest sense, exist within the earth etc. and rule them from inside. Besides, 
the followers of both the Kaova and Madhyandina recensions (of the 
.atapatha Brahmana) read of the embodied soul as being an entity different 
from the internal Ruler, and as being a habitation for and an object of 
control, like the earth, under the internal Ruler. The Kamvas read: "He who 
inhabits the intellect" (Br. III. vii. 22); and the Madhyandinas have: "He who 
inhabits the dtmd" the word dtma standing as a synonym for the embodied 
soul. And even in the reading, "He who inhabits the intellect (vijn-ana)", the 
word intellect means the embodied soul, which is but the entity identifying 
itself with the intellect. Therefore it stands established that God, the internal 
Ruler, is distinct from the emobodied soul. 

Opponent : How, again, can there be two witnesses in the same body-the 
one that is this God, the internal Ruler, and the other that is the embodied 
soul? 

Vedantin : What incongruity is there? 

Opponent : Since the Upani$adic text, "There is no other witness but 
Him" (Br. III. vii. 23), will stand contradicted; for in that text it is denied that 
any Self, other than the internal Ruler under discussion, can be the witness, 
hearer, thinker, or knower. 

Objection : May this not be meant for the denial of other rulers? 

Opponent : No, for no other ruler is under consideration, and the 
Upani$adic denial is made without any reservation. 



Vedantin : With regard to this, it is said: This mention of the distinction 
between the embodied soul and the internal Ruler is based on the limiting 
adjunct of body and senses, conjured up by ignorance, but this is not so in 
any real sense. For the indwelling Self can be but one, and not two. The 
same one, however, is mentioned as two owing to conditioning factors, as 
for instance it is said, "the pot-space", "the cosmic ;pace". From this 
standpoint, the Vedic texts about the differ:nee between the knower and 
things known, the means of *alid knowledge like perception, the experience 
of transmigraion, and scriptures dealing with injunctions and prohibitions,! 1 
become justifiable. Thus it is that the text, "Because when :here is duality, as 
it were, then one sees something" (Br. II. iv. 14), shows that all dealings are 
possible within the range of ignorance; and the text, "But when to the 
knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, then what should one 
smell and through what, what should one see and through what?" (ibid.), 
precludes all dealings within the sphere of illumination. 

Topic 6: THE ONE THAT IS UNSEEN ETC. 

qwwifywl wfa: II \\ II 


_7w: The possessor of the attributes of invisibility etc. (is Brahman); 

qi*-3W": on account of the characteristics having been stated. 

21. The entity, possessed of the qualities of not being seen etc., is 
Brahman, for Its characteristics are spoken of. 

Doubt : We read in the Upanigad: "Then there is the higher knowledge by 
which is realized that Immutable" (Mu. I. i. 5), and "(By the higher 
knowledge) the wise realize everywhere that which cannot be perceived and 
grasped; which is without source, features, eyes, and ears; which has neither 
hands nor feet; which is eternal, multiformed, all-pervasive, extremely 
subtle, and undiminishing; and which is the source of all" (Mu. I. i. 6). With 
regard to this, the doubt arises: Is it Pradhana, or the embodied soul, or God 



that is spoken of as the material cause of all things and as endowed with the 
qualities of not being perceived etc.? 

Opponent : Among these alternatives, the insentient Pradhana should 
properly be the material source of everything, for the insentient things alone 
are cited there by way of illustration: "As a spider spreads out and withdraws 
(its thread), as on the earth grow herbs (and trees), and as from a living man 
issues out hair on the head and the body, so out of the Immutable does the 
universe emerge here (in this phenomenal creation)" (Mu. I. i. 7). 

Objection : Are not the sentient spider and the human being taken here as 
examples? 

Opponent : We say, no; for a sentient being, by itself, can neither be the 
material source of thread nor of hair. It is rather well known that under the 
control of the sentient, the insentient body of the spider becomes the source 
of thread and the human body of the hair on the head and other parts. The 
argument for the non-acceptance of Pradhana, adduced earlier, was that, 
although Pradhana could be described as not subject to visual perception 
etc., still it could not be spoken of as a witness etc. (B; S. I. ii. 19). But here 
(in this context), the qualities of not being perceived etc. are seen to be 
possible in Pradhana at the same time that no incompatible quality is in 
evidence. 

Objection : Is it not a fact that the expression, "He who is omniscient in 
general and all-knowing in detail" (Mu. I. i. 9), heard in the complementary 
text, is not applicable to the insentient Pradhana? So how is it asserted that 
Pradhana is the source of all things? 

Opponent : With regard to this, it is said: It has been shown by the text, 
"That by which is realized that Immutable" (Mu. I. i. 5), and "That which 
cannot be perceived" etc. (Mu. I. i. 6), that the word immutable means the 
source of all things, and it is possessed of the quality of not being perceived 
etc. Then at the end it will be said again, "Superior to the superior 
immutable" (Mu. II. i. 2). Now then, the entity that is heard of as superior to 
the immutable, should be omniscient in general and particular; and it is 
Pradhana, the material source of all things, that is mentioned by the word 



immutable. If, however, the word yoni (source) means an efficient, and not 
material cause, then the embodied soul also can be the source of all things, 
since it brings into existence all the things through its merit and demerit. 

Veddntin : This being the position, it is said: The entity that is the source 
of all things and is possessed of such qualities as not being perceived and so 
on must be God and none else. 

How is this known? 

From the mention of the characteristics. For the characteristics of God are 
obviously mentioned here in, "He who is omniscient in general and all¬ 
knowing in detail" etc. (Mu. I. i. 9). Neither Pradhana which is insentient, 
nor the embodied soul which is circumscribed in its vision by limiting 
adjuncts, can possibly be omniscient in general and all-knowing in detail. 

Opponent : Did we not say that this omniscience in general and particular 
belongs to the one who is higher than the source of all things (i.e. Pradhana), 
called the immutable; but that omniscience does not belong to this source of 
all? 

With regard to this the answer (of the Veddmin) is: This is not possible, 
since the source of all things that is under discussion is mentioned as the 
material cause of all that is bom, in the text, "Out of the Immutable does the 
universe emerge here" (Mu. I. i. 7); and then the omniscient Being is 
mentioned immediately after as the material cause of all that is born, in the 
text, "From Him who is omniscient in general and allknowing in particular 
and whose austerity is constituted by knowledge, evolves thus this 
(derivative) Brahman, as well as name, colour, and food" (Mu. I. i. 9). 
Accordingly, since the Immutable under discussion, which is the source of 
all things, is called up to memory by a similarity of reference (in the second 
passage), it follows that the characteristics of omniscience in general and 
detail are declared about the Immutable Itself. And even in the text, 
"Superior to the superior immutable" (Mu. II. i. 2), none higher than the 
Immutable that is relevant and is the source of all things is referred to. 


How is that gathered? 



Because from the text, "That man of enlightenment should adequately 
impart that knowledge of Brahman by which one realizes the true and 
immutable Purina" (Mu. I. ii. 13), it can be understood that it is but the 
Immutable under discussion, the source of all things and possessed of the 
qualities of not being perceived and so on, that is promised to be presented. 

Why is it then declared to be "superior to the superior immutable"? 

That we shall answer in the succeeding aphorism. Moreover, it is said here 
that two kinds of knowledge have to be acquired, which are the "higher and 
the lower" (Mu. I. i. 4). Of these, the first is mentioned as comprising the Itg- 
Veda etc., and then it is said, "Then there is the higher knowledge by which 
is realized the Immutable" etc. (Mu. I. i. 5). There the Immutable is heard of 
as the subject-matter of the higher knowledge. If, therefore, it be fancied that 
the Immutable, possessed of the qualities of not being perceived etc., is 
different from the supreme Lord, then this will not be the higher knowledge. 
This division of knowled g e into hi g her and lower is made accordin g to the 
two results , viz liberation and prosperity. Not that any one can admit that the 
knowled g e of Pradhana leads to liberation, in that case three kinds of 
knowled g e should have been postulated : for from your point of view , the 
su preme Self is presented as somethin g different from the immutable that is 
the source of all thin g s. As a matter of fact , however , it is mentioned here 
that two kinds of knowled g e have to be acquired. Moreover , the fact that it is 
taken for g ranted that the knowled g e of all becomes included in the 
knowled g e of one , as implied in . "0 adorable sir , which is that thin g, which 
havin g been known , all this becomes known?" ( Mu. I. i. 3 ). can be j ustifiable 
only if the all-inclusive Brahman be the sub i ect-matter of the talk : but this 
cannot be so if the sub j ect-matter be either Pradhana which comprises 
merely the insentient , or the experiencin g soul that is different from the 
thin g s experienced. Further , the knowled g e of Brahman is introduced as the 
hig hest in the text . "To his eldest son . Atharva . he imparted that knowled ge 
of Brahman that is the basis of all knowled g e" tMu. I. i. 1 ). then makin g a 
division between the hi g her and lower knowled ge, it is shown that the hi g her 
knowled g e leads to the realization of the Immutable ; and from this it 
becomes revealed that this hi g her knowled g e is the knowled g e of Brahman. 
This knowled g e that is called the knowled g e of Brahman will be wron gly 




















































































called so if the Immutable to be attained throu g h .it becomes different from 
Brahman. And since there are such declamations as . "Since these ei g hteen 
constituents of a sacrifice , 12 on whom the inferior karma has been said to 
rest, are perishable because of their fragility, therefore those ignorant people 
who get elated with the idea, 'This is the cause of bliss', undergo old age and 
death over and over again" (Mu. I. ii. 7), it follows that the knowledge of 
karma, comprised in the ltg-Veda etc., is presented at the commencement of 
the knowledge of Brahman for the sake of eulogizing the latter. And after 
decrying the lower knowledge it is said that those alone have the competence 
for the higher knowledge who turn back from the former: "A Brahmaga 
should resort to renunciation after examining the acquired worlds with the 
help of the idea, 'There is nothing here that is not a result of karma; so what 
is the need of karma?' For knowing the Reality he should go with sacrificial 
fagot in hand to a teacher versed in the Vedas and absorbed in Brahman" 
(Mu. I. ii. 12). 

It was also argued that since the insentient earth and other things were 
cited as examples, therefore the source of all things, for whose sake these 
illustrations are presented, must be insentient as well. But that is wrong, for 
there is no such rule that the illustration and the thing illustrated must be 
absolutely similar. Moreover, just because the gross earth and other things 
are cited by way of example, it does not follow, even according to you, that 
the source of all things, that is exemplified, is postulated to be gross. 
Therefore the source of all things, that is possessed of the qualities of not 

^ y II ^ II 

a And fad-iM-3qgr;[ on account of the mention of distinctive 
characteristics and difference the other two are not. 

22. And the other two (viz the individual soul and Pradhdna) are not 
meant, for there is the mention of the distinctive characteristics (of Brahman) 
and (Its) difference (from the two). 


being perceived and so on, must be God. 









For this further reason, God alone is the source of all things; and neither 
Pradhana nor the individual soul is so. 

Why? 

"Because of the mention of distinctive characteristics and difference." For 
on the strength of dissimilar characteristics, the source of all things, which is 
relevant to the context, has been distinguished from the embodied soul in the 
text, "Purina is transcendental, since He is formless; and since He is 
coextensive with all that is external and internal, and since He is birthless, 
therefore He is without vital force and without mind. He is pure and superior 
to the ( other ) superior immutable" ( Mu. 11. i. 2 ) . These characteristics of 
transcendence etc, cannot lo g icall y appl y to the embodied soul which 
identifies itself with the limitations imposed by name and form , con j ured u p 
bv ig norance , and which ima g ines their attributes as its own. Hence Puru$ a 
( the conscious all-pervasive entit y), met with in the UpaniSads alone , is 
directly mentioned here. Similarly the source of all thin gs, which is relevant 
to the context , is mentioned as different from Pradhana in the text . "Superior 
to the superior immutable" (( ibid. ) . The immutable is the unmanifested (i.e. 
beg innin g less Ma ya) that is a kind of power belon ging to the source of name 
and form ( viz God ), that is the latent state of all the elements , that has God 
as its su p port , that is a limitin g ad j unct to God Himself . 18 and that is higher 
than all its own modifications, but is itself unmodified. By declaring a 
difference through the statement, "superior to that superior (immutable) 
Maya", the text shows that what is intended here to be spoken of is the 
supreme Self. It is not a fact that any independent principle, called Pradhana, 
is admitted, and then a difference from it is shown here (in the aphorism). 

What is admitted then? 

( It is held that ! if a principle , called Pradhana (meanin g Maya or 
nescience ), be ima g ined , and it be asserted without any violence to the 
U paniSads that this Pradhana is called bv such terms as the "unmanifested" 
and the "latent state of all the elements" , then you may as well follow that 
ima g ination. 14 The Upani$ad mentions a difference (of Immutable) from 
that. And so it is established here that God is the source of all things. 






































































For what further reason is God the source of all things? 



a And r-q-3gaugTq owing to a presentation of form. 

23. And because" there is a. presentation of form. 

Moreover, immediately after the text, "Superior to the superior 
immutable", the creation of the entities, counting from the vital force to the 
earth, is spoken of in the verse, "From Him originates the vital force" etc. 
(Mu. II. i. 3). And after that we notice that the form of that very source of all 
things, comprising within it all creation, is presented in the verse, "The 
indwelling Self of all is surely He of whom heaven is the head, the moon and 
the sun are the two eyes, the directions are the two ears, the revealed Vedas 
are speech, air is the vital force, the universe is the heart, and it is He from 
whose two feet emerged the earth" (Mu. II. i. 4). All that is appropriate for 
God alone, He being the source of all creation. Such a presentation of form 
is incompatible with the embodied soul for its greatness is limited; and this 
is incompatible with Pradhana which cannot be the indwelling Self of all 
beings. Therefore it is understood that God alone is the source of all things 
but not so are the other two. 

How is it again known that this is a presentation of the form of the source 
of all things? 

Because of the context, and because the words "it is He" (ibid.) allude to 
something under consideration. When after broaching the topic of the source 
of all things, statements such as these are made, "From Him originates the 
vital force" etc. (Mu. II. i. 3), "The indwelling Self of all is surely He" (Mu. 
II. i. 4), these must relate to the source of all things. For instance, if after 



starting a talk about a teacher, some one should say, "Read under him. He is 
versed in the Vedas and the ancillary subjects", then that statement relates to 
that teacher. The case is similar here. 

Opponent : How can the source of all things, that is possessed of the 
qualities of not being seen etc., have a physical form? 

Vedamin : That creates no difficulty; for the statement has in view the 
revelation of all-pervasiveness and not any physical form, just as it is the 
case in, "I am food, I am the eater of food" (Tai. III. x. 6). 

Others (viz the Vrttikasa ). ag ain , think: This is not a presentation of the 
source of all thin gs, for the presentation is made throu g h the fact of g ettin g 
bom. In the earlier verse . "From this One ori g inates the vital force , as well as 
the mind and all the senses , s pace , air , fire , water , and the earth that su p ports 
everythin g " 15 tMu. II. i. 3), all the entities, counting from the vital force to 
the earth, were presented from the standpoint of being born. Later on, too, 
the verses starting with, "From Him emerges the fire (i.e. heaven) of which 
the sun is the fuel" (Mu. II. i. 5), and ending with, "From Him issue all the 
corns as well as the juices" etc. (Mu. II. i. 9), speak only of things being 
bom. In the midst of all this, how can the form of the source of all things be 
presented here alone all of a sudden? The all-pervasiveness too will be 
taught, after finishing with creation, in the verse, "Puru$a alone is all this- 
comprising the karma and knowledge" (Mu. II. i. 10). In the Vedas and the 
Smrtis too we notice statements about the birth etc. of the Being who has the 
three worlds as His body; "Hiranyagarbha was bom first, and having been 
bom, He became the only Lord of all beings. He held the earth and this 
heaven. That single Deity we propitiate with oblation" (R. V. X. cxxi. 1). 
The word samavartata in that text means "was born". So also in the text, "He 
is the first embodied Being, He is called Puru$a, He is the first ordainer of all 
beings. Thus was Brahma born in the beginning". Even a created person (viz 
Hiranyagarbha) can be all-pervasive, for in His aspect as the vital force, He 
dwells within the bodies of all beings. 

If this point of view be accepted , then the explanation ( of the aphorism ) 
will be this: All the presentations of form in such texts as . "Puru$a is all this" 
t Mu. II. i. 10 ). lead to the understandin g of the supreme Lord.l° 







































Topic 7: VAIS VAN AR A 


fern: I! V II 

IfRqTvl't: Vai§vanara qmTq_vw_fki for the words denoting many things 
are used specifically. 

24. Vaibvanara (the Cosmic Person) is the supreme Lord, for though the 
(two) words (Self and Vailvanara) denote many things, they are used 
specifically. 

Doubt : fin the Chando g va Upani gadl the start is made thus: "Which is 
our Self and what is Brahman?"" ( V. xi. 1 ) and "At present you remember 
this Self , the Vailvanara. Tell us of that very entity"18 (V. xi. 6). Then after 
the denunciation (by A§vapati) of the separate meditation on heaven, sun, 
air, space, water, earth, as possessed of the qualities of bright light, 
(multiform, identity with divergent paths, vastness, wealth, support), and 
after the teaching (by A§vapati) that these constitute the head, (eye, life, 
middle part of the body, bladder, and feet) of VaiMnara, the text runs thus: 
"He who meditates on this Vaikvanara Self, knowing It directly as 
pradefamatra (spatially limited, or realized in limited places) and abhivimana 
(identified with oneself), eats food in all the worlds, through all the beings 
and through all the seifs. Of this Vai§vanara Self, the head is heaven, the eye 
is the sun, the vital force is air, the middle part of the body is space, the 
bladder is water, the earth is the two feet, the chest is the sacrificial altar, the 
heart is the Garhapatya fire, the mind is the Anvaharyapacana fire, and the 
mouth is the Ahavaniya fire" (Ch. V. xviii. 1-2). The doubt arises here as to 
what is indicated by the word Vaiivanara. Is it the heat in the stomach, or the 
element fire, or the deity identifying himself with it, or the embodied soul, or 
the supreme Lord? 

What, again, causes the doubt here? 















The cause is the use of the word Vai§vanara, which is a common term for 
the heat in the stomach, the element called fire, and the deity of fire, as also 
the use of the word Self denoting both the embodied Self and the supreme 
Lord. So the doubt arises as to which of these meanings should be accepted 
and which rejected. What should be the conclusion here? 

Opponent: It is the fire in the stomach. 

Why? 

Because the word is seen to be used sometimes specifically to signify this 
fire, as in, "This fire that is within a man and digests the food is Vaisvanara" 
(B;. V. ix), and such other places. Or it may mean simply the ordinary fire, 
for it is seen to be used in a general way also, as in, "For the sake of the 
whole universe the gods created that Vai§vanara (fire, i.e. the sun)" (R. V. X. 
lxxxviii. 12). Or it may mean the deity having fire as his body, the word 
being in use in that sense also: "Because Vaisvanara, the king of the worlds, 
ordains happiness, and because all glories belong to him, therefore may we 
remain within his favour" (R. V. I. iic. 1); for according to this and other 
texts of this kind, the word can apply to some deity possessed of glory etc. 
If, however, it is held that the word Vai§vanara is to be interpreted in 
consonance with the word Self, as the word Self alone is used in the 
beginning in the text, "Which is our Self, what is Brahman?" (Ch. V. xi. 1), 
still it must be merely the embodied soul, because it approximates to 
Vai§vanara by reason of being an experiencer, and because the attribute of 
spatial limitation is possible in its case, it being limited by conditioning 
factors. Therefore Vaisvanara is not God. 

Vedantin : This being the position, it is said: Vai. vanara should properly 
mean God. 

Why? 

Because even though the two words (Vai§vanara and Self) denote many 
things, they are used specifically. Sadharana-fabdavife;a means specification 
about the two common words. Although both these words-Self, Vaivvanara- 
are common to many things-Vai§vanara implying three things and Self 



twoyet a specification is noticed, because of which their meaning is 
understood to be the supreme Lord, as is seen in: "Of this Vaikvinara Self, 
the head is heaven" etc. (Ch. V. xviii. 2). Here we understand that the 
supreme Self Itself, which has assumed a special form with heaven etc. as 
the head and so on, is presented as the indwelling Self, for the sake of 
meditation. And this can be so, for It is the cause. From the fact that all the 
states of an effect belong to the cause, it follows that the supreme Lord can 
have heaven etc. as His limbs. And the result, viz subsisting in all the worlds 
etc. as heard of in the text, "He (the knower of Vailivanara) eats food in all 
the worlds, among all beings, and through all the seifs" (Ch. V. xviii. 1), is 
possible if the ultimate cause is meant. And the indication of Brahman, 
contained in the text, "Thus indeed are all his sins burnt away" (Ch. V. xxiv. 
3), which speaks of the burning away of all the sins of the knower of 
Vaikvanara, and the indication in the commencement, as contained in the 
words Se,f and Brahman in the text, "Which is our Self, what is Brahman;" 
(Ch. V. xi. 1), lead us to the comprehension of the supreme Lord alone. 
Hence the supreme Lord alone is meant by Vai§vanara. 

wwqm n $ li 

R(al that (form) mentioned in the Smrti i should be $ an indicatory 

mark; Xfr hence. 

2S. The form referred to in the Smrti is an indicatory mark (that 
Vaisvanara means the supreme Lord). Hence Vaifvanara is God. 

Another reason why God is meant by Vaikvinara is that the Smrti 
mentions that the form, comprising the three worlds and having fire as the 
mouth, heaven as the head, and so on, belongs to God Himself: "Salutation 
to Him who is embodied in the three worlds with fire as His mouth, heaven 
as His head, sky as the navel, the earth as the two feet, the sun as the eye, 
and the directions as the ears" (Mbh. XII. 47. 68). This form, mentioned in 
the Sm4ti, bears witness to the Vedic text forming its basis; and thus it 



becomes a ground for inferring that the (Vedic) word Vai. vanara stands for 
the supreme Lord. The word iti is used in the sense of "hence", implying 
thereby, "Since this is a ground of inference leading to that conclusion, 
therefore Vai. vanara means the supreme Self Itself". Though "salutation to 
Him who is embodied in the three worlds" is a eulogy, still a eulogy, 
involving the presentation of such a form, is not quite possible unless there is 
some Vedic text forming its basis. Other Sm;ti texts like the following can 
also he quoted here: "His nature is inscrutable and He is the creator of all 
beings, of whom, the Brahmar}as say, that heaven is the head, sky is the 
navel, the sun and moon are the eyes, the directions are to be known as the 
ears, and the earth constitutes the two feet." 


wfe^iJifdBRu *ifa ^ m 

WfM II \\ II 

qW-aq«ll: -Because of the word and other factors aAF,Mq and because of 
residence api: inside, q not so, ff 4q if this be the objection, then j not so, 
gft_3q" because the instruction is to conceive gql in that way because it is 
inapplicable (elsewhere) q and atgJO they mention ~ this one aftIM even as a 
Purina (lit. person). 

26. If it be objected that Vaisvanara is not the supreme Self f because of 
the word used as well as other factors, and because of residence inside, then 
we say : not so, because the instruction is to conceive of Brahman as such, 
because the specification is inapplicable to others, and because they mention 
Him even as a person (Puruya). 

The opponent says here that the supreme Lord cannot be Vaisvanara. 

Why? 



Because of the word used as well as other factors , and because of 
residence inside. To take up the "word" first: The term Vai S vanara cannot 
possibly be used for the supreme Lord , for its conventional meanin g is 
somethin g else. So also the word fire , as in "This fire that is such is 
Vaikvanara" tS. B. X. vi. 1.12 1. is not a p plicable to the supreme Self. Bv the 
term "other factors" is to be understood the conception with re g ard to the 
three fires contained in , "The heart is the Garha pat va lire" etc. ( Ch. V. xviil. 
2), as well as the mention of lire as the place for the oblation to Prdna . 
( conceived of as the lire in A g nihotra ). in the text . "Now then the food that 
comes first is to be offered as an oblation" t Ch. V. xix. IT For these reasons . 
the meanin g of the word Vai k vanara is to be understood as the fire in the 
stomach. So also we hear of residence inside , "He who knows this (this fire 
called Vai&vanara ) as Puru$a ( Person ), as havin g the likeness of Puru$ a. 
and as residin g inside Puru$a (eats food everywhere )" ( S. B. X. vi. 1.11 ). 
That is possible for the fire in the stomach. As for the ar g ument that because 
of the specification mentioned in "Heaven is the head" etc, tCh. V. xviii 2 ). 
VaiSvanaral9 must be the supreme Self, we ask, "In the face of the 
specifications supporting either point of view, how do you arrive at the 
decision that the specification about the supreme Lord alone is to be 
accepted and not the other about the fire in the stomach?" Or it may be that 
there is a reference to the element fire, existing inside and outside. For from 
the mantra texts, such as the following, we can gather that it too has a 
relationship with heaven etc.: "(That is to be meditated on) which, in the 
form of the sun, pervades this earth and heaven and the inter-space between 
heaven and earth" (R. V. X. lxxxviii. 3). Or the deity, having fire as his body 
can have heaven etc. as his limbs by virtue of the divinity he is dowered 
with. Therefore Vai§vanara does not mean the supreme Lord here. 

Vedantin : To this we say: No, for the instruction is about conceiving in 
that way. From such reasons as the "use of the word" and so on, the supreme 
Lord should not be denied. 

Why? 

Because the instruction is about ima g inin g ( Vaisvanara ) in that wa v 
without abandonin g ( its meanin g as ) the fire in the stomach , inasmuch as the 

































































su perimposition of the idea of the supreme Self on the Vai S vanara lire in the 
stomach is tau g ht here j ust as in . "Meditate on the mind as Brahman" ( Ch. 
III. xviii. 1 ) . Or the supreme Self is tau g ht here to be meditated on as 
conditioned by the limitin g ad j unct of the Vai § vanara fire in the stomach , 
j ust as it is done in such texts as . "identified with the mind , havin g the vital 
force as His bod y, havin g efful g ence as His form" etc.20 (Ch. III. xiv. 2). If 
the supreme Self be not implied here and the mere fire in the stomach be 
meant, then the specification in the text, "Heaven is the head" etc. will surely 
be impossible. We shall explain under the succeeding aphorism how this 
specification cannot be justified even by resorting to a deity or the element 
fire. If the mere fire in the stomach be meant, it can only have its residence 
within Puru$a, but it cannot be Puru$a himself. The followers of the 
Vajasaneya recension, however, read of this Vai§vanara ag Puru$a himself 
in, "He who is Puru$a is this fire called Vaigvanara. He who knows this fire 
called Vai§vanara as Puru$a, having the likeness of Puru$a, and residing 
inside Puru$a' (S. B. X. vi. 1.11). But since the supreme Self is the Self of 
all, It can very well be both Puru$a and have residence within Puru$a. 

For those who read this portion of the aphorism thus, "purusavidhannapi 
ca enamadhiyate-for they read of Him as having the likeness of Purusa as 
well", the meaning is this: On the assumption that the mere fire in the 
stomach is meant, it can simply have residence within Puru$a, but it cannot 
have the likeness of Puru$a. But the followers of the Vajasaneya recesion 
read of this One as having the likeness of Puru$a as well, in the text, 'Know 
Him as having the likeness of Puru$a and residing inside Puruga' ". And by 
the term "the likeness of Puru$a" is to be understood, in accordance with the 
topic under discussion, all the limbs counting from heaven as the head to the 
earth as the feet in His divine aspect, and the well-known human limbs 
counting from the head to the chin in His corporeal aspect. 

^ folPji ^ W 


























am:t For these very reasons qJW not a deity a and not any element. 

27. For these very reasons (Vaisvanara is) neither the deity nor the 
element. 

And it was asserted that from the presentation of the element fire in 
association with heaven and the rest in the text of the mantra, it follows that 
the conception of the limbs, as contained in, "The head itself is fire" etc. (Ch. 
V. xviii. 1) must he made about that very element fire; or the conception of 
limbs has to be made about the deity that has fire as his body, for the deity is 
dowered with divinity. That has to be repudiated. So it is said here: For these 
very reasons, the deity (of fire) is not Vai9vanara. The element fire is also not 
so, for the element fire that has the nature of mere heat and light cannot he 
fancied to have heaven as its head and so on, for a thing that is itself a 
product cannot be the Self of another product. So also the deity, possessed 
though he is of divinity, cannot be fancied to have heaven etc. as his head 
etc., for the deity is not their source, and his divinity depends on the supreme 
Lord. Besides, the inapplicability of the word Self is there to be sure in all 
the alternatives. 

giwtPrcft II ^ II 

gW;q: Jaimini (thinks) arfK;% non-contradiction UTWq 3t even if 
directly (meditated). 

28. According to Jaimini, there is no contradiction even in case of direct 
meditation. 

In conformity with the mention of residence inside and so on, it was stated 
earlier that the supreme Lord is to be meditated upon with the help of fire in 
the stomach as His symbol or He is to be meditated upon as conditioned b y 
the fire in the stomach. But now the teacher Jaimini thinks that even if the 

su preme Lord t in His cosmic form of Virat be understood bv the word 








Vai S vanara and ) be accepted directly for meditation21 without thinking of 
fire as a symbol or limiting adjunct, still there will be no contradiction. 

Opponent : Will not the statement about residence inside and "the use of 
the word" and other reasons mentioned in the earlier aphorism (26) be 
contradicted if the fire in the stomach be not accepted as the meaning of the 
word Vai§vanara? 


Veddntin : As to this, it is said: Of these, the statement about residence 
inside is not contradicted. For it is not a fact that the statement, "He who 
knows this (Vaisvanara) as Puru$a, having the likeness of Puru$a, and 
residing inside Puru$a" (S. B. X. vi. 1.11), is made with reference to the fire 
in the stomach; for that fire is neither under consideration nor is it mentioned 
by name. 


What is the meaning then? 


The sub j ect under discussion is the conception of the likeness of Puru$ a. 
so far as the limbs countin g from the head to the chin are concerned. And the 
statement . "He who knows this One havin g the likeness of Puru$a" . is made 
with reference to that conception. This is j ust like the statement . "He sees the 
branch fixed on the tree".22 Or the statement . "He who knows the One 
havin g the likeness of Puru$a and residin g in Puru$a" . is made with a view 
to presentin g the nature of the pure witness that belon g s to the supreme Self 
under consideration. This Self has the likeness of Puru$a since Puru$a is Its 
limitin g ad j unct in the bodily and divine contexts ,23 Once the supreme Lord 
is accepted as the meanin g of the text after a consideration of it in a lo g ical 
order from be g innin g to end , the word Vai.vanara must si g nify Him alone 
throu g h some derivative (and not conventional ) sense. Vai g vanara is the 
su preme Self in accordance with these derivations: He who is the cosmos 

( viva ) as well as a person Inara ): or He who is the ordainer Inara ) of the 
universe t vifva ): or He to whom belon g all tvifva l bein gs t naraL He is the 
su preme Self , for He is the Self of all. Vai-vanara is the same as Viivanara , 
the suffix ( ' brin ging about the transformation ) si g nifies nothin g but the 
ori g inal word itself , as in the words rdkasa and vdvasa.24 Even the word 
ag ni ( usuallv meanin g fire ), should mean the supreme Self from the 
derivative sense of leadin g to the attainment of the results of work,25 And 




















































































since the supreme Self is the Self of all, it is quite reasonable to think of It as 
the Garhapatya fire (Ch. V. xviii. 2), or as the place (i.e. fire) for offering the 
oblations to the vital force (Ch. V. xix. 1). 


Opponent : On the supposition that Vai§vanara stands for the supreme 
Self, how can the text about spatial limitation (pradesamatratva) (Ch. V. 
xviii. 1) be justified? 


Veddntin : The next aphorism proceeds to explain this: 

II II 



arf;: From the point of view of manifestation iftr this is (what) aR~: 
Ahmarathya (says). 

29. According to Afmarathya, it is from the point of view of manifestation 
(that God is referred to as spatially limited). 

Even though the supreme Lord transcends all limitation, still there can be 
a spatial limitation for the sake of (His) manifestation. For the supreme Lord 
does become manifest (in His majesty) out of favour for His worshippers. Or 
because He becomes specially manifest in particular spots like the heart, 
which are the places (pradefa) for His revelation, therefore from the point of 
view of manifestation, the text about spatial limitation is justifiable even in 
the case of the supreme Lord. This is how the teacher A.smarathya thinks. 

31-ifK: II $o II 

arl9k: On account of being meditated on, (says) wfz: Badari. 

30. According to Badari (God is spoken of as spatially limited) on account 
of being meditated on. 




Or He is said to be spatially determined because He is meditated on by the 
mind inhabitin g the heart which is spatially limited ." j ust as the barle y 
measured bv a ( vessel called ) prastha is said to be a orastha in quantit y. 
Althou g h it is a fact that barley itself has some intrinsic quantit y, which 
becomes obvious from its contact with the prastha . whereas the supreme 
Lord has no measurement to be revealed bv His contact with the heart , still it 
Is asserted that the text about spatial manifestation can somehow be 
ex plained on the basis of remembrance (of God ) .27 Or to make the text 
about the revelation in space fruitful, the meaning is that the supreme Self, 
which has no spatial limitation, is to be meditated on as though spatially 
determined. Thus the teacher Badari thinks that the text about spatial 
limitation occurs from the standpoint of meditation. 



gsgM: Because of meditation based on superimposition Wf~ so says jfiifi: 
Jaimini, fk because ffrr so qc (another text) shows. 

31. According to Jaimini, the spatial limitation is (justifiable) vecause of 
the meditation based on superimposition; for this is shown (in another text). 

Or the text about spatial limitation may be there because of the 

meditation through superimposition (i.e. imagining a small thing to be 
great). 

How? 

For so in a similar context in the Va j asaneva brdhmana . the limbs 
countin g from heaven to the earth , of the Vai § vanara Self , embodied in the 
three worlds , are superimposed on the ph ysical limbs countin g from the to p 
of the head to the chin ; and thus this brdhma7a shows how the supreme Lord 
becomes spatially limited in a meditation based on superimposition (S. B. X. 
vi. 1.11 ) : (Kin g ASvapati said to the Brahmanas . Pracina § ala and others 1- 
"The g ods knew Him fully as thou g h spatially limited : they knew Him as the 






































































inmost Self. Therefore I shall speak of those limbs to you in that very wa v. I 
shall superimpose them j ust accordin g to their spatial limitation. While 
teachin g about the crop of the head , he ( the kin g) said . "This ( crop of m v 
head ) is Vaisvanara as the all-surpassin g ( heaven 1 .' Teachin g about the two 
e ves , he said . "This ( the two eves of mine ) is Vai § vanara as the sun ( which is 
His e ve) .' Teachin g about the nostrils , he said . "This is Vai S vanara as air 
( which is His breath ) . 1 Teachin g about the space in the mouth , he said . This 
is Vai si vanara as the vast space ( which is His trunk ) .' Teachin g about the 
saliva in the mouth , he said . v This is Vai § vanara as water ( which is His 
bladder ) . 1 Teachin g about the chin , he said . "This is Vai s vanara as the earth 
( which constitutes His feet ) 1 ." Bv the word cubuka ( chin ) is to be understood 
the lower (j aw ) bone of the face. Althou g h the Va i asaneva brahmana speaks 
of heaven as all-surpassin g and the sun as brilliant , while in the Chando gya. 
heaven is spoken of as brilliant and the sun as possessed of many forms , still 
this difference is nothin g dama ging:28 for the Vedic statement about spatial 
limitation is the same. And (it will be shown that) the same kind of 
meditation (on Vai§vanara and others) is in evidence in all the branches (of 
the Vedas). The teacher Jaimini thinks that it is more logical to say that the 
text about spatial limitation occurs for the sake of meditation based on 
superimposition. 



W And they remember try this One aq in this place. 

32. And they (the followers of the Jabala branch) remember (i.e. read of) 
this One (i.e. God) in this place (i.e. in between the head and the chin). 

And the followers of the Jabala branch remember this One , i.e. the 
su preme Lord , in this place , i.e. in between the top of the head and the chin; 
"(Yai iiavalk va AThat which is this infinite and inscrutable Self is seated 
( that is to sa v. has to be meditated upon ) on this one that is under bonda ge 































































































( i.e. the individual bein g/_(Atri) : Where is the one under bonda g e seated?' 
'He is established in between Varaoa and Nasi.C 'Which is Vararu3 and 

which is Nisi?" 1 (Jabala 2 ) . In that text , ag ain , if is ascertained that this one 
( i.e. the eyebrows ) and the nose are Varana and Ndsi from the derivation of 
Varana as that which wards off ivaravati ) all the sins committed bv the 
senses , and of Nisi as that which destroys (nafa vati) all the sins committed 
b v the senses. The Jabalas read furthermore . '"Which becomes the seat for 
this one ( i.e. the individual bein g') ? 1 'That which constitutes the link between 
the eyebrows and the nose becomes the link between heaven and the 

su preme place (of BrahmanY29" (ibid.). Therefore the text about spatial 
limitation is appropriate with regard to the supreme Self. 

And the term abbivimdna in the text is used to indicate the innermost Self, 
in the derivative sense of that which is known directly (abbivimiyate) as the 
inmost Self by all beings; or in the sense of that which is directly attained 
(abhigata) as the innermost at the same time that it is free from any 
measurement (vimdna); or in the sense of that which creates diversely 
(abhivimimite) the whole universe, It being the source of all. Therefore it is 
proved that Vaiivanara must be the supreme Self. 

SECTION III 

Topic 1: THE ABODE OF HEAVEN, EARTH, ETC. 





q_;j_3_ The repository of heaven, earth, etc. fqqa on account of the word 
denoting Itself. 

1. The repository of heaven, earth, etc. (is the supreme Self) on account of 
the word denoting Itself. 
































Doubt : This is met with in the Upani$ad: "Know that Self alone which is 
one without a second, on which are strung heaven, the earth, and inter-space, 
the mind and the vital forces together with all the other organs;' and give -up 
all other talks. This is the dam (or bridge) leading to immortality" (Mu. II. ii. 
5). Here from the mention of the subsistence of heaven etc., it becomes 
obvious that something exists as the repository. The doubt arises as to 
whether this container (or abode) is the supreme Brahman or something else. 

Opponent : As to that, the obvious meaning is that something other than 
Brahman must be this repository. 

Why? 

Because we hear from the Upani$ad, "This is the dam leading to 
immortality." A dam (or bridge) is known in this world to be connected with 
two banks, whereas no bank can be admitted for Brahman in the face of the 
Upani$adic declaration: "Infinite, shoreless" (B;. II. iv. 12). If some other 
thing has to be admitted as the repository, then the Pradhana, well known in 
the Smrti, should be accepted, for it is logical for it to be the repository, it 
being the material cause. Or it can be the air well known in the Upani$ad, 
for air is also heard of as something holding together, in the text, "Vayu (air), 
0 Gautama, is that Sutra (lit. thread). Through this Sutra or Vayu this and the 
next life and all beings are held together" (Br. III. vii. 2). Or it can be the 
embodied soul; for by virtue of its being the experiencer, it can justifiably be 
a repository in relation to the manifold world of enjoyment. 

Veddntin "This being the position, it is said: "The repository of heaven, 
earth, etc." The compound word Dyubhuvau is formed by dyu (heaven) and 
bhu (earth); dyu-bhu-adi means those that have heaven and earth at the 
beginning. Since in this sentence the universe, consisting of heaven, earth, 
inter-space, mind, organs, etc. have been mentioned as transfixed on some 
entity (Mu. II. ii. 5), hence the repository of this must logically be Brahman. 

Why? 

"On account of the word denoting Itself", that is to say, because of the 
word "Self"; for the word "Self" does occur here in, "know that Self alone 



that is one without a second" (Mu. II. ii. 5). And the word "Self" fits in quite 
aptly if the supreme Self is understood by it, but not so if the meaning tie 
something else. Moreover, in some places, Brahman is spoken of as the 
repository by Its very name, as in, "0 amiable one, all these beings have 
Existence as their source, Existence as their repository, and Existence as 
their culmination" (Ch. VI. viii. 4). Besides, Brahman is mentioned by Its 
very name earlier as well as later in this very context: "Puru$a alone is all 
thiscomprising the karma and knowledge. He who knows this supreme 
immortal Brahman" (Mu. II. i. 10), "All that is in front is but .Brahman, the 
immortal. Brahman is on the right, as well as on the left. Above and below 
too is extended Brahman alone" (Mu. II. ii. 11). From hearing in that context 
of the relation, existing between a container and the thing contained, and 
from the appositional use (asserting Brahman's identity with all) in, "All is 
Brahman" (Ch. III. xiv. 1), the doubt may arise that just as a tree is a 
composite entity, comprising as it does the branches, trunk, and roots, so also 
the Self is variegated and possessed of diverse tastes. In order to obviate that 
doubt, the text declares with emphasis: "Know that Self alone that is one 
without a second" (Mu. II. ii. 5). The idea expressed is this: The Self is not 
to be cognized as a heterogeneous thing comprising the manifold created 
universe. 

How is It then to be cognized? 

The meanin g is that , after eliminatin g, throu g h knowled ge, the universe 
con j ured up b y ig norance , you should know that one and homo g eneous Self 
alone that a p pears as the repository. Just as when somebody is told . "Brin g 
that on which Devadatta sits" , one brin g s the seat alone , but not Devadatta : 
similarly the homo g eneous Self , ap pearin g as the repositor y, is tau g ht here 
as the ob j ect to be known. Furthermore , we hear of the condemnation of one 
who clin g s to the unreal created thin g s: "He g oes from death to death who 
sees as thou g h there is difference here (in Brahman )" ( Ka. II. i. 11 ) . As for 
the use of "all" and "Brahman" in a p position in the text . "All this is t buf ) 
Brahman" tCh. ITT, xlv. 1 ). it is meant for the elimination of the universe .2 
and not for proving heterogeneity (in Brahman). For we hear of homogeneity 
in, "As a lump of salt is without interior and exterior, entire and purely saline 
in taste, even so is the Self without interior and exterior, entire, and pure 
















































Intelligence alone" (Br IV. v. 13). Hence the supreme Brahman is the 
repository of heaven, earth, etc. 

As for the objection, that from the mention of the dam in the Upani~ad 
and from the fact that a dam is associated with banks, something other than 
Brahman should be the respository of heaven and earth, the reply is this: By 
the text about the dam, the only point sought to be illustrated is the fact of 
holding together (or impounding) and not the possession of banks. It does 
not follow that, since a dam in this world is made of earth and timber, the 
dam mentioned here is also assumed to be similarly constructed. The word 
dam itself (etymologically) implies mere holding together, but not 
possession of banks etc., for the word seta (dam) is derived from the root Fiii 
in the sense of impounding (the water from flowing out). 

Somebody else says: The knowledge of the Self met with in the text, 
"Know that Self alone" (Mu. II. ii. 5), and the discarding of speech met with 
in the text, "give up all other talks" (ibid.), are also declared here by the text, 
"this is the dam leading to immortality", for these two constitute the means 
(the bridge) leading to immortality. But Brahman as the repository of heaven 
and earth is not spoken of. 

Veddntin : The objection raised on that supposition, to the effect that the 
text about the dam reveals something other than Brahman as the repository 
of heaven and earth, is illogical. 





2. Because there is the instruction about (Its) attainment by the free. 



From this additional reason that this repository of heaven, earth, etc. is 
taught as the goal to be reached by the liberated, it follows that this 
repository is the supreme Brahman. Muktopasrpya means attainable by , 
those freed from bondage. Nescience consists in the idea of Selfhood 
entertained about the body etc., which are not the Self. As a result of this 
selfidentification, follow love for those who adore that body and hatred for 
those who dishonour it, and fear and confusion from noticing its death. In 
this way, this multitude of evils, with infinite differences, that flows on for 
ever, is obvious to all of us. In contradiction to this, it is stated with regard to 
this repository of heaven and earth that It is to be reached by those who are 
free from such defects as ignorance, love, hatred, etc. 

How is it stated? 

Having declared, "When that Self, which is both high and low (i.e. cause 
and effect), is realized, the knots of the heart get untied, all the doubts 
become solved, and all actions become dissipated" (Mu. II. ii. 8), it is stated, 
"As the rivers, flowing down, become indistinguishable on reaching the sea 
by giving up their names and forms, so also the illumined soul, having 
become freed from name and form, reaches the self-effulgent Puru$a that is 
higher than the higher Maya (unmanifested Nature)" (Mu. III. ii. 8). And it is 
well known from such texts as the following that Brahman is attainable by 
the liberated: "When all the desires that dwell in his heart are gone, then he, 
having been mortal, becomes immortal and attains Brahman even in this 
body" (Br. IV. iv. 7). But Pradhana and the rest are nowhere known to be 
attainable by the liberated. Again, with regard to the entity that is the 
repository of heaven and earth it is stated here in the text, "Know that Self 
alone and give up all other talks" (Mu. II. ii. 5), that this entity is realizable 
after the giving up of speech (that is to say, the activities of all organs). And 
this very fact is found to be declared in another Upani$ad in connection with 
Brahman: "The intelligent aspirant after Brahman, knowing about this alone, 
should attain intuitive knowledge. He should not think of too many words, 
for it is particularly fatiguing to the organ of speech" (Br. IV. iv. 21). For this 
reason also the abode of heaven and earth is Brahman. 



11311 

Not ai.Tifi5 any inferential entity 3j-ffq-wq on account of absence of any 
word indicating it. 

i. No inferential entity (is the repository), for there is no word of that 
import. 

It is being stated that there is no uncommon ground of inference 
establishing anything else, in the same sense that there is an uncommon 
ground of inference (viz the word) to prove Brahman. "The inferential 
entity", viz Pradhana fancied in the Smrti of the -Samkhyas, "is not" to be 
understood here as the abode of heaven and earth etc. 

Why? 

"For there is no word of that import." "A word of that import" means 
some word establishing that insentient Pradhana. An absence of such a word 
is meant. There is no word here to prove Pradhana, on the strength of which 
the insentient Pradhina could have been understood either as the cause or the 
abode. (Or the meaning of atacchabddt is): There are words of contrary 
import in evidence here, which establish a sentient entity opposed to it 
(Pradhina), as for instance, "He who is omniscient in general and all¬ 
knowing in detail" (Mu. I. i. 9). For this very reason, air too is not accepted 
here as the abode of heaven, earth, etc. 





murig A living creature also (is not so). 

4. A living creature also is not so. 

It is true that a livin g bein g, identif ying itself with intelli g ence , can be the 
Self and can have sentience : but there can be no omniscience for one whose 
knowled g e is circumscribed b y limitin g ad j uncts. And hence on the ver y 
g round of the presence of words of a contrary import . 3 a livin g bein g is not 
to be accepted as the repository of heaven and earth. Moreover , it is 
impossible for a livin g creature , circumscribed as it is by conditionin g 
factors , to be the repository of heaven , earth , etc, in the fullest sense. The 
present aphorism is framed separatel y ( from the earlier one ) in order to 
connect it with the succeedin g ones .4 

For what further reason is the living being not to be accepted as the 
repository of heaven, earth etc.? 











































5. (And) because there is a mention of difference. 

Moreover, there is a mention of difference as between the knowable object 
and the knower, in the text, "Know that Self alone that is one without a 
second" (Mu. II. ii. 5). In that text the knower is a living creature, since it 
hankers for freedom. And by the method of residue, Brahman, mentioned by 
the word Self, is the object to be known and is the respository of heaven, 
earth, etc., but not so is a living creature. 


What additional reason is there for not accepting a living being as the 
abode of heaven, earth etc.? 



6. On account of the context. 

And because this is a context of the supreme Self. This is evident from the 
text, "0 adorable sir, (which is that thing) which having been known, all this 
becomes known?" (Mu. I. i. 3), where the knowledge of all is made to 
depend on the knowledge of one. For it is only by knowing the supreme Self, 
that is the Self of all, that all this becomes known; but not so by knowing 
merely a living creature. 

For what more reason a living being is not to be accepted as the abode of 
heaven, earth, etc.? 




7. And on account of the facts of staying on and eating. 

While presenting the abode of heaven, earth, etc., the facts of staying on 
and eating (i.e. experiencing) are stated in the text, "Two birds that are ever 
associated and have similar names" etc. (Mu. III. i. 1), the experience of the 
results of work being mentioned in, "Of these the one eats the fruits of 
divergent tastes" (ibid.), and staying on indifferently being mentioned in, 
"The other looks on without eating" (ibid.). By these two facts of staying on 
and eating, God and the individual soul are understood in that context. 
Provided God had been sought to be presented as the abode of heaven, earth, 
etc. (in Mu. II. ii. 5), then only it becomes proper to speak of Him, who is 
already the subject under discussion, as separate from the individual soul. 
Otherwise it will amount to speaking suddenly about something out of 
context and unrelated. 

Opponent: Is not the mention of the individual soul as different from God 
equally out of context even in your case? 

Veddntin : No, for the soul (as such) is not presented as the subject-matter 
of the topic. The individual soul, present in every body as the agent and 
experiencer in association with such limiting adjuncts as the intellect, is 
known from common experience itself, and so it is not mentioned in the 



Upani$ads for its own sake. But as God is not thus familiarly known from 
common experience, He is intended to be declared in the Upani$ad for His 
own sake. Hence it is not proper to say that any mention of Him is uncalled 
for. It was also shown under the aphorism, "The two who have entered into 
the cavity are the individual Self and the supreme Self" (B. S. I. ii. 11), that 
God and the individual soul are spoken of in the verse, "Two birds" etc. (Mu. 
III. i. 1). Even though it is said in the explanation offered by the Pailigi 
Upani$ad that the sattva (intellect) and the individual soul are spoken of in 
this verse, still there is no contradiction. 

How? 

For what is repudiated here is that any living creature can be the 
repository of heaven, earth, etc., the reason being that, just like the space 
within a pot, this creature is perceived separately in every body as identified 
with such limiting adjuncts as the sattva. But He who is cognized in all 
bodies as free from all limiting adjuncts must necessarily be the supreme 
Self. Just as much as the spaces within pots etc., when perceived as free 
from the limitations of the pots etc., are but the cosmic space, similarly since 
the living creatures (freed from their adjuncts) are not logically different 
from the supreme Self, therefore it is not possible to deny them (as the 
repository of heaven etc.). Hence what is really denied is that the soul 
identifying itself with the sattva etc. can be the repository of heaven, earth, 
etc. Accordingly the supreme Brahman is alone the repository of heaven, 
earth, etc.; and this was established by the earlier a phorism . "The entit y 
possessed of the qualities of not bein g seen and so on is Brahman , for Its 
characteristics are spoken of" (L ii. 21 ) . For in connection with that very text 
about the source of all bein gs, we read , "on which are strun g heaven , the 
earth , and inter-space" etc. ( Mu. 11. ii. 5 ) . That sub j ect is revived here for the 
sake of elaboration.5 


Topic 2: BHUMAN (INFINITE, PFENITUDE) 

























IFII 


Bhuman (is Brahman), lac the teaching having been imparted gsSr 7q 3rfir 
as superior to samprasada. 

8. Bhuman is the supreme Self, since He is taught as superior to 
samprasada (i.e. Prang or vital force). 

Doubt: This is stated in the Upani$ad: "(Sanatkumara said), 'But Bhuman 
(the Infinite) has surely to be inquired into.' (Narada said), '0 venerable sir, I 
hanker to understand the Infinite.' (Sanatkumara said), 'That is the Infinite in 
which one does not see anything else, does not hear anything else, does not 
know anything else. And that is limited where one sees something else"' etc. 
(Ch. VII. xxiii-xxiv). Here the doubt arises: Is Prang the Bhuman (Infinite) 
or is the supreme Self so? 

Why does the doubt arise? 

By the word Bhfiman is meant plenitude, for it-is mentioned in the Smrti 
(i.e. Pat)ini's grammar), "The word bhuman is derived from the word bahu 
(much, many)' with the suffix iman added after it, and then the i of the suffix 
is dropped and bhu is substituted for bahu (to give rise to the abstract 
counterpart of bahu)" (VI. iv. 158). The Sm;ti speaks of the word bhuman as 
having a suffix added to it to impart the sense of the abstract noun. When the 
curiosity about the nature of that plenitude arises, it becomes obvious from 
the text, "Praha is certainly greater than hope" (Ch. VII. xv. 1), that Praha is 
Bhuman because of proximity. Similarly from the way the topic is 
introduced in, "For it has surely been heard by me from persons of your 
standing that the knower of the Self crosses over sorrow. Here am I such a 
sorrowing man, 0 venerable sir, ferry me across this sorrow, sorrowful as I 
am" (Ch. VII. i. 3), it appears equally that Bhuman is the supreme Self. Of 




these two, it becomes a matter of doubt as to which is to be accepted and 
which rejected. What would be the conclusion here? 

Opponent: The conclusion is that Praha is Bhuman. 

Why? 

Because it is noticed that the (series of) questions and answers are 
concerned with something greater (bhuyan), for instance, (it is asked by 
Narada), "0 venerable sir, is there anything greater than name?" (Ch. VII. i. 
5), and the answer (by Sanatkumara) is, "The organ of speech is surely 
greater than name" (Ch. VII. ii. 1). Similar are (the question), "0 venerable 
sir, is there anything greater than the vocal organ?" (Ch. VII. ii. 2), and (the 
answer), "The mind is surely greater than the vocal organ" (Ch. VII. iii. 1). 
Here a chain of questions and answers extends from name etc. to Praha. But 
after Praha no such question and answer are found in the shape of "0 
venerable sir, is there anything greater than Praha?" and "Such a thing is 
surely greater than Praha." But in the text, starting with, "Praha is surely 
greater than hope" (Ch. VII. xv. 1), Praia is spoken of in detail as the greatest 
of all things counting from name etc. and ending with hope. Then in the text, 
"(Should he be told), 'You are transcending all in your speech', he should 
say, 'Yes, I do transcend', he should not deny" (Ch. VII. xv. 4), it is 
acknowledged that for one who realizes Praia, there accrues the power of 
transcending all others in speech (i.e. establishing his assertion as the final 
one). Lastly it is said, "But this person verily transcends all others in his 
speech, who transcends them with the help of truth" (Ch. VII. xvi. 1), where 
the vow of Praha, consisting in transcending all other things is alluded to. 
And without discarding Praia, the Bhuman is introduced through a chain of 
truth and the rest. From all this it becomes clear that the text regards Praha 
itself as Bhuman. 

Objection : How, again, after explaining Praia as Bhurman would you 
explain the text, "That in which one does not see anything else" etc. (Ch. 
VII. xxiv. 2), which sets forth the characteristics of Bhuman? 

Op ponent : The answer is: That definition , viz "That in which one does 
not see anythin g else" , is a p plicable to Prdna also , since it is a matter of 










ex perience that all such activities as seein g cease in deep sleep when all the 
org ans mer g e in Pra*za. Thus the (Prasna ) Upanisad also speaks of the state 
of sleep as a state of the mer g er of all the activities of the or g ans , in the text . 
"This person does not then hear , does not see" ( IV. 2 ). and then in that ver y 
state it shows the sleeplessness of Prima with its fivefold functions , in the 
text . "It is the tires of Prdnae that really keep awake in this city (of the 
body)" (Pr. IV. 3), thereby showing that the state of sleep is dominated over 
by Pr ia. The mention of happiness in relation to Bbuntan in, "That which is 
Bhuman is bliss" (Ch. VII. otiii) is also not irreconcilable (with Praha); for 
we hear of bliss in the state of sleep in, "Then in that state the deity does not 
see dreams. Then at that time there occurs this kind of happiness in the 
body" (Pr. IV. 6). The text, "That which is Bhuman is immortal" (Ch. VII. 
xxiv. 1) is also not irreconcilable with Praha; for the Upani$adic text says 
"Praha is surely immortal" (Kau. III. 2). 

Objection : On the assumption that Prima is Bhuman, how would you 
justify the introduction of the topic from the point of view of a desire for the 
realization of the Self, as is evident from the text, "The knower of the Self 
crosses over sorrow" (Ch. VII. i. 3)? 

Opponent : We say that Prdna itself is here intended to stand for the Self; 
and that is why Praha is shown as identified with all in, "Praha is father, 
Praria is mother, Praia is brother, Praha is sister, Praha is teacher, Prang, is 
Brahman" (Ch. VII. xv. 1). The identity of Praha with Bbuman in the sense 
of vastness is also possible from the mention of Prabza's identity with all 
and the illustration of the spokes and nave in the text, "As the spokes are 
fixed on a nave, so also are all these fixed on Praha" (Ch. VII. xv. 1.). 
Therefore the conclusion arrived at is this that Praha is Bhuman. 

Vedantin : Hence it is stated: The supreme Self alone can be the Bhuman 
here, and not Praha. 

Why? 

Because of the instruction about His superiority to samprasida. 
Samprasada means deep sleep from the derivative sense of the state in which 
one becomes fully serene. This is confirmed by the B;hadaraoyaka also 

























because it is stated there along with the waking and dream states (IV. iii. 15- 
17). And since Prdna keeps awake in that state of full serenity, therefore in 
this aphorism, Prima is accepted as the meaning of samprasada. So the idea 
implied (by the aphorism) is this: "Since Bhuman is taught to be superior to 
Praha, therefore if Praha itself be Bhuman, then the teaching about its own 
superiority to itself will be incongruous. For instance, when the instruction is 
given that something is superior to name, it is not implied that name itself is 
superior to name." 

What then is taught to be superior? 

Something different from name and called vocal organ is taught in, "The 
vocal organ is surely superior to name" (Ch. VII. ii. 1). Similarly in all the 
(succeeding) stages, some things different from those respective (earlier) 
things themselves, counting from the vocal organ to Praha, are taught as 
being superior. In the same way, the Bhuman, that is taught to be superior to 
Prang, must be something other than Praha. 

Opponent : But there is no question here like "0 venerable sir, is there 
anything higher than Praha?" Nor is there an answer of the form, "Such a 
thing is surely greater than Praha." So how can it be said that Bhuman- is 
taught to be higher than Pr za? Moreover, in the subsequent passage we find 
a reference to transcendence in speech (i.e. establishing his own conclusion 
exclusively) by relying on Praha : "But he really transcends all others in his 
speech, who transcends by relying on truth" (Ch. VII. xvi. 1). Hence nothing 
is taught as higher than Prima. 

VedDntin : With regard to this we say: It cannot be asserted that the 
reference is to the transcendence in speech by relying on Prarta itself; for 
there is a specific mention (of truth) in, "He who transcends in speech by 
relying on truth" (ibid.). 

Opponent: Should not that specific mention too refer to Prc na? 


How? 



Just as in the sentence, "He indeed is a true performer of Agnihotra who 
speaks the truth", a man does not become a performer of Agnihotra because 
of his truthfulness. 

By what then? 

By the performance of the Agnihotra itself. But truthfulness is mentioned 
as a special qualification of a performer of Agnihotra. Similarly in the 
sentence, "But he really transcends in speech who transcends by relying on 
truth', the transcendence in speech does not result from truthfulness. 

From what then? 

From the knowledge of Prana that is under consideration. But truthfulness 
is intended as a special qualification of the knower of Prazna. 

Veddntin : We sa y, no : for that will lead to the abandonment of the 
meanin g of the Upani$ad. From the direct text of the UpaniSad it is obvious 
that the transcendence in speech results from the reliance on truth , the 
meanin g bein g, "But he really transcends in speech who transcends b y 
relying on truth." There is no declaration of the knowled g e of Prana here. 
The knowled g e of Prdna can perchance be brou g ht into pla y with the help of 
the context only. But if that be done , the direct text will be overruled by the 
context.? And on this interpretation , the use of the word to (but ) as in . "But 
he really transcends in speech" (ibid. ), meant to distin g uish somethin g going 
to be discussed from somethin g that preceded , cannot be j ustified. And the 
text . "But truth must be inquired into" t Ch. VII. xvi. 1 ). which implies an 
additional effort , su gg ests that a fresh subject (other than Prima) is intended 
to be introduced (by the word "truth"). Accordingly, just as when the 
mastery of a sin g le Veda is under discussion , and some one sa ys. "But he is 
really a g reat Brdhnrana who reads the four Vedas" , the praise relates to the 
knower of the four Vedas who is different from the knowers of a sin gle 

Veda , so also are we to understand here. Besides , there is no such rule that 
the intention to speak about a new thin g can be g athered merely from a 
freshness of questions and answers." For the intention of a new sub j ect can 
be understood when it becomes impossible to keep within the ran g e alread y 
attained. In the context under discussion (Ch. Vll. xv-xvi ). Narada becomes 
















































































silent after hearin g the teachin g u p to Prima. Then Sanatkumara voluntaril y 
ex pounds to him thus: The transcendence in speech by rei ving on the 
knowled g e of Prdna , which is mutable and unreal , is really no 
transcendence , "but he really transcends all others in his speech who 
transcends bv rei ving on truth". In that text the supreme Brahman is meant 
b v the term truth (satva) because that is the hi g hest realit y, and because 
another UpaniSad sa ys. "Brahman is Truth . Knowled ge. Infinite" (Tai. II. i. 
1) . To Narad a who has thus been enli g htened , and who has reacted b v 
saying, "0 venerable sir . I want to transcend all thin g s in mv speech b v 
relying on truth" tCh. VII. xvi. k Sanatkumara teaches Bhhman throu g h a 
succession of practices like deep meditation etc.s That being the case, it is 
understood that the very truth which is promised to be spoken of as higher 
than Prdna (in Ch. VII. xvi) is mentioned here (in Ch. VII. xxiii) as Bhuman. 
Hence there does occur an instruction about Bhhman as superior to Prdna. 
And in this way the starting of the topic with the purpose of the knowledge 
of the Self stands justified. Moreover, it is not reasonable to say that Prdna 
itself is intended here as the Self, for Prdna cannot be the Self in the primary 
sense. Furthermore, there can be no cessation of sorrow from anything but 
the knowledge of the Self, for another Upani$ad declares, "(Knowing Him 
alone one goes beyond death). There is no other path to reach the goal" (Sv. 
VI. 15). And starting with, "Take me across sorrow, such as I am, 0 
venerable sir," (Ch. VII. i. 3), the conclusion is made with, "The venerable 
Sanatkumara shows the other shore of darkness to him from whom has been 
rubbed away all attachment" (Ch. VII. xxvi. 2). By the word darkness 
(tamas) is meant ignorance, the source of sorrow etc. And if the instruction 
were really to end with Pram as the highest, this Prdna would not have been 
declared to be subject to something else; and yet the brahmana text runs 
thus: "From the Self proceeds Prana" (Ch. VII. xxvi. 1). 

Opponent : It may well be that the supreme Self is intended to be dealt 
with at the end of the context (Ch. VII. xxvi); but Bhuman here is nothing 
but Prdna. 

Veddntin : No, for by such texts as, "On what is He (i.e. Bhuman) seated, 
0 venerable sir? 'On His own glory 1 " (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), Bhuman is carried 
forward right up to the end of the topic. And the characteristic of Infinity, 













































expressed as plenitude (or vastness), fits in all the better in the case of the 
supreme Self, since It is the source of all. 



And q4-3Q9: because the characteristics are appropriate. 

9. And the characteristics of Bhinnan are appropriate (for the supreme 
Self). 

Moreover, the characteristics of Bhuman, mentioned in the Upanisad, are 
appropriate for the supreme Self. For instance, the Upani$ad informs us of 
the absence in the Bhuman of such acts as seeing, in the passage, "That is 
Bhuman where one does not see anything else, does not know anything else" 
(Ch. VII. xxiv. 1); and this absence of such acts as seeing is known to pertain 
to the supreme Self from the other Upani$adic passage, "But when to the 
knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, then what should one 
see and through what?" (Br. IV. v. 15). Even the absence of such acts as 
seeing in the state of sleep, mentioned earlier (Pr. IV. 3), was done so with a 
view to declaring the absence of any relationship in the case of the Self 
Itself, and not for revealing the nature of Prana, for the topic there was of the 
supreme Self. Again, the happiness that was spoken of in that state (Pr. IV. 6) 
was stated with a view to revealing the nature of the Self as Bliss Itself; for it 
is said, "This is its supreme Bliss. On a particle of this very Bliss other 
beings live" (Br. IV. iii. 32); and here (in the Chandogya) also it is said, 
"That which is Bhuman is Bliss. There is no happiness in the limited; the 
Infinite (Bhuman) Itself is Bliss" (Ch. VII. xxiii), where, after rejecting the 
happiness mixed with sorrow, Bhuman is shown to be nothing but Brahman 
that is Bliss. The immortality that is heard of in the passage, "That which is 


Infinite (Bhuman) is immortal" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), leads us to understand the 
supreme cause; for the immortality present in the created things is only a 
relative reality, as is evident from another Upani$ad, "Everything else but 
this is perishable" (Br. III. iv. 2). Similarly also, all such characteristics as 
truth, establishment in his own glory, all-pervasiveness, identity with all, 
which are met with in the Upani$ad, are appropriate for the supreme Self 
alone, and not for anything else. Therefore it is proved that Bhi man is the 
supreme Self. 


TOPIC 3: IMMUTABLE 



aR4Zjj The Ak$ara (Immutable) arriR-R-: on account of sppporting 
everything up to space. 

10. Akwa is Brahman because of supporting all things up to (and 
including) space. 

Doubt : It is heard in the Upani$ad: "(Gargi asked), 'On what is space 
woven and transfixed?' (Br. III. viii. 7). (Yajiiavalkya replied), O Gargi, the 
knowers of Brahman say, this Ak$ara (immutable Brahman) is that. It is 
neither gross nor minute"' etc. (Br. III. viii. 8). With regard to this the doubt - 
arises: Is the letter (Om) meant by the term Ak$ara (lit. letter), or is the 
supreme Lord Himself meant? 

Opponent: As to that, in such passages as "The enumeration of letters" 
(groupofl4aphorismsofParuni), the word akara is familiarly used in the 
sense of letter, and it is not reasonable to ignore common usage. Another 
Upani~ad also says, "Om is certainly all this" (Ch. II. xxiii. 3), where for the 
sake of meditation, the letter Om is declared to be identical with all. 
Therefore the word aksara is used to indicate a letter. 



Veddntin : This being the position, we say, the supreme Self is meant by 
the term Aksara. 

Why? 

"Because of holding everything up to and including space", because of 
supporting all created things from earth to space. For it is first stated in the 
text, "That remains woven and transfixed on unmanifested space" (Br. III. 
viii. 7), that all created things counting from earth, which are comprised 
within the three divisions of time, are supported by space; and then this topic 
of Aksara is mooted through the question, "On what is space woven and 
transfixed?" (ibid.). The conclusion is also made in a similar way: "On this 
Ak$ara, 0 Gargi, is the (unmanifested) space woven and transfixed" (Br. III. 
viii. 11). This supporting of everything including space is not possible for 
anything else but Brahman. As for the quotation, "Om is surely all this" (Ch. 
II. xxiii. 3), that must be understood in the sense' of praise, since Om is a 
means for the realization of Brahman. Therefore Ak$ara must be the 
supreme Brahman according to its derivative sense of that which does not 
decay and that which pervades all, conveying thereby the ideas of etemality 
and omnipresence. 

Opponent : It may be argued that, if by the fact of supporting all things 
including space be meant the dependence (i.e. inclusion) of the effect on the 
cause, then this holds equally good in the case of those (Sarhkhyas) who 
stand by Pradhana as the cause. So how can aksara be known to be Brahman 
from the fact of supporting all things ending with space? 

Veddntin : Hence the answer comes: 

4 And 8T that act (of supporting) si#Tfitaq owing to the mention of 
mighty rule. 




H. And that act of supporting is possible for God only, owing to the 
mention of His mighty rule. 

That act, viz the supporting of all things ending with space, belongs to 
God alone. 

Why? 

"Owing to the mention of the mighty rule." For we hear of the mighty rule 
in the text: "Under the mighty rule of this Ak$ara (Immutable), 0 Gargi, the 
sun and the moon, are held in their positions" etc. (Br. III. viii. 9). And this 
mighty rule is a work of the supreme Lord. The insentient Pradhdna cannot 
exercise this mighty rule; for insentient things like earth etc. do not have this 
mighty rulership over pot etc., though they are the material causes of these. 

wnwifa iirii 

12. And on account of the exclusion from being other entities. 

For the further reason of exclusion from being other entities, it follows 
that Brahman alone is the meaning of the term Ak$ara, for it is Brahman 
alone and nothing else to whom belongs the act of holding all things ending 
with space. 

Opponent: What is meant by this "Exclusion from being other entities"? 

Vedantin : What is meant is this: Anyabhava means the state of being 
something else; the exclusion from being so is anyabhava-vyavrtti. The text, 
"This Ak$ara, 0 Gargi, is never seen, but is the witness, It is never heard, but 
is the hearer; It is never thought of, but is the thinker; It is never known, but 
is the knower" (Br. III. viii. 11), distinguishes Ak$ara, supporting all things 
including space, from everything else that is different from Brahman and 



That can be presumed to be the meaning of the term Ak$ara. In that text, the 
attributes of not being seen and so on can be ascribed to Pradhana also, but 
Pradhana cannot be said to be a witness and so on, since it is insentient. 
From the denial of any difference in the Self, as stated in, "There is no other 
witness but this" (ibid.), it follows that the embodied soul too, conditioned 
by limiting adjuncts as it is, cannot be the meaning of Ak$ara. And this is so 
for the additional reason that all conditioning factors are denied by the text, 
"without eyes or ears, without the vocal organ or mind" (Br. III. viii. 8), for 
there can be no embodied soul unless there be conditioning factors. Hence 
the definite conclusion is that the supreme Brahman alone is the Ak$ara. 


Topic 4: THE OBJECT OF SEEING 



gft_w4_a:4gkql I Owing to the mention as an object of seeing q: He (is 
meant). 

13. From the menani;«n as the object of the act of seeing (ikrana), it 
follows th<r? the supreme Self is meant. 

Doubt : Starting with the sentence, "0 Satyakama, this very Brahman that 
is (known as) the inferior and superior, is but this Om. Therefore the 
illumined soul attains either of the two through this means (or symbol) 
alone" (Pr. V. 2), it is stated, "Again, anyone who meditates on the supreme 
Puru$a (allpervading entity) with the help of this very syllable Om, as 
possessed of three letters, becomes unified in the sun, consisting of light. He 
is lifted up to the world of Brahman (Hirai)yagarbha) by the Soma mantras" 
(Pr. V. 5). The doubt arises whether in this sentence the meditation on the 
supreme Brahman or the inferior Brahman is enjoined; for the topic is started 
with, "attains either of the two through this means alone", and both are 
relevant. 



Opponent: Now then, the conclusion is that it is the inferior Brahman. 

Why? 

Because in the text, "He enters into the sun consisting of light, he is lifted 
up to the world of Brahman by the Sdm mantras" (ibid.), a result, limited in 
space, is vouched for the knower of that Brahman. It is not reasonable that 
the knower of the supreme Brahman should attain a spatially limited result, 
inasmuch as the supreme Brahman is omnipresent. 

Objection : On the assumption that the inferior Brahman is meant, does 
not the qualification "the supreme Purusa" (ibid.) become inappropriate? 

Opponent : This creates no difficulty, for in comparison with the gross 
body (of Virit), Hiratmyagarbha (the inferior Brahman) is justly higher. 

Veddntin : This being the position, it is said: The supreme Brahman Itself 
is taught here for meditation. 

Why? 


Because the ob j ect of iksana is mentioned. Ikrana means seein g . And 
ik: ati-karma means the ob j ect covered by the act of seein g . The Puru$a that 
is to be meditated on is presented in the complementar y portion of the 
passa g e as an ob j ect of seein g : "From this total mass of creatures ti.e. 
Hiraln vag arhha ). he sees the supreme Puru$a that penetrates everythin g and 
is hi g her than the hi g her ( Hira pvag arbha ) " ( Pr. V, 5 ) . Of the two acts of 
seein g and meditatin g, the ob i ect of meditation may even be an unreal thin g: 
for a fanciful thin g may as well be the content of meditation : but in this 
world , the content of seein g is constituted bv a real thin g . Therefore we 
understand that it is the supreme Self Itself , formin g the content of full 
realization , that is mentioned as the ob j ect of ik . cana. And that very Self 
whose identit y is revealed bv the Upani$adic terms-"the Supreme" , "all- 
pervadin g Entity "-is presented here as the ob i ect of meditation. 10 


Opponent : Is not the supreme Puru$a mentioned in connection with the 
meditation, whereas the "higher than higher" is mentioned in connection 




































































with the seeing? So how can the one be recognized as identified with the 
other in another context? 


Veddntin : The answer is this: As to that, the two terms, supreme (para) 
and PuruR are common to both the texts (about seeing and meditation). And 
it cannot be said that the term, "total mass of creatures (jivaghana)" alludes 
to the supreme all-pervading entity that is relevant and is meant for 
meditation, in which case alone this other all-pervading entity (Puru$a) that 
is to be seen can be "higher than that high one". 

Opponent: Who is it then that is mentioned by the term, "total mass of 
creatures"? 

Veddntin : The answer is: A mass is a formation (like a lump of salt); a 
formation constituting an individual being is this "total mass of creatures". 
By the term "total mass of creatures" is meant a limited manifestation of the 
supreme Self in the likeness of an individual being (viz Hiraiiyagarbha) 
which is comparable to a lump of salt. And this is conjured up by limiting 
adjuncts, and it is higher than the sense-objects and the senses. 

(About the meaning of "He sees the supreme Puru$a, higher than the 
higher jivaghana") someone else says: By the term jivaghana (lit. a mass of 
creatures) is meant here the world of Brahman that is higher than the other 
worlds and is indicated in the immediately preceding sentence, "By the 
Selma mantras he is lifted to the world of Brahman" (ibid.). The world of 
Brahman can be a mass of creatures (by a transference of epithet), because 
all the individual beings delimited by their senses become united in 
Hiraiyagarbha, inhabiting the world of Brahman and identifying Himself 
with the totality of organs. Therefore it is understood that the supreme Self 
that is transcendental to that world and is the object of "seeing", is also the 
object of "meditation". The epithet "supreme all-pervading entity" becomes 
appropriate on the acceptance of the supreme Self alone, for the supreme 
Self alone can be the supreme allpervading entity, beyond which there can 
be nothing else, as stated in another Upani$ad, "There is nothing higher than 
Puru$a (the all-pervading entity). He is the culmination, He is the highest 
goal" (Ka. I. iii. 11). When the Upanisad makes a distinction by saying, 
"This very Brahman, that is known as the inferior and the superior, is but this 



Om" (Pr. V. 2), and adds just after this that the supreme Puru$a is to be 
meditated on with the help of Om, it makes us understand that the supreme 
Puru$a is none other than the supreme Brahman. The declaration of the 
result, viz freedom from sin as contained in, "As a snake becomes freed from 
its slough, exactly in a similar way he becomes freed from sin" (Pr. V. 5), 
indicates that the supreme Self is the object of meditation here. As for the 
objection that one who meditates on the supreme Self can have no spatially 
limited result, our answer is this: The result vouchsafed for one meditating 
on Brahman with the help of Om, as constituted by three letters, is the 
attainment of the world of Brahman, and the emergence subsequently of 
complete realization by stages. In this way this is meant for leading to 
emancipation by stages, so that there is nothing faulty. 


Topic 5: DAHARA (THE SMALL SPACE) 



qV: The small space (in the heart) r: owing to subsequent reasons. 

14. The small space (dahara fkdsa) is Brahman, on account of the 
subsequent reasons. 

Doubt : In the Chando g va UpaniSad it is stated . "Then in the small palace 
of the shape of a lotus that stands in this city of Brahman , there is a small 
s pace. That which is inside that 1 1 is to be sought for, that is surely to be 
inquired into" etc. (VIII. i. 1). Now the doubt arises with regard to the small 
space, heard of in this sentence as existing within the small lotus of the heart, 
as to whether it is the material space (called subtle ether), or the individual 
Self identified with the intellect, or the supreme Self. 


Why should the doubt arise? 













Owing to the presence of the words Ikafa and city of Brahman. Since this 
word akasa is seen to be used in the senses of both material space and the 
supreme Self, therefore the doubt arises as to whether the material space or 
the supreme Self should be the small space here. Again the doubt arises: Is 
some individual soul meant by the word Brahman, occurring in the phrase 
"city of Brahman", and is this city called the city of Brahman owing to its 
being owned by that individual? Or is the city called so because it belongs to 
the supreme Brahman? That being the case, the doubt arises as to who 
among the two-the individual Self and the supreme Self -is the owner of the 
city and is (referred to as) the small space. 

Opponent : As to that, the conclusion to be arrived at is that the material 
space is meant here by the term small (space), for that is the conventional 
meaning; and that space is called small (dahara) in relation to the small place 
where it subsists. Again the relationship, as between the illustration and the 
thing illustrated, that is established (here) between two portions of space by 
dividing it into the internal and the external in the text, "The space that is 
within this heart is of the same magnitude as the space outside" (Ch. VIII. i. 
3), is possible for the material space alone. Within that space can be 
"included heaven, earth, and the rest" (ibid.); for the material space, in its 
characteristic of providing space, is but one. Or the conclusion may be that 
the individual soul is the small space, for the term used is the city of 
Brahman. This body that is the city of the individual soul is called the city of 
Brahman, because it is earned by the soul's own work, the soul being called 
Brahman in a figurative sense. For the supreme Brahman can have neither 
identity with nor ownership of the body. Now the owner of a city, as for 
instance a king, is seen to inhabit a portion of the city. And the individual 
soul is limited by the mind and the mind is generally seated in the heart. 
Therefore this existence within the heart must be a fact in the case of the 
soul alone. The smallness too is appropriate for it, since it is compared (in 
the Upanisad) to the tip of a goading stick (Sv. V. 8). And the comparison 
with space etc. is possible when the intention is to speak of it as identical 
with Brahman. Besides , the small space is not spoken of in the UpaniSad as 
the thin g to be sou g ht for or to be known ; for in the clause . "That which is 
inside that" (Ch. VIII. L 1 ). the little space is presented as the abode of that 
(su preme Self ) which is inside.12 






















Veddntin : Hence we offer this answer: The supreme Lord alone can be 
small Space here; and neither the material space nor the individual soul can 
be so. 

Why? 

"On account of the subsequent reasons", because of the reasons occurring 
in the complementary portion of the passage. Thus with regard to the small 
space that is to be sought for, the objection is raised: "Should anyone ask 
him (i.e. the teacher), What is it that exists here that has to be sought for and 
that has to be known?'" (Ch. VIII. i. 2). And then this text occurs by way of 
an answer: "He (i.e. the teacher) should say, 'The Space that is within the 
heart has the same magnitude as the space outside. Both heaven and earth 
are verily included within it 1 " etc. (Ch. VIII. i. 3). Lest the Space in the text 
should be understood to be small owing to the smallness of the lotus (of the 
heart), the teacher repudiates that smallness through a comparison with the 
familiar material space, which fact leads us to understand that the teacher 
thereby denies the small Space to be the material space. Though the word 
space conventionally means the material space, still the suspicion about its 
(i.e. the small space) being the material space is ruled out, since the material 
space itself cannot be adopted as a standard of comparison for itself. 

Opponent: Did we not say that even the same space can be adopted as the 
standard of comparison and the thing compared by an assumption of internal 
and external difference? 

Veddntin : This cannot be so. To resort to a fanciful difference betrays a 
failure to discover any other way out. Besides, even for a man who would 
explain the relation between the thing compared and the standard of 
comparison by fancy ing an imaginary difference between them, the internal 
space cannot have the vastness of the external space since the former is 
limited. 

Opponent : Is it not impossible even for the supreme Lord to have the 
magnitude of material space, since another Vedic text declares, "Greater than 
space" (S.B.X. vi.3.2)? 



Vedi ntin : That is no fault, for the sentence is meant to deny the smallness 
arising from the delimitation by the lotus (of the heart). It is not meant to 
affirm that much of magnitude only; for the sentence will lose its unity of 
purport if it should mean both (magnitude and negation of limitation). 
Again, a portion of space, fancied to be different and contained within the 
lotus, can never include heaven, earth, etc. within it. And the characteristics 
of being the Self and free from sin etc. that are mentioned in the text, "This 
is the Self free from sin, old age, death, sorrow, hunger, and thirst, and 
possessed of true desire and true resolve" (Ch. VIII. i. 5), are not possible for 
the material space. Although the word Self applies to the individual soul as 
well, yet this possibility for the soul is overruled by other reasons. The 
smallness created by the enveloping lotus cannot be denied in the case of the 
individual soul, for it is delimited by conditioning factors and it is compared 
to the tip of a goading stick (Sv. V. 8). 

Opponent : All-pervasiveness can be asserted as having been intended to 
be spoken of for the individual soul since the real intention is to speak of it 
later on as non-different from Brahman. 

Veddmin : Then it is reasonable to assert all-pervasiveness etc. as having 
been directly intended to be spoken of for that very Brahman in identity with 
which the all-pervasiveness etc. are sought to be declared about the 
individual soul. 

It was also argued that, since in the term "the city of Brahman", the city is 
suggestively determined by the individual soul, this soul should be accepted 
as the master of the city, who, just like a king, inhabits a part of that city. To 
this we say that this body is spoken of as the city of Brahman just because it 
belongs to the supreme Brahman Itself, that being the primary meaning of 
the term Brahman. Brahman has a relation even with this city, it being the 
place for Its realization as is mentioned in such Upani$adic passages as, 
"From this total mass of creatures (that I-liranyagarbha is) he (the aspirant) 
sees the supreme Puru$a that has entered into every body and is higher than 
the higher (Hiranyagarbha)" (Pr. V. 5), "He that is this Purup exists within 
the hearts in all the bodies" (Br. H. v. 18). Or the idea may be that it is in the 
city of the individual soul itself that Brahman is perceived directly, just as 



Vi~nu is on a Lilagrdma (symbol). Again the text says, "Just as the results of 
work get exhausted here, so also the results of good works get exhausted in 
the other world" (Ch. VIII. i. 6), which expresses the finitude of the results 
of work; and then it is said, "Again those who depart after knowing here the 
Self and these true desires (existing in It) get freedom of movement in all the 
worlds" (ibid.), which reveals the infinite result accruing from the 
knowledge of the small Space under • discussion. Thereby the text suggests 
that the small Space is Brahman. 

It was also stated that the small Space is not heard of in the passage as an 
object to be sought for or to be known, it having been presented as a 
receptacle of that (supreme Self) which is inside. In answer to this we say: If 
Space be not presented as an object to be sought for, then the revelation of 
the nature of Space in, "The Space that is within the heart is of the same 
magnitude as the space outside" (Ch. VIII. i. 3), becomes inappropriate. 

Opponent : Is not even this mentioned by way of revealing the existence 
of something inside? For the objection is first raised thus: "Should anyone 
ask him, 'The small palace that there is of the shape of a small lotus within 
this city of Brahman and the small space that there is within that lotus, what 
can it be that exists there and that has to be sought for and known?' " (Ch. 
VIII. i. 2). And then in the course of meeting the objection, the illustration of 
space is first resorted to and then it is shown that heaven, earth, etc. exist 
within it. 

Vedintin : This is not so; for if that had been the case, the purport would 
have been that the heaven, earth, etc., which exist within, are to he sought 
for and known. But the comple lnentary portion of the passage does not 
conform to this interpretation. For there the Space, that is the receptacle, 
serving as the repository of heaven, earth, etc., is alluded to in, "Within this 
are included all desirable things. This is the Self free from sin" etc. (Ch. 
VIII. i. 5); and then in the passage, "Those who depart without realizing here 
the Self and these true desires" etc. (Ch. VIII. i. 6), the concluding portion of 
the text shows, by using ca in the sense of "and", that the things to be known 
are the Self, that is the repository of the desires, and the desirable things that 
are held therein (in the Self). Accordingly, it is understood that even in the 



beginning of the text, the small Space, seated in the lotus of the heart, is 
spoken of as the entity to be known together with the earth etc., as well as 
the true desires included within It. And in accordance with the reasons 
adduced, this must be the supreme Lord. 

ntawii m % vi for m\ 

tfft-TT+TT9j From the facts of going and the use of the word; ffW ff 
likewise (it is) seen; fWTrij indicating mark q as well (is present). 

15. From the facts of going and the use of the word (Brahmnaloka), (it 
follows that the small Space is Brahman); likewise it is seen in other 
Upani~ads, and an indicatory mark is also present. 

It has been said that the small Space is the supreme Lord, on account of 
the subsequent reasons. Those very subsequent reasons are being elaborated 
now. The small Space is the supreme Lard for this further reason that in the 
text, complementary to the passage relating to the small Space, occurs this 
sentence, "These creatures, though going everyday to this Brahmaloka (the 
world that is Brahman), do not know It" (Ch. VIII. iii. 2), where the act of 
going and the term used furnish a proof of the supreme Lord alone. In that 
sentence, the small Space under consideration is referred to by the phrase 
Brahmaloka, and then it is related that the individual souls, mentioned by the 
term creatures, approach towards It; thereby it is shown that the small Space 
is Brahman. Similarly in other Upani$adic texts, we come across the 
approach of creatures towards Brahman, as for instance in, "0 amiable one, 
then (during sleep), the individual becomes merged in Existence (Brahman)" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 1). In common parlance also, it is said with regard to a man in 
deep sleep, "He has become Brahman, he has gone to the state of Brahman". 
Similarly the term Brahmaloka, used there with reference to the small Space 
under consideration, rules out the assumptions about the individual soul and 
the material space, and makes us understand the term small Space in the 
sense of Brahman. 



Opponent : May not tha term Brahmaloka mean the world of Brahma 
(Prajapati)? 


Veddntin : It may, if the compound Brahmaloka is explained as having 
been formed with an implied sixth case-ending (meaning the world of 
Brahman); but if it is explained in the sense of apposition, viz "the world that 
is Brahman", then it will lead us to the supreme Brahman alone. And this 
very fact of repairing to Brahmaloka everyday is an indication that the 
(compound) word Brahmaloka is to be explained in the sense of apposition; 
for it cannot be imagined that the creatures go everyday to the world of 
Brahma otherwise called Satya-loka. 



q And owing to holding in place; arMofis the glory 3wq: being noticed 
aT as pertaining to this One. 

16. And owing to the fact of holding (the worlds) in place, (the small 
Space must be God); for this glory is noticed (in other texts) as pertaining to 
Him. 


Also from the fact of holding (the worlds) in place, it follows that the 
small Space is the supreme Lord. 

How? 


The start is made with, "within this is a small Space" (Ch. VIII. i. 1); and 
then after presenting the analogy of (material) space, everything is said to be 
included in that (small) Space. With regard to this very entity, again, the 
word Self is used and It is taught to be endowed with such characteristics as 
freedom from sin and so on. And lastly that self-same Space , which still 
continues to be the sub i ect-matter of the UnaniSadie tonic , is mentioned in . 
"Then , ag ain , that which is the Self is a dam , a reservoir ( an impounder ) to 
prevent the worlds from g ettin g mixed up" t Ch. VIII. iv. 1L In that passa ge. 























the word Vidbrti means an impounder ( which holds in position ), it bein g 
placed in a p position with the word Self ( which is in the nominative case ); 
for the suffix ktic is used , accordin g to g rammar , in the nominative sense. As 
a dam is an impounder of an expanse of water , so that the valuable cultivable 
fields may not lose their demarcations , so this Self is a dam , a reservoir , to 
prevent these worlds , divided accordin g to the different planes , viz the 
bodil y plane etc. , and the castes , colours , etc. , from g ettin g intermixed. 13 
Thus it is shown that this small Space under consideration has the glory of 
holding (the worlds) in position. And this glory is known from another text 
to pertain to the supreme Lord alone: "Under the mighty rule of this 
Immutable, 0 Gargl, the sun and moon are held in their positions" etc. (Br. 
III. viii. 9). Similarly in other passages, that definitely speak of the supreme 
Lord, it is heard, "It is the Lord of all, It is the ruler of all beings, It is the 
dam that serves as the boundary to keep the different worlds apart" (Br. IV. 
iv. 22). Accordingly, on account of this fact of holding in place, this small 
Space must be the supreme Lord. 



17. And because of familiar use. 

For this additional reason, it is the supreme Lord that is spoken of by the 
text, "Within this is a shall Space" (Ch. VIII. i. 1): The word space is well 
known to denote the supreme Lord, as is evident from such uses as, "That 
which is known as Space is the manifester of name and form" (Ch. VIII. 
xiv), "All these beings surely originate from Space" (Ch. I. ix. 1). But the 
word space is never found in use in the sense of the individual soul. And 
although the material space is very often meant by that word, still it was 



































pointed out by us that it cannot be accepted because of such reasons as the 
impossibility of the same thing becoming the illustration and the thing 
illustrated. 

mwk « mm, 

"-<-qV" Owing to the allusion to the other q: he (is meant), >lf 4q if such 
be the argument, q not so, aRgs" owing to impossibility. 

18. If it be argued that the other one (viz the individual soul) should be the 
small Space, since it is alluded to (at the end), then not so, for that is 
impossible. 

Op ponent : If on the stren g th of the complementar y portion , the small 
S pace is understood to mean the supreme Lord , then the other , viz the 
individual soul also , is alluded to in the complementar y portion in . "He said . 
' Now then , that .is the Self which is this serene one ( samprasada ) that raises 
itself up from this bod y, and realizin g itself as the supreme Li ght, attains its 
own real nature. 14 This is the Self" (Ch. VIII. iii. 4). Since the word 
samprasada (complete serenity) is used in another Upanipdic passage in the 
sense of deep sleep, it can call to mind the soul in that state in the text under 
consideration, but not anything else. Similarly, it is possible for the 
individual soul alone, existing in the body, to rise up from the body. Just as 
air etc., existing in space, can emerge from space, similar is the case here. 
Moreover, though the word space is not familiarly used in the world in the 
sense of the supreme Lord, still in such texts as, "That which is called Space, 
is surely the manifester of name and form" (Ch. VIII. xiv), the word is 
accepted as standing for the supreme Lord because of its association with the 
characteristics of God. In a similar way, it can be used for the individual soul 
as well. Accordingly, from the fact that the other (namely individual soul) is 
alluded to (at the end of the text), it follows that it is the individual soul that 
is referred to in the passage, "The small Space that there is within it" (Ch. 
VIII. i. 1). 




























Vedamin : This cannot be so. 


Why? 

"Because this is impossible" , for the individual soul , identif ying itself with 
such limitin g ad j uncts as the intellect , cannot be compared with space : nor 
can such qnullities as freedom from sin and so on be possible for somethin g 
identif ying itself with the limitations of conditionin g factors. This was 
elaborated under the first aphorism ( L iii. 14 1 , But the sub j ect is mooted 
ag ain for removin g additional doubts. Another aphorism also will be 
advanced later: "And the allusion is meant for a different purpose"la (I. iii. 
20 ). 


HUH 

(Space is the soul) vffu;7 owing to subsequent reference, 4q if this be the 
objection, oiifci-igvq:- that is the revealed real nature, q rather. 

19. If it be argued that the small Space is the individual soul, because of 
the subsequent reference to it (in the same chapter), then we say : Rather it is 
spoken of there in its own revealed nature. 



Opponent: The assumption about the individual soul, that had arisen from 
the allusion to some one other than Brahman, has been dismissed on the 
ground of impossibility. Here again, "on the strength of the subsequent 
references "-on the strength of the utterance of Prajapati-that very assumption 
about the individual soul is being revived like the resuscitation of the dead 
by the sprinkling of nectar. In that very context (Ch. VIII) the assertion 
started with is that the Self possessed of the attributes of freedom from sin 
and so on . as stated in . "The Self that is free from sin" ( Ch. VIII. vii. 1 ). is to 
be sou g ht for and known ; and then by sa ving. "This PuruSa that is seen in 
the eve is the Self" ( Ch. VIII. vii. 4 ). the witnessin g individual soul , seated in 
the e ve, is pointed out as the Self. Then after alludin g to that very individual 






















































soul a g ain and a g ain , by saving. "I shall explain this very one to you over 
ag ain" ( Ch. Vlll. ix. 3-8 ), the individual soul is explained under var ying 
conditions ( b v Pra ja pati to Indra ) in the texts . "The one that moves about in 
dream , adored (b v ob j ects con j ured up b v past tendencies ), is the Self" (Ch. 
VIII. x. 1 ). and "At the time when one sleeps in such a wav that one g ets all 
one's senses withdrawn and hence becomes wholly serene , and does not see 
dreams . 16 then that is the Self" 17 (Ch. VIII. xi. 1). For that individual soul 
are shown such attributes as freedom from sin and so on in, "This one is 
immortal, fearless, this one is Brahman" (ibid.). Again, after the perception 
of some defect (by Indra) in the state of sleep, as stated (by him) in, "Alas, 
this (sleeping) man does not certainly know himself now (in sleep) as 'I am 
this', nor does he know those beings! (But he attains annihilation, as it were. 
I do not find anything desirable here)" (ibid.), (in reply) Prajapati first says, 
"I shall explain this very one to you over again, and not anything other than 
this" (Ch. VIII. xi. 3); then he denounces all association with the body; and 
lastly he says, "This samprasada (wholly serene one) raises itself up from 
this body and realizing the supreme light, attains its own real nature. It is the 
highest Puru$a" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3), where Prajapati shows that the individual 
soul itself, that has risen up from the body, is the highest Puru$a. Therefore 
the attributes of the supreme Lord are possible in the individual being. 
Accordingly, the individual soul is spoken of in the text, "The small Space 
inside that". 

Veddntin : Should anybody argue like this, then one should tell him: 
(Even there) "the individual soul is rather spoken of in its own revealed 
nature". The word "rather" is used for repudiating the opponent, the idea 
implied being that even on the strength of the subsequent text, the 
assumption of the individual soul is not possible here. 

Why? 

Because even there the individual soul is intended to be presented in its 
real revealed nature. "The individual soul in its own revealed nature" means 

the soul of which the true nature has become manifest , the term "individual 
soul" bein g retained even after enli g htenment , in continuation of the earlier 
( conventional ) uses in the text. The sense conveyed is this: The Witness . 













































sugg ested throu g h the word "eve" , is first pointed out bv the text . "He that is 
in the eve" (Ch. VIII. vit 4 ) . Then in the Brahmama . presentin g the analo gy 
of the water in a plate'" (Ch. VIII. viii), this very one is freed from the 
conception of identity with the body. And this very one is repeatedly alluded 
to for the purpose of explanation with the utterance, "I shall explain this very 
one to you" (Ch. VIII. ix. 3). Then after presenting the states of dream and 
deep sleep, it is said, "realizing the supreme Light, attains its own real 
nature" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3), where this individual soul is explained in its true 
nature, which is Brahman, but not in its nature as an individual. The supreme 
Light that is mentioned in the Upani~ad as -the thing to be realized is the 
supreme Brahman. That Brahman has such characteristics as freedom from 
sin and so on; and that is the real nature of the individual being, as shown in 
such texts as, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii-xvi), but not so is the other nature 
(as that is) conjured up by limiting adjuncts. The individuality of the 
individual persists so long as, like the elimination of the false idea of a man 
superimposed on a stump of a tree, he does not eradicate ignorance 
expressing itself as the world of duality and does not know that Self as "I am 
Brahman" -the Self that has no change and is eternal and a witness by nature. 
But when the individual is roused from the assemblage of body, senses, 
mind, and intellect by the Upani$ad which makes him understand, "You are 
not the assemblage of body, senses, and intellect, nor are you a 
transmigratory being. What are you then? That which is truth-the Self of the 
nature of pure Consciousness—that thou art", then he realizes the Self that 
has no change and is eternal and a witness by nature, and then that very 
individual rises above its identity with the body and the rest to become the 
Self Itself-unchanging, eternal, and a witness by nature. This is declared in 
such Upani$adic texts as, "Anyone who knows that supreme Brahman 
becomes Brahman indeed" (Mu. III. ii. 9). And that is the soul's supremely 
real nature by virtue of which it attains its essential stature after rising above 
the body. 

Opponent : How, again, can the attainment of its true nature by itself be 
possible for that entity which is unchanging and eternal? In the cases of gold 
and other things, whose distinct characteristics remain unmanifest owing to 
coverings over their real nature arising from contact with foreign matters, 
there may be such a thing as the attainment of their own nature by becoming 















purified by addition of salts. Similarly in the case of the stars whose light 
becomes dimmed in the daytime, there may be an attainment of their real 
nature at night when the dimming factor is removed. But in the case of the 
eternal Light that is Consciousness Itself, there can be no overpowering by 
anything, since just like space, It can have no contact with anything, and 
since this contradicts common experience. The individual soul's nature 
comprises seeing, hearing, thinking, and knowing. And that is ever in 
evidence as a patent fact even for the soul that has not risen up from the 
body. For all beings live and behave in this world by seeing, hearing, 
thinking, and knowing; otherwise life comes to a standstill. If that nature be 
attainable only by the soul that has risen above the body, then the behaviour 
noticed earlier stands contradicted. Hence what does this rising up from the 
body mean, and in what does the attainment of the real nature consist? 

Vedantin : In reply to this we say: Before the dawn of discriminating 
knowledge, the individual soul's nature of Consciousness, expressing 
through seeing etc., remains mixed up as it were, with the body, senses, 
mind, intellect, sense-objects, and sorrow and happiness. Just as before the 
perception of distinction, the transparent whiteness, constituting the real 
nature of a crystal, remains indistinguishable, as it were, from red, blue, and 
other conditioning factors; but after the perception of distinction through the 
valid means of knowledge, the crystal in its latter state is said to attain its 
true nature of whiteness and transparence, though it was exactly so even 
earlier; similarly in the case of the individual soul, remaining 
indistinguishably mixed up with such limiting adjuncts as the body etc., 
there springs up a discriminatory knowledge from the Upani$ads 
constituting his rising from the body (consciousness); and the result of the 
discriminatory knowledge is the attainment of the real nature, its realization 
of its nature as the absolute Self. Thus unembodiedness or embodiedness for 
the Self follows respecttively from the fact of discrimination or non¬ 
discrimination, as stated by the mantra, "Bodiless in the midst of bodies" 
(Ka. I. ii. 22), and by the Smrti, "The supreme Self, 0 son of Kunti, neither 
acts, nor is affected though existing in the body" (GYta, XIII. 31), which 
mention the absence of any such distinction as embodiedness or 
unembodiedness. Therefore the individual soul continuing in the state of its 
unmanifested nature, owing to the absence of discriminatory knowledge, is 



said to have its real nature manifested when discriminatory knowledge 
dawns. For manifestation or non-manifestation of any other kind is not 
possible for what is one's own nature, just because it is intrinsic with one. 
Thus the difference between the individual soul and the supreme Lord 
springs from ignorance alone, but not from the things themselves, for both 
are equally free from attachment etc. (as well as partless and so on) like 
space. 

Opponent: How again is this to be known thus? 

Veddntin : Because Prajapati first teaches, "The Being that is seen in the 
eye" (Ch. VIII. vii. 4), and then says, "This is immortal and fearless. This is 
Brahman" (ibid.). If the wellknown seer in the eye, who is thought of as the 
Witness, were different from Brahman, characterized as immortal and 
fearless, then that seer would not have been put in apposition with the 
fearless and immortal Brahman. Nor is the reflection in the eye indicated 
here by the word eye, for that will lead to a prevarication on the part of 
Prajapati. So also at the second stage, Prajapati told Indra, "This one that 
moves about in dream receiving the adoration (of women and others) is the 
Self" (Ch. VIII. x. 1). Here also none other than the Witness, the Being in the 
eye, pointed out at the first stage, is indicated; for the introduction is made 
with the words, "I shall explain this very one to you over again" (Ch. VIII. 
ix. 3). Moreover, a man after waking up speaks thus: "I saw an elephant in a 
dream today; I do not see it now". What he repudiates here is what he saw, 
whereas he cognizes the identity of that very witness thus: "I myself who 
saw the dream now see the things of the waking state". Similarly at the third 
stage, Indra says, "This one does not certainly know himself now (in sleep) 
as I am so and so', nor does he know these beings" (Ch. VIII. xi. 2), where 
the absence of particularized cognition is shown in the state of sleep, but the 
Witness is not denied. As for the statement of Indra, "There it undergoes 
extinction, as it were" (Ch. VIII. xi. 1), that too is made with regard to the 
wiping out of particularized cognition, but not in the sense of the 
annihilation of the knower; for another Upanigad declares, "For the knower's 
function of knowing can never be lost, because it is immortal. (But there is 
not that second thing separate from it which it can know)" (Br. IV. iii. 30). 
Similarly at the fourth stage, Prajapati starts with, "I shall explain this very 



one to you over again, and nothing different from it" (Ch. VIII. xi. 3), and 
then he adds, "O Maghavan (i.e. Indra), this body is surely mortal" etc. 
(VIII. xii. 1), by which elaborate statement is denied any relationship with 
such conditioning factors as the body. And then by saying, "It.attains its own 
nature" (VIII. xii. 2), Prajapati reveals the individual being, called 
samprasada (one wholly serene in sleep) in its identity with Brahman, and 
thereby he does not show the individual soul to be anything other than the 
supreme Brahman which is immortal and fearless by nature. 

Some, however, think that if the idea sought to be imparted be that of the 
supreme Self, then it is improper to drag in the individual soul in connection 
with the text, "I shall explain this very one to you over again" (Ch. VIII. ix. 
3); so they consider the meaning of that sentence to be this: "I shall explain 
to you again, this very one, that is the Self, pointed out at the 
commencement of the topic (Ch.-VIII. vii. 1), and that is possessed of the 
characteristic of freedom from sin and so on". If their interpretation be 
accepted, the Upani$adic word "this", which naturally relates to something 
proximate, becomes distantly related, and the phrase "over again" becomes 
meaningless, for what is stated at the earlier stage is no longer repeated at 
the later. Again, if Prajapati starts wih the promise, "I shall explain this very 
one to you", and then explains a fresh entity (viz the soul in dream and 
sleep) at every stage, earlier than the fourth, then he will be open to the 
charge of prevarication. Therefore (the correct interpretation is this): After 
the unreal aspect of the individual being, conjured up by ignorance etc., 
tainted by many such defects as agentship, experiencership, love, hatred, 
etc., and subject to many evils, has been eliminated, the opposite aspect, viz 
the reality that is the supreme Lord, possessed of the characteristics of 
freedom from sin and so on, becomes revealed, just as the rope etc. are 
revealed after eliminating the snake etc. (superimposed on them through 
error). 

There are other doctrinaires , as also some of our Vedantins . who think that 
the creature aspect is real. This Sariraka text t i.e. this book , discussin g the 
embodied soul ) is be g un as a protest a g ainst all of them who are o p posed to 
the complete realization of the oneness of the Self. The theme of this 
Sariraka text is this: The supreme Lord is but one-unchan ging, eternal . 




















absolute Consciousness ; but like the ma g ician He a p pears diversely throu gh 
Maya, otherwise known as Avid va (ig norance ) . 19 Apart from this there is no 
other Consciousness as such. 


As for the assumption of the individual soul in a text relatin g to the 
su preme Lord , and its subsequent repudiation bv the aphorist under the 
a phorism . "Should not the other one be the small Space , since that is alluded 
to? No . for that is impossible" ( I. iii. 18 ). etc. , his intention there is this. 
When he affirms the difference between the supreme Self and the individual 
soul his idea is this; "Just as some surface and dirt are fancied on the sk y, so 

the idea of the individual soul , op posed thou g h it is to the supreme Self , is 
su perimposed on the supreme Self which is by nature eternall y pure . 
intelli g ent , free , everlastin g, unchan ging, one , and unattached : I shall remove 
that superimposition later on . and demolish all theories of duality with the 
help of texts that have the su p port of lo gic, and then establish the unity of the 
Self". But he will not establish the difference of the individual soul from the 

su preme Self , thou g h he sim pl y restates the po pular notion of the difference 
of the individual that is fancied throu g h i g norance : and he will show that 
when such a procedure is adopted , the in j unctions about rites and duties . 
based on this reiteration of instinctive a g entship and experiencershi p. do not 
become contradicted. But under the aphorism . "But the instruction follows 
from the point of view of the vision a g reein g with the scriptures , as in the 
case of Vamadeva" ( I. i. 30 ) etc. , he shows that the conclusion to be arrived 
at about the purport of the scriptures is only the unity of the Self. It was also 
shown bv us how the conflict with the in j unctions about the rites and duties 
is to be resolved bv a reference to the distinction between the enli g htened 
and unenli g htened men.20 

<RIW: m 

a And ar;q-aaq: for a different purpose qzrf: (is the) reference. 



































































































20. Moreover, the reference (to the individual soul in the complementary 
passage) is meant for a different purpose. 

Opponent : It was pointed out earlier that in the passage, "Nov then that 
which is this samprasdda (wholly serene one)" etc. (Ch. VIII. iii. 4), 
occurring in the complementary passage of the topic of the small Space, the 
individual soul is referred to. That reference will become meaningless if the 
small Space is explained to be the supreme Lord, for then there will be no 
meditation on the individual soul, nor will this be an instruction about some 
distinct attribute of the. small Space under discussion (which is different 
from the individual). 

Vedi ntin : Hence follows this answer: This reference to the individual 
soul has a different purport; it is not meant merely to determine the nature of 
the individual. 

What does it determine then? 

It determines merely the nature of the supreme Lord. 

How? 

The individual bein g, referred to by the term samprasdda . pla ys the role of 
the supervisin g director of this ca ge, made up of the body and senses , durin g 
all the wakeful dealin gs; and then movin g in the nerves , it experiences the 
dreams created by the impressions of that wakeful state. Then becomin g 
tired and desirous of havin g some refu ge, it rises above ( i.e. g ets detached 
from ) its identity with both kinds of bodies (g ross and subtle ), ap proaches in 
the sleep state the supreme Li ght, that is the supreme Brahman referred to b y 
the term Space , and g ettin g rid of the particularized co g nition attains its true 
nature. The supreme Li g ht which it has to a p proach as also its own nature in 
which it becomes established , is the Self possessed of the attributes of 
freedom from sin and so on ; and this Self is to be meditated on. Thus this 
reference to the individual soul for that purpose becomes lo g ical even for 
those who stand by the supreme Lord .21 

























































acam: Owing to the mention of smallness in the Upani$ad ' if such be the 
objection, that has been already answered. 

21. If it be argued that from the Upanifadic mention of smallness, (the 
small space must be the individual being), then this has been repudiated 
earlier. 

And the objection was raised that the smallness of Space that is heard of 
in the passage, "The small Space that is within it" (Ch. VIII. i. 1), cannot 
properly fit in with the supreme Lord, whereas it quite befits the individual 
soul that is comparable to the tip of a goading stick (Sv. V. 8). A refutation of 
that is called for. This objection was disposed of under the aphorism, "If it be 
objected that the supreme Self is not taught here because of the smallness of 
the abode and because of its being referred to as such (by the Upani$ad), 
then we say, no; for this is done for the sake of contemplation as is seen in 
the case of space" (I. ii. 7), where it was shown that .a limitation for the 
supreme Lord is possible from a relative standpoint (for the sake of 
meditation). The aphorist here suggests that the refutation made there is to 
be applied here as well. 

Moreover, this limitation is repudiated by the Upanigad itself by resorting 
to a comparison with the famliar space in the passage, "The Space within 
this heart has the same magnitude as this (material) space" (Ch. VIII. i. 3). 


Topic 6: ACTING IN ACCORDANCE 




apl!: Because of the fact of acting in accordance ffm and the word "His". 

22. Because of the fact of acting (i.e. shining) in accordance, and because 
of the use of the word "His", (the Light mentioned in the Mun0aka Upani~ad 
must be Brahman). 

Doubt : The Upani$ad reads thus: "There the sun does not shine, nor the 
moon or the stars; nor do these flashes of lightning shine there. How can this 
fire do so? Everything shines in accordance with His shining; by His light all 
this shines diversely" (Mu. II. ii. 10; Ka. II. ii. 15). Now the doubt arises 
with regard to this text as to whether the entity in whose wake all these shine 
and through whose light all this shines diversely, is some natural lustrous 
matter or the conscious Self. 

Opponent : When in such a predicament, the conclusion is that it is some 
lustrous matter. 

Why? 

Because what is denied is the shining of lustrous entities like the sun etc., 
it being well known that the luminaries-moon, stars, etc.-do not shine in the 
daytime when the bright sun keeps shining. Similarly it can be understood 
that the luminous substance in whose presence all these moon, stars, and so 
on cease to shine together with the sun, must be by nature a luminary. And 
"shining in accordance with another" also fits in with the assumption of a 
natural luminary; for action in imitation is seen in the case of things of the 
same nature, as for instance, in the act of following someone going ahead. 
Therefore it must be some natural light. 



Vedantin : Under such circumstances we say: It must be the conscious 
(self-luminous) Self. 

Why? 

Because of "acting in accordance", which phrase means imitation. This 
shining in imitation, as implied in, "He shining, all this shines", fits in 
exactly if the conscious Self is accepted; for the conscious Self is mentioned 
in the Upani$ad as "luminous by nature and having true resolve" (Ch. III. 
xiv. 2). For it is not a matter of experience that the sun and other things shine 
in accordance with some other shining substance. The luminaries like the 
sun etc. are similar in nature, so that they do not have to depend on some 
other luminary, in accordance with which they have to shine. For a lamp 
does not shine in imitation of another lamp. As for the assertion that acting 
in imitation is seen in the case of things of the same nature, there is no such 
hard and fast rule; for action in imitation is seen in the case of dissimilar 
things as well. For instance, a red-hot ball of iron simulates fire and burns 
things in accordance with the fire's doing so. Or take another illustration: 
The particles of earth blow about as the wind does so. By saying, "Because 
of the fact of acting in accordance", the aphorist suggests "shining in 
accordance with". And by the words "and" "His", the aphorist refers to the 
fourth line of this verse, "by His light all this shines diversely", where also it 
is stated that the shining of the sun etc. is caused by the Lord, and thereby he 
points to the conscious Self. Besides, they (the followers of the 
Brhadaraoyaka Upani$ad) read thus of the conscious Self: "Upon that 
immortal Light of lights the gods meditate (as longevity)" (IV. iv. 16). It is 
against experience and a contradiction in terms to say that the luminaries like 
the sun etc. shine variously with the help of another light, for one light dims 
out the other. Or it may be that it is not merely the diverse shining of the sun 
etc., enumerated in the text, that is caused by Him. 

What else is illuminated by Him? 

From the text "all this" ( Mu. II. if. 10 ). used without any reservation , it 
follows that the manifestation , noticed in the cases of all these names , forms . 
actions , and results , is caused by the existence of the li g ht of Brahman , just 
as the revelation of all kinds of colour is caused by the existence of the li ght 
















of the sun etc. And by the use of the word "there" in the verse , "There the 
sun does not shine" etc. (ibid. ), it is shown that the sub j ect-matter alread y 
under consideration is to be accepted. The sub i ect-matter that is bein g dealt 
with in the verses . "On which are strun g heaven and the earth and 
interspace" t Mu. 11. ii. 5 ) etc, is Brahman. Subsequently also , it is said . "In 
the supremely bri g ht sheath22 is Brahman , free from taints and without 
parts. It is pure . 23 and It is the Light of lights. It is that which the knowers of 
Brahman realize" (Mu. II. ii. 9). To show how Brahman is the Light of lights 
occurs the verse, "There the sun does not shine" etc. (Mu. II. ii. 10). 

It was also argued by the opponent: Just as it can be held that no other 
light can shine in the presence of the sun, so also the denial of illumination 
by the luminaries like the sun etc. is possible if there be some other entit y 
which is itself a luminous principle. As to that , it was shown by us even 
earlier that He ( the Lord ) alone and nothin g else can be that luminous 
principle." It is proper to deny that they can have any illumination even in 
respect of Brahman : for whatever is perceived is perceived throu g h the li ght 
that is Brahman , but Brahman is not perceived throu g h any other li ght. It 
bein g b v nature selfefful g ent.25 On a contrary supposition alone, the sun and 
the rest could illumine It. Brahman reveals all others, but Brahman is not 
revealed by them, as is shown in the Upanisadic texts, "It is through the light 
of the Self that one sits, (goes out, works, and returns)" (Br. IV. iii. 6), "It is 
imperceptible, for It is never perceived" (Br. III. ix. 26), and so on. 



aTfq a Moreover, Mit (it is) mentioned in the Smrti. 
23. Moreover, (this aspect) is mentioned in the Smrti. 



























































Moreover, in the Smrti this aspect is mentioned as belonging to the 
conscious Self, as in the Gita, "That the sun illumines not, nor the moon, nor 
fire; that is my supreme abode, going whither they return not" (XV. 6), and 
"The light which residing in the sun illumines the whole world, that which is 
in the moon and in the fire-know that light to be mine" (XV. 12). 

Topic 7: THE MEASURED ONE 



qZTcqqq From the very term slf W: the measured One (is Brahman). 

24. From the term itself it follows that the measured One is the supreme 
Self. 

Doubt: It is mentioned in the Upani$ad, "The Being (Purina) of the size of 
a thumb, resides (in the heart) within the body" (Ka. H. i. 12), as also, "The 
Puru$a, who is of the size of a thumb, is like a light without smoke. He is the 
ruler of the past and the future. He exists today and He will exist tomorrow. 
This is That" (Ka. II. i. 13). The doubt arises as to whether the Puru$a of the 
dimensions of a thumb, that is mentioned there, is the individual soul 
identified with the intellect or the supreme Self. 

Opponent: Now then, the conclusion to be drawn from the teaching about 
the dimensions is that the soul identified with the intellect is spoken of. For 
the Upani$ad cannot present the supreme Self, which is infinite in length and 
expanse, as having the size of a thumb. But from some point of view, it is 
possible for the soul, which is identified with the intellect, to be of the size of 
a thumb since it has its limiting adjuncts. This is borne out by Smtti also: 
"After that, Death dragged out forcibly from the body of Satyavan, the 
Puru$a, of the size of a thumb, which was tied with a noose and was 



completely at his mercy" (Mbh. III. ccxcvii. 17). The supreme Lord cannot 
certainly be dragged out forcibly by Death. Thereby it is established in that 
text that the transmigratory soul has the size of a thumb. And it is that very 
soul that is spoken of here. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say: The supreme Self alone can be 
the Puruga here of the size of a thumb. 

How so? 

From the text itself, viz "the ruler of the past and the future", inasmuch as 
none other than the supreme Lord can be the absolute ruler of the past and 
the future. And "This is That" (Ka. II. i. 3) refers back to the subject-matter 
inquired into (by Naciketas). It means: "The Brahman that is asked about is 
this indeed." The entity enquired about in the text, "Tell (me) of that entity 
which you see as different from virtue, different from vice, different from 
cause and effect, and different from the past and future" (Ka. I. ii. 14), is 
Brahman. "From the term itself" (in the aphorism) means this: From the term 
ruler (ifdna) used in the Upani$ad, it is gathered that the supreme Lord is 
meant. This is the idea. 

How, again, is the all-pervasive supreme Self taught as possessed of size? 

With regard to this we say: 




m 


q But atM from the point of view of f existence within the heart t~-aTf 
(the scripture) being concerned with human beings. 

25. But the size is spoken of from the point of view of existence within the 
heart, the scripture being concerned with human beings. 



Just as the space within a section of a bamboo can be spoken of as being a 
cubit in length, so from the point of view of existence within the heart, it can 
be asserted that though the supreme Self is all-pervasive, It has the size of a 
thumb. For the supreme Self, which as a matter of course transcends all 
limitations, cannot really have the size of a thumb. And it was pointed out 
that because of the words "ruler" etc., none other than the supreme Self can 
be acceptable here. 

Opponent : Since the hearts have no definite size as they differ from 
creature to creature, the possession of a size like that of a thumb is not 
possible even from that point of view. 

Veddntin : Hence the answer is being given, "The scripture being 
concerned with human beings". Though the scripture speaks impersonally, 
still it postulates the competence of human beings only, because human 
beings are able, desirous (of results), and not debarred, and because there are 
texts about initiation with the sacred thread. This is elaborated under the 
topic of the characteristics of a competent person (Jai. Su VI. i. 25-28). 
Moreover, the human body has a definitely proportionate size; and human 
hearts have ever the definite size of the (respective) thumbs. Accordingly, 
the scripture being concerned with men, it is but logical that the supreme 
Self should have the size of a thumb from the standpoint of Its residence 
within the human heart. It was argued, that from the teaching of the size and 
on the authority of the Smrti, it is to be understood that the entity, that has 
the size of a thumb, is the transmigrating soul. That is being repudiated. It is 
taught here that the very soul that transmigrates and has the size of a thumb 
is Brahman, just as it is done in the text, "That is the Self. That thou art" (Ch. 
VI. viii. 7). For the texts of the Upani$ads assume two forms: sometimes 
they determine the nature of the supreme Self and sometimes they teach the 
identity of the soul, conditioned by the intellect, with the supreme Self. That 
being the fact, what is taught here is the identity of the soul, conditioned by 
the intellect, with the supreme Self, and not that anything has the size of the 
thumb. This fact will be clarified later on (by the Upani$ad) in the verse: 
"Puru$a, the indwelling Self of the size of a thumb, is ever seated in the 
hearts of men. With a masterly control of the senses, one should separate 



Him from one's body like stalk from the Munja grass. Him one should know 
as self-effulgent and changeless" (Ka. IT. iii. 17). 

Topic 8: GODS 



rfZaifq (Beings) higher even than -these 7rFTAT: (according to) 
Badarayaipa erg" for that is possible. 

26. Badardyana thinks that beings higher than these (men) (are also 
qualified for knowledge), for that is possible. 

It has been said that the Upani$adic text about the size of a thumb stands 
justified in relation to the heart, the scriptures being concerned with human 
beings. In connection with that it is said: It is true that the scriptures sanction 
the competence of human beings (for religious deeds); but with regard to the 
knowledge of Brahman there is no hard and fast rule that the sanction in this 
field (also) is for the human beings alone. The teacher Badarayaiia thinks 
that the scriptures sanction the competence even of those divine beings and 
others who exist above these men. 

Why? 

Because that is possible : for they too have the desire etc, that confer the 
competence. Amon g those factors , even the g ods can have the hankerin g for 
liberation , caused by a reflection on the impermanence etc, of divine g lor y. 
included as it is within the ran g e of created thin g s. Similarly they can have 
the abilit y, since it can be g athered from the Vedic verses , corroborative 
passa ges, anecdotes , mytholo gy, and common belief , that they have bodies. 
Moreover , the y are not debarred anywhere. Nor can it be said that they are 
barred out by the scriptures about the investiture with the sacred thread : for 
investiture is meant for the study of the Vedas , and to them the Vedas get 








































revealed spontaneousl y ( owin g to their study in previous births ) . Besides , the 
scriptures speak of their followin g the vow of brahmacharva26 for the 
mastery of knowledge as in, "Indra lived with Prajapati for one hundred and 
one years under the vow of brahmacarya" (Ch. VIII. xi. 3), "Bhrgu, well- 
known son of Varuip, went to his father Varupa with the prayer, 'Teach me 
Brahman, 0 venerable sir'" (Tai. III. i), and so on. Though the competence 
for rites is denied in, "There is no competence for the gods, since they have 
no gods (to sacrifice to)", "The rsis have no competence for the performance 
of rites, since they have no rgis (to perform to)" (Jai Su. VI. i. 6-7), still that 
non-competence does not apply to knowledge (of Brahman). For when Indra 
and others are admitted to be qualified for knowledge, they do not have to do 
anything to another set of Indra and the rest, nor have Bhrgu and other rfis to 
do to another set of Bhrgu and others belonging to the same lineage. So who 
can deny the competence for knowledge even for the gods and others? And 
even in the case of the gods, the Upani$adic text about the soul of the size of 
a thumb is not improper when their own thumbs are kept in view. 




fktq: A contradiction iN in the matter of rites, wfa 4q if such be the 
objection, not so aAw-Rficiii:;Zdqc since in the Vedas are seen the 
assumption of many bodies. 

27. If it be objected that this (corporeality of the gods) will give rise to a 
contradiction (in the matter of the gods being associated) in rites, then we 
reply : Not so, for in the Vedas are noticed the assumption of many bodies. 

Opponent: It may come to this: If by admitting bodies etc. for the gods, it 
is argued that they have competence for knowledge, then just because they 
are possessed of bodies, it has to be admitted that like the priests and others, 
Indra and others also take part in the rites by their physical proximity. In that 
case an incompatibility will crop up in the matter of rites; for Indra and 
others are not seen to form parts of the rites by their physical presence, nor is 















that possible, for Indra cannot be bodily present at many sacrifices at the 
same time. 


Veddntin : That incongruity does not arise. 

'Why? 

Because of the assumption of many bodies-because even for a single god 
there is the possibility of assuming many bodies simultaneously. 

How is this known? 

"Because this is noticed in the Vedas". Starting with the (question of 
Sakalya), "How many gods are there?" (Br. III. ix. 1), the number of gods is 
determined (by Yajnavalkya) to be "three hundred and three, and three 
thousand and three". And when the question is put, "Which are those?", the 
Upatli$ad states, (through Yajnavalkya), "These are but the manifestations of 
them; but there are only thirty-three gods" (Br. III. ix. 2), by which statement 
the Upani$ad shows that each god can have many forms simultaneously. 
Similarly the thirtythree are shown to be included in six; and so it goes on 
till to the question, "Which is the one God?" the answer is given, "The Vital 
Force (Hiranyagarbha)" (Br. III. ix. 9). By showing here the identity of all 
the gods with Hiranyagarbha, the Upani$ad reveals that Hiranyagarbha 
Himself has multiple forms simultaneously. Similar is the Smrti text, "0 best 
of the line of Bharata, the Yogin, after attaining the mystic power (of Yoga), 
should create many bodies for himself, and should move over the earth 
through them all. He should acquire (desirable) objects through some of 
them, and through some he should perform hard austerities. And again, he 
should withdraw them all like the (setting) sun withdrawing its rays". This 
and other Smrtis of a similar purport show how even the Yogins, who 
succeed in acquiring the mystic powers of becoming subtle etc. (at will), can 
have association with many bodies at the same time. Therefore it goes 
without saying that the gods, dowered with perfection from birth, will have 
these multiple bodies. And since it is possible to assume many bodies, each 
god can divide himself into multifarious bodies to be associated 
simultaneously with many sacrifices. And yet they cannot be seen by others 
because of their power of remaining invisible. Thus it all stands justified. 



Or the second part of the aphorism may be explained otherwise (to mean, 
"because various ways of taking part in a sacrifice are in evidence"). Even 
for embodied beings it is seen that in the matter of injunction for becoming 
associated with rites etc., there are various ways of doing so. Sometimes no 
single embodied being is associated simultaneously with many rites; for 
instance, when feasts are offered by many, no single Brahmarja is fed 
simultaneously. But sometimes even a single embodied being becomes 
associated with many acts, as when a single Brahmaoa is greeted by many 
saluting him at the same time. Similarly, here also, since sacrifices consist in 
parting with one's things in honour of somebody, many can offer their 
respective things in the name of a single embodied god. Thus nothing stands 
in the way of the gods, so far as rites are concerned, even though they have 
bodies. 

qpk In relation to the Vedic words (the contradiction will arise) 'r 4q if 
such be the objection, not so, am:Wq" since from that it arises{-at34falRTzl 
as is proved by direct revelation and inference. 

28. If it be objected that this contradicts the validity of Vedic words, then 
not so, for the universe arises from this, which fact is proved by direct 
revelation and inference. 

Opponent : Granted even that even if bodies are assumed for gods, no 
contradiction will arise in the matter of their association with rites, still a 
contradiction will arise as regards the authority of the Vedic words. 

How? 

It is on the basis of the inborn relationship between words and their 
meanings from the very beginning that the validity of the Vedas has been 
established by saying, "Because of independence of other means of proof" 
(Jai Su. I. i. 5). According to the present view, however, although a god, 
assumed to have a body, can enjoy the oblation at many sacrifices by virtue 




of his possession of mystic power, still owing to embodiedness, he will be 
subject to birth and death just like ourselves. And this will militate against 
the validity of the Vedic words, which is based on the perception of an 
eternal relation between eternally present words with their eternal meanings. 

Vedantin: This contradiction, too, does not exist. 

Why? 

"Since from this it arises "-because the universe, consisting of the gods and 
others, originates verily from the Vedic words. 

Opponent : Under the aphorism, "That from which this universe has its 
birth etc." (I. i. 2), has it not been ascertained that the universe originates 
from Brahman? How can it be said here that it originated from words? 
Moreover, even if it be conceded that it arose from the Vedic words, how can 
this obviate the contradiction as regards the (eternality of) words, since such 
objects denoted by words as the Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Vi§vedevas, 
Maruts, will be non-eternal, just because those objects had an origin? And if 
the gods be impermanent, who can avoid the non-eternality of Vedic words 
"Vasus" etc. which signify those gods? For it is a well-known fact in the 
world that it is only after a son is born to Devadatta that the boy is given 
some such name as Yajfiadatta. Accordingly, this (embodiedness of the gods) 
is a real obstacle against the (validity of) words. 

Veddmin : No, since the relationship between such generic words and 
their meanings, as for instance cowhood and cows, is seen to be eternal (i.e. 
beginningless). Not that the distinguishing characteristics (i.e. genus) of the 
cows etc: are created afresh each time these cows etc. are born; for the 
individual forms of substances, qualities, and actions alone can have origin, 
but not so their distinguishing (general) characteristics (i.e. genus). And 
words are connected with the general characteristics and not with the 
individuals; for the individuals are infinite, and it is impossible to 
comprehend the relation of a word (with all of them). Thus, even though the 
individuals are born, the distinctive general characteristics (or features) 
remain constant, so that this creates no difficulty about the eternality of the 
words cow etc. Similarly it is to be understood that even though the birth and 



death of individual gods be admitted, still their distinctive general 
characteristics (or features) have no beginning. Accordingly, this does not 
militate in any way against (the etemality of) the words Vasus and so on. As 
for the distinctive general characteristics of a particular deity, they are to be 
gathered from what is known from the embodiedness etc. mentioned in the 
mantra and corroborative portions of the Vedas. And like the words 
commander etc. the words Indra etc. are used in relation to certain ranks etc. 
Accordingly, those who occupy the respective positions are called by the 
various names-Indra and so on. Thus there is nothing contradictory. And this 
origination from words is not spoken of in the sense of birth from a material 
cause, as it is done in the case of origination from Brahman. 

In what sense then? 

When there is first a word without a beginning and bearing a meaning 
with which it has an eternal connection, then only is there a possibility of an 
individual cropping up which can be fit to be referred to by that word. In that 
sense it is said to originate from a word. 

How, again, is it known that the universe originates from words? 

"From direct revelation and inference." By "direct revelation" is meant the 
Vedas , since they do not depend on any other means of knowled g e for their 
validity. By "inference" is meant the Smrti . for it depends on other sources 
for its validity. Both of them show that creation was preceded by words , as is 
declared in the Veda: "Brahma created the g ods b v ( thinkin g of ) the word 
ete : He created men and others by the word asr g ram : b y the word indavah 
the manes ; b v the word tirahpavitram the planets : b v the word asavah the 
h ymns : b v the word vifvkni the fastras : and bv the word abhisaubha g ah the 
other bein g s"27 (1 L. V. IX. 62 ) . Similarly elsewhere in "He (Pra japati), 
brou g ht about the union of speech (the Vedas ) with the mind"28 tBr. I. ii. 4), 
and other places where the Vedas speak of creation as preceded by words. 
The Smrti also speaks similarly: "In the beginning was projected by 
Prajapati, the eternal speech in the form of the Vedas which have no 
beginning and end, which are divine (i.e. run through the traditional line 
alone), and from which proceed all activities." And even this projection of 
speech is to be understood in the sense of starting of a cycle of transmission 















































through a line of teachers and students; for no other kind of projection is 
possible for the Vedas which are without any beginning and end. Similar is 
the text: "In the beginning, He, the great Lord, created from the words of the 
Vedas alone, the names and forms of the creatures and promoted religious 
activities" (Manu. I. 21); "In the beginning, He created from the Vedic words 
themselves, the names of all beings, and all actions separately, as also the 
separate modes of life". Besides, it is a matter of experience to us all that 
when one has to accomplish some desired thing, one remembers first the 
word denoting it and then accomplishes it. Similarly it is understood that in 
the case of Prajapati also, when He was intent on creation, the Vedic words 
flashed in His mind before creation and then He created the things according 
to these. In confirmation of this occur the Vedic texts, such as, "He uttered 
the syllable bhuh, He created the earth" (Tai. Br. II. ii. 4.2), which show the 
creation of the worlds-the earth and the rest-from the words bhuh and so on, 
coming to His mind. 

What particular nature of the words is meant when it is asserted that 
creation comes out of the words? 

The y f the g rammarians ) sa y, it is the sphota.29 If it be held that creation 
proceeds from the letters ( constitutin g the words ), then since the letters have 
a be g innin g and an end , the view that the g ods sprin g from the eternal words 
will have no le g s to stand on. And the letters have a be g innin g and an end . 
since at every fresh utterance the y ap pear differently. That is why even when 
a person is not in si ght, it can be clearly determined from the sound of the 
readin g itself , e. g . "This is Devadatta's readin g " or "This is Ya i fiadatta's 
reading ". This a p prehension of the difference in respect of the letters is not 
false inasmuch as no other a p prehension emer g es to contradict this. Nor is it 
reasonable to hold that the meanin g is g athered from the letters ; for the 
letters cannot convey the meanin g individuall y, since this is not universall y 
trueSO Nor can there be a comprehension of a totality of letters , for the 
letters occur in sequence.al It may be argued that the last letter, in 
association with the impressions of the letters uttered earlier in succession . 
will convey the meanin g . But that cannot be . for j ust as it is seen in the case 
of smoke l that it can make the lire known when it is itself known ). so a word 
can convey its meanin g only when it Is itself known in association with the 


































































impressions (as havin g a connection with its meanin g like smoke with fire )_. 
But It is not possible to a p prehend the successive letters in association with 
the impressions of earlier letters , since impressions are not perceived directl y 
Ib v sense-or g ans ) . If it be ar g ued that the last letter , in association with the 
impressions made known throu g h the effect ( viz the comprehension of 
meanin g or memor y) resultin g from the impressions , will convey the 
meanin g, that also cannot be.82 For even memor y, produced by the 
impressions , proceeds in a sequence.83 Accordin gly, a word is of the nature 
of a sphofa. The a p prehension of the letters individually sows the seed in the 
mind in the form of impression , which attains full maturity on the 
ap prehension of the last letter , and then becomin g the ob j ect of a sin gle 
ap prehension , it flashes in. the mind without further effort.84 This singleness 
of apprehension, again, is not a form of memory (of a collection of letters), 
for the letters being many, they cannot form the content of a single 
perception. And this sphota has no beginning, since its identity is 
recognizable at every utterance (of the word). The idea of difference springs 
from the difference of the letters. Therefore the universe of actions, agents, 
and results, standing for the meaning of word, emerges from the eternal 
word, conceived of as a sphota, which indicates it. 

Vedintin : But the venerable Upavarsa is of opinion that the letters 
themselves constitute the words. As for the ob j ection raised earlier that the 
letters have a be g innin g and an end , the re pl y is that it is not so , for they are 
reco g nized as "Those are the same as these". If it be ar g ued that the 
reco g nition is caused bv similarit y, as in the case of hair etc. , the answer is 
that it cannot be so . since the reco g nition cannot be repudiated bv any other 
means of knowled g e. If it be said that the reco g nition arises from (the unit y 
of) s pecies , the answer is'that it cannot be so . since the individual letters are 
reco g nized to be the same. The reco g nition would have been caused bv the 
s pecies if the letters were co g nized as separate entities like the individual 
cows at the time of each fresh utterance. But this is not so . for it is the letters 
themselves that are co g nized to be the same at each fresh utterance , the 
reco g nition takin g the form . "The word cow is uttered twice" , but not . 
"There are two words 'cow' ", It may be ar g ued that it was pointed out 
earlier that owin g to differences in pronunciation , letters also a p pear 
differentl y, as is obvious from a distinction that can be made between the 














































































































readin g s of Devadatta and Ya i iiadatta from a mere hearin g of the sound of 
readin g . The answer will be this: Granted that there is a definite reco g nition 
of the identit y ( of the letters ), the peculiarity about the ( distinction of ) letters 
that is perceived can be explained as arisin g not from their intrinsic 
difference ( at every fresh utterance ), but from the difference in the 
instruments of their expression. For letters are expressed by the association 
and dissociation of air , proceedin g u pward and strikin g ag ainst such parts of 
the mouth as the palate etc. Besides , to make reco g nition possible , s pecies 
for the ( individual ) letters will have to be posited even by one who holds the 
view that individual letters differ ( at different ) utterances. With re g ard to 
these species , a g ain , one will have to admit differences created b v 
conditionin g factors. That bein g so . it is better to sav86 in conformity with 
the law of parsimony (or brevity of imagination) that the ideas of difference 
arise with regard to the individual utterances of the letters owing to the 
presence of conditioning factors, and the recognition (of identity) arises from 
their intrinsic nature. This very fact of the recognition of identity is a bar 
against any idea of difference in relation to each utterance of any letter. 
When a letter, for instance "g", is the same, how can it possibly become 
divergent at that very same time to different people uttering it 
simultaneously as highpitched, low-pitched, medium-pitched, or nasal, non¬ 
nasal, and so on? 

Or the true position is this: This cognition of difference is created by the 
sound and not the letter itself; and hence there is no fault. 

Opponent: What is this sound? 

Veddntin : This sound is that which reaches the ear of a distant hearer 

without a p prisin g him of any distinction of letters . but invests the letters with 
such differences as hi g h or low pitch etc. in his ears as he a p proaches nearer. 
The difference in loudness etc, is a creation of this sound and not of the 

letters as such ; for the identity of each letter is reco g nized at every fresh 
utterance.86 From this point of view, the highness etc. of pitch gets a basis; 
otherwise, from the fact that each letter, when uttered, seems to be different, 
though it is recognized as the same, one would have to fancy that the 
difference is created by the air coming in contact with or getting 








































































disconnected from the vocal apparatus. But since these conjunction and 
disjunction are not perceived by the ear, the distinction created by them will 
fail to be associated with the letters, and hence this cognition of pitches-high, 
low, etc .-will be baseless. Moreover, the view does not deserve consideration 
that though the letters are recognized to be the same, still they differ in 
accordance with the differences in pitch; for anything continuing to be the 
same does not differ simply because of the difference in something else, for 
instance a species is not considered to be different owing to the difference in 
the individuals (of the species). Besides, inasmuch as the comprehension of 
meaning can follow from the letters, it is useless to assume a sphota. 

Opponent: I do not assume, but I directly perceive the sphota, for it flashes 
suddenly in the intellect imbued with the impressions of letters occurring 
successively. 

Vedamin : No, for that comprehension also relates to letters. The single 
concept "cow", arising after the comprehension of letters individually, 
emerges on the basis of the letters as a whole and not any other thing (called 
sphota). 

How can this be known? 

Even in this comprehension, the letters "c" etc. (of cow) are in evidence, 
but not the letters "d" etc. For if a sphofa, which is different from the letters 
"c" etc., had formed the content of that comprehension, then the sphota 
would have ruled out "c" etc. just as it does "d" etc. But facts are otherwise. 
Accordingly, this idea of identity is based on the memory of letters alone. 

Opponent: Did we not say that the letters being many, they cannot form 
the basis of a single concept? 

Vedantin : To that we say: Even many things can be the basis of a single 
concept as is seen in the cases of a line, a forest, an army, ten, hundred, 
thousand, etc. As for the idea that "cow" is a single word, that is only a 
secondary idea of unity applied to the letters "c o w" because of their being 
related to the same object "cow", as is the case with the ideas of forest, army, 
etc. 



Here the opponent says: If the letters alone, as a group, form the basis of a 
single concept and become a word, then in such instances as jdra 
(paramour)-rdja (king), kapi (monkey)pika (cuckoo), the words should not 
be comprehended distinctly, since the very same letters appear in different 
places in a different order. 

Vedamin : To this we say: Although all the letters in a word are cognized, 
still like the ants entering into the idea of a line in a definite order, the letters 
enter into the notion of a word in their definite sequence. That being the 
case, there is nothing illogical in understanding a particular word arising 
from a particular arrangement, even though the letters may be the same. At 
the time of apprehending the meaning of words from the use of them b y 
older people , these letters , as uttered in a certain sequence , were understood 
(b v a child ) to be related to certain meanin gs: so at the time of his own 
dealin g s with them ( b y the child ), the letters a p prehended individuall y, 
ap pear in that very sequence in the intellect which g roups them to g ether , and 
thus they invariably convey those particular senses. In this wa v, those who 
hold by the letters have the law of parsimony in their favour , whereas those 
holdin g the theory of sphota have to face the difficulties of re j ectin g an 
obvious thin g and acceptin g somethin g fanciful.37 Besides that theory 
assumes too many things, inasmuch as these letters, apprehended in 
succession, reveal a sphofa, and then that sphofa reveals the meaning. Or 
even if it be the case that the letters are quite new at every fresh utterance, 
still to explain the recognition of identity, species of letters has to be 
admitted perforce. And thus the process of expression of meaning, that has 
been shown in the case of letters, has to be transferred to the species (by 
them). 

Thus (since the letters are permanent and convey meanings, therefore) it 
involves no contradiction to say that the gods as individuals emerge from the 
eternal words. 










































SRI IfH WCTJ m 

q And am trq from this very fact fqil (follows) eternality. 

29. And from this very fact follows the eternality (of the Vedas). 

The beginninglessness of the Vedas stands established (in the Purva- 
Mimamsa) from the fact that no independent author of the Vedas is 
remembered (i.e. known). That having been taken for granted, the admission 
of the origin of individual deities from the Vedic words, raised a doubt about 
the non-etemality of the words themselves. This was refuted by saying, "For 
the universe arises from this" (I. iii. 28). Now this fact of eternality of the 
Vedas, that stands unaffected, is being confirmed by saying, "And from this 
very fact follows eternality." "From this very fact"-from the fact that the 
universe of gods and others, having a definite form, emerges from the Vedic 
wordsit is to be understood that the Vedic words also are eternal. So also the 
mantra text, "The sacrifices, having acquired the fitness to receive the Veda 
as a result of the earlier performance of good deeds, received it as it had 
already existed among the T,sis" (It. V. X. lxxi. 3), shows the acquisition of 
the Veda that had already existed. Veda-Vyasa also writes in his Smrti thus: 
"In days of yore, the great ryis received through austerities, with the 
permission of the self-born One, the Veda, together with the anecdotes, that 
had remained withdrawn during dissolution". 

#n? ii^ii 

q And qTq-Tq-iq owing to the similarity of names and forms aifq even 
WRTft in the revolution of world cycles, aif: there is no qfrqR as is known 
from the Vedas and i':< from the Smrti. 



30. And there is no contradiction, since similar names and forms are 
repeated even in the revolution of the world cycles, as is known from the 
Vedas and the Smrti. 

Opponent : Now it may be granted that, if the individual gods originate 
continuously like individual animals and others, and they disappear in the 
same way, then there will be no discontinuity in the continuance of 
behaviour based on words, meanings of words, and pronouncers of words; 
and thus owing to a continuity of relationship, the defect of Vedic words 
becoming non-eternal can be avoided. But how can this difficulty be avoided 
in the face of the statements in the Vedas and the Smrtis that the whole 
creation, consisting of the three worlds, loses its names and forms and gets 
dissolved without a trace, and it emerges again as a fresh entity? 

Vedamin : As to that this is the answer: (There is no contradiction with the 
beginninglessness of the Vedas), because of the similarity of names and 
forms. (If final dissolution and creation thereafter be believed in) even then 
the beginninglessness of creation has to be admitted. The teacher (Vyasa) 
will establish this beginninglessness in the aphorism, "Moreover, this is 
logical and so it is met with" (II. i. 36). Just as it is the case that although we 
hear of merging and emerging in sleep and waking, still it involves no 
contradiction, because the behaviour in the succeeding waking state follows 
the pattern in the earlier one in the case of the beginningless worldly state, so 
also it is to be understood that the creation and dissolution in a subsequent 
cycle raise no difficulty. And merger and emergence of consciousness in 
sleep and waking states are heard of in the Upani$adic texts, "When a 
sleeping man sees no dream, then he becomes unified in this Prang (i.e. Self) 
Itself. Then the organ of speech, together with all the names, merges in 
Prima; the organ of sight, with all the forms, gets unified in Prang; the organ 
of hearing, with all the sounds, gets united in Prana; the mind, with all the 
thoughts, merges in Prana. And when the soul wakes up, then just as sparks 
dart to all the quarters from a blazing fire, similarly from the Self all the 
organs proceed to their various seats; from the organs emerge the gods, and 
from the gods the sense-objects" (Kau. III. 3). 



Opponem : It may be conceded that in sleep there is no contradiction, 
since the empirical behaviour of other individuals continues unbroken and 
since the man who wakes up from sleep can recollect his behaviour in the 
past. But since all behaviour is eradicated in final dissolution, and since the 
behavour in a previous cycle of creation cannot be called up to memory like 
the behaviour in a past life, the analogy is inapt. 

Vedamin : That defect does not arise; for although the final dissolution 
intervenes to obliterate all empirical behaviour, still by the grace of God, it is 
reasonably possible for divine beings like Hiraiyagarbha to recollect the 
behaviour in an earlier cycle. From the fact that ordinary creatures are not 
seen to recollect their past lives, it does not follow that the fact must be the 
same in the case of divine beings as well. It is noticed that although as living 
creatures all are the same, counting from men to a clump of grass, still the 
obstruction to the manifestation of knowledge, glory, etc. increases 
successively all through the series at each sta ge; similarly when it is 
mentioned more than once in the Vedas and Smrtis that knowled ge, glory. 
etc, become increasin gly more manifest at each successive sta g e countin g 
from men themselves up to Hiraii vag arbha . it cannot be brushed aside as 
non-existent. From this it lo g ically follows , on the analo g y of a man risen u p 
from slee p, that the recollection of the behaviour in a past cycle is possible 
for bein g s like Hirai yag arbha . who had undertaken meditation and work, in a 
su perexcellent wav in a past cycle , who have emer g ed at the be g innin g of 
the present cycle fas a result of past achievement ), and who have been 
vouchsafed the g race of God. In su p port of this here is a Vedic text: 
"Hankerin g after liberation . 1 take refu s e in that self-efful g ent Bein g. 
revealin g Himself in mv intellect that is transformed in the likeness of that 
Bein g Himself , who created Hirau vag arbha in the be g innin g and transmitted 
the Vedas to Him" ( Sv. VI. 18 ) . And Saunaka and others mention that the r 
is. Madhucchandas and others , were the seers of the mantras of the 1 . g -Veda, 
And in the same wa v t it is mentioned b v) Bodhavana and others , with re g ard 
to the ( Kariclas i parts of the other Vedas , that they also were seen b v r.cis. 
Moreover , the Vedas also show that the rites are to be performed with 
mantras after knowin g their seers. For instance , after startin g with . "Anyone 
who conducts a sacrifice or teaches with a mantra , of which he does not 
know the seer , the metre , the deit y, and the a p plication , enters into 

























































































motionless thin g s or falls into hell" , it is said , "Therefore one should know 
these in every mantra". Furthermore , virtuous deeds are en j oined for the 
acquisition of ha p piness bv creatures , and vicious deeds are prohibited for 
the avoidance of sorrow. And likes and dislikes occur in respect of ha p piness 
and sorrow that are known directly or from the scriptures . but not in respect 
of others. Accordin gly, It follows that when successive creations take place 
as the result of virtue and vice , they are brou g ht into existence exactly like 
the previous creation. Bearin g on this is a Smrti text:88 "Among them, the 
creatures that had adopted certain courses of action in a previous creation, 
adopt those very courses when created a g ain and a g ain , they bein g under the 
influence of those works , be they in j urious or non-in i urious . soft or cruel . 
associated with virtue or vice , and true or false. Accordin gly, each has a 
likin g for his respective work." When this universe g ets dissolved , it 
dissolves bv keepin g its latent power intact , and the next creation emer ges 
from that latent power. For otherwise it will all be a matter of chance ( i.e. 
result occurrin g without cause ) . Now we cannot ima g ine diverse powers of 
different kinds.39 That bein g the case , it is to be understood that i ust as the 
relation between the senses and the sense-ob j ects is fixed , so also is fixed in 
this be g innin g less universe , the arran g ement of the succession of masses of 
creatures like g ods , men , and animals , and the arran g ement of castes , sta ges 
of life , virtue and vice , and their results , which ori g inate after intervenin g 
breaks. For like the impossibility of fanc ying ob j ects for the sixth or gan, it is 
not possible to fancy that the pattern of behaviour , as manifested , for 
instance , in the relation between the senses and the sense-ob j ects , can be 
different in every fresh creation.40 Therefore from the facts that the pattern 
of behaviour is the same in every cycle of creation and that the mighty 
divine beings can recollect the lives in the earlier cycles of creation, it 
follows that the particulars in each creation emerge with the same 
(characteristics of) names and forms. No contradiction with the validity of 
the Vedas arises from holding that the universe has the same kind of names 
and forms in its cycles (of final dissolution and fresh creation). The 
similarity of names and forms is shown by Vedic texts and Smitis: "The 
ordainer created the sun and moon, as also heaven, which is an abode of 
happiness, the earth, and interspace, just as before" (R. V. X. cxc. 3), which 
means that the supreme Lord created the universe of sun , moon , etc, like 
what it was in the previous cycle. "Fire desired . V 1 shall become a bestower 









































































































of food to the g ods.' In honour of the (g ods of the stars in the ) Ktttika 
constellation . he41 performed in fire a sacrifice, in which was offered the 
cakes cooked in eight plates" (Tai. Br. III. i. 4.1), where the text shows that 
the sacrificer who offered the oblation in fire in the course of performing the 
sacrifice in honour of the stars, and the fire into which the offering was 
made, had the same name and form. Other texts of a similar purport are to be 
quoted here. There are Smiti texts: "To the seers, bom after the end of 
dissolution, the unborn One imparts those very names and those very visions 
of the Vedic texts as they had before. As the signs of various kinds of the 
different seasons are seen to revolve in order, in that very way all the things 
emerge at the beginning of a yuga (cycle), and whatever forms, peculiar to 
each, the beings had in the past, those exactly conform to these of the present 
beings-the gods being similar to the gods of the past in forms and names" 
(Mbh. Sa., 231.58, 210.17). Such other texts are also to be referred to. 

: \\\\W 

4194-114R Owing to impossibility (of competence) Bq.anfVVargf4wtz~ 
in the Madhu-vidya etc., ifT: Jaimini (asserts) incompetence. 

31. Jaimini asserts (that the gods and others have) no competence (for 
knowledge of Brahman), owing to the impossibility of their competence for 
Madhu-vidya etc. 

The assertion made here that even the gods have competence for the 
knowledge of Brahman is being challenged. The teacher Jaimini holds that 
the gods are disqualified. 

Why? 

Because of the impossibility of their being qualified for the Madhu-vidya 
(meditation on honey, i.e. the successive quin tessences of things), etc. If 
their competence for the knowledge of Brahman be admissible, it should be 











so with regard to MadhuVidyd etc. as well, for they too are equally forms of 
sidyd (knowledge). But this is not possible. 

How? 

According to the text, "This sun is madhu (honey) to the gods" (Ch. III. i. 
1), human beings should meditate on the sun by superimposing the idea of 
honey on it. If the gods and others be accepted as (competent) adorers, then 
which other sun will the (god) Sun adore? Then again, after introducing the 
five kinds of nectar, red and the rest, that exist in the sun, it is said that the 
five groups of gods-Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Maruts, and Sadhyas-subsist on 
these nectars seriatim. After this instruction, it is shown in the text starting 
with, "He who meditates on this nectar thus, becomes one with the Vasus 
themselves and gets satisfied by seeing this nectar, with Fire in his leading" 
(Ch. III. vi. 3), that those who know the honey on which the Vasus and 
others subsist attain the glory belonging to Vasus and others. But whom else 
can the Vasus and others know as the enjoyers of the nectar? And what other 
glory, belonging to the Vasus and others, will they desire to get? So also in 
other places, as for instance in, "Fire is a quarter, Air is a quarter, the Sun is 
a quarter, the Directions are a quarter" (Ch. III. xviii. 2), "Air is indeed the 
place of merger" (Ch. IV. iii. 1), "The sun is Brahman-this is the instruction" 
(Ch. III. xix. 1), where meditations on the deities themselves are enjoined, 
and where those very gods cannot be qualified for undertaking those very 
meditations. So also in such texts as, "These two (ears) are Gotama and 
Bharadvaja: This one is Gotama, and this one Bharadvaja" (B;. II. ii. 4), 
where meditations about the seers are enjoined, and where those very seers 
cannot be qualified for those very meditations. 


For what more reason are the gods disqualified? 




w And WqM owing to the occurrence (of words) mfifh in respect of a 
sphere of light. 

32. Because of the occurrence of the words in respect of a sphere of light. 

To this sphere of li g ht exisitin g in the sk y, that illumines the world b y 
rotatin g throu g hout day and ni ght, are a p plied such words as the sun etc, 
which are indicative of g ods : because in this sense of a mere sphere they are 
familiar in the world and are reco g nized as such in the complementar y 
portion of the text .42 Not that we can understand any connection of this 
sphere of light with any human form, comprising the heart etc., or with 
sentience, desire etc.; for it is known to be insentient like the earth etc. 
Hereby are explained away fire and the rest (which are equally insentient). 

Objection : No such fault arises, since the gods are known to have forms 
etc. from the mantras, corroborative statements, anecdotes, mythologies, and 
common experience. 

Jaimini : No, for there is no such independent means of valid knowledge 
called common experience. Any object that is known through the well- 
known means of knowledge, such as perception, may be said to be known 
from common experience when these means are not applied with careful 
scrutiny. But with regard to the matter under discussion, none of the valid 
means of proof-perception and the rest-can be cited. As for anecdote and 
mythology, they too originate from human beings, and hence must be 
dependent on some other valid means for their authenticity. Vedic 
corroborative statements are also subservient to some injunctions, and hence 
they cannot prove the embodiedness etc. of the gods on the strength of any 
independent meaning. The mantras also, that are applied to rites according to 
the (six) tests of fruti etc. (direct assertion, indicatory mark, syntactical 
connection, context, position, designation), denote things intrinsically 
connected with ritual application; and accordingly it is said that they are not 
the valid means of knowledge of any object. Hence the gods have no 
competence. 





















uri 5 <rortsfa % ii^ii 

$ But vrvr: Badarayar}a (upholds) WMst existence (of competence) f; for 
arfRr exists. 

33. But Badarayana upholds the existence of competence (for the gods); 
for (the requisite for competence) exists (in them). 

Vedantin : The word "but" rules out the o p posite point of view. But the 
teacher Badaravai a thinks that competence does exist even for the g ods and 
others. Althou g h the g ods and others cannot have any competence for 
Madhu-vidva etc. , where the g ods , as also the others , g et intermin g led , still 
they have the possibility of competence for pure knowled g e of Brahman . 
since this competence is dependent on desire , abilit y, non-prohibition , etc. 
Not that competence can be ruled out even where it is possible , j ust because 
it is impossible somewhere else. Even in the case of men , not all of them are 
competent for all thin gs: for instance , the Brahmai as have no competence 
for the Ra i asuva sacrifice. The lo g ic that a p plies there , ap plies here as well. 
Under the topic of the knowled g e of Brahman we come across a Vedic 
indicator y mark revealin g the competence of g ods and others for the 
knowled g e of Brahman: "And whosoever amon g the g ods knew that 
Brahman also became that : and the same with sa g es and men" (Be. I. iv. 10 ): 
as also . "They said . v Let us search for that Self , searchin g for which one 
attains all the worlds and all the desirable thin g s.' Thinkin g thus . Indra . 
amon g the g ods , started out ( for Pra ia pati's place ), and so did Virocana of the 
devils" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1 ) . There is a similar si g n in the Smrti also ; as for 
instance the story of Ya i navalkva and the Gandharva ( Viivavasu ).'$ 

And it was argued: "Because of the occurrence of the words in respect of a 
sphere of light". To this we say: Although the words sun etc. may refer to a 
sphere of light, still from their use in the sense of gods, they present those 
respective gods as possessed of sentience and divine powers; for these words 





























































































are thus used in the mantras and corroborative statements. Being endowed 
with divine power, the gods certainly have the capacity to remain in identity 
with a sphere of light etc., and also to assume various bodies at will. Thus in 
the sentence, "Come Indra, thou ram of Medhatithi" etc., occurring in the 
corroborative statement about Subrahmanya (the priest singing the Sama), it 
is said, "For Indra, in the form of a ram, carried A4edhatithi of the line of 
Kanva" (. acivirizsa Brdhmam, I. 1). In the Smrti also it is mentioned, "The 
sun came to Kunti by assuming a human form." In the case of the earth etc. 
also, sentient presiding deities are admitted as ruling over them, for there are 
such Vedic texts as, "Earth said", "Water said", etc. (S. B. I. vi. 3.2-4). We 
pointed out that in the case of the sun and the rest, the material substances 
like light etc. are held to be insentient, but in accordance with the uses in the 
mantras and the corroborative statements, their presiding deities are held to 
be sentient. 

As for the argument that the mantras and corroborative statements are 
meant to serve some extraneous purpose, so that they have no power to 
reveal corporality etc. for the gods, we say that the existence or non¬ 
existence of a thing is proved from the emergence or not of some valid 
knowledge (from the application of some valid means), and it is not 
dependent on whether it is meant for some other purpose (e.g. rites) or not. 
For instance, a man, travelling for some purpose, certainly perceives the 
existence of grass and leaves that lie on the way. 

To this the opponent says: The analogy is inapt, for there the means of 
perception are directly in contact with the grass, leaf, etc. so that their 
existence becomes known. But here the corroborative statement conveys its 
purport in syntactical combination with another sentence meant as an 
injunction: and hence it cannot be made to mean some existing thing through 
an independent purport of its own. For when a sentence as a whole conveys 
its sense, its component parts are not admitted to have their own independent 
purports as well. Thus from the sentence, "One should not drink wine", 
formed with a negative (not), a single idea, viz the prohibition of drinking, is 
understood from a combination of the three words (not, should drink, and 
wine); but from a connection between the two words "wine" and "should 



drink", one cannot also understand an injunction of the form, "One should 
drink wine". 

Veddntin : To this the answer is: The analo g y is not ina p propriate. It is 
q uite proper that in the matter of prohibition of drinkin g wine , no other 
meanin g can be accepted since the words combine tin a sin g le construction ! 
round a sin g le idea. But in the cases of in j unction and corroboration , the 
words in the corroborative portion do combine to denote some independent 
existin g thin g: and then when the Question of the purpose to be served is 
raised , the v become corroborative of the in i unction as far as possible. Thus 
in the sentence . "One who wants prosperity shall sacrifice a white g oat in 
honour of Air" (Tai. S. II. i. 1 ). the words Air etc, occurrin g in this in j unctive 
sentence are directly strun g u p with the in i pnction itself : but not so are the 
words in the text , "Air is indeed a swift deity. He runs to Air himself with his 
own portion. It is he who brin gs prosperity to this (performer of sacrifice ^ 
( Ibid. ) . Here the words occurrin g in this corroborative sentence are not to be 
construed with the in j unction , for Air or the swift g od cannot be con j oined 
with the in j unctive verb to im ply. "Air is tc sacrifice" , or "the swift g od is to 
sacrifice" , and so on. But they first form into a secondary combination for 
declarin g the nature of Air , and then eulo g ize the in j unction by conve ying 
the idea that this rite has such a distin g uished deity. Accordin gly, wherever 
the meanin g of a subsidiary sentence is known to be true from some other 
valid means of knowled ge, the corroborative statement proceeds to serve its 
purpose by way of recapitulatin g ( or recallin g! that meanin g .44 But 
wherever such a meanin g runs counter to other means of knowled g e the 
corroborative statement proceeds by wav of an interpretation in the sense of 
an attribute45 In the absence of both ( contradiction and non-contradiction 
with other means ') 46 the question arises as to whether it is to be interpreted 
in the attributive sense , since there is no other valid means of knowled ge, or 
it is to be interpreted as referrin g to some existin g thin g, since there is no 
conflict with other means of knowled g e. When under such a predicament . 
people who stand by knowled ge, should interpret it to mean somethin g 
existin g, but not of an attribute. This also explains the standpoint to be 
adopted with re g ard to the mantras.47 































































































































Moreover , when the in j unctions en j oin that certain oblations are meant for 
the g ods-lndra and others-thev have certainly an eve on the nature of those 
g ods-lndra and the rest. For Indra and others cannot be conceived of by the 

mind without the help of their own characteristics : nor can oblations be 
offered to the respective g ods without havin g some mental ima g e of them. 
And the Vedic text reads thus: "When utterin g the mantra Varat one shall 
meditate on the deity in whose honour the oblation is taken up" (Ai. Br. III, 
viii. Id. it cannot be said that the meanin g consists in nothin g but the words 
themselves , ( the g ods bein g nothin g more than the words ). for words and 
meanin g s are not identical thin g s.48 That being so, anyone who believes that 
the Vedic words are an independent source of knowledge cannot deny the 
nature of the gods-lndra and others-just as it is found in the mantras and 
corroborative statements. Similarly, the anecdotes and mythologies, based on 
the mantras and corroborative statements, can supply knowledge according 
to the process shown, and they can prove the corporality of the gods and 
others. Besides, it is quite possible that the anecdotes and mythologies are 
based on direct perception (by Vyasa and others). For things imperceptible to 
us can be perceptible to immortal bein g s. Thus it is mentioned in the Smrtis 
that Vvasa and others deal directly with the g ods. Anyone sa ving that like the 
modern bein gs, the- ancient ones also had no capacity to deal with the g ods . 
denies variety in the world , and ma y as well say that j ust as Id the modern 
age, so also in the past , there was no K$atriva kin g rulin g over the whole 
earth. He will also have to set his face a g ainst the in j unction about the 
Rdi asuva sacrifice etc. , and he will have to assume that the rules of caste and 
sta g es of life were as unstable in other periods as at present. From that point 
of view , he will also set at nou g ht the scriptures meant for establishin g 
norms of conduct. Hence the proper position is that the immortal bein gs 
should have dealin g s with the g ods as a result of the perfection of their 
virtue. Besides , the Smrti declares: "From the repetition of the mantra 
follows the proximity to (and conversation with ) one's chosen deit y" (Yoga- 
sutra . IF 44 ) . Besides , since Yo g a is spoken of in the Smrti as leadin g to the 
attainment of such mystic powers as becomin g minute . It cannot be denied 
b y a mere bold assertion. The Vedas also declare the g lory of Yo g a: "When 
the five elements-earth . water , fire , air , s pace-have been conquered'49 and 
when the Yogic powers (of becoming minute etc.) have started functioning, 
then for the aspirant, who has acquired a body constituted by the fire of 














































































































Yoga, there is no disease, no decrepitude, no death" (Sv. II. 12). The power 
of the seers who visualize the mantra and brahmana portions of the Vedas 
are not to be measured in terms of our power. Therefore the anecdotes and 
mythologies have a true basis. Common belief too should not be dismissed 
as baseless so long as there is some probability. Hence it is proper to 
understand from the mantras etc. that the gods and others have bodies. And 
since on that account they can have aspiration etc., their competence for the 
knowledge of Brahman is justifiable. Moreover, such facts as gradual 
emancipation, mentioned in the Vedas, become logical from this standpoint. 

Topic 9: PSEUDO-SUDRA 



arM To him occurred I grief on hearing his disparagement -arrgvrry as is 
evident from his approaching him ff for ;f~ this is hinted at. 

34. To him (i.e. Janasruti) occurred grief on hearing his (i.e. swan's) 
disparaging utterance, as is evident from his (Janafruti's) approaching him 
(Raikva), for this is hinted at (by Raikva by using the word Sudra). 

It may be argued that, even as any hard and fast rule about the competence 
of men alone is denied and the competence of the gods as well for different 
kinds of knowledge is upheld, similarly by denying any monopoly of 
qualification by the three classes of the twice-bom alone, the 9udras also 
may be accepted as qualified. In order to remove such an assumption is 
begun the present topic. 

Opponent : Now then, the apparent conclusion is that a Sidra also is 
qualified, for he can have the aspiration and ability. And unlike the 
prohibition, "Therefore the Sidra is unfit for performing sacrifices" (Tai. S. 
VII. i. 1.6), no prohibition against his acquisition of illumination is met with. 
Even the disqualification for sacrifices that arises for the Sidra from the fact 
of his not being qualified for lighting a sacrificial fire, is no sign of his being 



debarred from knowledge. For it is not a fact that a man who has no fire- 
Ahavaniya and the rest-cannot acquire knowledge. Moreover, there is an 
indicatory sign confirming the Sidra's competence. In the section dealing 
with the knowledge of snnvarga (merger of all things), Janasruti, grandson of 
Putra and an aspirant of knowledge, is referred to by the word Sudra: "Fie, 0 
Sidra, keep to yourself the chariot and the necklace, together with the cows" 
(Ch. IV. ii. 3). And in the Smttis are mentioned Vidura and others as bom in 
the SBdra caste but endowed with special knowledge. Hence St dras have 
competence for different kinds of knowledge. 

Veddntin : Faced with this, we say: The Sudra has no competence, since 
he cannot study the Vedas; for one becomes competent for things spoken of 
in the Vedas, after one has studied the Vedas and known these things from 
them. But there can be no reading of the Vedas by a Sudra, for Vedic study 
presupposes the investiture with the sacred thread, which ceremony is 
confined to the three castes. As for aspiration, it cannot qualify anyone 
unless one has the ability. Mere ability in the ordinary sense also cannot 
qualify anyone; for scriptural ability is needed in a scriptural matter. But this 
scriptural ability is denied by the prohibition of the right to study. As for the 
text, "The Sudra is unfit for performing a sacrifice" (Tai. S. VII. i. 1.6), since 
it is based on a logic having common applicadon, it suggests that the Sudra 
has no right to knowledge as well, for the logic applies both ways. And what 
you take for an indicatory mark occurring in the section dealing with the 
knowledge about merger, that is no mark at all, for there is no logic behind 
it. An indicatory mark becomes suggestive when stated logically; but that 
logic is lacking here. Granted even that this mark qualifies the Sudra for the 
samvarga-vidy~t (meditation on merger) alone, because it occurs there, still 
it cannot qualify him for all kinds of knowledge. The fact, however, is that 
this word Sudra cannot guarantee his competence anywhere, because it 
occurs in a corroborative statement (Arthavdda). On the contrary, this word 
Sudra can be construed with some one already having the competence. 

How? 

The answer is: On hearing this utterance of the swan, "Hullo, who is this 
one, insignificant as he is, of whom you speak as though he were like Raikva 



of the chariot?" (Ch. IV. i. 3), which was a personal disparagement for him, 
Jana§ruti, grandson of Putra, was struck with grief (luk). Raikva hinted at 
this grief by using the word Sudra, thereby revealing his own power of 
television. This is what we can understand. For a bom Sfldra has no right to 
knowledge. 

How, again, is it suggested by the word Sudra that he was struck with 
grief? 

The answer is: "Tat-ddravanat". Because the word Sudra can be split up 
thus to mean that he (Raikva) approached towards, (abhidudrava) that (tat) 
grief (sucam); or he was approached (abhidudruve) by that (tat) sorrow 
(fuca); or he rushed (abhidudrava) to that (tat) Raikva, because of sorrow 
(.Fuca). And this derivative meaning has to be accepted because the 
conventional meaning is inadmissible. Moreover, this meaning is obvious 
from the story itself. 



a And qF-q ; owing to his K$atriyahood being known 3" later on fe giq 
from the indicatory mark 4jTQ4_q of mention along with a descendant of 
Citraratha. 

35. And because his K,catriyahood is known later on from the indicatory 
mark of his mention along with a descendant of Citraratha. 

For this further reason Janagruti is not a Sudra by birth, for from a 
consideration of the topic it transpires that he is a K$atriv a, which fact 
becomes obvious from his suggestive mention later on along with the 
K$atriya Abhipratarin of the line of Citraratha. Later on in the 
complementary portion of the section on the knowledge about the merger 
(Samvargavidya) Abhipratarin of the line of Citraratha is mentioned as a 
K$atriya in, "Now then, a Brahmacarin begged of Saunaka of the line of 
Kapi, and Abhipratarin, son of Kak$asena, when they were being served by 



the cook" (Ch. IV. iii. 5). That Abhipratarin belonged to the line of Citraratha 
is to be understood from his association with a descendant of the line of 
Kapi; for the association of the descendant of Citraratha with that of Kapi is 
known from the text, "The Kapeyas made Citraratha perform this (Dvirdtra 
sacrifice)" (Tan4ya Brdhmana, XX. xii. 5). For the people of the same 
lineage generally have the priests of a common descent. Besides, it is known 
that he was a K$atriya from the text, "From him issued one named Citrarathi 
who was a K$atriva kin g", where we find him to be a Ksatriva kin g. 
Accordin gly, the mention of Jana S ruti alon g with the K$atriva Abhipratarin . 
in the context of the same kind of knowled ge, sugg ests that the former is a 
K $atri va: for equals are g enerally found to be mentioned to g ether. Moreover . 
Jana § mti is known to be a KSatriva from the fact of his despatchin g a 
K $atta6° and his possession of riches. Hence a born Sudra has no right to 
knowledge. 

n^u 

On account of the mention of purificatory rites q and -arRM-wfgR[ 
declaration of the absence of these. 

36. Because purificatory rites are mentioned (for. others) and absence of 
these is declared (for the Sudra). 

For the additional reason that , in the contexts where knowled g e is spoken 
of. such actions for acquirin g the ri g ht to knowled g e are declared as 
investiture with the sacred thread etc. . 51 for instance, "Him he vested with 
the sacred thread" (S. B. XI. v. 3.13), "Uttering the sacred formula, 'Teach 
me venerable sir', he approached" (Ch. VII. i. 1), "They, who were adepts in 
the Vedas, adhered to the qualified Brahman, but were intent on an inquiry 
about the supreme Brahman, went to the venerable Pippalada with sacrificial 
faggot in hand, under the belief, 'This one will certainly tell us about It' " 
(Pr. I. 1). And the text, "Even without initiating them" (Ch. V. xi. 7), only 
shows that those (who were exempted from initiation) had it already. The 
absence of purificatory rites for the Sudra is mentioned in the Smrti thus: 




































"The Sudra belongs to the fourth caste and has but a single birth" (Manu, X. 
4), as also in such texts as, "The Sudra has no sins, nor is he fit for any 
purificatory rite" (Manu,X. 126). 


wntfi# * sp m\ 

Moreover g : on account of inclination having arisen when the absence of 
that had been ascertained. 


37. And because (Gautama's) inclination arose (to initiate and instruct 
Satyakama) when the absence of that (Sudrahood) had been ascertained. 


Here is an additional reason why a Sudra has no right. When owing to the 
utterance of truth (by Satyakama Jabala), the absence of Sudrahood had been 
established, then Gautama proceeded to initiate and instruct (Satyakama) 
Jabala, which fact is gathered from an indicatory sign in the Upani$ad: "No 
non-Brahmai a can dare utter such a truth. 0 amiable one, bring sacrificial 
faggot, I shall initiate you because you did not depart from truth" (Ch. IV. iv. 
5). 



And mm-aft-aTW-wfiikvaq hearing, study, acquisition of meaning are 
prohibited : according to SmTti. 


38. And because the Smrti prohibits for the Sudra the hearing, study, and 
acquisition of the meaning (of the Vedas). 


This is another reason why the Sudra has no ri g ht: Bv the Smrti he is 
debarred from hearin g, stud ying, and acquirin g the meanin g of the Vedas. 













The SmTti mentjons that a Sudra has no ri g ht to hear the Vedas , no ri g ht to 
study the Vedas , and no li g ht to acquire the meanin g of the Vedas ( and 
perform the rites ) . As for prohibition of hearin g, we have the text . "Then 
should he ha p pen to hear the Vedas , the expiation consists in his ears bein g 
filled with lead and lac"52 . and "He who is a Sudra is a walkin g 
crematorium. Hence one should not read in the nei g hbourhood of a 
~Udra"53. From this follows the prohibition about study. How can one study 
the Vedas when they are not to be recited within his hearing? Then there is 
the chopping off of his ton g ue if he should utter the Vedas , and the cuttin g of 
the body to pieces if he should commit it to memorv64. From this it follows 
by implication that the acquisition of meanin g and actin g on it are also 
prohibited , as is stated in . "Vedic knowled g e is not to be imparted to a 
8udra"66 . and "Stud y, sacrifice , and distribution of g ifts are for the twice- 
bom"56. But from those to whom knowled g e dawns as a result of (g ood ) 
tendencies acquired in the past lives , as for instance to Vidura . 
Dharmavvadha . and others , the reapin g of the result of knowled g e cannot be 
withheld , for -lie result of knowled g e is inevitable. This position is 
confirmed bv the Smrti text . "One should read out to the four castes (keeping 
the Brahmaua in front ) "67 . which declares the competence for all the four 
castes for the acquisition of the anecdotes and mythologies. But the 
conclusion stands that a SUdra has no right to knowledge through the Vedas. 

Topic 10: VIBRATION 





39. (Praha is Brahman) because of (the mention of) vibration. 

The side issue about competence is concluded. Now we revert to the 
discussion of the meanings of texts we were engaged in. By following the 



































































root meaning of the verb ejr which is "to vibrate" (to move), this aphorism 
refers to the text, "All this universe that there is, emerges and vibrates 
because there is Praha that is a great terror like an uplifted thunder. Those 
who know this become immortal" (Ka. H. iii. 2). In this sentence we hear of 
the whole creation pulsating on Praha as its support, and of some great 
source of fear that is imminent and is mentioned by the word thunder, as also 
of the attainment of immortality from that knowledge. 

Opponent: Now in this context, a deliberation is bound to arise, since it is 
not clear as to what that Prdna is and what that terrible thunder is. When 
such a deliberation ensues, we arrive at the conclusion that the familiar vital 
force, with its five functions, is the Prin. And from familiar use, the thunder 
must be the thunderbolt. This is a eulogy of Prdna. 

How? 

All this creation pulsates by getting its support on air, called PTdna, 
having five functions. And it is through the energy of air that the thunderbolt 
is lifted up; for they say that when air moves about in the form of clouds, 
then there are the movements (or flashes) of lightning, roar of clouds, rain, 
and thunder. And this immortality ensues from the knowledge of air itself. In 
support of this, occurs another Upanigadic text, "Air is the particular 
(separate parts) and air is the genus (or whole). He who knows this conquers 
accidental death" (Br. III. iii. 2). Therefore the entity here is to be understood 
as air. 

Veddntin : Such being the position, we say: Brahman Itself is to be 
understood here. 

Why? 

From a consideration of what precedes and succeeds; for we notice that in 
the earlier and following texts, it is Brahman that is dealt with. So why 
should we, all of a sudden, understand air in this verse alone? In an earlier 
verse we have, "That is bright (pure), that is Brahman; and that is called 
immortality. On It is fixed all the universe. It is this that nothing can 
transcend" (Ka. II. iii. 1), where Brahman is mentioned. That Brahman is 



spoken of here as well because of proximity. Besides, from the recognition 
of Its being the support of the universe, as stated in, "This whole universe 
that emerges and moves because Prdna is there" (Ka. II. iii. 2), it is 
understood that Brahman is referred to. Moreover, even this word Prdna is 
used for the supreme Self, since we find such a use in the Upani$ad as, 
"Prdna of Prhna (Vital force of vital force) (Br. IV. iv. 18). This power to 
move (the whole universe) also fits in with the supreme Self, but not with 
mere air (of which the vital force is a form). It has been said accordingly, 
"No mortal lives by Pram or Apdna (exhaling or inhaling), but all live by 
something else on which these two depend" (Ka. II. ii. 5). Later on too, 
Brahman and not air is declared in, "From fear of Him fire bums, from fear 
shines the sun; from fear run Indra and Air, and Death, the fifth" (Ka. II. iii. 
3), where Brahman is spoken of as the source of fear for the whole universe 
including Air. Furthermore, from the fact of proximity and from the 
recognition of the identity of the source of fear as indicated in, "A source of 
terror like an uplifted thunder" (Ka. II. iii. 3), it can be understood that the 
same Brahman is declared here as well. The word thunder is used on account 
of the similarity of striking terror. Even as the king's subjects and others 
continue ever under the rule of the king under the fear, "This uplifted 
thunder will fall on my head unless I obey his rule", similarly this universe 
of fire, air, sun, etc. continues in its own course out of fear of this very 
Brahman. So Brahman is likened to a terrifying uplifted thunder. Similar is 
another Upani$adic text about Brahman: "Out of His fear the Wind blows. 
Out of fear the Sun rises. Out of His fear runs Fire as also Indra, and Death, 
the fifth" (Tai. II. viii. 1). From the mention of immortality as the result (of 
knowledge), it is understood that Brahman Itself is this Entity; for it is 
known from the verse, "Knowing Him alone one attains immortality. There 
is no other path to proceed by" (tv. VI. 15), that immortality results from the 
realization of Brahman. As for the immortality (referred to by the opponent 
and) declared in some contexts as resulting from the knowledge of Air 
(Hiraoyagarbha), that is merely relative; for in that very (Brhadarar)yaka) 
Upani$ad, the text turns to another topic and after speaking of the supreme 
Self, it declares the perishableness of all else-Air and the rest-in, "Everything 
else is perishable" (Br. III. iv. 2). From the context under discussion as well, 
the supreme Self stands established, for the question asked is: "Tell (me) of 
that thing which you see as different from virtue, different from vice, 



different from this cause and effect, and different from the past and the 
future" (Ka. I. ii. 14). 

TOPIC 11: LIGHT AS DECLARED IN THE UPANI$AD 



-iii: Light "ti owing to its being met with. 

40. Light is Brahman, for it is met with as such (in the Upanigad). 

Doubt : In the Upani$ad it is heard, "This serene one (samprasada), rising 
up from this body, and realizing the supreme Light, becomes established in 
his own nature" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3). The doubt arises as to whether the word 
light refers to the light visible to the eye and dispelling darkness, or to 
supreme Brahman. What should be the conclusion then? 

Opponent: It must be the common light. 

Why? 

Because the word light conventionally means this. Under the aphorism, 
"Light is Brahman, because of the mention of feet" (Li. 24), it was of course 
shown that from the force of the context, the word light gives up its own 
meaning and implies Brahman. But no cause for discarding the common 
meaning is noticed here. Similarly in the chapter, dealing with the nerves, 
the attainment of the sun by the aspirant for liberation is spoken of thus: 
"Now (after the loss of consciousness) when one departs from this body in 
this way (befitting death), then one proceeds upward along these very rays 
(associated with the nerves)" (Ch. VIII. vi. 5). Accordingly the familiar light 
is meant by the word light here. 



Veddntin : This being the position, we say: The supreme Brahman Itself is 
meant by the word light. 

Why? 

"Because it is met with in that sense in the Upani$ad". It is obvious in this 
context that Brahman is repeatedly alluded to as the subject-matter. Thus in 
the beginning of the topic, the Self that is possessed of such characteristics 
as freedom from sin and so on, as mentioned in, "The Self that is free from 
sin" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), is declared as the entity to be searched for and to be 
aspired after for realization. It is also alluded to in, "I shall explain this very 
one to you over again" (Ch. VIII. ix. 3). And this Self stands declared from 
the fact of the attainment of this Light for the sake of becoming unembodied, 
as mentioned in, "Happiness and sorrow do not certainly touch one who has 
become unembodied" (Ch. VIII. xii. 1); for unless it be bv identity with 
Brahman , there can be no unembodiedness anywhere else.58 Another reason 
for this is the use of such attributes as "supreme Light" (Ch. VIII. iii. 4), "the 
transcendental Being" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3). As for the criticism that the 
attainment of the sun by the aspirant for liberation is spoken of, that is not 
the absolute liberation inasmuch as it is dependent on a course to be 
followed, and that after departure from the body. We shall state later on that 
in the case of the absolute liberation, there are no such things as a course to 
be followed or departure from the body. 

Topic 12: SPACE Is BRAHMAN, BEING DIFFERENT FROM NAME 

AND FORM 



a tgi: Space aryq-tccg-a-aggi?rq since it is declared as being something 
else and so on. 

41. Akafa (Space) is Brahman, because of the declaration of being 
something different and so on. 









Doubt : In the Upani$ad we hear: "That which is called akasa is the 
accomplisher of name and form. That in which they are contained is 
Brahman; that is immortal and that is the Self" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1). Now the 
discussion arises, whether the word akdsa denotes the supreme Brahman or 
the familiar material space. 

Opponent : Under such a predicament, it is reasonable to accept the 
element called space (ether); for the word dkaca conventionally means that, 
and the fact of the accomplishment of name and form can fit in with it in the 
sense of providing space (for them). Besides, nothing that can be a clear 
indication of Brahman, as for instance, creators hip, is heard of here. 

Vedantin : This aphorism is enunciated to meet that position. The supreme 
Brahman alone can be the meaning of the word akasa (Space) here. 

Why? 

"Because of the declaration of Its being something different and so on." 
For by saying, "That in which they are contained is Brahman" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 
1), it is declared that dkdsa is something different from name and form. 
Nothing but Brahman can be different from name and form, since the whole 
of creation consists of a manifestation of name and form (i.e. word and its 
meaning). And the manifestation of name and form in an absolute sense is 
not possible for anything but Brahman; for the Upanigad mentions that 
Brahman is the agent of their revelation: "Let me manifest name and form by 
Myself entering as the individual soul" (Ch. VI. iii. 2). 

Opponent : Is it not a matter of direct experience that the individual being 
also has the power of manifesting name' and form? 

Veddntin : True, he has; but the intention (of the text, "by Myself entering 
as the individual soul") is to declare the identity of the individual and 
Brahman (and not the agentship of the individual). From this very 
declaration of the manifestation of name and form, creatorship etc., as the 
indicatory signs of Brahman become stated ipso facto. The sentences, "That 
is Brahman; that is immortal; that is the Self" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1) are also 
indications that Brahman is spoken of. This is an elaboration of the 



aphorism, "Space is Brahman, for Brahman's characteristic is in evidence" 
(I.i. 22). 


ii^ii 

(Because of the declaration) iRq as being different gejfR(,czr): in sleep 
and death. 

42. Because of the declaration of being different in sleep and at the time 
of departure, (the supreme Lord is the subjectmatter of teaching). 

The portion, "Because of the declaration" follows (from the earlier 
aphorism) to complete the sense. 

Doubt: In the sixth part of the Brhadaranyaka Upanigad, the start is made 
with," '(Of all the entities cognized through the idea of 1) which is the Self?' 
'This infinite entity (Puruia) that is identified with the intellect and is in the 
midst of the organs, the self-effulgent light within the heart (i.e. in the 
intellect)' " (IV. iii. 7), and then the subject of the Self is amply elaborated. 
The doubt arises whether that text is concerned simply with the explanation 
of the true nature of the transmigrating soul, or with establishing the true 
nature of the transcendental Self. What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : It is concerned only with the true nature of the transmigrating 
soul. 

How do you know? 


Tonic 13: SLEEP AND DEATH 



From a consideration of the start and finish. At the start, an indicatory sign 
of the embodied soul is found in, "the entity that is identified with the 



intellect and is in the midst of the organs", and the non-rejection of that soul 
is found at the end in, "That which is identified with the intellect and is in the 
midst of the organs is this great birthless Self" (Br. IV. iv. 22); that very soul 
is dealt with elaborately in the middle also through a presentation of the 
waking state etc. 

Vedantin : Under these circumstances, we say: This text is meant for 
speaking about the supreme Lord alone, and it is not meant for speaking 
further about the embodied soul. 

Why? 

Because in the state of deep sleep and at the time of departure from the 
body, the supreme Lord is mentioned separately from the embodied soul. In 
sleep for instance, the supreme Lord is mentioned separately from the 
embodied soul in, "So this Puru$a, being fully embraced by the supremely 
intelligent Self-prdjna dtmd-does not know anything at all, either external or 
internal" (Br. IV. iii. 21). In that text the Puru$a must be the embodied soul, 
since it is he who is the knower inasmuch as the knowledge of anything 
external or internal can be denied only when the possibility of knowing 
exists. And the supremely intelligent Self is the supreme Lord, for He is 
never separated from intelligence (prajna) which is of the nature of 
omniscience. So also at the time of departure the supreme Lord is mentioned 
separately from the individual in, "So does the embodied soul, being 
presided over by the supremely intelligent Self, go making noises" (Br. IV. 
iii. 35). There too the embodied soul must be the individual being, since it is 
the master of the body; but the supremely intelligent One must be the 
supreme Lord Himself. Therefore from the separate mention in sleep and at 
the time of departure, it is to be understood that the entity sought to be taught 
here is the supreme Lord. In answer to the argument that from the indicatory 
signs of the individual soul at the start, middle, and end, it follows that this 
text is meant for presenting the soul, we say: The nature of the 
transmigrating soul is not sought to be presented at the start in the sentence, 
"that is identified with the intellect and is in the midst of the organs". 


What is meant then? 



The intention is to show the identity of the transmigrating soul with the 
supreme Self after a restatement of the former's characteristics. For the 
succeeding text, viz "it meditates as it were, it runs as it were" etc. (Br. IV. 
iii. 7), is seen to be devoted to the elimination of the characteristics of the 
transmigrating soul. Similarly at the end, as at the start, the conclusion runs 
thus, "That Self which is identified with the intellect and is in the midst of 
the organs is this great birthless Self" (Bt. IV. iv. 22). The idea conveyed is 
that the transmigrating soul, that is perceived as identified with the intellect 
and in the midst of the organs, is proved by us to he but this great birthless 
Self, the supreme Lord. But one who would infer, from the presentation of 
the waking state etc., in the middle, that the nature of the transmigrating soul 
is sought to be taught here, may as well pop up in the western direction when 
sent towards the east, for the presentation of the states of waking etc., is 
meant neither to imply the possession of any state nor of transmigration. 
What is meant then? 

What is meant is freedom from the states and transmigration. 

How is that known? 

Because at every turn Janaka requests Yajiiavalkya: "Please instruct me 
further about liberation" (Br. IV. iii. 14-16, 33), and because the answer 
given at every step is: "He is untouched by whatever he sees in that state, for 
this infinite Being is unattached" (Br. IV. iii. 15-16). Further, it is stated, " 
(This aspect of his) is untouched by good work and untouched by bad work, 
for he is then beyond all the woes of his heart (intellect)" (Br. IV. iii. 22). 
Accordingly, it is to be understood that this text is meant for establishing the 
nature of the supermundane Self. 




gfr_Wt_qr-.q: From such words as ruler. 

43. This is confirmed by such words as ruler. 

Here is an additional reason why this text is to be understood as 
establishing the nature of the supermundane Entity; for the words ruler etc., 
occurring in this text, are calculated to establish the nature of the 
supermundane Entity and to rule out the nature of the transmigrating soul. 
Of these two objectives, such sentences as, "It is the controller of all, the lord 
of all, the ruler of all" (Br. IV. iv. 22), are meant for establishing the nature of 
the supermundane Entity; and such sentences as, "It does not become better 
through good work, nor worse through bad work" (ibid.), are meant for 
denying the nature of transmigration. Hence it is understood that the 
supreme Lord, who is not subject to transmigration, is spoken of here. 




TOPIC 1: THE INFERRED ENTITY 

After broaching the subject of the deliberation on Brahman, the definition 
of Brahman was given: "That is Brahman from which the birth etc., of this 
are derived" (B. S. I. i. 2). Then the doubt was raised that this definition 
applies equally to Pradhana (primordial Nature), and it was dismissed by 
saying, "Because of the attribution of seeing, the one (viz Pradhana) which is 
not taught in the Upani$ads is not the cause of the universe" (I. i. 5), the 
reason being that it is not mentioned in the Upani$ads. It was also shown in 
the earlier portion of this book that the sameness of the knowledge imparted 
by the Upanisads is in favour of the belief in Brahman as the cause (I. i. 10), 
but not in favour of the theory that Pradhana is the cause. Now are being 
raised some doubts not considered hitherto. 

Opponent: The assertion made that Pradhana is not mentioned in the 
Upani~ads is groundless; for in some sections are heard words calculated to 
suggest Pradhana. So it comes to this that when the great seers Kapila and 
others adopted the causality of Pradhana, they did so on the authority of the 
Vedas themselves. Accordingly, as long as those words are not proved to 
convey some other meaning, so long the theory that Brahman is the cause 
will remain under doubt, even though it has been proved earlier. 

Veddntin : Hence the succeeding topic starts with a view to showing that 
they mean something else: 


The inferred entity aft even (is revealed) to followers the of some 
recension 4q if this be the con- tention, (then) :notso-,qtk since it is cognized 
as occurring in a simile illustrating the body a and zfcr (the Upani$ad) shows 
(this). 

1. If it be said that even the inferred entity (Pradhana) is revealed to the 
followers of some recension, we say, not so, for the word is cognized as 
occurring in a simile illustrating the body. And the Upanifad also shows this. 

Opponent : Even the inferred entity, even Pradhana, arrived at through 
inference, is met with by the followers of some recensions, as having been 
mentioned by name. For the Katha Upani$ad has this reading: "The 
unmanifest (avyakta) is higher than mahat, purufa is higher than avyakta" (I. 
iii. 11), where mahat, avyakta, and purusa are found exactly under the same 
epithets and in the same order as they are known from the (Sariikhya) 
Smctis. Of these, by the word avyakta is meant Pradhana, well known in the 
Samkhya Smrti, for the word avyakta is in common use in the Sarhkhya 
Sm;ti, and being devoid of sound etc. (Ka. I. iii. 15), it can be derived in the 
sense of that which is not manifest (na vyakta). Having been mentioned thus 
in the Upani$ad, it remains unproved that it is not mentioned. Now that very 
Pradhana is the cause of the universe, it being well known to be so from the 
Upani$ads, Sm;cis, and reason. 

Veddntin : This is not so. This sentence of the Katha Upani$ad is not 
meant for proving the existence of the avyakta and mahat of the Sarhkhyas. 
For we do not come here across the very same Pradhana, as it is taught in the 
Sarirkhya Sm;tis as an independent cause constituted by its three 
(component) attributes. The only identical thing we come across is the mere 
word avyakta, which from its derivative sense of that which is not manifest 
can be applied equally to any other subtle and inscrutable thing. And this 
word does not conventionally mean any particular thing. As for such a 
conventional usage among the followers of the theory of Pradhana, that is 
only a technical term for them, and as such, it cannot be adduced as a reason 
for ascertaining the meaning of a Vedic text. The identity of a thing cannot 
be established merely from the similarity of the order of treatment, unless 
the nature of the thing itself is recognized as identical; for unless one is a 



fool, one will not conclude by seeing a cow in a stable that it must be a 
horse. From a consideration of the context also, the Pradhana, fancied by 
others, does not emerge as the meaning, "for the word is cognized as 
occurring in a simile illustrating the body". The body in fact, occurring in the 
simile of the chariot, is understood here by the word avyakta. 

How? 

On the strength of the context and the method of residue. Thus the text, 
immediately preceding, shows how the Self, body etc., are analogous to the 
master of the chariot, chariot, etc. (respectively): "Know the Self as the 
master of the chariot, and the body as the chariot. Know the intellect as the 
charioteer, and the mind as verily the bridle. They call the senses the horses; 
know the objects (of the senses) as the ways. The discriminating people call 
that Self, associated with the body, senses, and mind, as the experiencer" 
(Ka. I. iii. 3-4). And then it is shown that one attains the worldly state 
through those organs etc., when they are not under control; but that when 
they are under control, one "reaches the end of the road that is the highest 
place of Viwu" (Ka. I. iii. 7-9). When after this has been shown, the desire 
arises to know what that highest place of Vi$ou is, the text shows that the 
supreme Self is transcendental to those very senses etc., that are under 
discussion, and that It is at the end of the road and is the highest place of 
Vi$riu: "The sense-objects are higher than the senses, and the mind is higher 
than the sense-objects; but the intellect is higher than the mind and the great 
soul (mahan atmd) is higher than the intellect. Avyakta is higher than mahat, 
Puru$a is higher than avyakta. There is nothing higher than Puru$a. He is the 
culmination, He is the highest goal" (Ka. I. iii. 10-11). The very senses etc., 
that were spoken of as the horses etc., in the imagery of the chariot are (to be 
understood as) spoken of here in this text as well, so that the fault of giving 
up the subject-matter under discussion and taking up something else, not 
within purview, may not arise. Of these, the words senses, mind, and 
intellect occur in common in the preceding and present texts. The sense- 
objects, namely such things as sound and the rest, were mentioned as the 
road for the senses, conceived of as horses. They (the objects) are higher 
than the iii.3 ) . senses , in accordance with the fact well known in the 
U paniSad ( Br. 111. 11. 1-6 ) that the senses are the g rahas and the senseob i ects 










are the ati- g rahas.l The mind is superior to the senseobjects, for the 
interactions between the sense-organs and senseobjects are based on the 
mind. The intellect is superior to the mind, for the objects of experience 
approach the experiencer by riding on the intellect. That great soul (mahan 
atma) that is higher than the intellect (Ka. I. iii. 10) is presented in the words, 
"Know the Self (attna) as the master of the chariot" (Ka. I. 

How? 

Because the word Self (atma) is used, and because the experiencer can 
reasonably be superior to the objects of experience. Further Its greatness is 
justifiable because It is the master. Or by the phrase mahan atma (Ka. I. iii. 
10) is meant here the intellect of the first-born Hirariyagarbha which is the 
highest basis of the intellects of all beings in accordance with the Smrti, 
"That which is read of by the learned people as mind (i.e. the power of 
thinking), pervasive, presentiment (i.e. power of determining the future), 
soul, the refuge (of all enjoyable things), intellect (power of determining the 
present), (power of) fame, (power of) rulership, intuition (of things of all 
times), (power of) expression, consciousness, memory (of all the past)" 
(Mbh. XIII. x. 11), and in accordance with the Upani$ad, "He who created 
Hirat}yagarbha in the beginning and transmitted the Vedas to Him" (Sv. VI. 
18). That (cosmic intellect) was mentioned there in the earlier verse by the 
simple word intellect; and therefore to make the idea clearer, it is mentioned 
here separately (in its cosmic aspect); for that intellect too is justly higher 
than ours. But on this interpretation, according to which the word Puru$a in 
the latter text (Ka. I. iii. 11) is accepted as implying the supreme Self, the 
individual soul which is the master of the chariot becomes enumerated ipso 
facto, for in reality there is no difference between the supreme Self and the 
soul identified with the intellect. So the body alone, among those (six) 
factors (Ka. I. iii. 3-4) is left over. With a view to leading to the realization 
of the supreme state, the Upani$ad (Ka. I. iii. 10-11) goes on enumerating 
seriatim those other factors themselves that were being discussed (in Ka. I. 
iii. 3-4). While engaged thus, the Upani$ad (after pairing off the others), 
points out the remaining factor, viz body occurring in the earlier passage 
(Ka. I. iii. 3), by the remaining factor, viz avyakta in the present text (Ka. I. 
iii. 11). This is how we understand it. For what is sought here to be taught is 




the realization of the identity with Brahman, which is the inmost Self, by the 
experiencer (i.e. the individual soul) who is under ignorance and is 
associated with body, senses, mind, intellect, and experiences of sense- 
objects. This is done for him by chalking out the path of liberation from the 
worldly state with the help of the comparison of the body and the rest with a 
chariot etc. Thus it is that the place of Vi$i u is spoken of as difficult of 
approach in the verse: "He is hidden in all beings; and hence He does not 
appear as the Self of all. But by the seers of subtle things, He is seen through 
a pointed and fine intellect" (Ka. I. iii. 12). Then Yoga meant for its 
realization is revealed in: "The discriminating man should merge that mind 
into the cognizing self; he should merge the cognizing self into the mahan 
dtmd (great soul); he should merge the great soul into the peaceful Self" (I. 
iii. 13). The idea implied is this: "He should merge the organ of speech into 
the mind" means that he should give up all the external activities of the 
organs of speech etc., and continue to act only through the mind; and 
because the mind also has a tendency to think of objects, he should discover 
the defect inherent in thinking of pros and cons, and then he should hold the 
mind confined steadfastly in the intellect that has the faculty of 
determination and is referred to by the term "cognizing self". That intellect, 
again, he should withdraw into the great soul, the experiencer, or into the 
acute intellect, sharpened through meditation. The great soul is, however, to 
be established by him in the peaceful Self, in the supreme Puru$a under 
consideration, that is to say, in the "highest goal" (Ka. I. iii. 11). Thus when 
we run through the context, preced ing and succeeding, there remains no 
scope for Pradhana pointed out by others. 

irii 

$ Rather v* the subtle "q-W4Cqjq it deserves that. 




2. Rather she subtle (causal state) is meant (by avyakta), for it deserves 
that epithet. 

It has been said that on the strength of the context and the method of 
residue the word avyakta refers to the body and not Pradhana. But the doubt 
arises now: How can the body be called avyakta (unmanifest)? For from the 
fact of its grossness, the body deserves the term manifest all the more, 
whereas the term unmanifest (avyakta) is meant for something indistinct (or 
undeveloped). 

Hence the answer is being offered: But here the subtle onethe body in its 
causal state-is sought to be spoken of; for the subtle (cause) deserves to be 
mentioned by the word unmanifest. Though this body is gross and cannot in 
itself be called unmanifest, still the subtle elements from which it is 
produced can be called unmanifest. And the word denoting the material 
cause is seen to apply to its product also as for instance in, "The Soma juice 
is to be mixed with the cows (i.e. cow's milk)" (I R. V. IX. xlvi. 4). The 
Upani$adic text, "This universe was then undifferentiated" (Br. I. iv. 7) also 
shows that this very world, diversified through names and forms, was in the 
beginning in a state of latency, devoid of differentiation into names and 
forms, and hence fit to be called undifferentiated. 



uT.~IcR Being dependent on that; a9 it serves some purpose. 

3. (Avyakta is not Pradhdna) because it is dependent on that (God); (but 
this avyakta has to be admitted as) it serves some purpose. 

The opponent argues here: If it be admitted that when in the beginning the 
world was in its causal state, and remained undifferentiated through names 


and forms it was fit to be called unmanifest, and if it be held that in a similar 
state the body also could be called unmanifest, then that amounts to an 
admission of the theory of Pradhana as the cause; for the primordial 
(undifferentiated) state of this very universe is called Pradhana. 

Vedantin : To this it is said: Should we admit some primal state as an 
independent cause of the world , we shall be openin g the door for the theor y 
of Pradhana as the cause. But this primal state is held by us to be sub j ect to 
the supreme Lord , but not as an independent thin g . That state has to be 
admitted , because it serves a purpose. Without that latent state , the 
creatorship of God cannot have an y meanin g, inasmuch as God cannot act 
without His power tof Ma ya), and without that latent state , the absence of 
birth for the freed souls cannot be explained .2 

Why? 

Because liberation comes when the potential power (of Maya) is burnt 
away by knowledge. That potential power, constituted by nescience, is 
mentioned by the word unmanifest. It rests on God, and is comparable to 
magic. It is a kind of deep slumber in which the transmigrating souls sleep 
without any consciousness of their real nature. This thing, that is avyakta, is 
sometimes referred to by the word space, as stated in the text, "By the 
Immutable, 0 Gargi, is (the unmanifest) space pervaded" (Br. III. viii. 11). 
Sometimes it is called the immutable as in, "Higher than the higher 
immutable" (Mu. II. i. 2); sometimes it is called Maya as in, "Know Maya to 
be Nature and the master of Maya to be the great God" (Sv. IV. 10). That 
Maya is surely unmanifest, for it can neither be ascertained as real nor as 
unreal. This is why it has been stated that "Avyakta is higher than mahat" 
(Ka. I. iii. 11); for if the cosmic intelligence of Hiraoyagarbha be meant by 
the word mahat, then avyakta. is higher than mahat, for mahat springs from 
the former. If, however, the individual being be the meaning of mahat (vide 
end of commentary on 1. iv. 1 ). still the statement . "Avyakta is hi g her than 
=hat" . is admissible , since the state of becomin g an individual creature 
de pends on the influence of avyakta t Ma val actin g as a limitin g ad j unct. For 
ig norance is avvakta : and it is because of the possession of i g norance bv the 
individual soul that all kinds of empirical behaviour continue for ever. This 
























































su periority to mahat . that avvakta has , is also fancied in the case of its 
modification , the body itself , b y thinkin g of them as fi g uratively identical. 
Althou g h the or g ans are as much the products of avvakta as the bod y, still 
the identity is fi g uratively fancied in the case of the body alone , whence it is 
s poken of as avvakta . the or g ans havin g already been referred to bv their 
own names , and the body alone havin g been left over ( to be paired off with 
av vakta ) .3 

Pseudo-Vedantin : Others explain that the bodies are of two kinds-gross 
and fine. The gross one is what is directly perceived, and the fine will be 
referred to later on in, "The soul goes out of the body, enveloped with the 
subtle parts of the elements, with a view to obtaining a fresh body; so it is 
known from the question and answer in the scripture" (B. S. III. i. 1). Both 
these bodies were equally described earlier as the chariot. But the fine body 
is mentioned here by the word avyakta; for the fine deserves that epithet. 
And since all behaviour, associated with bondage or freedom is "dependent 
on this" fine body, it is higher than the individual being. This is just like 
saying that the sense-objects are higher than the senses owing to the 
dependence of the senses on their objects. 

Veddntin : But they have to answer this question: Since in the earlier text 
both the bodies were described in common as the chariot, and since both are 
equally under discussion here in the latter text, and both remain to be 
enumerated (i.e. paired off), why should the fine body alone be mentioned 
here and not the gross? 

Pseudo-Veddntin : We can only interpret the meaning of what is stated by 
the scripture, but cannot question it. And the word used by the scripture is 
avyakta, which can mean only the fine and not the reverse, that being vyakta 
(manifest). 

Vedantin : Not so . for the meanin g has to be determined bv keepin g the 
unity of purport in view. Not that these words , mentioned earlier and later . 
can convey any sense without g ettin g connected throu g h a common pur port. 
for that will lead to the fault of g ivin g u p somethin g under discussion and 
takin g u p somethin g extraneous. And unity of purport cannot exist unless the 
subsequent portion is connected with the earlier by way of completin g some 



































































idea. Now since the completion of the idea requires the consideration of both 
the bodies equall y, the unity of purport itself will be vitiated , unless the 
relationship between the two ( earlier and later ) parts be admitted in 
accordance with this requirement. In that case how can the meanin g of an y 
scriptural expression be understood? Besides , it is not to be thou g ht thus: 
"The line body is mentioned here because it is difficult to be purified : 1 but 
the gross one is so palpably repugnant that it can be easily purified, and 
hence it is not mentioned." For the purification of anything is not intended to 
be spoken of here, inasmuch as no verb occurs here to enjoin purification. 
But since "the highest place of Vi~nu" (Ka. I. iii. 9) was pointed out in the 
immediately preceding verse, the question arises, "What is it?" Hence the 
intention here (Ka. I. ii. 11) is to speak of that place. Accordingly, it is 
pointed out in succession that a certain thing is higher than the one preceding 
it; and then it is declared, "There is nothing higher than Purusa" (ibid.). 
However we lose nothing by accepting any one of these two points of view, 
since both are calculated to demolish the inferred entity, Pradhana. So it may 
well be as you put it. 



a And zM-ateR owing to the non-mention of being known. 

4. And because (avyakta is) not mentioned as an entity to be known. 

Pradhana is presented in the Sarfikhya Smrti as a thing to be known, since 
according to them, freedom (or the detachment of the soul from Nature) 
ensues from knowing the difference between the gums (that constitute 
Pradhana) and purwa (soul). One cannot know the purusa to be different 
from the three gupas, unless one has known the nature of the guns. And at 
places they mention Pradhana as a thing to be known for the sake of 
acquiring supernatural powers. But here in the Upani$ad, this avyakta is not 
























mentioned as a thing to be known, the term avyakta being used as a mere 
epithet. There is no other text to show that avyakta is either to be known or 
adored. Moreover, it cannot be upheld that the knowledge of the term 
avyakta itself can lead to some fruitful human result even though it be not 
enjoined as such in any scripture; (for that alone can be understood as a thing 
to he known which has been enjoined as such). From this point of view also, 
Pradhana is not referred to by the word avyakta. Our standpoint, on the 
contrary is beyond cavil, since according to us this word avyakta is used 
with a view to revealing the state of Vi$r}u by a process of following the 
comparison of the body etc., with the chariot etc. 

5n# ([ wm. W 

(The Upani$ad) Wqftr does speak Wftr 4q if this be the contention not so; 
k because Arw: the conscious Self (stands out) Nv" from the context. 

5. If it be argued that the Upanisad does mention Pradhana (by the word 
avyakta), we say : No, for the conscious Self is understood from the context. 

Here the Sarnkhya says : The aphorism, "And because zvyakta is not 
mentioned as an entity to be known", remains unproved. 

How? 

For later on we hear of Pradhana, mentioned by the word avyakta, as a 
thing to be known, in the text, "One becomes freed from the jaws of death by 
knowing that which is soundless, touchiess, colourless, undiminishing, and 
also tasteless, eternal, odourless, without beginning and without end, higher 
than mahat, and ever constant" (Ka. I. iii. 15). Pradhana, presented in this 
text for the sake of knowledge, conforms exactly to the Pradhana mentioned 
in the Smrti as being devoid of sound etc., and higher than mahat. Hence it is 
Pradhana that is declared here, and that, again, is pointed out by the word 
avyakta. 



Vedantin : To this we say: Pradhana is not presented here as a thing to he 
known; on the contrary we understand that the conscious Self, which is the 
supreme Self, is presented here for realization. 

How is it so? 

From the context. It is the topic of the conscious Self that spreads out 
elaborately; because it is declared, "There is nothing higher than Puru$a. He 
is the culmination, He is the highest goal" (Ka. I. iii. 11), and so on; and 
because by mentioning the inscrutability of the Self, the curiosity to know 
that very Self is roused by the text, "He is hidden in all beings, and hence He 
does not appear as the Self (of all)" (Ka. I. iii. 12); and because the control of 
the organs of speech etc., is enjoined for the sake of the knowledge of the 
Self alone in, "The discriminating man should merge (the organ of) speech 
into the mind" (Ka. I. iii. 13); and because the result is the delivery from the 
mouth of death (Ka. I. iii. 15). For it is not held by the Samkhyas that one 
becomes freed by knowing Pradhana alone, their theory being that one 
becomes free by knowing the sentient soul. Besides, in all the Upani$ads, 
such attributes as soundlessness etc., are vouched for the conscious Self 
alone. Hence it is not Pradhana that is the thing to be known here, nor is it 
meant by the word avyakta. 

wnfa ^m> m \\\\\ 


And "MT;j of the three qq only 3qmB: is the presentation qqzl thus a and 
AW: the question. 

6. And thus there is the presentation of three things alone, and the 
question also is concerned with them. 

An additional reason why Pradhana is neither meant by avyakta, nor is it a 
thing to be known is that three things alone-Fire, individual soul, and the 
supreme Self-are met with in this book, the Katha Upani$ad, as things 



presented for being spoken of in conformity with the granting of the boons; 
and the question also relates to them. No other thing is asked for, nor is it 
presented. Of these, the question about Fire is contained in, "0 Death, such 
as you are, you know that Fire which leads to heaven. Of that you tell me 
who am full of faith" (Ka. I. i. 13). The question about the individual soul 
occurs in, "This doubt that arises consequent on the death of a man, some 
saying, 'It exists', and others saying, v It does not exist'-I would know this 
under your instruction. Of all the boons this one is the third boon" (Ka. I.i. 
20). And the question about the supreme Self is contained in, "Tell me of 
that thing which you see as different from virtue, different from vice, 
different from these cause and effect, and different from the past and future" 
(Ka. 1. ii. 14). In the answer also, Fire is spoken of in, "Death told him of the 
Fire that is the source of the world, the form and number of bricks" (Ka. I.i. 
15); the individual soul is spoken of in the remote passage, "Well, 0 
Gautama, I shall tell you of this secret, eternal Brahman, and also how the 
soul fares after death. Some souls enter the womb for acquiring bodies, and 
others follow the motionless, in accordance with their works and in 
conformity with their knowledge" (Ka. II. ii. 6-7); and Brahman is spoken of 
elaborately in the text starting with, "The intelligent Self is neither bom nor 
does It die" (Ka. I. ii. 18). But there is no such question about Pradhina; and 
since it has not been asked for, it has no need to be presented. 

To this the opponem says : Is the same Self that is inquired about in the 
question, "The doubt that arises consequent on the death of a man, some 
saying, v It exists', others saying, v It does not exist'" (Ka. I. i. 20), again 
alluded to in, "Tell me of that thing which you see as different from virtue, 
different from vice" etc. (Ka. I. ii. 14), or is a fresh question raised here that 
is different from the earlier one? 

What are you driving at? 

Should you say that the earlier question itself is alluded to, then there will 
be only two questions relating to Fire and the Self, the two questions about 
the Self having coalesced. Hence it cannot be said that only three questions 
have been put. If, however, it is maintained that a fresh question has been 
raised here, then just as there is no harm in fancying any question outside the 



boons granted, so also there can be no harm in thinking that Pradhana is 
presented irrespective of any relevant question. 


Vedantin : With regard to this it is said: We do not, in that sense, imagine 
here (in Ka. I. ii. 14) any question outside the boons offered, for we are 
backed by the way the topic is started. It is noticeable that the course of the 
whole narration in the form of a talk between Death and Naciketas, as 
presented by the Katha Upani$ad, has for its starting point the offer of the 
booms. Death granted three boons to Naciketas who had been dismissed by 
his father. Naciketas on his Dart, asked for his father's mental composure 
through the first boon. Through the second boon he prayed for the 
knowledge of Fire. Through the third, he asked for the knowledge of the Self 
thus: "The doubt that arises consequent on the death of a man" etc. (Ka. 1. i. 
20). That this is the third boon is known from the indicative sign, "Of all the 
boons, this one is the third" (ibid.). Now if a fresh question is raised in, " ... 
different from virtue" etc. (Ka. I. ii. 14), then the unity of purport (or 
consistency of the text) will be marred by the imagination of something 
outside the boons offered. 

Opponent Since the subject-matter of the question is different, the 
question itself must be new. The earlier question was about the individual 
soul, for therein was mentioned a doubt about existence and non-existence in 
the words, "The doubt that arises consequent on the death of a man" etc. 
Besides, the individual soul is within the range of virtue etc., so that it 
cannot be the subject of the question, " ... different from virtue" etc. But the 
intelligent Self can be the subject-matter of the question, "... different from 
virtue" etc., that Self being beyond virtue etc. The modes of the questions 
are also noticed to be dissimilar; for the earlier question relates to existence 
and non-existence, whereas the latter relates to something beyond virtue etc. 
Hence from the absence of a recognition of identity, it follows that the 
questions are different, and that it is not a fact that the earlier subject-matter 
is reverted to in the latter. 

Veddntin : No, for it is admitted that the individual soul and the intelligent 
Self are one. Had the individual soul been different from the intelligent Self, 
then the question could have been different owing to a difference of subject- 



matter. But the difference is non-existent according to other Upani$adic 
texts, as for instance, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7). And here also the 
answer to the question, "...different from virtue" etc., is "The intelligent Self 
is never born, nor does It die" (Ka. I. ii. 18), which, through a denial of birth 
and death, reveals the identity of the embodied soul and the supreme Lord; 
and this is the fact that is sought to be established. A denial is appropriate 
when a certain possibility is under discussion. And that possibility is the 
birth and death that can occur to the embodied soul owing to its association 
with the body, but not to the supreme Lord. Similarly the text, "Having 
realized that great and all-pervading Self, with the help of which a man 
perceives the objects in both the sleeping and waking states, a wise man does 
not grieve" (Ka. II. i. 4), shows that one becomes freed from sorrow by 
contemplating on the greatness and pervasiveness of that very individual 
soul which witnesses the states of sleep and wakefulness; and there it refuses 
to show that the individual soul is different from the conscious Self. For it is 
the conclusion of the Upani~ads that sorrow ends after the realization of the 
conscious Self. Similarly, a little later it is said, "What indeed is here is 
there; what is there is here likewise. He who sees as though there is 
difference here goes from death to death" (Ka. II. i. 10), which repudiates the 
idea of difference between the individual soul and the conscious Self. 
Similarly, after the question regarding the existence or non-existence of the 
individual soul, Death goes on tempting Naciketas by offering various 
desirable things, as stated in the verses commencing with, "0 Naciketas, ask 
for some other boon" (Ka. I. i. 21). But when Naciketas remains unmoved 
even under the temptation, Death shows to him the division between worldly 
prosperity and liberation as also the division between enlightenment and 
unenlightenment. After that he praises Naciketas by saying, "I consider 
Naciketas to be an aspirant for knowledge, since the covetable things, 
multifarious though they are, did not tempt you" (Ka. I. ii. 4). Then praising 
his question also, Death says, "The intelligent man gives up happiness and 
sorrow by developing concentration of mind on the Self and thereby 
meditating on the old Deity who is inscrutable, lodged inaccessibly, located 
in the intellect, and seated in the midst of (the body and senses which are a 
source of ) misery" (Ka. I. ii. 12). From this also it becomes obvious that 
what is sought to be spoken of hereis the non-difference of the individual 
soul and the conscious Self. If Naciketas had discarded the question for 



which he earned the high encomium of Death, and raised another question 
just after that appreciation, then all that praise would have been misplaced. 
Accordingly, "... different from virtue" etc. (Ka. I. ii. 14) only reiterates the 
question asked in, "The doubt that arises consequent on the death of a man" 
(Ka. 1. i. 20). As for the assertion that the modes of the questions are 
different, that creates no difficulty; for the details about the earlier question 
are asked. The existence of the soul in dissociation from the body 'was 
inquired into earlier, and of that very soul the state beyond birth and death is 
inquired into later on. For as long as ignorance does not vanish, so long there 
can be no going out of the range of virtue etc. and no cessation of the 
individuality of the soul. When this ignorance is removed, the individual 
soul is revealed to be nothing but the conscious Self in the text, "That thou 
art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7). The thing itself is not affected in any way by the 
existence, continuance, or elimination of ignorance. For instance, somebody 
mistaking a piece of rope lying in deep darkness to be a snake may run away 
from it, shaking with fear, and some one else may tell him, "Do not be 
afraid; this is not a snake, but simply a piece of rope." Then on hearing this, 
the former gives up the fear of the snake as well as his shaking and retreat. 
But neither during the continuance of the idea of the snake, nor when it 
leaves, is the thing itself affected in any way. So also are we to understand 
here. From this it follows that the text, "The intelligent Self is neither bom, 
nor does It die" (Ka. I. ii. 18), and the succeeding texts stand as an answer to 
the question about the existence and nonexistence (of the soul). But the 
aphorism is to be construed from the standpoint of a fancied difference 
between the individual soul and the intelligent Self; for though the question 
is the same, still the earlier portion of the text can be imagined to be 
concerned with the individual soul, because the question about the Self 
during the state of departure from the body involves a doubt regarding 
merely the existence of the soul distinct from the body, and because its 
mundane aspect of being the agent of activity etc. still persists (in the 
questioner's mind). But the later portion of the text relates to the conscious 
Self, since in it are described non-association with virtue etc. From this it is 
quite justifiable to think of Fire, the individual soul, and the supreme Self (as 
the subject-matters of the questions). But on the supposition of Pradhina, we 
can find no offering of boon, no question, and no answer. This is the 
difference. 




7. And like mahat (avyakta does not signify any Sa»zkhya category). 

The word tnahas is used by the Sirhkhvas to mean Pradhina's first evolved 
effect ( viz intellect ), which is endowed with a predominance of the qualit y 
of sattva (light, transparence , pure intelli g ence , etch. But that meanin g is not 
in evidence in Vedic uses , because the word dtma t Self ) is seen to be used 
t alon s with it ) in such texts as . "The mahan atmd (g reat soul ) is hi g her than 
the intellect" ( Ka. 1. iii. 10 ): and also because of such texts as . "Havin g 
meditated on the atma as mahan (g reat ) and pervasive , the wise man does 
not g rieve" ( Ka. 1. ii. 22 ); 6 "1 know this mahan (g reat ) Pump beyond 
darkness" (Sv. III..8). Just as mahat does not signify the pure intellect of the 
Samkhyas (in Vedic literature), so also the word avyakta cannot mean 
Pradhana in Vedic uses. For this reason also the inferred Pradhdna has no 
Vedic authority. 


Topic 2: THE BOWL 













































Nj-i As in the case of the bowl qh~tll special characteristics not having 
been stated. 

8. (The word aja does not refer to Pradhdna), because special 
characteristics have not been stated as in the case of the bowl. 

Opponent : The believer in Pradhana makes the rejoinder that Pradhana is 
not un-Vedic. 

Why? 

Because of the mantra text: "One aja (lit. birthless entity) while enjoying 
the ajd (feminine of aja), lies by the side of that aja which has the variegated 
hues of red, white, and black, and which gives birth to many creatures akin 
to itself. But another aja discards her after enjoyment" (Sv. IV. 5). In this 
mantra the qualities of rajas (activity), sattva (intelligence), and tamas 
(inertia) are indicated by the words "red, white, and black". The red is rajas, 
since it attracts; the white is sattva, since it is of the nature of light; and the 
black is Lamas, for it hides. The state of their balance (i.e. Pradhana) is 
expressed through the qualities of the constituents-red, white, and black. The 
word aid is derived in the sense of one that has no birth, for it is declared, 
"Primordial Nature is changeless" (Si. Ka. 3). 

Objection : Does not the word ajd conventionally mean a she-goat? 

Opponent : True, but that conventional meaning cannot be subscribed to 
here, since it is a context of philosophy. That Nature does produce many 
creatures, endowed with the three qualities of sattva, rajas, and tamas. "One 
aid', that is to say, a puru,sa (conscious soul), while enjoying or while being 
delighted by that Nature, "lies by her side", accepts that Nature as identical 
with itself through ignorance, and transmigrates by becoming deluded by 
ideas of "I am happy, I am unhappy, I am unenlightened" etc., owing to its 
non-discrimination. "Another aja", again, that is to say, another puruga 
whose power of discrimination has been aroused, becomes detached, and he 
discards this Nature after having enjoyed her, gives her up when she has 
accomplished her task of furnishing experience and liberation; that is to say, 



he becomes free. Thus the postulation of Pradhana etc. by the followers of 
Kapila has a Vedic basis to be sure. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: It is not possible to find out a 
Vedic basis for the Satinkhya theory by a reliance on this mantra; for this 
mantra, in its isolation from the context, cannot lend support to any theory. 
Inasmuch as primordial Nature (ail) etc. can be established anywhere 
through some sort of manipulation, there is no special reason for 
emphasizing the fact that the theory of the Samkhyas alone is presented here. 
This is just as in the case of the bowl. To explain: As in the text, "There is a 
bowl that opens out at the bottom and bulges at the top" (B;. II. ii. 3), the 
bowl cannot be independently and definitely identified with any kind of bowl 
by name, for the fancying of an opening below etc. can be somehow applied 
to all kinds of things, similarly here also, this mantra, "one aja, while 
enjoying" etc. mentions no specific characteristic. And so it cannot be 
categorically asserted that Pradhana alone is meant by the word aid in this 
mantra. 


Opponent : But in that text (Bt. II. ii. 3) a particular type of bowl is 
understood from the complementary portion: "The 'bowl that opens out at 
the bottom and bulges at the top' is this head of ours, for it is a bowl that has 
its opening below and bulges at the top" (ibid.). But in what sense is this ajd 
to be understood here? 


Veddntin : In answer to this we say: 



ICertainly :-ZgTW (the source consists of) those counting from fire ff for 
c so g* some a'ztca read (of them). 

9. The ajd certainly consists of the elements counting from fire, for some 
read of them as such. 



B y this a j d is to be understood the material source of the four classes of 
bein gs. 1 It sprang from the supreme Lord, and it consists of the elements 
counting from fire, viz fire, water, and food (i.e. earth). The word to (lit. but) 
is used to imply emphasis, (the meaning being), this aja is to be understood 
as consisting of the three elements, and not as constituted by the three 
attributes (of sattva, rajas, and tamas). 

Why so? 

For the followers of a certain Vedic recension read of the ori g in of fire . 
water , and food from the supreme Lord and then read of their colours as red 
etc.: "That red colour that the (g ross ) fire has is the colour of the ( unmixed 
element ) light: that which is the white colour (in the g ross fire ) is the colour 
of t unmixed ) water : that which is the black colour tin the g ross fire ) is the 
colour of t unmixed ) food" fCh. VI. iv. 1 ) . Those very fire , water , and food 
are found identically here as well , because of the common words "red" etc. . 
and because the words "red" etc, primaril y im ply particular t y pes of colour . 
and only fi g urativel y im pl y the constituents of Pradhana. And they consider 
that an ambi g uous passa g e should be understood with the help of somethin g 
unambi g uous. So also here tin the Svetasvatara Upanipd we read ) : "The 
teachers of Brahman sa v. v Is Brahman the cause ( of the universe ) ?' " Makin g 
the start with this , it is said . "The y ( the teachers of Brahman ) entered into 
Brahman throu g h the Yo g a of meditation , saw the hidden power , existin g 
identified with the Deity Himself and remainin g hidden ( i.e. superimposed 
on Brahman ) to g ether with its ( three ) constituents" (L 1-3 ) . Thus it is the 
power of the supreme Lord which creates this universe that we come across 
here in the very be g innin g of the text. Towards the end of the topic also that 
very power is met with in the text . "Know Maya to be Nature ( material 
cause ), and the master of Mava to be the g reat Lord" (Sv. IV. 10 ). and "He 
who , thou g h one , presides over every sources (i.e. the power of ignorance)" 
(Sv. IV. 11). Hence it cannot be asserted that the mantra about the ail 
presents any independent Nature (material cause), called Pradhana. From the 
trend of the context it is held by us that this very divine power in which 
names and forms remain undifferentiated and which is the latent form of 
names and forms, is mentioned by this mantra (Sv. IV. 5) as well. But that 








































































































power is spoken of as having a triple form, just because its products have a 
triple form. 


Opponent : How again from the three characteristics of fire, water, and 
food can we arrive at the aid (she-goat) which is different in form? For the 
shape of the ajd (she-goat) is not present in fire, water, and food. Again, 
since the Upani$ad mentions the birth of fire, water, and food, the word ajd 
(in the sense of birthless) cannot apply to them just because of birthiessness. 

Vedantin : Hence the answer is being given: 


: IIW 

q And qrggT-3q" since that is an instruction in the form of an imagery Rq- 
aq-;qq as in the case of honey etc., aifTZlq: there is no contradiction. 

10. And since this is an instruction in the form of an imagery, just as in the 
case of honey etc., therefore there is no incongruity. 

The word aja is not used from the point of view of the form of a she-goat 
(aid), nor is it used in the derivative sense (of that which is unborn). 

How is it used then? 

"This is an instruction in the form of an imagery"; the analogy to a she- 
goat is taught here about the (material) source of all things-moving and 
immobile-that consists of fire, water, and food. Thus even as in the world, 
there may perchance be a she-goat (aid), red, white, and black in colour, with 
kids, many in number and of similar constitution with hers, and some hegoat 
(aja) may lie by her, while some other may discard her after enjoyment, 
similarly this source of all elements (i.e. Maya), consisting of fire, water, and 
food, and having three colours, gives birth to many products that are similar 
to her. She is enjoyed by the unenlightened knower of the body (i.e. the 
individual soul) and discarded by the enlightened one. But it is not to be 
assumed that since one soul lies by her, while another discards, therefore 




there emerges a real difference among the souls as is upheld by the others 
(Samkhyas). For this is not an attempt at establishing any difference among 
the souls; rather this is an attempt at explaining the mechanism of bondage 
and freedom. This process of bondage and freedom is explained by taking 
the help of the commonsense difference (among souls). This difference, 
however, is a creation of limiting adjuncts; and is conjured up by false 
ignorance. It is not real as is shown in such Upani$adic texts as: "The one 
single Deity lies hidden in all beings. He is all-pervasive and the inmost soul 
of all" (Sv. VI. 11). This is analogous to honey etc. Just as the sun, which is 
not honey, is thought of as honey (Ch. III. i); or as the organ of speech which 
is not a cow, is fancied to be a cow (Br. V. viii); or as heaven and other 
things, which are not fire, are imagined to be fire (Ch. V. iv-viii; Br. VI. ii. 
9); so here also, like these and other similar instances, something (viz 
Maya), that is not a she-goat, is thought of to be a she-goat. This is the idea. 
Therefore it is nothing incongruous to apply the word she-goat to fire, water, 
and food (i.e. earth). 

Tonic 3: STATEMENT OF NUMBER 



q Not atfq even -~qZq on the strength of the mention of number, qrm-wi 
because the entities are disparate q and qNRqq there is an excess. 

11. Not even on the strength of the mention of number can Pradhana have 
Vedic sanction, because the entities are disparate, and they involve an 
excess. 

Though the mantra, having a reference to the she-goat, has thus been 
disposed of, still the Sltnkhya comes forward with another mantra. In the 
mantra, "That in which the pahca paficajanah (five of the quintuplet) and 
space are placed, that very Self I regard as the immortal Brahman. Having 
known (Brahman), I am immortal" (Br. IV. iv. IT ), we hear of pafica 
pan"ca i anah. In this phrase one number five is heard of in connection with 









another number live : for the word five is used twice. So these quintuplets 
taken five times make up twenty-five. And the number of thin g s that can be 
enumerated as twenty-five corresponds exactly to the number of the 
cate g ories mentioned by the Sirhkhvas . as in . "Primordial Nature is the 
undifferentiated (cate gory): seven , countin g from mahat . are both sources (of 
others ) and are ( themselves ) modifications (of Nature ): and sixteen are the 
evolved products .9 But purusa is neither a source nor a modification of it" 
(Sarizkhya-Karikd, 3). Since the number twenty-five, known from the 
Upanigad, stands for the twenty-five categories, therefore Pradhina and the 
rest come to have Vedic authority again. 

Vedrintin : Therefore we say: No hope of Vedic sanction of Pradhana and 
the rest should be entertained "even from the mention of number". 

Why? 

Because the entities are disparate. For these twenty-five (Sarhkhya) 
categories are diverse indeed; they do not have five common qualities to 
form five groups, in which case alone one could have split up the number 
twenty-five afresh into five divisions of five each. For such numerals as two 
and the rest are not applied to divergent things that do not display some 
unifying common factor. If, however, it be maintained that (there is no 
grouping in that sense), but the mere number twenty-five is indicated here 
with the help of its component numbers, as for instance a drought continuing 
for twelve years is described thus: "Indra did not pour rain for five and seven 
years"; that too is unjustifiable. The weakness of such a view is that one has 
to resort to an indirect indication. Moreover, the second word panca here 
combines with jana to form the compound word p&icgjandh, which is 
known to be a single word from its way of pronunciation accordin g to 
Bhaika rules ( about pronunciation ) with ( or without ) accent on the last 
vowel alone. Besides , from another use also . "0 oblation . 1 take you up in 
honour of the panca panca i anas ( five deities ), ( so that this body of mine 
which is like an instrument for the g ods and which is the basis ofen j o vment 
here and hereafter may remain unimpaired )" ( Tai. Sa. I. vi. 1.2 k we know it 
to be a sin g le word uttered in the same breath and havin g a sin g le case¬ 
endin g . Besides , since one live forms a compound word (with i ana ). there 





































































can be no such repetition of five ( as "five fives" ) .10 Accordin gly, we cannot 
have two lives ( or ten ) . Nor can be one number five be j pined to another 
number five , for an attributive word cannot take another ad j ective." 

Op ponent ; May it not be that the word i anah ( entities ), with the number 
five already construed with it . is qualified a g ain by the number five , so that 
i anah can a p pear as twentvfive in number , j ust as it is in the case of panca 
pan"capulvah . where twenty-five pieces of g rass are understood.12 

Vedantin : We sa y, no. The term pancapuli . bein g an instance of a 
compound term si g nif ying a group t i.e. a bundle of five pieces of g rass ), the 
curiosity arises about a qualif ying numeral: "How many bundles?" And 
hence we g et a phrase , "five of the bundles of five g rass pieces ( each ) ". But 
here , in the very use , panca j anah ( five entities ), ( which is not a samahara- 
dvigu),'3_the qualifying numeral (five) being already present, no curiosity 
about any numerical determination arises ; and hence pail ca panca i anah 
cannot be a numerical determination. If panca be still a numeral ad j ective , 
( the first ) five will qualify the second five ( and not j andl ,,) d_4 The 
consequent defect (that one adjective cannot qualify another) has already 
been pointed out. 

"And since they involve an excess" , the twenty-five cate g ories are not 
mean: : for the number twenty-five is exceeded bv the Self and space ( which 
would make the number twenty-seven ) . Of these two , the Self is here 
mentioned as the receptacle holdin g others : for the entity indicated bv the 
locative case in vasmin ( in which ) is referred back as the Self in . "that ver y 
Self 1 re g ard" 15 (Bx. IV. iv. 17). The Self is the conscious Purina (all- 
pervasive entity). Since that Puru$a is already included (by the Samkhyas) 
among the twenty-five (categories), that Puru$a cannot be both the container 
and thing contained. Again, if the Self be taken in some other sense, the 
number of categories will still be exceeded. This militates against the 
Samkhya theory. Similarly, it is not proper to enumerate space separately by 
saying, "and space is placed", it having been already included in the twenty- 
five (categories). If some other meaning be given to it, the accruing defect 
has been pointed out already. Why, again, from hearing the mere number 
twenty-five should one jump to the twenty-five categories that are not talked 













































































































of? For the word Jana does not conventionally mean a (Samkhya) category, 
and the number can be justified in some other sense as well. 

Op ponent : How would you then explain . pan"ca pafica i andh? The answer 
is: Accordin g to the special rule of g rammar . "Words denotin g direction (or 
q uarter ! and number are combined with nouns to form terminolo g ies" 16 tPa. 
Su. II. i. 50), the word panca is combined with jana to give rise to a technical 
term. So some beings, called pancajanah are meant in a conventional sense, 
and not the categories of the Samkhyas. When the curiosity arises to know 
how many they are , the word five is added a g ain to it. There are some 
entities ( conventionall y) called a quintuplet ( panca i anab ). and they are five 
in number. This is j ust as one mi g ht sa y. "The saptar . cisl* tseven-Ns) are 
seven". 

Who, again, constitute that quintuplet? 

That is being answered: 



gpr_q: The vital force and the rest q-qiw from the complementary 
passage. 

12. The vital force and the rest (are the pancajanah), (as is known) from 
the complementary passage. 

In the verse, following "That in which five of the quintuplet" etc. (Br. IV. 
iv. 17), the five entities-vital force and the rest-are enumerated for the sake 
of ascertaining the nature of Brahman: "Those who have known the Vital 
Force of the vital force, the Eye of the eye, the Ear of the ear, the Food of 
food and the Mind of the mind, (have realized the ancient, primordial 
Brahman)" (Br. madhyandina recension IV. iv. 21). On account of proximity, 






































the ones enumerated in the complementary passage are meant by the 
quintuplet. 

Opponent : How, again, can the word Jana (lit. person) be used with 
regard to the vital-force-and the rest? 

Vedantin : How can it either be used with regard to the Satnkhya 
categories? Since either of the two interpretations involves a transgression of 
common usage, the vital force etc. must be accepted on the strength of the 
complementary passage. And the vital force etc. become fit to be referred to 
by the word jana (person) by virtue of their association with a synonym of 
jana (viz puruca). Moreover, the word puru~a, which is a synonym of jana, 
is used to denote the vital force etc. in, "These are in fact the five persons of 
Brahman (Brahmapuru,sah)" (Ch. III. xiii. 6). There is also the brahmana 
text, "The vital force is the father, the vital force is the mother" (Ch. VII. xv. 
1). Besides, on the strength of the formation of the compound, the whole 
phrase can well be a conventional term without any contradiction. 

Opponent : How can a conventional sense be accepted in the absence of 
earlier usage? 

Vedantin : The answer is: It can be so as in the case of the words udbliid 

etc. When a word with an unfamiliar import is used in the proximity of 
words of familiar meanin g, its meanin g is determined by that association 
itself , as in . "One ( desirin g animals ! should endeavour to acquire the desired 
result bv sacrificin g Throu g h udbhidT8" . "He splits the sacrificial stake la" . 
"He prepares an altar20". Similarly, this word pan"cajanah, being understood 
on the strength of the formation of the compound to stand for the name of 
something, raises an inquiry about the thing it names, and thereby it points to 
the vital force etc. occurring in the complementary passage. 

Some explain that the pan"cajanas are the gods, manes, Gandharvas, 
devils, and demons, while others accept the four castes with the Ni;ddas (i.e. 
Brahmaga's sons by Sudra wives) as the fifth. In some places, again, the 
word pancajandh is found in the sense of creatures, as in, "(It is but proper) 
that assuming the form of a human being, bom of the pancajanJd (i.e. 
creatures), He created calls for the invocation of Indra" (It. V. VIII. liii. 7). 

























No incongruity arises even if we accept any of these senses. But when the 
teacher Vyasa says, "The vital force and the rest are the pancajandh as is 
known from the complementary passage", he wants to show the twenty-five 
categories that are not to be understood here. 

Opponent : The vital force and the rest can be the pancajandh for the 
followers of the Madhyandina recension who read of food along with the 
vital force etc. But how will the followers of the Kapva recension get their 
pancajandh, who do not read of food in their enumeration of the vital force 
etc.? 

Hence the answer is being given (by the Vedantin): 


\\\\\\ 

(The number is filled up) mf)fr by light 7" for some ate' 3rufcr when food 
is not present. 

13. For the followers of some recension, the number five has to be made 
up with light in the absence of food. 

Although the followers of the Kamva recension miss food, their quintuplet 
is made up of light (fire), for in the verse, "Upon that immortal Light of all 
lights the gods meditate as longevity" (Br. IV. iv. 16), which precedes the 
verse, "That in which the five pancajanah" etc., they read of light for the 
very purpose of determining the nature of Brahman. 

Opponent : How, again, can this light, read of equally in both the 
recensions, be accepted for some but not for others as having been referred 
to by the number five, occurring in the same verse? 




The answer ( of the Vedantin ) is bein g g iven by sa ving that this is owin g to 
a difference in necessity. In the case of the Madhvandinas . the quintuplet 
consists of the vital force and the rest. Thev bein g all present in the same 
verse , there is no need to turn to li g ht occurrin g in another verse. But since 
in the case of the Kativas . these are not so present , the need arises for takin g 
the help of li g ht. And althou g h the mantra about the li g ht is the same , lig ht is 
accepted or not accordin g to the difference of need. This is j ust like the 
acceptance or non-acceptance of (the sacrificial vessel called ) Sodasin . on 
the basis of a difference of in j unction , althou g h the Atiratra sacrifice ( in 
which the vessel is used ) is the same .21 


Thus, in any case, there is no familiar mention (i.e. sanction) of Pradhana 
in the Upani$ads. As for familiarity through Smiti and reasoning, that will be 
repudiated in future. 


Topic 4: CAUSALITY 


iipii 

q Andq as the cause in respect of space and the rest, zM_aggfgZ_M;: It 
having been spoken of in all the Upani$ads as in any one. 

14. (Brahman is presented by all the Upanicads); for as the cause of space 
and the rest, Brahman is spoken of in all the Upani;ads just as It is in any one 
of them. 

Opponent : The characteristics of Brahman have been shown (B. S. I. i. 
2); and the uniformity of knowledge of Brahman in all the Upani$ads has 
also been proved (I. i. 10). Moreover, it has been established that Pradhana is 
not mentioned by the Upani$ads (I. iv. 1). Now in that connection another 
objection is being raised. It cannot be proved either that Brahman is the 
cause of the universe or that the texts of the Upani$ads lead to an identical 
knowledge of Brahman. 



Why? 














































On account of the divergence that comes to view. The creation in every 
Upanisad seems to be divergent, owing to the difference in the order etc. (of 
creation). For instance, at one place creation is described as starting with 
space: "From the Self emerged space" (Tai. IT. i). At some place it starts 
with light: "That Existence (Brahman) created light" (Ch. VI. ii. 3). At 
another place, creation has the vital force at its head: "He created the vital 
force; and from the vital force He created faith" (Pr. VI. 4). At still another 
place the emergence of the worlds is recounted irrespective of any order: 
"He created these worlds-heaven, interspace, the earth, the nether world" 
(Ai. I. i. 2 ) . Similarly at some places we read of creation startin g from non¬ 
existence. "In the be g innin g all this was but non-existence. From that spran g 
existence" ( Tai. II. vii ). and "This was but nonexistence .in the be g innin g. 
That became existence. That became ready to be manifest"22 (Ch. III. xix. 
1). At some places the theory of creation from nothing is refuted, and 
creation from existence is asserted. For instance, starting with, "With regard 
to that some say that the universe was non-existence before creation", it is 
stated, "'But how can this be so, 0 amiable one?' he said, 'How can existence 
emerge out of non-existence? This was but existence, to be sure, in the 
beginning'" (Ch. VI. ii. 1-2). The evolution of the universe is stated at some 
places to be spontaneous: "In the beginning this was undifferentiated. That 
became differentiated into name and form only" (Br. I. iv. 7). Thus since 
there are many such opposing ideas, and since a thing in itself is not 
paradoxical, it is not proper to hold that the Upanisads are concerned with 
any definite ascertainment of the cause of the universe. But in consonance 
with the theory, well recognized by the Smrtis and reasoning, it is proper to 
accept some other thing as the cause. 

Veddntin : Under such circumstances we say: Although the Upani$ads are 
individually at variance in the matter of the order of creation etc. of space 
and other things, they have no difference as regards the Creator. 

How? 

Because all the other Upani$ads declare just what any one of them does. 
In the very same way that the omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, the One 
without a second is declared in any one of the Upani$ads as the cause, so in 















that very way is that One declared in the other Upani$ads. Take for instance 
the text: "Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite" (Tai. II. i). By the use of 
the term knowled g e in this text and by speakin g of "wishin g " by It in a 
subsequent passa ge ( Tai. II. vi ). Brahman is ascertained as Consciousness : 
and God is spoken of as the cause bv virtue of not bein g dependent on others 
t ibid. ) . By usin g the word Self with re g ard to Him subsequentl y, and b v 
placin g ( The Self ) successively inner and inner in a series of sheaths . 
countin g from this bod y. He is shown to be the inmost Self of all (Tai. 11. il- 
v) . Bv teachin g how the Self became man y, in the text . "He wished , let me 
be man y, let me be bom" ( Tai. II, vi ). it is stated that the mutable , created 
thin g s are non-different from the Creator. Similarl y b v declarin g the creation 
of the entire universe in the text . "He created all this that exists" (Tai. II. vi ). 
the Unani g ad asserts that a sin g le Creator without a second existed before 
creation. The characteristics under which Brahman is known here as the 

cause , are exactly the same as those under which It is known in other 
U pani$ads as well: "In the be g innin g. 0 amiable one , all this was but 
Existence ( Brahman ) -one without a second" f Ch. VI. ii. 1 1: "He saw tor 
deliberated ). V 1 shall become man y. 1 shall be born'. He created li g ht" ( Ch. 
VI. ii. 3 ) . Similarl y. "In the be g innin g, all this was but the Self-one without a 
second. Nothin g else winked. He saw ( or deliberated ). Let me create the 
worlds' " (Ai. 1. i. 1 ) . In this wa v ( there is no disa g reement about the creator ) 
since the texts of this kind , which ascertain the nature of the cause , are not at 
variance in any one of the Upani$ads, But difference is noticed in the case of 
the products -for instance , sometimes creation starts with space , sometimes 
with li ght, and so on. But j ust because there is a difference as re g ards the 
products , it cannot be asserted that Brahman is not the intended purport of all 
the Upani$ads even thou g h It is known as the cause from all of them without 
an y doubt. For such an assertion will lead to unwarranted conclusions,23 

The teacher (Vyasa) will reconcile the variations, so far as the products are 
concerned, under the aphorisms starting with, "Space is not created, as it is 
not so stated in the Upani$ads" (II. iii. 1). Or diver g ences may well be there 
in the case of the effects , for they are not the thin g s sou g ht to be tau g ht. Not 
that all these forms of manifestation , that creation is . are sou g ht to be 
propounded tb v the UpaniSads ): for no human g oal is seen or heard of in the 
U pani$ads as remainin g linked up with them: nor can this be ima g ined to be 
so. for in those respective places , they are seen to combine with the texts 



































































































































about Brahman to convey a sin g le unified idea. This is what the 'JpaniSad 
also shows: "0 amiable one , with the help of this sprout that food is . search 
out its root that is water. With the help of this sprout that water is . 0 amiable 
one , search out the root that fire is. With the help of this sprout that fire is . 0 
amiable one , search out the root that Existence is" (Ch. VI. viii. 4b Besides . 
we can understand that when the UpaniSad speaks of the forms of 
manifestation etc, in extenso . the intention is to declare the non-difference of 
the effects from the cause with the help of such illustrations as cla y ( Ch. VI. 
i. 4-6 ) . And this is what people versed in the Vecl-antic tradition say: "The 
creation that is tau g ht diver g ently with the help of cla y, iron , s parks , etc, is 
only a means for inculcatin g the knowled g e of Brahman : but there is no 
diversity whatsoever" ( Ma. Ka. 111. 15 ) . But the result associated with the 
realization of Brahman is heard of in . "The krnower of Brahman attains the 
su preme ( Brahman )" ( Tai. II. i ). "The knower of the Self transcends sorrow" 
( Ch. VII i. 3 ). and "Knowin g Him alone one g oes beyond death" (Sv. III. 8 ). 
And this result is a matter of direct experience , for the transmi g rator y 
selfhood ceases on the attainment of the transcendental Selfhood as a result 

of the instruction . "That thou art"24 (Ch. VI. viii. 7). 

The divergence in the case of the cause that was pointed out by quoting, 
"In the beginning all this was but non-existence" (Tai. II. vii) etc., has to be 
reconciled. As to that it is said: 



IS. (Non-existence does not mean void), because of its allusion (to 
Brahman). 





































































In the text, "In the beginning all this was but non-existence", non¬ 
existence, conceived of as void, is not presented as the cause; for the theory 
of non-existence is repudiated in the verse: "If any one knows Brahman as 
non-existence, he himself becomes non-existent. If any one knows that 
Brahman does exist, then they consider him as existing by virtue of that 
knowledge" (Tai. II. vi. 1). And then this Brahman, which is Existence, is 
ascertained as the indwelling Self with the help of a succession of sheaths 
counting from that made of food. Again, after referring to that Brahman 
under consideration in the text, "He wished" (Tai. II. vi. 1), it is stated that 
creation in all its ramifications stemmed out of Brahman, and the conclusion 
is made with, "They call that Brahman Truth" (ibid.). Lastly, by saying, 
"Pertaining to this, there occurs this verse," (ibid.), the verse, "In the 
beginning all this was but non-existence" etc. (Tai. II. vii. 1), is quoted in 
connection with that very subject-matter that is being discussed. If 
something, non-existent in the sense of a void, be the purport of this (latter) 
verse, then the whole text will become incoherent as involving the citation of 
something irrelevant to what is sought to be referred to. Therefore it follows 
that because the word "existing" is used in common parlance to imply things 
manifested through names and forms, therefore Brahman which surely 
existed before creation is mentioned here as though non-existent before 
creation in a secondary sense owing to this absence of manifestation. This is 
how the text, "In the beginning this was but non-existence" (Ch. III. xix. 1) 
has also to be construed, for the same is alluded to later on with the words, 
"That was Existence" (ibid.). Had absolute void been asserted, what would 
have been referred to later on by saying, "That was Existence"? And even in 
the text, "With regard to that some say that this universe was but non¬ 
existence before creation" (Ch. VI. ii. 1), the view of "some" people is not 
presented as having the sanction of some other Upani$ad; for unlike action, 
an object is not paradoxical. Accordingly, it is to be understood that the 
theory of non existence, fancied by the people of dull intellect, is raised and 
repudiated with a view to strengthening the idea of Existence, accepted by 
the Upanisads. Even in the text, "This universe was then undifferentiated 
(Br. I. iv. 7), the differentiation (or evolution) of the universe is not spoken 
of as proceeding without an ordainer; for in the text, "He (the Self) has 
entered into these bodies up to the tips of the nails" (ibid.), the ordainer is 
alluded to as having entered into the differentiated products. If the 



differentiation be understood as having taken place without an ordainer, who 
would have been alluded to as having entered into the products by the 
pronoun "He", occurring later on, which can advert only to something 
already under consideration? And this act of entry into the body is heard of 
(in the Upanisad) about the sentient Self; for in the text, "... when It sees, It 
is called the eye; when It hears, the ear; and when It thinks, the mind" (ibid.), 
the Upanisad speaks of the consciousness of the entity that has entered. 
Besides, it can be understood that at the time of the first creation, the 
universe required some ordainer for its differentiation into names and forms, 
just as much as even today it has somebody to guide it when differentiating 
into names and forms (as pot, cloth, etc.). For any fancy that does not agree 
with observation is illogical. Moreover, another text, "Let me manifest name 
and form by Myself entering this as this individual soul" (Ch. VI. iii. 2), 
shows that the universe differentiated under some guidance. And although 
God was there as the creator, still the use of the object (universe) as the 
subject of the (intransitive) verb "differentiated" (in "it differentiated into 
name and form only"-Br. I. iv. 7), is to be understood as pointing to the ease 
and facility in the act of differentiation, even as one might say, "The field is 
harvesting well", it being possible for the crop to be harvested well only if 
there be some peasant to harvest. Or it is to be understood that (it is a 
transitive) verb used in the passive voice with relation to some subject called 
up to mind by the trend of the topic, as in "The village is being reached" 


Topic 5: BALAKI 



16. Because (the word "work" is) indicative of the universe, (He of whom 
this is the work must be Brahman). 



Doubt : In the course of the conversation between Balaki and Ajata§atru 
in the Kausitakl Upani$ad, it is heard, "He indeed is to be known, 0 Balaki, 
who is in fact the creator (or master) of these purusas (beings), or rather of 
whom this is surely the work (IV. 19). With regard to this, the doubt arises: 
Is it the individual soul that is taught to be known, or the chief vital force, or 
the supreme Self? What should be the conclusion to be drawn? Opponent: It 
must be the vital force. 

Why? 

Because the Upanisadic text is: "He of whom this is surely the work". For 
work, consisting of movement, is dependent on the vital force; the vital force 
is met with in the complementary part of the topic: "Then it becomes unified 
in Prana itself" (Kau. IV. 20); and the term Prana is familiarly used for the 
chief vital force. Moreover, the vital force is also the master of the persons 
(purusas) referred to by Balaki in the earlier portion of the sentences: "The 
being in the sun" (Kau. IV. 3), "The being in the moon" (Kau. IV. 4), and so 
on. For the deities of the sun etc. are merely different aspects of the vital 
force as is well known from another Upani$ad, '"Which is the one god?' 'The 
vital force; the vital force is Brahman which is called Tyat (That)"' (Br. III. 
ix.9). 

Or it may be the individual being that is taught here as the entity to be 
known; for his activities, too, constituting virtue and vice, are fit to be 
mentioned in such words as, "Of whom this is the work" (Kau. IV. 19). He, 
too, as being the experiencer, can justifiably be the master of all these 
purucas who serve as the things of his experience. And in the 
complementary text also we come across a sign indicative of the individual 
being; for it is because of this fact that, when Balaki approached Ajatakatru 
to know the creator of the puruFas (in the sun etc.) who had been presented 
as the entity to be known, Ajatasatru, bein g desirous of enli g htenin g Balaki . 
called a sleepin g man by name ; 25 and then from the fact that the man did 
not heed the call . Ai atasatru made Balaki understand that the vital force and 
the rest are not the experiencer. Lastl y, from the fact of wakin g u p as a result 
of bein g struck bv a stick , he makes him understand that the individual soul . 
which is different from the vital force and the rest , is the experiencer. 























Similarly from the subsequent text also can be g athered a si g n indicative of 
the individual soul: "To explain this point: As the head (of a g uild ) lives on 
( what is brou g ht b v) his own people or retinue , or as his own people or 
retinue live on him , so also this conscious soul ( i.e. the individual ) lives on 
these souls ( of the sun etch , and these souls live on this soul"26 (Kau. IV. 
20). The individual soul can well be called the vital force, for it sustains the 
vital force. Hence either the individual soul or the vital force is to be 
accepted here, but not the supreme Lord, for we do not perceive any sign to 
indicate Him. 

Veddntin : Faced with this, we say: The creator of these puruias must be 
the supreme Lord Himself. 

How? 

On the strength of how the topic is started with. For Balaki started to talk 
with Ajata§atru here with the words: "I shall tell you of Brahman" (Kau. IV. 
1); but he became silent after asserting that some persons (puru,sas) residing 
in the sun etc. are fit to be looked upon as Brahman in the primary sense. 
Ajata§atru then told him, "Falsely indeed you promised me, V I shall tell you 
fully of Brahman'", and thus he repudiated Balaki for speaking of those that 
were Brahman only in a secondary sense. Then the king presented another as 
the creator of them all and as the entity to be known. Should Ajatasatru also 
be a seer of the secondary Brahman, it will run counter to the 
commencement of the text. Therefore this must be the supreme Lord. And 
the creatorship of all these persons cannot be thought of as belonging 
exclusively and independently to any one other than the supreme Lord. The 
text, "He of whom this is surely the work" (Kau. IV. 19), does not refer 
either to actions in the form of movements or those constitutin g virtue and 
vice : for neither are they under discussion nor are they mentioned bv the 
U nanind bv name. Nor are the persons indicated thus (as ob j ects of the verb 
b v the text , "this work" ), they havin g been already mentioned in . "the creator 
of these persons"27 ( Kau. IV. 19 ) . Besides , that would .involve a 
contradiction in g ender and number.28 Nor is it indicative of some action 
( i.e. creative function ) or of the result of such action pertainin g to the 
persons ( undertaken bv the creator ): for these have already been referred to 


























































b y the word "creator."29 As the last resort, the universe that is perceived 
proximately (or directly) is referred to by the word "this" (occurring in "this 
work"); and that very universe is referred to by the word "work" in the 
derivative sense of "that which is accomplished" (i.e. product). 

Opponent : Is it not a fact that even the universe is not under discussion, 
nor is it mentioned by name? 

Veddntin : Quite so. Still from the fact that when there is no specific 
mention , thin g s in g eneral that lie near at hand" become signified by a 
pronoun that stands for proximate things in general; but it does not mean 
anything specific, for nothing specific is near at hand. Moreover, the persons 
(in the sun etc.), forming a part of the universe, had been specifically 
mentioned earlier, so that it can be understood that the unspecified universe 
is taken up here. The idea expressed is this: "He who is the creator of these 
purujas, constituting a part of the universe, or rather, leaving aside such a 
specification, He of whom this whole universe, without any specification, is 
a work". The word "rather" is meant for rejecting the creatorship of a limited 
portion. But the specific mention (of the purulas-persons) is made in order to 
show that the persons spoken of as Brahman by Balaki are not Brahman. In 
this way, through general and specific statements , on the analo g y of "the 
BrahmaOas and mendicants " . at the creator of the universe is taught as the 
entity to be known. And the supreme Lord is affirmed as the creator of the 
whole universe by all the Upani$ads. 

^ a ?MRin iit'sii 

-Hof-frTT;~ Owing to the presence of the indicatory marks of the 
individual soul, and the chief Prdna, not so, acq if this be the objection, ffq 
that at t; has been already explained. 

17. If it be contended that the supreme Self is not meant, owing to the 
presence of the indicatory marks of the individual soul and the chief Prdna, 
then that has already been explained. 















Opponent : Now then, the argument was advanced that from the 
indicatory marks of the individual soul and the chief Prdna (vital force) met 
with in the complementary portion of the text, either of the two must be 
accepted, but not the supreme Lord. That has to be answered. 

Vedantin : With regard to this we say: This was repudiated under the 
aphorism, "(If it be argued that Brahman is not spoken of here, since there 
are the indications of the individual soul and the chief vital force, then we 
say), that cannot be so, since this will lead to a threefold meditation. Besides 
Pram is admitted elsewhere as meaning Brahman (owing to the presence of 
Brahman's characteristics) which are in evidence here" (I i. 31). For on such 
an assumption, a threefold meditation will crop up here-meditation on the 
individual soul, on the vital force, and on Brahman. But this is not 
justifiable; for from a consideration of how the passage starts and ends, it is 
seen to refer to Brahman. Of these, it has already been shown how Brahman 
is dealt with at the commencement. And from the mention of the highest 
result (at the end), the concluding portion also is seen to point to Brahman 
thus: "He who knows thus, destroys all the sins and becomes the foremost 
(in attainment) among all, sovereign (over all), and independent (of all)" 
(Kau. IV. 20). 

Objection : On such a view, the ascertainment of the meaning of this 
passage is anticipated by the text about the dialogue of Pratardana (under 
B.S.I.i.31). 

Veddntin : Not so, for the sentence, "Or rather He of whom this surely is 
the work", was not ascertained there as pertaining to Brahman. Accordingly, 
the doubt about the individual soul and the chief vital force that arises here 
again is set aside over again. Moreover, the word Prdna is seen to be used in 
the sense of Brahman: "For, 0 amiable one, the mind (i.e. soul) is tethered to 
Prdiia (Brahman)" (Ch. VI. viii. 2). As for the indicatory signs of the 
individual soul here, they are to be interpreted as used from the standpoint of 
the identity (of the soul with Brahman), for Brahman is known to be the 
subjectmatter of discussion from the consideration of the beginning and the 
end. 




q But iW9: Jaimini (holds): al-ate (the reference to be) for a different 
purpose, mR- TgTvgT;j on the strength of the question and the answer; aTfq 
moreover, ,some people r thus. 

18. But Jaimini holds the reference (to the individual soul) to be meant for 
a different purpose, as is known from the question and the answer. 
Moreover, some mention this clearly. 

Moreover, there need be no dispute here as to whether this text has the 
individual soul primarily in view or Brahman; for the teacher Jaimini is of 
opinion that the allusion to the individual soul in this text is meant for a 
different purpose, viz the comprehension of Brahman. 

How? 

"On the strength of the question and the explanation." As for the question, 
it is seen that when it has been demonstrated by waking a sleeping man that 
the individual soul is distinct from the vital force etc., there occurs another 
question with regard to something beyond the individual soul: "0 Balaki, 
where did this person sleep? Or where did he stay thus, and whence did he 
come thus?" (Kau. IV. 19). The answer also is: "When a sleeping man 
dreams no more, then he becomes unified with Prdna Itself" etc., as also, 
"From this Self the organs move towards their own seats; from the organs 
issue the presiding deities; from the deities issue the sense-objects" (ibid.). 
Now it is a settled conclusion of the Upani$ads that the individual soul 
becomes unified with the supreme Self in sleep, and that the universe, 
inclusive of the organs etc., issues from the supreme Self. So it is to be 
understood that the entity in which this individual being has an absence of 
particularized knowledge, in which it has its deep sleep, consisting in the 
absence of the defect of perturbation, in which it has its real nature of 
freedom from particularized knowledge caused by limiting adjuncts, from 
which occurs its emergence, consisting in a break in that state-that entity is 



the supreme Self, taught here as the thing to be known. Besides, in this very 
context of the conversation between Maki and Ajata§atru, the followers of a 
certain recension, viz the Vajasaneyins, mention clearly the individual soul 
by the term "vijianamaya" (identified with the intellect), and then read of the 
supreme Self, beyond it, in the question, "When this being, identified with 
the intellect, was thus asleep, where was it, and whence did it thus come?" 
(Br. II. i. 16). In the answer also they recite: "... and lies in the Space 
(supreme Self) that is in the heart" (Br. II. i. 17). The word Space is used for 
the supreme Self, as in "the small Space that is inside it" (Ch. VIII. i. 1). It is 
to be understood here in the Brhadaranyaka that when they mention the 
emanation of the conditioned self from some other entity in the text, "All 
these seifs emanate" (Br. II. i. 20), they really point to the supreme Self as 
the source. And the instruction about (the individual soul as) an entity other 
than the vital force, that is imparted with the help of the act of waking up a 
sleeping man, is an additional reason ruling out the vital force. 

Topic 6: CORRELATION OF PASSAGES 

IIKII 

19. (The Self to be realized, heard of, reflected on, and profoundly 
meditated upon is the supreme Self), because (this is the meaning gathered) 
from the correlation of the passages. 

Doubt: Starting with: "It is not for the sake of the husband, my dear, than 
he is loved," it is said, in the Maitreyl Brdhnnanut of the Brhadaarat}yaka 
Upani$ad, "It is not for the sake of all, my dear, that all is loved, but for 
one's own sake that all is loved. The Self, my dear Maitreyi, should be 
realized-should be heard of, reflected on, and profoundly meditated upon. By 
the realization of the Self, my dear, through hearing, reflection, and profound 
meditation, all this is known" (II. iv. 5, IV. v. 6). About this the doubt arises: 



Is it the individual soul, identified with the intellect, that is taught to be 
realized, heard of, etc. or is it the supreme Self? 

Why, again, should there he this doubt? 

Since the start is made with the en joying soul , called up by the su gg estive 
word "loved" .8' it appears that the individual soul identified with the intellect 
is meant. Again, from the instruction that all is known when the Self is 
known, it would seem that the supreme Self is meant. What should be the 
conclusion then? 

Opponent: This is an instruction about the individual soul. Why? 

On the strength of the commencement. It is said at the start that this whole 
universe of enjoyment, consisting of husband, wife, son, and others, is loved 
for the sake of oneself. In this passage the enjoying soul is presented through 
the suggestive word love; and then when the seeing (i.e. realization) etc. are 
taught of the Self, to what other Self (apart from the individual) can this 
refer? In the middle also it is taught, "... even so, my dear, this great, 
endless, infinite Reality is but pure intelligence. ( The Self ) comes out t as a 
se parate entit y) from these elements , and (this separateness ) is destroyed 
with them. After attainin g ( this oneness ) it has no more ( particularized ) 
consciousness" ( tar. H. iv. 12 . IV. v. 13 ). where the " g reat Realit y", which 
has to be realized , is spoken of as "comin g out from the elements" in the 
form of an individual bein g identified with the intellect : and thereby it is 
revealed that it is the individual bein g ( identified with the intellect ) that has 
to be realized. Similarly when the conclusion is made in the text thus: 
"Throu g h what , m v dear , should one know the knower?" ( Br. II. iv. 14 . IV. v. 
15). with a word ( viz knower ) denotin g an a g ent of knowin g, it is shown that 
the individual soul is tau g ht here. Accordin gly, the statement about the 
knowled g e of everythin g accruin g from the knowled g e of the Self must be 
taken in a secondary sense to indicate all the en jo yable thin g s meant for the 
enjoyjng soul.88 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: This is an instruction about the 
supreme Self Itself. 

































































Why? 


On the strength of the correlation of this with other passages. When this 
passage is examined in its proper context, its parts are seen to he linked up 
with the supreme Self. 

How? 

That is being shown. Hearing from Yajnavalkya, "But there is no hope of 
immortality through wealth" (Br. II. iv. 2, IN. v. 3), Maitreyl expresses her 
desire for instruction about immortality in these words: "What shrill I do 
with that which will not make me immortal? Tell me, sir, of that alone which 
you know (to he the only means of immortality)" (Br. II. iv. 3, IV. v. 4). Then 
Yajnavalkya impart, to her the knowledge of the Self. And the texts of the 
Upanisads and Smrtis declare that there can he no immortality from anything 
other than the knowledge of the Self. Similarly whc:t it is stated that the 
knowledge of everything results from the knowledge of the Self, it cannot 
bear any literal import unless the knowledge of the supreme Cause be meant. 
And we cannot resort to any secondary meaning here, since the assertion is 
first made that everything is known by knowing the Self, and then it is 
expounded by saying, "The Brahma>}a ousts one who knows him as 
different from the Self" etc. (Br. II. iv. 6, IV. v. 7). For a false perceiver, who 
perceives the universe, consisting of Brahmapas, Ksatriyas, and others, as 
having emerged into existence independently of the Self, is ousted by that 
very falsely apprehended universe of Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, and others. 
After repudiating the dualistic vision thus, the Upanisad broaches the topic 
of the non-difference of all things from Brahman by saying, "... and this all 
are this Self" (Br. II. iv. 6, IV. v. 7). Again, that very non-difference is 
confirmed with the illustration of the drum etc. (Br. II. iv. 7-9, IV. v. 8-10). 
Besides, when in the text, "... the Rg-Veda, (etc.) are like the breath of this 
infinite Reality" (Br. IV. v. 11), the Upanisad states that the Self under 
consideration is the source of this vast expanse of name, form, and action, it 
only shows that this Self is nothing but the supreme Self. Again, when with 
the help of the process of merger in the same thing (Br. IV. v. 12), the 
Upanisad speaks of the Self as the goal of the whole universe of sense- 
objects, senses, and internal organs, and as without interior and exterior, and 



wholly a mass of pure intelligence (Br. IV. v. 13), it only shows that this Self 
is the supreme Self. Therefore it is understood that this instruction about 
realization etc. is concerned with the supreme Self alone. 

The further objection was raised that from the way the start is made with 
the suggestive word love, the realization etc. that are taught here are of the 
individual soul. Our reply is: 

IRo || 

Afm-f: Of the fulfilment of the declaration fW9 (this is) an indication a 
eg: (thinks) A§marathya. 

20. Afmaratbya. thinks this (statement of non-difference between the 
individual soul and supreme Self) to be a sign indicative of the fulfilment of 
the declaration. 

A solemn declaration is made here tin the text under discussion ! that all 
this becomes known when the Self is known (Br. IV. v. 6 ). as also . "... and all 
this are the Self ( Br. IV. v. 7 ) . The mention of the Self , called up by the 
sugg estive word love , as an entity to be realized and so on . is a si gn 
indicatin g the fulfilment of that declaration. Were the individual soul 
different from the supreme Self , the individual soul would remain unknown 
even when the supreme Self became realized , so that the promise made that 
everythin g becomes known b y knowin g one would be falsified. Hence the 
teacher Asmarathva thinks that it is with a view to fulfillin g the declaration 
that the start is made with the help of the lion-different aspects of the 
su preme Self and the individual Self.34 









































Rmtcq since such becomes the state 3cllf'Ba: of one who is about to die 
Xft this is what afla~i:a Audulomi (says). 

21. Auilulomi says that (the statement about the identity of the individual 
soul and the supreme Self occurs in the beginning) since this state of identity 
comes to the soul when it departs from the body. 

The teacher Audulomi thinks that the start is made with the individual 
soul in a way as though it is identified with the supreme Self, because the 
individual soul, remaining tainted on account of its association with the 
aggregate of body, senses, mind, and intellect, becomes serene (and purified) 
through the practice of knowledge, meditation, etc.; and as such, it can 
justifiably be united with the supreme Self only after it departs from this 
assemblage of body etc. In support of this, occurs the Upani$a& text, "This 
serene one (i.e. the individual soul) rises up from this body and realizing the 
supreme Light becomes established in its true nature" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3). 
Besides, in some texts it is shown with the help of the simile of the river, that 
name and form also rest on the individual soul: "As rivers, flowing down, 
become indistinguishable on reaching the sea, by giving up their names and 
forms, so also the illumined soul, having become freed from name and form, 
reaches the selfeffulgent Purusa that is higher than the higher. (Maya)" (Mu. 
III. ii. 8). In keeping with the parallelism between the illustration and the 
thing illustrated, the meaning of the verse is obviously this: Just as in this 
world the rivers approach the sea by discarding the names and forms 
belonging to themselves, so also the individual being approaches the higher 
Purusa by discarding the name and form belonging to itself. 

mm* ww 

ara fF%c : Owing to the existence (of the supreme Self as the individual 
Self) i~fff so says vTqTf~fq: Ka§akxtsna. 



22. Kdsakrtsna thinks (the statement about the identity in the beginning of 
the text is in order) because of the existence of the supreme Self as the 
individual soul. 

The teacher Kasak;tsna opines that inasmuch as this very supreme Self 
exists as the individual soul, this commencement with a statement of 
identity- is quite in order. In conformity with this occur such brdhmana texts 
as: "Let me manifest name and form, by Myself entering in the form of this 
individual being" (Ch. VI. iii. 2), and so on, which reveal the existence of the 
supreme Self as the individual soul. There are mantra texts also such as: " 
(One becomes immortal by knowing) that omniscient Being, who after 
having created all the forms (i.e. products), and given names to them (has 
entered into them) and exists there by performing the acts of talkitt (etc.)" 
(Tai. A. III. xii. 7). While speaking of the creation of light etc. the Upanisad 
does not make any separate mention of the creation of the individual soul, in 
which case alone the soul could have been different from the supreme Self, it 
being (in that case) a product of the Self. 

The view of the teacher Ka£akitsna is that the supreme Lord Himself 
ap pears as the individual soul without under g oin g any chan g e. As for 
Ag marath va. thou g h the non-difference of the individual soul from the 
su preme Self is admitted by him , still from his conditional statement . "For 
the fulfilment of the declaration" etc. , it becomes clear that his intention is to 
posit some sort of relationship as found between a cause and its effects. 
Accordin g to Auc i ulomi . both difference and nondifference become clearl y 
discernible as bound up with the different states ( of the soul under bonda ge 
and freedom ) . Of these , the view of Kasakrtsna is understood to be in accord 
with the Upani ~ads . for it a g rees with the instruction sou g ht to be imparted . 
as stated in such texts as . "That thou art" ( Ch. VL viii. 7 ). and from this 
standpoint , ( of non-difference ), the attainment of immortality as a result of 
the knowled g e of the Self is qcite in order. But if the individual soul be a 
created thin g t as A g marathva thinks ), then since the modification of a 
substance loses itself on mer ging into its material cause , the assertion of the 
attainment of immortality throu g h knowled g e does riot become lo g ical.35 
(Just because immortality can result from knowledge only if the difference is 
imaginary), therefore (contrary to what Auciulomi thinks) name and form 



























































cannot he the natural appendages of the individual soul. Hence also the name 
and form belong to the limiting adjuncts; but they are stated by way of 
concession (to common experience) as belonging to the soul. For this very 
reason, the origin of the individual being, that is sometimes mentioned in the 
Upanisads with the help of the simile of sparks darting out from fire, should 
he understood as spoken of from the standpoint of the limiting adjuncts 
alone. 

Furthermore, it was argued thus: When it is shown that the "great 
Reality", that is to be realized and that is under discussion, "comes out from 
the elements in the form of the individual soul" (Br. II. iv. 12), what is really 
presented as the entity to be realized is the individual soul. For the refutation 
of this argument as well, these three aphorisms are to be interpreted thus: 
"Aimarathya thinks this reference to the realization etc. of the Self to be a 
sign indicative of the fulfilment of the declaration "-the declaration alluded to 
here being, "Everything becomes known when the Self is known" (Br. II. iv. 
5), and "... all this are the Self" (Br. IV. v. 7). This stands proved by reason of 
all the modes of manifestation of name and form emerging from and 
merging into the same single entity, and by reason of demonstrating the 
identity of the cause and effect through the illustration of the drum etc. And 
the teacher Aimarathya is of opinion that the statement made about the 
"coming out of the great Reality from the great elements in the form of the 
individual soul" is a sign indicative of the fulfilment of the declaration; for 
the knowledge of one thing can lead to the knowledge of all if there is 
identity among them. "Auclulomi says that since this state of identity comes 
to the soul when it departs from the body "-the teacher Audulomi thinks that 
this statement about identity is made just because an identity with the 
supreme Self is possible for the individual soul when, after becoming 
purified through knowledge and meditation, it departs from the body. 
"Kaiakrtsna thinks (that this is so) because of the existence of the supreme 
Self as the individual soul"-the teacher Kasakrtsna is of opinion that since it 
is the very supreme Self that exists in the form of the individual soul, this 
statement of non-difference is justifiable. 


Opponent: The statement-"The Self comes out from these elements and is 
destroyed with them. After this attainment there is no more consciousness" 



(Br. II. iv. 12)-being a statement of annihilation, how can this be a 
declaration of non-difference ?- 

Vedantin : There is no such difficulty; for this statement about destruction 
relates to the eradication of particularized knowledge, but not to the 
annihilation of the soul. For after reverting to the topic with, "Just here you 
have thrown me into confusion sir," (Br. H. iv. 13), the Upani$ad itself 
shows a different meaning in: "Certainly I am not saying anything confusing. 
This Self is indeed immutable and indestructible, my dear. But there is a 
dissociation for it from the sense-objects" (Br. IV. v. 14). The idea is this: 
The individual soul is verily unchanging, eternal, and a mass of 
homogeneous consciousness; there can be no possibility of its annihilation. 
But as a result of knowledge, there is a dissociation for it from the matras 
comprising the senses and the elements that originate from ignorance. And 
since from an absence of contact, particularized knowledge arising from that 
contact cannot exist, it has been said, "After this attainment there is no 
consciousness". 

The further assertion was made that this realization is of the individual 
Self itself, for in the concluding portion, "Through what, my dear, should 
one know the knower?" (Br. II. iv. 14), occurs a word (viz knower) 
suggestive of one who knows. That also is to be refuted with the help of 
Ka§akFtsna's view. Moreover, in the text commencing with, "Because when 
there is duality, as it were, then one sees something" (Br. IV. v. 15), it is 
stated elaborately that for that selfsame soul there is particularized 
knowledge when it is within the range of ignorance. And then in the text, 
starting with, "But when to the knower of Brahman everything has become 
the Self, then what should one see and through what?" (ibid.), it is shown 
that for that very soul there is an absence of particularized knowledge like 
seeing etc. when it is within the ambit of illumination. Then, again, the 
apprehension is raised that even though there be no other object of 
knowledge, still one may know the Self; and in answer to this it is said, 
"Through what, my dear, should one know the knower?" (ibid.). Hence from 
the fact that the text is devoted to the proving of the absence of 
particularized knowledge, it can be understood that, though the Self is 
Consciousness Itself and remains for ever in Its absoluteness, still by 



keeping in mind how It had appeared (in the state of ignorance), It is referred 
to by the word vijndtJ (knower), formed with the suffix trc and conveying 
the sense of an agent of the act (of knowing). It was shown earlier that the 
view of Kasakrtsna accords with the Upanisads. So the interpretation that 
should be accepted by all those who follow the Upanisads is that the 
difference between the individual Self and the supreme Self is a creation of 
conditioning factors like body etc. constituted by name and form which are 
conjured up by nescience; the difference is not real; for this view is 
supported by such Upanisadic texts as: "0 amiable one, in the beginning, all 
this was but Existence, one without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1), "All this is but 
the Self (Ch. VII. xxv. 3), "All this is but Brahman" (Mu. II. ii. 11), "...and 
all this are the Self" (Br. II. iv. 6), "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. 
III. vii. 23), "There is no other witness but this" (Br. III. viii.). and so on; as 
also by such Sn ti texts as, "...that all this is Vasudeva" (GTta, VII. 9), "0 
scion of the race of Bharata, know Me also to be the individual witness in all 
the bodies" (ibid. XIII. 2), "...the Lord Supreme, existng equally in all 
beings" (ibid. XIII. 27), and so on. Furthermore, the same conclusion 
follows from the rejection of the dualistic outlook in, "While he who 
worships another god, thinking, 'He is one and I am another', does not know. 
He is like an animal to the gods" (Br. I. iv. 10). "He goes from death to death 
who sees difference, as it were, in It" (Br. IV. iv. 18), and similar other 
passages. Besides, all changes are denied in the Self by the passage, "The 
great birthless Self is undecaying, immortal, undying, fearless, and Brahman 
(infinite)" (Br. IV. iv. 25). For unless this be understood thus, the aspirants 
for liberation will not have any illumination that defies sublation; nor can 
any knowledge be gained by them that carries with itself the fullest 
conviction. For the knowledge about the Self that is sought here is that 
knowledge alone that is beyond all refutation and sets at rest all questions, as 
declared by the Upani$adic passage, "Those to whom the entity, presented 
by the Vedic knowledge, has become fully ascertained" (Mu. III. ii. 6), as 
also, "What delusion and what sorrow can persist there for one who has 
realized Unity?" (Is. 7). This follows also from the Sm;ti text, setting forth 
the characteristics of the man of steady wisdom (GYta, II. 55-72). When the 
full illumination about the oneness of the Supreme Self and the Self 
witnessing the body becomes established, such terms as "the witness of the 
body", "the supreme Self betrays a mere difference in terminology; and 



hence this insistence on the theory that this "witness of the body" is different 
from the supreme Self and the supreme Self is different from the "witness of 
the body", that centres round the idea of difference of the two Selves, is 
meaningless. For the Self is but one, though spoken of differently on the 
basis of difference in mere nomenclature. Not that the text, "Brahman is 
Truth, Knowledge, Infinite. He who knows that Brahman as existing in the 
cavity of the intellect" (Tai. II. i), is spoken of in relation to any particular 
cavity; nor does anything else but Brahman exist in the cavity (of the 
intellect), since we hear of the entry of the Creator Himself in the text, 
"Having created that, He entered into that" (Tai. II. vi). Those who insist on 
difference, shut the door to the understanding of the purport of the 
Upanigads and thereby shut out full illumination itself that leads to 
liberation. Moreover, they fancy that liberation is a product and 
impermanent, and they do not conform to logic. 

Topic 7: BRAHMAN AS MATERIAL CAUSE 




(Brahman is) T: the material cause w as well srfi-lgiftrq so as not to 
contradict the proposition and the illustration. 

23. Brahman must be the material cause as well, so as not to contradict the 
proposition and the illustration. 

Doubt: It has been said that just as virtue and vice are to be deliberated on 
since this leads to secular well-being, so also Brahman is to be deliberated 
on since this leads to liberation. And Brahman was defined as "That from 
which the universe has its birth etc." (I. i. 2). That definition is applicable 
either to the material cause in the sense in which earth, gold, etc. are the 
causes of pots, necklaces, etc., or to the efficient cause in the sense in which 
a potter, a goldsmith, and others are the causes. Therefore the doubt arises: 
In what, again, does Brahman's causality consist? 



Opponent : While under such a predicament, it would appear that It can 
only be the efficient cause. 

Why? 

For creatorship, preceded by reflection is heard of. From such Upanipdic 
texts as, "He deliberated" (Pr. VI. 3), "He created the vital force" (Pr. VI. 4), 
the causality of Brahman is understood to have been preceded by reflection. 
And creation after reflection is noticed in the cases of efficient causes like 
the potter and others. It is also seen in the world that success in a work 
depends on many accessories. That logic should be extended to the first 
Creator as well. Besides, this follows from the fact of His being well known 
as the Lord; for efficient causality is alone noticed in the cases of lordly 
beings like kings, Death, and others. In conformity with this it is but proper 
to understand efficient causality alone even in the case of the supreme Lord. 
Besides, this universe, which is a product, is seen to be composite, 
insentient, and impure; so its material cause, too, must be of the same nature, 
since the cause and effect are seen to be similar. But Brahman is known to be 
devoid of such a nature from such texts as, "Without parts, motionless, 
unchanging, taintless, and free from tarns" (Sv. VI. 19). As a last resort, 
some material cause, other than Brahman, that is well recognized in the 
Sm;tis and is possessed of the characteristics of impurity etc., has to be 
admitted; for the Upani$ads speaking of Brahman as the origin, speak of 
nothing more than efficient causality. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say: Brahman has to be admitted as 
the material cause as well as the efficient cause. It is not merely the efficient 
cause. 

Why? 

"So that the proposition and the illustration may not be contradicted." Of 
these the proposition is: "Now then, did you ask about that subject-matter of 
instruction by which the unheard becomes heard, the unthought becomes 
thought, and the unknown becomes known?" (Ch. VI. i. 2), where it is 
obvious that by knowing one thing all other things, even though unknown, 
become known. And that knowledge of all things can be possible only from 



the knowledge of their material cause, since the effect is non-different from 
its material, whereas the effect is not non-different from its efficient cause, 
as is evident from the difference noticed in the world between the architect 
and his architecture. The illustration cited also relates to the material cause, 
as in, "0 amiable one, as by knowing a lump of earth, all things made of 
earth become known, since earth alone is true and all transformations exist 
only in name, having speech as their origin (or support)" (Ch. VI. i. 4). 
Similar also are the illustrations: "All modifications of gold become known 
by knowing a piece of gold", "All things made of iron become known when 
a nail-cutter is known" (Ch. VI. i. 5-6). So also it is seen in the other 
Upanipds that the proposition is stated thus: "0 adorable sir, (which is that 
thing) which having been known, all this becomes known?" (Mu. I. i. 3), and 
the illustration is: "As herbs grow on the earth" (Mu. I. i. 7). Elsewhere, too, 
the proposition is: "All this, my dear, becomes known when the Self is seen, 
heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon" (Br. IV. v. 6), and the illustration 
is: "As when a drum is beaten, one cannot distinguish its various particular 
notes, but they are included in the general note of the drum or in the general 
sound produced by different kinds of strokes" (Br. IV. v. 8). In this way, in 
each Upani$ad, the proposition and illustration are to be understood, so far 
as they go, as pointing to the material cause. The phrase, "that from which- 
yatah" occurring in, "That from which these beings emerge" (Tai. III. i.), is 
to be understood as pointing to the material constituting the basic substance, 
in accordance with the special rule of grammar, "The basic substance of 
anything that is being born is used in the ablative case (i.e. with the pronoun, 
from)" (Pa. SO. I. iv. 30). As for the efficient causality of Brahman, it is to 
be understood from the absence of any other ordainer. Unlike the basic 
substances like earth, gold, etc., acting under the control of their moulders— 
the potter, goldsmith, and others-Brahman, even though It is a basic 
substance, does not depend on any other ordainer; for it is emphasized that 
before creation, all this was but one without a second. And it is to be 
understood that this absence of any other ordainer has to be assumed so that 
no conflict between the proposition and the illustration may arise. For if any 
ordainer be admitted apart from the material, it will become impossible 
again to have a knowledge of all from the knowledge of one, and so the 
proposition and the illustration will be at variance. Accordingly, the Self is 



the ordainer since there is no other designer, and It is also the material cause 
since there is no other material. 


What more reason is there to show that the Self is the agent as well as the 
material? 

arfWqfcra \m 

w And atf+lT-aqa because of the teaching about the will to create. 

24. This is also understood from the teaching about the will to create. 

"The teaching about the will to create", also leads to the understanding of 
the Self as the efficient and material cause: "He wished, ' let me be many, let 
me be born 1 " (Tai. II. v. 2), and "It deliberated, 'I shall become many, I shall 
be bom 1 " (Ch. VI. ii. 3). In those texts the Self is known to be the agent by 
virtue of independent action proceeding from deliberation. And it is 
understood that the Self is the material cause as well, since the will to 
become many as expressed in, "I shall become many", relates to Himself. 

ran 



w And zRq-rmt( both having been taught qr directly. 

25. And because both (origin and dissolution) are taught directly (from 
Brahman). 



This is again in continuation of the material causality. Brahman is the 
material cause for this further reason that both creation and dissolution are 
spoken of by accepting Brahman directly as the cause in the text: "All these 
beings originate from Space (Brahman) alone, and they merge by proceeding 
towards Space" (Ch. I. ix. 1). It is recognized that anything from which 
something originates and in which it merges, must be its material cause, as 
for instance, earth is of paddy, barley, etc. By the word "directly" the 
aphorist implies that the text, "Originates from Space alone", means that no 
other material was accepted. And a product is not seen to be absorbed into 
anything other than its material cause. 





mif=f-i*: Because of action related to Itself 4ft-1 lli by way of change of 
form. 

26. (Brahman is the material cause) because of action related to Itself by 
way of change of form. 

Brahman is the material cause for the further reason that in dealing with 
the topic of Brahman, it is shown in the text, "That created Itself by Itself" 
(Tai. II. vii), that the Self is both the object and the subject-"Itself" denoting 
the object, and "created by Itself presenting the subject. 

Opponent : How, again, can a pre-existing entity, standing there as the 
agent (of some action), be reduced to an object that is being produced? 

Veddntin : We say that this can be so by way of change of form, the idea 
being that the Self, pre-established though It is, changed Itself into a special 
form as the Self of the modifications; and particular changes into modified 
things are in evidence in the cases of such material causes as earth etc. The 
use of the qualifying phrase "by itself" indicates that there was no 



dependence on any other cause. (Or the second word) parini mdt may be an 
independent aphorism, the meaning being this: Brahman is not the material 
cause for this further reason that this modification of Brahman Itself into 
created things is mentioned in the Upanisad by using the same case-ending 
after Brahman in, "It became the (elements) -gross (earth, water, fire) and 
subtle (air, space)" etc. (Tai. II. iii). 

IRttll 

w And ff because f: as the source " is declared. 

27. And because Brahman is declared to be the source (yoni). 

Brahman is the material cause for this additional reason: Brahman is 
mentioned in the Upani$ad as the source, as in, "...the creator, lord, 
indwelling soul, Brahman, the source" (Mu. III. i. 3), and "the source of all 
beings which the wise perceive" (Mu. I. i. 3). The word yoni is understood in 
the world as signifying the material cause, as in, "The earth is the yoni 
(source) of the herbs and trees". The female organ too (called yoni) is a 
material cause of the foetus by virtue of its constituent (materials). 
Sometimes the word yoni is used in the sense of a place, as in "0 Indra, I 
have placed a yoni (seat) for you" (1 . V. I. civ. 1). But in the present texts 
(of the Upani$ads), yoni is used in the sense of the material cause, which 
fact becomes clear from such complementary portions as, "As a spider 
projects and withdraws" (Mu. I. i. 7), and so on. Thus it is a well-known fact 
that Brahman is the material cause. As for the argument that creation after 
deliberation is seen in the world only in the cases of such efficient causes as 
the potter and others, but not in the case of materials, that is being answered. 
Any argument from common sense is not applicable here; for this is not a 
truth to be arrived at through inference. Rather, it being known from the 
Vedas (alone), its meaning should conform to Vedic statements. And we said 



that the Vedas affirm that the deliberating God is the material cause as well. 
We shall expound this point again more elaborately. 

Topic 8: EXPLANATION OF EVERYTHING 

qfo m *rr *jpw m 

xj~q Hereby Bq all (theories) wnwm: are explained agTWM. explained. 

28. Hereby all (other theories of the cause of the universe) are explained. 
They are explained. 

Starting with, "Because of the attribution of seeing, the one (i. e. Pradhina 
of the Salhkhyas) which has not been taught by the Upani$ads is not the 
cause of the universe" (B. S. I. i. 5), the theory of Pradhina as the cause was 
raised and refuted again and again by the aphorisms themselves. This was 
so, because in the Upanigads are found some semblances of indicative signs, 
which appear in the eyes of the people of dull intellect as reinforcing that 
theory. Inasmuch as that theory admits the non-difference of the cause and 
the effect, it approaches very near to the Vedantic theory, and it has been 
drawn upon in their own texts by some writers like Devala, who composed 
aphorisms on injunctions and prohibitions (religious duties etc.). For this 
reason, a great effort was made for repudiating it, and not so for the 
repudiation of the theories of the atom etc. as the cause. But they too have to 
be disproved, since they are opposed to the theory of Brahman as the cause. 
Some Vedic indications may appear in the eyes of the people of poor 
intellect as seemingly confirming those views. Hence the same arguments 
are being extended to them on the analogy of defeating the chief wrestler. 
"Hereby", by the arguments refuting the theory of Pradhana as the cause, "all 
other theories" about the atom etc. as the causes, are also to be understood as 
"explained", proved to be fit for rejection; for they too are not mentioned in 
the Vedas, and they too are opposed to the Vedas. The repetition of 
"explained" is by way of showing the end of this Part. 



Topic 1: CONFLICT WITH SMRTI 



CHAPTER II 


AVIRODHA-NON-CONTRADICnON 



In the course of showing how all the Upani;adic texts are in agreement in 
presenting Brahman (as the cause of the universe), it was proved in the First 
Chapter that the omniscient Lord of all is the source of the origin of the 
universe, just as clay, gold, etc. are of pots, necklaces, etc.; that by virtue of 
His being the ordainer of the created universe, like the magician of his 
magic, He is the cause of the continuance of the universe; that He is the 
cause of the withdrawal of the manifested universe into Himself, like the 
earth withdrawing the four kinds of creatures; and that He is the Self of us 
all. Moreover, the theories that Pradhana and other things are the causes 
were demolished on the ground of being un-Vedic. Now the Second Chapter 
is begun for showing that the Smrtis and logic are not antagonistic to our 
own point of view; that the theories of Pradhana and the rest as the causes 
are based only on a semblance of logic; and that the processes of creation 
etc. are not at variance in the different Upani$ads. Of these the contradiction 
with the Smrtis is presented and refuted first. 





mm 

There arises the defect of the (Satflkhya) Smrtis being left without any 
scope f if such be the objection, not so,t-a~.-5ij Tc~ for (otherwise) arises 
the defect of other Smrtis being left without any scope. 

1. If it be argued (that from the acceptance of Brahman as the cause of the 
universe) arises the defect of the (Sathkhya) Smrtis being left without any 
scope, then not so, for otherwise will arise the defect of other Smrtis losing 
their scope. 

Opponent : The assertion made that the omniscient Brahman is the cause 
of the universe is untenable. 

Why? 

Because that is tantamount to leaving no scope for the Smrtis. The Smrtis 
are the scriptural text called Tanta, written by the great seer (Kapila) and 
accepted by the good people, and also the other Smrtis that are in accord 
with them. These will lose their scope on the acceptance of this view. For in 
them the insentient Pradhana is upheld as an independent cause. As for the 
Smrtis of Manu and others, they retain their scope in so far as they present 
the accessories postulated by religious rites and ceremonies like the 
Agnihotra sacrifice etc., comprised within the domain of injunctions and 
prohibitions, as for instance, such and such . caste should have the ceremony 
of investiture with the sacred thread at such a time, in such a manner, and 
such should be the mode of conduct, such the study of the Vedas, such the 
returning from the teacher's house after the completion of the study, and such 
the marriage with a woman who will perform the religious rites conjointly. 
So also they enjoin many kinds of human objectives and rites and duties of 
the four castes and four stages of life. But the Smrtis of Kapila and others 
have no such preoccupation with things to be performed; for they are 
composed from the standpoint of the fullest insight leading to liberation. If 
they are left without scope even there, they will surely become useless. 





Accordingly, the Upani$ads have to be explained without contradicting 
them. 

Objection : As it has already been established on the strength of such 
reasons as "seeing (or reflecting)" that the purport of the Upani$ads is that 
the omniscient Brahman is the cause of the universe, why is it again called 
into question under the apprehension of the defect of the Smrtis being left 
without any scope? 

An Explanation : This kind of acceptance of Vedanta without any question 
may be quite possible for people of independent intellect; but people 
generally depend for their enlightenment on the scriptures written by others. 
Being unable to comprehend the meaning of the Upani$ads independently, 
they will turn to the Smrtis that have well-known authors, and they will 
comprehend the meaning of the Upani$ads with their help; but they will not 
rely'on our explanation, since the authors of the Smrtis command great 
respect. Besides, the Smrtis mention that Kapila and others had the 
(unobstructed prophetic) vision of seers. And there is the Upani$adic text, " 
(One should realize that God) who saw the seer Kapila emerging out in the 
beginning of creation and filled him with knowledge after his birth" (Sv. V. 
2). Therefore it is not possible to make their view appear false. Moreover, 
they establish their interpretation with the help of logic. Hence from this 
point of view also, the Upani$ads have to be explained with the help of the 
Smrtis. Hence this objection is raised again. 

Vedantin : The solution of that difficulty is this: "No, because that will 
leave other Smctis without scope." If by arguing under the fear of some 
Smrtis being left without scope, the theory of God as the cause be set at 
naught, then other Smxtis speaking of God as the cause will be left without 
any scope. We shall quote them: After commencing about the supreme 
Brahman with the words, "That which is that subtle, inscrutable entity", and 
stating, "for He is called the indwelling Self of all beings, and the witness of 
the bodies", it is declared, "from that arose, O best among the Brahmanas, 
the Unmanifested, possessed of the three gtrrtas". Similarly, it is said 
elsewhere, "0 Brahmana, the Unmanifested gets merged in the attributeless 
Purina", and "Therefore hear this again in brief: The eternal Nara"ana is all 



this. At the time of creation, He projects everything, and eats it up again at 
the time of dissolution." These are statements in the Puranas. In the Gita also 
occurs this: "I am the origin and dissolution of the whole universe" (VII. 6). 
And Apastamba has this with regard to the supreme Self: "All things, 
counting from space, originate from Him; He is changeless and He is 
eternal" (Dharimasutra. I. viii. 23.2). Thus in the Smrtis also, God is 
revealed in quite a number of places as both the material and efficient cause. 
The reason for presenting the defect of other Smttis being left without scope 
is this: "With the help of the Smrtis, we shall meet the arguments of those 
who take their stand on the Smrtis." It was shown earlier that the Upani$ads 
have for their purport God as the cause. In a case of conflict among the 
Smrtis themselves, when it become incumbent to accept some and reject 
others, the Smrtis agreeing with the Upan*ds are to be accepted as valid, 
while the others are not to be relied on. Thus it has been said in the course of 
determining the validity of the means of knowledge: "When a Smrti 
contradicts a Vedic text, it is not to be relied on (and ought to be rejected); 
for a Vedic text can be inferred to exist as the basis of a Smrti passage only 
when there is no such contradiction" (Jai. Su. I. iii. 3). And one cannot 
surmise the possibility of perceiving supersensuous things without the help 
of the Vedas, for there is no ground for this. 

Opponent : It is possible for Kapila and others who have attained 
perfection in their practices; for their knowledge is unobstructed. 

Veddntin : No, for even perfection is dependent on other things, it being 
contingent on the practice of virtue etc. And virtue (and vice) are indicated 
by injunction (and prohibition). Hence the meaning of an injunction, existing 
even earlier (than anybody's perfection), cannot be overridden on the 
authority of somebody's words who attains perfection subsequently. Besides, 
even if it be fancied that we have to rely on the adepts, still in the face of the 
fact that perfected beings are many, in a case of conflict among their Smrtis, 
there is no other means of ascertaining their meanings unless it be by an 
appeal to the Vedas. And even for people whose intellects are dominated by 
the scriptures of others, it is not proper to entertain a bias for any particular 
Smrti without question. For if anybody has any bias for any point of view, 
then since the power of understanding differs from man to man, there will be 



no definiteness in the matter of the ascertainment of Reality. Accordingly, 
even the intellect of such a man has to be won back to the proper course 
through a presentation of the conflict among the Smrtis and a consideration 
of their agreement or disagreement with the Vedas. As for the allusion to the 
Upani$adic text showing the excellence of the wisdom of Kapila, one cannot 
on that score put faith on any view of Kapila even when it contradicts the 
Vedas , because that conclusion has for its basis only a similarity of the name 
Kapila . and because another Kapila . called Vasudeva . is mentioned in the 
Smrti . who burnt away the sons of Sa g ara. Moreover , a passa g e meant for 
impartin g knowled g e of one thin g cannot prove the existence of somethin g 
else (mentioned casuall y)., unless the latter has some independent basis.' 
Besides, there is a Vedic text declaring the greatness of Manu: "Whatever 
has been spoken by Manu is a curative medicine" (Tai. Sa. II. ii. 10.2). And 
Manu says, "That sacrificer to the Self, who sees his own Self equally in all 
beings, and all beings in his own Self, attains independent sovereignty" (XII. 
91), where we understand that he eulogizes the vision of everything as the 
Self and thereby condemns the (dualistic) view of Kapila. For Kapila does 
not approve the realization of everything as the Self, since he admits a 
multiplicity of souls. The passage, "0 Brahmat}a, are the souls many or 
one?" in the Mahabharata, raises a discussion, the opponent's point of view 
being stated in "0 king, the souls are many according to those who base their 
discussion on Samkhya and Yoga". Then by way of demolishing that theory, 
the start is made with the passage, "Just as the same earth is spoken of as the 
source of many human forms, so also I shall tell you of that cosmic Person 
endowed with transcendental qualities". And lastly omnipresence itself is 
established in the passage: "He is my indwelling Self as well as yours; He is 
the witness of all others who are spoken of as associated with bodies; but He 
is not perceived by anybody anywhere. All heads are His, all hands are His; 
all legs, all eyes, all noses are His. He is one, but moves through all beings at 
His will. He is blissful and free from sorrow". There are also Vedic passages 
about the Self of all, as for instance, "When (at the time of realization), all 
beings become the Self of the enlightened man, then (during that state) what 
sorrow can there be and what delusion to that seer of non-duality?" (is. 7). 
Hence both to the Vedas and the teachings of Manu which follow the Vedas, 
the scripture of Kapila is antagonistic not only so far as it assumes an 
independent Prak ti (primordial Nature), but also because of its assumption 




























of a multiplicity of souls. For the Vedas have an independent authority with 
regard to what they reveal (within their own province), just as much as the 
sun has with regard to its colour, whereas the authority of any human being 
is remote, since it depends on some other source of knowledge and since the 
memory of the speaker intervenes. Hence it is nothing damaging if the 
Smrtis are left without any application in matters contradictory to the Vedas. 


Why, again, it constitutes no defect to leave the Smrtis without any scope? 



qr And g" of the others ait3eiq: there being no perception. 

2. And (Pradhana is not the cause) since the others are not met with (in the 
Vedas and common experience). 

Categories, other than Pradhana, such as mahat and the rest, which are 
assumed in the Smrtis as the derivatives of Pradhana, are not met with either 
in the Vedas or in common experience. Of these the elements and the senses 
can have a place in the Smrtis, since they are well known in the world and 
the Vedas. But since mahat and the rest are unfamiliar, like the- objects of a 
sixth sense, both in the world and the Vedas, they are not fit to be mentioned 
in the Smrtis. Even though words appearing to suggest them may occur 
occasionally in the Vedas, they do not really bear those meanings, as it was 
explained under the aphorism, "If it be said that even the inferred entity is 
revealed to the followers of some recension" (I. iv. 1). The idea implied is 
that, since the reference to the derivatives (mahat and the rest) is invalid, the 
Smrti referring to the source (Pradhana) must be equally so. From this point 
of view also there can be no fault arising from leaving the (Sarhkhya) Smrtis 
without scope. As for the logical validity of the Sarilkhya view, it will be 



demolished under the aphorisms commencing with, "Brahman is not the 
cause of the universe, since the world is of a different nature" (II. i. 4). 

Topic 2: REFUTATION OF YOGA 

q~m Hereby 1: Yoga Ali: is refuted. 

3. Hereby is refuted Yoga. 

The arguments under the last topic are being extended here to another 
topic by saying that "hereby", by the repudiation of the Sarhkhya Slnrti, it is 
to be understood that the Yoga Smrti is also repudiated. For there also, in 
contradiction to the Vedas, occurs the assumption of Pradhana . as an 
independent cause, as also of its derivatives, mahat and the rest, though these 
have no place in common experience or the Vedas. 

Opponent: If that be so, all this is already implied in the earlier aphorism. 
So why is this fresh extension? 

Vedirntin : Because an additional doubt does crop up, Yoga having been- 
enjoined in the Vedas as a means to the realization of full illumination, as in, 
"The Self is to be realized-to be heard of, reflected on, and profoundly 
meditated upon" (Br. II. iv. 5). Moreover in the Svetasvatara Upani$ad we 
come across an elaborate injunction about Yoga, comprising the arrangement 
of seat and the rest, which commences with the verse, "Holding the body in 
balance, with the three limbs (chest, neck, and head) erect" (II. 8). And 
thousands of Vedic signs indicative of Yoga are met with, as in, "The holding 
of the senses and organs unperturbed and under control is called Yoga by the 
adepts" (Ka. II. iii. 11), "Getting fully this knowledge (of Brahman) and the 




process of Yoga" (Ka. II. iii. 18), and so on. In the philosophy of Yoga also, 
it is said, "Now then, starts Yoga which is a means to the realization of 
Reality", where it is admitted as a means to complete illumination. So a 
portion of the Yo g a Smrti bein g acceptable to either side , it cannot be 
discarded j ust as much as the Smrti about the A g akd ceremony cannot be .2 
This additional doubt is also disposed of by extending the application of the 
previous aphorism. Though there is an agreement in respect of a portion of 
the subject-matter, still since disagreement is in evidence in respect of 
others, as shown above, an effort is being made against the Satnkhya and 
Yoga Smrtis alone, though many Smrtis dealing with spiritual matters are 
extant. For the Samkhya and Yoga are well recognized in the world as means 
for the achievement of the highest human goal (liberation), and they are 
accepted by the good people and are supported by Vedic indicatory marks, as 
in, "One becomes freed from all the bondages after realizing the Deity that is 
the source of these desires and is attained through Samkhya and Yoga". 
Their refutation centres round only this false claim that liberation can be 
attained through Satinkhya knowledge or the path of Yoga independently of 
the Vedas. For the Upanisads reject the claim that there can be anything apart 
from the Vedic knowledge of the unity of the Self that can bring about 
liberation, as is denied in, "By knowing Him alone, one goes beyond death. 
There is no other path to proceed by" (Sv. III. 8). But the followers of 
Sarimkhya and Yoga are dualists, and they do not perceive the unity of the 
Self. 

As for the reference to realization in the quotation . "One becomes freed 
after realizin g the Deity that is the source of all desires and is attained 
throu g h Sarhkhva and Yo g a" (Sv. VI. 13 ). the Vedic knowled g e and 
meditation are there referred to by the words Skhkhva and Yo gas, for these 
latter have an affinity of meaning to the former. This is how it is to be 
understood. But it is admitted that Satinkhya and Yoga have their applica 
tion so far as those features are concerned which are not antagonistic to the 
Vedas; for instance, the absolute (qualityless) Puru$a (infinite conscious 
Entity) that is well known in such Upani$adic texts as, "For this infinite 
Being is unattached" (Br. IV. iii. 15), is accepted by the Sarilkhyas when 
they affirm that their purufa (individual soul) is without any quality. 
Similarly the followers of Yoga, when instructing about the qualifications of 



























monks etc., subscribe to the path of detachment as it is well known from the 
Upani$adic text, "Then there is the monk with his discoloured (ochre) cloth, 
shaven head, and non-acceptance of all gifts" (Jabala, 5). 

Thus also are to be refuted all the Smttis of the NyayaVaiie$ika schools. 

Opponent : Through inference and supporting reason, they too are 
conducive to the knowledge of Reality. 

Veddntin : Let them be so conducive. But the knowledge of Reality 
springs from the Upani$adic texts alone, as is stated in such passages as, 
"One who is not versed in the Vedas cannot reflect on the great Entity" (Tai. 
Br. III. xii. 9.7). "I ask you of that infinite Being known only from the 
Upani$ads" (Br. III. ix. 26). 

Topic 3: DIFFERENCE IN NATURE 

* fowled TO ^ ^ IIVII 

(Brahman is) not (the cause), fgarm owing to the dissimilarity in nature 
aim of this (universe); q and the fact of being so qwq follows from the 
Vedas. 

4. Brahman is not the cause of the universe owing to the dissimilarity in 
the nature of this universe; and the fact of being so is known from the Vedas. 

The objection to the view that Brahman is the material as well as efficient 
cause of the universe, that was raised from the standpoint of the Smrtis, has 
been disposed of. Now is being met the objection raised from the standpoint 
of logic. 

Objection : When this meaning of the Vedas has once been ascertained, 
how can there be any scope for doubt from the standpoint of logic? Are not 
the Vedas as much an independent authority about Brahman as they are 
about virtue and vice? 



Opponent: Such an objection could have been raised, if like religious rites 
etc., that have to be accomplished, the subjectmatter here had to be known 
from the Vedas alone, and not from any other source of knowledge. But 
Brahman is recognized as an entity already existing (and not a thing to be 
accomplished). With regard to an existing reality, other means of knowledge 
have also an applicability, as for instance in the case of the earth etc. And 
just as in a case of conflict among Vedic texts, all the rest are made to 
conform to one, so also when the Vedic texts contradict other means to 
knowledge, they should be made to conform to others. Besides, inference is 
nearer to perception inasmuch as it presents an unknown thing in conformity 
with the characteristics of the known, whereas the Vedic passages are remote 
from perception inasmuch as they present their subject-matters on the basis 
of (dogmatic) tradition. It is held that the knowledge of Brahman, 
culminating in personal realization, has a perceived (or tangible) result in the 
form of removing ignorance and leading to liberation. The Upani$adic text, 
"The Self is to be heard of, reflected on" (Br. II. iv. 5), which enjoins 
reflection over and above hearing, shows that reasoning is also to be given 
due consideration. Hence the doubt is again preferred from the standpoint of 
logic, by saying, "Brahman is not the cause of the universe owing to the 
dissimilarity in nature". The assertion made that conscious Brahman is the 
material cause of the universe has no legs to stand on. 

Why? 

Because this product is dissimilar to the material cause. For this universe, 
that is believed to be a product of Brahman, is seen to be different in nature 
from Brahman, it being insentient and impure, whereas Brahman is declared 
in the Upani$ads to be dissimilar in nature from the universe, It being 
conscious and holy. It is not a matter of experience that things differing in 
nature can be related as the material cause and its effect. For products like 
gold necklace etc. cannot have clay etc. as their material cause, nor can 
earthen plates etc. have gold as their material. As a matter of fact, clay things 
are made from clay, and gold things from gold. Similarly this universe- 
insentient, full of happiness, misery, and delusion as it is-must be the product 
of something which is insentient and abounds in happiness, misery, and 
delusion. But it cannot be the product of Brahman which is dissimilar. That 



the universe is dissimilar to Brahman is to be understood from noticing the 
former's insentience and impurity. This universe is impure because it 
abounds with happiness, sorrow, and dejection, and as a result leads to 
enjoyment, grief, and delusion etc., and it remains diversified into such high 
and low states as heaven, hell, etc. And the universe is insentient, since it is 
admitted to be serviceable to the sentient (souls) by becoming transformed 
into bodies and senses. There can be no action and reaction in the form of 
mutual benefit when two things are absolutely equal, for two lamps-do-not 
help each other. 

Objection : Though the body and organs be sentient, they can still be 
beneficial to the experiencing soul on the analogy of the master and the 
servant. 

Opponent: Not so, for even in the case of the master and the servant, it is 
the insentient part alone that is beneficial to the sentient (master). Those 
things which constitute the insentient appendages of the one sentient being, 
viz the intellect and the rest, are alone serviceable to the other sentient being. 
But one conscious entity does not by itself either help or harm another 
conscious entity. For the Samkhyas are of opinion that the conscious souls 
are devoid of degrees of perfection and imperfection, and hence they are not 
the agents of action. Therefore the bodies and organs are insentient. Not that 
there is any proof of consciousness residing in wood or lumps of earth. This 
distinction between the sentient and the insentient is quite familiar in the 
world. Accordingly, this universe cannot have Brahman as its material cause, 
for it is different from Brahman in nature. 

Objection : Somebody might make such an assertion: Hearing from the 
Vedas that-creation has Consciousness as its material cause, we can 
understand on the strength of this, that the whole universe is conscious, for 
the characteristics of the material are seen to inhere in the product. The non¬ 
perception of consciousness is caused by some peculiarity of the 
transformation. Just as the sentience of the souls, which is a patent fact, is 
not felt in states of sleep, unconsciousness, etc., similarly the sentience in 
wood, lumps of earth, etc. can remain unmanifest. And on account of this 
very peculiarity brought about by manifestation or non-manifestation of 



Consciousness, and on account of the presence or absence of forms etc., it 
involves no contradiction to have a relationship of superiority and inferiority 
between the soul and the assemblage of body and senses, although as 
Consciousness they are the same. And just as meat, soup, and rice, which are 
equally the products of earth, become helpful to one another (as courses of 
food) by virtue of their individual peculiarity, similarly it can be here as 
well. For that very reason (of distinction created by expression and non¬ 
expression), the well-known division between the sentient and the insentient 
is also not contradicted. 

Opponent : In this way also the well-known division between sentience 
and insentience can at the most be somehow circumvented; but even so the 
distinction between the holy and the unholy cannot be explained away. Nor 
can the other dissimilarity (shown below) be really reconciled. This is stated 
in, "And that fact of being thus different is known from the Vedas." If 
sentience for everything, even though this fact is surely unknown in this 
world, be assumed on the strength of the Vedic declaration that 
Consciousness is the material cause and in accordance with people's reliance 
on the Vedas, then that assumption is opposed by the Vedas themselves, 
since "the fact of being so (different) is known from the Vedas" as well. "The 
fact of being so" means, "the fact of being different from the material cause". 
In the passage, "It became the sentient and the insentient" (Tai. H. vi.), the 
Vedas themselves apprise us of the insentience of some portion and thereby 
let us know that the insentient creation is different from Brahman. 

Objection : Is not sentience also asserted sometimes by the Upani$ads for 
the elements and organs which are considered to be insentient? For instance, 
in "Earth said", "Water said" (S. B. VI. i. 3. 2-4), "That Fire deliberated", 
"That Water deliberated" (Ch. VI. ii. 3-4), etc., we come across Vedic texts 
about the sentience of the elements. There are also texts about the organs; 
"Those organs, disputing over their respective greatness, went to Brahman" 
(Br. VI. i. 7), "They said to the organ of speech, 'Chant the Udg-itha for us'" 
(Br. I. iii. 2), and so on. 


Opponent: Hence comes the answer: 



mill 

$ But agfglrfk-aqq: the reference is to the presiding deities fw-31TIF 
Owing to the mention of distinction and inherence. 

S. But this is only a reference to the presiding deities, because of the 
mention of distinction (between the sentient deities and the insentient organs 
and elements) and the inherence (of these deities in them). 

The word "but" discards the objection. It is not to be assumed from such 
Vedic passages as "Earth said", that the elements and organs have sentience, 
since this is only a reference to the presiding deities-the sentient deities 
identifying themselves with earth etc. and the organs of speech etc. being 
referred to as engaged in activities befitting conscious beings, such as talking 
and disputing (or quarrelling). But the mere organs and elements are not so 
referred to. 

How can this be? 

"Because of the mention of distinction and inherence." For the distinction, 
expressing itself as a division, of the experiencing souls and the elements 
and organs, into the sentient and the insentient, was mentioned earlier. And 
this becomes illogical if everything is conscious. Moreover, with a view to 
obviating any assumption regarding the mere organs and for accepting the 
presiding deities, the followers of the Kau$Itaki recension qualify them by 
the word deity in the course of the anecdote of Praha thus: "In days of yore, 
these deities, while disputing about their respective supremacy" (Kau. II. 
14), and "All these deities, coming to know that their supremacy was in the 
keep ing of (i.e. derived from) Prai.ia" (Kau. H. 14). Besides, from mantras, 
corroborative statements, anecdotes, mythologies, etc. it is known that the 
sentient presiding deities inhere everywhere (in the elements and organs). 
Such texts as, "Fire entered into the mouth by becoming the organ of 
speech" (Ai. I. ii. 4), reveal the benevolent presiding deities inhering in the 
organs. In the subsequent portion of the text also, dealing with the anecdote 




of Praha, occurs the passage, "Those organs approached their father Prajapati 
and said" (Ch. V. i. 7), where we meet with such behaviour as going to 
Prajapati in order to ascertain their supremacy, the understanding of the 
supremacy of Prang by following a process of agreement and difference, 
according to Prajapati's advice, by the leaving of the body successively and 
the carrying of presents to Prltna (Br. VI. i. 13). These and other forms of 
behaviour of this kind, which are seen to be quite like ours, confirm the view 
that the reference is to the presiding deities. It is to be understood that in the 
text, "That Fire deliberated" also, the deliberation referred to belongs to the 
supreme, presiding Deity (Brahman) who inheres in all His modifications 
(viz the inferior deities). Hence this creation is certainly different from 
Brahman, and being different, it does not have Brahman as the material 
cause. 


Ved,intin : Such being the objection raised, the aphorist refutes it: 



6. But it is seen. 

The word "but" rules out the opponent's view. The assertion that this 
universe does not have Brahman as its material cause, since its 
characteristics are different, is not wholly true. For it is a matter of common 
experience that from a man, well-known as a conscious being, originate hair, 
nail, etc. that are different in nature (being insentient), and scorpion etc. 
grow in cowdung etc. known to be insentient. 



Opponent: Is it not a fact that the insentient bodies etc. of men and others 
are the sources of the insentient hair, nails, etc., and the insentient bodies of 
scorpions etc. are produced from the insentient cow-dung etc.? 

The answer (of the Vedlntin) is: Even so, there is this difference that some 
insentient things constitute the basis for some sentient beings, while others 
do not. Besides, the departure from their own source (by hair, nails, etc.) 
through transformation is very great indeed, since human bodies and hair, 
nails, etc. differ in appearance, (size), etc. Similar is the difference between a 
scorpion etc. and cow-dung. Had they been quite similar, the very 
conception of cause and effect would have vanished. If, however, it is argued 
that some characteristics, inherited by man from his earthly origin, persist in 
the hair and nails etc., and so also those of cow-dung etc. persist in the 
scorpion etc., then in that case the characteristic of existence, belonging to 
Brahman, is seen to persist in space etc. And when somebody objects to the 
theory of Brahman's being the material cause of the universe by relying on 
the act of dissimilarity, he has to explain whether the dissimilarity is caused 
by the non-persistence of all the characteristics, or of some one of them, or 
of Consciousness. From the first standpoint the whole theory of the material 
cause becoming transformed into the effect will fall through, for in the 
absence of some distinctive feature (in the effect) there can be no such thing 
as the modification of a material cause. From the second standpoint, the 
objection has no basis, since it has been pointed out that the characteristic of 
existence, belonging to Brahman, is seen to inhere in all things counting 
from space. From the third standpoint, there is an absence of confirmatory 
illustration, for what can possibly be cited against the believers in Brahman 
by saying, "Whatever is not endowed with Consciousness is seen to be 
produced from something other than Brahman"? For all things are held by us 
to have Brahman as their material cause. And the contradiction with the 
scriptures is quite obvious, for it has been established that the purport of the 
scriptures is that Brahman is the material as well as efficient cause of the 
universe. 

As for the argument that Brahman being an existing thing, other means of 
knowledge should apply to It, that too is a mere figment of the brain. For this 
Entity is not an object of perception, It being devoid of form etc. And It is 



not subject to inference, being devoid of all grounds of inference etc. But 
like the religious acts (producing virtue), this entity is known from the 
scriptures alone. In support of this occurs the Upani$adic text, "This idea 
about Brahman is not to be induced by (independent) logic. 0 dearest one, 
when imparted by some (knower of Brahman) who is other than the logician, 
this idea becomes conducive to realization" (Ka. I. ii. 9), and the Vedic text, 
"Who ever knew here that thing directly from which this diverse creation 
originated, and who ever spoke of this in this world? The gods were later 
than this creation. So how can anyone know that from which creation 
originated?" (R.V. I. xxx. 6). These two verses show that the origin of the 
universe is inscrutable even to the perfected lordly (divine) beings. There is 
also the Smrti text: "Entities that are beyond thought are not to be 
approached through logic. The definition of the unthinkable is that which is 
beyond nature"; as also "The Self is said to be unmanifested, unthinkable, 
and unchangeable" (Giza, II. 25), "Neither the hosts of gods, nor the great 
riis (seers) know My origin, for in every way I am the source of all the gods 
and the great rfis" (GYta, X. 2), and similar other passages. 

It was also argued that by enjoining "reflection" over and above "hearing", 
the (Bchadarariyaka) Upani$ad shows that logic also is to be honoured. But 
through such a subterfuge, empty logic cannot find any scope here; for logic, 
conforming to the Upani$ads, is alone resorted to here as a subsidiary means 
helping realization. And this is of this kind: Since the states of sleep and 
wakefulness contradict each other, the Self is not identified with any one of 
them; since the individual soul dissociates itself from the world in the state 
of deep sleep to become one with the Self which is Existence, it must be the 
same as the transcendental Self; since creation has originated from Brahman, 
and since the law is that the cause and effect are non-different, creation must 
be non-different from Brahman; and so on. The aphorism, "Because 
reasoning has no conclusiveness, (it cannot upset the conclusions of 
Vedanta)" (II. i. 11) will show that independent reasoning is misleading. 

And it was pointed out that in accordance with the Vedic declaration that 
the material cause of the universe is conscious, the pseudo-Vedantist 
concludes that the whole of creation is conscious. Still we say that even from 
his standpoint, the text, "It became the sentient and insentient" (Tai. II. vi.), 



which speaks of the division between the conscious and the unconscious, can 
surely be reconciled on the basis of the manifestation or non-manifestation 
of Consciousness. It is rather from the standpoint of the other party (i.e. the 
Samkhyas) alone, that even this Vedic mention of division becomes 
irreconcilable. How? 

Because here the Up9ni$ad reveals the presence of the supreme Cause in 
the whole of creation by saying, "It became the sentient and the insentient". 
On the basis of this text, just as it can be argued on the one hand that it is 
impossible for the sentient to become insentient owing to dissimilarity, sd 
also it can be argued on the other, that the insentient (Pradhana) cannot 
become the sentient creatures. As, however, the dissimilarity (between 
Brahman and creation) has already been explained away (with the help of 
such illustrations as cow-dung and scorpion), therefore a conscious cause is 
to be accepted just as it is mentioned in the Upani$ads. 

M in 

(The effect is) aqa non-existent X& ' if this be the contention, q not so; 
gfFR%F-'TTckZ it being a mere negation. 

7. If it be said that the effect (in that case) is non-existent (before 
creation), then not so; for it is merely a negation (without any object to 
deny). 

Opponent : If Brahman, that is conscious, pure, and free from sound etc., 
be accepted as the cause of the effect that is opposed to It, being 
unconscious, impure, and possessed of sound etc., then it comes to this that 
the effect was non-existent before creation. And that conclusion is 
undesirable for you (Vedantins) who believe in the pre-existence of the 
effect (in the cause). 

Veddmin : That creates no difficulty, for yours is a denial without any 
object to deny. This denial cannot amount to a rejection of the existence of 



the effect before creation. 


How? 

Because it can be understood that even as today, the effect (universe) has 
existence only in identity with its material cause (Existence-Brahman), so it 
had its existence in that very way even before creation. For even now, this 
creation does not exist independently of the Self that is its material source, as 
is shown in the Upani$adic text, "All ousts one who knows it as different 
from the Self" etc. (Br. II. iv. 6). But the existence of the product as the cause 
before creation is in an indistinguishable form. 

Opponent : Is not Brahman, the (alleged) source of the world, devoid of 
sound etc.? 

Vedantin : True; but the effect, possessed of sound etc., does not certainly 
exist separately from its Self, the material cause, either before creation or 
now. Thus it cannot be said that the effect is non-existent before its creation. 
We shall speak about this elaborately when dealing with the non-difference 
of the cause and effect (B.S. II. i. 14). 



am In dissolution owing to the predicament of becoming just like that 
amiqR it becomes incongruous. 

8. Since in dissolution there is the predicament of the cause becoming just 
like that effect, therefore this (theory that Brahman is the material cause) 
becomes incongruous. 

To this the opponent makes this rejoinder. If it be admitted that this 
creation, possessed of grossness, parts, insentience, limitation, impurity, etc., 
has Brahman as Its material cause, then during merger, i.e. dissolution, when 



the course of creation is reversed and the effect becomes indistinguishable 
from the cause, it will taint the cause with its own attributes. Thus since in 
this way arises the possibility of Brahman's becoming tainted during 
dissolution by the impurities etc. of creation, the Upani$adic view that the 
omniscient Brahman is the material cause of the universe is incongruous. 
There is also another absurdity. When all differences become obliterated, 
there will be no possibility of a re-emergence with a division between the 
experiencers and the objects of experience, since there can be no fixity of 
rules to guide the new creation. Besides, there will be this impropriety: If it 
be admitted that the experiencing souls can be reborn after they have become 
unified with supreme Brahman during dissolution when even the results of 
their past actions become obliterated, then there will arise the possibility of 
even the free souls being reborn. If on the contrary it be held that even in 
dissolution this world maintains its distinction from the supreme Brahman, 
then there will be no possibility of dissolution; and yet there can be no effect 
that is nondifferent from the cause. In this way this is all inconsistent to be 
sure. 

* | u 

q But not so tm-w" owing to the existence of supporting illustration. 

9. But that cannot be so on account of the existence of supporting 
illustration. 

Vedirnmtin : The answer here is: There is certainly nothing incongruous in 
our point of view. As for the argument that when the effect merges in the 
cause, it will tarnish the cause with its own drawbacks, that is unacceptable. 


Why? 



For there are illustrations to substantiate this; there are illustrations to 
show that even though the effects merge in their causes, they do not pollute 
the latter with their own peculiarities. For instance, such products as plates 
etc., fashioned out of the material earth, have the peculiarities of being high, 
medium, and flat during their separate existence; but when they become re¬ 
absorbed into their original substance, they do not transfer their individual 
features to it. Nor do such products as necklaces etc., fashioned out of gold, 
transfer their individual peculiarities to gold during their merger into it. The 
host of living creatures of four classes, emerging from earth, do not transmit 
their individual characteristics to the earth during their absorption into it. But 
there is no such illustration in support of your point of view. Resorption 
itself will be an impossibility if the effect should persist in the cause together 
with its peculiarities. And though cause and effect are non-different, the 
effect has the nature of that cause and not vice versa, which fact we shall 
state under the aphorism, "The non-difference of the effect from the cause is 
known from words like 'origin'" (II. i. 14). And your argument that the effect 
will pollute the cause during resorption does not go very far; for the position 
is the same even during the state of continuance (of creation), since the cause 
and effect are admitted to be non-different. The effect is recognized to be 
equally non-different from the cause during all the three periods of time 
according to the Upani$adic texts like the following: " ... and this all are the 
Self" (Br. II. iv. 6), "All this is but the Self" (Ch. VII. xxv. 2), "All this that is 
in front is but Brahman, the immortal" (Mu. II. ii. 11), "All this is certainly 
Brahman" (Ch. III. xiv. 1). The way that the objection has to be met there 
(during continuance) by holding that the cause is not affected by the product 
and its characteristics, these being superimposed on the cause by nescience, 
is equally to be followed in the case of dissolution as well. Moreover, there 
are parallel instances. As a magician himself is not affected at any time-past, 
present, or future-by the magic conjured up by himself, it being unreal, so 
also the supreme Self is not affected by this world which is a delusion. As a 
dreamer, remaining the same under all conditions, is not affected by the 
delusion of dreaming, just because that delusion does not persist in him 
during the states of wakefulness and sleep, so also the witness of the three 
states, who ever remains the same, is not touched by the three variable states. 
This appearance of the supreme Self in identity with the three states is a 
mere superimposition, as in the case of the rope appearing as a snake etc. 



With regard to this it is said by the teacher Gaudapada, versed in the 
traditional views of Vedanta, "When the individual sleeping under the 
influence of beginningless Maya is awakened, then he realizes the birthless, 
sleepless, dreamless, non-dual (turiya)" (Ma. Ka. I. 16). Thus the objection 
that was raised that in resorption, the cause, like the effect will be open to 
the defects of grossness etc., has no validity. 

And it was pointed out that if all distinctions are obliterated during 
resorption there will be no reasonable ground regulating the re-emergence of 
creation with the usual differences. That too is untenable for the very reason 
that there is a supporting illustration. As in natural slumber and samddhi 
(absorption in divine consciousness), though there is a natural eradication of 
differences, still owing to the persistence of the unreal nescience, differences 
occur over again when one wakes up, similarly it can also happen here. 
Bearing on this is the Upani~adic text, "All these beings, when they become 
one with Existence (during sleep), do not know, 'We have become one with 
Existence'. Whatever they might have been here-tiger, lion, wolf, pig, worm, 
butterfly, gnat, or mosquito-they become so over again (after returning)" 
(Ch. VI. ix. 3). As during the state of the continuance of the world, it is seen 
that like dream, there are empirical differentiations under the influence of 
unreal ignorance, despite the existence of the supreme Self as an undifferen. 
tiated entity, so also we can infer that even in dissolution, a power of 
diversification, possessed by unreal nescience, persists, Hereby is answered 
the objection that free souls may become subjected to rebirth. For (in their 
cases) unreal nescience stands eradicated by full illumination. And the other 
objection that was implied at the end that even in dissolution the universe 
will continue in the supreme Brahman with all its diversification, that too is 
dismissed by the non-admission of such a position. Hence this view of the 
Upani$ads is quite logical. 



And fq-g4r_x owing to (your) own point of view being open to defects. 

10. And because the defects cling to your own point of view. 

Besides, these defects will crop up equally from the standpoint of our 
opponent. 

How? 

The answer is: The objection advanced that this universe cannot have 
Brahman as its material cause on account of its dissimilarity is applicable 
equally against the theory of Pradhana as the material cause; for it is 
admitted (by the Samkhyas) that the universe of sound etc. springs out of 
Pradhana which is devoid of sound etc. So from the admission of the origin 
of a dissimilar effect, the defect of the product having no previous existence 
persists equally. Similarly from the admission (by the Samkhyas) of the non¬ 
difference of the effect from the cause during dissolution, the defect arising 
from such a position is equally applicable. Again, when during dissolution 
the effects are divested of all their peculiarities and they become 
nondifferentiated, then the differences that could have been distinguished 
individually before dissolution, by saying that such and such a material 
created such and such a person, and such and such a material created that 
other, cannot be so determined at the time of a new creation; for there is no 
such regulating basis for this. And even if in the absence of any basis, a 
regularity in the recurrence (of difference) be maintained, then the absence 
of a basis being the same, such a theory may lead to the rebirth of a free soul 
as well. If, again, it be argued that some distinctive features become effaced 
during resorption while others are not, then those that do not part with their 



peculiarities will not be the products of Pradhana. These defects being thus 
equally shared, they are not to be hurled at either point of view. Thus this 
merely strengthens the faultlessness of the Vedantic standpoint, which has to 
be accepted in any case. 

-arsrfagrrT Owing to the inconclusiveness of reasoning arfr also a;rr in a 
different way 3r:4i9 it has to be reasoned Wft acq if it be argued thus, 3rfq 
even so, agt_r: there will be no getting away (from the defect). 

11. If it be argued that although reasoning is inconclusive, still it has to be 
done in a different way, (so as to avoid this defect), then even so there will 
be no getting away from the defect. 

For this further reason, one should not on the strength of mere logic 
challenge something that has to be known from the Vedas. For reasoning, 
that has no Vedic foundation and springs from the mere imagination of 
persons, lacks conclusiveness. For min's conjecture has no limits. Thus it is 
seen that an argument discovered by adepts with great effort is falsified by 
other adepts; and an argument hit upon by the latter is proved to be hollow 
by still others. So nobody can rely on any argument as conclusive, for 
human intellect differs. If, however, the reasoning of somebody having wide 
fame, say for instance, Kapila or someone else, be relied on under the belief 
that this must be conclusive, even so it surely remains inconclusive, 
inasmuch as people, whose greatness is well recognized and who are the 
initiators of scriptures (or schools of thought)-for instance, Kapila, Kagida, 
and others-are seen to hold divergent views. 

If, again, it be said (by the opponent): "We shall infer in some other way, 
so that no defect of inconclusiveness can arise. It cannot certainly be 
asserted that there can be no conclusive argument whatsoever; for even this 
inconclusiveness of reasoning is established by reasoning itself. For by 
noticing that some reasonings are inconclusive, it is concluded that others of 
the same class must be so. Moreover, on the assumption that all reasonings 




are inconclusive, all human dealings will be upset. It is noticed that people 
wishing to get happiness or avoid misery pursue future courses on the 
analogy of the past and present courses. And when there is any divergence as 
regards interpretation of Vedic passages, it is through reasoning, meant for 
the determination of the meaning of sentences, that false interpretations are 
discarded and the proper import is determined. Manu is also of the same 
opinion when he says, 'One who would extricate virtue from vice, should 
fully master three thingsdirect perception, inference, and scriptures that have 
come down through different traditions' (XII. 105), and 'He, and nobody 
else, knows virtue and vice who seeks to understand the teachings about 
virtue and vice, imparted by the sages, with the help of reasoning that does 
not run counter to Vedic literature' (XII. 106). This in fact constitutes a 
recommendation for reasoning that it is thought to be inconclusive (i.e. not 
dogmatic), for it is thus that one has to discard faulty reasoning and resort to 
the faultless one. There is no sense in being a fool just because one's 
forefathers were so. Hence the assertion that reasoning has no finality creates 
no real difficulty." 

To this (we Veddntins say): "Even so there is no getting away from the 
defect." Although reasoning may be noticed to have finality in some 
contexts, still in the present context it cannot possibly get any immunity 
from the charge of being inconclusive; for this extremely sublime subject- 
matter, concerned with the reality of the cause of the Universe and leading to 
the goal of liberation, cannot even be guessed without the help of the Vedas. 
And we said that It cannot be known either through perception, being devoid 
of form etc., or through inference etc., being devoid of the grounds of 
inference etc. 

Besides, (taking avimok;a to mean "absence of liberation"), it is the 
accepted view of all who stand by liberation that freedom from bondage 
comes from true illumination. And that true enlightenment has no diversity, 
since its content is the thingin-itself. That content of knowledge is said to be 
the most real since it ever remains the same; and in the world, the knowledge 
of that kind is said to be right knowledge, as for instance, the knowledge 
about fire that it is hot. This being the case, people should have no 
divergence when they have true knowledge, whereas the difference among 



people whose knowledge is based on reasoning is well known from their 
mutual opposition. For it is a patent fact of experience, that when a logician 
asserts, "This indeed is the true knowledge", it is upset by somebody else. 
And what is established by the latter is disproved by still another. How can 
any knowledge, arising from reasoning, be correct, when its content has no 
fixity of form? Again, the follower of the theory of Pradhana is not accepted 
by all logicians as the best among adepts in reasoning, in which opposite 
case alone could his knowledge be accepted by us as right knowledge. It is 
not also possible to assemble all the logicians of past, present, and future at 
the same place and time, whereby to arrive at a single idea, having the same 
form and content, so as to be the right knowledge. But since the Vedas are 
eternal and a source of knowledge, they can reasonably reveal as their 
subject-matter something which is (well established and) unchanging; and 
the knowledge arising from them can be true, so that no logician, past, 
present, or future can deny it. Hence it is proved that the knowledge arising 
from the Upani~ads is alone the true knowledge. And since there can be no 
other source of true knowledge, (avirnokpprasangah) "there will arise the 
possibility of liberation being ruled out". So the conclusion stands firm that 
in accordance with the Vedas and reasoning conforming to the Vedas, 
conscious Brahman is the material and efficient cause of the universe. 

Tonic 4: NON-ACCEPTANCE BY THE WISE 

mm ii pu 

tr Hereby f_3gft: the views not accepted by the wise aifq also aq: are 
explained. 

12. Hereby are explained all the (other) theories that are not accepted by 
the wise. 

As the theory of Pradhana as the material cause of the universe 
approximates to the Vedantic philosophy; as it is supported by plausible 
reasons; and as it is accepted by some good followers of the Vedas, therefore 




the objection has been demolished that could be raised against the 
Upanigadic passages on the strength of the logic based on that theory. Now, 
some people of dull intellect raise certain objections against the Upanigadic 
passages on the strength of logic based on the views that the atoms etc. are 
the material causes. Hence the arguments advanced earlier are being 
extended here on the analogy of defeating the chief wrestler. 

Those views that are accepted are parigrahah; those that are not accepted 
are aparigrahah. Those unacceptable to the wise are sispa-aparigrahah. 
"Hereby", by the reasons advanced or refuting the theory of Pradhana as the 
cause; it is to be understood that the theories of atoms etc. as the causes, 
which are not accepted even partially by wise people like Manu, Vyasa, and 
others, "are also explained" as not to be accepted; they are to be understood 
as having been repudiated. The reasons for the refutation being the same, 
there can be no room for anything else that can be doubted. The reasons in 
support of the refutation-viz that the supreme cause of the universe is beyond 
the ken of logic, that reasoning is inconclusive, that even if inference be 
applied otherwise, it cannot get out of the difficulty, that there is 
contradiction with the Vedas, and so on-are equally applicable here. 

Tonic 5: BRAHMAN BECOMING AN ]ExPERIENCER 

»wi 

_a: From the fact of (objects) becoming the experiencing soul atfd%mi: 
distinctions will cease ' if such be the contention Krq it can well exist 0 as 
seen in common experience. 

13. If it be argued that the distinction between the experiencer (of 
happiness and sorrow) and the things experienced will cease when the 
(experienced) objects turn into the experiencer, then we say that such a 
distinction can well exist as observed in common experience. 




Opponent : The view that Brahman is the cause is being controverted 
again with the help of reasoning from another point of view. Although the 
Vedas are a valid means of knowledge within their own domain, still when 
they contradict some fact known through other means, they must be 
interpreted otherwise (in a secondary sense), as for instance, in the case of 
the mantras and corroborative statements. Even reasoning will be fallacious 
when it oversteps into fields that are not its own, such as the fields of virtue 
and vice. 

What follows if it be so? 

From this it follows that it is illogical that the Vedas should overrule 
something well ascertained through some other means of knowledge. 

How again do the Vedas deny what is well established by other means of 
proof? 

Apropos of this it is said that the division between the experiencer and the 
things experienced is quite familiar in this world -the experiencer (bhokta) 
being the conscious embodied soul, and sound etc. being the objects 
experienced (bhogya). For instance, Devadatta is the experiencer (enjoyer) 
and food is the thing experienced (enjoyed). That division will be nullified if 
the experiencer should become the things experienced and vice versa. Yet 
this interchange of position between them will result from the assumption of 
their non-difference from Brahman, the supreme cause. But this well-known 
division should not be effaced. On the contrary, on the analogy of the 
division between the experiencer and things experienced, as it exists now, 
the inference should be that the same was and will be the case in the past and 
the future. Accordingly, the assertion of Brahman as the material cause is 
improper, for it leads to a denial of the well-known division between the 
experiencer and the thing experienced. 

Veddntin : Should anyone raise such an objection, the answer to him will 
be: Such a distinction may well exist just as it is in common experience. This 
division can be upheld from our point of view as well; for so it is seen in the 
world. Thus though foam, ripple, wave, bubble, etc. which are different 
modifications of the sea, consisting of water, are non-different from the sea, 



still amongst themselves are perceived actions and reactions in the form of 
separating or coalescing. And yet the foam, wave, etc., do not lose their 
individuality in relation to one another, even though they are modifications 
of the sea and non-different from it, which is but water. Again, even though 
they do not lose their individuality in one another, they are never different 
from the point of view of their being the sea. Similar is the case here. The 
experiencer and the things experienced never get identified with each other, 
nor do they differ from the supreme Brahman. Although the experiencer is 
not a transformation of Brahman, for in the Upani$adic text, "Having created 
that, He entered into that" (Tai. II. vi), it has been stated that the Creator 
Himself, without undergoing any change, has become the experiencer by 
entering into His product (the body), still some difference accrues to one 
who has entered into the product, owing to the presence of the product which 
serves as .the limiting adjunct, just as much as space becomes divided, owing 
to the presence of conditioning factors like pot etc. Thus it is said that 
though all things are nondifferent from the supreme cause, Brahman, still 
there can be such a distinction as the experiencer and the things experienced 
on the analogy of the sea and its waves etc. 

Topic 6: ORIGIN 

: m 

aq-il There is non-difference of those (cause and effect) aIT~_-aflfv: on 
account of the texts about origin etc. 

14. There is non-difference of those cause and effect on account of the 
texts about origin etc. 

Assuming, for the sake of argument, an empirical difference between the 
experiencer and the things experienced, the refutation (under the previous 
aphorism) was advanced by holding that "the distinction can well exist as 
observed in common experience". But in reality, this difference does not 
exist, since a non-difference between those cause and effect is recognized. 




The effect is the universe, diversified as space etc. and the cause is the 
supreme Brahman. In reality it is known that the effect has non-difference 
from, i.e. non-existence in isolation from, that cause. 

How so? 

"On account of the texts about origin etc." (in the Upanisad). As for the 
word "origin", it occurs by way of citing an illustration, called for by the 
assertion that the knowledge of all follows from the knowledge of one: "As, 
0 amiable one, all things made of clay are known when a lump of clay is 
known , since a modification has speech as its ori g in and exists only in name ; 
as clay alone it is true" ( Ch. VI. i. 4 ) . The idea implied is this: When a lum p 
of clay is known as nothin g but clay in realit y, all thin g s made of cla y, for 
instance pot , plate , iar. etc. , become known , since they are non-different as 
clay, because of which fact it is said . "A modification has speech as its ori gin 
and exists only in name". A modification , e. g . a not , plate , or iar. etc, 
ori g inates from speech alone that makes it current by announcin g. "It exists". 
But speakin g from the standpoint of the basic substance , no modification 
exists as such (a part from the cla y) . It has existence only in name and it is 
unreal. As clay alone it is real. This is an illustration about Brahman cited in 
the Upani$ad, From the use of the phrase , "speech as its ori g in" , in 
connection with the illustration , it can be understood that even from the 
standpoint of the thin g illustrated ( viz Brahman ), no modification has an y 
existence separately from Brahman. A g ain , after statin g that fire , water , and 
food (earth ! are the effects of Brahman , the Upanisad says that the products 
of fire , water , and food have no existence in isolation from fire , water , and 
food themselves: "The firehood of the ( g ross ) fire is g one , since a 
modification has speech as its ori g in and exists only in name. The three 
colours are alone true"4 tCli. VI. iv. 1). Because of the use of the word "etc." 
in "on account of texts about origin etc.", are to be cited the many texts 
establishing the oneness of the Self, such as, "All this has That as its 
essence; That is the Reality; That is the Self; That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), 
"...and this all are the Self" (Br. II. iv. 6), "All this is but Brahman" (Mu. II. 
ii. 11), "All this is but the Self" (Ch. VII. xxv. 2), "There is no difference 
whatever in It"'(Br. IV. iv. 19), etc. Moreover, the knowledge of all cannot be 
brought about by the knowledge of one in any other way. As the spaces 






















































































within pots or jars are non-different from the cosmic space or as water in a 
mirage is non-different from a (sandy) desert-since they sometimes appear 
and sometimes vanish away, and as such their nature cannot be defined, even 
so it is to be understood that this diverse phenomenal world of experiences, 
things experienced, and so on, has no existence apart from Brahman. 

Opponent : But Brahman consists of many things. As a tree has many 
branches, so Brahman has many powers and functions. Hence both unity and 
diversity are necessarily true, even as a tree, considered as a tree, is one, but 
has diversity in its aspect of branches; or as a sea, considered as a sea, is one, 
but has diversity in its aspects of foam, wave etc.; or as clay, considered as 
clay, is one but has diversity in its aspects of a pot, a plate, etc. That being 
so, liberation can well be accomplished through knowledge from the 
standpoint of (the) unity (of Brahman), whereas social and Vedic activities 
can be justified from the standpoint of diversity. And in this way the analogy 
of clay etc. will become appropriate. 

Veac ntin : This cannot be so, since in the illustration, the truth of the 
material cause alone is emphasized by saying "as clay alone it is true" (Ch. 
VI. i. 4) and the unreality of all modifications is spoken of in the words, "has 
speech as its origin" (ibid.). In the case of the thing illustrated also the 
supreme cause alone is ascertained to be real in, "All this has That as its 
essence; That is the Reality" (Ch. VI. viii. 7). This also follows from the 
teaching that the embodied soul is Brahman in essence in the passage, "That 
is the Self; That thou art, 0 Svetaketu" (ibid.). This identity of the embodied 
soul, that is taught, is a self-established truth, and it has not to be 
accomplished through some extraneous effort. From this it follows that like 
the idea of the rope removing the ideas of snake etc. (superimposed on it), 
the acceptance of the unity of the (individual) Self with Brahman, as 
declared in the scripture, results in the removal of the idea of an individual 
soul bound up with the body, that is a creation of beginningless ignorance. 
When this (false) notion that the embodied soul is the real Self is removed, 
all those activities become sublated which are based on that assumption, 
which are created by ignorance, and for supplying a rationale for which a 
separate diversified part is imagined in Brahman. It is further shown by the 
Upani$ad, with the help of such passages as, "But when to the knower of 



Brahman everything has become the Self, then what should one see and 
through what?" (Br. II. iv. 13) etc., that in the case of one who has realized 
Brahman as the Self, all (empirical) dealings cease that are concerned with 
action, instruments, and results. It cannot be said that this negation of 
dealings (in the Self) is confined within a certain state (during liberation 
only), for the identity of the Self and Brahman stated in, "That thou art", is 
not contingent on any particular state. Besides, when with the help of the 
simile of the thief it is shown that one banking on lying comes under 
bondage and one adhering to truth becomes freed (Ch. VI. xvi), the point 
established in the Upani$ad is that unity alone is the highest truth and that 
multiplicity is conjured up by false ignorance. If both difference and non¬ 
difference be true, why should a creature be condemned as married to 
unreality even though he be within the domain of empirical existence? The 
text, "He goes from death to death who sees difference as it were in It" (Br. 
IV. iv. 19), while condemning the dualistic vision, reveals only this very fact. 
Besides, from this point of view (that both difference and non-difference are 
true) the att A inment of liberation through knowledge cannot be justified, 
since (in this view) no such false ignorance is admitted as a cause of the 
transmigratory state that can be removed by right knowledge. For if both 
difference and non-difference be true, how can it be asserted that the 
knowledge of unity will falsify the knowledge of multiplicity? 

Opponent : If absolute unity be affirmed, multiplicity will stand negated, 
and so direct perception and the rest which are the empirical means of valid 
knowledge will be nullified; for they will have no valid content like the ideas 
of a man etc. superimposed on a stump etc. Similarly the scriptures about 
injunction and prohibition, which depend on multiplicity, will be falsified 
when diversity is uprooted. Even the scriptures about liberation, based on 
such differences as between the teacher and the taught, will be contradicted. 
Moreover, how can the unity of the Self, propounded by the scriptures about 
liberation, be true when they themselves are false? 

Vedantin : As to this, the reply is: That is no defect; for earlier than the 
realization of the identity of the Self with Brahman, all activities can justly 
be true like the activities in dream before waking up. So long as the oneness 
of the true Self is not realized, nobody entertains the idea of unreality when 



dealing with the means of knowledge, objects of knowledge, and the results; 
rather, as a matter of fact, all creatures discard their natural oneness with 
Brahman to accept through ignorance the modifications themselves as "I and 
mine "-that is to say, as one's Self or as belonging to oneself. Hence all 
common human dealings or Vedic observances are logical (and valid) prior 
to the realization of the identity of the Self and Brahman, just as much as 
knowledge with the stamp of conviction, -supposed to be attained through 
direct perception, does occur, before waking up, to an ordinary man when he 
is asleep and dreams of things high and low. The idea that these are 
semblances of perceived things does not occur to him during that dream. 

Opponent : But how can the true knowledge of the identity of the Self 
with Brahman arise from the unreal Upanipdic texts? For a man does not die 
when bitten by a snake superimposed (by him) on a rope, nor are such needs 
as drinking and bathing fulfilled by the water in a mirage. 

Vedantin : That creates no difficult y, for death etc, are seen to result from 
the suspicion of poison etc. , and in the case of a man in a state of dream even 
such acts as bein g bitten by a snake and bathin g in water do ha p pen. Should 
one ar g ue that such an act too is false , we would say that thou g h the 
snakebite and bathin g in water in the case of a dreamer be false , still the 
knowled g e resultin g from those acts is true , since that knowled g e is not 
sublated even when he wakes up. For even when a man knows after wakin g 
that the acts of snake-bite and bathin g in water etc. , experienced by him in 
dream , were false , he does not surely consider the knowled g e of those acts to 
be false as well. By this-this non-sublation of the knowled g e acquired by a 
dreamer-it is to be understood that the doctrine of the identity of the Self 
with the mere body is also discarded.5 In su p port of this (true result arisin g 
from an unreal basis ) is the Vedic text: "If in the course of performin g some 
rite with a view to obtainin g results , one sees a woman in a dream , one 
should conclude from that dream that the rite will be successful" ( Ch. V. ii. 
8). which shows the true fulfilment of a desire from the seein g of a false 
dream. So also , after declarin g that when some evil omens come within the 
ran g e of one's direct perception , one should conclude . "Methinks 1 shall not 
live lon g", it is said . "Then a g ain , a black man with black teeth , if seen in a 
dream , causes the death of the dreamer" , which text shows that true death is 











































































indicated by that false dream Itself. Moreover , it is a well-known fact in this 
world , that to people , well versed in the method of inferrin g from a g reement 
and difference , a dream of a particular t ype pro g nosticates somethin g, while 
a dream of another t y pe foreshadows somethin g else. Similarly from the 
false perception of the presence of letters in some lines (drawn on pa per ! the 
true letters like a etc, are g rasped.6 Furthermore . the Upani$ads are the 
ultimate ( conclusive ) means of valid knowled ge, establishin g the truth of the 
oneness of the Self .7 after which nothing else remains to be sought after for 
knowledge. Unlike the curiosity arising in common life to know "what, with 
what, and how" on hearing the injunction "one should sacrifice", there 
remains nothing more to be sought for after one is taught, "That thou art" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 7). or "I am Brahman" (Br. IV. iv. 5), for that knowledge has 
for its content the Self which is all. A curiosity can arise only when 
something is left over, but nothing remains there beyond the oneness of the 
Self about which one may become curious. Besides, it cannot be said that 
such a knowledge does not arise, since there are the Upani$adic texts like, 
"That reality of the Self he knew from him" (Ch. VI. xvi. 3). And this 
conclusion also follows from the enjoining of hearing etc., and study etc. of 
the Vedas as (direct and indirect) means to realization. It cannot be said that 
this realization is useless or erroneous, since it is seen to lead to the 
eradication of ignorance, and since there is no other knowledge to override 
it. We said earlier that before the realization of the oneness of the Self, all 
ideas of true and false involved in human and Vedic dealings remain intact. 
Hence when all the old ideas of multiplicity become uprooted after the 
establishment of the oneness of the Self by the ultimate means of valid 
knowledge, there can be no fancying of Brahman as a composite thing. 

Opponent: From the citation of the analogy of clay etc., does it not follow 
that, according to the scriptures, Brahman is capable of transformation? For 
things like clay etc. are known in the world to be changeful. 

Veddntin : We say, no, since Brahman is known to be changeless from the 
Upani$adic texts denying all kinds of change, such as, "That great birthless 
Self is undecaying, immortal, undying, fearless, and Brahman" (Br. IV. iv. 
25), "This Self is that which has been described as 'Not this, not this 1 " (Br. 
IV. iv. 22), "Neither gross nor minute" (Br. III. viii. 8) etc. For one cannot 



































comprehend that the same Brahman can be possessed of the attributes of 
change and changelessness. 

Opponent: It can be like motion and motionlessness. 

Vedintin : No, for Brahman has been qualified as changeless; for the 
changeless Brahman cannot be possessed of diverse attributes like motion 
and motionlessness. And we said earlier that Brahman is changeless and 
eternal, it having been denied that Brahman can undergo any modification 
whatsoever. It cannot be argued that just as the knowledge of Brahman as the 
one (non-dual) Self brings about liberation, so also Its knowledge as an 
entity transforming Itself into the world is intended to lead to some 
independent result; for there is no evidence in support. The scripture reveals 
only the result arising from the realization of the unchanging Brahman as the 
Self; for instance, the commencement is made with, "This Self is that which 
has been described as 'Not this , not this' " ( Br. IV. ii. 4 ), and then it is said . 
"You have attained that which is free from fear" ( ibid. ); there are also other 
texts of this kind. That bein g so . the conclusion to be drawn is this: Since in 
a context speakin g of Brahman , it stands proved that the result ( i.e. 
liberation ) accrues only from the realization of Brahman , devoid of all 
distinctions created bv attributes , therefore when in that context some other 
fact is heard of that has no result , as for instance , the modification of 
Brahman into the world , that fact has to be interpreted as a means leadin g to 
that realization. And this has to be done on the stren g th of the ada ge. "An y 
act en j oined without mentionin g a result , closely on the heels of some other 
act havin g a result , has to be accepted as formin g a part of the latter" : but it 
is not ima g ined to bear a separate result. It is not reasonable to sav that from 
a knowled g e of Brahman as capable of transformation , one wifi g et that 
ca pacity of transformin g one's own Self ; 8 for liberation is changelessly 
eternal. 

Opponent : Since the believers in a changeless Brahman have a 
predilection for absolute unity, there will be no ruler and the ruled, so that 
the assertion that God is the cause (of the universe) wifi be contradicted. 

Vedantin : No, since that omniscience (of God) is contingent on the 
manifestation of name and form which arc creations of ignorance and which 























































constitute the seeds of the world. In accordance with the texts like, "From 
that Self which is such, originated space" (Tai. II. i. 2), it was asserted under 
the aphorism, "That from which this world has its birth etc." (B. S. I. i. 2), 
that the origin, continuance, and dissolution of the world result not from the 
insentient Pradhana or anything else, but from God who is by nature eternal, 
pure, intelligent, and free, as also omniscient and omnipotent. That assertion 
remains intact. Nothing contradictory to that is stated here again. 

Opponent: How is it not stated by one who speaks of the absolute oneness 
and non-duality of the Self? 

Vedantin : Listen, how it is not stated. Name and form which constitute 
the seeds of the entire expanse of phenomenal existence, and which are 
conjured up by nescience, are, as it were, non-different from the omniscient 
God, and they are nondeterminable either as real or unreal, and are 
mentioned in the Vedas and the Smrtis as the power, called Maya, of 
omniscient God, or as prakrti (primordial Nature). But omniscient God is 
different from them, as is known from the Upani$adic text, "That which is 
Space (Brahman) is the accomplisher of name and form. That in which they 
subsist is Brahman" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1). And there are also in evidence texts 
like, "Let me manifest name and form" (Ch. VI. iii. 2), "The omniscient 
Being who creates all forms, gives them names, (and entering into them) 
goes on uttering these" etc. (Tai. A. III. xii. 7), "He who diversifies the single 
seed" (Sv. VI. 12). Thus like space conforming to the conditioning factors 
like pot, jar, etc., God conforms to the limiting adjuncts-name and form- 
created by nescience. And within the domain of empirical existence, He 
rules it over the selves which identify themselves with the (individual) 
intellects and are called creatures, and which though identical with Himself, 
conform, like the spaces in pots etc., to the assemblages of bodies and senses 
created by name and form that are called up by nescience. Thus God's 
rulership, omniscience, and omnipotence are contingent on the limiting 
adjuncts conjured up by nescience; but not so in reality can such terms as 
"the ruler", "the ruled", "omniscience", etc., be used with regard to the Self 
shining in Its own nature after the removal of all limiting adjuncts through 
illumination. Hence it has been said, "That is infinity where one does not see 
anything else, does not hear anything else, does not know anything else" 



(Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), as also, "But when to the knower of Brahman everything 
has become the Self, then what should one see and through what?" (Br. II. iv. 
14, IV. v. 15), and so on. Thus all the Upanisads speak of the cessation of all 
empirical dealings in the state of the Highest Reality. So also in the Song 
Divine : "Neither agency, nor actions does the Lord create for the world, nor 
(does He bring about the union with the fruit of action. It is universal 
ignorance that does it all). The Omnipresent takes note of the merit and 
demerit of none. Knowledge is enveloped in ignorance, hence do beings get 
deluded" (Gita, V. 14-15). In this text it is shown that in the state of the 
highest Reality, all transactions as between an ordainer and things ordained 
cease to exist. But within the state of phenomenal existence, even the 
Upani$ads mention such behaviour as divine rulership, as in the text, "He is 
the Lord of all. He is the ruler of all beings, He is the protector of all beings. 
He is the embankment serving as the boundary to keep the different worlds 
apart" (Br. IV. iv. 22). So also in the Song Divine : "The Lord, 0 Arjuna, 
dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing all beings by His Maya, to revolve 
(as if) mounted on a machine" (Giza, XVIII. 61). The aphorist (Vyasa) also 
has the supreme Reality in mind when he writes the aphorism, "It has non¬ 
difference from That (Brahman)" etc. (II. i. 14); but when he has the 
empirical standpoint in view, he says, "Such distinction can exist as observed 
in common experience" (II. i. 13), where he speaks of Brahman as 
comparable to a vast ocean. Again, without denying the vast phenomenal 
creation, he resorts to the process of transformation, in so far as this can be 
made use of in the worship of the qualified Brahman. 



a And 3gee : because (the effect is) perceived iTrk when (the cause is) 
present. 



15. (Cause and effect are non-different) since the effect is perceived when 
the cause is there. 

The effect is non-different from the cause for this further reason , that the 
effect is perceived when the cause is there . but not otherwise,° For instance, 
the pot is perceived when the clay is there, and the cloth is perceived when 
the yams are there. But it is not an (usual) invariable fact that something is 
seen when something other than it is present, for it is not the case that a cow, 
which is different from a horse, is seen only where a horse is present. Nor is 
it a fact that a pot is perceived only when the potter is there, even though 
there is the relation of agentship and effect; for they are different. 

vOpponent: Even the presence of something is invariably perceived when 
something other than itself is present, as for instance smoke can exist only if 
fire is present. 

The answer (of the Vedantin) is, no; for even when the fire is 
extinguished, smoke, as held up in a cowherd's pot etc., is seen to persist. 
Should you, however, qualify the smoke as subject to certain conditions (e.g. 
a smoke that rises up from a place in a continuous stream), and say that a 
smoke of that kind cannot exist unless there he fire, still it will not vitiate our 
proposition; for we say that the reason for holding that the (material) cause 
and effect are non-different is that (not only can the effect exist only when 
the cause exists, but also that) the idea of the effect can exist only when the 
idea having the impress of the cause persists. And this coexistence we do not 
get in the case of fire and smoke (sec f.n. 9). 

Or the aphorism is: jg j q 3' 9: It 

The meanin g is this: Not only is the non-difference of the cause and effect 
to be accepted on the authority of scriptures , their non-difference is "also to 
be accepted on the stren g th of the existence of such a perception" : for direct 
perception does occur about the non-difference of the cause and effect. It is 

thus: In a cloth constituted bv an arran g ement of yarns , one does not 
perceive the cloth apart from the yarns ; but the yarns themselves , arran ged 
as warps and woofs , are perceived independently. Similarly with re g ard to 
the fibres formin g the yam , and the constiintents of the fibre in relation to the 













































fibre itself. By this direct perception are known the three coloursred . white . 
and black ( of fire , water , and earth-Ch. VI. iv ) -( as constitutin g the minute 
parts of the fibre etc. ) . From these are to be inferred 10 (the imperceptible) 
subtle air and subtle space. Beyond that is the supreme Brahman-one without 
a second. And we said that in It culminate all means of knowledge. 

mm ll^ll 

4 And RT" owing to the existence arRTM of the posterior one. 

16. And (cause acid effect are non-different) because the posterior one has 
(earlier) existence (in the cause). 

From this additional reason the effect is non-different from the cause: The 
subsequently originating effect is h'ard of (in the Upani$ad) as existing in the 
cause in identity with it before its own origin; for in the texts, "0 amiable 
one, this world was but Existence Itself before creation" (Ch. VI. ii. 1), and 
"In the beginning this was but the absolute Self alone" (Ai. I. i. 1), the effect, 
referred to by the word "this", occurs in apposition (having the same case¬ 
ending) with the cause (showing that they are identical). And a thing which 
does not exist in and in identity with something does not originate from that, 
as for instance oil from sand. Hence from the fact of non-difference before 
origin, it is understood that the effect must be nondifferent from the cause 
even after its birth. Just as Brahman, the cause is never without existence in 
all the three periods of time, so also the universe, which is the effect, never 
parts with Existence in all the three periods. But Existence is only one. And 
this is a further ground for the non-difference of the of ,:ct from the cause. 


















Owing to the declaration of non-existence (the effect did) not (exist) 
(before creation) eff" if such be the objection, (it is) not so, 4M- TWc since 
from the complementary portion (it is known that the word is used) *-emu 
from the standpoint of a difference of characteristics. 

17. If it be argued that the effect did not exist before creation, since it is 
declared (in the Upanisad) as "non-existent", then we say, no, because from 
the complementary portion it is known that the word is used from the 
standpoint of a difference of characteristics. 

Opponent : Is not the non-existence of the effect also declared by the 
Upani$ads now and then, as in, "This was indeed nonexistent in the 
beginning" (Ch. III. xix. 1). "This was nonexistent in the beginning to be 
sure" (Tai. II. vii. 1). Therefore from the declaration of this non-existence, 
the effect did not exist before creation." 

Ved&itin : We say, no, for this declaration of the non-existence of the 
effect before creation is not meant to imply absolute non-existence. 

What is the implication then? 

The condition in which name and form become evolved is different from 
the condition in which name and form are not so evolved. Hence although 
the effect exists as non-different from the cause before creation, still from 
the standpoint of this difference in conditions the effect is declared to be 
non-existent before creation. 

How is this known? 

From the complementar y portion of the passa g e. A passa g e whose 
meanin g is doubtful in the be g innin g is ascertained from its complementar y 
portion. Here , for instance , t in the Chando gva passa ge q uoted above !, what 
is referred to in the be g innin g b y the word "non-existence" in the sentence . 
"This was indeed non-existent in the be g innin g", is a g ain alluded to by the 
word "that" and specified as "Existence" in , "That was Existence" (Ch. III. 
xix, 1 ) . Moreover , since non-existence has no relation with any sequence of 
time , precedin g or succeedin g, the word "was" becomes illo g ical. In the 










































sentence , "This was non-existent in the be g innin g to be sure" (Tai. H. i. 1 ) 
also , absolute non-existence is not meant , since in the complementar y 
portion occurs the qualif ying sentence , "That created Itself bv Itself"" (ibid.). 
Therefore this declaration of non-existence of the effect before creation is 
made from the standpoint of a difference of conditions. Since in the world a 
thing is said to exist when it manifests itself through name and form, 
therefore, as a concession to common sense, the universe is said to be 
nonexistent before being evolved through name and form. 



From reasoning 4TK-i2j from another passage a as well. 

18. (The pre-existence and non-difference of the effect are established) 
from reasoning and another Upanicadic text. 

From reasonin g also , as well as another UpaniSadic text , it is known that 
the effect exists before its creation and that it is non-different from the cause. 

Of these , the reasonin g is bein g adduced first In the world .it is seen that 
people wantin g curds , pots , necklaces , etc, take up their well-established 
respective (material ) causes-milk . cla y, g old , etc. Not that a man wantin g 
curds takes up earth , or a man wantin g a pot takes up milk. This fact does 
not fit in with the theory of the non-existence of the effect before ori gination. 
If everythin g be equally nonexistent everywhere before creation , why should 
curds be produced from milk alone and not from cla y; and why should a pot 
come out of da y and not out of milk? it may be said that althou g h non¬ 
existence before creation is indistin g uishable , still curds have some special 
property ( of bein g latent ! in milk alone , but not in cla y, and the pot has some 
s pecial pro perty ( of bein g latent ! in clay alone , but not in milk. ( Or"Milk . 
but not cla y, has some special potency for curds , and cla y, but not milk , has 
some special potency for a pot" ) . But then as a result of this possession of 


























































































potenc y b v the state precedin g ori g ination , the theory of the nonexistence of 
the effect before creation will fall throu g h'12 and the theory of the pre¬ 
existence of the effect will stand confirmed. Again, when some potency is 
assumed in the cause , to determine the effect , that potency cannot influence 
the effect bv bein g different (from the cause and effect ! or non-existent Hike 
the effect ), since ( on either su p position ) nonexistence and difference will 
pertain to that potency as much as to the effect." 1 Therefore the potency must 
be the very essence of the cause , and the effect must be involved in the ver y 
core of the potency. Besides , we do not have any such idea of difference 
between cause and effect , substance and qualities , and such other pairs as 
between a horse and a buffalo : and hence their non-difference has to be 
admitted. Even if a relationship of inherence be postulated . '" it will lead to 
an infinite re g ress , since if the inherence has to be related to a thin g in which 
it is to inhere bv the assumption of another relation f between the inherence 
and the thin g), one will be forced to fancy another relation to connect this 
one with inherence , etc. , and still a g other relation to connect the new 
relation , and so on. Or if this new relation be not admitted , the thin g s will 
remain disconnected. If it be said that inherence bein g itself a relation , it 
becomes connected with entities bv itself without the help of an y 
intermediate relation , then the relationship of con j unction also , bein g a 
relation , should become so connected (with entities ) without the help of 
inherence.IB Moreover, since identity between substance and qualities etc. 
is actually apprehended, it is vain to assume a relationship of inherence. And 
while subsisting in the cause (i.e. the component parts), in what way will the 
product, constituted by parts, subsist in its cause, viz the component parts? 
Will it inhere in the parts as a whole or correlatively in them part by part? If 
it exists on the parts as a whole, then there will be no perception of the 
product, since it is impossible to have a (simultaneous) sense-perception of 
all the parts; for the whole, existing in all its bases taken together, is not 
apprehended by perceiving its bases separately. If, however, the effect 
subsists in all the (constituent) parts correlatively (part by part), still we have 
to postulate some (fresh) parts for that product other than those constituent 
parts themselves, by virtue of which the product may reside correlatively in 
the parts producing it; for a sword fills up a scabbard through such of its 
component parts as are different from the components of the scabbard. And 
this will lead to an infinite regress, for we shall have to imagine at every step 




















































































some new components to be inserted into the earlier ones. Again, if it 
subsists (successively) in all the parts taken separately, then when action 
takes place in one part, there will be no action in others; for when Devadatta 
is present at Srughna, he is not present on that very day at Pataliputra. If 
presence in various parts at the same time be meant, that will presuppose a 
multiplicity of (causal) entities, as in the case of Devadatta and Yajnadatta 
residing in Srughna and Pataliputra (respectively). 

Opponent : There is no fault since the inherence can be like the (single) 
genus "cowhood" inhering in its entirety in all the cows individually. 

Veddntin : No, since it is not perceived thus. If the whole (composite 
product) resided in its entirety in all the components individually like 
cowhood etc., then just as cowhood is directly perceived in each of the 
individual cows, so also the whole should have been perceived wholly in all 
the separate parts. But this does not occur invariably. Moreover, if the whole 
(composite product) abides in its totality in each part, then since the whole 
has competence to perform all its own functions, and since it is the same 
(even when existing separately on all the parts) it should perform the duties 
of the teats even through the hom (of the animal), and the duties of the back 
through the chest. But this is not our experience. 

Furthermore, if the effect does not exist before origination, the creative 
action will be without any agent and without any reality. But creation is an 
act , which , like motion etc. , must have an a g ent. It is a contradiction in terms 
that there can be an act but no a g ent.16 When, therefore, somebody would 
speak of the origin of a pot (as "The pot originates"), the act of origin would 
not have the pot itself as the subject. 

What will be the subject then? 

It has to be imagined that the origin has something else as the subject (of 
the verb). Similarly, when the origin of the (two) parts of a pot is spoken of, 
it will have to be imagined that the origin has some other thing (and not the 
two halves) as the subject. And if that be so, then when it is asserted that a 
(non-existing) pot is originating, it will mean that the agents like the potter 
etc. are originating. But it is not a fact of common experience that when the 










origin of a pot is spoken of, the emergence of the potter etc. is perceived. 
Rather, what is perceived is that the potter etc. have already originated. 

If it be argued again that the origin of a thing means but the relation in 
inherence that the product has with its own cause or with existence (satta), 
and that is also what constitutes its emergence into being, then one should 
explain how a thing can have any relationship with others before it has any 
being. For a relationship can subsist between two existing things, but neither 
between the existing and non-existing, nor between two non-existing things. 
Besides, non-existence has no name and form (i.e. it is unreal), and hence it 
is illogical to indicate any limit for it by saying, "non-existence before its 
creation". For in the world we see boundaries set to fields and houses, that is 
to things that exist, and not to non-existing ones. About the unreal son of a 
barren woman it is not asserted, "The son of a barren woman became a king 
before the enthronement of Pumavarman", whereby he can be allotted to a 
certain period of time in the sense that he became, is becoming, or will 
become a king. Were it possible for the son of a barren woman to emerge 
into being after the accessories of production (causal agents) were activated, 
then could it be equally asserted that the effect, non-existing (before origin), 
would originate after the activity of the causal agents. But as a matter of fact 
what we find is that since the son of a barren woman and the nonexistence of 
an effect (before origin) are equally non-existent, the non-existent effect 
cannot spring into being even after the causal agents become activated, just 
as much as the barren woman's son does not after the operation of the causal 
agents. 

Opponent : In that case the activity of the causal agent will become 
useless, just as nobody tries to bring into existence or cause what already 
exists, so also nobody will make any effort to bring about an effect which 
already exists (in the cause) and is non-different from it. But people do 
engage. Accordingly, in order to make the activity of the causal agent 
purposeful, we think that the effect does not exist before its production. 

Vedantin : That is not damaging since the activity of the causal agent 
gains a meaning by transforming the cause into the shape of the effect. For 
we have said already that the aspect that the effect assumes is also non- 



different from the cause, and that anything not existing already in the cause 
cannot be produced. A thing does not become different just because of the 
appearance of some peculiarity; for Devadatta, even though noticed in 
different attitudes when he has his hands and feet contracted or extended, 
does not differ in his personality, since the recognition of identity persists as, 
"It is he himself". Similarly though the positions, in which father and other 
relatives are placed every day, do not remain the same all along, still the 
father and others do not become some other persons, they being recognized 
as, "My father", "My brother", "My son", and so on. 

Opponent: Since birth and death do not intervene, that kind of recognition 
is possible in those cases only, but not elsewhere. 

Vedantin : No, since even milk etc. are recognized as having assumed the 
form of curds etc. When (tiny) invisible things like the seeds of a banyan 
tree grow in size through the accretion of additional cells of the same class 
and become visible as s prouts etc. , it is called their birth ; and when the y 
become invisible a g ain throu g h a decay of those very cells , it is called their 
death. Now then , if from the intervention of such birth and death , the non¬ 
existent should be considered to come into existence and the existent should 
be considered to become nonexistent ." then there arises this predicament that 
the child lying in its mother's womb and lying on its back after birth must be 
different. Similarly the contingency arises that a person will become 
different in boyhood, youth, and old age, and all such conventional 
relationships as father etc. will cease to exist. For the same reason the 
(Buddhist) theory of the momentariness of everything is to be understood as 
repudiated. Again, in the case of one who believes that the effect does not 
exist before origin, the activity of a causal agent will have no purpose in 
view, since non-existence cannot stand for the object of any effort, and it will 
be tantamount to wielding various weapons with the purpose of killing 
space. 

Opponent : The activity of the causal agent will have for its object the 
(material) causes that produce the effect (through inherence). 

Veddntin : No, since it will overshoot the mark if it is argued that the 
causal agent, concerned with one thing (viz the material) will produce 
















something else (which is not the material). 


Opponent: The effect is nothing but some sort of a peculiar disposition of 
the inherent cause. 

Veddntin : Then that will lead to the theory of the pre-existence of the 
effect (in the cause). Thus since things like milk etc., are themselves called 
products when they exist in the forms of curds etc., therefore nobody can 
establish even in a hundred years that the effect differs from its cause. 
Similarly it is the primary cause (Brahman) Itself that like an actor evolves 
into the respective products up to the last one, and thus becomes the object 
of all empirical dealings. From such reasoning it is known that the effect 
exists before its origin and that it is non-different from the cause. 

This is also known from "another Upani$adic text". Since texts denoting 
non-existence were referred to under the previous aphorism, "another" here 
means a passage which is different from those and which refers to existence, 
for instance, "0 amiable one, in the beginning all this was but Existence, one 
without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1). Again, the theory of nonexistence is first 
alluded to in the words, "with regard to this some say, V A11 this was but non¬ 
existence in the beginning'." Then this is challenged by saying, "How can 
existence come out of non-existence?" And lastly it is asserted, "0 amiable 
one, in the beginning all this was Existence to be sure" (Ch. VI. ii. 1-2). In 
that passage we find that the word "this", meaning the product (i.e. creation), 
is placed in apposition with Existence, from which fact the product is 
established to be both existing (in) and non-different (from the cause). If the 
effect were nonexisting before its origin, and inhered in the cause after the 
origin, then it would be different, from the cause, and in that case the 
declaration, "That by (knowing) which the unheard becomes heard" (Ch. VI. 
i. 3), would be set at naught. But it can be upheld only by understanding that 
the effect exists before its birth and it is non-different from the cause. 




T9 On the analogy of cloth a as well. 

19. And the effect is non-different from the cause on the analogy of a 
piece of cloth. 


A piece of rolled up cloth is not recognized as to whether it is cloth or 
something else; but when it is spread out, its real nature becomes revealed 
through that spreading and it is recognized thus: "The thing that remained 
rolled up is a piece of cloth to he sure". Or even though it is cognized as 
cloth when remaining rolled up, its length and breadth arc not delinitely 
known; but when it is spread out, it is known as possessed of a definite 
length and breadth. And yet it is never known to be something other than the 
rolled up piece of cloth. Similarly such products as the cloth etc. are 
unmanifest so long as they remain latent in their causes, viz yams etc.; but 
they are known distinctly when they become manifest as a result of the 
activity of such causal agents as the shuttle, loom, weaver, etc. So on the 
analogy of the cloth rolled up and spread out, the effect is non-different from 
the cause. This is the meaning. 




T As qr also 3TTaf-3ift (are) the outgoing breath etc. 

20. And this is so just as in the case of the outgoing breath etc. 

In the world it is seen that when through pranayama (control of breath) the 
different forms of the vital force-outgoing and incoming breath etc.—ire 
stopped, when these remain only in their causal form, the mere act of living 
is continued, but not so the other acts of expansion, contraction, etc. Again, 
when those very forms of the vital force become active, then expansion, 
contraction, etc. are performed in addition to mere sustaining of life. But the 
various forms of the vital force, though distinct from one another, are not 
different from the vital force itself, since they equally partake of the nature 
of air (energy). Similarly the cause is non-different from the effect. 
Accordingly, since the whole world is a creation from and non-different 
from Brahman, the Upani$adic assertion, "That by knowing which the 
unheard becomes heard, the unthought becomes thought, and the unknown 
becomes known" (Ch. VI. i. 1) stands vindicated. 

TOPIC 7: NON-PERFORMANCE OF GOOD 


WWW 

eC-lT On account of the mention of the other kffafT-alTft-i-AtrN: faults 
like not doing what is good and so on will arise. 

21. Since the other (individual soul) is mentioned (as identi cal with 
Brahman), faults like not doing what is beneficial and so on will arise. 

Opponent : Consciousness as the cause is being challenged again in 
another way. By depending on a conscious entity as the originator of the 
process of creation, the door will be left open for such defects as non¬ 
performance of good. 


Why? 



"On account of the mention of the other "-for the Upanisad mentions the 
identity of the other, viz the embodied being, with Brahman, for the state of 
enlightenment is declared thus: "That is the Self; That thou art, 0 Svetaketu" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 7). Or the meaning may be this: The Upanisad mentions the 
identity of the other, viz Brahman, with the embodied being in the text, 
"Having created that, He entered into that" (Tai. II. vi), where it is said that 
Brahman, the creator, entered into the body without undergoing any 
modification, thereby showing that Brahman became one with the embodied 
being. And in the text, "Let me manifest name and form by Myself entering 
as the individual soul" (Ch. VI. iii. 2), the supreme Deity alludes to the 
individual being as His Self, thereby showing that the embodied being is not 
different from Brahman. Therefore the creatorship that is declared about 
Brahman belongs really to the embodied being. Accordingly, being an 
independent agent, the soul should create such beneficial things as it likes, 
and not bring about death, old age, disease, and such other hosts of evil 
states which are harmful. For nobody creates a prison house for himself and 
enters into it unless it be under duress. No one who is absolutely holy would 
accept this extremely unholy body as himself. And even if he had done 
something causing pain, he would voluntarily eschew it and accept what is 
pleasant. Besides, he would have remembered thus: "This wonderful sphere, 
that the universe is, has been created by me." For all people clearly 
remember after accomplishing a notable act, "This has been done by me". As 
a juggler withdraws at will and without effort the magic spread out by 
himself, so the embodied being also would be able to withdraw this creation 
at will. But as a matter of fact, the embodied being cannot easily do away 
even with his own body. Thus from the fact of non-perception of the 
performance of beneficial works and so on, it follows that the theory of 
tracing the world process to some conscious entity is unjustifiable. This is 
how the opponent thinks. 



$ But arW greater ?a-farra on account of the declaration of difference. 


22. But (Brahman is) greater (than the embodied being) on account of the 
declaration of the difference (between the two). 

Veddntin : The word "but" rules out the opposite point of view. We speak 
of that entity as the creator of the universe which is by nature eternal, pure, 
intelligent, and which is something greater than, that is to say, different from 
the embodied being. With regard to that Brahman, the faults of not doing 
what is beneficial and the like cannot arise, for there is nothing beneficial to 
be achieved or harmful to he eschewed by that Brahman which is by nature 
eternally free. Nor is there anything to debar Its knowledge or power, since It 
is omniscient and omnipotent. But the embodied being is not of that kind. 
With regard to him can arise the fault of not doing what is beneficial and the 
like. But we do not call him the creator of the world. 

How can it be so? 

"On account of the declaration of difference" in, "The Self, my dear, is to 
be realized-to be heard of, reflected on, and profoundly meditated upon" (Br. 
II. iv. 5), "He is to be searched for, He is to be inquired into" (Ch. VIII. vii. 
1), "0 amiable one, he then becomes unified with Existence" (Ch. VI. viii. 1), 
"the Self that is in the body, being presided over by the Supreme Self" (Br. 
IV. iii. 35). Such statements, mentioning the differences of the agent, object, 
etc., show that Brahman is greater than the individual soul. 

Opponent: Has not the declaration of non-difference also been cited as in, 
"That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7) and similar texts? How can both difference 
and non-difference be possible, they being contradictory? 

Vedantin : That is no defect; for we have established the possibility of this 
in the relevant places on the analogy of the cosmic space and the little bits of 
space in pots etc. Moreover, when the idea of non-difference is generated by 
such declaration of identity as "That thou art", then the transmigratoriness of 
the individual is removed as also the creatorship of Brahman; for all dualistic 
dealings, brought about by unreal ignorance, get sublated by right 
knowledge. Then in that state where can creation come from, and from 



where the defects like nonaccomplishment of beneficial results? We have 
stated more than once that the mundane existence, characterized by the 
nonaccomplishment of beneficial results etc., is an error arising from the 
non-recognition of the difference (from the soul) of the limiting adjunct 
constituted by the assemblage of body and senses which are a creation of 
name and form called up by ignorance. It does not exist in reality. This (false 
notion) is of a piece with the notions that one has birth, death, injury, wound, 
etc. But so long as the dualistic dealings persist, the superiority of Brahman 
(to the individual) known from texts like, "He is to be sought for, He is to be 
inquired into" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1) rules out the presumption of such faults 
attaching to Brahman as the non-accomplishment of beneficial results etc. 




il 


aT-3TTf-ER On the analogy of stone etc. W as also (for other reasons), 
cR-arVgfl: that is untenable. 

23. On the analogy of stone etc. as also for other reasons, that (opponent's 
view) is untenable. 

Moreover, as it is found in the world that, though stones possess the 
common attributes of having been formed from earth, there is a great 
diversity among them-some are precious jewels like diamond, lapis lazuli 
(vaidurya), etc., others are of medium value like crystal etc., while still 
others are worthless pieces of stone to be used for pelting at dogs, crows, etc. 
for driving them away; or as it is seen that though all the seeds grow on the 
same soil, there is a great variety in their leaves, flowers, fruits, odour, taste, 
etc., as is noticed in sandalwood, the kimpaka, etc.; or as from the same 
chyle originate different products like blood etc., hair and down etc.; so it is 
justifiable even for the non-dual Brahman to have such distinctions as 
becoming the embodied soul and God, and the different products (like earth 
etc.). Therefore "that is untenable", that is to say, the defects fancied by the 
opponent cannot be sustained. Moreover, this is untenable since the 



Upani$ads are authoritative, since "the modifications have speech alone as 
their origin" (Ch. VI. i. 4), and since this is possible on the analogy of the 
variety of things seen in a dream (though the dreamer remains the same). 
This is the idea implied by "as also". 


Topic 8: CREATION WITHOUT MATERIALS 



3gZiW-Ig Owing to the observation of the collection of materials (in 
common life) 1 is) Off not (the cause) if this be the object'km, T not so, k 
because (it is possible) like milk. 

24. If it be said that (Brahman) cannot be the cause, since one is noticed to 
procure materials (for the production of an object), then we say, no, for it is 
possible on the analogy of milk. 

Opponent : The assertion made that conscious Brahman alone, without a 
second, is the cause of the universe cannot stand scrutiny. 

Why? 

"Since one is noticed to collect materials." In common experience it is 
seen that potters and others who make pots, cloth, etc. engage themselves in 
those works after they have provided themselves with the requisite causal 
means by collecting such materials as clay, rod, wheel, string, and so on. 
And you maintain that Brahman is without any help. But how can there be 
any creatorship for Brahman unless It has procured an assemblage of other 
accessories? Therefore Brahman is not the cause of the universe. 

Vedantin : That fault does not arise, since on the analogy of milk it can be 
reasonably maintained that this can happen on account of the peculiar nature 
of the thing itself. As in the world, milk or water gets transformed into curds 



or ice by itself without depending on any extraneous accessory, so it can be 
here as well. 


Opponent : Even when milk etc. turn into curds etc. they have to depend 
on external factors like heat etc. So how can it be said, "For it is possible on 
the analogy of milk"? 

Vedantin : That creates no difficulty, for whichever may be the 
transformation and whatever its extent, it is milk itself that undergoes that 
modification, while heat etc. merely accelerate the process. If it had not any 
intrinsic capacity to turn into curds, then it could not have been forcibly 
transformed into curds even by heat etc.; for neither air nor space can be 
forced by heat etc. to become curds. An accession of paraphernalia only 
perfects the capacity of milk. Brahman, however, is possessed of the fullest 
power, and It has not to depend on anything else for imparting an excellence 
(to that power). In support of this is the Upanigadic text: "He has no work 
and no instrument; none is seen either as equal or superior to Him. His 
supreme power is heard of as of various kinds. And His knowledge, power, 
and action are natural" (Sv. VI. 8). Hence even though Brahman is one, it is 
possible for It, by virtue of the possession of diverse powers, to be 
transformed variously on the analogy of milk etc. 



k4-31Tfk-zrq As in the case of gods and others 30 as well in this world. 

25. Also (Brahman can create without extraneous help) like gods rnd 
others (as is seen) in this world. 

Opponent : It may be granted that insentient things like milk etc. turn into 
curds etc. without the help of external means, it being a matter of 
experience; but conscious beings like potters and others are seen to depend 



on the requisite means while engaging in their respective works. So how can 
Brahman, conscious as It is, act without help? 

Vedantin : We say, it can be so "as in the case of gods and others". For on 
the authority of the mantras and (other) corroborative statements (in 
scriptures), anecdotes, and mythologies, it is a known fact "in this world" 
that the gods, manes, TFis, and others, very powerful and sentient as they 
are, create by themselves through mere will and without any external help, 
many such things as bodies, palaces, chariots, etc., of various shapes, 
because they are possessed of special powers. The spider also creates its 
threads by itself; the crane conceives without mating by hearing merely the 
roar of clouds; and the lotus stalk moves from one lake to another without 
waiting for any vehicle. Similarly, Brahman, conscious though It is, may 
well create the universe by Itself - ,w ithout looking for external means. 

If the opponent argues thus: When you take up your gods and others as 
illustrations for Brahman, they do not bear any similarity to Brahman which 
is sought to be illustrated. For the insentient bodies themselves of the gods, 
and not their conscious souls, furnish the material for the manifestation of 
their divine powers in the shape of other bodies etc. In the case of the spider, 
it is th; saliva that becomes solidified as a result of eating smaller insects and 
thus turns into thread. The crane conceives by hearing the roar of clouds. 
And the lotus stalk moves, under the impulsion of its consciousness, from 
lake to lake with the help of its body like a creeper climbing up a tree; not 
that the insentient lotus starts moving by itself to another lake. Hence these 
analogies do not apply in the case of Brahman. 

Vedi ntin : To him one can say: That is no defect. For the point 
emphasized is the mere difference from the illustrations of the potters and 
others. Though the potters and the gods and others are equally sentient 
beings, the potters depend on external accessories for undertaking their 
work, whereas the gods and others do not. Similarly, Brahman, though 
conscious, wifi not depend on external means. It is merely this much that we 
imply by citing the cases of the gods and others. Therefore what is implied 
(by the aphorist) is that there cannot be any such invariable rule that the 
power of everybody must conform to that of somebody we are familiar with. 



TOPIC 9: WHOLESALE TRANSFORMATION 


It is established that Brahman-conscious, one, and without a second- 
becomes the cause of the universe through a transformation that needs no 
extraneous help as in the case of milk etc., or of gods and others, without any 
external help. But an objection is being raised again with a view to placing 
the purport of the scriptures beyond cavil: 

11^11 

c-uMf: There will be the contingency of wholesale transformation ar or 
fgrqN_r_aAq: the violation of Upani$adic texts about partlessness. 

26. (If Brahman changes into the world, then) there will arise the 
contingency of either wholesale transformation or the violation of the texts 
about partlessness. 

Opponent : There arises the contingency of the whole of Brahman 
becoming transformed into creation, since It has no parts. Had Brahman 
been composite like the earth etc., one of Its parts could change while the 
other would remain intact. But Brahman is partless as -is known from such 
Upani$adic texts as, "Partless, actionless, peaceful, faultless, taintless" (Sv. 
VI. 19), "Puru$a is transcendental; He is coextensive with all that is external 
and internal and He is birthless" (Mu. II. i. 2), "This great, endless, infinite 
Reality is but pure Intelligence" (Br. II. IV. 12), "This is that Self that is 
known as 'Not this, not this'" (Br. III. ix. 26), "Not gross, not minute" (Br. 
III. viii. 8), and others which deny all distinctions. Accordingly, it being 
impossible to change partially, there arises the question of changing wholly, 
in which case you cut at the very root. And the instruction about seeing (i.e. 
the realization) of Brahman becomes useless since the created things can be 
seen without any special effort, and there remains no other Brahman outside 
these products. Besides, the texts about the birthlessness of Brahman will be 
violated. If, however, Brahman be accepted to be composite just for the sake 
of avoiding this difficulty, then this will militate against the texts cited above 



about the partlessness of Brahman. Furthermore, Brahman will become non¬ 
eternal if It has parts. Thus this theory cannot be substantiated from any 
point of view. This is the objection. 



$ But lica: on the Upanigadie authority 417-zJffKc[ (Brahman) being 
known from Upani;ads alone. 

27. But (this has to be accepted) on the authority of the Upanisads, for 
Brahman is knowi from the Upanilads alone. 

Vedantin : By the word "but" the objection is ruled out. No defect 
certainly attaches to our point of view. For instance, there is no possibility of 
change (of Brahman) as a whole. 

Whence is it so? 


"On the authority of Upani$adic texts." The Upanigads speak as much 
about transcendence of all modifications by Brahman, as they do about the 
creation of the universe from It; for the material cause and its product are 
mentioned separately in such texts as, "That Deity that was such, 
deliberated, 'Let this be so, that I manifest name and form after Myself 
entering into these three gods as the individual soul"' (Ch. VI. iii. 2), "That 
much is His glory. But Puru$a is higher than that. All beings are but one foot 
of His, But His three immortal feet exist in heaven" (Ch. III. xii. 6). This 
also follows from the declaration of the heart as His seat, and absorption in 
Existence (in sleep). Had Brahman wholly evolved as this creation, it would 
have been unreasonable to speak of any speciality in the state of deep sleep, 
as is done in,"0 amiable one, he then becomes absorbed in Existence" (Ch. 
VI. viii. 1), for in that case an individual would have been ever in union with 
the transmuted Brahman, so that there would have been no unchanged 



Brahman left over (into which to merge). This follows also from the denial 
of Brahman as an object of the senses, whereas all transformations are 
objects of perception. Hence Brahman does exist as an unchanged Entity. 
There is no violation of the texts about partlessness. since partlessness is 
accepted on account of its very "mention in the Upani$ads", and the 
Upanisads are the only authority about It, but not so are the senses etc. 
Hence It has to be accepted just as It is presented by the Upanisads. The 
Upanisads prove both the facts for Brahman-the non-transformation of 
Brahman as a whole and partlessness. Even the things of this world like 
gems, incantations, herbs, and so on, are seen to possess many powers 
capable of producing incompatible effects under the influence of a variety of 
space (environment), time, and cause. And even these powers can be known 
not from mere reasoning but from such instruction as, "Such a thing has such 
kinds of potency with the aid of such things, on such things, and for such 
purposes". So what need has one to argue that the nature of Brahman, whose 
power is beyond all thought, cannot be ascertained unless it be through the 
Vedas? So also it has been said by an author of a Purama, "Do not bring 
those things within the range of argumentation which are beyond thought. 
The nature of a thing beyond thought consists in its being other than the 
things within Nature." Hence a supersensuous thing is truly known from the 
Vedic source alone. 

Opponent : Even the Vedas cannot make us understand a self¬ 
contradictory thing, when they say for instance, that the partless Brahman 
changes (into the world), but not wholly. If Brahman be partless, then either 
It will not change at all, or else It will change wholly. If, however, it be said 
that Brahman changes in some aspects, but remains intact in others, then 
from this imagination of aspects, Brahman will surely become 
heterogeneous. It is only when a contradiction appears in the context of 
some action, as for instance with regard to the two injunctions "One should 
take up the (vessel called) $oda~in during the Atiratra sacrifice", "One 
should not take up the $ocja§in during the Atiratra sacrifice", that one has to 
resort to an optional course for resolving the contradiction; for the 
performance of an act is dependent on the' person concerned. But the 
contradiction cannot be resolved here even by taking shelter under option, 



since a thing, as such, is not dependent on any person. Hence this 
(contradiction) is difficult to reconcile. 


Veditntin : That is nothing damaging, since it is admitted that this 
difference of aspects is created by ignorance. For a thing does not become 
multiformed just because aspects are imagined on it through ignorance. Not 
that the moon, perceived to be many by a man with blurred vision (timira- 
diplopia), becomes really so. Brahman becomes subject to all kinds of 
(phenomenal) actions like transformation, on account of the differences of 
aspects, constituted by name and form, which remain either differentiated or 
non-differentiated, which cannot be determined either as real or unreal, and 
which are imagined through ignorance. In Its real aspect Brahman remains 
unchanged and beyond all phenomenal actions. And since the differences of 
name and form, brought about by ignorance, are ushered into being through 
mere speech, the partlessness of Brahman is not violated. Besides, this text 
about transformation is not meant to establish transformation as a fact, for no 
fruit is seen to result from such a knowledge. But this is meant to establish 
the fact that all this is in essence one with Brahman that is beyond all 
phenomenal processes; for some fruit is seen to result from such a 
realization. Thus after starting with, "That which is the Self is known as 'Not 
this, not this 1 ", it is said, "0 Janaka, you have certainly attained that which is 
beyond fear" (Br. IV. ii. 4). Hence there is no possibility of any defect arising 
from our point of view. 



f Because (it occurs) tt thus W?04 in the soul a as well; W and (creations) 
fafWV: of diverse kinds (occur in the cases of gods and others). 

28. Because it occurs thus in the case of the individual soul as well, and 
creations of diverse kinds occur in the cases of gods and others. 



Moreover, there is no occasion for dispute here as to how there can be 
creation of various kinds in the same Brahman without changing Its nature; 
for we read in the Upanipd that a diverse creation occurs in the same soul in 
dream without any change of nature: "There are no chariots, nor animals to 
be yoked to them, nor roads there, but he creates the chariots, animals, and 
roads" (Br. IV. iii. 10). In the world also it is seen in the case of gods, as also 
jugglers and others that various kinds of creation of elephants and so on take 
place without any destruction of their nature. Similarly even in the same 
Br:hman there can be a diverse creation without any destruction of Its 
nature. 



29. And because the opponent's own point of view is equally vitiated. 

The others also have the same defect attaching to their own point of view. 
For the view of the believers in Pradhana is also the same, viz that Pradhana 
which is partless, limitless, attribute less (devoid of sound), and so on, 
becomes the cause of a product that is composite, limited, and possessed of 
sound etc. In that case also arises the possibility of Pradhana changing as a 
whole, since Pradhana is partless; else there arises the possibility of the 
theory of partlessness being contradicted. 

Opponent : But they do not certainly believe in a partless Pradhana. For 
there are its three constituents-sattva, rajas, and tamas (representing 
intelligence, activity, and inertia); Pradhana is the state of their balance. 
Pradhana has parts on account of these constituents. 

Vedantin : The defect under consideration cannot be avoided b y 

( acceptin g) this kind of hetero g eneit y, for each one of these sattva . rajas, and 








tamas is equall y partless ; and each one of these individuall y, in co-operation 
with the other two , becomes the material cause of a creation (which must be ) 
homo g eneous with itself. In this wav arises the predicament of their own 
view bein g eq uall y o pen to these char g es.18 

Opponent : In keeping with the maxim that reasoning has no 
conclusiveness, Pradhana has to be accepted as heterogeneous (by discarding 
the inconclusive arguments about Pradhana's partlessness). 

Veddntin : Even so there arises the contingency of such defects as 
impermanence etc. 

Again, if it be your contention that the various powers of Pradhana, 
inferable from the diversity seen in its products, are its constituents, then 
such powers can be equally upheld by the believers in Brahman. 

Similarly also in the case of the believers in atoms , when one atom unites 
with another , then since an atom has no parts , it must unite as a whole , so 
that no ma g nitude will arise from that combination : 19 and hence this will 
end in an atom only. Or if it should unite in one part, then the theory that the 
atom has no part will fall through. So the fault vitiates equally their own 
point of view as well. And since the defect is shared equally, it should not be 
directed against one of the disputants (viz the Vedantin) only. But as a matter 
of fact, the believer in Brahman has freed his own point of view from this 
defect. 


TOPIC 10: POSSESSION OF ALL POWERS 

^ ^ \\\*\\ 

a And "*-Tf possessed of all (powers) ffq-T49171 it having been thus 
revealed. 


























30. Moreover (the Deity is) possessed of all (powers), it having been 
revealed thus (in the Upanisads). 

It has been said earlier that a kaleidoscopic phenomenal creation can very 
well stem out from the same Brahman on account of Its being endowed with 
multifarious powers. 

Opponent: How, again, is it known that the supreme Brahman is endowed 
with diverse powers? 

Veddntin : That is being answered: "The supreme Deity is possessed of all 
powers, it having been revealed thus." It has to be accepted that the supreme 
Deity is endowed with all powers. 

How does this follow? 

Because so it is revealed. Thus the Upani$ads show that the supreme 
Deity is possessed of all the powers in such passages as, "He is the doer of 
all (good) actions; He is possessed of all (good) desires, all (good) smells, all 
(good) tastes, and He pervades all this. He is without the organ of speech, 
and has no hankering" (Ch. III. xiv. 4), "His desires are true, and His will is 
inviolable" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1). "He who is all-knowing in general and 
particular" (Mu. I. 1. 9), "Under the mighty rule of this Immutable, 0 Gargi, 
the sun and the moon are held in their positions" (Br. III. viii. 9). 

fWTfllfd lip 


NW-U~cdret Owing to the non-possession of organs 9 (Brahman 

is) not (the agent) fii'l if such be the objection, that (objection) 3ij was 
answered. 



31. If it be argued that (Brahman cannot act) on account of absence of 
organs, that was answered earlier. 

Opponent : It may be so. But the scripture teaches that the supreme Deity 
is without organs, as in such texts, "without eyes or ears, without the vocal 
organ or mind" (Br. III. viii. 8). How can He be able to perform action even 
though omnipotent? For it is known that even though the gods are sentient 
and equipped with all kinds of power, still they can accomplish their 
respective duties only when they are in possession of bodies and organs in a 
physical context. Now how can the Deity from whom all distinction is ruled 
out by saying, "Not this, not this" (Br. IV. v. 15), become associated with all 
kinds of powers? 

Veddntin : Whatever can be stated in this matter has already been stated 
earlier (B. S. II. i. 27). This supreme and sublime Brahman is to be known 
from the Vedas alone, but not from reasoning. Moreover, there cannot be any 
such rule that since somebody is seen to have some power in some way, 
another should also have it in the same way. Moreover, this also has already 
been stated that even though all distinctions are denied in Brahman, still It 
can have an accession of all powers owing to the presence of a variety of 
aspects conjured up by ignorance. In support of this is the scripture, "He 
moves and grasps even though He is without feet and hands, He sees without 
eyes, and hears without ears" (Sv. III. 19), which shows the possession of all 
kinds of power by Brahman, even though It is devoid of organs. 

Tonic 11: NEED OF MOTIVE 

That a conscious entity can be the creator of the universe is being 
challenged again in another way (by the opponent): 




9 Not (the cause) Aml;r-ar"c owing to the need of motive. 


32. (Brahman is) not the cause, owing to the need of some motive (for 
creation). 

The conscious supreme Self can never create this sphere of the universe. 

Why? 

"Owing to the need of motive" for action. It is a matter of common 
experience that an intelligent man whose engagement in work is preceded by 
forethought, does not start any activity, easy of performance though it be, 
unless it is conducive to his purpose. What to speak of an undertaking 
requiring stupendous effort? And there is an Upanigadic text confirming this 
wellknown human fact: "It is not for the sake of all, my dear, that all is 
loved, but for one's own sake that all is loved" (Br. II. iv. 5). The creation of 
this spherical universe, consisting of a multiple conglomeration of high and 
low things is a huge task. Even if this effort be imagined to be conducive to 
some purpose of the conscious supreme Self, then the mention in the Vedas 
of Its contentment will be contradicted. Alternatively if there be no purpose, 
then there will be no activity. It may, however, be argued that it is a matter of 
experience that a mad man, sentient though he is, acts on account of the 
derangement of his brain, even where he has nothing to gain; and on this 
analogy the supreme Self too can have action. But on that assumption the 
mention of His omniscience in the Vedas will be contradicted. Hence it is 
incongruous to hold that creation stems out from an intelligent being. 




q But 1-W like what is seen in the world ffftM-W4;qRR (creation is) a 
mere pastime. 



33. But (creation for Brahman is) a mere pastime like what is seen in the 
world. 

Veddntin : The objection is rebutted by the word "hut". As in the world it 
is seen that though a king or some councillor of the king who has got all his 
desires fulfilled, may still, without any aim in view, indulge in activities in 
the forms of sports and pastimes, as a sort of diversion, or as inhalation, 
exhalation, etc. proceed spontaneously without depending on any external 
motive, so also God can have activities of the nature of mere pastime out of 
His spontaneity without any extraneous motive. For any motive imputed to 
God can have neither the support of reason nor of the Vedas. Nor can one's 
nature be called into question. Although the creation of this sphere of the 
universe appears to us to be a stupendous task, yet to God it is a mere 
pastime, because His power is infinite. Even though people may fancy that 
sport also has some subtle motive behind it, still no motive can be thought of 
here, since the Vedas declare that He has all desires fulfilled. Again, there 
can be neither inactivity, nor any mad activity, since there are the Vedic texts 
about creation and omniscience. And yet the Vedic statement of creation 
does not relate to any reality, for it must not be forgotten that such a text is 
valid within the range of activities concerned with name and form called up 
by ignorance, and it is meant for propounding the fact that everything has 
Brahman as its Self. 

Tonic 12: PARTIALITY AND CRUELTY 

On the maxim of drivin g a pole deeper20 . the view that God is the cause 
of the origin etc. of the universe is being challenged again, in order to make 
the proposition all the more well established. 


i 



aT-fTN4 Partiality and cruelty 9 (do) not (occur) ziTRIl owing to 
consideration of other factors f$ fore T so ITftT (the Vedas) show. 





34. No partiality and cruelty (can be charged against God) because of 
(His) taking other factors into consideration. For so the Vedas show. 

Opponent: God cannot reasonably be the cause of the world. 

Why? 

For that would lead to the possibility of partiality and cruelty. For it can be 
reasonably concluded that God has passion and hatred like some ignoble 
persons, for He creates an unjust world by making some, e.g. gods and 
others, experience happiness, some, e.g. animals etc., experience extreme 
misery and some, e.g. human beings, experience moderate happiness and 
sorrow. Hence there will be a nullification of God's nature of extreme purity, 
(unchangeability), etc., that are declared in the Vedas and Smrtis. And owing 
to infliction of misery and destruction on all creatures, God will be open to 
the charge of pitilessness and extreme cruelty, abhorred even by a villain. 
Thus on account of the possibility of partiality and cruelty, God is not an 
agent. 

Vedantin : To this we say, "No partiality or cruelty can be charged against 
God." 

How can this be so? 

"Because of His taking other factors into consideration." Had God created 
this erratic world by Himself, irrespective of other factors, He would be open 
to these charges of partiality and cruelty. But in His isolation (from these) He 
has no creatorship, for God makes this unequal creation by taking the help of 
other factors. 

What factors does He take into consideration? 

We say that these are merit and demerit. No fault attaches to God, since 
this unequal creation is brought about in conformity with the virtues and 
vices of the creatures that are about to be bom. Rather, God is to be 
compared to rain. Just as rainfall is a common cause for the growth of paddy, 
barley, etc., the special reasons for the differences of paddy, barley, etc., 



being the individual potentiality of the respective seeds, similarly God is the 
common cause for the birth of gods, men, and others, while the individual 
fruits of works associated with the individual creatures are the uncommon 
causes for the creation of the differences among the gods, men, and others. 
Thus God is not open to the defects of partiality and cruelty, since lie takes 
other factors into consideration. 

How, again, is it known that God creates this world of high, low, and 
medium conditions in accordance with other factors? 

"For so the Vedas show" in, "It is He indeed who makes him perform 
virtuous deeds whom He would raise high above these worlds; and it is He 
indeed who makes him perform vicious deeds whom He would cast below 
these worlds" (Kau. III. 8), "It becomes virtuous through good acts, and 
vicious through evil acts" (Br. III. ii. 13, IV. iv. 5). The Smiti also shows that 
God's dispensation of favour and disfavour is contingent on the specific 
merit of the work done by each creature, e.g. "In whatever way men worship 
Me, in the same way do I fulfil their desires" (Gita, IV. 11), and other texts of 
a similar import. 

iivui 

Fr Not (so) 4-sifl on account of kczrnta remaining undifferentiated ~1 acJ 
if this be the objection, r not so, TfcTq because of the beginninglessness (of 
the transmigratory state). 

3S. If it be argued that it is not possible (to take Karmamerit and demerit- 
into consideration in the beginning), since the fruits of work remain still 
undifferentiated, then we say, no, since the transmigratory state has no 
beginning. 

Opponent : There could have been no karma (result of work) before 
creation, in accordance with which a diverse universe could have emerged; 
for nondifferentiation is emphasized in the text, "0 amiable one, in the 



beginning all this was but Existence, one without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1). It 
is only after creation that results of work, depending on the diversification 
into bodies etc., could be possible, and the diversification into bodies could 
be possible by depending on the results of work. This would lead to the 
fallacy of mutual dependence (logical seesaw). Thus, well may God become 
active by depending on the fruits of work after the creation of multiplicity. 
But before this emergence of diversity it would come to this that the first 
creation would perforce be without any variety, since the fruits of work 
bringing about differentiation would he absent. 

Veddntin : That is no defect, since the transmigratory state has no 
beginning. This defect would have arisen if transmigration had a beginning. 
But if that state has no beginning, there is nothing contradictory for the fruits 
of work and the variety in creation to act as cause and effect of each other on 
the analogy of the seed and the sprout. 

How, again, is it known that this transmigratory state has no beginning? 

To this the answer is: 



' 3TRT Moreover 7"Vc this is logical a and dca is met with. 

36. Moreover, this is logical, and (so) it is met with (in the scriptures). 

And it is logical for the transmigratory existence to have no beginning; for 
had it emerged capriciously all of a sudden, then there would have been the 
predicament of freed souls also being reborn here, as also the contingency of 
results accruing from non-existing causes, for the differences in happiness 
and misery would have no logical explanation. It has been pointed out 
already that God is not the cause of inequality, nor is ignorance by itself a 
source of this, it being homogeneous. Ignorance can at best become the 



creator of inequality in consequence of the fruits of work, which are 
acquired as a result of the influence of past impressions of the three 
infatuations-love, hatred, and delusion. The fallacy of mutual dependence 
does not arise from the impossibility of bodies being created without karma 
and karma being performed without bodies; for if creation is beginningless, 
all this becomes reasonable on the analogy of the seed and the sprout, and 
hence there will be no defect. 

And we realize the beginninglessness of creation from the Vedas and the 
Smrtis. In the Vedas, for instance, occurs the text, "Myself entering into this 
as the embodied soul (Jiva-atma -living being)" (Ch. VI. iii. 2). Referring to 
the beginning of creation, this text speaks of the embodied soul as the "living 
being" on account of its sustaining life, and thereby it shows that creation 
had no beginning; for if creation had a beginning then, since the soul had no 
life to sustain (at that time), why should the "living being" have been 
referred to in that text through the word jiva (living one) which comes into 
use from the fact of supporting the life process (jivana)? It cannot be that the 
term jiva is used in anticipation that it will support life in future; for an 
existing relationship is stronger than a future one, inasmuch as the former is 
an accomplished fact. And the mantra text, "The Ordainer created the sun 
and moon like those of the previous cycles" (II. V. X. cxc. 3) shows the 
existence of earlier cycles of creation. In the Smtti also the transmigratory 
state is noticed to be without beginning, as in, "Its form is not here perceived 
as such, neither its end, nor its origin, nor its continuance" (Gita XV. 3). The 
conclusion made in the Puranas also is that the past and future cycles of 
creation are numberless. 


Topic 13: PROPRIETY OF ALL THE CHARACTERISTICS 




37. And Brahman is the cause on account of the propriety of all the 
characteristics (of a cause in It). 

After it has been ascertained that the Vedas have for their purport the 
conscious Brahman as the efficient and material cause of the universe, the 
teacher (Vy5sa) refuted the objections raised by others on such grounds as 
the difference between Brahman and the world. Now he concludes the 
subject mainly concerned with the establishment of his own point of view, 
before he commences the subject mainly concerned with demolishing the 
opposing points of view (B. S. II. ii). This philosophy based on the 
Upani$ads is not to be cavilled at; for when this Brahman is accepted as the 
cause, all the characteristics of a cause, namely that Brahman is omniscient, 
omnipotent, and a great conjurer, fit in with It in the way already indicated. 




Topic 1: SAMKHYA VIF.w REFUTED (IMPOSSIBILITY OF DESIGN) 

\ 



T-3Tj79#: Owing to the inexplicability of design q and (other reasons) 
31;iT;r9j the inferred one 9 is not. 

1. The inferred one (Pradhxna) is not (the cause) owing to the 
impossibility of explaining the design, as also for other reasons. 

Although this scripture is begun with the purpose of establishing the fact 
that the texts of the Upanisads have such a thing (viz Brahman) alone in 
view, but it is not begun for proving or disproving any conclusion with the 
help of mere reasoning, as is done in the books of logic, still for anyone 
explaining the texts of the Upanisads, it becomes incumbent to repudiate the 
philosophies of the Salilklryas and others which run counter to the right 
knowledge. This is why the succeeding (i.e. the present) section begins. And 
because the determination of the correct meaning of the Upanisads is meant 
for right knowledge, his own point of view has been first established (by 
Vyasa) in the course of determining that meaning; for that is preferable to the 
rejection of opposite views. 



Opponent: It is proper to establish one's own point of view for the sake of 
det A rmining what the right knowledge is, it being a means for the attainment 
of liberation by people aspiring for release; what need is there of 
demolishing others' points of view, which amounts to being inimical to 
others? 

Veddntin : Well, it is iust as you say. But there are some people of dull 
intellect who on noticing that the great scriptures of the Sarhkhvas and 
others are accepted by the honoured ones and that they proceed under the 
plea of bestowing the right knowledge, may conclude that these too are to he 
accepted as a means to right knowledge. Besides, they may have faith in 
these, since there is a possibility of weight of reasoning and since they are 
spoken by omniscient people. Hence this effort is being made to expose their 
hollowness. 

Opponent : Have not the views of the Samkhyas and others been thrown 
overboard even earlier with the help of the aphorisms: "Because of the 
attribution of seeing, the one not taught in the Upanigads is not the cause" (I. 
i. 5), "There can be no reliance on inference owing to the mention of desire" 
(I. i. 18), "Hereby are explained ah other theories" (I. iv. 28)? What need is 
there of doing it all over again? 

That is being answered (by the Veddntin). Even the Samkhyas and others 
cite the Upani$adic texts for reinforcing their own points of view, and they 
explain these in conformity with their own theories. What was done before 
was just to prove that their interpretations are mere fallacies and not the 
correct explanations. But here follows a refutation of their reasonings 
independently of the texts. This is the difference. 

With re g ard to this the Sathkhvas ar g ue thus: As it is seen in this world 
that the modifications like pots , plates , etc, which remain transfused with 
earth as their common substance , ori g inate from the material cause earth , so 
all the different products , external or corporeal , which remain transfused 
with ha p piness , miser y, and delusion , must sprin g from a material cause 
constituted by ha p piness , miser y, and delusion. Now the material cause 
constituted by ha p piness , sorrow , and delusion is the same as Pradhana . 
which is constituted by the three g unas t sattva . rajas, and tamas-intelli g ence . 






































activit y, and inertia ), which is insentient like earth , and which en gag es in 
activit y b y under g oin g diverse transformation under a natural impulsion for 
servin g a sentient soul ( by providin g experience or liberation ) . So also the y 
arrive at that very Pradhana on such g rounds of inference as limitation , 
( ori g ination from the potency of the cause , evolution from cause , mer ger 
into cause , unity as source of diversit y). 1 

Vedantin : With regard to this we say that if this has to be decided on the 
strength of analogy alone, then it is not seen in this world that any 
independent insentient thing that is not guided by some sentient being can 
produce modifications to serve some special purpose of a man; for what is 
noticed in the world is that houses, palaces, beds, seats, recreation grounds, 
etc., are made by the intelligent engineers and others at the proper time and 
in a way suitable for ensuring or avoiding comfort or discomfort. So how 
can the insentient Pradhana create this universe, which cannot even be 
mentally conceived of by the intelligent (i.e. skilful) and most far-famed 
architects, which is seen in the external context to consist of the earth etc. 
that are fit places for experiencing the results of various works, and in the 
context of the individual person, of the body and other things having 
different castes etc., in which the limbs are arranged according to a regular 
design, and which are seen as the seats for experiencing various fruits of 
actions? For this is not noticed in the case of a lump of earth or stone. Even 
in the cases of earth etc. it is noticed that special creations take place under 
the control of potters and others. On that analogy, the possibility arises of 
Pradhana also being under the control of some conscious entity. There can 
be no hard and fast rule that the primal cause is to be traced through the 
attribute (of insentiency) that inheres in the very nature of the material 
causes like earth, but that it is not to be traced through the qualities inherent 
in the external factors like the potter. And from this latter point of view 
nothing is contradicted, rather the Vedas stand vindicated, since the Vedas 
present a conscious entity as the cause. Accordingly, by reason of the 
impossibility of design as well, the insentient Pradhana should not be 
inferred to be the cause of the universe. By the word "and" (in the aphorism) 
is adduced the additional argument that the ground of inference (i.e. the 
middle term) is absent from the major term ( universe ) on account of the 
hollowness of the ar g ument about the inherence of the qualities of ha p piness 


































etc. ;in the universe ( that was advanced by the Samkhyas ) . For the external 
and corporeal modifications cannot lo g ically remain transfused with 
hap piness , miser y, and delusion as their very substance , for ha p piness etc, 
are perceived to be internal t i.e. mental ), whereas sound etc, are not 
perceived to be of that kind (they bein g external ), and the latter are perceived 
as the cause of the former. Moreover , even when the sound etc, continue to 
be the same , ha p piness etc. ( connected with them ) are felt to be different in 
accordance with the mental attitudes towards them. Similarl y if somebod y 
infers that "since limited products like roots , s prouts , etc, are bom out of a 
combination of many materials , therefore all external and corporeal 
modifications too must have been similarly formed out of the combination of 
many materials ; for they too are limited" , then one will be faced with the 
predicament of sattva . rajas, and tamas also sprin ging out of a combination 
of many materials , they too bein g equally limited. On the contrar y, as a 
causal relation is in evidence even in the case of beds , seats , etc. , that are 
( seen to be l manufactured ( b y sentient bein gs) after deliberation , therefore 
after noticin g a causal relationship in the cases of external thin g s and 
personal modifications one cannot j ump to the conclusion that these must 
also have been created b y some Insentient entit v.2 


\ 



W And Rr: owing to (the impossibility) of the tendency to act. 










































































2. And the inferred (Pradhana) cannot be the cause, since the tendency to 
create (cannot logically arise in'it). 

Leave alone this design. It is not possible for the insentient Pradhana in its 
isolation, even to have the tendency-the departure from the state of balance, 
consisting in attainment of a condition of relative superiority and inferiority 
by sattva, rajas, and tamas, the state of imminence for the creation of some 
distinct product-(that is necessary for that design); for such (independent 
action) is not seen in the case of earth etc. or chariot etc. For neither earth 
etc. nor chariot etc., which are themselves insentient, are seen to have any 
tendency to behave in a particular way unless they are under the guidance of 
potters and others or horses and the like. The unseen has to be inferred from 
the seen. So on account of the absence of any logical ground for acquiring 
the tendency to act, the insentient (Pradhana) is not to be inferred to be the 
cause of the universe. 

Sdmkhya : Well, even in the case of a mere sentient entity (in its 
isolation), no such tendency to act is in evidence. 

Veddntin : This is true. Still insentient things like chariot etc. are seen to 
have a tendency to act only when in association with a sentient being. 

Samkhva : But a sentient bein g is not seen to develop a tendencv to act 
even when in contact with insentient thin g s .s 

A third party : So what should be the reasonable position here? Should the 
tendency belong to that (insentient thing) in which it is noticed or to him in 
association with whom it is seen to develop? 

Sdyhkhya : Well, the reasonable position is that it should belong to that in 
which it is actually noticed, for here both (the tendency to act and the bases 
on which it rests) are perceived together as such, whereas a sentient being by 
itself is not perceived like the chariot etc. to be the seat of the tendency to 
act. It is only by noticing the difference of a living body from a mere 
insentient chariot etc. that a sentient being can be inferred to exist in 
association with the body etc., which serve as the seat of the tendency to act. 
And it is from this very fact of sentience and activity being perceptible when 








a body exists but being imperceptible when the body does not exist, that the 
materialists infer that even sentience belongs to the body itself. Therefore the 
tendency to act belongs to the insentient alone. 

Veddntin : That is being answered: We do not say that the tendency does 
not belong to the insentient entity in which it is noticed. Well may it belong 
to it. But we say that this tendency is derived from the sentient, since it 
exists or does not exist in accordance as the sentient entity exists or does not 
exist. For instance, even though such transformations as burning and 
emitting light subsist in fuel etc. and though they are not in evidence in fire 
in its isolation (from fuel), still they originate from fire itself, for they occur 
as a result of contact (of fuel) with fire and do not occur when that contact is 
absent. The case is the same here. Even according to the materialists a 
sentient body is seen to be the impeller of the insentient chariots, etc., and 
hence the view that the sentient is the impeller of action stands undisputed. 

Opponent : But from your point of view, the Self, even when in 
association with the body etc., cannot reasonably have any tendency to act 
over and above having Its intrinsic nature of pure consciousness, and hence 
it cannot be upheld that it can impart any tendency (to others). 

Veddntin : No, for on the analogy of the magnet and colour etc. something 
bereft of any tendency to act can still impart this to others. For instance, a 
magnet, though possessing no tendency to act by itself, still induces that 
tendency in iron; or objects of perception like colour etc., which by 
themselves have no tendency to act, still impart this to the eye etc. Similarly 
it is but logical that God who is all-pervasive, the Self of all, omniscient, and 
omnipotent, should be the impeller of all even though He is Himself free 
from any tendency to act. 

Objection : Since God is one (without a second), and there is nothing else 
to be impelled, the impellers hip itself is a fiction. 

Vedm?:i No, for it has been said again and again that God can be the 
impeller because of an illusory association with name and form conjured up 
by ignorance. Hence the existence of such tendency becomes a possibility 



only if omniscient God be accepted as the cause (of creation), but not so on 
the assumption of something insentient as the cause. 



tM:—z Like milk and water iq if this be the claim, then arfq even cif there. 

3. If it be claimed (that Pradhana acts spontaneously) like milk and water, 
then even there (intelligence is the guide). 

Opponent : It may be like this. As insentient milk has a natural tendency 
to act for the nourishment of calves, or as insentient water flows 
spontaneously for the good of people, similarly insentient Pradhana will also 
naturally act for fulfilling human needs. 

Veddntin : This is not a correct statement, since we infer that even in those 
cases, the milk and water develop a tendency to act when they are under the 
guidance of some sentient beings; for the chariot etc. which are admitted by 
both of us to be insentient, are not seen to have any action by themselves: 
The scripture also shows that all motion in this world has God as its source 
as in, "He who inhabits water but is within it (whom water does not know).... 
and who controls water from within (is the Internal Ruler)" (Br. III. vii. 4), 
"Under the mighty rule of this Immutable, 0 Gargi, some rivers flow 
eastward" (Br. III. viii. 9), and such other texts. Accordingly, the illustrations 
of milk and water should not be cited in opposition, since they too are very 
much of a piece with your point of view that is being disputed (viz that 
insentient Pradhana can have any independent tendency). Besides, it is 
logical to hold that milk is induced to flow under the affectionate desire of 
the cow; and it is drawn out by the sucking of the calf. Water too is not quite 
independent since its flow is dependent on the slope of the ground etc. And it 
was shown earlier that in all cases there is a dependence on sentience. But 



under the aphorism, "If it be said that Brahman cannot be the cause, since 
one is noticed to collect materials for the performance of an act, then we say 
no, for it is possible on the analogy of milk" (B. S. H. i. 24), the illustration 
was cited from the common-sense point of view to show that action can take 
place in a thing itself without the aid of any external means. But from the 
scriptural point of view it is known that all acts take place under God's 
bidding. Hence this does not contradict the earlier one. 


M 

W And oof: owing to the absence of anything extraneous T since 
(Pradhana can have) nothing to rely on. 

4. And (Pradhina is not the cause) since (nothing extraneous to it exists, so 
that) it has nothing to rely on (for impulsion to or stoppage from action). 

Pradhina accordin g to the Samkhvas . consists of the three g uns in a state 
of balance. Apart from these , nothin g else exists externally to Pradhina . on 
which it can depend for either impellin g or sto pping it. As for the ( external ) 
soul t nurufa ). it is a passive (witness ), neither impellin g nor sto p pin g . Hence 
Pradhina is without any other hel p, and bein g without hel p, it is wron g to 
maintain that it g ets sometimes transformed into mahat etc. , while at other 
times it does not.4 But since God has omniscience, omnipotence, and the 
great power of Maya, His engagement in or disengagement from activity 
presents no contradiction. 

^ HUH 

W And at'ITT owing to non-occurrence W1W elsewhere 9 it cannot be f- 
3Tft-" like grass etc. 




































S. And Pradhina cannot change (automatically) like grass etc. (into milk 
in a cow) for such a change does not occur elsewhere (e.g. in a bull). 

Opponent : It may happen thus: As grass, leaves, water, etc. change 
naturally into milk without the help of any other factor, even so Pradhana 
can change itself into mahat and the rest. 

How is it known that grass etc. are not helped by other factors? 

Because no other factor is observed. If we could discover some causes, 
then we could have taken up grass etc. along with those causes at will and 
would have manufactured milk; but we cannot do so. Therefore the change 
in the grass etc. is spontaneous. So also it can be the case with Pradhana. 

Veddntin : With regard to this we say: Pradhana can change naturally like 
grass etc. if the change in the grass etc. be accepted as automatic. But this is 
not admitted, since other causes are perceived. 

How is it known that there are other causes? 

From the non-occurrence (of such a thing) elsewhere. For grass etc. eaten 
by a cow alone changes into milk; but not so when rejected or eaten by a bull 
etc. If this could happen without any cause, then grass etc. would have 
become milk even without entering into a cow's body. A thing does not 
become causeless just because men cannot manufacture it at will. For some 
effects can be produced by men, while others happen under divine 
dispensation. Besides, men also can produce (more) milk by adopting the 
requisite methods, as for instance, procuring grass etc. For people wanting 
plenty of milk feed the cows with plenty of grass, and thereby they procure 
milk abundantly. Hence the changes in Pradhana cannot occur naturally on 
the analogy of grass etc. 




a Even qqqqA when admitted a*t-TTWTl on account of the absence of 
purpose. 

6. Even if (spontaneous modification of Pradhana be) accepted, still 
(Pradhana will not be the cause) because of the absence of any purpose. 

It has been established that Pradhana has no natural tendency to act. If 
now as a concession to your belief we admit that Pradhana has a 
spontaneous impulsion to act, still defects will persist. 

Why? 

Because of the absence of an y purpose. If it be said that Pradhana has a 
s pontaneous tendencv to act and that there is no need of any other auxiliar y 
in this matter , then from this it will follow that j ust as Pradhana does not 
require any help for its activit y, so also it will not stand in need of an y 
purpose as well : and thereby the proposition that Pradhana acts for 
accomplishin g the purposes of the soul will be set at nau g ht. If . however , the 
op ponent says that the need of any auxiliary alone is discarded , but not so 
any purpose , still we have to search for the purpose leadin g to Pradhana's 
actions. This purpose may be experience ( of io v and sorrow ) or liberation , or 
both. If experience of pleasure and pain be the motive , then what kind of 
ex perience can be provided tbv Pradhana ) for a soul which has no scope for 
its own perfection or imperfection (which such an experience can brin g 
about ) ? Besides , liberation will become an impossibility.5 If liberation be the 
purpose , then liberation bein g an accomplished facts even before Pradhana 
acts , its en gag ement in activity will be useless. Moreover , there will be the 
contin g ency of an absence of the experience of sound etc ,7 If both the 
purposes (experience and liberation) be admitted, still since the products of 







































































Pradhana, which are to be experienced, are infinite, there will arise the 
predicament of nonrelease (from them, since the experience will be 
limitless). And the impulse to act cannot be for the sake of satisfying some 
desire (or curiosity), since neither the insentient Pradhana can have any 
curiosity, nor can the partless and pure soul have it. If out of a fear that the 
powers of knowing and creating (that are present in the soul and Pradhana 
respectively) will become infructuous (in the absence of objects and 
creation), Pradhana be supposed to act, then just as the soul's power to know 
can never be eradicated, so also Pradhana's power to create will continue 
inter minably, so that the predicament of liberation becoming impossible will 
be just the same. Hence it is wrong to say that Pradhana acts for the sake of 
the soul. 



VqFF159 On the analogy of a man and a loadstone Offacq if such be the 
contention cfIT4 even so. 

7. If it be argued that like a (lame) man (riding on a blind man) or a 
loadstone (moving iron), (the soul can stimulate Pradhdna), even then (the 
defect will persist). 

Samkhya : It may be like this: As a man having the power of sight but not 
that of movement, he being lame, acts by riding on the shoulders of 
somebody else who has the power of action but not the power of vision, or 
as a loadstone, does not move by itself and yet makes a piece of iron move, 
similarly the soul can impel Pradhana. 

Opposition thus raises its head by relying on analogy. 


Vedantin : To this we reply that "even so", there is no escaping the defect. 
For instance, the defect of discarding your proposition crops up inasmuch as 



your hypothesis is that Pradhana has an independent tendency to act and the 
soul is not an impeller. Moreover, how can the passive soul impel Pradhana? 
Even a lame man guides a blind man by his speech, but the soul has no such 
causal function to induce action in Pradhana, since it is actionless and 
attributeless. And it cannot stimulate movement like a loadstone by mere 
proximity, for proximity (between soul and Pradhana) being eternal, the 
possibility will arise of such movement also becoming endless. In the case of 
a loadstone, (the proximity being inconstant), there can be such an activity as 
the attraction (of the iron to itself), for the proximity is inconstant. Besides, 
the loadstone depends on cleaning etc. for its action. Hence the illustrations 
of the man and the loadstone are inapt. Again, there can be no relation 
between the soul and Pradhana, since Pradhana is insentient, the soul is 
indifferent, and there is no third factor to bring them into relation. If, 
however, the relation follows from their intrinsic fitness to be related ( with 
each other )8. there will arise the predicament of liberation becomin g non- 
achievable . since that fitness cannot be uprooted. As in the previous 
a phorism , so here also the absence of purpose has to be taken into 
consideration from different points of view.9 But in the case of the supreme 
Self there is the greater advantage that It has inactivity from Its own point of 
view, but a driving urge (for creation) from the standpoint of Maya. 



arfci-8TV'd:On account of the impossibility of the relation of the 
Principal (and the subordinate) W as well. 

8. Besides, Pradhana cannot act on account of the impossibility of (the 
existence of) any relationship of the principal and its subordinates (among 
the gums constituting Pradhana). 

















For this additional reason no activity for Pradhana is possible. The state of 
Pradhana is a condition of balance of the three constituents (sattva, rajas, and 
tamas) continuing in their absolute intrinsic nature after giving up the 
reciprocal relation of predominance over or subordination to one another. 
There cannot be any relation of predominance or subordination among them 
in that state of their existence in their pristine nature which is independent of 
their reciprocal relation; for a contrary supposition will lead to a negation of 
their individual nature. And since there is no external factor to excite them, 
there can be no origin of mahat and the rest that results from the disturbance 
of the balance of the three constituents. 



W And a-T-c even if the inference be pursued in another way, (still the 
defect will persist) W-qft-f on account of the absence of the power of 
intelligence. 

9. And even if the inference be pursued otherwise (still the defect will 
persist) owing to the absence of the power of intelligence (in Pradhana). 

Sfrhkhya : Even then, we shall draw the inference in a different way, so 
that this last defect may not crop up. For we do not admit that the guns are 
by nature mutually independent or that they are changeless; for such a 
hypothesis lacks proof. But their nature is postulated in accordance with the 
modifications springing from them. Their nature must be postulated to be 
such as may logically lead to the production of the effects. And the accepted 
view is that the gunas are naturally unsteady. From this it follows that even 
during equilibrium the gums exist in a state of potential divergence.- 

Vedantin : Even so . the faults like the impossibility of sustainin g desi gn 
etc, rationall y, as mentioned earlier , persist j ust as before , since Pradhana is 
bereft of the power of intelli g ence. Should the o p ponent infer this power of 
intelli g ence as well ( for Pradhana ). he will cease to be an o p ponent ; for that 
























will open the door to the belief in the theory of Brahman , that a sin gle 
sentient entity is the material cause of the universe of varied a p pearances. 
Ag ain , even if the g ums possess a potentiality for imbalance . 10 still once 
they are in a state of equilibrium, they cannot undergo loss of balance in the 
absence of some cause for this; or should they become disturbed without a 
cause, it will lead to the predicament of their remaining in a state of 
disturbed equilibrium through eternity, for the absence of a cause is equal in 
either state. In this way the defect (of the non-emergence of the derivatives 
like mahat) stated last, will certainly crop up. 



-a And NAf+rrg owing to contradictions aTffT13W" incoherent. 

10. And (the Sdmkhya doctrine is) incoherent because of the 
contradictions involved. 

And this thesis of the Samkhyas is self-contradictory. For sometimes they 
enumerate seven organs and sometimes eleven; similarly sometimes they 
teach about the origin of the subtle elements from mahat, and sometimes 
from the ego; so also sometimes they mention three internal organs, and 
sometimes one. And their opposition to the Upani$ads, speaking of God as 
the cause, as also to the Sm;tis which follow the Upani$ads, is a patent fact. 
For these reasons also the philosophy of the Samkhyas is incoherent. 

To this the Sdmkhya says: Is not the philosophy of the followers of the 
Upanigads equally incoherent, since in this it is denied that the tormented 
(individual being) and the tormentor (world) belong to distinct categories? 
For when they postulate that the one Brahman, which is the Self of all, is the 
cause of the entire world-appearance, they have necessarily to admit that the 
afflicted and the afflicter are but two aspects of one and the same Self, and 
that they do not belong to different categories. If these two, the tormentor 














and the tormented, be but two aspects of the same Self, then that Self will 
never get freed from those two, so that the scripture teaching about right 
knowledge for the sake of getting rid of affliction will become useless. For a 
lamp possessed of the properties of heat and light cannot reasonably get 
freed from heat and light so long as it continues to be a lamp. As for the 
illustration of water, ripple, wave, foam, etc., even there, the same single 
water has the appearances of ripple etc. which merge and emerge for ever, so 
that in the case of the water as well, there can be no getting rid of these 
ripple etc. Moreover the tormentor and the tormented are well known in this 
world to belong to distinct categories. Thus it is that the seeker (who is 
afflicted by the desire) and the thing sought (which afflicts), are seen to be 
entirely different. If the thing sought did not differ in substance from the 
seeker, then the thing sought by any seeker being ever an accomplished fact 
for that seeker, he should have no desire for that thing, just as a lamp, that is 
nothing but light, has got its light ever present in itself so that it has no desire 
(i.e. need) for it; for a seeker desires something that is still unattained. And 
so also an object (of desire) will cease to be an object (unless there be a 
difference between the man and his ob j ect ) . And should it be ever coveted . 
the desire will be only about itself. But this does not accord with facts ; for 
the terms seeker and the sou g ht are relative expressions , they bein g mutuall y 
determined. A relation can subsist between two ( mutuall y) related thin gs, but 
not in a thin g standin g sin gl y. Hence these seeker and the thin g sou g ht must 
be different and so also must be the detester and the thin g detested. That 
which is favourable to the seeker is the desirable thin g and that which is 
unfavourable is the undesirable thin g . And a person becomes related to the 
desirable and the undesirable by turns. Since the desirable thin g s are few . 
while the undesirable thin g s are man y, both the desirable and the undesirable 
are in effect a source of evil , and are hence called a source of torment. The 
tormented is the person who , thou g h one , g ets connected with each of these 
two bv turns. If these afliicter and afflicted be identical , no liberation will be 
possible. But if they belon g to different cate g ories , then liberation ma y 
perchance be possible at tunes as a result of the removal of the causer' of 
their coming into contact. 

Veddntin : With regard to this the answer is: There is no defect, since the 
relation of the tormentor and tormented cannot exist in the face of this very 



















































fact of unity (of the Self). This defect would have existed if even within the 
unity of the Self, the tormentor and the tormented coutd be related by way of 
being the subject and the, object of each other. But this cannot be so 
precisely because of this unity. For fire does not either bum or illuminate 
itself precisely because it is one even though possessed of the different 
attributes of heat and light and subject to transformation. Need it be said that 
the relation of the tormentor and the tormented cannot be possible in the 
changeless Brahman which is one? 

Where will then this relation of the and the tormented exist? 

The answer is: Do you not see that the living body which stands as the 
object (of the act of scorching) is the tormented and the sun is the tormentor? 

Opponent : Torment means pain and that can affect a sentient being, but 
not the insentient body. Should affliction belong to the body, it will cease 
with the death of the body, so that no spiritual practice need be found out for 
the removal of that affliction. 

Vedantin : The answer is: A sentient being, when unassociated with a 
body, is not seen to suffer. Even you do not uphold the view that a change, 
called affliction, comes over the sentient being in its isolation; and the body 
and the sentient (soul) cannot get mixed up, since that would give rise to 
impurity etc. (in the soul). Nor do you admit that torment can torment itself. 
So even from your point of view how can there be a state where one 
becomes the tormentor and the other the tormented? 

Opponent : The attribute sattva is the tormented and the attribute rajas is 
the tormentor. 

Vedantin : No . since the sentient ( soul ) cannot enter into any combination 
with these two," 


Opponent : Since sentience conforms to (i.e. becomes reflected on) sattva, 
it seems to be afflicted. 








Vedantin : Then it comes to this that in reality it (i.e. the soul) is not 
afflicted at all, for you use the word "seems". And if it is not afflicted, then 
the word "seems" is not misplaced. For if somebody says, "A (non- 
poisonous) dundubba (snake) is like a (poisonous) snake", the dundubbe 
does not thereby become poisonous; or if one says "A snake is like a 
dundubba," the snake does not thereby become non-poisonous. So it has to 
be understood that this state of one being the afflicted and the other the 
afflicter is a creation of ignorance; it does not exist in the truest sense. If 
such be your position, I too lose nothing. On the contrary, if you understand 
that the sentient soul is afflicted in a real sense, then since you uphold that 
the tormentor (rajas) is eternal, there will be all the less possibility of 
liberation from your side. 

Op ponent : Althou g h the power to afflict and the capacity of bein g 
afflicted be everlastin g, still affliction bein g dependent on the contact 
coexistin g with the cause . 13 an absolute cessation of contact follows from 
the cessation of non-perception (tamas) which is the cause of the contact. 
Absolute liberation becomes a logical outcome of this. 

Vedi ntin : It cannot be so, since you hold that tamas, which is of the 
nature of non-perception, is eternal. And since there is no fixed rule about 
the appearance or disappearance of the gums, the cessation of the cause (i.e. 
non-perception) of the contact (between Nature and soul) is not subject to 
any fixed law. Thus the separation between the two (soul and Nature) being 
also unpredictable the absence of liberation follows as an inevitable result of 
the Sarnkhya view itself. But from the Upani$adic point of view, one cannot 
doubt even in dream of there being no liberation, because here it is admitted 
that the Self is one, that the one cannot be both the subject and object, and 
that all the different modifications are mentioned in the Upanisad to he based 
on mere speech. Yet within the range of empirical experiences, the state of 
one being the tormentor and another the tormented is to be accepted for the 
time being just for what it is worth. And (since its eradication follows as a 
matter of course from right knowledge) it is not either an object to be 
questioned about or avoided (in the state of knowledge). 


Topic 2: VAISESIILA OBJECTION REFUTED 













The theory of Pradhana as the cause of the universe has been demolished. 
Now it is the turn of the theory that the atoms are the cause. While on this 
task, we first meet the objection that can be fancied against the believers in 
Brahman by the believers in the atoms as the cause. In this matter the 
postulate of the Vai§e$ika (atomist) is that the qualities inhering in the causal 
substance reproduce in the substance, constituting the product, (a set of) new 
qualities of the same class; for a white cloth is seen to be bom out of the 
white yarns, but the contrary is not in evidence. Hence if intelligent Brahman 
be posited as the (material) cause of the universe, intelligence will inhere in 
it. But since this is not noticeable, intelligent Brahman cannot be the 
(material) cause of the universe. By following this line of argument of the 
atomists themselves, the aphorist shows that such a postulate is not 
invariably true: 



EIT Rather B$?-Y-"c like the great and long (arising) WfgfkwvTulTzt 
from the short and inextensive. 

11. Rather (the universe may originate from Brahman) even as the great 
and long (triads etc.) originate from the short (dyad) or the inextensive 
(atom). 

This is their (i.e. Vaise~ikas') process of creation. (During dissolution) the 
(ultimate) atoms continue for some time in their rudimentary state without 
producing any effect, but suitably possessed of the respective qualities of 
colour etc. Then under the influence of the merits and demerits (adrs#a- 
unseen potential results of works) etc. of creatures aided by the conjunction 
(with one another) they begin creating all things starting from dyads; and the 
qualities of the causes produce new qualities in the effect. When two 
(ultimate) atoms create a dyad, the colours, viz white etc., inhering in the 
atoms, produce a new whiteness etc. in the dyad. But the special 
characteristic of the atoms, viz their inextension (i.e. atomicity) does not 



produce a new inextension; for it is postulated that a dyad comes to possess a 
new magnitude; for according to them a dyad is microscopic in size and has 
no length. When again two dyads produce a tetrad (combination of four 
atoms) the whiteness etc., inhering in the dyad, produce other whiteness etc. 
in a similar way. But the dyad-ness (i.e. microscopic size) and the lack of 
length, Lnough inhering in the dyads, do not produce their counterparts; for 
their tenet is that a tetrad has an accretion of magnitude (or greatness) and 
length. The same line of argument is to be followed even if many atoms, or 
many dyads, or the atoms in combination with the dyads, produce an effect. 
Thus even as from the (ultimate) atoms, which are inextensive, arise dyads 
which are microscopic in size but have no length, and the triads which have 
both magnitude and length, or as from the microscopic and non-linear dyads 
are formed the triads having volume and length, but neither atomicity nor 
absence of length is reproduced, so also if the insentient universe emerges 
out of intelligent Brahman, what do you lose? 

You (the atomist) may, however, think thus: The resulting substance, a 
dyad for instance, is beset by an opposing magnitude; hence we do not admit 
that the atomicity etc. inherent in the cause (atom) produce any effect (in the 
dyad). But the universe is not beset by any other attribute, called insentience 
opposed to consciousness, owing to which the consciousness present in the 
cause (Brahman) could not produce another consciousness in the effect 
(universe). For there is no such (positive) attribute called unconsciousness 
(residing in the world) which is opposed to consciousness, unconsciousness 
being only a negation of consciousness. Hence consciousness being 
dissimilar to atomicity etc., it (consciousness) should perforce reproduce 
another consciousness (in the universe). 

Vedintin : You should not think like that; for even as the atomicity etc., 
though present in the cause (atom), do not become the producers of 
atomicity etc., so also it can be in the case of consciousness. To this extent, 
both are on the same footing here. 

And it cannot be the case that atomicity etc. do not reproduce themselves 
because they are opposed by adverse magnitude; for the atomicity etc. can 
very well reproduce themselves before being opposed by any adverse 



magnitude (which has still to emerge), your view being that even when a 
thing is being produced it remains momentarily without any quantity, before 
the qualities actually come into being. It cannot be said that atomicity etc. 
become so very preoccupied with the production of other dimensions , that 
they do not reproduce the dimensions of their own class , it bein g understood 
by you that some thin gs (e.g . dualit y) which are entirely different from these 
( atomicity etc. ) produce the other dimensions. For the aphorisms of the 
VaiSeg ikas run as follows: "Ma g nitude is produced from the multiplicit y of 
the causes , the ma g nitude of the cause , and the abundance ( i.e. a particular 
combination ) of the cause" 14 ( Vai. Su. VII. i. 9 ); "But the atom is o p posed to 
this'"" (V2i. SO VII. i. 10); "Hereby are explained length and shortness" 
(Vai. Su. VII. i. 17). It cannot be argued that owing to some peculiar 
disposition, multiplicity etc. alone of the causes are reproduced, but not so 
its atomicity etc., for when some other thing or quality is being produced, all 
the qualities of the cause are equally present (in the cause) through 
inherence. So it comes to this that just as atomicity does not reproduce itself 
in the effect, owing to its peculiar nature, so also can be the case with 
consciousness as well. This is how it is to be understood. And since it is 
noticed that entirely dissimilar things (and attributes) are produced from the 
combination of different things etc., there is no invariable rule that things 
(and attributes) of the same class alone are produced. 

Vaise;ika : When a substance is under discussion, it is improper to cite the 
illustration of a quality. 

Vedkntin : Not so, because the point sought to be emphasized by the 
illustration is merely the production of dissimilars. And there is no reason 
behind a rule that a substance must be illustrated by a substance alone or a 
quality by a quality. For even your aphorist cited a quality for illustrating a 
substance in the aphorism: "Since a conjunction between the perceptible and 
the imperceptible is imperceptible, nothing can exist that is a combination of 
the five elements" (Vai. Su. IV. ii. 2). What is implied by the aphorist is this: 
Just as the quality, called conjunction, existing through the relation of 
inherence in the perceptible earth and the imperceptible space (when they 
combine), is not perceptible, similarly if the body inheres in (i.e. be a 
combination of) the perceptible and imperceptible five elements (as its 
































material causes), it should not be perceived. But as a matter of fact the body 
is directly perceived. Hence it is not formed by the five elements. Here (in 
this illustration) conjunction is a quality and the body is a thing. 

Furthermore, it was elaborated under the aphorism, "But it is seen" (B.S. 
II. i. 6) that the effect can be dissimilar (to the cause). 

Opponent: If that be so, the present topic was anticipated there itself. 

Vedantin : We say no, for that was an argument against the Samkhyas, 
whereas this is against the Vai§e$ikas. 

Opponent : Was not an extension of those arguments made to other 
systems as well under the aphorism, "Hereby are explained all the theories 
that are not accepted by the wise" (II. i. 12), the reasons being the same in 
both the cases? 

Vedantin : That is true. Still at the commencement of the scrutiny of the 
Vaise$ika system, those very reasons are elaborated here with the help of 
illustrations accepted by themselves. 

Topic 3: ATOMS NOT THE CAUSE OF UNIVERSE 

1 llftll 

3tqUITM Even from either point of view qqM* no action (is possible) 
3M: hence ffff-3raTEr. (there is) absence of that. 

12. (Whether adrga leads the atoms or conjunction helps them), in either 
case no action is possible, and hence there can be no creation or dissolution. 

Now the doctrine that the ultimate atoms are the causes of the universe is 
being demolished. That doctrine originates thus: In common experience it is 
seen that such things as cloth etc., which are possessed of parts, are produced 
from such things as yarns etc. in which they inhere and which are helped by 



the quality of conjunction. On the analogy of this, it is known that all things 
that are composed of parts are produced from those respective things in 
which they inhere and which are helped by the quality of conjunction. The 
(ultimate) atom is the culmination of minuteness where this division between 
the whole and its parts ceases. Again, this whole universe consisting of hills, 
seas, etc., is a composite thing, and being composite, it has a beginning and 
an end. An effect is not produced without a cause. So the ultimate atoms are 
the cause of the universe. This is what Kai da (father of the Vai"ka theory) 
implies. Now from noticing these four elements-earth, water, fire, and airto 
have parts, the ultimate atoms are imagined to be of four kinds. Since the 
ultimate atoms stand at the furthest limit of minuteness, so that there can be 
no division beyond them, therefore earth etc. in the course of destruction 
reach the ultimate atoms as the culmination of their disintegration. That is 
the time of dissolution. After that at the time of creation, some action starts 
in the ultimate atoms of air under the influence of adr}xa (unseen potential 
fruits of works of creatures). That action unites the atom, on which it occurs, 
with another atom. From that combination originates air through a gradual 
process starting with (the production of) dyads. Thus also originate fire, 
water, and earth, and thus the body together with the sense-organs. In this 
way, this whole universe originates from the atoms. And from the (qualities 
of) colour etc. inherent in the atoms, the colour etc. of the dyads etc. are 
produced just as it occurs in the case of the yarns and cloth. This is how the 
Vaiie~ikas think. 

With regard to this we say: It has to be admitted that the combination of 
the atoms, existing in their isolation is contingent on action, since the yams 
are seen to combine when they are being acted upon (by others). And since 
action is an effect, some cause for it has to be assumed. If such a cause be 
not admitted, then in the absence of any cause, no initial action will be 
possible in the atoms. And even if a cause be admitted, it must be accepted 
in conformity with common experience to be something like effort, impact, 
etc. But since these are impossible ( durin g the state of dissolution ), no initial 
action will take place in the atoms. For in that state , no effort , which 
( accordin g to the atomist ) is a quality of the soul , can be possible in the 
absence of a bod y; for effort sprin g s up as a quality of the soul when a 
contact between the mind and the soul takes place in the mind havin g the 
























body as its seat. By the same reason , all ordinarily co g nized causes like 
impact etc. 16 are to be rejected; for all these come after creation, and hence 
cannot be the causes of the initial action (in atoms). 

Again, if it be maintained that adrga is the cause of the initial movement, 
then in what does it inhere-in the soul or the atoms? In either case the first 
movement in the atom cannot possibly result from adrra, since adr#a is 
insentient. For in the course of examining the Samkhya point of view it was 
said that an insentient thing by itself neither acts nor makes anything else act 
unless it is presided over by some sentient being. As for the soul, its (quality 
of) consciousness does not emerge in that state (according to the Vai a ika), 
so that it is insentient; hence even if adrga be admitted to inhere in the soul, 
it cannot be the cause of action in the atom, for adrga has no connection with 
the atom. 

Opponent: The soul possessing the adra is in conjunction with the atoms. 

VedJntin : Then from a constancy of that conjunction, the predicament 
will arise of action becoming constant; for nothing else exists to put a check. 
Thus from the absence of any welldetermined cause of action, the initial 
action cannot occur in the atoms. And because of the absence of any action, 
any conjunction that depends on such an action will be impossible. In the 
absence of conjunction, dyads and other products coming out of conjunction 
will have no existence. 

Ag ain , when an atom comes into con j unction with another , does it do so 
wholly or in some part? If the con j unction occurs wholl y, then there will be 
no increase in ma g nitude . lz so that the result will be a mere atom. Besides, 
this leads to contradic don of common experience, for a thing having 
dimensions is seen to combine with another having them. Should (on the 
other hand) the ultimate atom combine through some art, it will result in 
making the atom a composite thing (thus demolishing the atomists' theory). 

Opponent: The ultimate atoms may have imaginary parts. 

Vedantin : Since imaginary things are unreal, the conjunction will surely 
be unreal, and hence it will not become the noninherent (asamavayin) cause 

















of the thing produced. In the absence of the non-inherent cause (viz 
conjunction), such products as the dyads etc. will not come into being. As in 
the first creation the atoms cannot possess any action for producing 
conjunction, there being no cause for that action, similarly on the eve of the 
cosmic dissolution the atoms will have no action for causing their 
separation; for even then, no well-determined cause can be noticed to make 
them act. As for adr#a, it is meant for producing experience (of happiness 
and sorrow) and not dissolution. Hence in the absence of any cause, the 
atoms can have action neither for bringing about their conjunction nor 
disjunction. This absence of conjunction and disjunction will lead to an 
absence of creation and dissolution. Therefore this theory of the atoms as the 
cause stands discredited. 

Ilftll 

4 And tiff- on account of assuming inherence (creation and dissolution 
become impossible), mfc: because of infinite regress tiq. arising from a 
parity of reasoning. 

13. And (there can be no creation or dissolution) by reason of assuming 
inherence, for this leads to an infinite regress on a parity of reasoning. 

The portion "And by reason of assuming inherence" is to be connected 
with "there can be no creation or dissolution" (in the previous aphorism) 
which was meant for refuting the theory of the atoms as the cause of the 
universe, which is the topic under discussion. Your (Vaife ilea's) theory is 
that the dyad, originating from two atoms, becomes entirely dissimilar to 
these two, and it inheres in both of them. But one accepting such a view 
cannot substantiate the theory of the atoms as the cause. 

why? 



Because "this leads to an infinite regress on a parity of reasoning". Just as 
the dyad, though absolutely dissimilar to the two atoms, becomes connected 



with them through the relationship of inherence, so also inherence itself, 
which is absolutely different from the inhering things, should be connected 
with the inhering things through a separate relationship of the nature of 
inherence, since the fact of similarity of absolute difference exists here as 
well. And from this it follows that for those successive relationships, other 
relationships of inherence have to be imagined. In this way the door is laid 
open for an infinite regress. 

Opponent: Inherence is an everlasting relationship that is actually grasped 
through the idea of "here" along with the things inhering. It is not perceived 
in its isolation (apart from the related objects) or through some other 
relationship, hence no other relation need be sought for it; so there can be no 
possibility of infinite regress. 

Veddntin : The answer is . no : for in that case con j unction also can be an 
everlastin g relationship between the thin g s con j oined , so that no other 
relationship like inherence need be sou g ht for it. If now it be said that 
con i unction is different (from the thin g s con i oined ), so that it has to be 
related throu g h another relationshi p, then inherence also must need some 
other relationshi p, since it too is different ( from the thin g s inherin g) . And it 
is not reasonable to assert that con j unction has need of some other 
relationshi p, it bein g a qualit y, whereas inherence has no such need , since it 
is not a qualit y; for in either case the need determinin g such a relationship is 

the same. The technical terminolo gy_( of the Vai §e $ikas ) dubbin g 

con j unction as a qualit y ( and inherence as a relationshi p) has no bearin g in 
the matter of determinin g this need, 1 " So far as those who consider inherence 
as a separate category are concerned, an infinite regress is inevitable. And 
when this infinite regress becomes a possibility, and when the whole series 
of successive relationship of inherence fails on the failure of any one 
relationship in that series being proved to be ultimate, a dyad cannot arise 
out of two atoms. For this reason also the theory of the atoms as the cause is 
untenable. 
















































mn i wn iitfli 

If Furthermore, %"M owing to persistence lR97q eternally. 

14. (The atomic theory is inadmissible) for the further reason of (activity 
etc.) persisting eternally. 

Again, the atoms have to be accepted as naturally active, inactive, both 
active and inactive, or neither active nor inactive; for no other alternative is 
possible. But all the four alternatives are inadmissible. If the atoms be 
naturally active, it will lead to the possibility of ruling out dissolution 
altogether, for activity will persist eternally. If the atoms be naturally 
inactive, it will lead to the possibility of ruling out creation altogether, for 
inactivity will persist eternally. And they cannot naturally have both activity 
and inactivity, for that is irreconcilable owing to contradiction. If they have 
neither activity nor inactivity, by nature, then one will have to admit that 
these two originate from some cause; but then if such causes as adr? fa he 
ever at hand, it will lead to constant activity; and if they are not under the 
guidance of adryta etc., it will lead to constant inactivity. For this reason also 
the theory that the atoms are the cause is unjustifiable. 



It And T->k-'TWK owing to possession of colour etc. NOT. a reversal will 
occur aZQiiig for this accords with experience. 

If. And on account of the possession of colour etc. there will be a reversal 
(of the nature of the atoms), for this accords with experience. 



The Vai§e$ika asserts that the ultimate atoms stand at the last limit of a 
process of breaking up of composite things till there can be no further 
division, that these atoms are of four kinds, possessed of colour etc., that 
they arc the constituents of the four elements and the modifications of the 
elements endowed with the qualities of colour etc., and that they are eternal. 
That tenet of theirs is baseless. For by virtue of possessing colour etc. the 
atomicity and everlastingness of the atoms stand contradicted; that is to say, 
the atoms become grosser and less eternal than (what) the ultimate cause 
(should be), a position that is the opposite of what the atomists intend. 

Why so? 

For thus it is seen in the world. Anythin g that is possessed of colour etc, in 
this world is seen to be g rosser and less permanent than its cause : for 
instance a cloth is g rosser and less permanent than its yarns : and the yarns 
are g rosser and less permanent than the fibres. Similarl y, as these ultimate 
atoms are admitted by them to have colour etc. , they too have some cause in 
comparison with which thev will be g rosser and less permanent. If this be 
the case , the g rounds of eternalitv shown by them in ( the aphorism ). 
"Anythin g that has existence and is unproduced is eternal" tYai, Su. IV. i, 1 1 
would not a ppl y to the ultimate atoms , for on account of the reason shown 
above the atoms also should have some cause. As for the second g round of 
eternalitv stated by them in . "And ( atoms are eternal , for on that assumption 
alone ) there can be a specific denial about an effect by sa ving. v It is 
impermanent" 1 " (Vai. Su. IV. i. 4), that also does not prove the permanence 
of the atoms as a matter of necessity. For while it is true that unless there is 
something eternal, the negative (na) cannot form a compound term with 
eternalit v ( to mean non-eternalit v). vet on such a g round it cannot be 
asserted that the compound term ( anitva-noneternal ) has to depend ( for its 
meanin g) on the eternalitv of the ultimate atoms alone ; for as a matter of 
fact , the eternal Brahman is already available as the supreme cause. 
Moreover , it is not a fact that the existence of anythin g becomes established 
merely because a certain word si g nif ying a certain thin g is in common 
use.20 Rather it is only when words and ideas become established to be true 
with the help of other valid means of proof (viz perception , inference , etc. ) 
that they find vo g ue in common usa g e. The third g round of eternalitv is 



































































































stated in . "And want of knowled g e" ( Vai. Su. IV. i. 5 ) . Now if this aphorism 
be explained to mean . "Eternalitv is also deducible from Want of 
knowled g e' consistin g in not knowin g throu g h direct perception any cause of 
those existin g causes whose effects are fully in-view " . -then the dyad also 
will become eternal.21 


Now if the qualif ying term "not havin g any substance as the cause" be 
added after "cause" (in the previous explanation ), " still eternalitv will be 
determined by the absence of a cause , but then that was stated earlier ( Vai. 
Su. IV. i. 1 ) and it will involve a repetition to restate it in the aphorism . "And 
want of knowled g e". A g ain , if the explanation be this . "The eternalitv of the 
cause is determined by the "Want of knowled ge 1 , consistin g in the 
impossibility of there bein g any other third cause of destruction , a part from 
the destruction of the non-inherent cause and the destruction of the inherent 

causes" . 23 then we say that there is no such rule (as propounded by you) that 
a thing undergoing destruction must be destroyed in either of the two ways 
only. This could be so only on the supposition that whenever a new thing is 
produced, it is produced by many things helped by their conjunction. When, 
however, it is admitted that a common cause (e.g. earth, gold, etc.), 
considered in itself as devoid of the peculiarities (present in the products), 
becomes the originator of something else by getting transformed into another 
distinct state, then the destruction may follow from the cessation of the 
particular state as in the case of the melting away of the solidified clarified 
butter. Hence on account of the possession of colour etc. the ultimate atoms 
wifi stand opposed to what they are postulated to be. From this point of view 
also the atomic theory is inadmissible. 

gwn * iiftii 

W And q on account of defect 3+TT from either point of view. 




























































16. And (the atomic theory is untenable) because it is defective from 
either point of view. 

Earth is gross and is possessed of the qualities of smell, taste, colour, and 
touch; water is fine and possessed of the qualities of colour, taste, and touch; 
fire is finer and is possessed of colour and touch; and the finest is air 
possessed of touch. Thus it is seen in this world that these four elements 
have (an increasingly) greater or lesser number of the qualities and are 
comparatively gross, fine, finer, and finest. Should the ultimate atoms also be 
considered likewise to be possessed of qualities in a comparatively greater or 
less degree, or should they not? In either case they will inevitably be open to 
defects. For instance, if it be thought that they have an abundance or paucity 
of qualities, those atoms that have an abundance will have an augmentation 
of grossness, so that they will cease to be the ultimate atoms. And it cannot 
be said that qualities can increase even without having an augmentation of 
grossness, for in the gross products of the elements it is seen that an 
accretion of attributes is followed by an increase in grossness. If, however, 
no comparative abundance or paucity of qualities be thought of and for 
establishing a parity among the atoms it is considered that each of the atoms 
possesses a single quality, then there will be no perception of touch in fire, 
no colour and touch in water, and no taste, colour, and touch in earth, for the 
qualities in the products orignate from the qualities of the causes. Again, if 
all the ultimate atoms be assumed to be possessed of four qualities, then 
smell should be perceived even in water, smell and taste in fire, and smell, 
colour, and taste in air. But this does not conform to experience. For this 
reason also the atomic theory is illogical. 



allrig On account of non-acceptance W as well absolute aTTTT non¬ 
reliance . 



17. This (theory of atom as the cause) is to be entirely ignored, since it is 
not accepted (by the worthy). 

The theory of Pradhana as the cause is partially incorporated in their 
writings even by some Vedic scholars like Manu on the ground of its being 
helpful in establishing such views as the pre-existence of the effect in the 
cause, (the non-attachment of the soul, its sentience), etc. But this atomic 
theory is not adopted even in the least by any worthy person. Hence it is to 
be wholly discarded by the followers of the Vedas. Moreover, the Vail;e$ikas 
admit, as the subject-matter of their scriptures, six categories, viz substance, 
quality, action, class, distinction, and inherence which differ entirely from 
one another and which are possessed of dissimilar characteristics, like man, 
horse, and hare. Having defined them to be so, they admit contrary to their 
own theory, that the other categories are dependent on substance. But that is 
untenable. 

How? 

Jost as it is seen in the world that among a hare, Ku§a grass, and a Pala. a 
tree, which live by maintaining their absolute distinctness, there can be no 
subjection of the rest to any one of them, similarly qualities and the rest, 
should not be dependent on substance, since substance and the rest are 
entirely different. Again if quality and the rest be dependent on substance, 
then since they exist when a substance is there, and cease to exist when the 
substance is not, it would amount to this that the substance alone becomes 
the content of various words and ideas in accordance with differences in its 
own forms, conditions, etc., even as the same Devadatta comes to be known 
through many words and ideas (like father, brother, son, kind, learned, etc.) 
owing to the differences in his states and circumstances. But in that case 
there will be the possibility of the Samkhya theory cropping up and your 
own theory being stultified. 

Atomist : Is it not a fact that smoke, though different from fire, is seen to 
depend on fire? 

Vedamin : True, it is seen. But precisely because a difference between 
them is perceived, it is concluded that smoke and fire are different. But in the 



case under discussion, the substance itself being known as possessed of the 
respective attributes in such perceptions as, "a white blanket", "a red cow", 
"a blue lotus", and so on, there can be no such perception of difference 
between a substance and a quality as between fire and smoke. Hence the 
quality is one with the substance. Hereby is explained how action, class, 
distinction, and inherence are also one with the substance. 

If it be argued that the dependence of a quality on its substance follows 
from the fact of their inseparability, then does that inseparableness consist in 
not having different loci, or different times, or incompatible nature? But 
none of these alternatives can be justified. If their inseparableness consists in 
not being present in different places, then your own position will be 
reversed. 

How? 

For according to you, a piece of cloth produced from yams exists in the 
yarns and not in a distinct place of its own; but the quality of the cloth, viz 
whiteness etc., are admitted to exist in the place occupied by the cloth and 
not in that occupied by the yarns. For this is what the atomists assert: 
"Substances produce other substances, and qualities other qualities" (Vai. Su. 
I.i. 10 ) . The yarns which are the material substance , g ive birth to the cloth 
as their product : and the qualities of whiteness and the rest , existin g in the 
yarns , g enerate similar other qualities -whiteness and the rest in the product . 
the cloth. This is what the y postulate. That postulate will be contradicted if 
substance and quality have to remain in the same locus. If inseparability be 
held to be non-existence in different tunes , then inseparableness will belon g 
even to the ri g ht and left horns of a cow.24 Similarly if inseparableness 
means want of incompatibility of natures, then substance and quality can 
have no difference in essence; for a quality is apprehended in identity with 
the substance. And their theory that the relation between two things 
artificially combined is conjunction, but the relation between two naturally 
inseparable categories is inherence is false; for the cause existing even 
before the effect cannot logically have any inseparability from the effect. It 
may, however, be maintained that this proposition means that one of the two 
factors involved in inseparableness, viz the effect which is inseparable from 




























the cause, becomes related to the cause through inherence. Even so, the 
effect which has no pre-existence and has not emerged into being, can have 
no relation with the cause, since a relationship is dependent on two factors. 

Atomist: The effect becomes related after emerging into being. 

Veddntin : In that case, if the effect be admitted to have any existence 
before being related with the cause, then the statement, "The cause and effect 
can have neither conjunction nor disjunction, for that would lead to an 
absence of inseparable connection" (Vai. Su. VIII. ii. 13), will be difficult to 
maintain. Moreover, just as it is held by you that a product, at the first 
moment of its emergence, has no action and it remains related to other all- 
pervasive substances like space through the relationship of conjunction, but 
not inherence, so also the relationship between that entity and its material 
cause would be conjunction itself and not inherence. Besides, there is no 
proof that the relationship of either conjunction or inherence has any 
existence apart from the related factors. 

Atomist : Conjunction and inherence must have separate existence since 
words and ideas expressive of the relationships of conjunction and inherence 
exist apart from the words and ideas expressing the things so related. 

Veddntin : This cannot be so, since even when there is but a single entity, 
it may give rise to many words and ideas from the individual and relative 
points of view. As for instance, Devadatta is one; but in the world he may be 
the object of many words and ideas, such as a man, a Brahmataa, well versed 
in the Vedas, generous, boyish, youthful, old, a father, a son, a grandson, a 
brother, a son-in-law, and so on, from his personal and relative points of 
view; or as a digit (or line) though one, may have different words and values 
to express it, such as one, ten, hundred, thousand, and so on in accordance 
with the position to which it is shifted. Similarly the related things 
themselves come to be associated with such words and ideas as conjunction 
and inherence, rather than with the words and ideas denoting the two related 
things themselves; but this does not occur because of the existence of some 
distinct categories (like the relationships of conjunction and inherence). 
Accordingly, from the fact of the non-perception of some other categories 
(viz such relationships as conjunction and inherence), which are inferred to 



exist (from a supposition of their perception apart from the related things), it 
follows that those other things (viz relationships) do not exist 
(independently). 

Atomist : If words and ideas standing for relationships denote merely the 
things related, then those words and ideas standing for relationships will 
persist for ever (that is to say, words and ideas expressing relationships will 
be present whenever the things related exist). 

Veddntin : This objection cannot be raised, for it was explained earlier that 
words and ideas are used from the individual and relative points of view. 

Moreover, atoms, souls, and minds cannot have any conjunction, since 
they are without parts; for it is seen that substances slaving parts come in 
contact with other substances having parts. 

Atomist: The atoms, souls, and minds can have imaginary parts. 

Ved4ntin : No, for if one can resort to imagining the existence of things 
that do not exist, then anything can be proved to exist; and there is no 
restriction to the effect that such and such non-existing things alone, and 
nothing else, are to be imagined to exist irrespective of whether they be 
contradictory or not. Besides, imagination is its own master and it can well 
be prolific. Moreover, there is no such overriding reason that apart from the 
six categories imagined by the Vaiikas, other categories, greater in number- 
say a hundred or a thousand-are not to be imagined. Accordingly, anything 
that anyone likes will stand established. Some kind-hearted man may wish 
that creatures may never have this round of birth and death, full of misery as 
it is; while some hedonist may imagine that the liberated souls should be 
bom again. Who can debar either of them? Moreover, a dyad, which has 
parts, cannot come into intimate contact (or cohesion) with two partless 
ultimate atoms, just as much as it can have no intimate contact with space. 
For earth etc. and space do not come into intimate contact like wood and lac. 

Atomist : Since the relationship of the container and the thing contained, 
subsisting between the two substances, viz the effect and the cause, cannot 



be justified in any other way, inherence has to be posited as a matter of 
course. 

Veddntin : No . for that leads to the fallacy of mutual interdependence 
(log ical seesaw ), inasmuch as the relationship of the container and the thin g 
contained tor abode and the abider subsistin g between the cause and the 
effect as propounded b v you ) can be established only after the cause and 
effect are proved to be different , and their difference can be established on 
the establishment of their relationship of bein g the container and the thin g 
contained , j ust as in the case of a basin and the juj ube's in it (which mutually 
distinguish each other). Thus ensues the fallacy of mutual interdependence 
(involving an argument in a circle). Not that any difference or any 
relationship of the container and the thing contained is admitted between the 
cause and the effect by the followers of Vedanta, for their position is that the 
effect is a peculiar condition of the cause itself. 

There is this additional argument. As the ultimate atoms are limited in 
size, they must have as many surfaces (or parts) as there are directions-be 
they six, eight, or ten; and having parts, they will be impermanent. Thus the 
view that they are permanent and partless will be nullified. 

Atomist : The very parts, that you assume to be defined by the different 
directions, are exactly the so many atoms admitted by me. 

Veditrtin : Not so, for all things are subject to destruction through a 
process of change from the gross to the fine, till they reach the ultimate 
cause (which must be Brahman). For instance, earth, which, though a 
substance, gets destroyed, it being the grossest in comparison with the dyads 
etc.; then the subtle substances that belong to the same class as earth, but are 
subtler than earth, get destroyed; then the dyad disintegrates; so also the 
ultimate atoms too will disintegrate, since they belong to the same class as 
earth. 

Atomist : Even while getting destroyed, they disintegrate merely through 
a process of being divided into their parts; (but ultimate atoms do not 
disintegrate, since they are partless). 

























Vedantin : That creates no difficulty, for we said that destruction may take 
the form of the cessation of solidity, as in the case of a lump of clarified 
butter (ghee). Just as in the cases of ghee or gold, though there is no 
destruction of their parts, still a destruction of their solidity may take place 
on becoming liquefied by coming in contact with fire, even so in the case of 
the ultimate atoms there may be a destruction of grossness etc. by their 
reversion to the ultimate cause. Similarly an effect is not produced merely by 
a conjunction of parts; for milk, water, etc. are seen to turn into curd, ice, etc. 
even without the addition of parts. Thus since this doctrine of the atoms as 
the cause is based on such comparatively hollow grounds, since it runs 
counter to the Vedic texts holding forth God as the cause, and since it is not 
accepted by such worthy persons as Manu and others who abide by the 
Vedas, therefore it is to be entirely ignored. "Ignored by all respectable 
persons aspiring for the highest good "-this much has to be supplied at the 
end (of the aphorism). 

Topic 4: REFUTATION of BUDDHIST REALISTS 

It has been said that the doctrine of the Vaifika is not to be relied on since 

it is bolstered up bv bad lo gic, it g oes a g ainst the Vedas , and it is not 
accepted bv the worth y people. This is semi-nihilistic havin g an affinity with 
nihilism ; and hence we now proceed to show that the conclusions of the full 
nihilist are to be i g nored all the more.26 That nihilism, again, takes various 
forms in accordance with the doctrinal difference (in the presentation by one 
who explains) or the mental calibre of those who are taught. Among them 
there are three schools: some are Sarvastitvavadins (divided into the 
Sautrantikas and Vaibhasikas, believing respectively in the inferential and 
perceptual existence of all things); some are Vijnanavadins (or Yogacaras, 
believing in the existence of consciousness or ideas alone); while others are 
Sarva§unyavadins (or Madhyamikas, denying the existence of everything), 
(i.e. they are realists, idealists, and nihilists respectively). Now we first refute 
those Sarvastitvavadins who admit both external things, viz the elements and 
elementals, and the internal things, viz the citta and caittas. Of these the 
elements are earth and other materials. The elementals are colour etc. and 
organs of sight etc. The four kinds of atoms of earth etc. which have the 
characteristics of solidity, fluidity, heat, and motion, get massed together in 



















the form of (gross) earth etc. This is how they think. So also there are the 
five skandhas, (groups), viz the group of colour (consisting of the sense- 
organs and their objects), the group of egoism (31aya-viriiana-rousing 
constantly the idea of "I"); the group of feelings (of happiness etc.), the 
group of conceptual knowledge (such as "this is a cow" and so on), and the 
group of attitudes (of likin g, dislikin g, delusion , merit , demerit ) .27 These 
also combine to form the basis of all internal dealings. This is how they 
think. 

With regard to this, we say: 

wpi cRsnftn ii^ii 

aft Even ffr* in (the supposed) combination arising from either of the 
causes Bq-a f g: that (combination) will not be achieved. 

18. Even if the integration be supposed to arise from either of the causes, 
that will not be achieved. 

From either point of view "that will not be achieved", there will not 
emerge any combination (or integration) that is supposed by others to have 
these two kinds of causes and to be of those two kinds. Even if the 
combination be supposed to arise from either of the two sets of causes, that 
will not materialize, that is to say, no combination will result-be it either a 
combination of the elements and the elementals arising from the atoms, or a 
combination of the five groups of things arising from those groups. 

Why? 

Because the components of such a combination are insentient and because 
consciousness can flash ( from a contact between sense-or g ans and ob j ects ) 
only if a combination of thin gs ( formin g the body etc. ) is already there , and 
because no other steady and independent entity is admitted which is sentient , 
an experiences and a ruler , and which can brin g about the combination. If 






























impulsion to activity be postulated for them independently of an y ag ent , then 
there will be the possibility of such impulsion continuin g lnterminablv.28 
Again, since currents (of ego-consciousness) cannot be determined to be 
either different or non-different (from the individual forms of consciousness 
constituting the current), and since everything (including the current) is 
supposed to be momentary, there can be no activity (in this momentary 
current), and hence no impulsion (apart from its own birth). Therefore a 
combination cannot emerge, and in the absence of combination, all mundane 
existence dependent on it will be nullified. 

Ilfcll 

w—m On account of being the cause of one another, (a combination will 
be possible) X* q?t if this be the position, it cannot be -nw-fc for (each is 
merely the cause of the origin (of another just succeeding). 

19. If it be argued that a combination becomes possible since (nescience 
and the rest) can be the causes of one another (in a successive series), then 
we say, no, (for nescience etc.) can each merely be the cause of origin of 
another just succeeding. 

Buddhist: Even if no sentient and steady experiencer or ruler be admitted 
as the agent bringing about the combination, still the transmigratory 
existence will be possible, since nescience and the rest are the causes of one 
another; and if the transmigratory existence becomes a possibility, there 
remains no need for depending on anything else. Those nescience etc. are: 
nescience (the idea of permanence with regard to things momentary), 
attitudes (attachment, detachment, and delusion arising from that false 
knowledge), ego-consciousness, name (i.e. the four elements depending on 
names), form (or colour), the six sense-organs (having egoism, four 
elements, and form as their habitations), touch (contact among name, form, 
and senses), sensation, thirst (for objects), impulsion (caused by that thirst), 
merit etc. (which are the sources of birth), birth (of the body), maturity (of 
the groups coming into being), death, sorrow, wailing, pain, misery, etc. (i.e. 















evils like honour, dishonour, etc.) -these and others of the same class which 
are sometimes indicated briefly or sometimes stated elaborately in the books 
of the Buddhists. These categories cannot be denied by other schools as well. 
So may it not be that when these nescience and the rest go on revolving for 
ever like (the cups in) a Persian wheel, as the cause and effect of one 
another, a combination of things, emerging out of the force of circumstances, 
becomes a possibility? 

Veddntin : That cannot be so. 

Why? 

Because they are merely the causes of the origination (of one another). A 
combination may be possible if any cause for the combination can be 
ascertained; but as a fact, it cannot be ascertained. For although nescience 
etc. be the causes of one another, the earlier ones will merely give rise to the 
later ones. That may well be so; but nothing can possibly become the source 
of a combination. 

Buddhist : Did we not mention earlier that nescience and the rest 
(revolving in order) lead to the assumption of the existence of -a 
combination by implication? 

Veddntin : To this we say: If vour idea is that since nescience etc, cannot 
emer g e unless there is a combination ( in the form of a bod y), therefore the y. 
as a matter of course , im pl y its existence , then you have still to tell me the 
cause of that combination. But in the course of examinin g the Vaise~ika 
theory we said that this is not possible even on the assumption of permanent 
atoms and experiencin g souls which can sustain the acquired merits ; and can 
this be possible here , m v dear friend , sim ply by assumin g momentary atoms 
which have no experiencers and which are not related with everythin g_by 
way of bein g the abider and the abode t or the benefited and the benefactor )? 
29 On the other hand, if this be your idea that nescience and the rest 
themselves constitute the source of combination, then how can they be the 
source of that combination when they themselves have to emerge into being 
by depending on that combination? Or if you think that the combinations 
themselves recur constantly like a current in this beginningless world, and 







































nescience etc. are sustained by them, even then, when one combination 
emerges out of another, it will be either regularly similar or irregularly 
similar or dissimilar. If regularity be admitted, then a human body can have 
no possibility of being transformed into divine, animal, or hellish bodies. 
And if irregularity be admitted, then a human body may at times turn 
momentarily into an elephant, and then be transformed again into a godly or 
human form. But either point of view goes against your own position. 
Moreover, your theory is that there is no permanent experiencer for whose 
experience the combination (i.e. body) should come into being. That means 
that an experience occurs merely for the sake of experience, and there need 
be none else to desire it. Similarly liberation will occur for its own sake, and 
so there need be none else to want liberation. Were there somebody else who 
could desire these, then he would be present both during the times of 
experience and liberation. And if he does so, the doctrine of momentariness 
will be negated. So even if nescience etc. be the sources of the emergence of 
one another, let them be so; still no integration (into a body) will be achieved 
thereby, for there is none to experience. This is the idea. 

IRoll 

a And -fK because the earlier one gets obliterated ;M-TMW when the 
succeeding one originates. 

20. And because the earlier is negated when the later emerges, (therefore 
nescience and the rest cannot each be the cause of the next in the series). 

It has been stared that since nescience etc. are merely the causes for the 
origin of one another (successively), the formation of an aggregation cannot 
be achieved. But now it is being shown that even this assumption of being 
the cause of origin is not tenable. The postulate of those who swear by 
momentariness is that with the emergence of the entity of the succeeding 
moment, the entity of the earlier moment is obliterated. But one who 
postulates like this cannot establish any relationship of cause and effect 



between the two entities of preceding and succeeding moments. For the 
entity of the preceding moment that is getting obliterated or is already 
obliterated is involved in non-existence, and as such it cannot reasonably be 
the cause of the entity of the next moment. If, however, the idea be that the 
entity of the earlier moment becomes the cause of the next when the former 
has actually emerged into being and is in a state of positive existence, still it 
cannot become the cause of the entity of the next moment; for if any 
operative activity be assumed for a thing that has come into existence at an 
earlier moment, then the contingency will arise of its becoming associated 
with a subsequent moment (when the activity occurs). Again, if it be held 
that its operative activity (i.e. causality) consists in its mere presence, still 
this is unjustifiable; for no effect can emerge that is not transfused with the 
essence of the material cause. If, however, it be assumed that the essence of 
the cause persists in the effect, then you will be forced to give up the theory 
of momentariness owing to the presence of the essence of the material cause 
during the (succeeding) time that the effect lasts. If causality be admitted 
even without any transfusion of the effect by the essence of the cause, then it 
can be had anywhere; and so this will lead to the predicament of an 
unwarrantedly wide application (i.e. this causality of anything may be 
assumed anywhere). 

Moreover, origination and annihilation must be the very nature of things, 
or some states of them, or some new things. None of these alternatives can 
be reasonably upheld. If origination and annihilation be the same as the very 
nature of a thing, then the word "thing" and the terms "origination and 
annihilation" will become synonymous. If, however, you think that there is 
some distinction and that by the terms origination and annihilation are meant 
the first and last states of a thing which is itself in a state intermediate 
between the two, even then the theory of momentariness will be destroyed, 
since the thing will get related to three moments-the first, the intermediate, 
and the last. Again, if origination and annihilation be absolutely 
disconnected with the thing like a horse and a buffalo, then the thing will 
become permanent, since it will not have any connection with either 
origination or annihilation. Even if the origination and annihilation consist in 
the perception and non-perception of the thing, still these (perception and 
non-perception) will be merely the qualities of the perceiver and not of the 



thing; and so the predicament of the thing becoming permanent will be just 
the same. From this viewpoint also, the Buddhist doctrine is illogical. 


uTnWI tflWPPNT IRfll 

aM* In the absence (of cause) AM:nl-39Z : the proposition will fall 
through aram else fqq simultaneity (will take place). 

21. (If it be contended that the effect arises) even when there is no cause, 
then your assertion (of causation) will be stultified; else (if you contend that 
the entity of the earlier moment continues till the entity of the later moment 
emerges), the cause and effect will exist simultaneously. 


It has been said that since , accordin g to the theory of momentariness , the 
entity of the earlier moment is swallowed up into annihilation , it cannot be 
the cause of the entity of the later moment. Should the Buddhists now assert 
that the effect arises even in the absence of the cause , their own assertion 
will be nullified , that is to sa v. their proposition that the perception of colour 
etc, and ha p piness etc. ( citta and caitta ) arises as a result of acquirin g the 
four kinds of causes80 (objects, senses, accessories, and past tendency), will 
be negated. And if origination be without any cause, then anything may 
originate anywhere, for there is nothing to hinder this. Should they, however, 
assert that the entity of the earlier moment continues till the origination of 
the entity of the later moment, then the cause and effect will become 
simultaneous. Even so, their assertion will be contradicted just the same; 
their declaration that all entities are momentary will stand discredited. 



Af_amf ffqM_fr-fB; There can be no arrival at artificial annihilation and 
natural annihilation alF'a ~ on account of non-termination. 





























22. Neither pratisarirkhya-nirodha (artificial annihilation) nor an 
apratisamkhya-nirodha (natural annihilation) is possible, for there can be no 
cessation (either of the current or of the individuals forming the current). 

Moreover, the nihilists (i.e. Buddhists) fancy that whatever becomes an 
object of knowledge and is different from the three categories, has an 
origination and is momentary. As for the three, they say, they are these- 
pratisamkhya-nirodha (artificial annihilation), apratisamkhya-nirodha 
(natural annihilation), and dkasa. They think that all these three are non- 
substantial, nonexistent, and illusory. The annihilation of a thing brought 
about deliberately is technically called pratisarirkhya-nirodha; the opposite 
of that is apratisamkhya-nirodha (natural annihilation); and akdsa is the mere 
absence of any obstruction (or screening). The aphorist will refute their 
akasa later on. The two kinds of annihilation are now being refuted. "There 
can be no arrival at", that is to say, there can be no possibility of the two 
kinds of annihilation, artificial and natural. 

Why? 

"Because there can be no cessation." These two kinds of annihilation- 

artificial and natural-will he perceivable in relation to either the chain of 
causality or the individuals (formin g the chain ) . But they cannot relate to the 
chain. Since in all the chains , the individuals formin g the chain continue 
uninterruptedly as a succession of causes and effects , therefore the chains 
cannot cease. They cannot relate to the individuals , because the individuals 
can have no such destruction as to leave no trace of reco g nition or to become 
non-existent , for under all circumstances , the common ( material ) substratum 
is seen throu g h a process of reco g nition to persist uninterruptedl v.3 1 Where 
such recognitions are not obvious, the persistence of the common substratum 
can be inferred from the fact of its percep don elsewhere.32 Hence 
annihilation of either kind, fancied by others, is untenable. 



































11311 

:w And q)wq owing to defect iii from either point of view. 

23. And (the Buddhist view is untenable) owing to defect arising from 
either point of view. 

The annihilation of nescience and the rest, that is assumed by the others 
and is classified under the heads of artificial and natural annihilations, must 
be achieved either as a result of complete knowledge associated with its 
accessories (of selfcontrol etc.) or (spontaneously) by itself. On the first 
assumption will arise the predicament of discarding the theory of destruction 
being an uncaused event. On the second assumption will arise the 
predicament of instruction about the spiritual path (as taught by Buddha) 
becoming useless. Thus, being subject to defects from either point of view, 
this philosophy is incoherent. 





' And alF on account of absence of dissimilarity in the case of space. 

24. And (non-existence cannot be asserted) in the case of akafa on account 
of the absence of (its) dissirnil ity (with destruction). 


As for their view that the two kinds of destruction and akafa have no 
reality, we have already refuted the assertion that the two kinds of 



destruction are nonentities. Now it is being refuted that akafa is a nonentity. 
It is unreasonable to assert with regard to dkLfa that it is a nonentity, for 
even in its case nothing stands in the way of knowing it as an entity equally 
like the artificial and natural destructions. As for Vedic proof, it is 
established from such Vedic texts as, v Akdsa originated from the Self Tai. II. 
i. 2), that akdfa is a substance. But for those who are not convinced by Vedic 
texts, it can be inferred through its quality of sound, for qualities such as 
smell and the rest are seen to abide in substances like earth and the rest. 
Moreover, according to you, akafa is merely an absence of obstruction (or 
covering). So when any one bird flies in space, there is the presence of 
obstruction (and so absence of space); hence another bird that may try to fly 
will find no scope for doing so. 

Opponent: It will fly where there is no obstruction. 

Veddntin : In that case , that very thin g with the help of which "the absence 
of obstruction" is specified , will itself be the positive entity akdfa . 93 and it 
will not be a mere absence of obstruction. Moreover, when the Buddhist 
asserts that akdfa consists in a mere absence of obstruction, he lands himself 
into a self-contradiction. For according to the Buddhist view, in the chain of 
questions starting with, "Sir, on what does earth rest?" occurs this question 
after earth etc., "On what does air rest?" And the answer to that question is, 
"Air rests on akdfa", That becomes logically consistent if akdfa is a 
substance. For this reason also it is illogical to say akdfa is a nonentity. 
Besides, it is contradictory to say that the two kinds of annihilation and 
akdfa-these three are nonentities and yet they are eternal; for that which is 
non-existent can neither be eternal nor non-etemal, for all judgements about 
relationship, as between a quality and the thing possessing it, are based on 
the existence of something. And if such a relationship, as between a quality 
and the thing qualified, does exist, then this will inevitably mean that the 
thing itself is as much real as a pot, for instance, and it cannot be a nonentity. 













Rr And NV: on account of remembrance. 

25. And (a permanent soul has to be admitted) because of the fact of 
remembrance (i.e. memory). 

Moreover, when the nihilist asserts all things to be momentary, he will 
have to assert the perceiver also to be momentary. But that is an absurdity 
because of the fact of remembrance. Remembrance means recalling to mind 
something after its perception, and that can happen only when the agent of 
perception and memory is the same; for one person is not seen to remember 
something perceived by another. How can there be an awareness of the form, 
"I who saw earlier see now", arise unless the earlier and later perceiver be 
the same? Moreover, it is well known to all that direct experience in the form 
of recognition, such as "I who saw that, see this now", occurs only when the 
agent of seeing and remembering is the same. Should their agents he 
different, then the awareness will take such a form, "I remember, but 
somebody else saw"; but nobody in fact experiences in this way. Where 
cognition takes such a form, all understand the agents of seeing and 
remembering to be different, as for instance in, "I remember that he saw this 
then". But in the present case where occurs the remembrance of the form, "I 
saw this then", even the nihilist understands the agent of seeing and 
remembering to he but he himself, and he does not deny his own past vision 
by saying, "I did not see that", just as much as he would not deny that fire is 
hot or that it emits light. That being the case, the nihilist cannot avoid a 
rebuttal of his theory of momentariness in the face of a single agent 
becoming connected with the two moments of perception and remembrance. 



And why should not the nihilist be ashamed of himself when he holds on to 
the theory of momentariness at the same time that he recognizes all his 
perceptions from now on to the last breath and the past ones from his very 
birth till now as having happened to his own very same self? 

If he should maintain that this can come about through similarity, then he 
should be answered thus: Since similarity, which is apparent in such a 
judgement as "This is similar to that", is dependent on two factors, and since 
from the point of view of the believer in momentariness, there is no single 
perceiver of two similar things, it amounts to a false incoherent jargon on his 
part to assert that recognition results from similarity. This can only be 
possible if the perceiver of the similarity of the entities of the preceding and 
succeeding moments be the same. But then the theory of momentariness will 
be adversely affected on account of the presence of the same person during 
two moments. 

Buddhist : The cognition, "This is like that", is an entirely new cognition 
which is not dependent on the perception of the things of the earlier and 
succeeding moments. 

Vedi ntin : No . since in the awareness . "This Is like that" , are involved 
( three ) distinct factors .a 1 If this experience of similarity be an independent 
ex perience (not related to the two similar factors ), then the expression . "This 
is like that" , would be meanin g less , and the expression would sim pl y he 
"similarity".as If people engaged in judging something do not take into 
account the facts that are universally accepted, then even after the statement 
of the validity of one's own point of view and the invalidity of one's 
opponent's view it will not appear to be convincing to the intellect of either 
the judges or oneself. That alone should be spoken of which has been 
ascertained as, "This thing is certainly so". Were one to speak of something 
other than this, one would simply expose one's garrulousness. Moreover, 
human dealings cannot be said to be dependent on mere similarity, for the 
experience is of the existence of the entity itself (expressing itself as, "I am 
that very person") and not of mere similarity with that (as would be 
expressed in, "I am like that person"). It may be conceded, however, that in 
the case of an external thing there may be the possibility of doubt of the 






















form, "It may be either that very thing or similar to that", for in the case of 
an external thing there is scope for delusion. But in the case of the cognizer 
himself there can never be such a doubt as, "I may be either that very person 
or similar to him". For there occurs a definite recognition of identity, as in, "I 
who saw yesterday, am remembering today". For this reason also, the nihilist 
theory cannot be reasonably sustained. 

The nihilist theory is untenable for this additional reason that the nihilists 
do not admit any lasting and persisting cause (inhering in the effect), so that 
their view amounts to saying that something comes out of nothing. And they 
show that existence comes out of non-existence when they assert, "The 
effect cannot arise without destroying the cause; for the sprout comes out of 
a seed when the latter is destroyed and a pot out of a lump of clay when the 
latter is destroyed. Were a product to come out of an unchanging cause, 
anything could come out of anything and anywhere; for the cause is common 
to all". Thus since (according to them) the sprout and the rest emerge from 
the seed and the rest when these latter get swallowed up in nonexistence, 
they conclude that existence comes out of non-existence. With regard to this 
we say: 



Not am: from non-existence, aTjrzirTcq because this is not seen (thus). 

26. Something does not come out of nothing, for this does not accord with 
experience. 

Existence does not come out of non-existence. If something can come out 
of nothing, then it becomes useless to refer to special kinds of causes, since 
non-existence as such is indistinguishable everywhere. There is no 
distinction, as regards the nature of non-existence, between the non- 



existence arising from the destruction of the seed and the rest and the horn of 
a hare, both being equally unsubstantial (false). Had there been any 
distinction, then only would the assertion of such separate causality be 
meaningful as, "The sprout comes out of the seed alone, and the curd out of 
the milk alone". But when an indistinguishable non-existence is posited as 
the cause, the sprout and the rest may as well spring out of a hare's horn and 
the like. This is, however, contradicted by experience. If, again, distinctive 
attributes be ascribed to non-existence on the analogy of the lotus etc. having 
blueness etc., then on that very analogy of the lotus etc., non-existence will 
turn into existence by the very fact of possessing distinctive qualities. 
Moreover, nonexistence can never be the source of anything, precisely 
because it is non-existent like the hare's hom etc. Were existence to arise out 
of non-existence, all the effects would be imbued with non-existence. But 
that goes against experience, for all things are perceived to exist as positive 
entities with their respective distinguishing features. Not that anybody will 
admit that such real objects as earthen plates etc., in which earth inheres, are 
the transformations of threads for instance. As a matter of fact, people 
perceive all real earthen things as the transformations of earth itself. 

As for the assertion that something can come out of nothing since no 
immutable thing can become a cause unless it be by destroying its real 
nature, that is a wrong assertion; for gold and the rest that are recognized as 
remaining unchanged assume the roles of such cause and effect in the cases 
of products like a gold necklace and so on. Even in the cases of the seed and 
the rest where there is an appearance of destruction of substance, it is not the 
earlier state, undergoing destruction, that is understood to be the cause of the 
subsequent state; for what is admitted is that those parts (or cells) of the seed 
and the rest which remain undestroyed and which persist (in the sprouts and 
the rest) become the material causes of the sprout and the rest. Accordingly 
since nothing that actually exists is seen to result from nonentities like the 
hom of a hare etc., and since it is seen that from existing things like gold etc. 
originate existing things (like necklace etc.), the assertion of something 
coming out of nothing cannot be substantiated. Moreover, all people get 
deluded by the nihilists (i.e. Buddhists) who first assert that the ego- 
consciousness and the mental moods arise from the four causes and that the 
aggregates of elements and elementals arise from the atoms (see p. 405), and 



then again assume that something comes out of nothing and thus negate their 
own assertions. 


ftfo ll^ll 

a And graril in this way fkft: success (should come) arfq even 3RT8ITK to 
the indifferent. 

27. And (if something can come out of nothing, then) on the same ground, 
success should come even to the indifferent people. 

Moreover, if it be admitted that something can come out of nothing, then 
on the same ground even the indifferent people who are inactive should 
attain their desired results, for nonexistence is clearly evident even there; and 
so a husbandman who does not engage in cultivation should get his crop, a 
potter who makes no effort for preparing the clay should get his vessels 
ready, and a weaver who does not make any effort for weaving the yarn 
should get a cloth just as much as one that weaves. And nobody need in any 
way strive for heaven or liberation. But such a position is neither reasonable 
nor is it accepted by anybody. Therefore this assertion of something coming 
out of nothing is unjustifiable. 

Topic 5: BUDDHIST IDEALISM REFUTED 

Vii ndnavdda : The defects , such as the impossibility of formation of 
aggreg ates that arise a g ainst the views of those Buddhists who believe in 
external thin gs, havin g been pointed out , the Vi i nanavadin (Buddhist Idealist 
believin g in momentary consciousness ) now stands up in o p position. ( He 
asserts ) : This ( earlier ) viewpoint , based on the belief that external thin gs 
exist , was tau g ht tb v Buddha ) as a concession to some of those followers 
who were noticed to have a predilection for external thin g s. But that was not 
the view of Buddha himself , whose real sanction was for the doctrine of the 
g roup constituted bv consciousness (sub j ective co g nition ) alone. Accordin g 










































to this Vi i nanavada . all dealin g s concerned with means of knowled ge, 
obj ects of knowled ge, and ends of knowled g e become possible as sub j ective 
occurrences superimposed on consciousness : E6 for even thou g h an external 
obj ect may exist , there can be no activity of the means of knowled g e etc. . 
unless it be throu g h a superimposition of that ob j ect on consciousness ti.e. 
unless the mind or intellect is aware of it ) , if it be asked . "How , ag ain , can it 
be known that all these processes are sub j ective , and that nothin g but 
sub j ective co g nition exists"?-tfae answer he ( the Buddhist ) g ives is that , this 
is so because no external tirin g can possibly exist. When external ob i ects are 
assumed , they must either be the individual atoms or an a ggreg ate of them—a 
pillar for instance. Of these the knowled g e of the atoms cannot be acquired 
throu g h a perception of the pillar etc. , for the atoms are not ob j ects of 
perception.38a And a pillar etc, cannot be a con g lomeration of atoms , since 
the (aggreg ates like ) pillar etc, cannot be ascertained to be either different 
from or identical with the atoms. Thus also are to be re j ected g enus , (q ualit y. 
action ), etc. Moreover , knowled ge, as it arises , has the common feature of 
bein g a mere awareness : but it dis pla ys a selective bias for individual forms , 
such as the knowled g e of a pillar , the knowled g e of a wall , the knowled g e of 
a pot , the knowled g e of a cloth , and so on. This particularization cannot be 
possible unless there be some peculiarit y in each individual co g nition itself. 
And so in this wav it has to be admitted that knowled g e has a tendency to 
have the same form as its content. And once this is admitted , the ob j ective 
ap pearances become explicable from the standpoint of consciousness alone 
( they bein g included within the knowled g e itself ), and it becomes useless to 
assume external ob j ects. Moreover , from the fact of the simultaneous 
awareness of the knowled g e and its ob j ect , it follows that the ob j ect and its 
knowled g e are identical. For neither of them can be known without the other. 
This simultaneity would not have been possible if knowled g e and its ob j ect 
were naturally different : 37 for there would be nothing to cause a hindrance 
(to the cognition of one even when the other is not cognized). For this reason 
also there is no external object. 

This is to be understood as analo g ous to dream etc. Even as the co g nitions 
in a dream , a ma gic, water in a mira ge, a phantom city in the sk y, etc, have 
stamped on them the perceptions of the knowled g e and the known , thou gh 
there are no ob j ects , so also it is to be understood that the perceptions of a 













































































































































pillar etc, in the wakin g state are of a similar nature , for as perceptions the y 
do not differ. If it be asked . "Were there no external ob j ects how could there 
be a diversity in knowled g e?" then the Vi i nanavadin says that this is possible 
owin g to a diversity of mental impressions.88 For it is nothing contradictory 
in this beginningless state of transmigration that cognitions and mental 
impressions should have a variety, acting as they do alternately as the causes 
and effects of one another like the seed and the sprout. Moreover, it is known 
through a process of agreement and difference (i.e. from positive and 
negative instances) that variety in knowledge occurs from past impressions; 
for by both of us it is admitted that even in the absence of objects, a variety 
in cognition, caused by past impressions, takes place in dream etc. But it is 
not admitted by me that even without such mental impression, knowledge 
can have a variety in conformity with external objects. Hence also external 
objects do not exist. 

Veddntin : This being the position we say: 

mn 1 Rsi I 

c Not arm: non-existent 3g3:$: because of perception. 

28. (External objects are) not non-existent, for they are perceived. 

It cannot be asserted that external things do not exist. 

Why? 

"Because they are perceived." As a matter of fact such things as a pillar, a 
wall, a pot, a cloth, are perceived along with each act of cognition. And it 
cannot be that the very thing perceived is non-existent. How can a man's 
words be acceptable who while himself perceiving an external object 




















through sensecontacts still says, "I do not perceive, and that object does not 
exist", just as much as a man while eating and himself experiencing the 
satisfaction arising from that act might say, "Neither do I eat, nor do I get 
any satisfaction"? 

Vijyi navddin : Well, I do not say that I. do not perceive any object, but all 
that I hold is that I do not perceive anything apart from the perception. 

Vedantin : Yes , you do speak like that , since vou have no curb to vour 
mouth ; but you do not sneak lo g icall y, for somethin g other than the 
perception has to be admitted perforce , j ust because it is perceived. Not that 
an ybody co g nizes a perception to be a pillar , a wall , etc. , rather all peo ple 
cog nize a pillar , a wall , etc, as ob j ects of perception. And it is for this reason 
that all people understand those others ( viz the Buddhists ! as really assumin g 
the existence of an external thin g even while they den y it b v saving, "That 
which is the content of an internal awareness a p pears as thou g h external". 
For they use the phrase "as thou g h" in the clause "as thou g h external" j ust 
because they too become aware of a co g nition a p pearin g externally in the 
same wav as is well known to all people , and vet they want to deny an y 
external ob i ect.89 Else why should they say, "as though external"? For 
nobody speaks thus: "Viumitra appears like the son of a barren woman". 
Accordingly, those who accept truth to be just what it is actually perceived to 
be, should accept a thing as it actually reveals itself externally, and not "as 
though appearing outside". 

Buddhist : Since no object can possibly exist externally, I come to the 
conclusion that it appears as though it is outside. 

Vedantin : This conclusion is not honest, since the possibility or 
impossibility of the existence of a thing is determined in accordance with the 
applicability or non-applicability of the means of knowled g e to it . but the 
ap plicability or non-a p plicabilitv of the means of knowled g e is not 
ascertained in accordance with the possibility or impossibilit y ( of the thin g). 
What is known throu g h anyone of the means of knowled ge, such as direct 
perception etc. , is possible , and what cannot be known throu g h any one of 
these means of knowled g e is impossible. In the case under discussion , the 
external thin g s are known individuall y_b y the respective means of 
































































































knowled ge: so how can they be declared to be impossible bv raisin g such 
alternatives as different , non-different . etc.?40 For external things are 
perceived as a matter of fact. It is wrong to say that external things do not 
exist merely on the ground that cognition is seen to have the likeness of an 
object, because the very likeness of an object is not possible unless the 
object itself be there, and also because the object is cognized outside. So also 
it has to be admitted that the regularity in the simultaneous appearance of the 
cognition and its object is owing to the relation of causality between them 
and not owing to their identity. Again, in (such forms of awareness as) 
"knowledge of a pot", "knowledge of a cloth", the difference is seen in the 
two qualifying parts, pot and cloth, but not in the substantive part 
knowledge, even as in the cases of "a white cow" and "a black cow" we find 
that whiteness and blackness alone differ, but not so the cowhood. And the 
difference of the one (viz cowhood) from the two (whiteness, blackness) 
stands out clearly, as also the difference of the two from the one. Therefore 
an object and its knowledge differ. Similar should be our comprehension in 
the cases of the seeing of a pot and the remembrance of a pot. Here also the 
substantives, viz seeing and remembering differ, but not so the adjectival 
portion, viz pot; this is just as in the cases of the cognitions, "the smell of 
milk", and "the taste of milk", where the substantives smell and taste alone 
differ, but not so the adjectival part milk. 

Moreover, as regards two cognitions occurring successively, which vanish 
after self-revelation, there can be no logical apprehension of the one by the 
other. And in that case will be nullified all the assertions made in the 
Buddhist scriptures themselves about the difference among cognitions, 
momentariness and other attributes, individual characteristics, common 
characteristics, bequeathing of tendency by one cognition to the other, true, 
false, or mixed attributes arising from contact with nescience, as also about 
bondage, liberation, and so on. 

Again, if one admits a distinction between knowledge and knowledge, 
why should not one admit external objects such as a pillar, a wall, and so on? 

Buddhist: A cognition is actually perceived. 











Vedantin : External things too are perceived, and so they too should be 
admitted. 

Buddhist: Since cognition is a luminous thing it stands selfrevealed like a 
lamp, but an external object is not like that. 

Vedantin : Then like assuming that fire burns itself, you assume that 
something can act on itself by itself, which is absolutely opposed to reason; 
yet you do not admit the wellknown fact, bearing no contradiction, that an 
external object is known through a cognition which is different from the 
object. What a great display of erudition you make! It cannot be asserted that 
consciousness is known to itself as something apart from objects for the 
simple reason that there can be no action on oneself. 

Buddhist: If a cognition has to be known by some entity other than itself, 
that second one will have to be known by another, and that one again by 
another. This will lead to an infinite regress. Moreover, since cognition is an 
illuminator like a lamp, if you should imagine a second cognition (to know 
it), then since both the cognitions are similar there will be no revelation of 
the one by the other, so that this whole assumption will fall to the ground. 

Vedantin : Both these arguments are wrong, for once an awareness of the 
cognition occurs, no further desire to apprehend the witness of the cognition 
can arise; and so there is no possibility of infinite re g ress.41 And since the 
witness and the co g nition are different by nature , there can be a relationshi p 
of the perceiver and the perceived amon g them. Besides , the self-evident 
witness cannot be denied.42 There is another consideration. When you assert 
that cognition shines by itself like a lamp without requiring some other 
cognition, you virtually say that a cognition is not apprehended by any other 
means of knowledge or by anything else, which would be like saying that a 
thousand lamps shine (unknown) within a massive boulder. 

Buddhist : Exactly so; for cognition being of the nature of an awareness 
(suggested by you), you have only approved the view that we hold. 

Veddntin : No, for it is seen that some other perceiver having the eye etc. 
as his instrument, perceives a lamp etc. So it is understood that since 















cognition has equally to be revealed by some one else, it can be perceived 
like a lamp only when a distinct perceiver is present. 

Buddhist : By upholding the theory that the perceiving witness is self- 
effulgent, you only accept under a different garb of words my own view that 
cognition shines by itself. 

Veduntin : Not so, for you admit many such distinctions for cognition as 
origin, destruction, multiplicity, and so on. And hence it is that we establish 
the apprehension of that cognition by some entity outside it, as in the case of 
a lamp. 

foif? 7 

Rr And it> on account of difference of nature not M—mac like dream etc. 

29. And because of the difference of nature (the waking state is) not 
(false) like dream etc. 

It has been said by those who deny the existence of external things that 
perceptions of things like a pillar etc. in the waking state occur even in the 
absence of external things, just as they do in a dream; for as perceptions, 
they are similar. That has to be refuted. With regard to this we say, the 
perceptions of the waking state cannot be classed with those in a dream. 

Why? 

Because of difference of characteristics; for waking and dream states are 
really different in nature. 



In what does that difference consist? 



We say that it consists in being subject to sublation or not. To a man, 
arisen from sleep, the object perceived in a dream becomes sublated, for he 
says, "Falsely did I imagine myself in contact with great men. In fact I never 
came in contact with great men; only my mind became overpowered by 
sleep; and thus this delusion arose." So also in the case of magic etc., 
adequate sublation takes place. But. a thing seen in the waking state, a pillar 
for instance, is not thus sublated under any condition. Moreover, dream 
vision is a kind of memory, whereas the visions of the waking state are 
forms of perceptions (through valid means of knowledge). And the 
difference between perception and memory, consisting in the presence and 
absence of objects, can be understood by oneself, as for instance when one 
says, "1 remember my beloved son, but I do not see him, though I want to 
see". That being so, it cannot be asserted by a man, who feels the difference 
of the two, that the perception of the waking state is false, merely on the 
ground that it is a perception like the perception in a dream. And it is not 
logical for those who consider themselves intelligent to deny their own 
experience. Moreover, one who cannot speak of the waking experiences as 
naturally baseless, just because this would contradict experience, wants to 
speak of them as such on the strength of their similarity with dream 
experiences. But anything that cannot be the characteristic of something in 
its own right, cannot certainly be so because of a similarity with another. For 
fire which is felt to be warm does not become cold because of some 

similaritv48 with water. As for the difference between dream and the waking 
states, this has already been shown. 



i Not: existence qVweaq: because of non-perception 






30. (Tendencies) can have no existence since (according to you) external 
things are not perceived. 

And the assertion has to be refuted that even in the absence of ob j ects , the 
diversity of experience can be explained on the stren g th of the variety of 
tendencies t or impressions ) . To this we say: The tendencies cannot lo g icall y 
exist : for accordin g to vou . ob j ects are not perceived externally. It is 
precisely owin g to the perception of ob i ects that a variety of ( mental ) 
tendencies correspondin g to the diverse ob i ects can arise. But how can a 
variety of tendencies arise when no ob j ect is perceived? Even if these 
tendencies have no be g innin g ( on the analo g y of the seed and the sprout ). 
this infinite re g ress will amount to a baseless assumption leadin g us nowhere 
like the blind leadin g the blind . 44 and it will thus cut at the root of all human 
dealings, so that your aim will remain unfulfilled. And it is to be noted that 
the positive and negative instances that were adduced by those who would 
deny the existence of external objects by saying, "All these experiences are 
caused by tendencies and not by objects "-those instances also stand refuted 
from this standpoint; for no tendency can arise unless there be a perception 
of some object. Moreover, from the admission that apprehension of objects 
is possible even in the absence of past tendencies, and from the non¬ 
admission that tendencies are possible in the absence of perception of object, 
it follows that such positive and negative instances (adduced by you) also 
prove the existence of objects. Besides, what you call a tendency is a kind of 
impression (or predisposition); and from common experience it is known 
that a disposition cannot be imagined to exist unless it has some basis to 
stand on, whereas you have nothing to supply this need; for nothing can be 
found (by following your view) to stand as an abode for dispositions. 

















































a And ipfvlipm, on account of momentariness. 

31. And (the ego-consciousness cannot be the abode), for it is momentary. 

As for the ego-consciousness that is assumed to be the abode of 
disposition (or tendency), that too has no stable form, since you postulate its 
momentariness like sense-perception. Hence it cannot be the abode of 
tendencies. For unless there be some principle running through everything 
and abiding through all the three periods of time or some unchanging 
witness of all, there can be no human dealing involving remembrance, 
recognition, etc. which are contingent on past impressions that are stored up 
in conformity with environment, time, and causation. If the ego- 
consciousness be (assumed to be) unchanging by nature, your doctrine (of 
momentariness) will be set at naught. Moreover, since the theory of 
momentariness is upheld equally in Vijiianavada, all the defects arising from 
momentariness that were levelled (by us) against the theory of those 
(Buddhists) who believe in the existence of (momentary) external things, viz 
those shown under the aphorisms starting from, "And because the earlier is 
negated when the later emerges" (II. ii. 20), are to be remembered in this 
context as well. Thus are refuted both these Buddhist points of view-of both 
those who believe in the external things and those who believe in 
(subjective) consciousness. As for the view of the absolute nihilist, no 
attempt is made for its refutation since it is opposed to all means of valid 
knowledge. For human behaviour, conforming as it does to all right means 
of valid knowledge, cannot be denied so long as a different order of reality is 
not realized; for unless there be an exception, the general rule prevails. 



q Besides, ?from every point of view arggw: being untenable. 



32. Besides (this view stands condemned), it being untenable from every 
point of view. 

To be brief, from every point of view that this Buddhist doctrine may be 
examined for finding out some justification, it breaks down like a well sunk 
in sand; and we do not find any the least logic here. Hence also all behaviour 
based on the Buddhist scripture is unjustifiable. Moreover, Buddha exposed 
his own incoherence in talk when he instructed the three mutually 
contradictory theories of the existence of external objects, existence of 
consciousness, and absolute nihilism; or he showed his malevolence towards 
all creatures, acting under the delusion that these creatures would get 
confused by imbibing contradictory views. The idea is that the Buddhist 
view should be abjured in every way by all who desire the highest good. 

Topic 6: JAINA VIEW REFUTED 


llftil 

Not qrw" in the same thing aRgsimil owing to impossibility. 

33. (The Jaina view is) not right since the presence (of contradictory 
attributes) in one and the same thing is impossible. 

The view of Buddha has been disproved. Now is being invalidated the 
view of the naked ones (Jainas). The categories approved by them are seven- 
called (1) the soul (experiencer), ( 2 ) non-soul t the experienced ob j ects !. 131 
impulsion ( of sense-or e ans towards ob i ects ).,_(4) control ( of senses and 
organs).,_(5) austerities ( which completely demolish merit and demerit 
throu g h experience of ha p piness and sorrow ). 16) bonda g e t action ). ( 1 ) 
liberation (a continuous upward movement ) . In brief , there are only two 
cate g ories-soul and nonsoul , for the others g et included , as best they can , in 
these two only. This is how they think. The y s peak of these two in another 






































wav thus: There are five cate g ories called asti -kavas-the cate gor y of soul , the 
cate gor y of bod y ( combination of atoms ), the cate gor y of merit , the cate gory 
of demerit , and the cate gor y of space ( want of hindrance ) . They describe 
many subsidiary divisions of each one of these accordin g to the assumptions 
of their own doctrine. And in all cases the y appl y this lo g ic of what they call 
the lo g ic with seven facets: ( 1 ) somehow ( may be it ) exists , (2) somehow 
f mav be it ) does not exist . 13) somehow exists and does not exist . (4) 
somehow indescribable . (5) somehow exists and is indescribable . (6) 
somehow does not exist and is indescribable , (7) somehow exists , does not 
exist , and is indescribable. Thus they a ppl y this lo g ic with seven facets 
,(sa pta-bhan g i-na va) to unity and permanence as well .45 

With regard to this we say: This assumption is not justifiable. 

Why? 

"Owing to the impossibility of presence in one and the same thing"; for it 
is not possible for such contradictory characteristics as existence, non¬ 
existence, and so on to be associated simultaneously with the same thing; 
just as much as cold and heat cannot be. These seven categories that are 
definitely ascertained to be so many in number and such in character, must 
either be just as they are described or they must not; for else the resulting 
knowledge of such an indefinite nature, which may either be as it is 
described or may not be so . will certainly be unauthoritative like doubts.46 

Jaina : When knowledge of a definite nature, viz that a thing has different 
facets, does arise, it cannot be invalid like doubts. 

Veddntin : We say, no; for one who would unrestrictedly affirm 
indefiniteness for every object without exception, the definiteness of his 
knowledge itself being equally an object of knowledge, would come under 
the application of such alternatives as, "somehow it may exist, somehow it 
may not exist", and so on; and hence this knowledge would have an 
indefinite nature all the same. Similarly, the ascertainer, as also the 
knowledge that results from the ascertainment, would be somehow partially 
existent and somehow partially non-existent. This being so, how can a 
teacher of the Jaina school, (who has to be assumed to be) an authority, 























































impart instruction when the means of knowledge, objects of knowledge, the 
knower, and knowledge remain indefinite in nature? 

Also how can those who rely on his views act upon his instruction about 
things which remain indefinite in their nature? For all people engage without 
hesitation in the requisite practices for acquiring some result when that has 
been ascertained to be inevitable, but not otherwise. For this reason also, if 
anyone should write a scripture of such indefinite significance, his words 
will be unacceptable like those of the mad or intoxicated. So also when the 
doubt arises as to whether the categories mentioned as five in number (viz 
soul, non-soul, etc.), have really that number or not, the conclusion from one 
point of view will be that the number is five, and from another point of view 
that it is not so; and hence those things can be greater or less in number. 
Besides, these categories cannot be indescribable (that is to say, existing and 
non-existing at the same time); for if they be indescribable, they cannot he 
expressed in words. It involves a contradic don to utter them in words and 
yet to hold that they are indescribable. Again, even when they are expressed 
in words, they may either be understood as such or may not be understood. 
Similarly the perfect knowledge, arising from the comprehension of all this, 
may exist or may not; so also its opposite, false knowledge, may or may not 
exist. Anyone who would speak in that way, would be classed with the 
intoxicated and the mad, but not with people whose words can be trusted. 
Moreover, no reasonable inspiration for action to achieve liberation or 
heaven will follow from an indefinite knowledge that heaven and liberation 
exist on the one hand and do not exist on the other; or similarly that they are 
eternal from one point of view and impermanent from another. And the 
eternally free souls (Arhats) and the rest (who either become free through 
spiritual practices or continue in bondage), whose natures have been 
determined to be so in their own (Jaffna) books, will tend to have an 
indefinite nature. Thus since it is not possible for any of the categories, 
counting from the souls, to have such contradictory attributes as existence 
and nonexistence, and since in the presence of the attribute of existence there 
can be no possibility of the presence of the other attribute of non-existence, 
just as much as existence is not possible in the presence of non-existence, 
therefore this Jaina doctrine is illogical. Hereby it is to be understood that all 
such tenets of indeterminateness, to the effect that the very same thing is one 



and many, permanent and impermanent, different and non-different at the 
same time, that are assumed by them, are demolished as well. As for their 
imagination that the aggregation, called pudgala (body) can result from the 
combination of atoms, that stands discredited as a result of the earlier 
refutation of the Vai§e~ika theory of atoms. Hence no separate attempt is 
made for overthrowing it. 



t Similarly a also acre-r non-pervasiveness of the soul. 

34. Similarly also ( arises the defect of ) the soul havin g no all¬ 
pervasiveness t or havin g only a medium dimension ! .47 

Just as the defect consisting in the impossibility of the presence of 
contradictory attributes in the same substratum arises in the Jaina view, so 
also arises the other defect of the embodied soul becoming limited (or of a 
medium dimension). 

How? 

The Jainas think that the embodied soul has the dimension of the body. 
Now if it conforms to the size of the body, then the soul will he of a medium 
dimension-non-omnipotent and limited; and so like the pot etc. the soul will 
be subject to impermanence. Again, because the bodies have no fixed 
dimensions, the soul bom as a man will assume the size of a human body. 
Then when as the result of the fruition of some past action it is born as an 
elephant, it will not pervade the whole of the elephant body, and when it is 
bom as an ant, it will not be wholly contained in the body of the ant. This 
defect applies equally to the different stages of boyhood, youth, and old age 
during the same life. 










It may be held that the soul has infinite parts; these parts get condensed in 
a small body and expanded in a large one. But then it has to be stated as to 
whether there is any obstruction to the different parts of the soul becoming 
concentrated at the same place or not. Should there be any impediment, the 
infinite parts will not be contained in the same limited space; and even if 
there be no impediment, then all the parts can very well be accommodated in 
the place occupied by a single part, so that there will be no possibility of 
increase in magnitude. As a result, the predicament will arise of the 
embodied soul becoming atomic in dimension. Besides, it cannot even be 
imagined that the soul that is limited by the size of the body should have 
infinite parts. 

Again, if it be argued that whenever in due sequence the soul gets a large 
body, it has an accretion of some parts, and when ever it gets a small body it 
has a reduction of some parts, then the answer is: 

if* 

And i not aTfq even qqVwq from (assumption of) sequence aNZtq: 
contradiction can be avoided, frr-alrfkw: in the face of mutability etc. 

33'. And the contradiction cannot be avoided even by an assumption of 
sequence (in the increase and decrease of parts), for still there will be the 
defects of mutability etc. 

Even by assuming the increase and decrease of parts in succession it is not 
possible to establish beyond any contradiction the fact that the soul conforms 
to the size of the body. 

Why? 

For this will lead to the defects of chan g efulness etc, for the soul. In the 
first instance , mutability becomes unavoidable for the soul that increases and 
decreases for ever throu g h the accession and depletion of parts. And if it be 
mutable like a piece of leather , it will be sub i ect to impermanence. In that 


















case will be falsified the assumptions about bonda g e and liberation , which 
facts are expressed bv sa ving that the soul , surrounded bv ei g ht kinds of 
karma . 48 r emains sunk in the sea of this world like a bottle gourd, and it 
floats upward when that bond is snapped. Moreover, the parts that come and 
go will be other than the soul precisely because they are adventitious like the 
bodies etc. In that case some part that is everlasting will be the soul. But that 
cannot be pin-pointed to be so and so. Again, it has to be stated from where 
these incoming parts emerge and where the outgoing ones submerge. It 
cannot be that they come out of the elements and merge into the elements; 
for the soul (of which they are the parts) is not material. And nothing else 
can be ascertained as either the common or uncommon source of (any one or 
all) the parts of the (individual) soul; for that lacks evidence. Furthermore, in 
such a case, the nature of the soul will remain indeterminate; for the 
incoming and outgoing parts will have no definite measurement. Thus owing 
to the predicament of such defects, it is not possible to take shelter under a 
successive increase or decrease in the parts of the soul. 


Or the explanation will be this: Under the previous aphorism the doubt 
raised was that, if the soul be of the size of the body, the soul will be subject 
to limitation (or incompleteness) owing to its assumption of other enlarged 
or attenuated bodies, and thus it will not be eternal. In reply to that doubt it 
may be held (by the Jainas) that though the size of the soul has no fixity, 
owing to successive changes, still the soul can have permanence on the 
analogy of a current of a river. Just as the russet-robed (Buddhists) hold that 
though cognitions have no permanence, yet a current of these cognitions can 
well be permanent, similar may be the position of the naked ones (Jainas) as 
well. This was the opposite point of view presented under the earlier 
aphorism. The answer (of the Vedantin) to that is being given under the 
present one: As to that, if the current be false, you will land into a theory of 
the non-existence of the soul. Or if it be true, the soul will be subject to such 
defects as mutability. Hence this view is unjustifiable. 


















And aRq-qR: on account of the permanence of the ultimate size, 3-few 
since both the (other) sizes become permanent aifqTq: distinction ceases to 
exist. 

36. The ultimate size attainable (by the soul) being permanent, the other 
two sizes also must be so; and hence there will be no distinction (among the 
sizes). 

Besides , the Jainas hold that the ultimate size attained bv a soul on the eve 
of liberation becomes permanent. Just like that , the earlier initial size and the 
intervenin g size of the soul can also be permanent , and hence there will be 
similarit y ( amon g the ma g nitudes ) . Thus the soul will have the size of one 
sing le body only and it will not acquire any other inflated or deflated bodv.49 

Or the explanation is this: Since the ultimate size of the soul is permanent, 
its sizes in the two earlier stages also must be the same. In that case the soul 
has to be admitted to be atomic or non-atomic at all times equally. Thus the 
Jaina view is as illogical as the Buddhist view; and hence it is to be ignored. 

Tonic 7: GOD IS NOT A MERE SUPERINTENDENT 

Now is being refuted the theory that God is a mere superintending cause 
(and not a material cause as well). 

How can this be understood? 

Because by the teacher (Vyasa) himself God has been established as both 
the material and efficient causes in the aphorism, "And Brahman must be the 
material as well, so as not to contradict the declaration and the illustration" 
(I. iv. 23), as also in, "This is also understood from the teaching about the 
will to create" (I. iv. 24). If it be maintained now that God's causality in 
general is being refuted here, then from a contradiction between the earlier 
and later portions, the objection would be raised that the aphorist stultifies 
himself. Therefore, what is being diligently rebutted here is the view that 
"God is not the material cause, but is simply the efficient cause," because it 
runs counter to the Vedantic conclusion that Brahman is one without a 
second. This un-Vedic conception takes various forms. Some, following the 






















Sdthkhya and Yoga tenets, conclude that God, who is the ruler of Prakrti and 
puruca (Nature and soul), is merely an efficient cause, and that God, Nature, 
and soul are totally different from one another. The Mahe~varas (Saivas and 
others), however, think that the five categories-effect (i.e. mahat, ahankara, 
etc.), cause (i.e. Nature and God), union (samridhi), observances (e.g. 
bathing three times a day etc.), and the end of sorrow (liberation) -have been 
taught by the Lord Siva for the removal of bondage (pdsa) of the creatures 
(paSus). Pasupati (Lord of the creatures) is God, and He is the efficient 
cause. This is how they propound it. Similarly there are some Vaisegikas and 
others who speak of God as the efficient cause by somehow keeping within 
their own sphere of thought. Hence the answer is being given in the 
aphorism: 


W1 l~MIPYRTiT IH'311 

9N: For the Lord (there can be no creatorship) 7 on account of 
incongruity. 

37. For the Lord there can be no creatorship, for that leads to incongruity. 

"For the Lord", that is to say, for God, there can be no causality towards 
the universe by becoming (a mere) superintendent over Nature and souls. 

Why? 

"On account of incongruity." 

What is that incongruity? 

For a Lord who creates the various creatures by dividing them into grades 
of inferiority, mediocrity, and superiority will be open like ourselves to the 
charges of likes, dislikes, etc., so that He will cease to be God. 

Opponent : That defect will not arise, for He acts in accordance with the 
past actions of the creatures. 

Veddntin : Not so, for if such God and actions be mutually the impeller 
and the impelled, it will lead to a logical seesaw (or argument in a circle, 



each being prompted by the other). 


Opponent: This fault will not arise, since 'creation is without beginning. 


Veddntin : No, just as at present, so also in the past that defect of ar guing 
in a circle is equall y presented so that we are faced with the logic of the 
blind leading the blind (for both action and God are impelled, there being no 
impeller). Moreover, it is the accepted view of the logicians that by noticing 
an impulsion to work it can be inferred that there are such defects (i.e. likes, 
dislikes, delusion, etc.)-(Nydya-sutra, I. i. 18). For nobody is seen to engage 
in any work for one's own or for somebody else's sake unless one is impelled 
by these defects. As a rule, all people serve other people's purposes only 
when they are impelled by their own interest. In this way also this is 
incongruous; for God will cease to be God by being selfish. The incongruity 
arises even from the admission that God is a special type of puru,sa (soul), 
for that puruga is admitted to be indifferent to everything. 




a And. grW~7_WTqq : owing to impossibility of relationship. 

38. And (the incongruity arises) because of the impossibility of a 
relationship. 

There is still another incon g ruity. God who is different from Nature and 
soul cannot rule them unless it be throu g h some relationship. But the 
relationship of con j unction is not possible , since God . Nature , and souls are 
all omnipresent and partless. Nor can it be the relationship of inherence . 
because of the impossibility of determinin g which is the container and which 
the thin g contained. Nor can any other relationship be inferred from the 





























presence of the effect , since that very causal relationship has vet to be 
established, ai 


problem?6a Opponent: How does the believer in Brahman solve this 

Veddmin : He has no difficulty; for in his case an indescribable 
relationship of identity (between God and Maya) is reasonably sustainable 
(Sv. I. 3). Moreover, a believer in Brahman ascertains the cause etc. in 
accordance with the Vedas, and so for him there is no such need that he must 
accept all things just as they are perceived. But the opponent, who 
determines the nature of the cause etc. on the strength of illustrations, has to 
accept things just as they are perceived. Here lies the excellence. 

Objection : Your opponent too can have the scriptures composed by 
omniscient teachers; as such both of you are equally backed by scriptural 
authority. 

Veddntin : No, for that will lead to arguing in a circle, omniscience being 
proved from the knowledge of the authority of the scriptures and the 
(authority of the) scriptures being proved from the knowledge of the 
omniscience of the author. Therefore the ideas about God held by the 
Samkhyas and Yogins are illogical. This charge of incongruity can be 
equally levelled in a suitable manner against all other theories that are 
outside the Vedic pale. 



IIHII 

v And —w3gqT'T: because of the impossibility of being directed. 

39. And (the position is untenable) because of the impossibility of 
(Nature) coming under (His) direction. 









For this additional reason the God imagined by the sophists has no 
justification. Were God just what He is imagined to be, He could impel 
Nature (Pradhana) etc. by becoming their director (i.e. moulder) in the same 
way as a potter is in the case of clay etc. But this cannot be proved; for 
Nature, which is beyond the range of perception etc. and is devoid of form 
etc., cannot come under God's direction (i.e. moulding), it being different 
from clay etc. 

WRJ VFlfo M 

-ag Like (presiding over) the organs qrq if this be the contention, not soon 
account of (resulting) experiences etc. 

40. Should it be argued that God will direct Nature like (a man directing) 
the organs, then it cannot be so, for that 'will result in God's having 
experiences (of happiness, sorrow etc.). 

Opponent : It may be thus. Just as the individual soul directs the senses, 
counting from the eye, which cannot be perceived and which are without 
forms etc., so also God can direct Nature. 

Veddntin : Even thus it is not possible to maintain this. It is by noticing 
such facts as the experiencing (of happiness and sorrow) that one is led to 
infer that the set of sense-organs has a director. But in this case, such 
experience etc. (accruing to God from Nature) are not in evidence. And if 
Nature etc. be equated with the set of sense-organs, then God will have the 
same kind of experiences as the transmigrating souls. 


Or the two aphorisms can be explained in another way: 



39. And (God cannot be proved), since no physical support (adhi,cFhr3na) 
is possible for Him. 

For this further reason, God as He is conceived by the sophists has no 
logical justification. In this world, a king, having the support of a body, is 
seen to rule over a kingdom, but not so without a physical support. 
Therefore, if anyone wants to fancy an unseen God by drawing upon that 
analogy, one will have to imagine some body as the seat of the sense-organs 
of God. But such a conception is impossible, since a body comes into being 
after creation starts; it is not possible before creation. And if God has no 
physical support, He cannot be a director. For this is what accords with 
experience. 

ww iftafesj: won 

40. If a body, equipped with sense-organs, be assumed for God; (we say 
that) this is not possible; because of (consequent) experiences etc. 

Again, if in accordance with common experience, it be fancied that God 
can have a body to hold His organs, even then His ordainership will not be 
logically sustainable; for if God has a body, He will have to undergo 
experiences like any transmigrating soul, so that we shall be faced with the 
predicament of God Himself being deprived of His Godhead. 


r Finitude T or tjq absence of omniscience. 

41. God will be subject to finitude or loss of omniscience. 

For this additional reason, the God, as conceived by the logicians, is an 
impossibility. For by them He is declared to be omniscient as well as infinite. 
So also are admitted by them an infinite Nature and infinite souls which are 
different from one another. Now, that being the case, the question is: Can the 
limits (in number and extension) of Nature, souls, and Himself be 
determined by God or not? Either standpoint is open to defect. 

How? 

According to the first view, Nature, souls, and God will inevitably come to 
an end, since their limits in number or extension are grasped by God. For 
this accords with human experience, according to which whatever in this 
world has any limitation in number or dimension has an end, for instance a 
pot. Similarly, Nature, souls, and God, all three being circumscribed in 
number or dimension, must have an end. As for a limitation in number, that 
arises from the enumeration of Nature, souls, and God as three entities. And 
their characteristic of dimensions, as also the vast number associated with 
the souls, may well be determined by God. From this the conclusion arises 
that the world as well as the state of transmigration will have an and for 
those transmigrating souls which become freed from this world from among 
these numerically and physically limited souls. Thus also when other souls 
become free in succession, the transmigratory existence itself, as also those 
who are in that state of existence, will come to an end. According to them, it 
is Nature together with her derivatives, acting under the direction of God, 
that constitutes the state of transmigration for providing experiences to the 
souls. Now in the absence of that as well, over what will God assume His 


directorship, and Divine power? If Nature, soul and God have an end in this 
way, they will have a beginning as well. When they have both beginning and 
end, we shall be landed into nihilism. Again, if for avoiding this defect, they 
stick to the other alternative that the number and extension of Nature, souls, 
and God are not determinable by God, then this will lead to the other defect 
that God will lose His omniscience. For this reason also the theory of the 
causality of God, as it is advocated by the sophists, is illogical. 

Tonic 8: BHAGAVATA VIEW REFUTED 

IIWII 



,dq4?~ Owing to the impossibility of origin. 

42. (The Bhagavata view that Sa kkarsana and others originate 
successively from Vasudeva and others is wrong), since any origin (for the 
soul) is impossible. 

We have refuted the view of those who hold that God is simply a 
directing, efficient cause without being the material cause as well. Now is 
being discarded the view of those who hold that God is both the material and 
efficient causes. 

Opponent : Was not Brahman ascertained to be both the material and 
efficient causes exactly like this with the help of Vedic texts (B. S. I. iv. 23)? 
And it is the accepted principle that a Smrti is authoritative when it follows 
the Vedic texts. So what is the reason for this attempt at disproving this 
(Bhagavata) view? 

Veddntrn : To this we say: Although a portion of this kind is common to 
both of us and should not be a matter of dispute, there is another portion 
which leads to disagreement. Hence this endeavour at rebutting it. 



With regard to this the Bhdgavatas think: God as Vasudeva, who is pure 
consciousness by nature, is the supreme reality. He has divided Himself and 
set Himself up as a fourfold figure-in the form of Vasudeva, in the form of 
Samkar ai a., in the form of Pradyumna, and in the form of Aniruddha. The 
supreme Self is referred to by the name Vasudeva, the embodied soul is 
pointed out by the term Sarhkarpi)a, mind has the epithet of Pradyumna, and 
egoism is called Aniruddha. Of them Vasudeva is the highest material cause, 
while Sarhkar a and others are His products. By adoring Him for a hundred 
years through such a process as visiting Him in His temples (in a proper state 
of body, mind, and speech), acquiring the requisites for worship, worship, 
japa (constant recital) of His mantra, and meditation, one becomes freed 
from such drawbacks (as likes and dislikes), and then one attains the Lord 
Himself. 

Vedfirtin : Now, we do not refute the view stated therein that Niriyai a, 
who is superior to Nature and is well known to be the supreme Self and the 
Self of all, has divided Himself by Himself into many forms; for from such 
Vedic texts as, "He assumes one form, He assumes three forms" (Ch. VII. 
xxvi. 2) etc., it is known that the supreme Self does become multifarious. As 
for the predilection for His propitiation; consisting in visiting His temple etc. 
and so on, with exclusive devotion and for long, that also is not denied. For 
the contemplation of God is well in evidence in the Vedas and Smrtis. But 
with regard to the view that Sarhkar$ar}a originates from Visudeva, 
Pradyumna from Sathkar$a4a, and Aniruddha from Pradyumna, we say that 
it is not possible for an individual soul, called Sarhkar$aiia, to be created 
from the supreme Self, called Vasudeva; for such a view will lead to such 
defects as impermanence. If the individual soul has any origin, it will be 
subject to such defects as being impermanent and so on. Owing to this 
drawback, liberation, consisting in attaining God, will not be possible for the 
soul, for an effect gets completely destroyed on reaching back to its source. 
The teacher (Vyasa) will deny any origin for the individual soul in the 
aphorism, "The individual soul has no origin, because the Vedic texts do not 
mention this and because the soul is known from them to be eternal" (II. iii. 
17). Accordingly this assumption is unjustifiable. 



q And R not al; from an agent (originates) *t" an implement. 

43. And (this view is wrong because) an implement cannot originate from 
its agent (who wields it). 

That (Bhagavata) assumption is wrong for this additional reason that in 
the world it is never seen that such implements as an axe etc. originate from 
the agent of the action (of cutting etc.), say for instance Devadatta. But the 
Bhagavatas describe this thus: From the individual soul, called 
Samkar$arXa, who is the agent, originates the instrument mind, called 
Pradyumna; and from the mind, originating from the agent, emerges egoism, 
called Aniruddha. We cannot, however, comprehend this in the absence of 
any confirming parallel illustration, nor do we come across any such Vedic 
text. 





w Alternatively fT-aRfa- (even) on the (assumption of the) possession of 
knowledge etc. wZ-siifc q: there is no remedy of that defect. 

44. Alternatively even if (it be assumed that Vasudeva and others are) 
possessed of knowledge, (majesty, etc.), still the defect cannot be remedied. 

Opponent: It may rather be the case that these Sarhkar$aoa and others are 
not considered to be the individual souls and so on. 


In what way are they conceived then? 



They are all believed in as Gods, being endowed with all such divine 
attributes as the mental power of knowledge and divinity, physical strength, 
heroism, and boldness; they are all Vasudevas to be sure, free from the 
defects (of likes, dislikes, etc.), not bom of Nature, and free from destruction 
etc. Hence the defect alluded to, of origin being impossible, does not arise. 

Vedantin : To this our reply is that even so that defect is not remedied; the 
impossibility of origin persists all the same. The idea is that the defect of the 
impossibility of origin does crop up from another side. 

How? 

If the idea be this that these four Gods, counting from Vasudeva, are 
entirely different from one another and are yet possessed of equal attributes, 
and that they do not constitute a single Self, then it is useless to imgine many 
Gods, since the divine functions can be accomplished by a single one. 
Besides, this goes against their own conclusion, inasmuch as it is admitted 
that God as Vasudeva alone is the supreme Reality. 

Again, if the position be this that these four forms belong to a single God, 
though they have equal attributes, still the impossibility of origin remains 
where it was. For in the absence of any distinguishing quality, Samkar$aua 
cannot spring from Vasudeva, nor can Pradyumna from Samkar$aua, or 
Aniruddha from Pradyumna. As between the cause and effect, some 
distinction has got to be admitted as existing, as in the case of clay and a pot, 
for unless some peculiarity exists, it is not possible to distinguish them as 
cause and effect. But in any one or all of them, counting from Vasudeva, the 
followers of the Paiicaratra school do not admit any distinction created by 
degrees of knowledge, majesty, etc.; for they believe that all the forms are 
but Vasudeva without any distinction. Besides, these forms of God cannot 
remain confined within the number four, since they believe that the whole 
universe, starting from Brahma and ending with a clump of grass, is but a 
form of God. 




a And NxNRqj owing to contradiction. 

45. Besides, (in this scripture) many contradictions are met with and it 
runs cowzter to the Vedas. 

And in the scripture of the Bhagavatas many kinds of contradiction are in 
evidence, concerning, for instance, qualities and the things qualified. Thus 
one comes across beliefs like this. The qualities, viz the power of knowledge 
and divinity, physical strength, heroism, and boldness, are nothing but so 
many selves and they are the same as Vasudeva, the Lord. Moreover, this 
scripture contradicts the Vedas, since it is seen to cast a slur on the Vedas by 
declaring, "Not finding the highest good in the four Vedas,ciilya studied this 
scripture". Therefore it is concluded that this assumption is illogical. 

SECTION III 

Topic 1: ORIGIN OF SPACE 

Introduction : In various places in the Upani$ads we come across texts 
dealing with creation etc. which seem to represent different schools of 
thought. Some mention the origin of space, while others do not; similarly 
some mention the origin of air, while some do not; so also with regard to the 
individual soul and the organs and senses. In the same way, contradiction is 
met with in the different Upani$ads in the matter of the order of creation etc. 
The ground for ignoring the opponents' points of view was shown to be their 
self-contradiction. So our own point of view may run the risk of being 
ignored on that very ground of self-contradiction. Hence begins the 
succeeding amplification (in two sections) for clarifying the purport of all 
the Upani$adic texts about creation. And when that purport is clarified, the 



result achieved will of course be the removal of the doubt already 
mentioned. So to begin with, it is being considered about space as to whether 
it has any origin or not. Pseudo-Vedirntin : As to that, it is being 
propounded: 



Not f space aN: because not heard of. 

1. Space is not (a created thing), since this it not heard of in (some of) the 
Upaniiads. 

Space does not certainly originate. 

Why? 

"Since this is not heard of." There is no mention of it in the context 
dealing with creation. For in the Chandogya Upani$ad occurs the text, "0 
amiable one, all this was but Existence in the beginning-one without a 
second" (VI. ii. 1), where Brahman, called Existence, is presented as the 
topic, and then with regard to this Brahman, it is said, "That deliberated" and 
"That created fire" (VI. ii. 3), where fire, (usually) occupying the middle 
place among the five great elements, is placed first and mention is made of 
the creation of (only) the three elements fire, water, and food (earth). Vedic 
texts are the valid means to us in the matter of generating knowledge about 
the supersensuous things. And no text is in evidence here proving the origin 
of space. Hence space has no birth. 




q But arftu there is. 

2. But there is (a mention of the origin of space). 

Opponent : The word "but" is used to indicate the preference for another 
point of view. Space might not have been mentioned as having any origin in 
the Chandogya Upani$ad, but it is (so mentioned) in another Upani$ad. 
After starting with, "Truth, Knowledge, Infinity is Brahman" (Tai. II. i. 1), 
the followers of the Taittiriya recension recite thus, "From that Self, that is 
such, originated space" (II. i. 1). Thereby the two Upani$ads come into 
conflict, inasmuch as creation starts in one with fire, and in another with 
space. 

Veddntin : Is it not proper that these two Upani$adic passages should be 
reconciled? 

Opponent: They should truly be reconciled; but it is not known how to do 
so. 

Why? 

For the creator who is mentioned only once in, "That created fire" (Ch. VI. 
ii. 3), cannot reasonably be brought (simultaneously) into association with 



two created things (fire and space) by asserting, "That created fire, That 
created space". 

Veddntin : Is not an agent, mentioned but once, seen to have (successive) 
connection with two different acts, as in the statement, "He cooks rice after 
cooking a curry"? Similarly we can connect the creator with the two created 
things by saying, "That created fire after creating space." 

Opponent: That is not logical. For in the Chandogya, fire is understood as 
the first creation, whereas in the Taittiriya space comes first. And both 
cannot be the first creation. Hereby is also exposed the contradiction 
involved in other Vedic texts. Thus in the text . "From that Self , which is 
such , ori g inated space" ( Tai. II. h 1 ). the ablative case ( in atmanah-from the 
Self ) and ori g ination are mentioned but once : now to connect these two 
( ablative case and ori g ination ) with both space and fire at the same time to 
imply. "From that ori g inated space , from that ori g inated fire" , will not be 
log ical. Besides , a different process is mentioned in the text . "From air came 
fire" t TaiJIH l. 


Faced with this contradition, somebody else says: 



q Secondary awdkZ because of impossibility. 

3. (The Upani,cadic passage about creation of space has) a secondary 
sense, for real creation is impossible. 

Pseudo-Veddntin : Space has no origin, just because there is no Vedic 
mention. As for the other text quoted as speaking of the origin of space, that 




































must have "a secondary sense". 

Why? 

"Because of impossibility", for it is not possible to establish the origin of 
space so long as the followers of the views of the venerable Kaoabhuk (i.e. 
Vaise$ikas) live. For they set aside the theory of the origin of space just 
because of the absence of the requisite causes. All that is seen to originate, 
does so from the inherent (material), non-inherent (concomitant), and 
efficient causes. And an inherent cause of an object is constituted by an 
abundance of substance of the same class. But for space there can be no such 
abundance of any substance of the same class, which can constitute its 
inherent cause; nor is there any conjunction of such substances which can be 
accepted as the noninherent cause from which space can emerge. And since 
these two causes are absent, any efficient cause for space, which func tions 
when these are favourable, becomes a far cry. In the case of fire, etc., 
however, which have origin, it is possible for them to have some peculiarity 
before and after creation; for instance, such phenomena (or effect) as 
illumination do not exist before their creation, but they come to exist after 
creation. But for space, no such peculiarity can be conceived of either before 
or after creation. For before the creation of space, what indeed can be 
conceived of as existing without space, interstices, or cavities? Moreover, 
space is proved to be without any origin on account of its being different in 
nature from earth etc. and owing to its characteristics of all-pervasiveness 
etc. Hence, just as we meet with such expressions in common usage as, 
"Make space (i.e. room)", "Space (room) is provided", and so on, in which 
the word space is used in a secondary sense (to mean room); or just as there 
are references to the differences in the same space in a secondary sense in 
such expressions as, "the space in a pot", "the space in ajar", "the space in a 
house"; or just as there are such expressions even in the Vedas as, "They 
sacrifice the forest-animals in the spaces"; similarly the Vedic texts about 
creation are to be understood in a secondary (or figurative) sense. 




And qR from Vedic texts. 


4. And (this is borne out) by Vedic texts. 

Pseudo-VedBntin : The Vedas as a matter of fact, declare the birthlessness 
of space, since it is stated, "Now the subtle-it is air and space. It is immortal" 
(Br. II. iii. 3); for that which is immortal cannot have an origin. And the text 
"It is all-pervasive and eternal like space", while comparing Brahman with 
space in respect of the attributes of omnipresence and etemality, also 
indicates that space has those two characteristics. As such, space cannot 
reasonably be maintained to have an origin. There is also the statement, 
"This Self is to be known to be as infinite as this space", as also the texts, 
"Brahman has space as Its body" (Tai. I. vi. 2), "Space is the Self" (Tai. I. vii. 
1). If space had an origin, it could not have been used as an attribute of 
Brahman, like blueness in the case of a lotus. So it is understood that 
Brahman is ever on a par with space. 

Iftll 

T And q it is possible qWM for the same (word) wFqW_qZ~ like the 
word Brahman. 

5. And it is possible for the same word ("originated") to have (primary and 
secondary senses) like the word Brahman. 


This aphorism follows in succession the series of objections raised about 
the word "originated". 

It may be objected thus: How can the single word "originated" occurring 
in the context, "From that Self, which is such, originated space" (Tai. II. i. 1), 
have the primary sense when used at a later stage in connection with the 
words fire and the rest which come subsequently, whereas it has a secondary 
sense when used (earlier) in connection with space? 

Pseudo- Veddntin : Therefore the reply is being given. Just as the word 
Brahman can have primary and secondary senses with reference to different 
objects, so also the same word "originated" can have primary and secondary 
meanings with reference to different objects. As for instance, the same word 
Brahman has a secondary sense with reference to food etc. (in the 
expressions "Food is Brahman" etc.), occurring in the context, "Try to know 
Brahman through concentration of mind; concentration is Brahman" (Tai. 
III. 2); but it has a primary sense with regard to Bliss (in "He knew Bliss to 
be Brahman"-Tai III. vi.) in the same context; or as the word Brahman is 
used by way of courtesy with regard to concentration which is a means to the 
knowledge of Brahman, but directly (in the primary sense) in connection 
with the Brahman to be known; similar is the case here. 

Objection : If, again, space has no origin, how can the declaration, " 
(Brahman is) one only without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1), be supported? For 
does not Brahman come to have a second to Itself by the presence of space? 
How then can it be true that all becomes known when Brahman is known 
(for the unproduced space remains still unknown)? 

Pseudo-Vedantin : That is being answered. The text, "One only" can be 
justified when considered with reference to (the absence of) Its own effects 
(before creation). Somebody, for instance, who had seen clay, turning rod, 
and potter's wheel at the potter's house on the previous day and then notices 
next day different kinds of vessels soread about, might say, "It was all but 
clay alone the other div". What he would imply by that declaration would be 
that the products of clay alone did not exist on the previous day, but not that 
the rod etc. also were not there. Similarly the text ("without a second") 
speaking about (the) non-existence of a second rules out any other ordainer: 



unlike the potter who is observed to be an ordainer apart from the clay which 
is the material cause of the earthen vessels, there is no other ordainer for the 
universe apart from Brahman which is its material cause. And it cannot be 
that Brahman becomes associated with a second entity owing merely to the 
presence of space. Multiplicity is created by differences in the characteristics 
(of entities). But it is not a fact that before creation Brahman and space have 
different characteristics; because like milk and water in a mixture, they both 
(then) possess the common properties of pervasiveness, want of features, 
(partlessness, formlessness), etc. At the time of creation, however, Brahman 
becomes active for producing the universe, while the other (viz space) 
remains motionless; and hence it is thought that they are different. In this 
way also the identity of Brahman and space in a secondary sense stands 
proved according to such Vedic texts as, "Brahman has space as Its body" 
(Tai. I. vi. 2). And thus also is proved the attainment of omniscience through 
the knowledge of Brahman. Moreover, whatever has origin, originates in 
some space and time that are non-separate from the space and time of space 
itself, which again is non-separate from Brahman. So when Brahman and Its 
effects are known, space also becomes known ipso facto. Just as the few 
drops of water thrown into a potful of milk become taken up when the milk 
itself is taken, for when the milk is taken up, the drops of water do not stand 
apart to be taken up separately, so also when Brahman is known, space 
becomes known as a matter of course, for space does not stand apart from 
Brahman and Its effects either in space or time. Hence the Vedic text about 
the origin of space has a figurative sense. 

Vedantin : Such being the position, the aphorist says: 



gN;Rl-arZtff: The declaration stands unaffected amMaPrd from the non¬ 
difference (of effects); gakR: (confirmed) from Vedic texts. 


6. The (Vedic) assertion (that "all things become known when the one is 
known") can remain unaffected only if all the effects are non-different from 



Brahman; and this is confirmed by Vedic texts. 


In all the Upani$ads, individually, we come across a declaration on the 
following line, "That by knowing which all that is not heard becomes heard, 
all that is not thought becomes thought, all that is not known becomes 
known" (Ch. VI. i. 3), "All this becomes known, my dear, when the Self is 
seen through hearing, thinking, and meditation" (Br. IV. v. 6), "What is that, 
sir, by knowing which all this becomes known?" (Mu. I. i. 3), "There is no 
knowledge of all outside Myself". "That declaration can remain unaffected", 
unhampered, "only if all things (without exception) are non-different from 
the Brahman" that is to be known. For if anything be different from 
Brahman, the declaration that "all becomes known when one is known" will 
be stultified. And that non-difference can be upheld justifiably only if all 
things without exception originate from Brahman alone. And it is in 
accordance with the logic of the identity of the material cause and its effects, 
that the justifiability of the declaration is revealed in the Vedic texts 
themselves. It is precisely for this reason that the declaration is first made in, 
"That by which the things unheard become heard", and then this declaration 
is confirmed with the illustrations of clay etc. which are calculated to 
establish the non-difference of cause and effect. It is in affirmation of this 
very fact that the subsequent texts, "0 amiable one, all this was Existence 
alone in the beginning, one without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 2), "It saw (or 
thought), It created fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3) show that the effects arise from 
Brahman; and then non-difference is shown in the texts starting with, "All 
this has that alone as its Self" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), till the end of the sixth 
Prapafhaka. Now if space be not a product of Brahman, it will remain 
unknown even when Brahman is known. But that will undo the declaration. 
It is not proper, however, to invalidate the Vedas by hurting this declaration. 
So also in every Upani$ad, the appropriate texts establish that very 
declaration with the help of suitable illustrations, for instance, " ... and this 
all are the Self" (Br. II. iv. 6), "All that is in front is but the immortal 
Brahman" (Mu. II. ii. 11), and so on. Accordingly, space also originates just 
like fire and the rest. The assertion is unjustifiable that space has no origin 
because of the absence of any such Vedic statement; for another Vedic text, 
speaking of the origin of space, was quoted earlier, viz "From this Self that is 
such, originated space" (Tai II. i.-2). 



Opponent: True it was quoted, but this conflicts with this other text, "That 
created fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3). 

Veddntin : No, for all the Vedic texts have a unity of purport, (that is to 
say, they can be reconciled). 

Opponent: Let the non-contradictory texts have a unity of purport (and be 
reconcilable). But contradictions have been pointed out here to the effect that 
the creator who is heard of only once cannot be connected with two things to 
be created, that the two things cannot both be born first, and that there can be 
no possibility of alternativeness (in either of the two being the first). 

Vedantin : That is no defect, for the creation of fire is heard of third in the 
Taittiriya Upani$ad in, "From that Self which is such, was born space, from 
space air, and from air fire" (II. i. 2). And this text cannot be construed in 
any other way, whereas the Chandogya text can be interpreted thus, "Having 
created space and air, That (Brahman) created fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3). This 
(latter) text, which has for its main purport the presentation of the birth of 
fire, cannot rule out the birth of space well known in other Upanipds . for the 
same sin g le sentence cannot operate in two wavs.s The creator , thou g h one . 
can create man y products .in succession. And since there is a possibility of 
maintainin g a unity of purport ( amon g the texts by reconcilin g them ), a 
Vedic text should not be abandoned b v ima g inin g some contradictor y 
meanin g . A g ain , it is not a fact that we want to connect the same creator . 
heard of only once , with the two thin gs (s pace and fire ) that are to be 
created ; rather a second thin g to be created is drawn upon on the authority of 
another ( i.e. Taittiri ya) Upani$ad.3 Besides, just as the direct mention of the 
creation of everything from Brahman in the text, "All this is certainly 
Brahman, for everything is born from, rests in, and merges in Brahman" (Ch. 
Ill. xiv. 1), does not overrule the order of creation stated elsewhere with fire 
as the first (Ch. VI. ii. 3), similarly the Vedic mention of creation of fire from 
Brahman cannot rule out the order of creation with space in the forefront as 
mentioned in another (i.e. Taittiriya) Upaniad. 

Opponent: Is not the sentence, "Everything is bom from, rests in, and 
merges in Brahman; worship with calmness" (Ch. III. xiv. 1), meant for 
enjoining (meditation with) tranquillity? This is not a passage about creation, 







































so that it cannot overrule the order of creation established elsewhere (in the 
Chandogya Upanigad). The text, "That created fire", however, speaks of 
creation itself, so that the order as stated there in the (Chindogya Upani$ad, 
VI. ii. 3) has to be accepted. 

Veddntin : To this the answer is, no; for the entity space, as established in 
another Upanigad, cannot be rejected just because fire has got the first place 
(somewhere); for an order follows the nature of things. Moreover, in the text, 
"That created fire", no (explicit) word indicating order is in evidence, the 
order being posited (merely) from the implication of the sentence. That, 
however, is ruled out by the order known from another Upanisad, viz "from 
air comes fire" (Tai. IT. 1). As for assigning the first place to space and fire, 
either alternatively or jointly, that is ruled out because of impossibility and 
non-acceptance (by the Upanigads). Hence there is no contradiction between 
the two texts. Moreover, the assertion, "That by knowing which things 
unheard become heard", is found at the commencement. For confirming this 
statement, one has to include space among the things created, though it is not 
mentioned (there in the Chandogya). That being so, it is all the more 
unreasonable not to take space into account, though it is mentioned in the 
Taittiriya Upani$ad. 

And the statement was made that space bein g non-different from 
everythin g so far as the time-space relation is concerned , it becomes known . 
as a matter of course , alon g with Brahman and Its products , and that hence 
the declaration ( "everythin g becomes known when one is known" ) is not 
compromised , nor is the Vedic text "one without a second" contradicted , for 
like milk and water (mixed to g ether ). Brahman and space can reasonably be 
non-different. As to this , our answer is that this fact of everythin g becomin g 
known throu g h the knowled g e of one is not to be understood on the analo gy 
of milk and water. From the presentation of the illustrations of clay etc, f in 
the UpaniSad ) it is to be understood that this all-knowin g ness is to be 
ex plained rather in conformity with the lo g ic of the tnondifference of the ) 
material and its products. If omniscience is understood in conformity with 
the illustration of milk and water , it will not be perfect knowled ge, for the 
knowled g e of water acquired throu g h the knowled g e of milk is not a 
complete knowled g e at all. And it cannot be ar g ued that like men , the Vedas 































































also ascertain a thin g throu g h delusive , equivocal , or deceptive statements 
etc. Moreover , if the emphatic statement . "One without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 
2). be interpreted on the analo g y of milk and water , it will be adversel y 
affected. It is not also proper to assert that this all-knowin g ness li.e. the 
knowled g e of everythin g arisin g from the knowled g e of one ), as also the 
state of bein g one without a second , relates only to one particular feature of a 
substance , viz the modifications of itself : for in that case these statements 
will be equally valid even in the cases of clay etc, .4 so that they have no 
need to be presented (in the Upanisad) as unique truths (not known except 
through the Upanisads), as it is actually done in the text, "0 Svetaketu, now 
that you appear 'to be so conceited, proud of your knowledge, and irreverent, 
did you 'inquire about that subject of instruction after knowing which all that 
is unheard becomes heard?" etc. (Ch. VI. i. 2-3). Hence it is to be understood 
that the all-knowingness is concerned with the" knowledge of everything 
without exception, and thlt this statement is made from the point of view that 
everything is an effect of Brahman. 


As for the statement that the Vedic text about the origin of space is to be 
taken in a secondary' sense, since the creation of space in the primary sense 
is impossible, our reply is this: 



% But fk-ir+r: separateness (is wherever there is m-lpi a modification (i.e. 
effect), present) as it is noticeable in the' world.. 

7. Bu;. (space is a product); • for separateness persists wherever there is an 
effect, as it is seen in the world. 

The word "but" is used for barring out any apprehension of impossibility. 
In the matter of the possibility of the creation of space, no doubt should be. 
entertained. Whatever is known as a product in this world-be it a pot, a 
pitcher, or a jar; a bracelet, an armlet, or an ear-drop, a needle, an arrow, or a 






































sword-e very thing is seen to be a separate entity; but nothing that is not a 
product is seen to be separate (as for instance the Self). And space is known 
to be separate from, earth etc., hence space also must be a product. Hereby it 
is also 'explained how directions, time, mind, and atoms are also products. 

Opponent: Is not the Self also separate from space etc, and so does It not 
also become*a product like a pot etc.? 

Veddntin : No, for there is the Vedic text, "From the Self arose space" 
( Tai. II. i. 3 ) . Now , if even the Self be a product , then since nothin g hi gher 
than the Self is heard of ( as the cause ), all the products countin g from space 
will be without a Self ( he. ultimate substance ). j ust because the Self is itself 
a product. And this will g ive rise to nihilism. Any idea of the possibility of 
denying the existence of the Self is illo g ical , i ust because it is the Self .5 The 
Self is not an adventitious effect of any cause , it bein g self-established,6 For 
the Self of any one does not require to be revealed to any one with the hel p 
of any other means.? For such means of knowled g e as perception etc. , that 
are taken up for provin g the existence of other thin g s that remain unknown . 
belon g to this very Self." Not that space and other things are understood by 
any one to be self-established, independently of other means of knowledge. 
But the Self being the basis of all such empirical dealings as the use of the 
means of knowledge, stands there as a postulate even prior to the use of 
those means. And it is not possible to deny such a Self; for it is an 
adventitious thing alone that can be repudiated, but not so one's own nature. 
The Self constitutes the very nature of the man who would deny it. The heat 
of fire cannot be denied by the fire itself. Thus it is that when a man says, "It 
is I myself who know the present object now, it is I who know the past and 
the remote past, and it is I who shall know the future and the remote future", 
it is seen that though the object to be known has different modes varying 
with the past, present, and future, the knower remains unchanged; for he has 
the nature of being ever present. Similarly even when the body is reduced to 
ashes, the Self is not reduced to nothing, Its nature being such that It is ever 
present; and precisely because of this it is not possible to conceive of any 
change in Its nature. Thus owing to this very fact of its nature of being 
undeniable, the Self is not a product, whereas space etc. are products. 














































As for the ar g ument that ( for its own production ) s pace has not g ot an 
abundance of material substance of the same class (which can produce it ). 
that is bein g refuted. For one thin g, there is no such rule that thin g s of the 
same class , and not of different classes , produce an effect. For the yarns and 
their con j unction ( consr4tutin g the inherent and non-inherent causes of the 
cloth ) do not belon g to the same class ; since they are classified as substance 
and quality. Nor do the instrumental causes , e.g . the shuttle , the loom , etc. . 
belon g invariably to the same class. It may be ar g ued that this rule about 
belon ging to the same class , is upheld in the case of the inherent causes onl y. 
but not in the case of other (non-inherent and instrumental ) causes. But that 
too is not universally true. For it is seen that a sin g le rope is made of cotton 
yarn and cow's hair belon ging to different classes ; so also they weave 
chequered blankets with cotton yarn and wool etc. If , however , this rule be 
u pheld by rei ving on the common properties of havin g existence , substance . 
etc. , then the rule itself becomes useless , for in that case anythin g can belon g 
to the same class as any other. A g ain , there is no such rule that an effect is 
produced bv a multiplicity of thin gs, but not bv one , sin g le cause : for in the 
cases of an atom and the mind , an initial activity has to be admitted , it bein g 
u pheld ( by you ) that an atom or a mind starts its own initial activit y b y itself . 
and not in con j unction with any other thin g.9 

Opponent: The rule about a multiplicity (of materials) producing an effect 
relates to the production of things (and not production as such). 

Veddntin: Not so, for what is admitted (by you) is transformation (as 
against emergence out of nothing, advocated by the Vaise$ikas). The above 
rule can be true if it be a fact that a material cause, in association with 
conjunction, produces an entirely new thing; but as a matter of fact, the 
position upheld is that the very same material cones to be called an effect 
when it attains a different state with cLrtain peculiarities. And there, again, 
sometimes many things get transformed into a single effect, as for instance, 
earth, seed, etc. into a sprout and sometimes a single thing gets transformed, 
as milk into curd etc. There is no divine ukase that only a multiplicity of 
(material) causes must produce an effect. Hence on the authority of the 
Vedic texts it is firmly ascertained that the universe sprang from the one 
Brahman alone in a regular order beginning with the origin of the great 

























































































elements, space and the rest. And thus it has been stated, "If it be said that 
Brahman cannot be the cause, since one is seen to collect materials (for the 
performance of an act) then we say, no; for it is possible on the analogy of 
milk (turning into curd)" (B. S. H. i. 24). 

And the assertion is false that no such distinction between the conditions 
of space before and after its creation can be conceived of as can make the 
creation of space a possibility. For it can be understood that the very 
distinctive attribute (of sound) by virtue of which space becomes 
distinguished from earth etc. at present and is comprehended as having an 
individual nature of its own, (that very distinctive attribute) did not exist 
before creation. And from the Vedic texts, "Brahman is without space", it 
can be understood that Brahman is free from the characteristics of space, just 
as much as it is known from such Vedic passages as, "not gross, not fine" 
(Br. 111. viii. 8), that Brahman is not possessed of such attributes as 
grossness etc. that belong to (Its products) earth etc. Thus it is proved that 
before creation Brahman was without space. 

The assertion is wrong that space is birthless owing to its being dissimilar 
in character to earth and the rest. For the logical position is that when an 
inference about the impossibility of origin contradicts a Vedic text, it stands 
condemned as fallacious. And we showed the inference about the creation 
(of space). Such syllogisms also can be used as: Space is impermanent like a 
pot, since it is the substratum of impermanent attributes. 

Op ponent : This inference does not hold g ood in the case of the Self.l° 

Veddntin : Not so, for the possession of any impermanent attribute is 
impossible for the Self according to one who holds on to the Upani$ads. And 
the possession of all-pervasiveness etc. by space is impossible according to 
one who believes in the origin of space. 

As for the assertions that space is eternal on the authority of the Vedas ( B. 
S. II. iii. 4 ). we sav that the Vedic mention of immortality of space in that 
text ( Br. 11. iii. 3 ) is to be understood in the same sense as the statement . 
"The heavenly bein g s are immortal" ; for ori g in and dissolution of space have 
been expounded earlier. Even when it is said ., "( The Self is ) allpervasive and 

























eternal like space" , the comparison is made with the well-known vastness of 
s pace , so as to reveal the Self's unsurpassable vastness , but not to equate the 
Self with space. This is like the declaration . "The sun runs like an arrow" . 
where the point of comparison is the quickness of motion , but not an y 
eq uality of speed with the arrow. Hereby is explained the Vedic text 
ex poundin g infinitude throu g h illustration." 

Besides, from such texts as, "Greater than space", space is proved to have 
lesser dimensions than Brahman. And the text, "There s nothing to compare 
with Him" (Sv. IV. 19), shows that Brahman is incomparable. The text, 
"Everything else but this is perishable" (Br. III. iv. 2), shows that all 
thingsspace and the rest-other than Brahman are perishable. And the 
argument that the birth of space is mentioned in the Vedas in a secondary 
sense, like the term Brahman used in a secondary sense to mean tapas 
(concentration), has been refuted with the help of Vedic texts and inference 
proving the origin of space. Hence it is established that space is a product of 
Brahman. 


Tonic 2: ORIGIN OF Am 

^ rf'Wi ii ? ii 

qaq By this jTafT air mod: stands explained. 

8. Hereby is explained air. 

This aphorism extends (to air) the conclusion (about origin) already 
stated. "Hereby", by this explanation of space, 7ndtari..van, "air", supported 
by space, also stands explained." In its case also (as in that of space), the 
opposing viewpoints are to be suitably formulated (and answered) thus: One 
viewpoint is that air has no origin, since this is not stated in the context 
dealing with creation in the Chandogya Upani$ad. The other view is that this 
is mentioned in the context of creation in the Taittiriya Upani$ad: "Air came 



























out from space" (II. 1). From this it follows according to another view that 
since the Upani$ads are at variance, the. text about the origin of air must 
bear a secondary sense; for air can have no origin, since that is impossible. 
And the impossibility is shown with the support of the text, "This then is the 
deity, called air, that never sets" (i.e. ceases from action) (Bt. I. v. 22), where 
setting down is denied, and also in accordance with the Vedic statement of 
its immortality etc. The (Vedantin's) conclusion is that air must have an 
origin, because it is thus that the declaration ("everything becomes known 
when one is known") is not set at naught, and because it is admitted that 
separateness persists wherever there is a product (B. S. II. iii. 6-7). The 
denial about air ever going to rest is made within the range of inferior 
knowledge (of Hirapyagarbha); it is a relative one in :;,e sense that air is not 
seen to go to rest like fire and the rest. And the Vedic mention of immortality 
etc. as in, "Air and inter-space-these are immortal" has already been 
explained (as relative). 

Opponent: Since in the contexts of creation, the origin or non-origin of air 
and space is mentioned or not mentioned equally by the Vedas, let there be a 
single topic (adhikarana in the Vedanta-sutras) comprising both. So why 
should you resort to a process of extension of application when no special 
point is at issue= 

The (Veddntin's) answer is: This is quite so. Still this extension of 
application resorted to for removing the doubt from those people of poor 
intellect who base their misconceptions merely on words. For after hearing 
of the gloriousness of air as a thing to he meditated on, as stated in 
connection with the contemplation on merger (sarirvarga-vidya-Ch. IV. iii. 1- 
4) etc., and from such facts as the denial of its setting down, some one might 
be led to believe that air is eternal. 


Topic 3: ORIGIN OF BRAHMAN DENIED 



: m\ 

$ But aRgr: impossible qd: for Existence (Brahman) al3gq: owing to 
illogicality. 

9. But (origin) for Existence (Brahman) is impossible on account of 
illogicality. 

Hearing that even space and air, whose birth seems to be impossible, have 
still an origin, somebody might be led to think that Brahman too must have 
some source of origin. Again, hearing that all subsequent products come out 
of space etc., which are themselves products, somebody might think that 
space also, in its turn, sprang from Brahman which is Itself a product. This 
aphorism, "But origin is impossible", stands for removing that 
misconception. It should never be conceived that Brahman which is 
Existence by nature can come out of, i.e. originate from, anything else. 

Why? 

"On account of illogicality". Brahman, being mere Existence, cannot 
certainly originate from that pure Existence Itself. For in the absence of 
some distinguishing feature a causal relationship cannot be reasonably 
maintained. Nor can Brahman be derived from a particular form of 
Existence, as that goes against common experience; for particulars are seen 
to emerge from the general, as pot etc. from clay, but not the general from 
the particulars. Nor ca i Brahman come out of non-existence , for non¬ 
existence is without any substance. Besides , an ob j ection tto this ) is 
contained in the text . "How can existence come out of non-existence?" tCh. 
VI. ii. 2 ) . And a creator of Brahman is denied in the text . "He is the cause . 
the ordainer of those who stand as causes . 12 He has no begetter, nor any 
ordainer" (Sv. VI. 9). Again, we pointed to (texts telling of) the origin of 
















space and air; but Brahman has no (such text about Its) origin. This is the 
difference. 

Opponent : Since it is seen that products come out from other things that 
are themselves products, Brahman also should be a product. 

Veddntin : No , for unless a primary material cause is admitted , it will all 
end in an infinite re g ress. And whatever is understood to be the primar y 
cause will itself be our Brahman. Hence there is no possibility of conflict. 13 


Tonic 4: ORIGIN OF FIRE 



c}r: Fire aTff: from this one, f because aTj~ (it) says azrl so. 

10. Fire originates from this one (i.e. air); for the Upani,sad says so. 

Opponent : In the Chandogya Upani$ad, fire is spoken of as originating 
from Existence (VI. ii. 3), whereas in the Taittiriya Upani$ad it is spoken of 
as originating from air (II. i. 2). Now then, since there is a conflict in the 
Upani~ads about the source of fire, the conclusion drawn is that fire has 
Brahman as its source. 

Why? 

Because the introduction is made with . "In the be g innin g it was Existence 
alone" ( Ch. VI. ii. 3 ). and then it is said . "That created fire" (ibid. ); because 
the declaration about "everythin g becomin g known throu g h the knowled ge 
of one" becomes possible if everythin g ori g inates from Brahman : also 
because there is the g eneral text . "Everythin g ori g inates from That , rests in 
That , and mer g es in That" (Ch. Ill, xiv ); and lastly because in another 












































U pani$ad the introduction is made with . "From this arises vital force" ( Mu. 
II. i. 3 F and then it is shown that everythin g without exception is bom of 
Brahman.14 In the Taittiriya (Upani$ad) also we come across the text, 
"Having practised tapas (concentrated deliberation), He created all that there 
is" (III. vi. 1), where an all-comprehensive statement is made. Accordingly, 
the statement, "From air came fire" (Tai. II. i. 2), is made from the standpoint 
of subsequent occurrence, meaning thereby that fire originated (from 
Brahman) after air. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the answer is offered that fire comes 
out from this air. 

How can this be so? 

For that is how the Upani$ad says, "From air came fire". If fire had 
directly originated from Brahman without any intermediary, and if it had not 
come out of air, the text, "From air came fire", would be falsified. 

Opponent : Did we not say that this text would mean a subsequent 
occurrence? 

Veddntin : We say, not so. For in the earlier text, "From that Self, that is 
such, was born space" (Tai. II. i. 1), the word (dtmanah-from the) Self, 
occurring as the ablative (i.e. source) of the verb "to be bom" has the fifth 
case-ending ("from"). In the text under discussion as well that topic of 
"being born" holds the held. Again, in the subsequent text, "From e,—th 
were bom herbs" (Tai. II. i. 3), where also origination holds sway, we come 
across the fifth case-ending in the ablative sense. Hence it is understood that 
in the text, "From air came fire", the fifth case-ending that occurs (after air, 
"from air") is used in the ablative sense (meaning "fire was born from air"). 
Moreover, to arrive at the meaning, "After air was bom fire", you have to 
fancy the association (of the verb) with some word (e.g. "urdlrvam-after") as 
prefixed to it; whereas the sense (of "origination from") conveyed by the 
(fifth) case-ending in, "Fire was born from air", is already a patent fact. (And 
a patent fact is more powerful than what can be inferentially read into a 
passage). Hence this text conveys the idea of the origination of fire from air. 












Opponent : Does not the other text, "That created fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3), also 
convey the idea of the origin of fire from Brahman? 

Veddntin : No, for it does not involve any contradiction even if that text 
should imply the birth (ultimately from Brahman) in an order of succession. 
If it is conceived that after creating space and air (successively), Brahman, 
who had assumed the form of air, (next) produced fire, even then it will 
involve no contradiction to have Brahman as its (ultimate) origin. This is just 
like saying, "Her (i.e. cow's) hot milk, her curd, her cheese" etc. And in the 
text, "He formed Himself into the world by Himself" (Tai. It. vii. 1), the 
Upani$ad shows how Brahman exists in Its own modifications as their Self. 
Moreover, we come across this Smrti text from the Lord (Sri KI'$na), 
starting with, "Intelligence, knowledge, non-delusion" (Gita, X. 4), and 
ending with, "The diverse characteristics of the creatures originate from Me 
alone" (Gita, X. 5). For although it is known that intelligence etc. are born 
directly from their respective causes, still all these multitude of entities are 
derived either directly or indirectly (immediately or mediately) from God. 
Thus are also explained the Vedic texts that do not mention any order of 
creation, for they can be interpreted logically as speaking of the origin from 
Brahman alone in every way (be it mediately or immediately); but the texts 
mentioning an order cannot be interpreted in any other way (without the help 
of an order of creation). The declaration (of all things being known from the 
knowledge of one) also has reference only to the derivation of all from 
Existence, and not to any direct origination. Thus, there is no contradiction. 


Topic 5: ORIGIN OF WATT R 




11. Water (was bom from this fire). 


Water "was born from this fire, for the Upanipd says so"this much has to 
be supplied at the end of "Water is bom from this fire." 

How is this known? 

For so says the Upani~ad, "That (Existence Brahman) created water" (Ch. 
VI. ii. 3). And in the face of the text, "from fire came water" (Tai. II. i. 2), 
there is no place for doubt. Having explained the origin of fire and being 
about to explain that of earth, the aphorist thinks, "I shall insert water in 
between the two, so that it may not be left out"; hence he frames the 
aphorism "water". 


Topic 6: ORIGIN OF EARTH 



(Anna-food means) gftiTJ earth on the strength of the subject-matter, 
colour, and other Vedic texts. 

12. (The word "food" means) earth on the strength of the topic, colour, 
and other Vedic texts. 

Doubt : We come across the text, "That water deliberated, 'Let me be 
many, let me be born'. That water created food" (Ch. VI. ii. 4). With regard 
to this the doubt arises: "Are paddy, barley, etc. (i.e. corn) meant here by the 
word food, or is it some eatable (cooked) food like rice (i.e. articles of food), 
or is it earth?" 

Opponent: Among these, the conclusion to he drawn is that the term food 
means either paddy, barley, etc. or cooked rice etc., for the word food is 
commonly used in these senses. Besides, this complementary portion of the 
Upanisadic passage confirms this view: "Therefore food grows plentifully 



whenever there is rainfall" (Ch. VI. ii. 4). For only paddy, barley, etc., and 
not earth, grow abundantly when there is a rainfall. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we reply: It is earth itself that is 
intended to be conveyed by the word food mentioned as growing out of 
water. 

On what grounds? 

"On the strength of the topic, the colour, and other Vedic texts." As for the 
topic, it is seen that the text, "That created fire, That created water" (Ch. VI. 
ii. 3), relates to the great elements. That being the case, it is not proper to 
skip over the creation of earth that follows in order, and jump suddenly to 
paddy, barley,, etc. Similarly the colour mentioned in the complementary 
portion of the text also conforms to that of earth: "That which is the dark (or 
gray) colour, belongs to food" (Ch. VI. iv. 14). For articles of food like rice 
etc. do not invariably have the dark colour, nor do paddy etc. have it. 

Opponent : Not even earth is invariably dark in colour. For fields are seen 
to be whitish like milk and reddish like burning charcoal. 

Vedantin : That is no defect. The colour is mentioned from the point of 
view of frequency (preponderance). Earth is most generally dark (grey) in 
colour, but not either white or red. The writers of Puraia (Pauranikas) also 
speak of night as the shadow of the earth. And night is darkish; therefore it is 
appropriately understood that the earth's colour is dark. Moreover, another 
Vedic text, dealing with the same topic, says, "Earth came from water" (Tai. 
II. i. 2). There is also the text, "What was there like scum on the water was 
solidified and became this earth" (Br. I. ii. 2). But paddy etc. are shown as 
growing out of earth, as in, "From the earth grow the herbs, and from the 
herbs food" (Tai. II. i. 2). Thus in the face of the topic etc. which set forth 
earth, how can paddy etc. be understood (from anna-food)? Even the fact of 
that being the usual meaning (of the word anna) is ruled out by the topic etc. 
And it is to be understood that when the complementary portion of the 
passage mentions that food is produced from earth, it merely indicates 
thereby that it is earth that grew out of water. Accordingly, it is earth that is 
expressed here by the word "food". 



Topic 7: CREATION FROM GOD'S DELIBERATION 



asf5 afete \\\\\\ 

I But ff;—qNsqjni from profound meditation on that T. He tq only 
(created) r-ficcj (as is known) from His indicatory marks. 

13. It is He only, who through profound meditation on each thing (created 
it), as is known from His indicatory marks. 

Doubt : Do these elements, space and the rest, create their own products 
by themselves or is it God, existing as the Self of these elements, who 
produces the effects through His profound meditation? 

Opponent: Faced with this doubt, the conclusion to be arrived at is that the 
elements themselves create. 

Why? 

For in such texts as "From space came air, from air fire" (Tai. II. i. 1) we 
hear of their independence. 

Objection : Is not independent action denied in the case of the insentient 
things? 

Opponent : That is nothing damaging. For we hear of the sentience of the 
elements as well, in such texts as, "That fire deliberated, that water 
deliberated" (Ch. VI. ii. 4). 

Veddmin : As against such a position, it is said: It is God Himself, abiding 
in these elements as their Self, that creates every effect through profound 
meditation. 


How can this be so? 



Because of His indicatory marks. For example, the scriptural statement, 
"He who inhabits the earth but is within it, whom the earth does not know, 
whose body is the earth, and who controls the earth from within (is the 
Internal Ruler, your own immortal Self)" (Br. III. vii. 3), and other texts of 
the same class show that the elements have activity only when they are 
presided over by someone else. So also, starting with, "He decided, let me 
become many, let me be born" (Tai. II. vi. 1), it is stated in, "He became the 
gross and the fine. He created Himself by Himself" (ibid.), that He Himself 
is the Self of all. As for the mention of seeing (i.e. deliberation) by water and 
fire, that is to be understood as owing only to the controlling presence of 
God; for the text, "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23) denies 
the existence of any other seer. Moreover, in the text, "He deliberated, let me 
be many, let me be born" (Ch. VI. ii. 3), it is the witnessing Existence 
(Brahman) that forms the topic. 

Tonic 8: REVERSE ORDER OF DISSOLUTION 



q But arl: as compared with this (order of creation) qR: the order (of 
dissolution) fqc proceeds in the reverse way, w and 3ggVc (this) is logical. 

14. But as compared with this order of creation, the order of dissolution 
proceeds in a reverse way. This is logical too. 

Doubt : The order of creation of the elements has been considered. After 
that the order of dissolution is being considered now, as to whether the 
dissolution comes about without any order, or it follows the order of 
creation, or it occurs in the reverse way. In the Upani$ads we hear of all the 
three-the creation, continuance, and dissolution of the elements—as 
dependent on Brahman, as in, "That from which these elements emerge, that 
by which they are sustained after being born, and that towards which they 
proceed and into which they merge" (Tai. III. i. 1). 



Opponent: Now then, with regard to this, the conclusion is that there is no 
set order, as no specification is made; or if anyone should search for an order 
after hearing of a sequence stated in the Upanipds with regard to creation, 
then dissolution too may have the same sequence. This is what it comes to. 

Veddntin : Hence we say: As compared with this order of creation, 
dissolution ought to have a reverse order. For the common experience is that 
the order in which a man ascends a ssaircase, is reversed when he comes 
down. Besides, it is seen that pots, plates, etc., which originate from earth, 
are reduced to earth again when they disintegrate; and ice, hail, etc. formed 
from water return to water. Hence also this is logical that earth which 
originates from water, should at the end of its period of continuance as earth, 
return to water; and water which is bom out of fire, should merge in fire. It is 
also to be understood that the whole creation enters thus in this order 
successively into the finer and finer causes, and ultimately merges into 
Brahman which is the supreme cause and the acme of fineness. For it is not 
proper that a product should merge into the cause of its cause by skipping 
over its own cause. In the various places in the Smrti also, dissolution is 
shown as occurring in the order opposite to that in which creation occurs, as 
for instance in such texts as, "The end of the world comes about thus, 0 
divine saint: Earth, the basis of this world, is dissolved in water; water 
dissolves in fire; fire gets absorbed in air; (air dissolves in space, and space 
in the Unmanifested)"(Mbh. )II.339. 29). The order of creation is mentioned 
in connection with dissolution. Moreover, that order is not expected in the 
case of dissolution, it being irrelevant there; because so long as the effect 
persists, the cause cannot logically dissolve, for when the cause gets 
dissolved, the effect cannot continue; but it is quite logical that the cause can 
persist even after the dissolution of the effect; for this is what is observed in 
the case of clay etc. 

Topic 9: THE ORIGIN OF MIND AND INTELLECT 




f-~ Intellect and mind (must find a place somewhere) w;~m in between in 
sequence cffcq-fe j Tct owing to indicatory marks of their existence Wft4q if 
such be the view, r not so eO" for that creates no difference. 

15. If it he contended that the intellect and mind must find accommodation 
in some order in some intermediate stage, because indicatory marks of their 
existence are in evidence, then not so, because their presence creates no 
difference (i.e. does not disturb the order of creation or dissolution). 

Opponent: It has been stated that the creation and dissolution occur in the 
direct and reverse orders respectively. It has also been stated that creation 
starts from the Self and dissolution ends in the Self. Now in the Smrtis and 
Vedas the existence of mind together with the senses, as also of the intellect, 
is a wellknown fact, as is evident from such indicatory marks in the texts as, 
"Know the intellect to be the charioteer, and the mind to be the rein. They 
say that the senses are the horses" (Ka. 1. iii. 3). Their creation and 
dissolution in an orderly way must also be placed within some intermediate 
stage, for all things are claimed to have originated from Brahman. Moreover, 
in the Upani$ad of the Atharva Veda, under the topic dealing with creation, 
the senses are enumerated in between the Self and the elements in, "From 
this (Self) are bom the vital force, mind, all the senses, space, air, fire, and 
the earth that supports all" (Mu. II. i. 3). As a result, the order of creation and 
dissolution of the elements, stated earlier, will be disturbed. 

Vedintin : No . for no difference or disturbance is involved , because if the 
senses have come out of the elements , then their creation and dissolution 
follow as a matter of course from the creation and dissolution of the 

elements , and so no other order need be searched for these. And si g ns are in 
evidence to show that the senses are formed of the elements . as for instance 
in. "0 amiable one , the mind is formed of food , the vital force is formed of 
water , and speech is formed of lire" ( Ch. VI. v. 4 ). and so on. The separate 
mention of the elements and senses at some places is to be construed 
accordin g to the maxim of the Brahmaua and mendicant. 15 Again, even if 
the senses are not the products of the elements, still the order of creation of 
the elements is not disturbed by the senses, for the position then can be 
either that the senses originate first and the elements later , or that the 




























elements come out first and the senses later. What is done in the Upani$ad of 
the Atharva Veda is a mere enumeration of the senses and elements one b y 

one , but no order of creation is mentioned. 16 Similarly at another place the 
order of the ori g in of the senses is mentioned separately from ( i.e. 
independently of ) that of the elements: "In the be g innin g, all this (universe ) 
was but Pra ia pati (Hirai lvag arbha ) . He meditated on Himself. He created the 
mind. Then the mind alone existed ( and not all this ) . He thou g ht of Himself. 
He created the or g an of speech." 17 Hence the order of the creation of 
elements is not disturbed thereby. 

Topic 10: BIRTH AND DEATH 





$ But ffq-aMU: the mention of these (birth and death) prl must be -adz- 
aggM: in relation to the moving and the motionless; (with regard to the soul 
it is) 1: used in a secondary sense, ffkj-Wq-Mfkm7 being applicable when 
that (body) exists. 

16. The mention of birth and death must be in the primary sense in 
relation to the moving and the motionless; in relation to the soul it must be in 
a secondary sense, the application (of such words) being possible when a 
body is present. 

Somebody may have the misconception that even the individual soul has 
origination and dissolution, since there are such references in the human 
world as, "Devadatta is born, Devadatta is dead", and because purificatory 
rites like those following on birth are enjoined. 

Vedi ntin : We remove that misconception. In order that the scriptural 
mention of the association of the individual person with the results of his 
work may stand justified, the individual soul can have no origin or 
dissolution. Were the individual soul destroyed along with the body, the 
injunctions and prohibitions, meant for the acquisition of desirable results 
and avoidance of undesirable results in another body, would become useless. 


































The Upani$ad also declares, "It is this body that dies when it is left by the 
soul, but the soul does not die" (Ch. VI. xi. 3). 

Opponent: Did we not point out that the terms birth and death are used 
about the soul in common talk? 

Veddntin : True it was pointed out, but this reference to the birth and death 
of the soul is only in a secondary sense. 

Opponent: In relation to what, again, are the terms birth and death used in 
the primary sense, in contrast with which this can be secondary? 

Veddntin : The reply is that "the primary use of the two words is 
concerned with both the moving and the stationary "the words birth and death 
have reference to the bodies of the moving and motionless entities. The 
entities-both moving and non-moving are born and they die. So while the 
words birth and death have those in view in the primary senses, they are 
used figuratively with regard to the individual souls inhabiting them, for "the 
application of the terms birth and death is contingent on the presence of the 
bodies" (which are the limiting adjuncts of the souls). The words birth and 
death are used when there are manifestation and disappearance of the body, 
but not otherwise. For no one notices the soul to be bom or to be dead unless 
it be in association with the body. The text, "That man (individual soul), 
when he is bom or attains a body, is connected with evils (i.e. the body and 
organs); and when he dies or leaves the body, (he discards these evils)" (Bt. 
IV. iii. 8), shows that the words birth and death are used from the point of 
view of the association with or dissociation from the body. And the rule 
pertaining to the performance of rites connected with birth etc. is also to be 
understood as related to the emergence of the body, for there can be no 
emergence of the soul. In the next aphorism will be discussed whether or not 
the soul originates like space etc. from the supreme Self. But in the present 
aphorism it is explained that the terms origin and dissolu tion (birth and 
death) in the (popular) gross sense apply to the body, but they do not apply 
to the individual soul. 


Topic 11: ORIGIN OF THE SOUL 




wrM The soul q is not (bom) ara : because this is not heard of (in the 
Upani$ads); fiqCqllg because of etemality r: as known from them; w and. 


17. The individual soul has no origin; because the Upanicads do not 
mention this, because its etemality is known from them, and (because of 
other reasons). 


Doubt : That the soul, called jiva (living one), presiding over this cage of 
the body and senses, and becoming associated with the fruits of work, does 
exist is without doubt. But a doubt arises, from the conflict among the Vedic 
texts, as to whether the soul originates from Brahman like space and the rest, 
or it does not originate like Brahman Itself. For in some texts the origin of 
the living beings from the supreme Brahman is spoken of with the help of 
the illustrations like sparks (flying from fire), whereas in some texts it is 
declared that without undergoing any modification Brahman enters the body 
to assume the state of a living being; but no origination is affirmed. 

Opponent : As to that, the conclusion arrived at is that the soul does 
originate. 

Why so? 

So as not to override the (scriptural) declaration. The assertion that 
"everything becomes known when one is known" will remain unaffected if 
all things (including the soul) originate from Brahman, whereas this 
assertion will be adversely affected if the individual soul be an independent 
entity. And it cannot be understood that the unmodified supreme Self Itself is 
the individual soul, for their characteristics differ. The supreme Self has such 
attributes as being free from sin etc., whereas the individual soul is the 
opposite of that. And that the latter is an effect (of Brahman) becomes 
established from the fact of its delimitation. All that is delimited , countin g 




from space downward , is a product. Besides , the ori g ination of everythin g 
countin g from space is already known. Since the individual soul undertakes 
pious and impious works , since it is sub j ect to ha p piness and sorrow , and 
since it is separate in each bod y, therefore it too must have ori g inated in the 
course of the emer g ence of this entire creation. Moreover , in the passa ge. 
"As from a tire tin y s parks fly in all directions , so from this Self emanate all 
org ans" (Br. II. i. 20 ). the scripture first g ives instruction about the creation 
of the or g ans etc. , constitutin g the set of ob j ects to be experienced , and then 
imparts instruction about the separate creation of the experiencin g souls in 
the passa ge, "all these souls emanate" 18 tBr. II. i. 20). The origin and 
dissolution of the individual souls are also spoken of in, "As from a blazing 
fire emanate, a thousand sparks of the same nature as fire, similarly from the 
Immutable, 0 amiable one, are born different classes of creatures, and they 
merge there itself" (Mu. II. i. 1). From the phrase "of the same nature" it 
follows that the individual souls are similar to the supreme Self, for they 
have the gift of consciousness. An omission in mentioning (something) 
somewhere cannot override the mention (of it) elsewhere. For everything 
mentioned (afresh) in other texts has to be taken as implied everywhere if it 
is not contradictory and if it supplies an additional idea. Under the 
circumstances, the texts about the entry (of God into the bodies and creation) 
are also to be explained as meaning such entry by assuming a modified state, 
as it is done in the case of the text, "He made Himself by Himself" (Tai. II. 
vii. 1). Therefore the individual soul has an origin. 

Veddntin : To this we say, the soul, that is to say, "an individual living 
being", "has no origin". 

Why? 

"Because the Upani$ads do not mention this". In most of the places 
dealing with creation, the individual soul is not mentioned. 

Opponent : Did we not say that an absence of mention somewhere cannot 
overrule the mention made elsewhere? 

Veddntin : True, you said so. But we say that the very origin is impossible 
for it. 


















































Why? 


"Because its etemality is known from them (i.e. the texts), and (because of 
other reasons)". By the word "and" is to be understood, "and because its 
birthlessness etc. (follow from those texts)". For its eternality is understood 
from the Vedic texts, and so also it is understood that it is birthless and 
changeless, that it is the unchanging Brahman Itself existing as the Self of 
the individual living being, and that the soul is one with Brahman. Any 
origination for a soul of this kind can never be logically possible. 

Opponent: Which are those Vedic texts? 

Vedantin : "The individual being does not die" (Ch. VI. xi. 3), "That 
birthless Self is undecaying, immortal, undying, fearless, and Brahman 
(infinite)" (Br. IV. iv. 25), "The Intelligent one is not born and does not die. 
This ancient one is birthless, eternal, unchanging" (Ka. I. ii. 18), "Having 
created that, He entered into that" (Tai. II. vi. 1), "Let me manifest name and 
form by Myself entering as the individual soul" (Ch. VI. iii. 2), "This Self 
has entered into (i.e. permeates) those bodies up to the tips of the nails" (Br. 
I. iv. 7), "Thou art That" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), "1 am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), 
"This Self, the perceiver of everything, is Brahman" (Br. II. v. 19). These and 
such other texts which stand there to declare etemality etc. override the 
possibility of the origin of the individual soul. 

Opponent : Was it not said that anything that is delimited is subject to 
change, and anything having change has origination? 

Veddntin : As to that, this is the answer: The delimitation does not belong 
to it naturally, for the Vedic text says, "The one deity remains hidden in all 
creatures; He is all-pervasive and the inmost Self of all creatures" (Sv. VI. 
11). Just as space seems to be divided owing to the presence of pots etc., so 
also the appearance of division occurs in Brahman owing to the presence of 
limiting adjuncts like the intellect etc. To this effect are the texts: "The Self 
is indeed Brahman, as well as identified with the intellect , the mans (mind ). 
and the vital force , with the eves and ears" ( Br. IV. iv. 5 ). etc. , which show 
that the individual soul , thou g h always the same and one with Brahman 
Itself that has no chan g e and is one without a second , still a p pears to be 



















identified with diverse thin g s like the intellect etc. The identity with the 
intellect etc, is to be understood to consist in a p pearin g as thou g h coloured 
b y these ad j uncts owin g to a non-manifestation of the pure nature of the Self . 
as it occurs for instance in such cases as . "That voluptuous ro g ue is all 
sex".19 As for the Vedic mention of the birth of the individual soul at some 
rare places, that too is to be interpreted, for this very reason, as caused by its 
contact with the limiting adjuncts. It originates with the origin of the limiting 
adjuncts and dies with their death. This is shown in, "The Self is pure 
intelligence alone; it comes out (as a separate entity) from these elements 
(forming the body) and is destroyed with them. After this death, it has no 
more (particular) consciousness" (Br. IV. v. 13). Similarly this very fact, viz 
the destruction of the limiting adjunct alone and not of the Self, is proved in 
this very context by raising the question, "Just here you have led me into the 
midst of a confusion, sir; I do not at all comprehend this" (that after death 
the soul has no consciousness), and then offering the answer to this thus, 
"Certainly I am not saying anything confusing, my dear. This Self is indeed 
immutable and indestructible. But it becomes dissociated from objects" (Br. 
IV. v. 14). And thus there is no overriding of the declaration, inasmuch as it 
is admitted that the changeless Brahman Itself appears as the individual soul. 
The difference in the characteristics of the two is also created by the 
presence of limiting adjuncts, for in the passage, "Please instruct me further 
about liberation" etc. (Br. IV. iii. 14-16, 33), where the very soul, which 
remains identified with the intellect and forms the topic of the discussion, is 
shown to be one with the supreme Self through a process of denial of all 
worldly attributes. Accordingly, the soul never has any origin or dissolution. 


Tonic 12: ETERNALLY CONSCIOUS SOUL 



















Tr: (The soul is an eternal) cognizer am: qq for this very reason. 

18. The soul is eternally a cognizer for this very reason (of being free 
from origin and dissolution). 

Doubt : Schools of thought are not agreed as to whether the soul is 
naturally insentient but becomes endowed with an adventitious sentience as 
is believed by the followers of Kamada, or it is eternally conscious by nature 
as the Salhkhyas believe; therefore a doubt arises. What is the conclusion to 
be arrived at then? 

Opponent : The conclusion is that the consciousness of the soul is 
adventitious, arising from the conjunction of the soul and the mind, like 
redness etc. resulting from the contact of fire and a pot etc. For if the 
consciousness be eternal, it should be in evidence even in the cases of those 
who are asleep, have fainted, or are possessed by supernatural beings. But 
when questioned (afterwards), they say, "We were not conscious of 
anything"; and they are seen to have consciousness when brought back to 
normalcy. Thus since the soul is possessed of impermanent (intermittent) 
consciousness, its consciousness is adventitious. 

Vedantin : This being the position, it is being refuted: "This soul is a 
cognizer", it is endowed with eternal consciousness, exactly for the reason 
already adduced, viz that it has no origin, but that it is only the supreme 
Brahman Itself, which while remaining immutable, appears to exist as an 
individual soul owing to association with limiting adjuncts. That the 



supreme Brahman is eternal consciousness by Its very nature is mentioned in 
such Vedic texts as, "Knowledge, Bliss, Brahman" (Br. III. ix. 28.7), 
"Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite" (Tai. II. i. 1), "Without interior or 
exterior, entire, and pure Intelligence alone" (Br. IV. v. 13), etc. Now if the 
individual soul is but the supreme Brahman Itself, then it can be understood 
that like fire possessing heat and light, the soul is also possessed of eternal 
consciousness by its very nature. Besides , in the course of the topic dealin g 
with the soul identified with the intellect occur such texts as the followin g: 

"Himself awake , watches those ( org ans of speech etc. ) that are asleep" (Br. 
IV. iii. 11 ). "In this (dream ) state , the man himself becomes his own li ght 
t i.e. self-efful g ent V t Br. IV. iii. 9 . 14 ). "for the knower's function of knowin g 
can never be lost" ( Br. IV. iii. 30 ). and so on. And from the fact that there is a 
continuity of knowled g e throu g h the medium of all the sense-or g ans , such 
as. "1 know this . 1 know this" , it can be concluded on the authority of the 
text . "And he who knows . H smell this 1 , is the Self" ( Ch. VIII. xii. 4 ). that the 
individual soul has that nature tof eternal consciousness ) .20 

Opponent: If the soul be eternal consciousness by its very nature, then the 
senses of smell etc. become superfluous. 

Veddntin : No, for the senses are meant for perceiving the particular 
objects of smell etc. And this is shown by saying, "The sense of smell is 
meant for perceiving smell" (Ch. VIII. xii. 4) etc. As for the objection that 
the people in sleep etc. have no awareness, that is answered by the Upanisad 
itself when it says with regard to the sleeping man, "That (the soul) does not 
see in that state is because, although seeing then, it does not see; for the 
vision of the witness can never be lost, because it is immortal. But (then) no 
second thing exists there separate from it which it can see" (Br. IV. iii. 23), 
etc. This is what is meant: This appearance of absence of awareness is owing 
to the absence of objects of knowledge, but not owing to the absence of 
consciousness. It is like the non-manifestation of light, spread over space, 
owing to the absence of things on which it can be reflected, but not owing to 
its own absence. And the arguments of the Vaisesikas and others are falsified 
because of their opposition to Vedic texts. Hence we confirm that the soul is 
eternal consciousness by its very nature. 









































Topic 13: Soul's DIMENSIONS 



(There is mention) 3cq'firf-tl-dTli of departure (from) (or leaving the 
body), going, returning. 

19. (The individual soul must be atomic in dimension owing to the 
mention in the Vedas) of its departure from the body, going (to the next 
world by following a course), and coming back (from there). 

Doubt : Now is being considered the dimensions of the individual soul- 
whether it is atomic, or of an intermediate size, or vast (infinite). 

Objection : Has it not been said that the soul has no origin and that it is 
eternal consciousness? From this it follows that the individual soul is none 
other than the supreme Self; and it is stated in the scripture that the supreme 
Self is infinite. So how can any question be broached about the dimensions 
of the soul?- 

Doubt : This is truly so. But the Vedic texts about the soul's leaving (the 
body), its movement to the other world, and return to this world lead to a 
limitation in dimensions. Again, the Vedic texts sometimes speak of its 
atomic size in clear words. So this discussion has to be started for resolving 
these conflicts. 

Opponent: That being the position, the conclusion to be derived from the 
Vedic texts about leaving the body, going to, and coming from the other 
world is that the individual soul is limited and atomic in size. Of these the 
text about departure is: "When he departs from this body, he departs together 
with all these" (senses etc.) (Kau. III. 3); about going elsewhere: "Those 
people whoever depart from this world, go to the moon indeed" (Kau. I. 2); 
and about coming: "From that world they return to this world for (fresh) 



work" (Bt. IV. iv. 6). From the Vedic mention of their death, going (i.e. 
following a course), and returning, it is understood that the individual soul is 
limited; for no movement can be imagined for one that is infinite. And 
limitation being accepted, the soul must be atomic, for its correspondence to 
the size of the body (i.e. medium size) was discarded in the course of 
examining the Jaina view. 



' And tq-alqi (the relation) with one's own soul 3~: of the latter two. 

20. (The soul's atomicity stands confirmed) owing to the relation of one's 
own soul with the latter two facts (viz. following of a course and coming 
back). 

As for leaving (or giving up), it may sometimes be imagined as occurring 
to the unmoving soul through a cessation of its mastery over the body owing 
to exhaustion of results of work, just like the cessation of one's ownership 
over a village. But the latter two-viz going elsewhere and coming back- 
cannot happen to a soul that does not move; and yet their relation is with the 
soul itself; for the root "gam (to go)" indicates an action inhering in the 
agent. Now, since the soul is not (admitted to be) of medium dimension, its 
going (by following a course), and coming can be possible only if it he 
atomic in size. And going and coming being granted, it becomes obvious 
that (leaving the body or) death also is a moving away from the body, 
because going and coming are not possible for a soul that has not moved out 
of the body. Again, this is so, because particular parts of the body are 
mentioned as the places of departure, as in, "The soul departs through the 
eye, or from the head or from other parts of the body" (Br. IV. iv. 2). There 
are also movements of the soul even inside the body, as stated in, 
"completely withdrawing these particles of light, he comes to the heart" (Br. 



IV. iv. 1), "And taking the shining organs with him, he comes again to the 
waking state" (Br. IV. iii. 11). Hence also is proved its atomicity. 



n Not aiai: atomic :ardq-a since its size is heard of as not being so 'ic'q if 
this be the objection, q not so, >1—aff,ifj since the context relates to the 
other. 

21. If it be objected that the soul is not atomic because its size is heard of 
as not being so, we reply, no, since that context relates to the other (i.e. the 
supreme Self). 

Objection : Somebody may, however, object that the soul is not atomic. 

Why? 

Because it is heard of in the Vedas as not being so, that is to say, because 
its size is heard of to be the opposite of that of the atom. For the texts like 
the following will be contradicted if the soul be atomic: "That Self is verily 
great and birthless that remains identified with the intellect and in the midst 
of the organs" (Br. IV. iv. 22), "And it is all-pervasive like space and 
eternal", "Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinite" (Tai. II. i. 1). 

Opponent: That creates no difficulty. 

How? 

Because that topic is about the other (supreme Self). For this other kind of 
dimension is mentioned only in a context dealing with the supreme Self, 
inasmuch as it is the supreme Self that is (most often) presented in the 
Upani$ads as the chief reality to be known. And from such texts as, "The 
Self is spotless, beyond space" (Br. IV. iv. 20), it is known that the supreme 
Self is the special subject-matter of those texts. 



Objection : In the passage, "The Self that remains identified with the 
intellect and in the midst of the organs" (Br. IV. iv. 22) etc., it is the 
embodied soul itself that is indicated as possessed of vast dimension (in the 
sentence, "That Self is great and birthless" (Bt. IV. iv. 22). 

Opponent : But this mention is to be understood as made from the 
scriptural point of view as in the case Vamadeva (B. S. I. i. 30). Accordingly, 
the atomic size of the soul is not contradicted, since the mention of other 
dimension in the Vedas relates to the conscious (supreme) Self. 

HWhlMW! % IFRII 

fq-qW-mw" owing to direct (Upani$adic use of the) word and (mention 
of) infinitesimality as well. 

22. And the individual soul is atomic because of the direct Upaniiadic use 
of the word as well as mention of infinitesimality. 

The soul is atomic for this further reason that the UpaniSad directly uses a 
word im plying atomicity; "The atomic Self into which the vital force has 
entered in five wavs has to be comprehended throu g h the intellect'^ 1 (Mu. 
III. i. 9). From the association with the vital force it is understood that it is 
the individual soul that is here referred to as atomic. Similarly the 
infinitesimally small dimension of the individual soul mentioned in, "That 
soul is to be known as a hundredth part of the hundredth part of the tip of a 
hair" (Sv. V. 9), makes us understand that it is atomic in nature. And there is 
another illustration of infinitesimality in, "That inferior (individual) soul is 
seen to be finer than the tip of the iron piece at the head of a goading stick" 
(Sv.V. 8). 

Objection : If the soul be atomic (and consequently located in one place), 
will this not involve a contradiction for it to have perceptions all over the 













body while remaining at one place? It is a matter of common experience that 
people remaining immersed in the Ganga or some lake feel a coolness in 
every part of the body, while in summer they feel a heat all over the body. 

Hence the answer is given (by the opponent): 



atf) : There is no contradiction g: as in the case of sandalwood paste. 

23. (The soul's atomicity and its feeling over the whole body involve) no 
contradiction, just as in the case (of a drop) of sandal paste. 

Just as a drop of yellow sandal paste, coming in contact with a particular 
part of the body, produces a delightful sensation all over the body, similarly 
the soul, though located at one part of the body, will have perception all over 
the body. And a perception (or feeling) all over the body is not opposed to 
the soul's nature, since it is in contact with the organ of touch for the contact 
of the soul with the organ of touch exists all over the skin, and the skin 
spreads over the whole body. 

Ifyli 

ap~fc-~~Ta~ Owing to peculiarity of position (of sandal paste) >'er 4q if 
such be the objection, then not so, 3lgqJIq for (peculiar position is) admitted 
(for soul also) ff because Ifk (it is) in the heart. 



24. If it be objected that (the argument holds good in the case of sandal 
paste) owing to its peculiarity of position, (but that is not evident in the case 



of the soul), then we say, no, (a peculiar location) for the soul is admitted in 
the Upani,cads, for it exists in the heart. 

Objection : Someone may make the rejoinder that the statement, "No 
contradiction is involved as in the case of sandal paste", is illogical, for the 
illustration and the thing illustrated are not similar. The illustration of the 
sandal paste will apply only if it can be proved that the soul exists merely in 
a part of the body; but the peculiarity of the location, viz existence in one 
part of the body, in the case of the sandal paste, as well as its imparting 
delight to the whole body, is a matter of direct perception; while in the case 
of the soul what is perceived is only its awareness over the whole body, but 
not its particular location. If it be said (by the opponent) that this is inferable, 
then (we say that) an inference is inadmissible here, for the following doubts 
cannot be removed (even by such an inference): Does the awareness 
pertaining to the whole body arise because the soul spreads over the whole 
body like the sense of touch, or because it is all-pervasive like space, or 
because it is atomic in size and exists at one place only? 

Opponent: To this we say, this creates no difficulty. 

Why? 

Because that is the admitted fact; for it is admitted even in the case of the 
soul that, like a drop of sandal paste, it exists at a particular part of the body; 
it has a peculiarity of location. 

How? 

The answer is: Because this soul is mentioned in the Upanipds as existing 
in the heart, as is evident from such instructions as, "For this Self is (i.e. 
resides) in the heart" (Pr. III. 6), "That Self, that is such, is in the heart" (Ch. 
VIII. iii. 3), "Which is the Self? This infinite entity (Puruga) that remains 
identified with the intellect and is in the midst of the organs, the (self- 
effulgent) light within the heart" (Br. IV. iii. 7). Hence from the absence of 
any disparity between the illustration and the thing illustrated it is but logical 
to conclude that no contradiction is involved, as in the case of a drop of 
sandal paste. 




aR Or pr through the quality (of sentience) vAM as is seen in the world. 

25. Or on the analogy of what is seen in the world, (the soul may pervade 
the whole body) through its attribute (of sentience). 

Or because the quality of sentience (or intelligence) of the soul is 
pervasive, therefore, though the soul is atomic, still there is no incongruity if 
its action (of perception) spreads over the whole body. This is just like what 
is observed in common life; for instance the light of a gem or a lamp, 
occupying only a corner of an inner apartment, spreads over the whole 
apartment and does its work everywhere in the apartment. 

It might be objected that since the sandal paste consists of parts, it can 
produce delight in the whole body by scattering its minute particles; but the 
atomic soul has no particles through which it can spread over the entire 
body. Having this misconception in view, the aphorism says, "through the 
quality of sentience". 

Objection : How again can an attribute exist elsewhere than in the 
substance (in which it inheres), for the whiteness of a cloth is not seen to 
exist somewhere other than the cloth? 

Opponent: It can be possible like the light of a lamp. 

Objection : No, for that too is considered to be a substance, for a luminous 
substance in a state of compactness (of its particles) is the lamp, and that 
very luminous substance in a state of diffusion is light. 


Opponent: Hence the reply is being given: 




eqf~aF: Separate existence lqq like smell. 

26. (The quality of sentience can have) separate existence like smell. 

As smell, for instance, which is a quality, can have existence separately 
from the odorous substance, since the smell is perceived even when the 
odorous things like flower etc. are nowhere in view, similarly though the 
soul is atomic, its quality of sentience can remain detached from it. Hence 
this ground for inference that a quality cannot be detached from its 
substance, it being a quality like colour (or form) etc., has no invariable 
application, since smell, which is a quality, is seen to exist in isolation from 
its substance. 

Objection : Even in the case of smell, the fact is that it gets detached from 
its substance together with a part of it (viz particles of matter). 

Opponent : No, for the main source from which this detachment will 
occur would in that case become attenuated; but it is seen to continue 
undiminished from its previous state; for else it would become diminished in 
weight (mass) etc. as compared with its earlier state. 

Objection : It may be that the detached particles on which smell rests are 
so few in number (and minute in size) that their detachment goes undetected. 
The minute atoms of smell spread all around and give rise to the perception 
of smell by entering into the nostrils. 

Opponent : No, for the atoms are supersensuous (and so the nose cannot 
perceive the atoms of smell), at the same time that a distinct strong fragrance 
is felt in the case of such flowers as Nagake'ara. The experience in common 



life is not of the form, "A substance with aroma has been smelt", but the 
common people experience thus: "It is the aroma itself that has been smelt". 

Objection : Since it is not a matter of experience that form (or colour) etc. 
can exist apart from their substances, it is also improper to think that smell 
can exist separately from its substance. 

Opponent : No, for this being a matter of experience, inference can have 
no scope here. Accordingly, things are to be accepted by the seekers of truth, 
just as they are actually perceived, for no such rule can be (inferentially) 
arrived at, that because the quality of taste is felt by the tongue, therefore all 
the qualities starting from colour should be perceived by the tongue itself. 



And (the Upanisad) 4jrr shows um this. 

27. And the Upanisad also shows this. 

After stating that the soul resides in the heart and that it has the size of an 
atom the Upani~ad shows in the text, "up to the tip of the hair, up to the tip 
of the nail" (Ch. VIII. viii. 1, Br. 1. iv. 7, Kau. IV. 20), that through the 
quality of sentience, that very soul pervades the whole body. 




34h Because taught qqw separately. 

28. (The soul and its intelligence are separate), since they are taught 
separately (in the Upani,cads). 

From the text, "presiding over the body with the help of intelligence" 
(Kau. III. 6), where the soul and intelligence are spoken of separately as 
having the relationship of the agent and the instrument (respectively), it is 
understood that the soul pervades the body through its quality of 
intelligence. And in the text, "it absorbs at the time (of sleep) the power of 
perception of the organs through its own consciousness" (Br. II. i. 17), there 
occurs an instruction about consciousness existing separately from the agent, 
the embodied soul; and this instruction only confirms this very idea. Hence 
the soul is atomic. 


Veddntin : This being the position, we say: 



I But I-aqq: such appellation (occurs) owing r-.- to the dominance of the 
modes of that (intellect), 51TSIqq as in the case of the supreme Self. 


29. But the soul comes to have such appellations because of the 
dominance of the modes of that intellect; this is just as in the case of the 



supreme Self. 

The word "but" overrules the opposing point of view. It is not a fact that 
the soul is atomic. It has been said that the soul is none other than the 
supreme Brahman, for there is no mention of its origin in the Vedas, while 
the entry of the supreme Brahman is mentioned there and the identity of the 
two is taught. Now if the individual soul be none other than the supreme 
Brahman, then the soul should have the same magnitude as the supreme 
Brahman; and as it is mentioned in the scripture that the supreme Brahman is 
omnipresent, so the soul also must be omnipresent. Thus only will those 
statements stand vindicated that are made in such texts of the Vedas and 
Smrtis about the omnipresence of the soul as: "That Self is great and 
birthless which remains identified with the intellect and in the midst of the 
organs" (Br. IV. iv. 22). Moreover, it does not stand to reason that an atomic 
soul should have a feeling of pain all over the body. 

Opponent: This can be so owing to its contact with the organ of touch. 

Vedantin : No, for in that case, even when a thorn pricks the skin, one 
should feel the pain all over the body, since the contact between the thorn 
and the skin is a contact with the skin as a whole, which spreads over the 
whole body. But as a matter of fact, a man pricked by a thorn under the foot 
feels the pain in the sole of the foot only. It is not also possible for any 
quality of the atom to spread out (beyond the substratum), since the quality 
exists where its substance is. Unless the quality subsists in its own 
substance, it will cease to be a quality at all. And it was explained how the 
light of a lamp is but a separated substance (and not a mere quality). Smell 
also, which is understood to be a quality, can move out only when carried on 
its substance (particles), for else it may as well cease to be a quality. Thus it 
has been said by the adored Dvaipayana, "After perceiving smell in water, 
should some inexperienced people say that it belongs to water, still one 
should know that smell belongs to earth, though it floats on water and air". If 
the intelligence of the soul spreads over the entire body, then the soul cannot 
be atomic; (for) intelligence must be the soul's very nature like heat and light 
of fire. No such distinction as between a quality and its substance can exist 
here. And the view was refuted that the soul is of the size of the body. As a 



last resort, the soul is omnipresent. To explain how in that case there can be 
any mention of atomicity etc., the aphorism says, "But the soul comes to 
have such appellations because of the dominance of the modes of that 
intellect". Desire, dislike, happiness, sorrow, etc. are the modes of that 
intellect. These modes constitute the essence or chief factors in the 
attainment of the state of transmigratoriness by the soul. For unless it be 
through the modes of the intellect there can be no transmigratory state for 
the absolute Self. Though the Self is not an agent and experiencer, and 
though It has no transmigratoriness and is ever free, still It comes to have the 
states of being an agent and an experiencer, this being caused by the 
superimposition of the modes of the intellect acting as a limiting adjunct. 
Hence owing to the predominance of the modes of that intellect, the soul is 
said to have a dimension corresponding to that of the intellect. And it is said 
that it departs from the body and so on, in accordance as the intellect does 
so; but the soul does not do so naturally. Thus it is that after speaking of the 
atomicity of the soul, the Upani$ad speaks of infinitude about that very soul 
in, "The soul is to be known as a hundredth part of a hundredth part of a 
hair's end, into which it can be fancied to be divided. And that soul a g ain is 
infinite" ( Sv. V. 9 ) . This can be reasonably reconciled only if the atomic size 
of the individual soul be owin g to limitin g ad j uncts , but infinitude be its 
innate nature ; for both these cannot be thou g ht of to be true in the primar y 
sense. Nor can it be understood that is has infinitude in a fi g urative sense . 
since it is the identity of the individual soul with Brahman that is sou g ht to 
be tau g ht in all the Upani-ads. So also in another declaration of 
infinitesimalit v. "The soul a p pears to be inferior and of the size of the tip of a 
g oadin g stick , owin g to the a p pearance of the modes of the intellect as its 
own attributes" (9v. V. 8 ). the soul .is declared to have the dimension of the 
ti p of a g oadin g stick owin g to its contact with the attributes of the intellect . 
but not naturally in itself. Even in the text . "This atomic ( subtle ) Self is to be 
realized throu g h the intellect" ( Mu. Ill, i. 9 ). it is not tau g ht that the 
individual soul is atomic in dimension , for it is the supreme Self that has 
been introduced in that context as somethin g to he known throu g h the 
favourableness t i.e. purit vl of the intellect . It bein g bevond the g rasp of the 
e ye etc .22 Moreover, atomicity in the literal sense is inadmissible even for 
the individual soul. Hence it is to be understood that the mention of 
atomicity is intended to convey the idea that the Self is inscrutable or that 
































































this is done from the point of view of the limiting adjunct. Similarly in such 
texts as, "Presiding over the body through intelligence" (Kau. III. 6), where a 
separation (between soul and intellect) is spoken of, the sentence is to be 
construed to mean that the soul presides over the body through the intellect 
alone which is its limiting adjunct. The mere statement (of difference) here 
is like talking of the body of a stone pestle (where the "body" and the "stone" 
are non-different); for it has been already stated that there is no such division 
here as between quality and substance. As for the statement that the heart is 
the residence of the soul, that too is made from the standpoint of the 
intellect, for the intellect resides in the heart. So also in the following texts it 
is shown that such actions as departure from the body are dependent upon 
limiting adjuncts: "He deliberated, 'As a result of whose departure shall I 
rise up (from the body)? And as a result of whose continuance shall I remain 
established?' He created Prana" (i.e. energy that is non-different from 
intelligence) (Pr. VI. 3-4). And from the absence of its death, it is gathered 
that the going to and coming back from the other world are also 
(intrinsically) absent in the soul. For unless one has got detached from the 
body, there can be no following a course or returning. Thus since in the case 
of the individual soul, there is a predominance of the attributes of its 
adjuncts, it has the appellations of atomicity etc., "as in the case of Prajna 
(the supreme Self)". Even as in the case of Prajna, who is the supreme Self, 
there is a mention of atomicity etc. in connection with Its meditation as a 
qualified entity, where the attributes of the limiting adjuncts dominate, as for 
instance in, "Minuter than a grain of paddy or barley" (Ch. III. xiv. 3), "He is 
identified with the mind and has the vital force as His body, all (good) smells 
are His, all (good) tastes are His, all (good) desires are His. His resolves are 
true" (Ch. III. xiv. 2), and so on, so also is the case with the individual. 

Opponent : It may be objected thus: If the soul be thought of as attaining 
the worldly state (of transmigration) under the dominance of the modes of 
the intellect, then a cessation of the conjunction between the soul and the 
intellect, which are divergent, must be inevitable. Thus when the intellect 
gets detached, the soul will become undiscernible, and hence there will arise 
the predicament of its becoming non-existent or ceasing to be a 
transmigratory soul. 



Vedantin : So the reply is being given: 


And wzR-wciT-qlNm since (this association of soul and intellect) persists 
as long as the soul continues to be a transmigratory entity q )q: no defect 
arises, ffq-qqmrq for so it is seen (in the scriptures). 

30. And because the contact between the soul and the intellect persists so 
long as the worldly state of the soul continues, there can be no defect, for 
this is what is met with in the scriptures. 

There should be no such defect as mentioned just now. 

Why? 

Because the contact with the intellect endures all through the state of the 
soul's transmigratory existence. The contact of the soul with the intellect 
does not cease so long as the soul continues in its transmigratory state, so 
long as its condition of transmigratoriness is not sublated through complete 
realization. And this individuality and the worldly state of the soul last only 
as long as there is this connection with the intellect serving as a limiting 
adjunct. In reality there is no such thing as an individual soul apart from 
what it appears under the influence of the intellect acting as a conditioning 
factor. For when engaged in ascertaining the purport of the Upani$ads, we 
do not come across any other (second) conscious entity besides God who is 
by nature ever free, about which fact these texts stand as evidence: "There is 
no other witness but Him, no other hearer but Him, no other thinker but 
Him, no other knower but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23), "That thou art" (Ch. VI. 
viii-xvi), "I am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 7), and a hundred others of this kind. 

Opponent: How again is it gathered that the contact with the intellect lasts 
as long as the state of transnugratoriness of the soul persists? 



The (Veddntin's) answer is given in, "For this is what is met with (in the 
scriptures)". Thus the scripture reveals: "This infinite entity (purusa) that 
remains identified with cognition (vijnana) in the midst of the organs, the 
(self-effulgent) light within the heart. Assuming the likeness (of the 
intellect), it moves between the two worlds; it thinks as it were, and shakes 
as it were" (Br. IV. iii, 7) etc. The term "identified with cognition", occurring 
there, means "identified with the intellect"; for elsewhere occurs the text, 
"identified with cognition (i.e. the intellect), identified with the mind, 
identified with the vital force, identified with the eye, identified with the ear" 
(Br. IV. iv. 5), where the one "identified with cognition" is mentioned along 
with the one identified with the mind etc., and the identity with the intellect 
is meant to imply a dominance of the modes of the intellect. It is like saying, 
"Devadatta is all sex" where the idea sought to be implied is that he is 
dominated by a passion for women. And the text, "Assuming the likeness (of 
the intellect), it moves between the two worlds (this and the next)" (Br. IV. 
iii. 7), shows that even while going to another world, there is no dissociation 
from the intellect. Likeness of what? It can be understood that the likeness is 
with the intellect itself, for that is near at hand. And that very fact is pointed 
out in, "It thinks as it were, and shakes as it were" (ibid.), where the idea 
implied is this: "This one does not think by itself, nor does it move; but 
when the intellect thinks, it seems to think, and when the intellect moves, it 
seems to move." Moreover, this connection of the soul with the intellect has 
but false ignorance at its root, and this false ignorance cannot be removed by 
anything other than complete knowledge (of Brahman). Hence this 
connection with such limiting adjuncts as the intellect does not cease so long 
as the identity of the Self with Brahman is not realized. And this is shown in, 
"I have known this great Puru a (infinite entity) who shines like the sun (i.e. 
self-effulgent), and is beyond darkness (i.e. untouched by ignorance). 
Knowing Him alone one goes beyond death. There is no other path to 
proceed along" (Sv. III. 8). 

Opponent: You cannot certainly admit any connection of the soul with the 
intellect during sleep and dissolution, for the Upani$ad says, "0 amiable one, 
he then becomes identified with Existence (Brahman), he becomes absorbed 
in his own Self" (Ch. VI. viii. 1). This also follows from the admission of the 
(final) dissolution of the entire creation. So how can there be the persistence 



of the contact with the intellect as long as the transmigratory state of the soul 
endures? 


Veddntin : The answer is thus: 



I But arfq-,gfj..irir because of becoming manifest atm in the case of this 
which already exists -geq—qi like manhood etc. 

31. Rather because that contact (with the intellect etc.) which remains 
latent (in sleep and dissolution) can become manifest (during waking and 
creation) like manhood etc. (from boyhood etc.). 


We see in the world that manhood etc. though existing all the time in a 
latent state, are not perceived during boyhood etc. and are thus treated as 
though non-existent, but they become manifest in youth etc.; and it is not a 
fact that they evolve out of nothing, for in that case even a eunuch should 
grow those (moustaches etc.). Similarly, too, the contact with the intellect 
etc. remains in a state of latency during sleep and dissolution and emerges 
again during waking and creation. For thus alone it becomes logical. 
Nothing can possibly be bom capriciously, for that would lead to 
unwarranted possibilities (of effects being produced without causes). The 
Upani$ad also shows that this waking from sleep is possible because of the 
existence of ignorance in a seed form (remaining dormant in sleep): "Though 
unified with Existence (Brahman) in sleep, they do not understand, 'We have 
merged in Existence.' They return here as a tiger or a lion" (just as they had 
been here before) (Ch. AT ix. 3) etc. Hence it is proved that the contact with 
the intellect etc. persists as long as the individuality of the soul lasts. 



WH ll^li 



a# Else will arise the possibility of f~-3ge3f.-aqc.q-AEI: constant 
perception or non-perception 4f or w—q"ie'tfgzm: either of the two (powers) 
becoming debarred (or delimited). 

32. Else (if the existence of the internal organ be not admitted) there will 
be the possibility of either constant perception or nonperception or it will 
have to be admitted that either of the powers (of the soul or of the organs) 
becomes (suddenly) debarred (or delimited or lost). 

This internal organ, constituting a conditioning factor for the Self is 
variously spoken of in different places as the mans (faculty of thinking-Br. I. 
v. 3), buddhi (faculty of knowingKa. II. iii. 10), vijnana (cognition or 
egoism-Tai. IE v. 1), citta (feeling or memory-Mu. III. i. 9, Pr. IV. 8). 
Occasionally it is called variously in accordance with its moods-it being 
called the mind when it functions as the doubter, (thinker), etc., the intellect 
when it makes specific ascertainment, and so on. And it must of necessity be 
admitted that an internal organ of this kind does exist, for unless that organ is 
admitted, there will be the contingency of either constant perception or non¬ 
perception. For when the accessories of perception, viz the soul, organs, and 
objects of perception, are in contiguity, perception should occur always. Or 
even if in the presence together of all the factors of perception no result is 
produced, then there will be the possibility of constant non-perception. But 
this does not tally with experience. Or else it will have to be admitted that 
the power of either of the factors (involved in perception)-viz the soul or the 
senseorgan-stands debarred from itself. But it is not possible for the power 
of the soul to be debarred from the soul, since the soul is changeless. Nor 
can the power of any sense-organ be debarred from the organ, for an organ 
that has its power intact in the earlier and succeeding moments, cannot have 
it denied suddenly (in the middle). Accordingly the mind must be the entity, 
through the alertness of which perception occurs, and through the want of 
alertness of which it does not occur. In support of this is the Vedic text, "I 
was absent-minded, I did not see it; I was absent-minded, I did not hear it" 
(Br. I. v. 3), and "It is through the mind that one sees and hears" (ibid.). The 
Upanisadic text also shows that desire etc. arc its modes, "Desire, resolve, 
doubt, faith, want of faith, steadiness, unsteadiness, shame, intelligence, and 
fear-all these are but the mind" (ibid.). Hence the aphorism stands justified 



that "The soul comes to have such appellations because of the dominance of 
the attributes of that intellect" (II. iii. 29). 


Topic 14: SouL As AGENT 

up 

ad (The soul must be) an agent qnt- so that the scriptures may have a 
purpose. 

33. The individual soul must be an agent, for thus alone the scriptures 
become purposeful. 

In continuation of the topic dealing with the qualities of the intellect as 
mainly influencing the soul, another attribute of the soul is being elaborated: 
"This individual soul must also be an agent." 

Why 

"For thus only the scriptures become purposeful." In this way only, such 
texts about injunction as, "One should perform a sacrifice", "One should 
pour an oblation", "One should make gifts", etc. become purposeful. 
Otherwise they become meaningless. For they enjoin particular duties for an 
agent whose presence is a reality; and that kind of injunction can have no 
sense if there he no (soul with) agentship. Similarly, it is only thus that this 
text becomes meaningful: "And this one is the seer, feeler, hearer, thinker, 
ascertainer, doer-the Puru$a that is a knower by nature" (Pr. IV. 9). 





ft~R_7q~W;~ Because of the teaching about roaming. 

34. (The soul is an agent) because there are teachings about its roaming. 

The individual soul is an agent for this further reason that in a context 
dealing with the soul, the Upanigad speaks of the soul's roaming about in the 
intermediate state (of dream): "(Himself immortal), he goes wherever he 
likes" (Br. IV. iii. 12), and "It moves about, as it pleases, in its own body" 
(Br. II. i. 18). 



33'. (The soul is an agent) because of its taking up (the organs). 

The soul has agentship for the further reason that under the topic of the 
soul the Upani$ad speaks of the taking up (or using) of the organs by the 
soul: "(When this being, full of consciousness, is thus asleep), it absorbs at 
the time the power of perception of the organs through its own intelligence" 
(Br. II. i. 17), and also, "taking up the organs" (Br. II. i. 18). 



arfeiH fwm * ii^ii 

a And aggirj because of mention (as an agent) fgrttf in respect of work qq 
were it not so, fv-f*rizr: there would have been a contrary indication. 

36. And the soul is an agent because of the mention (as such) in respect of 
action; were it not so, there would have been a contrary indication. 

That the individual soul has agency follows from this additional 
consideration that the scripture designates it as being the agent in respect of 
Vedic and ordinary duties, "Vijnana (or Intelligence, i.e. the individual soul 
having it) spreads (i.e. performs) the sacrifices as well as works" (Tai. II. v. 
1 ). 

Opponent: Is not the word vijn"dna known as a synonym for the intellect? 
So how can it indicate the agency of the soul? 

Vedantin : Not so, for this is in fact a designation of the soul and not of the 
intellect. Had it not been used for the soul, there would have been a reversal 
of the designation-the indication would have been made by saying "through 
the intellect" (by using vijnana in the instrumental case, and not in the 
nominative case). Thus it is that at another place, where the intellect is 
meant, the word vijnana is seen to be used with the instrumental case¬ 
ending: "It absorbs at the time the power of perception of the organs 
vijnanena-through its own intelligence" (Br. II. i. 17). But here in "Vijnana 
spreads the sacrifice", the use is with the nominative case-ending, whereby 
the soul, different from the intellect, is indicated. Hence it is nothing wrong. 

Here somebody (an opponent) says: If the soul, which is quite different 
from the intellect, be the doer, then, being independent, it would do things 
that are delightful and beneficial to itself, and not act contrariwise. But as a 
matter of fact, it is noticed to do the opposite as well. Such irregular activity 
cannot be possible for the independent soul. 


Veddntin : Hence the answer is being given: 



34of As in the case of perception e;mq: there is no uniformity. 

37. As in the case of perception (there is no uniformity), so also there is 
no uniformity (in the case of action). 

Just as this soul, independent though it is as regards its own perception, 
yet perceives both good and bad without any invariable rule, so also it can 
accomplish both good and bad without any uniform rule. 

Opponent : It is not independent even as regards perception, for it is 
dependent on the acceptance of the means of perception. 

Veddntin : No, for the means of perception serve only the purpose of 
presenting the objects; but in the actual perception the soul is independent, 
since it is endowed with consciousness. Moreover, the soul is not wholly 
independent in the matter of activities yielding results, for it has to depend 
on particular space, time, and cause. An agent does not cease to have its 
agentship just because it has to depend on accessories; for a cook can very 
well be a cook even though he has to depend on fuel, water, etc. And 
because of a diversity of the accessories, it is nothing contradictory for the 
soul to engage in an irregular way in activities yielding good, bad, and 
indifferent results. 



qNF444qIq Because of a reversal of power. 

38. (The soul must be the agent), for (if the intellect be so), it will lead to a 
reversal of power. 

For this reason also the soul, that is different from the intellect, should be 
the agent. On the contrary, if the intellect, understood by the word vijnima, 
be the agent, then there will be a reversal of power-the instrumental power of 
the intellect will be negated and the power of the agent will accrue. Again, 
on the assumption that the power of the agent belongs to the intellect, it will 
have to be admitted that the intellect itself constitutes the subject of egoity; 
for all tendency to activity is seen to be preceded by the ego-consciousness, 
as in "I go", "I come", "I eat", "I drink", and so on. Again, for that intellect 
that is equipped with the power of the agent and possessed of the ability of 
doing everything, we have to fancy some other instrument that can be used 
for accomplishing everything. For despite the ability possessed by an agent, 
he is seen to engage in works with the help of some instruments. In that case, 
the fight (between us) will centre round a term, but there will be no 
difference as regards the thing itself, since (in either case) agentship is 
conceded for one who is different from the instrument. 



ar And gr-W+Tr47'i because of the negation of deep meditation. 


39. And (the soul must be an agent) because (a contrary supposition will) 
lead to a negation of deep meditation (on God). 

Samadhi (deep meditation), taught in the Upani$ads as a means for the 
realization of that Self that is known from the Upanisads alone, is spoken of 
in such texts as, "The Self, my dear, should be realized-should be heard of, 
reflected on, and profoundly meditated upon" (Br. II. iv. 5), "That is to be 
searched for, that is to be realized" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), "Meditate on the Self 
thus with the help of Om" (Mu. II. ii. 6), and so on. This meditation, too, 
cannot be reasonably sustained if the soul be not the agent (of meditation). 
From this fact also the agentship of the soul is proved. 

Topic 15: THE SOUL UNDER TWO CONDITIONS 

m i m 

a And (rather) qqr as c?5ra carpenter 3-qT (exists) under both conditions. 

40. And (rather) this is like the carpenter existing under both conditions. 

Thus the agentship of the embodied soul has been shown with the help of 
such reasons as the purposefulness of the scriptures. Now it is being 
considered whether this is natural or a result of conditioning factors. When 
in such a doubt, the conclusion arrived at (by the opponent) may be that it 
follows from these very reasons of the purposefulness of the scriptures and 
so on that the agentship is natural, for no reason is in evidence for modifying 
this conclusion. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say that it is not possible for the 
soul to have natural agentship, for that would lead to a negation of liberation. 
If agentship be the very nature of the Self, there can be no freedom from it, 



as fire can have no freedom from heat. Moreover, for one who has not got rid 
of agentship, there can be no achievement of the highest human goal 
(liberation), for agentship is a sort of misery. 

Opponent : Even while the power of agentship continues, the highest 
human goal can be achieved through the giving up of activities consequent 
on that. And that avoidance of activity follows from the avoidance of its 
causes (viz merit, demerit, etc.). This is just like the absence of the act of 
burning by fire when the fuel is removed, even though the fire has still the 
power to burn. 

Vedantin : No, since the causes (of activity, viz merit, demerit, etc.) 
become connected with (the agent through) the activities that his power 
necessarily evokes, (for power without the corresponding act is 
inconceivable). And when they become connected in this way, it is 
impossible to get rid of them wholly. 

Op ponent : Liberation will be achieved on the stren g th of the Vedic 
inj unction itself.28 

Vedantin : No, since anything that can be acquired through practice is 
impermanent. Moreover, it has been stated that liberation stands established 
from the fact that the soul has been expounded (in the Upanigads) to be 
eternally pure, enlightened, and free. But the presentation of such a soul 
cannot be logically justified if agentship be natural. Hence the agentship of 
the soul arises from the superimposition of the attributes of the limiting 
adjuncts; it is not innate. In support of this is the Vedic text, "It thinks as it 
were, and shakes as it were" (B;. IV. iii. 7). The text, "The intelligent people 
call the soul which is associated with body, organs, and mind, as the enjoyer" 
(Ka. I. iii. 4), shows that the soul when in association with the limiting 
adjuncts, gets the special characteristic of being an enjoyer. To the 
discriminating people there can be no individual soul, distinct from the 
supreme Self, which ':an be the agent or experiencer, for the Upani$ad 
declares, "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23), etc. 

Opponent : If apart from the supreme Self, there be no intelligent soul 
which is an agent and distinct from the assemblage of body and organs, then 





it would come to this that the supreme Self Itself would be the entity 
undergoing transmigration and becoming the agent and the experiencer. 

Vedintin : No, since the states of being an agent and an experiencer are 
conjured up by ignorance. Thus the scripture also shows that the individual 
soul is an agent and an experiencer when in a state of ignorance: "Because 
when there is duality, as it were, ... then one sees another" (Br. II. iv. 14); and 
then the scripture denies those very agentship and experiencership in the 
state of enlightenment: "But when to the knower of Brahman everything has 
become the Self, then what should one see and through what?" (ibid.). 
Similarly, the Upani$ad shows how like a falcon flying in the sky, the soul 
becomes tired in the waking and dream states owing to its association with 
limiting adjuncts; and then the Upani$ad shows the absence of that fatigue in 
the sleep state where the soul is embraced by the intelligent (supreme) Self; 
for the commencement is made with, "That is his real form, in which all 
objects of desire have been attained and are but the Self, and which is free 
from desires and devoid of grief" (Br. IV. iii. 21); and the conclusion is made 
with, "This is its supreme attainment, this is its supreme glory, this is its 
highest world, this is its supreme bliss" (Br. IV. iii. 32). This fact is stated by 
the teacher (Vyasa) in, "And (rather) this is like the carpenter existing under 
both conditions". The word "ca (and)" is used in the sense of "but" (rather). 
It is not to be thought thus that the agentship is natural to the soul just as heat 
is to fire. On the contrary, as it is seen in the world that a carpenter feels 
unhappy when working as an agent with instruments like an adze, and that 
this very man becomes happy when he reaches his own home leaving behind 
the instruments like the adze; then he is at nobody's beck and call, he is free 
from worries, and free from all activity; similarly the soul in association with 
the duality, brought about by nescience, becomes an agent and is unhappy in 
the dream and wakeful states; but when for becoming free from that fatigue, 
that very soul enters into its own Self, the supreme Brahman, in the state of 
deep sleep, and becomes free from the assemblage of body and organs, it is 
no more an agent, and it becomes happy. So also in the state of liberation it 
has the darkness of ignorance dispelled with the lamp of knowledge, and 
becoming the absolute Self, it attains happiness. The point in the illustration 
of the carpenter is to be understood as applying merely thus far that the 
carpenter becomes an agent only when he is in need of the pre-requisites like 



the adze etc. for the set works of planing etc. but he is a non-agent in his 
mere physical presence. So also the soul becomes an agent only when it 
requires the instruments like the mind etc. for all kinds of work; but 
considered in itself, it is surely not an agent. The soul has, however, no limb 
(like the hand) with which to pick up or put aside the organs (i.e. instruments 
of work) like the mind etc., just as the carpenter picks up or puts away the 
adze etc. with his hands etc. 

As for the assertion that the soul must have agentship for such reasons as 
the need of imparting purposefulness to the scripture, that is wrong. When 
the scripture imparts injunction, it takes for granted the conventional 
agentship and then teaches about particular forms of duty; but it does not 
itself prove the agentship of the soul. Moreover, we stated earlier that the 
soul has no agentship intrinsically, for there is instruction about the identity 
of the individual Self and Brahman. This is our standpoint. Hence any 
injunctive text will find enough scope by accepting the conventional 
agentship created by nescience. Besides, since the texts, such as this, "The 
Puru$a, a knower by nature, is a doer" (Pr. IV. 9), which are mere 
recapitulations of facts already known otherwise, may well be valid as 
merely referring to the empirical agentship as it is created by ignorance. 
Hereby are refuted the arguments about roaming (II. iii. 34), and taking up 
the organs (II. iii. 35), for they too are mere reiterations (of conventionally 
accepted facts). 

Opponent : Since the fact of roaming about by the soul is dealt with by 
saying that in the dream state, when all the organs have gone asleep, the soul 
moves about in its own body at will (Br. II. i. 18), it amounts to asserting 
that the absolute Self has agentship. So also in the matter of taking up the 
organs. Since the text, "it absorbs at the time the power of perception of the 
organs (vijndnam) through the intellect (vijndnena)" (Br. II. i. 17), the 
objective and instrumental case-endings are used after the organs (in 
vijnm2am and vijndnena), therefore we are led to the conclusion that the 
absolute Self has agentship. 

Vedantin : In answer it is said: As for the dream state, there is no absolute 
stoppage of the use of the organs by the soul; for in the text, "Entering the 



dream state in association with the intellect, he (the Self) goes beyond this 
world" (Br. IV. iii. 7Madhyandina), we hear of the association with the 
intellect even in that state. So also in the Smrti: "Know that to be the state of 
dream experience, where after the stoppage of the organs, the mind remains 
active and experiences the objects". Besides, the Upani$ad declares that 
desire etc. are the modes of the mind (Br. I. v. 3); and they are witnessed in 
dream. Therefore the soul moves about in dream in association with the 
mind. The roaming there also is not a reality but only a product of past 
impressions. Thus it is that the Upani$ad describes the dream activities by 
qualifying them with the phrase "as if": "He seems as if enjoying himself in 
the company of women, as if laughing or even seeing frightful things" (Br. 
IV. iii. 13). Ordinary people also describe the dream experiences in a similar 
way: "As if I were ascending a mountain peak", "As if I saw a forest". 
Similarly even with regard to the "taking up of the organs", although the 
objective and instrumental case-endings are used after the organs (vijnaana), 
still the soul's a g entship is to be understood as occurrin g as a result of 
con j unction with them , for we showed earlier that there can be no a g entshi p 
in the absolute Self. In the common world also , the speaker's modes of 
ex pression can be very various , as for instance . "The warriors are li g htin g". 
or "the kin g is fi g htin g throu g h the warriors". Moreover , in this case of 
"takin g u p" what is intended to be spoken of is the sto ppag e of the activity of 
the or g ans , and not the independent a g entship of anyone t i.e. of the soul ), for 
even when somebod y g oes to sleep without any conscious effort , the or gans 
are seen to stop from activitv.24. 

As for the allusion to the statement . "Vi i nana spreads the sacrifice" ( Tai. 
IT v. 1 ). that only makes us understand the a g entship of the intellect , since 
the word vi i n"ana is very often used in that sense , since it is mentioned 
immediately after the mind , and since in the text "faith is indeed bis head" 
( Tai. II. iv ). such limbs as faith etc, are declared for the Self identified with 
the intellect , and faith etc, are well known to be the modes of the intellect. 
Moreover , in the complementar y passa g e occurs the sentence . "All the g ods 
worship vi i nana (intellect ), the eldest , as Brahman" ( Tai. II. v. 1 ): and it is a 
well-known fact that the intellect ( identified with Hirau vag arbha ) is the 
eldest or the first born (B: . V. iv. 1 ) . Besides , this is confirmed by the 
assertion in another Vedic text that a sacrifice is performed by the or g an of 






















































































s peech and the intellect: "That which is a sacrifice consists in a succession of 

s peech and the Intellect one after the other."25 


And it cannot be ar g ued that if the or g ans (includin g the intellect ) are 
assumed to be the a g ents , then there will be a reversal of the power of the 
intellect ( from instrumentality to a g entship-B. S. II. iii. 38 ). for all the thin gs 
( even thou gh) ap pearin g with different case-endin g s must have a g entship in 
their own respective spheres ( of actions ) .26 The organs become instruments 
when considered from the standpoint of the act of perception; but the 
perception itself is by the soul. Here, again, the soul has no agency, for it is 
eternal consciousness by its very nature. The witnessing soul cannot have 
any agentship even through the ego-consciousness, for egoity itself is an 
object of perception to the soul. Again, if this position is accepted, there will 
be no need for fancying some other organ; for the intellect is admitted as the 
instrument. 

The objection that samadhi (profound meditation) would not be possible 
(B. S. II. iii. 39), stands refuted through the refutation of the assertion that 
the soul must be an agent so as to impart purposefulness to the scripture (B. 
S. II. iii. 33), for samadhi is enjoined by accepting the conventional 
agentship. Therefore the conclusion stands firm that the agentship of the soul 
is a creation of the limiting adjuncts. 

TOPIC 16: SOUL's AGENTSHIP DERIVED FROM GOD 



q But q (derived from) the Highest, -V#: for that is declared by Vedic 
texts. 































41. But the agentship (of the individual soul) is derived from God, for that 
is what is stated in the Vedic texts. 

Doubt : It has been said that the agentship of the individual soul occurs 
owing to the limiting adjuncts during the state of ignorance. Now it has to be 
considered whether that agentship occurs with or without any dependence on 
God. 

Opponent : Under the circumstances, the conclusion arrived at is that the 
soul does not depend on God for its agentship. 

Why? 

Because there is no need to depend. For this soul, impelled by likes, 
dislikes, etc. and endowed with all the other paraphernalia of action, can by 
itself have experiences of agentship. What has God to do for it? And it is not 
a recognized fact in the world that in such works as agriculture one has need 
of God, in the sense that one has of bullocks etc. Besides, a God, who 
creates creatures and endows them with an agentship that is essentially 
painful, will be open to the charge of cruelty as well as partiality owing to 
ordaining an agentship that leads to unequal results. 

Objection : Was it not said that "No partiality and cruelty (can be charged 
against God) because of His taking other factors into consideration" (B. S. II. 
i. 34)? 

Opponent: What was said would have been true if God could possibly 
depend on other things; and that dependence would be possible for God if 
the creatures could possess merit and demerit. These again would have been 
possible if the individual souls had agentship. Now, if that agentship be 
dependent on God, then on what will God have His dependence? (If again 
God ordains without dependence on results of action), then on that 
supposition the individual will get unmerited fruits. Hence the individual has 
his agentship independently and naturally. 


Veddmin : This contingency is ruled out by the aphorist by the word "but", 
and his own position is stated in "the agentship (etc.)". During the state of 



ignorance, when the individual soul is blinded by the darkness of ignorance 
and cannot understand itself to be different from the assemblage of body and 
organs, it derives its transmigratory state, consisting in its becoming an agent 
and experiencer, from the behest of the supreme Self who presides over all 
activities and resides in all beings, and who is the witness (of all), imparts 
intelligence (to all), and is the supreme Lord. Liberation, too, results from 
realization that is vouchsafed by Him out of His grace. 

Why? 

That is what is stated in the Vedic texts. Although the individual being is 
impelled by such defects as attachment and is endowed with the accessories 
of activity, and although in ordinary experience, such activities as agriculture 
are not recognized as caused by God, still it is ascertained from the Vedic 
texts that God is the directing (i.e. ultimate efficient) cause behind all 
activities. To this effect occurs the text: "It is He who makes him do good 
works whom He would raise above these worlds, and it is He who makes 
them do evil works whom He would drag down" (Kau. III. 8), as also "He 
who dwells in the sound and controls the soul from within" (S. B. XIV. vi. 
7.30, B;. III. vii. 3-23), and other texts of this kind. 

Opponent : If God has the (ultimate) power of directing in this way, He 
will have partiality and cruelty and the individual beings will reap unmerited 
results. 


The (Veduntin's) answer is given in the negative: 



However dependent on the efforts made, fd-Ae-3Ta{3TTfI: on grounds of 
the enjoined and prohibited duties not becoming meaningless and so on. 

42. (God is), however, dependent on the efforts made, so that injunctions 
and prohibitions may not become meaningless and other defects may not 


arrse. 



The word "however" is used for refuting the objections raised. In causing 
the individual to act, God takes into account the efforts-characterized either 
as virtuous or vicious-which the individual makes. Hence the defects, 
pointed out, do not arise. God acts merely as a general instrumental cause, 
dividing the resulting fruits of works unequally in accordance with the 
inequality of merit and demerit acquired by the individual beings, even as 
rain does. It is seen in the world that rain becomes the common instrumental 
cause of long and short creepers etc. or of rice and barley etc. which grow in 
accordance with their own seeds, and yet unless there be rainfall, they can 
have no differences in sap, flower, fruit, leaves, etc., nor can they have these 
in the absence of their own seeds; so also it stands to reason that God ordains 
good and bad for the individual beings in accordance with the efforts made 
by the beings themselves. 

Opponent : If the agentship itself of the individual be dependent on God, 
then God can have no dependence on the effort made by the individual. 

Vedantin : That creates no difficulty. Although the individual's agentship 
is dependent on God, still it is the individual who really acts. God directs 
him just as he himself would proceed with his work. Moreover, God directs 
him now in accordance with what he did previously, and He directed him 
earlier in accordance with what he had done still earlier. Thus since the state 
of transmigratory existence is without beginning, all this is above cavil. 

Opponent: How again is it known that God depends on the efforts made? 

The (Veddntin's) answer is contained in, "so that the injunctions and 
prohibitions may not become meaningless and other defects may not arise". 
For thus alone such injunctions and prohibitions as, "One desirous of heaven 
shall perform a sacrifice", "A Brahmama is not to be killed", will not be 
stultified; else (if God does not depend on the acts done, then) these will 
become meaningless, and God Himself will be installed (as an absolute 
dictator) in the place of injunction and prohibition, since the individual will 
be absolutely under God (and not under the scriptures). Similarly (God being 
without any standard), He will strike with evil one who acts according to 
scripture, and bestow gifts on one who acts against it. In that case the 
authority of the Vedas will be set aside. Moreover, if God be absolutely 



autocratic, even ordinary personal efforts will become useless, and so also 
space, time, and causation will be meaningless. Furthermore, there will be 
the defect stated earlier (of getting unmerited results, etc). These and such 
other drawbacks are indicated by the term "other defects". 

Topic 17: RELATION OF SOUL AND GOD 

3T* 1 111111.144kRIPPM Wft a 2f q* Inqu 

ar'gT: A part XI1 because mentioned qM as different, .;w aTfq as also aql 
otherwise t some aT read of z;rrfar-3nf identity with Ddfas (fishermen and 
slaves), Kitavas (gamblers), and others. 

43. (The individual souls are) parts of God because of the mention that 
they are different, also because some read other wise of (Brahman's) identity 
with fishermen, slaves, gamblers, and others. 

Doubt : It was stated earlier that as between the individual soul and God, 
there exists (a relationship based on) a feeling of one being the favoured and 
the other the favourer. And such a relationship is seen to subsist in the world 
between two mutually related entities, as for instance a servant and his 
master, or a fire and its sparks. Thus when it is admitted that the individual 
and God are mutually the beneficiary and the benefactor, the question arises, 
whether their relationship is like that between the master and the servant, or 
like that between fire and its sparks. 

Opponent : When this doubt arises, the conclusion may be either that the 
relationship is irregular, or since the feeling as between the ruler and the 
ruled is well known to be of the pattern subsisting between the master and 
the servant, it must be similar to that here as well. 

Vedantin : Hence the aphorist says, "A part" etc. The individual should be 
a part of God even as a spark is of fire. The individual is a part only 
apparently, for the partless Brahman can have no part in the literal sense. 

Opponent : Why should not the individual be God Himself on this very 
ground of partlessness (of God)? 



Vedantin : (No), "because of the mention that they are different". Unless 
there is some dissimilarity, the statement of difference, as contained in, "He 
is to be searched for, He is to be sought to be known" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1). 
"Knowing It alone one becomes a sage" (Br. IV. iv. 22), "He who dwells in 
the soul and controls the soul from within" (S. B. XIV. vi. 7), and similar 
texts, cannot be justified. 

Opponent : This reference to difference fits in more aptly if it be 
understood to be like that between a master and his servant. 

Vedantin : Hence the aphorist says: "it is mentioned otherwise also" etc. 
Not that the individual is known merely to be a part from the mention of 
difference. What else then? The mention is made in other ways also to 
establish non-difference. Thus the followers of a certain section of the 
Atharva Veda read in their hymn to Brahman of the identity of Brahman 
with the Ddias, Kitavas, and others in, "The Dafas are Brahman; the Dasas 
are Brahman; even these gamblers are but Brahman" etc. The Dihas are the 
people known as Kaivartas (fishermen); the DJsas are those others (i.e. 
slaves) who surrender their bodies to a master; and (kitavas are) those others 
who are the gamblers engaged in playing dice; they are all nothing but 
Brahman. With the help of these illustrations of inferior beings the text 
shows that all individual souls are Brahman, who have entered into the 
aggregates of body and organs created by name and form. Similarly 
elsewhere also, when dealing with Brahman Itself, this very idea is 
elaborated: "You are woman, you are man, you are a young man or even a 
maid; you are old tottering about with the help of a stick; having taken birth, 
you have your face everywhere" (Sv. IV. 3), and "One becomes immortal by 
knowing that intelligent One who, after having created all the forms and 
names, (and after having entered there) goes on uttering (i.e. making use of) 
them" (Tai. A. III. xii. 16). This idea finds confirmation from such Vedic 
texts as, "There is no other witness but Him" (Bi-. III. vii. 23). And 
consciousness is common to both God and the individual beings even as heat 
is to fire and a spark. Thus since both difference and nondifference are 
known (from texts), it is gathered that the individual is a part. 


Why, again, should it be known to be a part? 




IIWII 


a And qm-"I on the authority of the words of the mantras. 

44. This follows from the words of the mantras also. 

The mantra text also reveals this fact: "Thus far (i.e. the whole creation) 
constitutes His glory; Puru$a (i.e. the infinite Being) is greater even than that 
(creation). All bhutas (beings) are merely a foot (part) of His; His other three 
immortal feet are in heaven" (i.e. transcendental) (Ch. III. xii. 6). By bb(tas 
(beings) is (suggestively) indicated here everything that moves or does not 
move, the living creatures being the most prominent among them; for we 
come across such a use, "(One attains the world of Brahman) by practising 
non-injury to all the bhutas on all occasions apart from where the scriptures 
sanction it" (Ch. VIII. xv. 1). The words amfa (part), pdda (foot or quarter) 
are synonymous with bhaga (a portion). From this also the individual is 
known to be a part. 


What more is the reason for knowing it to be a part? 



aft Moreover Eck mention is made in the Sm;ti. 
45. And this is also stated in the Smrti (Gita). 



In the Bhagavad-Gita also (which is a Sm;ti) it is stated that the individual 
is a part of God: "An eternal portion of myself having become an individual 
soul in the world of the creatures" (XV. 7). From this also it is known that it 
is a part. As for the argument that in common experience it is well 
recognized that the relation of the ruler and the ruled obtains only among 
such persons as the master and the servant, although that is the well-known 
fact in the world, still it is ascertained from the scriptures that the 
relationship here is like that between a part and a whole as also like that 
between the ruled and the ruler. And it involves no contradiction to hold that 
God, having His unsurpassable limiting adjunct, rules over the individual 
souls having their inferior limiting adjuncts. 

Here the (opponent) says: If the individual be admitted to be a part of God 
who is the whole, then God will have to experience the pain of the 
transmigratory existence suffered by (all) the individuals, even as in the 
ordinary world, Devadatta, possessed of his own hands, feet, etc. suffers pain 
when it occurs to any one of the limbs. From this it will follow that those 
who reach Godhood will suffer greater pain; and as compared with this 
liberation, the earlier state of worldly existence will be preferable, so that the 
predicament will arise of full enlightenment becoming useless. 


Veddnmd'i: To this comes the reply: 



qz: The supreme Self ;r qaK does not (suffer) thus srrr-3rTfst like light 
etc. 


46. The Supreme Self is not so (touched by the suffering of the individual 
soul), even as light etc. are not (affected by the things that condition them). 



We solemnly declare that God does not suffer the woes of the world like 
an individual being. The individual soul, under the influence of ignorance, 
seems to become identified with the body etc., and it suffers the sorrows 
occurring to the body, owing to its belief that the sufferings created by 
ignorance are its own. But God has no such identity with the body etc. nor 
any conception of suffering in Himself. In the case of the individual soul as 
well, the feeling of suffering that it has, arises from an error consisting in not 
realizing its difference from the limiting adjunct constituted by the body, 
organs, etc. which are created by name and form that are the products of 
ignorance; but in reality it has no suffering. Just as a man, owing to his 
erroneous identity with the body, feels the pain caused to his body by a burn, 
a bruise, etc., so also he feels the pain caused to his son, friend, and others, 
owing to an erroneous identity with them under the idea, "I am the same as 
my son", "I am the same as my friend", arising from strong attachment to the 
son, friend, etc. caused by his love for them. From this it becomes known as 
a certainty that the feeling of sorrow is caused by an error of false identity. 
And this is understood from an observation of the opposite instances. Thus it 
is that when many sit together-both those who have sons, friends, etc. and 
have a feeling of relationship with them, and those that have no such 
conception-and such pieces of news are broken that a son is dead, a friend is 
dead, and so on, then from that news, sorrow comes only to those who have 
the belief of having friends and sons, but not to those, e.g. monks and others 
who have no such belief. Thus since complete (i.e. discriminating) 
knowledge is seen to serve some purpose even for a man under ordinary 
circumstances, what more need we speak of its purposefulness in the case of 
one who does not see anything apart from the Self which is never an object, 
and who has become one with what is by nature eternal consciousness? 
Hence there can be no question of complete enlightenment being useless. 
"As light etc." is said by way of an illustration. As the light of the sun or 
moon spreads over the whole sky, and yet when it comes in contact with a 
conditioning factor like a finger etc., it seems to become straight or bent like 
them as these things become so, but not so in reality; or as space seems to 
move when pots etc. change places, but not so in reality; or as the reflection 
of the sun in a plate of water etc. seems to shake with the shaking of those 
things, but not so the sun that is the prototype; similarly even though a part 
of God, which is conjured up by nescience, conditioned by the intellect etc., 



and called an individual soul, suffers pain, still God, the possessor of that 
part, has no suffering. And we said that even the suffering of the individual 
being is brought about by ignorance. Hence it is that the Upanisadic texts, as 
for instance, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), establish the soul's identity 
with Brahman Itself through a negation of the state of individuality caused 
by ignorance. Hence there can be no question of God becoming afflicted 
with pain owing to the individual's suffering. 



fqKfkT They say in the Smetis and. 

47. They say so in the Srnrtis, and (the Upanisads declare thus). 

Moreover, Vyasa and others recollect (i.e. mention) (in their SmXtis), how 
the supreme Self is not afflicted by the suffering of the individual being: 
"Among these two, that which is the supreme Self is stated to be eternal and 
without attributes; and like the lotus leaf unaffected by water, It remains 
untouched even by the results of work. Tine other one that is the basis of all 
works, is subject to bondage and liberation, and it is he that becomes a g ain 
associated with the ( subtle body constituted b vl the seventeen factors."27 By 
the word "and" (in the aphorism) it is to be understood that "the Upani$ads 
also state this", for instance, "Of these two, the one eats the fruit of divergent 
taste, and the other looks on without eating" (Mu. III. i. 1, Sv. iv. 6), and 
"Similarly the Self, that is but one in all beings, is not tainted by the sorrows 
of the world, It being transcendental" (Ka. II. ii. 11). 

Somebody (an opponent) says here: If then the innermost Self of all 
beings be the same, then how will acquiescence and inhibition (i.e. 
injunction and prohibition) -both scriptural and human-fit in? 








Objection : Has it not been said that the individual soul is a part of God? 
And because of this difference among them (i.e. God and His various parts), 
injunction and prohibition, which centre round this difference, can well 
maintain their distinction. So what is the point in your question here? 

The answer (of the Opponent) is this: This cannot be so, for the Vedic 
texts, speaking of non-difference, establish the other fact also that the 
individual is not a part, as in, "After creating it, He entered into it" (Tai. II. 
vi. 1), "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23), "He goes from 
death to death, who sees difference as it were, in It" (Br. IV. iv. 19), "That 
thou art" (Ch. VI. viii-xvi), "I am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), and other 
passages of the same class. 

Veddntin : Was it not said that from coming across both difference and 
non-difference (in the texts), the conclusion to be arrived at is that the 
individual is a part? 

Opponent : This could be so if both difference and nondifference were 
intended as facts to be established; but it is non-difference alone that is 
sought to be taught here, for the highest human goal is achieved through the 
realization of the identity of the individual soul with Brahman. The 
difference, comprehended empirically, is referred to only by way of a 
restatement of a known fact. And it was said that the individual cannot be a 
part of Brahman in the literal sense, for Brahman is partless. Hence it is the 
same supreme Self, which is the innermost Self of all beings, that assumes 
the state of the individual souls. This being the position, the logicality of 
injunction and prohibition has to be explained. 

Vedintin : That is being explained by us: 

m\ 

arlmT_qfkTA (scriptural) acquiescence and inhibition (are feasible) 
i_nzgy7 owing to association with the body mftfh:anft-qq as in the case of 




light etc. 


48. Injunction and prohibition become effective owing to physical 
association, just as it is in the case of light etc. 

"One shah approach one's wife at the proper time" is an injunction; "One 
shall not approach one's teacher's wife" is a prohibition. Similarly, "One 
shall sacrifice an animal to Agni and Soma" is an injunction; "One shah not 
injure any being" is a prohibition. So also in common life, "One shah 
entertain one's friend" is an injunction; "One shah avoid one's enemy" is a 
prohibition. Even though the Self is one, this kind of injunction and 
prohibition are possible owing to "physical association". "Physical 
association" means the contact with different bodies. 

What is this bodily contact? 

It consists in a rise of a perverse idea to the effect, "This aggregate of 
body etc. is but myself". This is seen to. exist in ah creatures and to take 
such forms as: "I go", "I come", "I am blind", "I am not blind", "I am dull", 
"I am not dull", and so on. There is nothing else apart from full 
enlightenment that can eradicate this. Before the dawn of that enlightenment, 
this error permeates ah creatures. In this way, even though the Self is 
admitted to be one, still injunction and prohibition can find scope owing to 
the distinctions created through the association with the limiting adjuncts 
like the body etc., conjured up by ignorance. 

Opponent : In that case, injunction and prohibition are meaningless for 
one who is fully enlightened. 

Veddmin : No, for he is beyond the range of scriptural direction, as he has 
already got ah that can be achieved. One who has to be directed will be 
directed with regard to something to be avoided or something to be accepted. 
But how can one be directed who does not see anything other than the Self? 
Not that the Self can be asked to be engaged in action on Itself. 

Opponent : It is precisely one who knows that the Self is different from 
the body that can be directed (by the scriptures). 



Veddntin : No , for (such fitness for in j unction follows when ) one has still 
a notion that one is the a ggreg ate of body etc.28 Though it is true that one is 
directed (by the scriptures) only when one knows (intellectually) the Self to 
be different from the body, still only that person alone can have the idea that 
he is being directed (by the scriptures) who does not realize the Self to be 
(actually) dissociated from body etc. even as space etc. (are from jar etc.). 
For nobody who understands the Self to be dissociated from the body etc. is 
ever seen to come under the range of direction, what to speak of one who 
realizes the unity of the Self? And it cannot be said that if the man of 
enlightenment is beyond all (scriptural) obligation, he may as well behave 
capriciously; for it is self-identity (with body etc.) that is seen to promote 
action everywhere, but in the case of the enlightened one there is no such 
self-identity. Therefore injunction and prohibition become possible only as a 
result of association with the body, "as it is in the case of light". As fire from 
the cremation ground is avoided, but not the others, though as fire they are 
all the same; as sunlight falling on an unholy place is avoided, but not so the 
sunlight on holy ground, though as sunlight it is all the same; as diamonds, 
beryls, etc., which are particles of earthly matter, are accepted, but not so 
human corpses etc., though they are equally earthly things; as also the urine 
and dung of a cow are accepted, (the cow being holy), but not so the excreta 
of other species; so also is the case here. 




q And aMR : on account of want of connection aij: there is no 
intermixture. 

49. And there is no intermixture (of actions and results), since the soul has 
no connection with all (the bodies). 

Opponent: Conceded that injunction and prohibition will be possible 
owing to the association with particular bodies even though the Self be the 










same. But as regards the association with the results of work, it will all 
become a jumble on the assumption of a single Self, for the possessor (of 
experiences) will be but one. 

Veddntin : This will not be so, because the connection is not universal. 
The soul, either as an agent or as an experiencer, has no connection with all 
the bodies. For it has been stated that the individual soul is dependent on its 
limiting adjunct. As this limiting adjunct does not spread everywhere, so 
also the soul has no universal connection. Thus there can be no intermixture 
of either works or their results. 



a And a r is a false appearance (i.e. reflection) t certainly. 

50. And' (the individual soul) is only a reflection (of the supreme Self) to 
be sure. 

And it is to be understood that this individual soul is a reflection of the 
supreme Self like the semblance of the sun in water. Not that the soul is the 
Self Itself, nor is it something else. From this also it follows that just as 
when any one of the reflections of the sun moves, the others do not, similarly 
when any one individual soul becomes associated with the result of its work, 
no other soul is associated with it. Thus the works and the results of works 
do not certainly get intermixed. And since a false appearance is a creation of 
ignorance, it is but logical that the transmigratory state centring round that 
appearance must also be a creation of ignorance; and hence the instruction is 
logically proper that the identity of the soul with Brahman, which is the 
supreme reality, is attained by eradicating that appearance. On the contrary, 
this intermixture (of works and results) arises in the case of those only who 
believe in many souls, each one of which is omnipresent. 


How? 



"The souls are many and omnipresent, and by nature they are 
consciousness, devoid of qualities, and unexcelled. For serving their 
purposes they have in common one primordial Nature (Pradhana). And the 
experiences (of happiness and sorrow) as well as liberation accrue to these 
souls from that Nature"-This is what the Saiirkhyas say. 

( The Vaifefikas maintain that ) althou g h the souls are many and 
omnipresent , still they are intrinsically unconscious , and are mere substances 
like pots , walls , etc. The minds which serve them are atomic and 
unconscious. That bein g so . from a contact of the substance called soul and 
the substance called mind , emer g e nine distinct qualities of the soul , viz 
desire and the rest . 29 and they inhere individually in the soul without getting 
intermixed. This is the transmigratory state. The absolute .cessation of the 
emergence of those nine qualities of the soul is liberation. This-is-the view 
of the followers of Kaoida (i.e. Vaik$ikas) . 

Of these two views, as regards that of the Sarhkhyas, since all the souls 
are consciousness by nature and the proximity of Pradhana is common to 
them all, when any one of them becomes associated with happiness or 
sorrow, all the others become equally so. 

Sdmkhya : It may be like this: Since Nature acts for the liberation of the 
souls, some individual differentiation (or adjustment) will be made (by her), 
for else the activity of Nature will amount merely to a display of her own 
glory, and in that case there will be no liberation. 

Veddntin : This is vain talk, for it is not possible to under- 

stand any such individual ad j ustment required (on utilitarian g rounds ) for the 
fulfilment of ( individual ) desired ends. The ad j ustment has , therefore , to be 
ex plained on the basis of some valid reason,S° In the absence of any reason, 
however, the desired liberation of the soul may very well remain 
unaccomplished, while the intermixture becomes inevitable owing to the 
absence of any valid ground for individual adjustment. 

Even from the point of view of the followers of Kamada, whenever the 
mind becomes connected with any one of the souls, it will have connection 





































with the other souls also without obstacle, for (the causes for that 
connection, viz) proximity, etc. are equally in evidence, (the souls being 
omnipresent). From this indistinguishability of cause, the result also will be 
indistinguishable, and so from the contact of one soul with happiness and 
sorrow all the other souls will be open to these. 

The opponents may argue that the individual adjustment will follow from 
the unseen potential results of work. But the' aphorist says, no- 



arV-aiFggi" Since the unseen potential results of works cannot be 
allocated individually. 

51. (Even the unseen potential results of works cannot regulate individual 
allocation), since the unseen potential results (themselves) cannot be 
allocated thus. 

The unseen potential results of works, consisting in merit and demerit, are 
earned (individually) through mind, speech, and body, even though the souls 
continue to be many, all-pervasive like space, and equally contiguous to 
every body, in and out. Now then, from the S3mkhya standpoint, there is 
nothing to regulate the experiencing of happiness and sorrow by each soul 
individually, since the unseen potential results do not inhere in the soul (the 
soul being attributeless), but they abide in Nature, which again is common to 
all. The same fault arises in the case of the followers of Kapada as well, 
since the unseen potential results are brought about by contacts between the 
souls and mind which (contacts) are common to all, just as much as in the 
earlier case, so that there is no reason to maintain any such rule that a 
particular result will belong to a particular soul. 



The (Vai4e ika) opponent may argue thus: Such resolves etc. as, "I shall 
get this result", "I shall avoid this", "I shall make such effort", "I shall act 
thus", and so on, which spring in each soul individually will regulate the 
mastery of the souls over their (respective) unseen results. 

But the aphorist says, no- 


IflRII 

a* Even aqffl_anfkl in the case of resolution etc. a also qiR it is the same. 

3'2. And the same (defect springs up) even in the case of resolves etc. 

Since resolves etc. are also made in the proximity of all the (omnipresent) 
souls through a contact between a soul and the mind (which contact 
becomes) common to all, therefore these resolves etc. cannot be logically 
accepted as regulating the allocation (of pleasure and pain). And hence the 
defect pointed out will certainly arise. 

ip 

w" On the basis of different parts if this be the position, ifa4i q not so, 
because of getting included (in all). al-,f:_a 

53. If it be said that this (individual allocation of pleasure and pain) can be 
possible in accordance 'with the separate part (of each soul in each body), 
then it cannot be so, because of all (the omnipresent souls) getting included 
in all (the bodies). 




Opponent : It may now be argued that though the individual soul is 
omnipresent, still its contact with the mind, residing in the body, will happen 
in a particular part of that soul that is circumscribed by that body, and thus 
the allocation of resolves etc., unseen potential results of works, and 
happiness and sorrow will be encompassed in relation to that part. 

Vedantin : Even that is not valid. 

Why? 

"Because of getting included (everywhere)". Since all the individual souls 
are equally omnipresent, they become included in all the bodies. That being 
the case, it is impossible for the Vaise~ikas to imagine any part of a soul that 
becomes separated by a body. And even if this be imagined, that part of the 
partless soul will not be able to regulate (the allocation of) actual effects, this 
separation having existence merely in imagination. And the body, coming 
into being as it does in the vicinity of all the souls, cannot be assigned to any 
particular soul rather than to all the others. Even if a difference of parts (in 
souls) be accepted, still (such parts cannot determine the allocation of 
experience; for) two souls, having in store for them the same happiness and 
sorrow may at times have those experiences through a single body, since it is 
possible for the two souls to have an unseen (potential) result bound up with 
the same locality. Thus when Devadatta's body moves away from a locality 
where Devadatta had experienced happiness and sorrow, and then 
Yajnadatta's body moves into the same place, he is seen to have the same 
kind of happiness and sorrow as the former; that would not be the case 
unless Devadatta and Yajnadatta had an unseen potential result (in store for 
them) bound up with the same locality. And the possibility of not enjoying 
heaven etc. also arises from the standpoint of one who talks of parts in the 
soul; for (there must be a unity of the agent and enjoyer; but according to 
your theory) the unseen potential results of works may be earned in the 
Brahmaraa bodies etc., whereas the heavenly enjoyment etc. have to occur in 
a different locality." Moreover if the souls be many, they cannot be all- 
pervasive, since there is no such illustration to prove this. Gte for me then 
those (illustrative) things that are many at the same time that they occupy the 
same place. 



Opponent: Take for instance colour, (taste, smell), etc. (existing in the 
same flower). 

Vedkitin : No . for they too are non-different so far as they are identical 
with the substance to which they belon g; and in themselves they have 
distinct characteristics. But the many souls have no distinctive 
characteristics." 


Opponent: The difference is possible owing to the presence of an ultimate 
vife;a (inherent differentia) in the souls. 

Vedittin : No, since the supposition of difference in the souls (resulting 
from the inherent differentia) and the inference of such differentia (on the 
strength of the differences among the souls) would lead to a logical seesaw. 
Moreover, even the omnipresence of space etc. is unacceptable to the 
believers in Brahman, since these are understood by them to be products. 
Hence the conclusion is that all defects can be obviated only by those who 
believe in the unity of the Self. 


SECTION IV 

TOPIC 1: ORIGIN OF THE PRANAS 

Introduction : In the third section was resolved the conflict amon g the 
Vedie texts about (the creation of ) s pace , etc. In the fourth section is now 
bein g resolved the conflict about prams (organs). 1 Now then, in such contexts 
dealing with creation as, "That created fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3), "From that Self 
that is such emerged space" (Tai. II. i. 1), and others, the origin of the pranas 
(organs) is not mentioned. Again in some contexts, their origin itself is 
denied, as in, "This was but non-existence in the beginning" (Tai. II. vii). 
(This is not nihilism;) for in, "With regard to that they asked, 'What is it that 
was non-existent?' The rsis themselves were non-existent in the beginning. 
With regard to that they asked, 'Who were the rsis?' The pranas were the 
rsis" (S. B. VI. i. 1.1), we hear of the existence of the pranas even before 
creation started. In other places, however, the origin of the organs as well is 
stated, as in, "As from a blazing fire tiny sparks fly in all directions, so from 
this Self emanate all the pranas (organs)" (Br. II. i. 20). "From Him 





















originates Prana (vital force) as well as the mind, all the senses, (space, air, 
fire, water, and earth that supports everything)" (Mu. II. i. 3), "From Him 
emerge the seven pranas (senseorgans)" (Mu. II. i. 8), "He created Prana, 
from Prana He created faith, space, air, fire, water, earth, organs, mind, food" 
(Pr. VI. 4), and other places. Since a textual conflict is obvious in those 
places, and since it is not possible to discover any reason for adopting either 
of the two alternatives, the result is bound to be a non-comprehension of the 
meaning; or since the existence of the organs before creation is mentioned 
by the texts, the conclusion may be that the texts speaking of the origin of 
the organs are to be taken in a secondary sense. Hence the answer is given in 
the aphorism: 



ffTT Similarly AMT: the prangs (organs). 

1. Similarly the organs (are produced from the supreme Self). 

Opponent : How again does the word "similarly" fit in here, since nothing 
is presented by way of an illustration, (this being only the beginning of a 
section)? The topic dealt with at the end of the section just preceding was the 
refutation of the theory that the souls are all-pervasive and many. That, 
however, cannot serve the purpose of an illustration, since there is no 
similarity. Something can serve as an illustration when it has similarity, as 
for instance, "Balavarman is like a lion". It may be argued (by some one) 
thus: "The word 'similarly' is meant for showing the similarity with unseen 
potential results (occurring at the end of the last section); the meaning being 
that the organs originating in the vicinity of all the all-pervasive souls cannot 
be allocated to any particular soul, just as much as the unseen potential 
results originating in the vicinity of all the all-pervasive souls cannot be 
assigned to any one of them". But since that position has been already dealt 



with by saying that the bodies cannot be assigned to the souls individually, 
(the souls being all omnipresent), a fresh consideration will mean a mere 
repetition. Moreover, the organs cannot be compared with the souls, for that 
would be going against the accepted point of view, inasmuch as it was stated 
that the souls are not produced, whereas the intention here is to speak of the 
creation of the organs. Hence the word 'similarly' seems to be inappropriate. 

Veddntin : No, for a relation (of 'similarity') can be established even with 
the illustration presented in the illustrative (scriptural) sentences themselves. 
The illustration in the present case is contained in the texts speaking of the 
origin of the organs, as for instance, "From this Self emanate all the organs, 
all worlds, all gods, and all beings" (BT. II. i. 20), and similar others. The 
meaning in those texts is that the organs originate from the supreme 
Brahman just like the worlds etc. So also in the text, "From Him originates 
Prdna, as well as the mind, all the organs, space, air, fire, water, and the earth 
that supports everything" (Mu. II. i. 3), as also in similar others, it is to be 
understood that the organs originate like space etc. Or it may be like this. 
Just as Jaimini relies on a connection with a remote example in such places 
as in the aphorism, "When one vomits after drinking in the course of a Vedic 
sacrifice, the remedy is to be undertaken in the same way as when a fault 
arises from giving away a defective horse in a sacrifice" (Jai. III. iv. 32), (so 
also Vyasa can do likewise). Just as it is understood that space etc., spoken 
of in the previous and other sections are the products of Brahman, so also the 
organs are the products of the supreme Brahman. This is how it is to he 
construed. 

Opponent: What again is the reason for accepting the organs as products? 

Veddmin : The very fact that the Upani$ads mention this. 

Opponent : Was it not pointed out that in some places the origin of the 
organs is not spoken of? 

Vedamin : That conclusion is wrong, since origin is spoken of in other 
places; for any omission in mentioning something somewhere cannot rule 
out the mention made elsewhere. Hence it is well affirmed that since there 
are Vedic mentions of origin, the organs originate even as space etc. do. 



It was argued that since the texts mention the existence of the pranas 
(organs) before creation, therefore, any text that speaks of the origin of the 
organs, must be taken in a secondary sense. That position is refuted in: 



rl}a- Because of the impossibility (of the text about origin) metaphorical 
the in sense. 

2. (Origin of the organs has to be accepted) because of the impossibility of 
(the text about origin having) the secondary sense. 

The compound in g auhyasambhavat is formed by dro p pin g the sixth case¬ 
endin g after g auhi (meanin g thereby: "Because of the impossibility of the 
secondary use" ) . The text speakin g of the ori g in of the or g ans cannot have a 
secondary sense , for that would lead to an abandonment of the g eneral 
assertion. The assertion of the knowled g e of all throu g h a knowled g e of one 
is contained in . "0 adorable sir , ( which is that thin g) which havin g been 
known all this becomes known?" (Mu. 1. i. 3 ): and for propoundin g that 
assertion it is stated: "From Him ori g inates Praha etc." t Mu. II. i. 3 s ) , If the 
whole of this creation startin g from Praha be a product of Brahman , then 
only can that assertion become j ustified in accordance with the reasonin g 
that a product cannot exist apart from its material cause. But if the creation 
of all this , startin g from Praha , be only in a secondary sense , then the 
assertion 'will be falsified.2 And it is in keeping with this, that the assertion 
made (earlier) is concluded thus: "Puruga alone is all this-(comprising) the 
karma and knowledge. He who knows this supremely immortal Brahman, 
(as existing in the heart, destroys here the knot of ignorance)" (Mu. II. i. 10), 
and "This world is nothing but Brahman, the highest" (Mu. H. ii. 11). So also 
such Upani$adic texts as, "By the realization of the Self, my dear, through 





























































hearing, reflection, and meditation, all this is known" (Br. II. iv. 5), are to be 
understood as making the same declaration. 

Opponent : Why then does a Vedic text speak of the existence of the 
prangs (organs) before creation? 

Vedantin : That sentence does not speak of the ultimate material cause 
(Brahman as existing in association with Praha), for in the text "He is 
without Praha, and without mind; He is pure and superior to the (other) 
superior immutable (i.e. Maya)" (Mu. H. i. 2), it is asserted that the ultimate 
material cause is free from all such distinctive features as Praha etc. But it is 
to be understood that the assertion about the existence of the pra?tas (organs) 
before creation is made from the standpoint of the (organs of the) subsequent 
material cause (Hiranyagarbha derived from Brahman) which is again a 
cause of its own derivatives. For it is well established on the strength of the 
Vedas and Smttis that the things that have become manifested (through 
names and forms) in several stages are themselves related by way of being 
the material causes and products (in a successive order). As the aphorism 
"gaunyasambhavat" (II. iii. 3) appearing under the topic of space stated the 
position of the opponent, it was explained to mean: "Any Vedic text about 
origin is secondary, for a primary sense is impossible". And the answer was 
given there by saying that such an interpretation would lead to an 
abandonment of the "general assertion" (or original declaration). But since 
the present aphorism states the conclusion of the Vedantin, the explanation is 
made by saying, "Because of the impossibility of (the text about origin 
having) the secondary sense". Those, however, who in conformity with that 
earlier aphorism, would interpret this one also to mean, "Any Vedic text 
speaking of origin is used metaphorically, for a primary sense is 
inadmissible", would ignore (the consequent difficulty, viz) the abandonment 
of the original declaration (of all being known from one). 




q Also Uq-S-q-~: because that term, (jayate, "is born"), is used earlier in 
the Upani$ad. 

3. Also because that term , ( "is born" ), is used earlier tin the primar y 
sense ) in the Upanicad ( in connection with Prana )_3 

For this further reason the Vedic text about the origin of the pranas is to he 
taken in its primary sense just as in the case of space etc., for the very same 
term jayate, signifying origin, that is heard of earlier in connection with the 
prams (organs) is applied later to space etc. as well. It was proved that the 
origin of space etc. is spoken of in the primary sense in the text . "From Him 
ori g inates Prdna" etc, tMu. II. i. 3 ) , Because of the use of the same word 
"ori g in" ( in connection with space , etc. ) the ori g in spoken of in the case of 
the pran g s also should be understood in the primary sense. For a sin g le term . 
used only once in the same context in the same sentence and connected with 
many thin gs, cannot be understood to have a primary sense in some places 
and a secondary sense at others : for that would involve a distortion. So also 
in the text . "He created Prima . and faith from Prdna" tPr. VI. 4 ). the term 
"creation" heard of in connection with pram , becomes connected with faith 
and the rest that too have ori g in. This lo g ic a p plies equally at places where a 
term denotin g ori g in is met with in the latter parts of a sentence , but has to 
be connected with earlier words , as for instance , the term "emanate 
fv yuccaranti ) " used at the end of the passa ge, "all the bein g s emanate" tBr. 
II. i. 20) is connected with the prams and the rest occurring in the earlier part 
of the sentence. 





























































ffq_V*m7 On account of their precedence g: over speech (etc.). 

4. (Prams must have originated from Brahman) since speech is preceded 
by them. 

Although the origin of the prams is not mentioned in the context, "That 
created fire" etc. (Ch. VI. ii. 3), the origin of the three elements-fire, water, 
and earth-alone being heard of, still from the mention of the fact that (the 
organ of) speech, the vital force (Prdna), and the mind emanate from fire, 
water, and earth (respectively), which have Brahman as their material cause, 
it follows that all the organs must have originated from Brahman, for the 
latter too are on a par with the former, (all being equally prams-organs). To 
explain this: In this very context (of the Chandogya), speech, the vital force, 
and the mind are mentioned as proceeding (respectively) out of fire, water, 
and earth in the text, "For the mind is formed out of food (earth), 0 amiable 
one, the vital force is formed out of water, and speech is formed out of fire" 
(Ch. VI. v. 4). Now if their birth from earth etc. be spoken of in the primary 
sense in that text, it goes without saying that they must have originated from 
Brahman. Even though a secondary sense be assumed, still from the fact that 
their origin is mentioned in the course of (describing) the process of the 
manifestation of names and forms by Brahman, and from the fact that the 
start is made with the text, "That by knowing which the unheard becomes 
heard" (Ch. VI. i. 3) and the conclusion is made with the text, "All this has 
that (Brahman) as its self" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), and from the fact that this is a 
well-known fact in the other Upani$ads, it becomes evident that when the 
mind etc. are spoken of as having originated from food etc., the motive is to 
elaborate the fact that they are produced from Brahman Itself. From this also 
it follows that the prams originated from Brahman. 


Tonic 2: NUMBER OF PRANAS 


The Vedic textual conflict about the origin of the prams has been resolved. 
Now is being resolved the conflict about number. While on this topic of 
prazuu, the (chief) Praha (vital force) will be dealt with (by the aphorist) 
later; now is being determined the number of the other prams (organs). 

The doubt (about the number) arises here owing to a conflict among the 
Vedic texts. At one place the pranas are declared to be seven, as in, "From 
Him emerge the seven prams" (Mu. II. i. 8). At another place again eight 
pranas characterized as grahas (i.e. perceivers or sense-organs), are declared, 
as in, "There are eight grahas and eight atigrahas (i.e. super-grahas, i.e. 
sense-objects determining the nature of the perceptions)"(Br. III. ii. 1). At 
some place the number is nine: "The prangs in the head are seven indeed, 
and two are below" (Tai. S. V. i. 7.1). In some place the number is ten: "Nine 
indeed are the organs in a man, and the tenth is the navel" (Tai. S. V. iii. 2.3). 
In another place it is eleven: "The ten organs in the human body with the 
mind as the eleventh" (Br. III. ix. 4). In some place it is twelve, for instance 
in the text (beginning with): "As the skin is the one goal of all kinds of 
touch" etc. (Br. II. iv. 11); somewhere it is thirteen, as in the text (beginning 
with): "The organ of sight and the object of vision" etc. (Pr. IV. 8). Thus are 
the Vedic texts at variance as regards the number of the prams. What then is 
the conclusion to be arrived at? 


BRr seven (in number) ;ft. because of being so understood w and 
ftlra,:ql,q because of being specified. 

5. The prazzas are seven in number because of being so known and 
because of such a specification. 

Opponent: The prams are surely seven in number. 




Why? 


"Because of being so known", because the organs are known to be so 
many from such Vedic texts as, "From Him emerge the seven prams" (Mu. 
II. i. 8). Moreover, they are specified as such in, "The prams in the head are 
seven indeed" (Tai. S. V. i. 7.1). 

Objection : We come across a repetition of the word "seven" in the text: 
"The prams have been deposited (in the cavity of the heart) by seven and 
seven" (Mu. II. i. 8). And that repetition leads us to understand that the 
prams are more than seven. 

Opponent : That is no defect; for the repetition is made from the point of 
view of the different persons, meaning thereby that the prangs are seven in 
each person, but not that each group of seven prams differs from other 
groups of seven prams intrinsically. 

Objection : Have not the numbers eight, etc. also been cited in regard to 
the prams? So how can they be seven only? 

Opponent : True, they have been cited; but since there is a conflict, only 
one of the numbers has to be accepted. But as it is reasonable to assume the 
smallest number, (according to the law of parsimony), we stick to the 
number seven. The other figures that are met with in the texts, are used from 
the point of view of the difference of functions. 

Vedmuin : To this the reply is being given: 

psp feM fo; ii^ii 

q But ecr-3rrqq: hands etc. (are there); ft it being established (thus) ate: 
therefore q q$ not so. 



6. But the hands etc. are there; since (an excess is) established thus, 
therefore it is not so. 

But hands and other pra7zas are mentioned in the Upanisads in addition to 
the seven prJZzas in such texts as, "The hands indeed are the grahas; they 
are controlled by the atigraha, work, for one does work with the hands" (Br. 
III. ii. 8). "It being established" that there is an excess over seven, it is even 
possible to justify the number seven by considering it to be included in the 
greater number. When there is a dispute about a smaller and a greater 
number, the greater number should be accepted, for the smaller one can be 
accommodated within the greater; but not so can the greater be 
accommodated within the smaller. Hence it is not to be thought that the 
pranas must be seven in number in keeping with the logic of preferring the 
less (in conformity with the law of parsimony). Rather those pranas should 
be eleven only, in accordance with the (greater) number occurring later. In 
support of this, the text was quoted: "The ten organs in the human body with 
the atma, as the eleventh" (Br. III. ix. 4). By the word atma, we arc to 
understand the internal organ (mind), for the context is of the organs (and 
not of the Self which is the usual meaning of atma). 

Opponent : Were not numbers greater than eleven, viz twelve and thirteen 
cited by us? 

•Vedantin : Truly they were cited; but there are no such objects (or 
functions) over and above eleven, for the sake of which one would have to 
posit more organs. The five senseobjects are sound, touch, colour, taste, and 
smell; and there are five sense-organs (ear, skin, eye, tongue, and nose) for 
their perception. The five activities are speaking, grasping, walking, electing, 
and enjoying, for which are the five motor-organs. And the mind which has 
to deal with all the objects and which operates over all the three periods of 
time is but one having various functions. According to the difference of 
these functions, that same internal organ is sometimes referred to by various 
names, viz mind, intellect, mind-stuff (memory), and egoism, as though 
these are quite different. Thus it is that after enumerating the different 
functions starting with desire, the Upanisad says: "(Desire, resolve, doubt, 
faith, want of faith, steadiness, unsteadiness, shame, intelligence, and fear)- 



all these are but the mind" (B;. I. v. 3). Moreover, one who would consider 
the seven organs (two eyes, two cars, two nostrils, and tongue) in the head to 
be the only organs, would really accept four organs (of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, and talking); for though they are really four, they become 
manifested in different places and are then counted as seven, viz two ears, 
two eyes, two nostrils, and one tongue. It cannot be asserted that the other 
organs are but the different functions of these four, for the functions of the 
(motor-organs like) hands etc. belong altogether to a different class. 
Similarly in the text, "Nine indeed are the prattas in a man, the tenth is the 
navel" (Tai. S. VII. v. 1.2), the prangs are numbered as ten from the point of 
view of the orifices in the body, but not from the point of view of the 
difference in the nature of the organs, which fact becomes clear from the 
statement, "The navel is the tenth." For no such organ as the navel is 
recognized any,,s here. But for the chief vital force, the navel, too, is a 
special place of residence, and hence it is said that the navel is the tenth. 
Some organs are counted somewhere for the sake of meditation (Tai. S. V. i. 
7.1), whereas elsewhere they are counted by way of illustrating (some point 
in view) (as in Br. III. ii. 1). Thus since the counting of the organs follows 
diverse patterns, one has to consider what point of view is involved in a 
particular statement. The final conclusion that stands established, however, is 
that the mention of the prams as eleven is authoritative, since that conforms 
to the objects (or functions) of the organs. 

Here is an alternative way of explaining the two aphorisms: 

Opponent : The pranas (organs) must be seven in number, since the 
Upanipd mentions the departure of seven only (at the time of death) in the 
text, "When it (the soul) departs, the vital force follows; when the vital force 
departs all the (sense-) organs follow" (Br. IV. iv. 2). 

Objection : Is not the word "all" also mentioned there? Why is it asserted 
that the seven organs alone depart? 

Opponent: The answer is given in, "because there is such a specification". 
The relevant seven organs alone, counting from the eyes to the skin, are 
"specified", that is to say, dealt with here one by one by making the start 
with, "[When this (soul) becomes weak and senseless, as it were, the organs 



come to it] ... When the presiding deity of the eye turns back from all sides, 
the man fails to notice colour. The eye becomes united (with the subtle 
body); then people se,-, 'He does not see"' (Br. IV. iv. 1-2). Besides, the word 
"all" refers to all that is relevant (to the context). Thus when it is said, "All 
the Brahmanas have to be fed", the invited Brahmaiias, who form the subject 
of the speech, are alone meant by the word "all" and not the others (who are 
uninvited). Similarly in the present context, the seven prams which are under 
discussion (viz the organs of vision, smell, speech, enjoyment, hearing, 
thinking, touch) are referred to by the word "all", but not the others. 

Objection : Is not the intellect also counted (in Br. IV. iv. 2) as the eighth? 
So how can it be said that the seven alone are enumerated? 

Opponent: That is no defect; for although the mind and the intellect differ 
in their functions (of thinking and knowing), they have no substantial 
difference; and hence the number seven is justifiable. Therefore the pra?ias 
are seven only. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: "But there are in evidence 
other organs like the hands etc. over and above the seven", as mentioned in 
such texts as, "The two hands are the graha" etc. (Br. III. ii. 8). This state of 
being a graha conveys the sense of bondage, implying that the embodied 
soul becomes hound down by this bondage called the graha (lit. one that 
grasp.). That embodied soul is not bound down to a single body, for bondage 
exists equally in other bodies as well. So by implication this comes to mean 
that this bondage, called graha, moves over to other bodies as well. And in 
support of this is the Smrti text: "He (the soul ) becomes associated with the 
assembla g e of ei ght." counting from Prana, which (eight) become its 
indicatory marks. One becomes bound when one is under their bondage, and 
free when liberated from them." This text shows that till liberation, the soul 
does not become dissociated from this bondage, called graha. And in the 
Pra§na Upanigad of the Atharva Veda, where the organs and their objects are 
enumerated in the passage opening with, "the organ of sight, and the object 
of vision" (IV. 8), the organs (of action) like hands etc. are also enumerated 
along with their objects in a similar way in, "the hands and the objects 
grasped, sex and enjoyment, the organ of excretion and the excreta, the feet 







and the space trodden" (ibid.). Similarly, the text, "These are the ten organs 
in the human body, with the mind as the eleventh. When they depart from 
this mortal body, they make (one's relations) weep" (Br. Ill. ix. 4), shows that 
the eleven organs leave the body (after death). And the word "all", being 
connected with the word prdi.ias, indicates all the prangs, and hence it 
cannot be confined to the seven alone on the strength of the immediate topic; 
for a direct Vedic text is of higher authority than a topic. Even in the 
example, "All the Brahmanas are to be fed", we should logically understand 
all the Brahmanas on the earth, for that is the meaning of the word "all". But 
since the feeding of all is not possible, we understand by a figure of speech 
that the "all" implies all the invited Brahmanas. But in the case under 
discussion there is no valid ground for restricting the meaning of "all". 
Therefore all the prams are to be understood here by the word "all", though 
the seven are presented by way of illustration. Thus this is beyond criticism. 
Hence, the conclusion arrived at is that the prams are eleven in number as 
gathered from the Vedic texts and in accordance with their function. 


Topic 3: ATOMIC PRANAS 



7. And the organs are atomic (i.e. subtle and limited in size). 

Now is bein g added another characteristic of the or g ans themselves. These 
org ans , that are bein g considered , are also to be known as atomic. The 
atomicity of the or g ans consists in their bein g fine ( be yond si g ht and touch ) 
and limited ( of a medium size ): but they are not like the ultimate atoms , for 
that would make their activities over the entire body impossible. These 
org ans are subtle : for if they were g ross , they would have been perceived b y 
people near a d ying man , when they come out of the body like a snake out of 
































its hole. And these or g ans are limited in size ; for if they be all-pervasive , it 
will set at nau g ht the Vedie texts speakin g of their departure from and 
comin g hack ( to the bod y); and in that case , it will not be established that 
"the soul comes to have such a p pellations because of the dominance of the 
modes of the intellect"e tB. S. II. iii. 29). 

Opponent : Even though the organs be all-pervasive, they can function 
only in the body. 

Veddntin : Not so , for it is reasonable to hold that every function is a 
karana ( i.e. an or g an for the soul ); for accordin g to us . whatever ( in the 
bod y) performs a function is Itself a karana . call it a function or somethin g 
else (a function or a functionar y). 1 That being the case, the contention would 
centre round a mere term. Hence it would be useless to fancy that the organs 
are all-pervasive. Thus we assert that these organs are subtle and limited in 
size. 


Topic 4: CHIEF PRANA : ITS CREATION 


\ 



8. So also the foremost (Prana is a product of Brahman). 

The conclusion (that the other pranas are the products of Brahman) is 
being extended to the chief Prana to imply that it too is a product of 
Brahman like the other pra?zas. And this is thus: It has been said in a general 
way that all the praZzas are the products of Brahman, for in the Upani$adic 


































text, "From Him originates the vital force (Prana) as well as the mind and all 
the senses" (Mu. II. i. 3), we hear of the origin of Prana separately from the 
origin of the mind associated with the organs; and we also have this from 
such texts as, "He created Prana" (Pr. VI. 4). 

Opponent: What again is the need for this extended application? 

Vedantin : It is meant for removin g another doubt. For in the Nasadi va 
Sukta t h vmn startin g with "nasad asit" ) which has Brahman as its sub j ect- 
matter . there is a descriptive verse (of dissolution ) ; "Then there was neither 
death , nor even nectar ; there was neither ( moon ) the symbol of ni ght, nor 
( sun ) the symbol of day. Only the one Brahman breathed (or vibrated , i.e. 
existed ) to g ether with the Maya held in Itself , but without any air. Apart 
from it . nothin g existed either as different or hi g her". ( It V. VIII. vii. 17 ). 
Since in the word "anit (lit, vibrated or breathed )", the activity of prana is 
mentioned , ( it may be ar g ued that ) the text indicates as thou g h Prana existed 
before creation. From this somebody may arrive at the conclusion that Prana 
is birthless. That misconception is bein g removed with the help of the 
extended a p plication (of the previous conclusion ) . Even the word snit does 
not indicate the existence of Pram before creation , for it is modified by the 
word avatam (without air ) . Moreover , in the text . "He is without Prana and 
without mind ; He is pure" ( Mu. H. L 2 ). it is shown that the ultimate material 
cause is free from all such attributes as the Prana. Accordin gly, the word snit 
( in the sense of Js.it ) is here used only to show the existence of the cause 
( Brahman )." 

The word fregha (foremost) denotes the chief vital force, for this is 
pointed out by the Upani$adic text, "Prdna is indeed the first bom and the 
foremost" (Ch. V. i. 1). Prdna is the eldest because it starts functioning from 
the very act of depositing the seed (in the womb). Were Prdna inactive at the 
time, the seed deposited in the uterus would either suppurate or fail to lead to 
conception. But none of the other organs-ear and the rest-is the eldest; since 
it can function only after its aperture, such as the ear-hole, is developed. And 
Prdna is the foremost, because of its superior qualities; for the Upani$ad 
declares: "We cannot live without you" (said the other organs), (Be. VI. i. 
13). 














































































TOPIC 5: NATURE OF PRANA 


^ WlW 

q Not -f4taught air and function TK-3gkqr onaccountof being separately. 

9. Praha is neither air nor a function, because it is taught separately. 

Now is being considered the nature of this chief Praha. When on this 
subject, the apparent view is that prazra is air according to the Upani$ad: 
"That which is Praha is air, and that air is of five kinds: outgoing breath, 
incoming breath, that which is spread over the whole body, that which 
moves upward, and that which digests." Or the conclusion may be that Prang 
is the combined activity of all the organs, as it is believed by another school 
of thought (Sarilkhyas). For the followers of that school speak thus: "The 
five kinds of vdyu (air), counting from Prdna, are merely the combined 
activities of the organs." 

Veddntin : With regard to this the answer is: "Praha is neither air nor any 
function (of the organs)." 


Why-? 

"Because it is tau g ht separately." For example . Prdna is spoken of 
se parately from air in . "Prdna indeed is a quadrant of Brahman : it shines and 
scatters heats with air as its light" (Ch. III. xviii. 4). Had Prdna been the 
same as air, it would not have been mentioned separately from air. Similarly 
Prirna is spoken of separately from the activities of the organs, for after 
enumerating the organs of speech and the rest one by one, instruction is 
given about Prima separately at various places. Since one who functions and 
the function itself are non-different, therefore Prdna would not have been 
spoken of separately if it were a mere function of the organs. Besides, we 














should take into consideration the instructions about Prdna separately from 
air and the functions as contained in such texts as: "From Him originates 
Prdna as well as the mind and all the organs, space, and air" (Mu. II. i. 3). 
Moreover, it is not a possibility that all the organs should have a single 
combined function, for each one has its individual function, and a collection 
of things cannot have any such independent activity. 

Opponent : This can be possible on the analogy of moving a cage. Just as 
eleven birds living in the same cage can have their well-determined 
individual activities, and yet in their combination may shake the cage, 
similarly, though the eleven organs contained in the same body have their 
well-defined individual functions, yet in their combination they perform a 
function which is called Prdna. 

Veddntin : The answer is . no. In the illustration , it is quite possible for the 
birds to shake the ca g e in their combination , endowed as they are with some 
individual subsidiary activities conducive to the shakin g of the ca ge: for this 
is a matter of experience. But in the case under discussion , it is not 
reasonable to hold that the or g ans , possessed of the subsidiar y ( individual ) 
functions of hearin g etc. . should perform in their combination the function of 
Prdna (viz livin g)., because there ii no proof in su p port of this , and because 
the function of livin g is quite different in nature from those of hearin g etc, 1 " 
Moreover, the declaration of the superiority etc. of Prdna, and the taking up 
of positions subordinate to it by speech etc., do not fit in with a I'rdna 
conceived of as a mere function of the organs. Therefore (the chief) Prdna is 
different both from air and the functions (of the organs). 

Opponent : How then can there be such a text as: "That which is Prmta is 
air" (Br. III.i.5)? 

Veddntin : The answer is: It is the selfsame air itself that, after entering the 
body and assuming five aspects, and existing there with some specialized 
features (not present in common air), is called by the word Prdna; but it is 
neither a different principle nor is it mere air. Hence there is no conflict 
between the texts showing identity and difference. 


































Opponent : It may well be then that just like the soul, (the chief) Prana 
also becomes independent in this body by virtue of its own predominance 
and the acceptance of secondary positions by the organs of speech and the 
rest. It is in accordance with this that many kinds of glory of Prana are 
mentioned by the Vedic texts, such for instance as: "When the organs go to 
sleep, Prana alone keeps awake"; "Pra?ia alone is not overpowered by death" 
(Br. I. v. 21); "Prana is the place of merger" (Ch. IV. iii. 3), for it withdraws 
into itself the organs of speech etc.; "Prana protects the other organs like a 
mother her sons" (Pr. II. 13). Hence there arises the possibility of Prana too 
having independence like the soul. 

Veddntin : That position is being refuted. 





I But (not independent) aai:-amfa-aq just like the organs of vision etc. on 
account of having been taught along with them and other reasons. 

10. But Prdna is not independent just like the organs of vision etc., 
because instruction is imparted along with the-?n and because of other 
reasons. 

The word "but" rules out the view that (the chief) Prdna is independent 
like the soul. As the eye etc. are not independent, but are subservient to the 
soul for making possible its agentship and experience, even as the king's 
subjects are to the king, so also the chief Prdna is subservient to the soul, 
managing every thing for it like the minister of a king; but it is not 
independent. 

Opponent: Why? 

Vedantin : "Because instruction is imparted (in the scriptures) along with 
them, and because of other reasons." For in such places as the story of Prana, 
it is spoken of along with them, i.e. the organs of vision etc. And it is 



reasonable to instruct about things of the same nature together, as in the case 
of the hymns Brhat, Rathantara, etc. (which are sung together in a sacrifice). 
By the term "other reasons" are shown such additional grounds for 
eliminating Prana's independence, as its being a composite thing, 
unconscious, and so on. 

Opponent : It may be said that if Prdna be assumed to be an organ of the 
soul just like the organs of vision etc., then it should have its own distinct 
object like (the eye etc. having) colour etc. For the eye etc. become the 
organs of the soul, owing to such individual functions as the cognition of 
colour and so on. Moreover, the functions are counted to be eleven only, viz 
perception of colour and so on, in conformity with which the organs are also 
enumerated as eleven; but no such twelfth group of functions is met with for 
accommodating which this twelfth organ has to be assumed. 

Vedantin : Hence comes the answer: 

aiTOTO if I5 llfill 

a And atv[cq since it is not a sense-organ, q ft: no fault (arises); fk for ffW 
so lFd (the Upani$ad) shows. 

11. No fault accrues, because Prana is not a sense-organ. For thus it is 
shoum in the Upanisads. 

The defect of a fresh object being needed does not arise, for Prana is not 
an organ, inasmuch as Prana, unlike the eye etc., is not recognized to be a 
sense-organ from the point of view of its determining (through cognition) 
some object of perception. But this is not, however, tantamount to its having 
no function. 

How? 

For the (Chandogya) Upani$ad shows in such contexts as the story of 
Prana etc. that the (chief) Prana has a distinct function, which is not possible 



for the other prarzas (organs). The start is made with, "Once upon a time the 
organs (of perception and action) began to dispute about their individual 
supremacy"; then the statement (of Prajapati) is made, "That one among you 
is the greatest, on whose departure, the body seems to become the most 
impure" (Ch. V. i. 6-7), and then it is shown that after the departure of the 
organ of speech etc. individually, life continues as before, though without the 
function of the particular organ. Then the Upani$ad shows that when the 
(chief) Prdzza attempts to depart, the organs, of speech etc. become 
weakened, and there arises the possibility of the death of the body. While 
showing all this, the Upani~ad demonstrates that the continuance of the body 
and organs is dependent on Prana. This same fact is stated in the Upani$adic 
text, "To them the (chief) Prana said, 'Do not he deluded; it is I who hold 
this body together by dividing myself in five ways and providing support for 
it."' (ibid.). And in the text, "(The radiant infinite being) ... preserves this 
unclean nest (of a body) with the help of Praia (vital force), (and roams out 
of the nest)", the Brhadaranyaka Upani~ad (IV. iii. 12) shows that when the 
organs sleep, the preservation of the body is effected by Pra?za. It also 
shows that the nourishment of the body and organs is accomplished through 
Prana, in such texts as, "From whatever member the vital force departs, right 
there it withers" (Br. I. iii. 19), "Whatever the individual eats or drinks 
through Prana, thereby he nourishes the other organs" (echo of Br. I. iii. 18). 
The departure of the soul from the body and its continuance there are shown 
to be owing to Prana in the texts, "(He deliberated), 'As a result of whose 
departure shall I rise up? And as a result of whose continuance shall I remain 
established?' He created Prdna" (Pr. VI. 3-4). 

iirii 

aqgfgp It is taught (that Prana is) q"i: possessed of five modes qq like the 
mind. 



12. It is taught that Prana has five states like the mind. 



Prdna has its own distinct functions, for this further reason that Prima is 
spoken of in the ~Upani$ads as possessed of five modes (or states of 
existence): "Prdna, apana, vyana, udana, and sarrtdna" (Br. I. v. 3). And this 
distinction of states is derived from the different kinds of activity. Prdna is 
that which moves forward and performs the function of exhaling etc. Apana 
is that which goes backward and performs the function of inhaling etc. 
Vyana exists in between these two and performs works requiring strength. 
Uddna moves upward and is the cause of such acts as departure from the 
body. Samana is that which carries the essence of food equally (samana) to 
all the limbs. Thus "Prana has five states (modes) like the mind". Just as the 
mind has five modes, so has Praia. The five modes of the mind that are 
caused by the (five) organs, ear etc., in relation to the (five) objects, sound 
etc., are well known. But desire, resolve, etc., enumerated in the Upanisad 
(Br. I. v. 3), are not to be accepted (here), for they exceed the number five. 

Opponent : Even from this viewpoint there are other mental states 
comprehending the past, future, etc., which are independent of the ear etc., 
and so here is an excess over the number five just the same. 

Veddntin : In that case, in accordance with the dictum, "Unless an 
opponent's view is forbidden, it can be accepted as one's own", the five 
mental states well-known in the books on Yoga, can be accepted, which are, 
"Right knowledge, error, false knowledge, sleep, memory" (Patanjali, I. i. 6). 
Or it may he understood in this way, that, Prdna is compared with the mind 
in point of the plurality of the states only (but not their number). And the 
aphorism is to be construed to mean that since Praia has five states, it is also 
an instrument of the soul just like the mind. 


TOPIC 6: PRANA IS ATOMIC 




13. And the chief Prana is atomic (i.e. subtle and limited in size). 

And like the other pra zas (organs) the chief Prana is also subtle 
(invisible) and limited in size. The atomicity is to be understood, in this 
connection as well, to mean subtleness and limitation in size and not any 
similarity to the ultimate atoms, for through its five states it pervades the 
whole body. Prana is subtle since people near by do not see it at the time of 
its leaving the body; and it is limited in size in accordance with the 
Upanipdic texts speaking of its departure from and coming back to the body. 

Opponent : Is not the all-pervasiveness also of Prd?ia mentioned by the 
scriptures in such texts as the following: "It is equal to a white ant, equal to a 
mosquito, equal to an elephant, equal to these three worlds, equal to this 
universe" (Br. I. iii. 22)? 

Vedantin : The reply to this is: This all-pervasiveness is declared not from 
the point of view of any individual body, but from that of the universal and 
individual aspects of the same divine Prana residing in Hirar}yagarbha. 
Moreover, the statement, "equal to the white ant" etc., which speaks of 
equality (with different creatures), only points out the fact that Prana, as it 
exists in such individual creatures, is limited in dimension. Hence there is no 
defect. 


TOPIC 7: PRESIDING DEITIES 



q But 7qW-3rft_aTMi there is (the fact of) presiding over by Fire and 
others, ~ff-wqffmq for so it is taught in the scriptures. 

14. But there is the (fact of) presiding over by (the deities) Fire and others, 
for so it is taught in the scriptures. 

Now it is being considered whether the prams under discussion are 
capable of engaging in their respective works by virtue of their own powers, 
or they do so under the guidance of deities. 

Opponent : As to that, the conclusion drawn is that the prams engage in 
their respective works by virtue of the power each is equipped with for 
performing those works. Besides, on the assumption that the prams act under 
the guidance of deities, those presiding deities themselves will become the 
experiencers, so that the experiencership of the embodied soul will be 
stultified. Hence these organs engage in work by virtue of their own power. 

Vedantin : This being the position, the aphorism is enunciated: "But there 
is the presiding over by Fire and others" etc. The word "but" refutes the 
opposite view; and the assertion is made that the organs of speech and the 
rest engage in their respective works when they are presided over by light 
etc., that is to say, by the deities identifying themselves with light (i.e. fire) 
etc. The reason is advanced in, "for so it is taught in the scriptures" For it is 
stated thus, "Fire entered into the mouth, taking the form of the organ of 
speech" (Ai. I. ii. 4) etc. The assumption of the form of speech by Fire and 
his entry into the mouth as a deity, are stated by taking it for granted that 
Fire presides (over speech). If this relation (of presiding) as a deity be 
denied, fire is not noticed to have any special relation either with the mouth 
or speech. In a similar way are to be interpreted the sentences starting with, 
"Air entered into the nostrils in the form of the organ of smell" etc. (ibid.). 
So also elsewhere, this very fact is confirmed by speaking of the organs of 
speech etc. as being illumined by Fire etc., as in, "Speech indeed, is a fourth 



quadrant of Brahman (eye, ear, and mind being the other three). It shines and 
emits heat (i.e. becomes manifest and active) through the light that is fire" 
(Ch. III. xviii. 3), and similar texts. This very fact is indicated by such texts 
as, "It (the vital force) carried the organ of speech, the foremost one, first. 
When the organ of speech got rid of death, it became Fire" etc. (Br. I. iii. 12), 
where occur statements about the organs of speech etc. becoming Fire etc. 
And wherever an enumeration of speech etc. and Fire etc., is undertaken by 
dividing them into the two classes of the physical and the divine, it is made 
on this pattern (of some being presided over and others being their deities). 
In the Smrti also, as in the following verse and others, it is shown in detail 
how speech etc. are presided over by Fire etc.; "The Brahmarias who have 
realized truth, say that the organ of speech exists on the bodily plane, the 
objects of speech on the natural plane, and Fire on the divine plane". As for 
the statement that the organs can engage in their works by virtue of the 
powers they themselves possess, that is unreasonable; for carts etc. though 
capable of performing their own function, are seen to act when impelled by 
bullocks etc. Moreover, though activity may be possible either way-(either 
spontaneously or under impulsion) -still on the authority of the scriptures it 
is affirmed that the organs are presided over by their deities.- 


And the objection is being demolished that those deities themselves will 
become the experiencers, and not so the embodied soul: 



(Connected) sT(aiqici with the possessor of the organs g7.-;rq as is known 
from the Vedic texts. 

15. (The organs are) connected with the possessor of the organs, as is 
known from the Vedic texts. 




Though there are the deities presiding over the organs, still it is 
understood from the Vedic texts that these organs are related with the 
embodied soul itself which is the master of the assemblage of body and 
organs, and which is the possessor of the vital force. Thus there is the text, 
"Then (after the entry of the vital force in the body), the organ of sight enters 
into the space that is within the black pupil, there exists the soul (identifying 
itself with the eye); and the eye is meant for the sake of seeing by the soul. 
Again that which knows, V I smell this', is the soul, and the sense of smell is 
for the sake of smelling by it" (Ch. VIII. xii. 4). These and other texts of the 
same class speak of the relation of the organs with the embodied soul itself. 
Moreover, the deities presiding severally over the organs are many in 
number; and hence they cannot be considered to be the experiencers in this 
body; for from the possibility of co-ordinated reco g nition etc." it is realized 
that the embodied soul which experiences in this body is but one. 

aw ^ PiwKj ii^ii 

a And f;jcqzqjq on account of the constancy c of that one (i.e. the soul). 

16. And on account of that soul's constant relation (with the body). 

And the embodied soul , as the experiencer , 12 has a constant relation with 
the bod y: for it has the possibility of bein g affected by virtue and vice and 
the experiences of ha p piness and sorrow , but not so the deities. For they are 
seated in their exalted divine spheres , and cannot therefore reasonabl y 
become the experiencers in this i g noble body. To this effect occurs the text ." 
( Howsoever these bein g s ma y g rieve , that g rief of theirs remains connected 
with them ) . But only merit g oes to Him (Hiraf lvag arhha ) . No demerit ever 
g oes to the g ods" t Br. I. v. 20 ) . Besides , the connection of the or g ans is ever 
with the embodied soul , for they are seen to accompany it at the times of 
death etc. , as is stated in such Vedic texts: "When it ( the soul ) departs , the 
( chief ) Praha ( vital force ) follows ; when the vital force departs , all the 




























































Prdnas ( org ans ) follow" ( Br. IV. iv. 2 ) . Hence althou g h the deities are there , 
presidin g over the or g ans , vet the embodied soul does not cease to be the 
ex perience!' ; for the deities are to be classed with the or g ans and not with the 
ex periencin g souls. 13 

TOPIC 8: PRANA AND PRANAS 

3 tfhwifr ^ ii^ii 

aiq'lf Apart 3Rg7 from the chief (Praha), k they (the other prams) are 
gTfar organs ffq-m4qiRjj on account of being designated thus. 

17. As distinguished from the chief Prdna, the other praises (eleven in 
number) are the organs, for they are so designated. 

Doubt : The chief Prang which is one and the other eleven prairas have 
been presented in order. Here, now, crops up another doubt whether the other 
prams are only the various modes of the chief Prana or they are independent 
realities. What is the conclusion to be arrived at then? 

Opponent: The others are mere modes of the chief Prd?ra itself. 

How is this known? 

From the Vedic texts. Thus it is that by presenting the chief Prmra and the 
other prd?las in close proximity, the Upani$ad declares that the others are 
identical with the chief Prdna: "Well, let us all be of its form, saying this 
they all (the organs) assumed its form" (Br. I. v. 21). Moreover, the word 
prdna is common; and hence the objects denoted by it are ascertained to be 
the same; for otherwise the word prmra will come to have various meanings; 
or else it will have the primary meaning at one place and a figurative 
meaning at another, all which is improper. Hence the eleven organs of 
speech etc. are as much the modes of the same Pru»a as the five modes, 
prang, apana, etc. are. 
















Vedantin : To this we say that speech etc. are really independent entities, 
different from prana. 

Why? 

"Because they are designated separately." 

In what does this difference of designation consist? 

These organs (prams) under discussion, which remain after leaving aside 
the (chief) Prd?ta, are called the eleven organs, for such a presentation is met 
with in the Vedic texts. In such texts as, "From Him originates Praha, as well 
as the mind and all the organs" (Mu. II. i. 3), Pra?ta is mentioned separately, 
and separately are mentioned the organs. 

Opponent: If such he the line of argument, then the mind like (the chief) 
Pralta should he taken out of the organs, for it is noticed to be separately 
mentioned in "the mind and all the organs" (ibid). 

Vedantin : Quite so; but in the Smrti the organs are counted as eleven, and 
hence the mind also is accepted to be an organ like those of hearing etc. But 
Prana is not recognized as an organ either in the Upanipds or the Smctis. 
And this difference in designation becomes logical if there is a substantial 
distinction. But, if they are the same in substance, then it amounts to a 
contradiction to hold that the very same Prana sometimes gets the 
appellation of an organ and sometimes not. Accordingly, the .other organs 
differ in substance from the chief Prana. 


Why, again, do they belong to a different category? 




18. Because of the (mention of) difference in the Upanisads. 

For everywhere in the Upani$ads (the chief) Prana is mentioned 
separately from the organs of speech etc. (In the Brhadaranyaka Upanipd) 
the commencement is made thus: "They (the organs) said to the organ of 
speech" (Br. I. iii. 2); then the organs of speech etc. are presented as being 
struck with the evil of the Asuras (demons), and the topic of the organs of 
speech etc. is concluded; after that the chief Prana, the shatterer of the 
Asuras, is presented separately in, "Then they said to this chief vital force" 
(Br. I. iii. 7). So also are to be cited the other texts about difference, such as, 
"('Three He designed for Himself eans:) The mind, the organ of speech, and 
Prana (vital force). These He designed for Himself" (Br. I. v. 3). From this 
also it follows that the other prangs (organs) form a category different from 
the chief Prana. 


What further reason is there for their being different in category? 




19. And (the organs are different from Prana) because of the dissimilarity 
in characteristics. 

Moreover, there is a dissimilarity in characteristics between the chief 
Prana and the others. When the organs of speech etc. go to sleep, the chief 
Prana alone keeps awake; and it alone is beyond the grasp of Death (i.e. the 
evil of attachment), whereas the others are within Death's reach. The 
continuance or death of the body is dependent on the continuance or 
departure of the vital force and not of the other organs. The organs are the 
causes for the perception of their objects, but not so is Prima. There are 
many other differences of characteristics of this kind between (the chief) 
Prana and the organs. From this also it is proved that they belong to different 
categories. 

The opinion was advanced that the vital force itself has become the organs 
according to the text, "They all assumed its form" (Br. I. v. 21); that is 
illogical, for difference becomes obvious even there when the sequence of 
thought in the topic as a whole is taken into consideration. Thus the start is 
made with the organs of speech etc. in the text, "The organ of speech took a 
vow, V I will go on speaking'" (ibid.); and then it is stated that the organs of 
speech etc. were captured by Death in the form of fatigue in the text, "Death 
captured them in the form of fatigue. Therefore the organ of speech 
invariably gets tired" (ibid.). Last of all is mentioned the vital force 
separately as not overwhelmed by Death in the text, "But Death did not 
overtake this vital force in the body" (ibid.). Its superiority is affirmed in, 
"This one is the greatest among us" (ibid.). So in conformity with all this, it 
is to be understood that the assumption of the form of the vital force by the 



organs of speech etc. means that the acquisition of their power of activity is 
dependent on Prdna, but it does not mean an identity with it. From this fact 
also, it becomes established that the word Prdna is applied to the organs by a 
figure of speech. And just in line with this is the text, "They all assumed its 
form. Therefore they are called by this name of Prdna" (ibid.), which shows 
that the word pram, denoting the chief Prdna, is applied to the organs by a 
figure of speech. Therefore the organs belong to a category different from 
Puna. 


Topic 9: CREATION OF GROSS OBJECTS 



The arrangement of designation and shape however (is) f-Tiff: by Him 
who made the elements q tripartite 3q~ for (so) it is taught. 

20. The arrangement of designation and shape, however, is by Him who 
made the elements tripartite, for it is taught (in the Upaniads). 

Doubt : In the course of speaking about Existence-Brahman, the creation 
of fire, water, and food (earth) is spoken of, and then it is taught, "That 
Deity, that is such, deliberated, 'Well, let me manifest names and forms by 
Myself entering into these three gods as their individual souls. Let Me make 
each of them tripartite'" (a mixture of the three) (Ch. VI. iii. 2). Here the 
doubt arises: Is this manifestation of names and forms an act of the 
individual soul or of God? 

Opponent : While in this predicament, the conclusion to be arrived at is 
that this evolving of names and forms is an act of the individual soul. 

Why? 


Because of the qualifying phrase, "as the individual soul". Just as in 
common experience it is seen that a king ascribes to himself the act of 



estimating the enemy's strength by saying, "Let me enter into the enemy's 
ranks through scouts and estimate their strength", where he uses the first 
person in, "Let me estimate", because he is the directing agent of the act of 
counting by the scouts, even so the Deity attributes to Himself the act of 
evolving names and forms by saying in the first person, "Let Me manifest", 
because He is the directing agent of the (actual) act of manifestation by the 
individual soul. Moreover, it is seen that the individual soul is the agent in 
such manifestations as the coining of names like 0ittha (a wooden elephant), 
4iavittha (a wooden deer) and so on, as also the shaping of articles like a pot 
or a plate. Therefore this manifestation is an act of the individual soul. 

Vedi ntin : This bein g the position , the aphorist sa ys. "The arran g ement of 
desi g nation and sha pe, however" etc, Bv the word "however" is refuted the 
op ponent's point of view. "The arran g ement of desi g nation and shape" 
means the manifestation of names and forms. And God is referred to in "b v 

Him who made the elements tripartite" ; 14 for in the matter of creating the 
tripartites His agency is stated to be indubitable. This creation of names and 
this creation of forms such as fire, sun, moon, lightning, etc. (in the divine 
context), as also the creation of names and forms for every individual and 
every species like Kusa grass, Kara grass, Palma tree etc. (in the material 
context), and animals, deer, men, and others (in the corporeal context), must 
be an act of God who created fire, water, and earth. 

Why? 

"For so it is taught." Thus by opening with the sentence, "That Deity, that 
was such, deliberated", and then using the first person in the statement, "Let 
Me manifest names and forms," it is the creatorship of the supreme Brahman 
Itself that is taught here. 

Opponent : On the strength of the use of the qualifying phrase, "as this 
individual soul", it has been ascertained that the manifestation is an act of 
the individual soul. 

Vedantin : This is not so. The phrase "as this individual soul" is to he 
construed with "by Myself entering into" and not with "Let Me manifest", 
for the former is in immediate proximity. Should the construction be with the 



















latter, the use of the first person, as referring to the Deity, in "Let Me 
manifest", will have to be imagined to be figurative. Moreover, an individual 
soul, bereft of divinity as it is, has no power of creatorship with regard to 
such diverse kinds of names and forms as mountains, rivers, seas, etc. Even 
in the case of those things, with regard to which the soul has any power, it is 
only under God's dispensation that it has this. And there is no such thing as 
an individual soul absolutely different from God, like a scout from the king, 
for the individual is described as "Myself", the state of individuality being 
contingent on the conditioning factors alone. From this it follows that even if 
this revelation of names and forms be an act of the individual, it is really an 
act of God. Moreover, the conclusion arrived at in all the Upani$ads is that 
God alone is the revealer of names and forms, as is evident from such texts 
as, "That which is called Space (Brahman) is surely the accomplisher of 
name and form" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1). Therefore, the manifestation of names 
and forms is surely an act of God who brought about the intermixture of the 
three elements. And it is the intention here to declare that the revelation of 
names and forms was preceded by the making of *-ach element tripartite, for 
in the very statement of the origin of fire, water, and earth is implied the 
manifestation of the name and form of each one of them. That fact of 
making tripartite is shown by the Upani$ad in the case of fire, sun, moon, 
lightning, etc. in "That which is the red glow of (gross) fire is the colour of 
(the subtle element) fire; that which is the white glow of (gross) fire, is the 
colour of (the subtle element) water; that which is the dark (i.e. gray) glow 
of (gross) fire, is the colour of (the subtle element) earth" etc. (Ch. VI. iv. 1). 
In the case of fire, the form fire is first revealed. And when the form is 
manifested, an object comes to exist, and then the name fire is revealed for 
it. This is how it is to be understood in the cases of the sun, moon, lightning, 
etc. And through this illustration of fire is shown the process of making 
tripartite all the three kinds of products, earth, water, and fire; for the 
commencement and conclusion of the topic are common to all the three. To 
elaborate this: The opening is made from a common standpoint in the 
passage, "Each of these three deities becomes tripartite" (Ch. VI. iii. 4), and 
the conclusion is also made from a common standpoint in the passage 
commencing with, "That which appeared (in the gross product) as though 
red was the colour of (subtle) fire", and ending with, "And that which 



appeared as though non-descript was the combination of those alone" (Ch. 
VI. iv. 6-7). 


Taking for granted that these three deities have their external state of 
tripartite existence, another state of tripartite existence for them in the bodily 
context was stated in, "These three deities undergo a triple conglomeration 
when they reach the state of men" (Ch. VI. iv. 7). This very fact is now being 
shown by the teacher (Vyasa), in accordance with the Upanisad itself, with a 
view to removing some defect that may be suspected here: 

fiHifc nft Wrcmfw<i)s[ ii^ii 

r-3rft Flesh etc. (are) Oj produced from earth r-tE as shown in the 
Upanisads; VqTzft: from the other two a as well. 

21. Flesh etc. are produced from earth as it is shown in the Upanisads. 
From the other two as well (evolve other things). 

According to the process shown in the scriptures, such products as flesh 
are generated from earth after it has become tripartite and is eaten by men. 
Thus there is the Upani$adic text, "Food when eaten becomes divided into 
three parts. That which is the grossest constituent of it becomes excreta; that 
which is the medium, becomes flesh; and that which is the subtlest becomes 
the mind" (Ch. VI. v. 1). The idea is that it is but the gross earth (made 
tripartite) that is eaten in the form of rice, barley, etc. Of that earth the 
grossest part goes out in the form of excreta. The medium portion builds up 
the flesh in the body; and the subtlest portion develops the mind. It is to be 
understood in accordance with the scriptures that the products of water and 
fire also develop similarly. Thus urine, blood, and pra.za evolve out of water, 
while bone, marrow, and the organ of speech are the products of fire. 

Here the opponent says that if in accordance with the text, "He made each 
of them tripartite" (Ch. VI. iii. 4), which speaks equally for all, it be the case 
that the elements and elementals are all tripartite, then from what do such 



special designations follow as "This is fire", "This is water", "This is earth", 
as also such references in the bodily context as "These flesh etc. are the 
products of the food (earth) eaten", "The blood etc. are the products of the 
water drunk", and "The bone etc. are the products of the fire (i.e. butter etc.) 
eaten?" 

Veddntin : With regard to this it is said, 

W® iiflii 

q But a A rq~raqTi~ owing to preponderance (occurs) cr-qTE: the 
(corresponding) designation of that, ffq-zm: (occurs) that corresponding 
designation. 

22. But owing to the preponderance (of any one) occurs the corresponding 
designation, occurs the corresponding designation. 

By the word "but" is refuted the objection raised. The abstract noun from 
vise,ca is vaiSe ya, which means preponderance. Although the process of 
making everything tripartite has taken place, still some elemental substance 
is found to preponderate in something, as for instance, in fire there is a 
preponderance of fire, in water there is a preponderance of water, and in 
earth there is a preponderance of earth. This process of triple combination is 
undertaken for the sake of making possible human dealings (i.e. phenomenal 
existence). Had the three elements formed into a single whole like the three 
strands of a rope twisted into one, no distinctive result could have been 
derived by human beings from the three elements separately. Hence though 
there is this triple intermixture, these particular designations of fire, water, 
and earth in the cases of both the elements and the elementals, follow from 
the preponderance of each. The repetition of the phrase "corresponding 
designation" indicates that the present Chapter is ended. 



SECriON I 



CHAPTER III 

SADHANA-SP1RITUAL PRACTICE 

Introduction : In the Second Chapter have been answered the ob j ections 
that can be raised from the standpoints of the Smftis and lo g ic a g ainst the 
realization of Brahman as propounded in the Upani~.ads. It has been 
ex plained why the views of others should be i g nored. The conflict of 
U paniSadie passa g es has also been removed. It has further been stated 
therein that all entities , except the individual souls , which are the means for 
the souls' experiences , emanate from Brahman. Now in this Third Chapter 
will be considered these sub i ects. The mode of transmi g ration of the 
individual soul , conditioned as it is by these paraphernalia ; its other states ; 
the nature of Brahman ; the difference or nondifference of meditations : the 
assembla g e or non-assembla g e of the attributes ; the attainment of the hi g hest 
human g oal throu g h complete knowled ge: the difference amon g the 
inj unctions for the methods of complete knowled ge: and absence of an y 
g radation in the state of liberation ( attained durin g the birth an which the 
means of knowled g e are adopted ) . Besides , some other topics will be 
discussed that crop up in connection with these. Of these sub j ects , the 
different courses of transmi g ration are shown in the first section by confinin g 
the attention to the meditation on the five fires : and this is done for 
g eneratin g dispassion . 1 for the Upani$ad savs at the end . "Therefore one 
should hate this "2 (Ch. V. x. 8). It has already been known that when the 
individual soul leaves the previous body and attains another, it is helped by 
the chief Prd za, it is accompanied by the senses and the mind, and it has 
ignorance, results of past actions, and the tendencies acquired in the previous 
birth as its main prop. This conclusion is arrived at from the passage starting 
with, "When the soul becomes weak and senseless, as it were, the organs 










































































come to it" (Br. IV. iv. 1), and ending with, "So does the soul throw this body 
away, or make it senseless, and creates another, a newer and better, form (i.e. 
body)" (Br. IV. iv. 4), which deals with the subject of transmigration. And 
this is true, because it becomes possible thus to experience the results of 
virtue and vice. 


Topic 1: DEPARTURE FROM THE BODY 

Doubt : Now it has to be considered whether the transmigrating soul 
moves out from this body without being surrounded by the (mixed) subtle 
elements which are the seed of the next body, or it goes surrounded by them. 
What should be the conclusion to be arrived at? 

Opponent: It goes without being surrounded. 

How is this known? 

For unlike the soul's taking up the particles of light (i.e. organs), it is not 
mentioned in the Upanigads that the elements are also taken up (at the time 
of departure). In the text, "completely withdrawing these particles of light it 
comes to the heart" (Br. IV. iv. 1), the taking up of the organs is mentioned 
by the term "particles of light"; for in the complementary text are mentioned 
the sense-organs like that of vision (ibid.); but there is no such mention of 
the taking up of the particles of elements. Moreover, the particles of 
elements are easy to get, they being present wherever the new body is to be 
formed. And hence it is unnecessary to carry them over. Therefore the soul 
goes without being surrounded by them. 

Vedantin : This being the position, the teacher (Vyisa) advances the 
aphorism: 

cTcj_3I-«cTt_Cq In the matter of obtaining the next one, (the soul) t 
moves out rf: enveloped (by subtle elements), (as is known) A-%- 
f;TWqurTTgTu from the question and its solution. 



1. In the matter of obtaining the next one (i.e. body), the individual soul 
moves out enveloped (by the subtle elements), for so it is known from the 
question and its solution. 

It is to be understood that "in the matter of obtaining the next one, the 
individual soul moves out", that is to say, when acquiring a fresh body after 
leaving the present one, it sallies forth enveloped by the subtle parts of the 
mixed elements, which are the seed of the next body. 

How is this known? 

"From the question and its solution". Thus there occurs the question, "Do 
you know (0 Svetaketu), how the water (i.e. the liquid that is poured as 
oblation in the five fires), comes to be called man after the fifth oblation is 
poured?" (Ch. V. iii. 3). The solution of the question is in its answer (by 
Pravahana Jaivali). The five oblations, viz faith, moon, rain, food, and 
semen, are shown as poured into the five fires, viz heaven, rain-god, earth, 
man, and woman; and then the question is answered by saying, "Thus indeed 
the water comes to be called a man in the fifth oblation" (Ch. V. ix. 1). 
Therefore it is understood that the soul goes out enveloped by water. 

Opponent: But another Upanisadic text shows that the soul does not leave 
the earlier body so long as it does not get hold of another like a leech: "Just 
as a leech supported on a straw goes to the end of it, takes hold of another 
support, and contracts itself, so does the soul throw this body aside, take 
hold of another support and contract itself" (Br. IV. iv. 3). 

Vedantin : There is no contradiction even here; for the point brought out 
through the analogy of the leech is that to the soul, remaining still 
surrounded by the subtle elements, occur such thoughts about the future 
body as are called up by the accumulated results of past actions; and this 
expectancy becomes len g thened out to the next body like a leech.8 This 
being the manner of acquiring a fresh body, as shown by the Upanigads, all 
other theories arising from the human intellect, such for instance as, (the 
Sarhkhya theory) that when the all-pervasive senses and soul acquire a new 
body as a result of past actions, they start functioning there itself; or (the 
Buddhist theory) that the soul alone, by itself, acquires its function there, 




while the senses, just as much as the body, are born afresh in those different 
spheres of experience; or (the Vaigesika view) that the mind alone proceeds 
to the new place of experience; or (the Jaina view) that the soul alone jumps 
from one body to another like a parrot from one tree to another-all these are 
to he ignored as running counter to the Vedic view. 

Opponent : From the question and answer cited above, we gather that the 
soul goes out accompanied by water alone; for this conclusion is borne upon 
us by the Vedic mention of the word water. So how is it asserted in a general 
way that it goes out along with the subtle parts of all the (mixed) elements? 


Veddntin : Hence comes the reply: 



$ But (the soul is not enveloped by water alone) N-MRIPP-41 it having 
three components; (water is mentioned), TTfKN owing to preponderance. 

2. But the soul is not enveloped by water alone, since water has three 
components; water is mentioned because of its preponderance. 

By the word "but" is demolished the objection raised. Water consists of 
three components, according to the Upani$adic text about the elements 
becoming tripartite (Ch. VI. iii). So when water it admitted as the constituent 
(of the body), the other two elements must he admitted pari passu. Moreover, 
the body is a product of the three elements, since all the three, viz fire, water, 
and earth, are seen to be involved in its making. In another way also it is 
constituted by three things; for it is constituted by the three humours, viz 
bile, phlegm, and wind. Such a body cannot be constituted by water alone by 
rejecting the other elements. Hence the word "water" found in the question 
and answer in, "water comes to be called man" (Ch. V. iii. 3, V. ix. 1), is used 
because of its predominance, and not to imply water alone; for in all the 
bodies, liquids such as secretions, blood, etc. abide in abundance. 



Opponent : The earthly (solid) substance is seen to predominate in the 
bodies. 

Veddntin : That is no defect ; for water is found to be in g reater proportion 
than the rest of the elements ( other than earth ); moreover , in blood ( i.e. 
ovum ) and semen , formin g the seed of the bod y, the liquid portion is seen to 
predominate. A g ain , past actions are the efficient cause for the production of 
the next bod y: and these activities in the form of such sacrifices as 
Ag nihotra . depend on such liquid substances as Soma , clarified butter , milk . 
etc. Besides , it will be stated in a later text that this water (i.e. liquid ). 
referred to by the word "faith" , and invariably associated with rites , is 
poured as oblation in the (first ) fire that is heaven .4 For this reason also 
water is known to be preponderant. And because of this preponderance, all 
the subtle parts of the mixed elements, constituting the seed of the body, are 
referred to by the word water. Thus there is no defect. 



3. And from the going out of the organs (it follows that the elements also 
move out). 

And the Upani$ads speak of the departure of the organs at the time of 
reincarnation, in such texts as, "When it (the soul) departs, the vital force 
follows, when the vital force departs, all the organs follow" (Br. IV. iv. 2). 
But since the moving out of the organs is not possible unless they have 
something as their support, it becomes evident that to make the motion of the 
organs possible, water too, which is their material basis, moves out with 
them in association with the other elements. For the organs cannot either go 




































or stay anywhere unless they have a material support, since this is not 
noticed in any living creature. 

WOR 11*11 

_arrf_Trf7_ssP: On account of the Upani$adic statement about repairing 
to Fire and others, Zfff qq if this be the objection, not so, A,crq (that 
statement) being metaphorical. 

4. If it be objected (that the organs do not accompany the soul at the time 
of death) since the Upanipdic texts mention their entry into (the deities) Fire 
and others, then we say, not so, for that is said in a secondary sense. 

Opponent : It may well be that the organs do not go with the soul at the 
time of reincarnation, for they are shown in the Upani$ads as going to Fire 
and others. Thus the text beginning with, "When the vocal organ of a man 
who dies is merged in Fire, the nose (i.e. sense of smell) in Air" (Br. III. ii. 
13), shows that the organs of speech etc. merge in such deities as Fire. 

Veddntin : Not so, for that occurs in a secondary sense. The Upani$adic 
mention of the merger of speech etc. in Fire etc. is figurative, for this is not 
seen in the case of the hair of the body and head, though the relevant text 
there is, "the hair of the body (merges) in the herbs, that of the head in the 
trees" (ibid.). For it is not possible for the hair of the body and head to fly 
away from the body and reach the herbs and trees. Besides, it is not possible 
to conceive of any going for the soul if it be denied that the organs follow it 
as its conditioning factors; nor can the soul have any experience in the next 
body in the absence of the organs. Moreover, in other texts it is clearly stated 
that the soul goes elsewhere along with the organs (Br. IV. iv. 2). 
Accordingly, having the fact in view that Fire and other deities, presiding 
over speech and the rest and helping them in their activities, cease to favour 
them thus at the time of death, it is said in a figurative way that speech etc. 
enter into Fire etc. 




I ^ ^W- IflUl 

s In the first instance aT5qj not having been heard f 4q if this be the 
objection, r not so, rl: to that (water) itself (is meant) fi; because 344X: of 
reasonableness. 

5. If it be objected (that water does not co-me to be known as man), since 
it is not heard of in the first instance, then not so, for on logical grounds, 
water itself is meant. 

Opponent : Granted even that this is so, how can it be ascertained that 
"water comes to be known as man in the fifth oblation" (Ch. V. ix. .1), for 
water is not heard of in connection with the first fire (heaven)? In this 
context the five fires, heaven and the rest, are mentioned as the receivers of 
the five oblations. In the course of enumerating them, the introduction is 
made with, "0 Gautama, the other world (heaven) is indeed a fire" (Ch. V. iv. 
1), and then it is said, "In this fire than is such, the gods pour faith as an 
oblation" (Ch. V. iv. 2), where faith is presented as the thing to be offered, 
but water is mentioned there as an offering. If you want to imagine that 
water is the oblation offered in the four succeeding fires starting with the 
Rain-god, you may very well do so, for Soma and the other things adopted 
for being offered in those fires have a preponderance of water. But it is an 
unwarranted boldness to reject faith which is mentioned in the Upani$ad and 
imagine water instead which is not mentioned as an offering in the case of 
the first fire. And faith means a kind of disposition (or attitude), for that is its 
usual purport. Hence it is unreasonable to say that water gets the name of 
man in the fifth oblation. 

Veddntin : This is nothing damaging, since that very "water is mentioned 
by the word faith" in connection with the first fire. 


How so? 



"On logical grounds". Because on such an interpretation alone, this whole 
topic reduces itself to an unequivocal single idea running consistently 
through the beginning, middle, and end of the topic. On a contrary 
supposition, again, this unity of idea (i.e. syntactical harmony) will be set at 
naught, since the question will relate to one thing and the answer to another, 
inasmuch as the question relates to how water becomes known as man in the 
fifth oblation, whereas during the course of the reply a thing called faith 
which is other than water is introduced as the offering in the first oblation. 
And the conclusion made with the words, "In this way indeed water comes 
to be known as man" (Ch. V. ix. 1), confirms this cDnclusion. Besides, the 
products of faith, viz Soma, rain, etc., are noticed, as they become gross, to 
have a preponderance of liquidity; that too is a pointer to faith itself being a 
liquid, for the effect conforms to the cause. Moreover, the attitude called 
faith, whether it be an attribute of the soul or the mind, cannot he separated 
from the possessor of the attribute like the hearts etc. from the animals to he 
offered as oblation; and thus water alone should be the meaning of faith 
(here). Moreover, the word faith becomes appropriate with regard to water, 
for such a Vedic use is met with in, "Faith indeed is water" (Tai. S. I. vi. 8-9). 
Besides, water becomes the seed of a fresh body by attaining a subtleness 
like that of faith; hence also it can he called faith, even as a man having the 
prowess of a lion is called leonine. Again, since water is associated with the 
rites performed with faith, it is but appropriate that the word faith should be 
applied to water on the analogy of a man shouting out from a platform being 
referred to by saying, "The platform is shouting". Furthermore, water can be 
called faith, since it is the cause of faith, as is evident from the Vedic text, "It 
is (holy) water that (by its very sight) generates faith in him for the 
performance of virtuous deeds (like bathing)." 

11*11 

aljcCqrq On account of not being mentioned in the Upani$ads Xfr aq if it 
be said so, (then) not so, ATc i. since it is perceived (to be so) ".ate-ajftin the 
case of the performers of sacrifices etc. 




6. If it be argued (that the soul does not depart enveloped by water) since 
it is not mentioned thus in the Upanicads, then not so, for it is perceived to 
be so in the case of those who perform sacrifices etc. (i.e. it can be verified 
by what happens to the sacrificers). 

Opponent :Even if it be conceded from a consideration of the question and 
answer that water itself, being offered as faith etc. in succession, assumes a 
human form during the fifth oblation, still it is not ascertained that the 
individual souls go out enveloped by water, for this is not heard of in the 
Vedic texts. We do not find any word in this context to denote the souls, like 
the word used to denote water. Hence your statement that the "soul departs 
from the body, enveloped by the subtle parts of the mixed elements" (B. S. 
III. i. 1) is illogical. 

Veddntin : This is nothing damaging. 

How? 

"Because it is perceived to be so in the case of those who perform 
sacrifices etc." For starting with the text, "Again, those who living in villages 
perform sacrifices, humanitarian works and charity, etc. (and meditate on the 
five fires) proceed along the path of smoke" (Ch. V. x. 3), it is shown that the 
performers of sacrifices etc. reach the moon by proceeding along smoke etc. 
constituting the path of the manes: "From space they reach the moon, which 
is king (or the shining) Soma" (Ch. V. x. 4). Those very individuals are in 
evidence here as well (in the context under discussion); for there is a 
similarity with the text, "In this fire, that is such, the gods pour faith as an 
oblation. From that oblation arises king (or the shining) Soma" (Ch. V. iv. 2). 
And those (performers of sacrifices) are seen directly to possess water in the 
form of curd, milk, etc., which are the means for the accomplishment of such 
rites as Agnihotra, Dar§a puroamasa . etc. , for curd etc, are mainly liquid. 
When these are offered in the Ahavaniva fire , they assume the form of the 
subtle unseen results of rites , and come to rest on those performers of the 
sacrifices etc. Their ( dead ) bodies are offered bv the priests to the last fire 
( for cremation ) in accordance with the rules of last rites while recitin g the 
mantra . "Fet suchand-such a performer of rites proceed to heaven. Svahd!" 
Then those waters , or the liquid oblations associated with the rites performed 




























with faith , become the unseen potency of the rites performed , and envelo p 
the bein g s who had performed those sacrifices etc. , and carry them to the 
other world for the fruition of their acts. This fact is mentioned here ( Ch. V. 

iv. 2 ) by the term "pours as oblation" in the text . "He pours faith as an 
oblation" (Ch. V. iv. 2 . Br. VI. ii. 9 ) . So also bv the sentences startin g with . 
"These oblations , when they are poured , rise up" (S. B. VI. ii. 6 ). that occur 
at the end of the topic of A g nihotra bv wav of summin g u p the six questions 
and answers ( with re g ard to A g nihotra ), it is shown that the two oblations 
poured in the A g nihotra sacrifice ( in the mornin g and evenin g) proceed to 
the other world for their fruition.5 Therefore, the individual souls depart 
from the body enveloped by the water that is nothing but the oblations. 

Opponent : How again can this be asserted that the performers of 
sacrifices etc. move out for experiencing the results of their own work, since 
it is shown in the text that after reaching the moon through the path 
symbolized by smoke, they turn into food: "This is the moon, the king (or 
the shining one), which is the food of the gods. The gods eat it" (Ch. V. x. 4). 
There is also another text of the same purport: "Reaching the moon, they 
become food. There the gods enjoy them like the priests drinkin g the shinin g 
Soma j uice ( re peatedly sa ving as it were ). Be filled u p. be emptied 1 " (Br. VI. 
ii. 16). And it is not possible for those to have any enjoyment who are being 
eaten up by the gods as though by tigers. 

Vedantin : Hence the answer is: 



afT Or rather iT4 it is figurative aT;rTM-fl on account of non-realization 
of the Self; ff because ffzR thus gfie the Upani$ad shows. 

7. Or rather the statement (that the souls become the food of gods) is made 
in a metaphorical sense on account of their nonrealization of the Self. For the 
Upanirad shows the some. 





























































The phrase "or rather" is used for obviating the defect shown. That they 
become food is only in a metaphorical and not primary sense. For if the 
literal sense be implied, then such texts as, "One desiring heaven should 
perform a sacrifice" which enunciate the competence for the performer, will 
become nullified. For if the performers of sacrifices etc. do not get any 
enjoyment in the lunar world, why should those who are qualified for them, 
undertake the rites involving great effort? Moreover, the word food is seen to 
be used figuratively with regard to things that are not food, simply because 
of the similarity of producing enjoyment, as for instance in, "The subjects 
are the food for kings, and the cattle are the food for the subjects". So what 
is meant by "the eating by the gods" is the enjoyment of the happy 
companionship of those who have performed sacrifices etc. and are now 
under their subjugation, like the people in this earth enjoying the 
companionship of beloved wives, sons, friends, and others who hold 
subordinate positions. But no such thing as munching or swallowing of 
sweets is meant. For mastication etc. are denied in the case of the gods in the 
text, "The gods do not certainly eat or drink, but they become satisfied 
simply by witnessing this nectar" (Ch. III. vi-x). And even as the followers 
of a king, depending on him for their subsistence, can still have individual 
enjoyment, so also those performers of sacrifices etc. who become 
subservient to the gods, can still have their individual enjoyment. Moreover, 
it is reasonable that the performers of sacrifices etc. should become objects 
of enjoyment to the gods since they are unenlightened. Thus it is that the 
Upanigad speaks of the unenlightened men becoming objects of enjoyment 
to the gods: "While he who worships another god thinking, 'He is one and I 
am another,' does not know. He is like an animal to the gods" (Br. I. iv. 10). 
Like animals such a man serves the gods even in this world by pleasing them 
with sacrifices etc.; and in the other world also he serves the gods like 
animals by depending on them for livelihood and enjoying the fruits of work 
as directed by them. This is what we understand. 

The other explanation of the second portion-"on account of their non¬ 
realization of the Self, for the Upani$ad shows the same "-(of the aphorism) 
is this: People "not having realized the Self are those who are engaged in 
ritualistic works alone, that is to say, those who do not undertake rites and 
meditation as a combined process. The phrase "realization of the Self" in the 



aphorism is used metaphorically to mean "the meditation on the five fires". 
This is what is gathered from the force of the context. Because of the fact 
that they are devoid of the meditation on the five fires, the performers of 
(mere) sacrifices are here presented as the food of the gods in a secondary 
sense, so as to eulogize the meditation on the five fires. For what is sought to 
be enjoined here is the meditation on the five fires, as can be gathered from a 
consideration of the purport of the text. And in line with this, another text 
shows the existence of enjoyment in the lunar world: "Having experienced 
his greatness in the lunar world he turns round again" (Pr. V. 4). Similarly 
there is another text, "When the joy of those manes who have won that world 
(of the manes) is multiplied a hundred times it makes one unit of joy in the 
world of the celestial minstrels (Gandharvas). This joy in the world of the 
celestial minstrels multiplied a hundred times makes one unit of joy for the 
gods by action, i.e. those who attain their godhood by their actions," (Br. IV. 
iii. 33), which shows that the performers of sacrifices etc. get enjoyment 
while staying with the gods. Thus since the sentence about becoming food 
has a secondary meaning, it becomes comprehensible that the individuals 
performing sacrifices etc. do go out from the body. Hence it has been said 
quite appropriately that "the individual soul moves out enveloped (by the 
subtle elements)" (B. S. III. i. 1). 

TOPIC 2: RETURN OF THE SOULS 

yff-W-,70 After the actions (i.e. earned merits) are exhausted, (the soul 
returns) aT" in association with (the residual) karma (results of action). '-t( as 
is known from the Upani$ads and Smrtis, zr-W along the path followed 
while going as also differently. 

8. After the actions are exhausted, the soul returns together with (the 
residual) karma, as is known from the Upanisads and Smrtis, along the path 
followed (by it) while going as also differently. 



The descent of those performers of sacrifices etc. who proceed along the 
"path of smoke" etc. to reach the lunar world and complete the enjoyment of 
the fruits of their work, is stated in the text, starting with, "Having resided 
there (yavatsampatam) till the limit of karma is reached, they return by the 
very route by which they had gone" (Ch. V. x. 5), and ending with, "The men 
of virtuous deeds are born among the Brahmapas and others, while those of 
vicious deeds are born among the dogs, etc." (ibid.). 

Doubt : Here the thing to be considered is this: Do they return after 
enjoying all the results of action without any (residual) karma, or do they 
come with (residual) karma? What is the conclusion to be arrived at then? 

Opponent: They return without (residual) karma. 

Why? 

Since the qualifying phrase there is "ydvat-sampdtam-up to the limit of 
the totality of their actions". By the word sampkta is meant here the total 
result of actions, being derived in the sense of that by which one ascends 
from this world to the other for the sake of experiencing the result. And by 
the text, "having resided up to the limit of the totality of their actions", it is 
shown that the total result of one's karma is experienced there. By another 
Upanipdic text, "And when their past work is exhausted, (they reach this 
space, from space air, from air rain, and from rain the earth)" (Br. VI. ii. 16), 
this very fact is revealed. 

Objection : It may be like this: We shall imagine that a man enjoys in that 
world only that much of the result of his actions as is to be enjoyed there. 

Opponent : You cannot imagine that way; for elsewhere the mention is 
made of "whatever work" in "Exhausting the results of whatever work he did 
in this life, he returns from that world to this for (fresh) work" (Br. IV. iv. 6). 
Thus this other text shows by referring to "whatever work", without any 
reservation, that all the works done in this world get exhausted in the other 
world. Moreover, death is the manifester of all works that had not yielded 
their results, (that is to say, it makes them ready to do so); for before death 
such works cannot yield their results, they being obstructed by those other 



works which had started their results in the present body. And (since there is 
nothing to curb the power of death) it makes all the works that had not been 
fruitful (in this life) ready, without exception, to yield their results (in the 
next life). For when a cause is common to all, it is not logical that the results 
should be different. It is not proper that when the proximity of a light is the 
same, a vessel will be illumined but not so a cloth. Therefore the souls 
descend without any residual karma. 

Vedintin : This being the position, we say, that "After the exhaustion of 
(good) work a soul returns along with (the residual) karma". When the 
results of those works, for enjoying which the soul had ascended to the lunar 
world, get exhausted through enjoyment, then the watery body that had been 
produced for that soul for enjoyment in the lunar world gets evaporated by 
the touch of the fire of sorrow enkindled at the sight of the exhaustion of 
enjoyment, like snow and hail melting at the touch of the sun's rays or the 
solidity of clarified butter being removed by the touch of the flames of 
(sacrificial) fire. Hence the soul returns with (the residual) karma itself "after 
its karma is exhausted", that is to say, when such works as sacrifices etc. get 
exhausted through the enjoyment of their results. 

Opponent: What is the reason for that? 

Veddntin : The aphorist says, "as is known from the Upani$ads and the 
Smrtis". Thus there is a direct Vedic text revealing the descent of souls along 
with their (residual) karma : "Among them those whose conduct has been 
good (ramaniyacaranah) will quickly attain some good birth, be it among the 
Brahmat as or among the K$atriyas or among the Vaisyas. Again those 
whose conduct has been bad (kapuya-caranah) will quickly attain bad birth, 
be it among dogs or among swine or among Chanjalas" (Ch. V. x. 7). The 
aphorist will state later that (residual) karma is indicated here by the word 
carana (lit. conduct). And it is a matter of experience that enjoyments are 
graded as higher and lower for each creature from the very birth; now since a 
theory of chance is inadmissible here, this division indicates the existence of 
(residual) karma; for the scriptures tell it in a general way that virtue and 
vice are the causes of happiness and sorrow. Smcti also shows that the souls 
descend with (residual) karma: "People belonging to the different castes and 



stages of life, who sincerely perform their duties, experience the fruits of 
their works after death, and then through the residual karma get births amidst 
special environment and have special caste, family, outstanding beauty, long 
life, knowledge, good conduct, wealth, happiness, and intelligence." 

Opponent: What is this residual karma? 

Some (pseudo-Vedantin) says that the residual karma is that portion of the 
results of work, conducive to heavenly life, which is left over after enjoying 
heaven, like water sticking to an emptied vessel. Just as an oil-pot does not 
become wholly empty even when the oil is poured out, since some oil still 
sticks to it, similar is the case with residual karma. 

Opponent: It is improper to say that the result of any work persists even 
after its enjoyment, inasmuch as the unseen potency of work cannot co-exist 
with its product (viz happiness and sorrow, by producing which it gets 
destroyed). 

Pseudo-Veddntin : This is no defect, for we do not assert that the results of 
work are wholly enjoyed there (in the lunar world). 

Opponent : Is it not a fact that one ascends the lunar world for the full 
enjoyment of one's acquired merit? 

Pseudo-Veddmin : True, and yet one cannot continue there when only a 
little bit of one's merit remains. Just as 'somebody wanting to serve a king 
may reside in his court with all the articles necessary .for the king's pleasure; 
but owing to his long sojourn there, he may run through most of his 
possessions, being ultimately left with only his umbrella, sandals, etc., and 
then he cannot live in the king's court any longer; similarly a soul that is left 
with its residual karma alone cannot continue in the lunar world. 

Veddntin : This view does not appear to be correct; for it is illogical to say 
that any portion of the result of work conducive to heaven should persist 
after enjoyment. It has been pointed out that the unseen potency of work 
cannot outlive its result. 



Pseudo- Veddntin : Did we not also say that the results of work conducive 
to heaven are not wholly enjoyed there? 

Veddntin : This is unsound; for people who follow the authority of the 
Vedas cannot lend any credence to such a fancy that the merit leading a man 
to heaven does not bestow on him all the acquired heavenly results even 
after he has reached heaven, but that a modicum of those results fructify for 
him even after his fall from heaven. As for the residual oil sticking to an oil- 
pot, that is quite logical, since it is a matter of experience. Similarly too the 
king's councillor is seen to be left with only a few materials. But in the case 
under discussion we can neither find any remnant of the merit that had been 
conducive to heaven, nor conceive such a thing, for that would contradict the 
scriptures declaring that such a merit is conducive to heaven. And this is to 
be known as a certainty that unlike oil sticking to a vessel, residual karma 
does not mean the survival of some remnant of the heavenly result acquired 
from such acts as sacrifice etc. If, however, residual karma means a part of 
that very result of the meritorious works like sacrifice etc., owing to which 
the souls have already enjoyed heaven, then a residue of a good type alone 
must be the residual karma, and not its opposite; but in that case the 
Upani$adic text making the division (of residual karma) by saying, "Among 
them those whose conduct here is good", "and then those whose conduct 
here is bad" (Ch. V. x. 7), will be contradicted. Therefore by residual karmas 
are meant those other results of actions which are calculated to produce 
effects in this world and which still stand over after experiencing the results 
that were to fructify there (in heaven); with these former the souls descend. 

As for the argument that from the mention of "whatever work" etc. (Br. 
IV. iv. 6), without any qualification, it follows that, through the enjoyment of 
the results, the souls in heaven exhaust all the (results of) works done on this 
earth, and then descend without any residual karma, our reply is that it is not 
so; for it has been established (by us) that residual karma persists. It is 
understood that they return here after exhausting through experience 
"whatever work" they had done here with a view to getting the results in 
heaven, and after those works had fructified there. The other argument was 
that death induces all works without exception, that had not fructified here, 
to become ready for yielding results, and that it is not possible to make any 



such division among those works as to show that some of them produce 
results in heaven whereas others do so on this earth. This point of view is 
refuted by us by the very fact of proving the existence of residual karma. 
Moreover, the reason for asserting that death induces all unfulfilled results of 
works to become ready to yield fruits has to be clarified (by the opponent). 
Should it be argued that the unfulfilled results of works remain without any 
function, they being hindered by the results of works that have become 
effective in this life, so that at the time of death, when the active results of 
this life cease, the dormant ones start functioning, then we reply thus: In that 
case the reasonable position is that if the dormant karma cannot function 
before death, it being obstructed by the active karma, then since on the same 
ground the conflicting results of diverse works cannot fructify 
simultaneously at the time of death, the weaker karma cannot reasonably 
become active then, it being obstrucred by the stronger one. It cannot be said 
that though the results of actions be many and have to be enjoyed in different 
births, still, owing to the fact that they constitute a single class from the 
comprehensive view that all of them are dormant, they become 
simultaneously ready for producing results on the eve of a single death, and 
thus they bring about a single birth. For such an assertion goes against the 
ordination of particular results for particular works. It cannot also be argued 
that some one (strong) karma becomes activated at the time of death, while 
some other (weaker one) is annihilated; for that contradicts the view that 
causes must havg their results inevitably. It is not possible for any karma to 
be eradicated except through such causes as expiation etc. Smrti also shows 
that a karma can remain dormant for a long time when it is obstructed by 
some other karma having a contrary result; for instance there are texts of the 
following class: "Sometimes it so happens that for a man sunk in this world, 
a virtuous work remains dormant here till he becomes free from sorrow 
(through suffering)." If, again, all the latent karmas become activated at a 
single death and thus lead to a single birth, then since the scriptures do not 
proclaim any competence for acquiring fresh karma in heaven or hell or 
among lower creatures, therefore there will be no emergence of fresh merit 
and demerit. Hence in the absence of any cause, no other birth after that can 
be possible, so that the declaration in the Smrti that each of the sins like the 
killing of a Brahmai a causes many births, will be set at naught. And no 
source other than the scriptures can be fancied to impart knowledge about 



the nature, result, cause, etc. of merit and demerit. Moreover, death cannot 
possibly induce such rites as Kariri (meant for rainfall) to yield their own 
results which are directly perceptible here (and are not to be achieved 
elsewhere through the medium of unseen potency). Thus this imagination 
about death activizing all karmas is out of place in those cases. The 
illustration of the lamp also stands nullified by the very fact that the results 
of actions have been shown to be either stron g or weak.7 Moreover, (even if 
death be a revealer), the analogy of the lamp is to be understood from the 
point of view of its revelation or nonrevelation of gross and subtle things. 
Just as a lamp reveals a gross thing but not a subtle one, though they be 
equally at hand, similarly death induces the functioning of the stronger 
karma alone but not of the weaker, though all the dormant works get an 
equal opportunity then for their expression. Therefore this theory about the 
inducement of all karmas to activity by death is improper, since it offends 
against the Vedas, Smrtis, and logic. And the flurry about liberation 
becoming impossible if residual karma lasts is groundless, since the 
Upanisads mention that all results of actions are eradicated on the dawn of 
enlightenment. Hence the conclusion remains intact that the souls descend 
with their residual karmas. And when they come down, they do so along the 
path followed (by them) while going up, as also differently. Yathetam (lit. as 
it had been reached) means-'just as they had gone"; and anevmn means "in 
the opposite manner". Because smoke and space, included in the path of the 
manes, are mentioned at the time of descent, and because the phrase "as it 
had been reached" is used, it follows that yathetam means "as they had gone 
up by". Again, from the omission of night etc. and the addition of cloud etc. 
it follows that the course (of return) may be different as well. 

lull 

wt'nc Owing to the use of the word "conduct" Afa'a if it be objected thus, 
not so dulTqV (the passage is) used suggestively > this is (how) ?JIurff: 
KaMajini (thinks). 




9. If it be contended that (the soul gets its rebirth) owing to conduct (and 
not residual karma), then according to Knrs?i ijini, it is not so, that 
(Upanifadic passage) being used suggestively (for residual karma). 

Opponent: Now, again, we see that the Upani$adic text quoted by you for 
proving the existence of residual karma, viz "Among them those who have 
good conduct (ramaniya-caranah) here" (Ch. V. x. 7), only shows that rebirth 
occurs on account of carana (conduct), but it does not show it as occurring 
on account of residual karma. Conduct is a different thing, and different also 
is residual karma. Conduct (carana), character (caritra), good behaviour 
(acara). good form (sila)-are all synonymous terms, whereas by residual 
karma is meant that karma which survives those others whose fruits have 
been experienced. And the Upani$ads also show how action and conduct 
differ, as in, "As he acts and as he behaves, so he becomes" (Br. IV. iv. 5), as 
also, "The works that are not blameworthy are to he resorted to, but not the 
others. Those behaviours of ours which are commendable are to be followed 
by you, but not the others" (Tai. I. xi. 2). Therefore it follows that since 
rebirth is mentioned in the Upani$ad as occurring from conduct, the theory, 
of residual karma is not proved. 


Kdrtajini : This is no defect, since the teacher Kar$rojini thinks that this 
Upani$adic passage about conduct is used suggestively for residual karma. 



anjq" (Conduct) will cease to have any usefulness f " if it be objected thus, 
not so, -w" because action (karma) is dependent on that conduct. 

10. If it be objected that (in that case) conduct will cease to have any 
usefulness, then it is not so, because karma is dependent on that conduct. 

Opponent : It may be so. But why again should Vedic conduct be rejected 
as the meaning of the word carana (conduct), and it should be made to 
convey the figurative meaning of residual work? The Vedic conduct itself, 



resulting from both injunction and prohibition, and expressing itself as virtue 
and vice, can have, as its effect, birth among good and bad crea tures. 
Moreover, one has perforce to admit some result for conduct, for else 
conduct will become useless. 

Kir ndjini: That is no defect. 

Why? 

"Because action is dependent on conduct"; for rites such as sacrifices are 
dependent on good conduct, since one devoid of good conduct cannot have 
the requisite qualification for them, as is said in Smrti texts like, "The Vedas 
do not purify one who is devoid of good conduct". And even if conduct be 
meant for personal purification, still it is not useless. For when rites like 
sacrifices start yielding their results, right conduct, though centring round a 
person, may still produce some excellence in the results of those very rites. 
The well-recognized fact in the Vedas and Smctis is that it is action that 
produces everything. Hence it is the view of Karajini that actions themselves 
that are implied indirectly by the word conduct, and are reduced to residual 
karma, become the cause of rebirth. For when rebirth can be deduced from 
actions, it is illogical to father it on conduct. When one can save oneself by 
running on foot, one should not move on one's knees. 

pjsfft i HHii 

I But W- good and evil works 7q certainly a this is how aRi t: Badari 
(thinks). 

11. But (the teacher) Badari thinks that good and bad works themselves 
are meant (by the word carana). 


Vedantin : The teacher Badari opines that actions, good and evil, are 
themselves meant (directly and not figuratively) by the word cara?ia. Carapa, 



performance, action-these are synonymous words. It is seen thus that the 
root car (to act) is used with regard to all actions in general. For when a man 
performs a virtuous deed like sacrifice etc., ordinary people say, "This great- 
souled man is acting (carati) religiously". Conduct (acdra) too is a form of 
religious action (or observance). As for the reference to the difference 
between virtuous acts and (good) conduct, it can be reconciled on the 
analogy of the Brahmapa and the mendicant (i.e. a Brahmana who has 
chosen the monastic life). Hence the conclusion is that ramaniya-caranah 
(men of good conduct) are those who perform the laudable acts, and kapfiya- 
caranah (men of bad conduct) are those who perform the condemned acts. 

Topic 3: FATE OF EVIL-DOERS 

* p IIW 

atfq a Even also 3Ifkz-3rrff->omt for the performers of evil etc. mm it is 
heard of. 

12. It is known from the Vedic texts that (the moon is the goal) even for 
the performers of unholy acts etc. as well. 

Doubt : It has been said that the performers of holy works (like sacrifices) 
etc. go to the lunar world. But now it is being considered whether those who 
perform unholy works etc. also go there or not. 

With regard to this the opponent says that it is not a fact that the 
performers of holy acts etc. alone go to the lunar world. 

Whence is it so? 

Opponent : Since the lunar world is mentioned in the Upani$ads as a goal 
for the performers of unholy acts as well. Thus the followers of the 
Kau$itaki recension read: "All those who depart from this world, reach the 
moon to be sure" (Kau. I. 2). And the acquisition of a fresh body, by those 





who are reborn, cannot be conceived of without their having reached the 
moon; for the number of oblations is fixed in the statement, "In the fifth 
oblation" etc. (Ch. V. ix. 1). Therefore all will reach the moon. 

Objection : It is not proper that the path for both the doers of holy and 
unholy acts etc. should be the same. 

Opponent : Not so, for the others (of unholy acts, go there but) have no 
experience. 

q But >&" in the case of others (descent occurs) ai q after having suffered 
#go in the abode of Death. (Thus occur their) ar-amt ascent and descent; 
ffq_qlf~_q4,jjq for their course is met with in the Upani$ads. 

13. (Vedantin) : But as for others (they have their descent) after suffering 
in the abode of Death; (thus occur their) ascent and descent, for their course 
is met with in the UpaniFads. 

The word "but" refutes the other point of view, by implying that it is not a 
fact that all go to the moon. 

How is this known? 

The ascent to the moon is meant for experiences and not for nothing; nor 
is it meant for the sake of mere descent. For instance, a man verily climbs a 
tree for gathering flowers and fruits, but neither purposelessly nor for merely 
dropping down from it. And it has been stated earlier that those who do not 
perform holy acts etc. have no experiences in the moon. Hence only the 
performers of holy acts ascend to the moon, not the others. As for the others, 
they enter into the place of Death (i.e. hell) and suffer the torments of hell in 
accordance with their own misdeeds, and then ascend to this world. Thus 
occur their ascent and descent. 



How is this known? 


Because "Their course is met with in the Upani$ads". Thus a Upani$adic 
passage, under the garb of a speech of Death concerning the departed evil¬ 
doers, shows how they come under the sway of Death: "The means of the 
attainment of the other world does not become revealed to the non¬ 
discriminating man who blunders, being befooled by the lure of wealth. One 
that constantly thinks thus, 'There is only this world, and none hereafter', 
comes under my (Death's) sway again and again" (Ka. I. ii. 6). There are 
other suggestive sentences indicating that people come under the sway of 
Death: "Let Death, to whom men have to go, be propitiated with oblations" 
(R. V. X. xiv. 1). 



14. And they mention this in the Smrtis. 

Moreover, such respected teachers as Manu, Vyasa, and others mention in 
the Smrtis, in connection with such stories as that of Naciketas, that the 
results of evil deeds is suffered in the abode of Death under Death's 
command. 




15. And (they are mentioned as) seven (hells in the Purdrnas). 

Moreover, seven hells, counting from Raurava are described by the 
followers of the Purar)as, as the fields for reaping the results of bad deeds. 
There the doers of unholy acts etc. are cast. How can they then reach the 
moon? This is the idea. 

Opponent : Is it not a contradiction to assert that the sinners suffer the 
pains inflicted by Death, since the Smctis mention many others like 
Citragupta, who preside over those Raurava and other hells? 

Veddntin : The answer is being given in the negative: 

(Rift ^ 

aft Even ffW there q also -atrrgr on account of his (Death's) control ate): 
there is no contradiction. 

16. Since Death's control extends even there, no contradiction can arise. 

No contradiction is involved since it is admitted that even in those seven 
hells. Death exercises control as the chief dignitary; for the Smrtis mention 
that Citragupta and others are officers appointed by Death. 

HtfMI 

$ But fkW-ft: of knowledge (meditation) and action dr this is (what is 
meant by the expression "of these two paths") Ratij that being the topic 
under discussion. 





17. But (by the expression "of these two paths") what is meant is "of 
knowledge (i.e. meditation) and action", for that is the topic under 
discussion. 

Under the topic of the meditation on the five fires, in the course of the 
answer to the question, "Do you know how the other world does not get 
filled up?" it is stated in the Upani$ad, "Then there are those who go by 
neither of these two paths (of the gods and the manes) and who become 
those tiny, continually transmigrating creatures under the divine command, 
'Be bom and die'. This is the third state. That is why that other world 
(heaven) does not get filled up" (Ch. V. x. 8). In this text, the expression 
"these two paths" stands for "the paths of knowledge (i.e. meditation) and 
work". 

Why so? 

For that is the topic under discussion. For knowledge and action are 
discussed here as the means for the attainment of the paths of the gods and 
the manes. Knowledge is mentioned in "Among these, those who know 
(meditate) thus" (Ch. V. x. 1), and it is declared that through that meditation 
is attained the path of the gods. Work is mentioned in, "sacrifices, 
philanthropic works, charity (dakcina)" (Ch. V. x. 3), and it is declared that 
through that is attained the path of the manes. It is in connection with these 
that the Upani$ad says, "Then there are those who go by neither of these two 
paths." The idea conveyed is this: For those is meant this ever rotating third 
path consisting in becoming tiny creatures, who are neither qualified for the 
path of the gods through the practice of meditation nor for the path of the 
manes through the performance of rites etc. From this also follows that those 
who do not perform holy deeds etc. do not reach the moon. 

Opponent : It may be that they too ascend to the moon and then descend 
from there to become the tiny creatures. 

Vedantin : That also is not possible, since the ascent itself is useless. 
Moreover, if all who depart, reach the moon, the other world would get filled 
up by the departing creatures; and hence the answer would run counter to the 
question (viz "Why does not the other world get filled up?"). The answer is 



to be given in a way that can show how the other world does not get filled 
up. 

Opponent : From the admission of descent it becomes possible for the 
other world not to become filled up. 

Veddntin : No, since such a thing is not mentioned by the Upanipd. It is 
true that the world may not get filled up because of the fact of descent as 
well; but the Upani$ad explains the fact of not being filled up by describing 
the third state thus: "This is the third state. That is why the other world does 
not get filled up" (Ch. V. x. 8). From that it follows that the nonfilling is 
caused by the absence of ascent in their case. For otherwise the descent 
being the common lot of the performers of holy deeds etc. as well, the 
mention of the third state would be useless. The word "but" is used for 
uprooting the misconception generated by the text of another branch that all 
the souls go to the moon. This being the case, it is to be understood that the 
word "all" used (in "all who depart") in the other branch (i.e. Kaufitaki, I. 2), 
is meant to imply "all who have the qualification (to ascend)"; the idea being 
that all those who depart from this world with the requisite qualification 
certainly reach the moon. 

And the objection was raised that all should go to the moon, so that their 
acquisition of fresh bodies may be possible in accordance with the number 
of oblations fixed in the statement, "in the fifth oblation" (Ch. V. ix. 1); that 
is being answered: 



Not (applicable) qff* in the case of the third state; 3gww: (this) being 
noticeable ffsr thus. 



18. (The specification about the number of oblations) is not applicable in 
the case of the third state, this being noticeable (in the Upanisad). 

Not mdch importance is to be attached to the fixity of the number of the 
oblations as five, so far as the acquisition of a body in the third state is 
concerned. 

Why? 

"This being (the position) noticeable (in the Upani$ad)". For it is found in 
the Upani$ad that the third course is attained in accordance with the process 
stated and irrespective of the specification about the number of oblations: 
"under the divine command, v Be bom and die'. This is the third state" (Ch. V. 
x. 8). Besides, in the text, "The water comes to be known as man in the fifth 
oblation" (Ch. V. ix. 1), the number of oblations is declared as a cause for the 
acquisition of a human body, but not as the cause for the bodies of insects, 
moth, etc., for the word man (purusa) stands for humanity as a Blass. 
Moreover, the instruction is about water becoming known as man in the fifth 
oblation; but it is not meant to overrule its becoming so in any oblation other 
than the fifth; for that would lead to a duality of meaning (equivocation) for 
the same sentence. That being the position, those who have the possibility of 
ascent and descent alone will get their bodies during the fifth oblation; for 
others, their bodies will be created by water, in association with the other 
elements, irrespective of the number of oblations. 

M nun 

a& Moreover, cO the Smrtis record, i'c in the Mahibharata etc. a well; 
(and there is popular belief). 

19. Moreover, there are records in the Smrtis (of birth without parentage) 
as also in the Mahabharata etc.; and there is popular belief as well. 




Moreover, the Smrtis record hove in this world Dropa, Dhrnadyumna, and 
others, and Sits, Draupadi, and others were bom without parentage. Of them 
Droiia and others lacked the oblation in the mother's womb, while 
Dhradyumna and others lacked the oblations in both man and woman. Just 
as in those cases the number of oblations is ignored, so also it can be in other 
cases. And it is a popular belief that female cranes conceive without contact 
with the males. 



20. Moreover, it is seen (that creatures are born without the five 
oblations). 

Moreover, it being noticed that among the four kinds of life viviparous, 
oviparous, life springing from moisture, and plant life -the latter two classes 
are bom without any mating. And hence the number of oblations is 
overlooked. This can be the case for others as well. 

Opponent: Those creatures have only three sources of life; for in the 
passage, "oviparous, viviparous, and plant life" (Ch. VI. iii. 1), only three 
classes of creatures are shown. So how is it asserted that the creatures are 
grouped into four classes? 


Vedantin : In answer it is said: 



IRtll 

".-3Rm: The third term is inclusive rl- of the one bom from moisture. 

21. Life springing from moisture is included in the third term (plant life). 

It is to be understood that in the text "oviparous, viviparous, and plant 
life", life springing from moisture is included in the third term plant life, for 
both plant life, and life springing from moisture have the common feature of 
coming out by pushing their way through earth or liquids. But since 
germination from motionless life is distinct from germination from motile 
life, a difference is drawn elsewhere between the plants and creatures born 
out of moisture. Hence there is no contradiction. 

Topic 4: SIMILARITY WITH SPACE ETC. DURING DESCENT 



lpiIq_3114M: Attainment of similarity 3ggg: that being reasonable. 

22. (The descending soul) attains similarity (with space, air, etc.); for that 
is reasonable. 

It has been said that the performers of holy works etc., reach the moon and 
stay there till the residual karma is reached; then they descend with their 
residual karma (III. i. 8). Now is being examined the process of descent. As 
to that, here is an Upanigadic text speaking of the descent: "Then they resort 
to this very path again, just as they had come. They reach space, from space 
air; having become air, the sacrificer becomes smoke; having become 



smoke, he becomes vapour; having become vapour, he becomes cloud; 
having become cloud, he pours down (as rain)" (Ch. V. x. 5). 

Doubt : Here the doubt arises as to whether the descending souls become 
identified in nature with space etc., or they become similar to them. 

Opponent: The conclusion that can be arrived at here is that they become 
identified with space etc. 

How can this be so? 

Opponent : For such is the Upanigadic text; for else we shall have to 
interpret the text figuratively. When a doubt arises about the literal and 
figurative senses, the literal one is to be accepted, and not the figurative. That 
being so, the texts "becoming air, he becomes vapour" etc. are to be taken in 
the sense of attaining identity with those things. Hence the conclusion is that 
the soul becomes transformed into space etc. in the literal sense. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say that they attain a state of 
similarity with space etc. As the liquid body, formed in the lunar world for 
the sake of enjoyment, starts to melt away after the exhaustion of enjoyment, 
it becomes fine (and light) like space. Then it comes under the influence of 
air. Then it comes in contact with smoke etc. This fact is stated in, "Just as 
he had come. He reaches space, from space air" (Ch. V. x. 5) etc. 

How do you know this? 

"Because that is reasonable." For it is not logical that something should be 
transformed into something else in the primary sense. If it were to become 
space itself, its descent through air etc. in succession would not be 
actualized. Moreover, the soul as well as space being omnipresent, it has a 
constant relationship with space; and hence there can be no other 
relationship (e.g. conjunction) of the soul with space than the assumption of 
a form similar to it.8 And when the literal sense of a text is inadmissible, it is 
but logical to resort to a figurative sense. Hence in this context the 
attainment of a state of similarity with space etc. is meant figuratively here 
by "becoming space" etc. 



TOPIC 5: INTERVENING PERIOD OF DESCENT 


;#ftr ii^ii 

(The descent takes place) q not qfr-fur after a long time fk~T" on the 
authority of a special statement. 

23. (The descent of the soul from one state to another takes place) not 
after long intervals, (as is known) on the authority of a specific statement (in 
the Upani~ad). 

Doubt : While on this topic, a doubt arises with regard to the soul's 
becoming space etc. before becoming paddy etc., as to whether it continues 
in its similarity with the earlier stages for long intervals before it attains 
similarity with the succeeding stages, or it continues so during small 
intervals. 

Opponent : As to that, there is no rule, since no categorical scripture is in 
evidence. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the aphorist says, "not after long 
intervals"; the souls descend to this' earth with the showers of rain after 
staying in the states of space etc. for short intervals. 

How is this known? 

"On the authority of a specific statement". Thus it is that after the 
attainment of similarity with paddy etc., the Upani$ad says, "It is indeed 
more difficult to come out of this state" (Ch. V. x. 6). In the word 
dumirprapataram, one to is to be understood as dropped as a Vedic licence 
(the word being actually durni;prapatataram). The meaning is that it 
becomes more difficult to get out of this state of similarity with paddy etc. 




Thus the coming out (ni,sprapatana) being shown to be difficult in this case, 
the idea implied is that the coming out is easier in the earlier stages. And this 
difference of happiness and sorrow as shown during the coming out has 
reference to the shortness or length of the interval of coming out; for the 
body is not formed during that interval, and so no experience is possible. 
Hence the soul's descent up till the moment of becoming similar to paddy 
etc. occurs in a short time indeed. 

Tonic 6: THE SOULS IN PLANTS AND THEREALTER 

awifilisn IRV1I 

tr-gq As in earlier stages (the soul stays in paddy etc.) a-aTFq inhabited by 
other souls; atfWwrgr?[ for so it is declared. 

24. As in the earlier stages, so also (in the later stages) the sord merely 
resides in paddy etc. that are already inhabited by other souls, for so it is 
declared. 

Doubt : While dealing with that very course of descent, the text mentions 
after the fall in the form of a shower, "Those descending souls are bom here 
(on the earth) as paddy, barley, shrubs, trees, sesamum, pulses, etc." (Ch. V. 
x. 6). With regard to this the doubt arises, whether the souls when 
descending with their residual karmas, enjoy and suffer the happiness and 
sorrow natural to the plants etc., after reaching this stage and becoming 
themselves motionless plants etc., or they merely come into contact with 
plant bodies which are possessed by other souls? What is the conclusion to 
be drawn then? 

Opponent : The descending souls, possessed of residual karmas are born 
as plants etc.; and thus they have experience of happiness and sorrow 
belonging to these species. 


How do you know this? 



Since the verb "to be bom" should be accepted in the literal sense. 
Besides, life as plants is well recognized in the Vedas and Smrtis as a state 
for the souls' experiences. Moreover, it is reasonable that acts like sacrifices 
etc. should have evil results, since they are connected with animal sacrifice 
etc. Hence like birth as dogs etc., the descending souls having residual 
karma, are bom as paddy etc. in the primary sense, lust as the descending 
souls have "births among dogs, swine, or Cau4alas" (Ch. V. x. 7) in the 
primary sense, and in those births they have the experiences of the respective 
happiness and sorrow, so also have they births as paddy etc. 

Veddntin : To this, our reply is that, as in the previous stages, similarly 
here also, the souls, having residual karma, merely come into contact with 
paddy etc. which are already inhabited by other souls, but they do not share 
in their happiness and sorrow. As the attainment of the states of air, smoke, 
etc. by the descending souls consists in their mere contact with these, so also 
the attainment of the states of paddy etc., consists merely in a contact with 
those that are plants etc. from birth. 

How is this known? 

Because the Upani$adic declaration here is similar to the earlier. 

Opponent : What is meant by the Upanigadic declaration being similar to 
the earlier? 

Veddntin : Their similarity consists in the declaration being made without 
any reference to (this state being attained through) a fruition of karma. As in 
the stages starting with space and ending with rainfall, no mention of fruition 
of karma is made, so also is it with regard to the births among paddy, barley, 
etc. Hence the descending souls have no experience here of happiness and 
sorrow. But where the intention is to speak of the experience of such 
happiness and sorrow, the fruition of karma also is mentioned by such 
statements as, "the people of good conduct, the people of bad conduct etc." 
(Ch. V. x. 7). Moreover, if the birth of the souls, having residual karma, 
among paddy, barley etc. be taken in the literal sense, then when the paddy 
etc. are harvested, fried, cooked, or eaten, the souls identifying themselves 
with these will be thereby ejected from them. For it is a well-known fact that 



a soul that inhabits any body leaves that body when it is subjected to great 
torment. In that case the Upani$ad would not have mentioned that from the 
state of similarity with paddy etc. the descending souls attain similarity with 
male creatures possessed of progenitive power. Hence the souls that have 
residual karma merely come into contact with paddy etc. that are already 
inhabited by other souls. As a result of this, one has to reject the primary 
meaning of the verb "to be bom", as also the state of plant life as a place for 
experiencing happiness and sorrow (by those souls). At the same time we do 
not deny that the plant life is a state for experiencing the fruits of work. Let 
this be a state of experience for those souls which, owing to their lack of 
merit, have attained the state of plant life. But the souls descending from the 
moon with their residual karmas do not have any experience in identification 
with plant life. This is our standpoint. 

ai^fofjl wn llftii 

(Sacrifices etc. are) a;~ unholy ifa t if such be the objection, not so, g q 
owing to the sanction of scriptures. 

25. If it be argued that rites (involving killing of animals) are unholy, we 
say, no, since they are sanctioned by scriptures. 

Opponent : It was argued that sacrificial actions are impure inasmuch as 
they are connected with animal-killing etc. and therefore their results can be 
inferred to be evil, so that the birth of the souls, having residual karma, as 
paddy, barley, etc., can well be in the literal sense, and it is useless to 
imagine a figurative meaning there. 

Vedantin : That argument is being refuted. That is not so, for knowledge 
of virtue and vice is derived from the scriptures. The scriptures alone are the 
source for knowing that such an act is virtuous, and such another is not 
virtuous; for merit and demerit are supersensuous realities and they are not 



invariable for all space, time, and environment. Any deed that is performed 
as virtuous in relation to certain place, time, and circumstances, becomes 
non-virtuous in relation to other places, times, and circumstances, so that 
nobody can have any knowledge about virtue and vice, unless it be from the 
scriptures. And from the scriptures it is ascertained that the Jyotistoma 
sacrifice, involving injury, favour, etc., is virtuous. So how can that be 
declared to be impure? 

Opponent : By saying, "One should not injure any of the creatures", the 
scripture itself shows that injury done to any creature is unholy. 

Vedantin : True; but that is only a general rule; and here is the exception, 
"One should immolate an animal for Agni and Soma". Both the general rule 
and the exception have their welldefined scopes. Hence Vedic rites are quite 
pure, since they are practised by the good people and are not condemned by 
them. Hence birth as plants cannot be their corresponding result. Nor can 
birth as paddy etc. be on an equal footing with birth as dogs -etc., for the 
latter is spoken of in connection with the doers of evil; but no specific 
liability (to be born as such) is met with here (as regards plant life). Hence 
the mere association with paddy etc. of the souls descending from the moon 
with their residual karmas is indirectly spoken of as becoming those plants. 



3M Then :-ft-rl: (occurs) connection with an inseminator. 

26. Then (the soul) gets connected with an inseminator. 

This is a further reason why what is meant by becoming paddy etc. is only 
association with them. After the statement about becoming paddy etc., the 
scripture states that the descending soul becomes a progenitor, as in, "For the 



soul becomes one with whomsoever eats food and performs the act of 
generation" (Ch. V. x. 6). But identity with the progenitor is not possible 
here in the literal sense,, for one becomes a progenitor long after birth when 
one attains adolescence. So how can the descending soul that remains 
associated with the food that is eaten become identified with the progenitor 
unless it be in a secondary sense? In that text then it has perforce to be 
admitted that the mere connection with the progenitor is spoken of as 
becoming himself. Therefore what is meant by becoming paddy etc. is also 
nothing but being connected with them. Thus there is no contradiction. 



tiff: From the womb q" (comes) a body. 

27. From the womb (comes) a new body (for the descending soul). 

Then after being connected with a progenitor the soul with its residual 
karma enters a womb and gets a body fitted for the experience of its 
(residual) karma. This is what is said in the scripture in, "Among them, those 
who have good conduct on this earth" (Ch. V. x. 7). etc. From this too it is 
known that when during the course of a soul's descent, an occasion arises for 
connection with paddy etc., those very bodies do not become a source of 
happiness and sorrow. Hence it is concluded that the mere contact with 
paddy etc. is spoken of as the birth of the souls descending with their 
residual karmas. 


SECTION II 


In the previous section, the topic of the meditation on the five fires was 
raised and the different courses of transmigration of the individual souls 



were discussed. Now is being elaborated the different states of those very 
souls. 


TOPIC 1: DREAM STATE 



In the intermediate ift: (occurs) creation, f; since (the Upanigad) ar says 
(so). 

1. In the intermediate stage (of dream) occurs (real) creation; for the 
Upaniiad says so. 

Opening with the passage, "When he dreams" (Br. IV. iii. 9) the scripture 
states, "There are no chariots, nor animals to be yoked to them, nor roads 
there, but he creates the chariots, animals, and roads" etc. (Br. IV. iii. 10).- 

Doubt: The doubt arises with regard to this, whether the creation in dream 
is as real as in the waking state, or it is only illusory. 

Op ponent: While on this topic , it is g athered that the creation in the 
intermediate sta g e (lit, occurrin g at the j unction ) is real. By the term 
"Intermediate sta g e" is meant dream , for such a use is met with in the Vedas . 
as in . "The dream state which is the third is at the j unction of the two 
( wakin g and deep slee pV t Br. IV. iii. 9T It occurs at the j uncture of the two 
worldsfthe other and this V. or between the two states of waking and deep 
sleep; therefore it is called the sandhya (intervening stage). The creation that 
occurs in that intervening period must necessarily be real. 


Why? 

























Since the Upani$ad, which is authoritative, says thus: "but he creates the 
chariots, animals, and roads" (Br. IV. iii. 10). etc. And from the conclusion, 
"For he is the agent" (Br. IV. iii. 10), this becomes confirmed. 



W And t some (consider the soul) f~,4%l w, as the creator; w and TMrr: 
sons and others (are the objects desired). 

2. And some (following a particular branch) consider the Self to be a 
creator (of things desired); and sons and others (are the objects desired). 

Moreover, the followers of one branch of the Vedas mention the Self as 
the creator of desires (i.e. desirable things) in this very intervening stage: 
"Puru$a (the all-pervading conscious entity), who keeps awake and goes on 
creating desires even when the senses fall asleep, is pure" (Ka. II. ii. 8). And 
sons etc. are the "desires" mentioned in the text, the word being derived in 
the sense of "things wished for or desired". 

Objection : By the word kima should be denoted different kinds of desire. 

Opponent : No, for the subject is broached thus: "Ask for sons and 
grandsons who will be centenarians" (Ka. I. i. 23), and the conclusion is 
made with, "I make you fit for the enjoyment of all kamas (delectable 
things)" (ibid. 24), where the word kama is used in the relevant places for 
sons etc. who are under consideration. From the subject-matter of the 
chapter and the complementary portion also we understand that the supreme 
conscious Self is the creator. For the subject-matter of the topic is the 
supreme Self, as stated in the beginning, "Tell me of that thing which you 
see as different from virtue, different from vice" (Ka. I. ii. 14); and the 
complementary passage also relates to It, "He is pure, He is Brahman, and 
He is called the immortal. All the worlds are fixed on Him; none can 



transcend Him" (Ka. II. ii. 8). It is also known that the creation by the 
supreme Self within the range of wakefulness is real; so equally real must be 
the creation in the domain of dream. In support of this occurs the Upani$adic 
text, "Others, however, say that the dream state of a man is nothing but the 
waking state, because he sees in dreams only those things that he sees in the 
waking state" (Br. IV. iii. 14), which shows the applicability of the same 
logic to the dream and waking states. Hence the creation in the intervening 
state must be real indeed. 

Vedantin : To this the aphorist makes the rejoinder: 

mm i w 

q But (the dream creation is) qM- s( mere Maya, f-F~c~la because of its 
nature of not being a complete manifestation. (A different reading-"i~ 
fully"). 

3. But the dream creation is a mere Mdyd, because of its nature of not 
being a complete mani f ezration of the totality of attributes (found in the 
wakeful state). 

The word "but" refutes the opposite view. It is not as you asserted, that the 
creation in the intervening state is real, for the creation in the intervening 
state is a mere product of Maya, there being not the slightest touch of reality 
in it. 

Why? 

"Because of its nature of not being a complete manifestation of the totality 
of attributes (found in the wakeful state)". For a dream is not such by nature 
as to be manifest with the totality of the attributes of a real thing. 


Opponent: What, again, is meant here by totality? 



Veddntin : It means the state of being endowed with the adequate space, 
time, and circumstances, as well as its not being suhlated. For the space, 
time, and causality adequate for a real thing, as well as the absence of 
sublation, can never be possible in the case of a dream. For instance, the 
space needed for a chariot etc. is not possible in dream; for within the 
narrow limits of the body, the chariot etc. cannot get sufficient room. 

Opponent : It may well be that a dreamer dreams outside the body, since 
he perceives things that are far removed. Moreover, the Upani$ad also shows 
that dream occurs outside the body: "The radiant infinite being who is 
immortal and moves alone preserves the unclean nest (of a body) with the 
help of the vital force, and roams out of the body. Himself immortal, he goes 
wherever he likes" (Br. IV. iii. 12). And the difference in the ideas (or 
perceptions) of staying in and moving out (occurring in dream) cannot be 
reconciled unless the soul goes out. 

Veddntin : We say, no; for it is not possible to conceive it for a sleeping 
man that in a moment he can reach a place hundreds of miles away and 
return from there. And sometimes a man relates a dream in which there was 
no return, as in the statement: "Then having laid down in the country of the 
Kurus and fallen asleep, I went in dream to the country of the Paiicalas, and 
woke up there." Had he gone out of the body, he would have awakened in 
the country of the Pancalas itself, as he is supposed to have reached there; 
but as a matter of fact he wakes up in the Kuru country. And the body, with 
which the dreamer dreams that he goes to another country, is seen by people 
nearby to be lying just where it was. Besides the places, as the dreamer sees 
them in dream, do not correspond with actuality. Were he to speed away to 
those places to see them, he would perceive them just as he does in the 
waking state. Moreover, the Upani$ad shows that dream occurs within the 
body. Opening with, "When it (the soul) remains in the dream state" (Br. II. 
i. 18), the Upani$ad says, "it moves about, as it pleases, in its own body" 
(ibid.). For this reason also, that the Upanigad and logic become 
contradicted, the text about "roaming out of the nest (i.e. body)" (Br. IV. iii. 
12) is to be explained figuratively to mean that the immortal soul seems to 
go out of the body. For a soul, that derives no benefit from the body even 
while inhabiting it, is as good as outside it. This being so, the different ideas 



(or perceptions) like staying in, moving out, etc. are to be admitted to be 
illusory. Moreover, incongruity of time is also apparent in a dream. A man 
asleep at night thinks that it is daylight in India. Similarly in a dream lasting 
for a moment, he sometimes passes through a number of years. Again, the 
materials necessary for the consequent perceptions or actions are not 
adequately present. For instance, he has no eye etc. for the perception of 
chariot etc., his senses having been withdrawn (in sleep). And from where 
does come his power to make a chariot in a moment, and from where the 
timber? Besides, these chariot etc. seen in a dream are sublated in the 
waking state. Not only this, they are easily sublated in the dream itself, since 
there is contradiction between their beginning and end inasmuch as 
something ascertained in dream to be a chariot turns into a man the next 
moment, or someone ascertained to be a man changes suddenly into a tree. 
The scripture also tells us clearly that chariot etc. do not exist in dream: 
"There are no chariots, no animals to be yoked to them, nor roads there" (Br. 
IV. iii. 10). Hence things seen in a dream are mere Maya. 





(Dream is) q also jw: an omen; k for (this is known) >,ft from the 
Upani$ads, 4 and r-fiR: experts in dream-reading alT'Bfa say (so). 

4. A dream is also an omen, for so it is known from the Upanilads, and 
experts say so. 

Opponent : In that case, since it is all mere Maya, there is no touch of 
reality in dream. 

Vedantin : We say, no; for dream becomes the indicator also of good and 
evil in future. Thus it is mentioned in the Upanipd: "If one should see a 
woman in dreams while engaged in performing some rites with a view to 
getting results, then one should know from the occurrence of the dreams that 
those rites will be fruitful" (Ch. V. ii. 8). Similarly the scriptures declare that 



the text, "Should a man dream of a black person with black teeth, that person 
will cause his death" and such other texts indicate imminent death. 
Moreover, people conversant with the science of dream, say, "Dreams of 
mounting on elephants etc. are auspicious, whereas those of mounting on ass 
etc. are bad omens". They think that some dreams caused by mantras, gods, 
and special substances have a touch of reality in them. But even in these 
cases, though it may be granted that the things prognosticated are true, the 
indicative omens like the seeing of a woman are certainly unreal, for these 
get sublated. This is the idea. Hence it is proved that a dream is merely 
illusory. 

As for the reference to the Upani$adic text in the aphorism, "because the 
Upani$ad says so" (III. ii. 1), that should he explained in a figurative sense in 
the light of the conclusion arrived at thus. This is like the statement, "The 
plough sustains the bullocks", where the plough is said to be the cause of 
sustenance because it is metaphorically so. Not that the plough really 
sustains the bullocks etc. So also from the mere fact that a sleeping man 
becomes an accidental cause for creation, it is said that he creates the 
chariots etc. and that "he is the agent" (B;. IV. iii. 9-10). And it is to be 
explained that the soul becomes an accidental cause for the creation of 
chariot etc. in the sense that happiness and fear are seen to arise from the 
sight of chariot etc., of which merit and demerit are the causes, and the soul 
is the efficient cause of those merit and demerit. Moreover, the topic of 
dream is introduced for revealing the self-effulgence of the witnessing Self 
as a distinct fact. This is done because in the waking state we have the 
existence of the contact between the objects and senses and an admixture of 
the light of the sun etc., so that the self-effulgence of the Self cannot be 
distinguished from them. That being the case, if the text about creation of 
chariot etc. he taken in the literal sense, then the self-effulgence of the Self 
will remain undetermined. Hence in the light of the mention of the unreality 
of chariot etc., it is to be explained that the text about the creation of these is 
figurative. Hereby is explained the text about creatorship (B. S. III. ii. 2, Ka. 
II. ii. 8). 


And the assertion was made that the followers of a particular branch of the 
Vedas consider this creator to be the supreme conscious Self; that too is 



improper; for in another Upanisad this is shown to be the activity of the 
individual soul in the text, "Himself puts the body aside and himself creates 
(a dream body in its place), revealing his own lustre by his own lightand he 
dreams" (Br. IV. iii. 9). In the text under discussion also, it is shown by a 
restatement of a known fact in, "He who keeps awake even when the senses 
fall asleep" (Ka. II. ii. 8), that this creator of desirable things is none other 
than the individual soul. In the complementary portion of the passage, 
however, the individuality of that soul is removed and it is shown to be none 
other than Brahman in the text, "He is pure and He is Brahman" (Ka. II. ii. 
8), even as it is done in such texts as, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii-xvi). Thus 
it does not go against the topic of Brahman with which the context deals. 
Nor do we deny the activity of the supreme Self even during dream, for that 
supreme Self is the Lord of all; and as such it is He who can be reasonably 
upheld to be the ordainer under all circumstances. But what we want to show 
is only this much that in truth, this creation in dream is not of the same order 
of reality as the creation of space etc. And yet the creation of space etc. also 
has no absolute reality; for under the aphorism, "The effect is non-different 
from the cause since terms like 'origin' etc. are met with" (II. i. 14), we 
showed that the whole creation is but Maya. But before the realization of the 
identity of the Self with Brahman, creation counting from space etc., 
continues just as it is, whereas the creation within dream is abrogated every 
day. Hence the statement that dream is merely Maya has a special 
significance. 


IIHII 

9z-4?[ By meditation on the supreme Lord, W that which is obscured 
(becomes manifest); fk for ff: from Him (are derived) aT its (the soul's) wq- 
Wzt bondage and its opposite. 

5. From the meditation on the supreme Lord, however, becomes manifest 
that which remains obscured; because the soups bondage and freedom are 
derived from Him. 




Opponent : Even so, it may he that the individual soul is a part of the 
supreme Self just as a spark is of a fire. That being so, just as the fire and the 
spark have the same power of combustion and light, so also the soul and 
God have the same power of knowledge, divinity, (true resolve, etc). And 
from this it follows that the soul can through its divinity (i.e. true resolve), 
create such things in dream as a chariot as an act of its will. 

Veddntin : To this it is said: Though the soul and God may be related as 
the part and the whole, still the soul is directly seen to be possessed of 
attributes opposed to those of God. 

Opponent: Do you mean that the soul has no attribute similar to God's? 

Vedantin : Not that it has not; but though present, this similarity remains 
hidden, since it is screened off by ignorance. That similarity, remaining 
hidden, becomes manifest in the case of some rare person who meditates on 
God with diligence, for whom the darkness of ignorance gets removed, and 
who becomes endowed with mystic powers through the grace of God, like 
the regaining of the power of sight through the potency of medicine by a 
man who had lost it through the disease called timira. But it does not come 
naturally to all and sundry. 

Why? 

Vedintin : Because "from him", i.e. owing to God, are "his", of this 
creature, "bondage and freedom", bondage that comes from the ignorance 
about the nature of God and freedom that comes from the knowledge of His 
reality. To this effect occurs the Upani$adic text, "On the realization of the 
Deity (i.e. Brahman with attributes), all the bondages (i.e. such evils as 
ignorance, desire, etc.) fall off; and on the eradication of these evils, there is 
complete cessation of birth and death. But (as compared with bondage and 
freedom) the third thing (viz mystic powers) occurs as a result of meditation 
on Him (with attributes), and after the death of the body comes 
unsurpassable divinity, and after that one becomes the Absolute with all the 
desires fulfilled" (Sv. I. 11). There are also other texts of this kind. 



aT Or rather -zfrj owing to connection with the body (occurs) ti: that 
(covering) aft also. 

6. Or rather that covering occurs also on account of connection with the 
body. 

Opponent: If the soul be a part of God, why should it have its knowledge 
and divinity (Lordship) under cover, the reasonable position being that 
knowledge and divinity should remain uncovered for a soul as much as 
combustion and illumination remain so for a spark? 

Veddntin : The answer is being given: What you say is truly so. But "that 
too", that covering up also, of knowledge and divinity, in the case of the 
individual soul, "occurs from the connection with the body", from the 
association with body, senses, mind, intelligence, perception of objects, etc., 
And we have an analogy on this point: As the power of combustion and 
illumination, though inherent in fire, remains hidden for it when it is (latent) 
inside the fuel, or as it remains hidden when the fire is covered with ashes, 
similarly there occurs a covering up of the knowledge and Lordship of the 
soul owing to an error of non-distinction of the soul from the body etc., 
arising from its association with the limiting adjunct comprising the body 
etc., and created by name and form, which are conjured up by nescience. 
The words "or rather" (in the aphorism) are meant for obviating the 
misconception about the difference between the soul and God. 

Opponent : Why should not the soul be accepted as different from God, 
since its knowledge and Lordship are covered up? What is the need of 
fancying this as arising from association with the body? 



Veddntin : The answer is in the negative; for it does not stand to reason 
that the soul can be different from God. For starting with the text, "That 
Deity, that was such, deliberated" (Ch. VI. iii. 2), the individual soul is 
referred to by the word Self in the text, "I Myself having entered into it as 
this individual soul" (ibid.). And in the text, "That is Truth; That is the Self, 
That thou art, 0 Svetaketu" (Ch. VI. viii-xv), the individual is taught as being 
identical with God. Hence the conclusion is that though the individual soul is 
non-different from God, its knowledge and Lordship become covered up 
owing to association with the body. From this also it follows that the creation 
of chariot etc. in dream is not an achievement of the individual soul by its 
will. If, on the contrary, dream creation were an act of will, one would not 
have an evil dream, for one does not will evil for oneself. As for the 
statement that the Upani~adic text equating dream with waking (viz Br. IV. 
iii. 14-"others, however, say that the dream state of a man is nothing but the 
waking state" etc.), declares the reality of dream, that declaration of 
similarity does not signify reality, for that would run counter to the self- 
effulgence of the Self. Moreover, the Upanigad itself shows the absence of 
chariot etc. in dream. The idea implied there is that dream being a product of 
.the impressions acquired during wakefulness, it has the verisimilitude of 
wakefulness. Hence it is reasonable to say that dream is mere Maya. 

TOPIC 2: THE SOUL IN DEEP SLEEP 



ffq; The absence of that (dream), (that is to say, deep sleep), (takes place) 
mw A q in the nerves a and aTTFq in the Self, -'4: that being known from the 
Upanigads. 

7. The absence of that dream (i.e. dreamless sleep) takes place in the 
nerves and the Self, as it is knoum to be so from the Upanisads. 

The dream state has been considered: now is being considered the state of 
sleep. Here are some Upanipdic passages about sleep: "Now then, (among 



these states), when one sleeps in such a way, that all his organs are 
withdrawn and he becomes completely serene (in mind) and does not dream, 
then the soul remain3 spread over these nerves" (Ch. VIII. vi. 3). In another 
place, however, in connection with these very nerves it is heard, "it comes 
back along the seventy-two thousand nerves called hitd, which extend from 
the heart to the pericardium, and sleeps in the puritat" (i.e. the heart) (Br. II. 
i. 19). Elsewhere also, while dealing with the nerves themselves, it is said, 
"When the sleeping individual sees no dream, he happens to be in those 
nerves; then he becomes united in this Prana" (Kau. IV. 19). Similarly in 
another place: "And (he) lies in the Akasa (supreme Self) that is in the heart" 
(Br. II. i. 17). So also elsewhere: "0 amiable one, then he becomes unified 
with Existence, he attains his own Self" (Ch. VI. viii. 1), as also, "So this 
infinite Being (Self), fully embraced by the Conscious Self (supreme Self), 
does not know anything at all, either external or internal" (B;. IV. iii. 21). 

Doubt: While on this subject, the doubt arises: Are these nerves and other 
places of sleep different from one another, or are they mutually 
interdependent and constitute a single place of sleep? What should be the 
conclusion here? 

Opponent: They are different places. 

Why? 

Since they are meant to serve the same purpose. Things that are meant to 
serve the same purpose are not seen to depend on one A :►other, as in the 
case of paddy, barley, etc. (optionally used for sacrificial cakes). And the 
nerves etc. are seen to serve the same purpose during sleep; for in "remains 
spread over these nerves" (Ch. VIII. vi. 3), "sleeps in the puritat" (Br. II. ii. 
19), the seventh (locative) case-ending ("in") is seen to be equally in use. 

Objection : But in the case of Existence (Sat) the seventh case-ending is 
not used thus in, "0 amiable one, he then becomes unified with Existence" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 1) (where the instrumental case is used). 

Opponent : This is no defect; for there too the sense of the seventh case 
can be understood; for in the complementary passage it is stated that the 



individual soul, in search of an abode repairs to Existence: "Not getting an 
abode anywhere else, he resorts to Praha Itself" (Ch. VI. viii. 2), where the 
Existence under discussion is referred to by the word Praha. And the sense 
of the seventh case is implied in the word ayatana (abode). Moreover the use 
of the seventh case is clearly in evidence in the complementary text: 
"Having become merged in Existence, they do not know, 'We have become 
merged in Existence' " (Ch. VI. ix. 2). In all these cases, the nature of deep 
sleep, consisting in the cessation of particularized knowledge, does not 
differ. Therefore, it follows that since the nerves etc. serve the same purpose, 
the soul resorts optionally to some one of them some time for its sleep. 

Vedantin : This being the position, it is being explained: "The absence of 
that takes place in the nerves and the Self". "The absence of that" means the 
absence of the relevant dreaming, that is to say deep sleep. That occurs in the 
nerves and the Self. By the use of "and" in the sense of combination, the idea 
conveyed is that the soul resorts to these nerves etc. collectively for sleep 
and not alternatively. 

Whence is it so? 

Since it is seen to be so from the Upani$ads. To explain: All these nerves 
and other things are mentioned in the respective contexts (in the Upani$ads) 
as the places of sleep; and all these become reconciled if they are accepted 
collectively, whereas if they are accepted alternatively then the others 
become ruled out. 

Opponent : Was it not pointed out that, serving as they do the same 
purpose like paddy, barley etc., the nerves, (puritat, and Self), can be 
accepted alternatively? 

Vedantin : The answer is . no. From the mere fact that the same case¬ 
endin g is used it does not follow that they serve the same purpose or that 
they can be taken alternatively. For even in the case of thin g s havin g 
diver g ent purposes as well as some collective purpose , the same case-endin g 
is found to be used , as in . "He sleeps in a palace , he sleeps in a couch"2 . and 
such other instances. Similarly it is but reasonable here that a combination is 
to be accepted in the sense that he sleeps in the nerves, Puritat, and 





















Brahman. In support of this is the Upani$adic text, "When the individual 
soul sees no dream, he happens to be in those nerves; then he becomes 
united in the Prana" (Kau. IV. 19), where the text speaks collectively of the 
nerves and Prana in deep sleep; for both are presented in the very same 
sentence. And it has been ascertained that Prana is Brahman in the aphorism, 
"Prim is Brahman, because it can be harmonized thus" (B. S. I. i. 28). Where 
the Upani$ad speaks of the nerves as though they are independent places of 
sleep as in, "Then he remains asleep in these nerves" (Ch. VIII. vi. 3), there 
also Brahman, well known (to be the place of sleep) from other texts is not 
ruled out, and hence the idea derived is that the soul rests in Brahman by 
proceeding along the nerves. Even from such a viewpoint the use of the 
locative case after the nerves is not contradicted; for though the soul 
approaches Brahman through the nerves, it happens to be in the nerves, just 
as a man proceeding to the sea along the river Ganga, remains as a matter of 
fact in the Ganga. Moreover, the thing sought to be taught in this text (Ch. 
VIII. vi) is the path constituted by the nerves and the rays and leading to the 
world of Brahman. The declaration about the soul's remaining spread over 
the nerves is meant for eulogizing the nerves; for first it is said, "He remains 
spread over the nerves", and then it is added, "no sin touches him" (Ch. VIII. 
vi. 3), in which latter sentence the nerves are praised. The reason for being 
free from the touch of sin is also stated in, "For he then becomes enveloped 
by tejas (light)" (ibid.), which means that the organs of the soul then become 
enveloped by the light (of the sun in the nerves) called bile, and so it cannot 
perceive external things. Or by the term "by light", Brahman Itself is referred 
to, for in another Upani$ad, the word tejas (light) is used for Brahman in the 
text, "Brahman, Itself, the Light" (Br. IV. iv. 7). The idea implied is that 
since the soul then becomes unified with Brahman by proceeding along the 
nerves, therefore no sin can touch it; for from such Upanigadic text as, "All 
sins turn back from here, for this is the world of Brahman that is unafflicted 
by sin" (Ch. VIII. iv. 1), it is known that merger in Brahman is the cause for 
remaining untouched by sin. This being so, the conclusion arrived at is that 
the nerves, dependent on Brahman as they are, have to be construed as the 
place of sleep collectively with Brahman which is well known to be the 
place of sleep from other Upani$adic texts. So also the puritat, having been 
mentioned in connection with Brahman, is understood to become a place of 
sleep in subordination to Brahman, which fact is known thus: The Akdsa 



(Brahman) in the heart, which is the place of sleep, is introduced in, "And 
lies in the Akdsa that is in the heart" (Br. II. i. 17); and in that context it is 
said, "sleeps in the puritat". (Br. II. i. 19). By the word puritat is meant a 
covering of the heart. One sleeping in the AkLa within the heart, enveloped 
by the puritat, may as well be said to be sleeping in the puritat; for somebody 
living within a city surrounded by a rampart is said to be living in the 
rampart. Now, under the aphorism, "The small Akafa (i.e. space in the heart) 
is Brahman, because of the subsequent reasons" (I. iii. 14), it was ascertained 
earlier that the Akafa in the heart is Brahman. And from the reference to the 
nerves and puritat in the same sentence, "It comes back through the nerves 
called bits and sleeps in the puritat" (Br. II. i. 19), it is known that the nerves 
and puritat are to be construed collectively. Besides "Existence" (Ch. VI. 
viii. 1) and "Conscious Self" (Br. IV. iii. 19) are well known to be terms 
denoting Brahman. In these Upanisadic texts three places only are 
mentioned as the places of sleep-the nerves, the puritat, and Brahman. 
Among these the nerves, as also the puritat, are mere entrances, Brahman 
alone, without a second, being the unchanging place of sleep. Moreover, the 
nerves as well as the puritat become merely the encasements for the 
individual soul by virtue of being its limiting adjuncts, for in them exist its 
organs. Without the association with the limiting adjuncts, the soul cannot 
have any natural encasement, since it is ever established in its own glory 
owing to its identity with Brahman. As for its having Brahman as its locus 
(or abode) during sleep, that too is not stated by way of making a distinction 
as between a container and the thing contained. 

In what way then? 

By way of showing their identity, since it is said, "0 amiable one, he then 
becomes unified with Existence, he attains his own Self" (Ch. VI. viii. 1), 
where the supreme Self is referred to by the phrase "own Self (sva)", the 
idea implied being that a man while asleep remains established in his true 
nature. Moreover there is no time when the soul is not in union with 
Brahman, since one's own nature is unchangeable. But the statement, "He 
attains his own Self" is made, because in dream and wakefulness the soul 
seems to assume another's garb under the influence of the limiting adjuncts 
with which it remains associated, whereas in sleep that garb falls off, so that 



in comparison with the earlier stages, sleep is sought to be spoken of as the 
state of assumption of the real nature. From this it is clear that it is improper 
to say that in sleep the soul sometimes becomes unified with Existence and 
sometimes not. Besides, even if it be understood that sleep can have different 
alternative loci, still deep sleep, as consisting in the cessation of 
particularized perception, is always the same. And under such 
circumstances, it is but logical that a soul, merged in Existence, should not 
know anything just because of its non-duality, as is shown in the text, "then 
what should one know and through what?" (Br. II. iv. 14). But should the 
soul sleep in the nerves or the puritat, no reason for its non-recognition of 
objects can be ascertained, since (particularized) cognition is concerned with 
duality (and duality is present there), as is shown in the text, "When there is 
something else, as it were, then one can see something". (Br. IV. iii. 31). 

Opponent : Even things within duality may remain unknown owing to 
great distance etc. 

Vedamin : This can be truly so, if the individual soul is supposed to be 
naturally limited, even as ViMumitra (who is different from his house) does 
not see his own house when on a sojourn. But the soul has no limitation 
apart from that caused by conditioning factors. Even if you say that in the 
case of the soul also, non-cognition is caused by the great distance etc. 
inherent in the limiting adjuncts, still the reasonable position is that when the 
adjuncts cease in sleep, the soul does not know because of its merger in 
Existence Itself. But when talking of a collection of factors (in sleep), we do 
not suggest here that the nerves etc. combine in equal partnership (with 
Brahman); for nothing is gained from the knowledge that the nerves, as also 
the puritat, are the locus of sleep, since neither any result is mentioned in the 
Upani$ads as attached to such a knowledge itself, nor is it construed that 
such a knowledge forms part of something else that has its own result. We 
are out to prove that Brahman is the invariable locus of sleep. Such a 
knowledge serves a purpose, namely that the soul is ascertained to be 
identical with Brahman, and it is realized to be free from the dealings 
consequent on the dream and wakeful states. Hence the Self is the locus of 
sleep. 




alff: Hence g: awakening (is) aT from this. 

8. For the same reason, the soul's waking up is from this supreme Self. 

Since the Self Itself is the locus of sleep, therefore, for that very reason, it 
is taught in the context of sleep that wakefulness occurs invariably from this 
Self, by the texts, "As from a fire tiny sparks fly in all directions, so from the 
Self emanate all organs" (Br. II. i. 20), etc., said in the course of the answer 
to the question, "Whence did it come?" (Br. II. i. 16). This is done also by 
the text, "Having emerged from Existence, they do not know, 'We have 
come from Existence"' (Ch. IV. x. 2). Had the loci of sleep been but optional, 
the Upanigad would have instructed that the soul wakes up sometimes from 
the nerves, sometimes from the puritat, and sometimes from the Self. From 
this also follows that the Self is the locus of sleep. 



cT But g: r that (soul) itself (returns) because of the reasons of action, 
remembrance, scriptural authority, and injunction. 

9. But the very same soul returns from sleep because of the reasons of 
action, remembrance, scriptural authority, and injunction. 



Doubt : It is being considered whether the one who awakes from that 
merger in Existence is the same at the time of awakening as one was at the 
time of merger, or whether it may either be the same entity or some one else. 

Opponent : When under this doubt, the conclusion arrived at is that there 
is no hard and fast rule. 

Why? 

When a drop of water is thrown into a mass of water, it becomes one with 
that mass. And when an attempt is made to take it up again from there, it is 
impossible to have that very same drop. Similarly when the sleeping soul has 
become one with the supreme Self and has attained quiescence (i.e. freedom 
from everything), that very soul cannot wake up again. Hence the conclusion 
is that the waking being may be either the original soul, or he may be God, 
or some other individual soul. 

Veduntin : To this the aphorist says, "But (it is) the very same soul", which 
had gone to sleep and attained its own Self, that rises up again; and it is none 
else. 

What are the reasons for that? 

"Because of the reasons of action, remembrance, scriptural authority, and 
injunction." We shall elaborate the reasons separately. To begin, the selfsame 
soul alone can awake, and none else, because an unfinished action is seen to 
be resumed. Thus one is seen to take up and finish a piece of work left 
incomplete on the previous day. One cannot reasonably engage oneself in 
some work left incomplete by another, since a contrary view will lead to 
unwarranted conclusions. Hence it is understood that the same person is the 
doer of the same work on the previous and next days. For this further reason 
also the selfsame person wakes up: If the person waking up be different, then 
there should be no memory of what was perceived earlier, which proposition 
is contrary to what is evident in the recollection, "I saw this on the previous 
day". For something seen by one cannot be remembered by another. And a 
recognition like, "I am that very person", in which one's own identity is 
recognized cannot be imagined to occur if some other soul should wake up. 



Again, from scriptural texts it is known that the selfsame person wakes up, 
as for instance, "He comes back again in the inverse order to his former 
condition, the waking state" (Br. IV. iii. 16), "All these creatures who repair 
to this world of Brahman every day, do .not know It" (Ch. VIII. iii. 2), and 
"Whatever they might have been here (in the previous waking state)-be it a 
tiger, a lion, a wolf, a boar, a worm, an insect, a gnat, or a mosquito, they 
become those very creatures then (after waking from sleep)" (Ch. VI. ix. 3). 
These and other texts occurring in the context of sleep and waking up cannot 
be reconciled if the waking soul be different. This also is the conclusion that 
follows from the injunctions about rites and meditations; for else the 
injunctions about rites and meditations become useless, since on the 
supposition of some other soul waking up, the conclusion will be that any 
one becomes free as soon as one goes to sleep. And if this be the case, then 
would you tell me what is the need of undertaking a rite or a meditation that 
will yield its fruit in future? Again, on the hypothesis that some other 
(bound) soul wakes up, it will either mean that some soul that had been 
working through a second body wakes up (in the sleeping body under 
consideration), in which case there will be the predicament of that (active) 
soul's activity ceasing in that second body. Or if it be held that the soul 
sleeping in the second body wakes up in the first, then that supposition is 
useless; for when one sleeping in any body can wake up in that very body, 
what do you gain by supposing that some one sleeping in one body wakes up 
in another? Again, if it be held that a free soul wakes up in the body (in 
which another had slept), then liberation will become terminable. Moreover, 
it is illogical that one for whom ignorance has ceased should become 
embodied again. Hereby is also refuted the view that God wakes up in the 
body, since in Him ignorance is eternally absent. Besides, the defects of 
deriving some unearned result and losing something earned will be 
inevitable on the supposition that some other soul wakes up in the body after 
sleep. Hence that very (sleeping) soul wakes up and none else. 

And it was argued that just as a drop of water thrown into a mass of water 
cannot be singled out, so also a soul merging in Existence cannot spring up 
again. That is being refuted. In the analogy it is quite in order to say that the 
(selfsame) drop of water cannot be singled out, since there is nothing to 
mark out its individuality. But here we have karma and ignorance as the 



factors making the (individual) distinction. The two cases are thus different. 
Moreover, it is a matter of experience that though milk and water, when 
mixed together, cannot be separated by any one of the human race, still they 
can be separated by ducks. Besides, there is no such entity, different from the 
supreme Self, which has to be distinguished from Existence like a drop of 
water from a mass of water. It has been shown more than once that Existence 
Itself comes to be called indirectly a soul, because of the intervention of 
limiting adjuncts. This being the case, as long as a soul continues to be 
bound up with a particular set of adjuncts, so long do we deal with it as the 
very same one; and when it comes to be bound up with another set of 
adjuncts, we deal with it as though it is different. That very same set of 
adjuncts persists in sleep and wakefulness on the maxim of the seed and 
seedling, so that the reasonable position is that the selfsame soul wakes up 
from sleep. 

Topic 4: SOUL IN SWOON 
sq r-T lja g IltoII 

;1' In the case of a person in swoon a-4gsgRr: occurs only partial 
attainment (of the state of sleep), 4ftNl that being the last alternative. 

10. In the case of one in swoon, there is only partial attainment (of the 
state of sleep), that being the last alternative. 

Opponent : There is such a phenomenon as a man in a swoon whom 
people call unconscious. When the condition of such a man is under scrutiny, 
it is said: The soul inhabiting a body is known to have three states- 
wakefulness, dream, and sleep. The fourth is the departure from the body. 
But no fifth state is known to exist for the soul either in the Vedas or the 
Smrtis. Therefore unconsciousness must be classed under one of the four 
conditions. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say: Of these states, a man in a 
swoon cannot be in the waking state; for he does not perceive objects 
through his senses. 



Opponent : Well, this can be so on the analogy of an arrowmaker. As an 
arrow-maker, being occupied with the arrow, does not perceive anything but 
the arrow, though he is wide awake, similarly a man in a swoon, though still 
awake, does not perceive anything else because his mind is fully 
overwhelmed by the pain arising from a blow dealt with a club etc. 

Veddntin : No, since he behaves as one having no consciousness (at the 
time). For the arrow-maker, whose attention had been fully engaged, says 
afterwards, "I was perceiving simply the arrow so long". But the 
unconscious man says on regaining his consciousness, "For so long I was 
immersed in blinding darkness, and nothing was perceived by me." Besides, 
a waking man, who has his mind concentrated on one object, holds his body 
erect, whereas the body of an unconscious man drops down to the ground. 
Therefore neither does he keep awake nor does he see dreams, for he has no 
consciousness (i.e. capacity of perception). Nor is he dead, for he has life 
and warmth. For when a man faints, people having doubts as to whether he 
is dead or alive feel his heart to ascertain if he has warmth; and to ascertain 
if he breathes, they examine his nostrils. Should they fail to perceive the 
existence of both breath and warmth, they conclude that the man is dead and 
so carry him to the forest for cremation. On the contrary if they feel the 
existence of either breath or warmth, they conclude that the man is not dead, 
and so they resort to treatment for bringing back his consciousness. Also 
from the fact that the unconscious man rises up again, it follows that he was 
not dead; for one who goes to the king of death, never comes back from that 
domain. 

Opponent : Let it be then that he is in deep sleep, since he has no 
consciousness at the same time that he is not dead. 

Veddntin : Not so, for there is a difference. A man in a swoon may not 
breathe for a long time, but his body may be in tremors and his face may be 
distorted (with a look of terror), and the eyes may remain wide open. But a 
man in deep sleep has a calm face, he breathes rhythmically again and again, 
his eyes remain closed, and his body has no contortion. A sleeping man is 
awakened simply by pushing him with the hand, whereas an unconscious 
man cannot be brought back to consciousness even by beating with a club. 



Furthermore, the causes of swoon and sleep differ, for fainting results from 
blows from a club etc., while sleep comes as a result of fatigue. And people 
never acknowledge that a man under a swoon sleeps. By a process of 
elimination we realize that swooning away is a state of half sleep; for he is 
partially asleep owing to absence of consciousness, and still he is not fully 
asleep as his state is different from sleep. 

Opponent : How again can a swoon be described as a partial sleep, since 
with regard to the sleeping man the Upani~ads say, "0 amiable one, he then 
becomes unified with Existence" (Ch. VI. viii. 1), "In this state a thief is no 
thief" (Br. IV. iii. 22), "Night and day do not overflow this embankment (i.e. 
Brahman), nor old age, nor death, nor sorrow, nor merit, nor demerit" (Ch. 
VIII. iv. 1)? For an individual being gets the results of merit and demerit 
through the generation of the ideas of his being happy or sorry; but neither 
the idea of happiness nor of misery exists in sleep; so also they are absent in 
a swoon. Hence it follows that in a swoon, as in sleep, there is a complete 
merger in Existence owing to the cessation of the limiting adjuncts; but it is 
not partial merger. 

Vedantin : With regard to this the answer is, that it is not our view that in a 
swoon a man becomes half merged in Brahman. 

What do you say then? 

A swoon is partially a form of sleep, and partially of some other state. We 
have already shown its similarity and dissimilarity with sleep. And it is a 
door to death. So long as the individual's karma lasts, his speech and mind 
return from a swoon; but when the karma has no residue, his breathing and 
warmth depart. Hence the knowers of Brahman call swoon a partial sleep. 
As for the objection raised that no fifth state is known to exist, that is nothing 
damaging. On account of being a casual state, it is not so widely noted; and 
yet it is well recognized in this world and in the books of medicine. By 
admitting it to be a partial sleep, we do not reckon it to be a fifth state. In this 
way it is all beyond criticism. 


Tonic 5: THE NATURE OF BRAHMAN 




q Not irr: according to (difference of) place (i.e. limiting adjunct) 8th even 
(can there be) u-qq-Fff-ffq a twofold characteristic 97M of the supreme 
Brahman fk for -t+ everywhere (It is taught otherwise). 

11. Not even according to place can Brahman have a twofold 
characteristic, for everywhere (It is taught to be withort attributes). 

With the help of Upani$adic texts, the nature of that Brahman is now 
being ascertained with which the individual soul becomes unified in sleep 
when its limiting adjuncts become quiescent. Vedic texts about Brahman are 
met with which are indicative of Brahman both with qualification and 
without qualification. Such texts as, "He is the doer of all (good) acts, 
possessed of all (good) desires, all (good) smell, all (good) tastes" (Ch. III. 
xiv. 2), indicate that Brahman has attributes. And the texts, "It is neither 
gross, nor minute, neither short nor long" (Br. III. viii. 8) and others, indicate 
that It is devoid of attributes. 

Doubt : Now should it be understood that in these texts Brahman is 
spoken of as possessed of a twofold characteristic, or that It is spoken of as 
possessed of either of the two characteristics? Again, even if one of these 
characteristics be true, it has to be ascertained whether the aspect with 
attributes is to be accepted or the aspect without attributes. 

Opponent : As to that, on the authority of the texts presenting a dual 
aspect, Brahman must have both the aspects. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say: As to that, the supreme 
Brahman, considered in Itself, cannot logically have both the characteristics; 
for it cannot be admitted that the very same thing is naturally possessed of 
attributes like form etc., and that it is also without these; for that is self¬ 
contradictory. 



Opponent: Then let this be so owing to position, that is to say, on account 
of association with such limiting adjuncts as earth. 

Vedantin : That too is not logical. For even by association with the 
limiting adjuncts a substance that is different in kind cannot change its 
nature into another; for a transparent crystal cannot become opaque even 
when in contact with limiting adjuncts like red lac, the idea of opaqueness 
being a mere error. Moreover, adjuncts are conjured up by ignorance. Hence, 
even if we have to take up either of the two characteristics, it is the Brahman 
that is absolutely attributeless and unchangeable that has to be accepted and 
not the opposite. For in all texts which aim at presenting the real nature of 
Brahman, as for instance in, "soundless, touchless, colourless, 
undiminishing" (Ka. I. iii. 15), etc., Brahman is presented as devoid of all 
distinguishing attributes. 



"n Not so ir" owing to differences" Xf~r* if it be argued thus, (then) R not 
so, ar-ffq-!q because of the negation of such differences individually. 

12. If it be argued that (Brahman cannot have only one characteristic), on 
account of differences (met with in the scriptures), (we say that) it is not so, 
because the scriptures negate each of these differences individually. 

Opponent : It may still be argued thus: It does not stand to reason to 
assert, as it has been done, that Brahman is beyond all distinctions and has 
but one characteristic, and that It cannot have a double characteristic either 
naturally or owing to the influence of position. 

Why? 

"On account of differences". For the aspects of Brahman are taught 
differently in connection with the individual meditations, as for instance, 
"Brahman has four feet (or quarters)" (Ch. III. xviii. 2), "Brahman has 



sixteen digits (parts)" (Pr. VI. 1), "Brahman is the bestower of the results of 
actions on those persons" (Ch. IV. xv. 3), "Brahman has the three worlds as 
Its body" (Br. I. iii. 22), and It is called "Vai§vanara' (Ch. V. xii-xviii), and so 
on. Hence Brahman has to be admitted as possessed of attributes as well. 

Vedintin : Did we not say that it is not possible for Brahman to have a dual 
characteristic? 

Opponent : That too creates no difficulty, because a difference in aspects 
is created by limiting adjuncts; for otherwise the texts talking of difference 
will be left without any scope. 

Veddntin : We say, this is not so. 

Why? 

"Because the scriptures negate each of these differences individually. "For 
along with (the mention of) each difference created by a limiting adjunct, the 
scriptures affirm the nondifference alone of Brahman, as in, "The same with 
the shining immortal being who is in this earth, and the shining immortal 
corporeal being in the body. (These four) are but this Self" etc. (Br. II. v. 1). 
Hence the difference having been spoken of for the sake of meditation, and 
non-difference being the real purport of the scriptures, it cannot be held that 
the scriptures support the view, that Brahman is possessed of diverse aspects. 



afq q Moreover, r some (followers of some branches) q9 thus (declare). 
13. Moreover, the followers of certain branches declare thus. 



Moreover, the followers of certain sections declare in favour of the 
realization of non-duality after condemning the dualistic outlook, as in, 
"This is to be attained through the n5ind. There is no diversity whatsoever. 
He who sees as though there is difference, goes from death to death" (Ka. II. 
i. 11). Similarly others have: "After deliberating on the experiencer, the 
things experienced, and the ordainer, one should know all these three to be 
but the Brahman I speak of" (Sv. I. 12), where the entire variety of 
phenomenal manifestation, consisting of the objects of experience, the 
experiencing souls, and (God) the ordainer, is declared by the Upani$ad to 
be none other than Brahman in essence. 

Opponent : Since two classes of Upani$adic texts, speaking of Brahman 
as with form and also as without form, are in existence, how can it be 
asserted that Brahman is formless alone? 

Vedantin : Hence comes the answer: 




m 


a-qFormless qq only fk to be ffq-qWq~qq that being the dominant note. 

14. Brahman is only formless to be sure, for that is the dominant note (of 
the Upani;adic teaching). 

Brahman is surely to be known as having no form constituted by colour 
etc., and not as having it. 

Why? 

"For that is the dominant teaching", inasmuch as it has been established 
under the aphorism, "But that Brahman is known from the Upani$ads, 
because of their being connected with Brahman as their main import" (I. i. 
4), that the texts like the following have for their main purport the 
transcendental Brahman which is the Self, and not any other subject-matter: 



"It is neither gross, nor minute, neither short nor long" (Br. III. viii. 8), 
"Soundless, touchless, colourless, undiminishing" (Ka. I. iii. 15), "That 
which is known as Space is the accomplisher of name and form; That in 
which they are included is Brahman" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1), "Puru$a is 
transcendental, since He is formless; and He is coextensive with all that is 
external and internal, sirtce He is birthiess" (Mu. H. i. 2), "That Brahman is 
without prior or posterior, without interior and exterior. The Self, the 
perceiver of everything, is Brahman" (Br. H. v. 19), and so on. Hence in 
sentences of this kind, the formless Brahman alone, just as It is spoken of by 
the texts themselves, has to be accepted. But the other texts, speaking of 
Brahman with form, have the injunctions about meditations as their main 
objectives. So long as they do not lead to some contradiction, their apparent 
meanings should be accepted. But when they involve a contradiction, the 
principle to be followed for deciding one or the other is that, those that have 
the formless Brahman as their main purport are more authoritative than the 
others which have not that as their main purport. It is according to this that 
one is driven to the conclusion that Brahman is formless and not its opposite, 
though texts having both the purports are in evidence. 

Opponent: What would then be the fate of the texts speaking of forms? 


Veddntin : Hence comes the reply: 



q And (Brahman can have appearances) AWM-qc like light ar-kqudq so 
that scriptures may not be rendered purportless. 

15. And like light, Brahman can (be assumed to) have different 
appearances, so that the scriptures may not become purportless. 



Though the light of the sun or moon spreads over the whole space, still 
when it comes in contact with adjuncts like fingers etc., it seems to assume 
the forms, straight or bent, as those adjuncts may have; similarly Brahman, 
too, seems to have the forms of earth etc., when in contact with those things. 
And it is nothing contradictory to enjoin meditations on Brahman based on 
those forms. Thus the sentences presenting Brahman as having forms do not 
become meaningless, for it is not proper to interpret some Vedic sentences as 
having meaning and the others as meaningless, since they are all valid. 

Opponent : Even so, does not the assertion made earlier that Brahman 
cannot have a dual characteristic even in association with limiting adjuncts, 
stand contradicted? 

Vedantin : We say, no, since whatsoever is brought about by an adjunct is 
not the essential characteristic of a thing, since the adjuncts themselves are 
conjured up by ignorance. And we said in the respective contexts that all 
social and Vedic behaviours crop up only when the beginningless nescience 
is taken for granted. 

1 % * llftll 

q And (scripture) arR declares (Brahman to be) a-q-Bir that much (i.e. 
consciousness) only. 

16. The Upanisad also declares Brahman to be Consciousness alone. 

The Upani$ad also says that Brahman is pure consciousness, devoid of 
other aspects contrary to this, and without any distinguishing feature, as in, 
"As a lump of salt is without interior or exterior, entire, and purely saline in 
taste, even so is the Self without interior or exterior, entire, and pure 
Intelligence alone" (Br. IV. v. 13), which means that the Self has no internal 
or external aspect apart from pure consciousness, Its nature being mere 



impartite consciousness without any interstices. Just as a lump of salt has the 
saline taste alone both inside and outside, and no other taste, so also is this 
Self. 




m 3tn to ii^ii 

w Moreover qy (Vedic text) reveals aMl likewise m4ca it is mentioned in 
the Smrti Oq as well. 

17. Moreover, the Vedas reveal this; likewise this is mentioned in the 
Smrtis also. 

Moreover, the Vedas reveal through a negation of other aspects that 
Brahman has no distinguishing feature, as for instance in, "Now therefore 
the description (of Brahman): 'Not this, not this'" (Br. II. iii. 6), "That 
(Brahman) is surely different from the known; and, again, It is above the 
unknown" (Ke. I. 4), "That Bliss of Brahman, failing to reach which, words 
turn back along with the mind" (Tai. II, ix. 1), and so on. And it is also 
known from the Vedic texts that Badhva being asked by Ba$kali, replied 
merely by not uttering a word, as stated in, "He (Ba$kali) said, 'Teach me 
Brahman, sir.' He (Badhva) became silent. When the question was repeated a 
second and a third time he said, 'I have already spoken, but you cannot 
comprehend. That Self is Quiescence' ". Similarly in the Smrtis, the 
instruction is given through a negation of other things, as in, "I shall tell you 
of that which is to be known and by knowing which one attains immortality. 
The supreme Brahman is without any beginning. It can neither be called 
gross (visible) nor fine (invisible)" (Mira, XIII. 12), and so on. Similarly the 
Smrti mentions how Narayaoa in His cosmic form said to Mirada, "0 
Narada, that you see me as possessed of all the (five divine) qualities of all 
elements, is only because of My Maya, called up by Myself. For else you 
should not understand Me thus." 



ffaifas iiwi 

am: t Hence q also 3ggl the illustration _wft-wq like the reflection of the 
sun etc. 

18. Hence also are the illustrations of the sun's reflection etc. 

Since this Self is by nature Consciousness Itself, distinctionless, beyond 
speech and mind, and can be taught by way of negating other things, hence 
in the scriptures dealing with liberation an illustration is cited by saying that 
it is "like the sun reflected in water". Here the aspect kept in view is the one 
with attributes, which is not real and which is created by limiting adjuncts, 
as it is done in such texts, "As this luminous sun, though one in itself, 
becomes multifarious owing to its. entry into water divided by different pots, 
similarly this Deity, the birthless self-effulgent Self, though one, seems to be 
diversified owing to Its entry into the different bodies, constituting Its 
limiting adjuncts." Similarly, "Being but one, the Universal Soul is present in 
all beings. Though one, It is seen as many, like the moon in water" 
(Am;tabindu, 12) and other texts. 

Here the opponent raises his head: 

if HUH 

$ But a-aK-awuiq as nothing is perceived to be similar to water ffq that 
kind of parallelism q (does) not (apply). 

19. But that kind of parallelism is inapplicable as nothing is perceived to 
be similar to water. 




The comparison with the reflection of the sun in water cannot be 
reasonably upheld here (in the case of the Self), since nothing like that is 
perceived (here). A material thing, such as water, is seen to be clearly 
separate from and remotely placed from the sun etc. which are themselves 
material entities (with forms). There it is proper that an image of the sun 
should be formed. But the Self is not such a material entity (having form); 
and since It is all-pervasive and non-different from all, It can have no 
limiting adjuncts either separate or remote from It. Hence this illustration is 
inapt. 

Vedamin : The objection is being remedied: 

liyil 

,fg_WM-Wp There is a participation in increase and decrease Wm:-M" on 
account of the entry (immanence): 41 IB" on account of the propriety of both 
(the illustration and the thing illustrated) q" in this way, (there can be no 
contradiction). 

20. Since Brahman has entered into the limiting adjuncts, It seems to 
participate in their increase and decrease. The illustration is apt since the 
illustration and thing illustrated have propriety from this point of view. 

On the contrary, this illustration is quite apt, inasmuch as the point sought 
to be illustrated is pertinent. For as between the illustration and the thing 
illustrated, nobody can show equality in every respect over and above some 
point of similarity in some way, which is sought to be presented. For if such 
an all-round similarity exists, the very relation between the illustration and 
the thing illustrated will fall through. Moreover, this illustration of the 
reflection of the sun in water is not cooked up by anybody's imagination. But 
this illustration having been already cited in the scripture, its applicability 
alone is being pointed out here. 


Where, again, is the intended point of similarity? 



The reply is this: "A participation in increase and decrease", inasmuch as 
the reflection of the sun in water increases with the increase of water, and 
decreases with its reduction, it moves when the water moves, and it differs 
as the water differs. Thus the sun conforms to the characteristics of the 
water; but in reality the sun never has these. Thus also from the highest point 
of view, Brahman, while remaining unchanged and retaining Its sameness, 
seems to conform to such characteristics as increase and decrease of the 
limiting adjunct (body), owing to Its entry into such an adjunct as the body. 
Thus since the illustration and the thing illustrated are both compatible, there 
is no contradiction. 





21. And (this is also) in accordance with (the Vedic) revelation. 

The Upanisads also show that the supreme Brahman Itself has entered into 
the limiting adjuncts, such as the bodies and the rest, as in, "He made bodies 
with two feet and bodies with four feet. That supreme Being first entered the 
bodies as a bird (i.e. the subtle body)" (Br. II. v. 18), as also, "Myself 
entering as this individual Self" (Ch. VI. iii. 2). Therefore it has been aptly 
said, "Hence also are the illustrations like the sun's reflections etc." (III. ii. 
18). Accordingly, the conclusion is that Brahman is without any 
distinguishing feature, and has but one aspect, and not two or an opposite 
one. 

Some people (i.e. pseudo-Veddntins) fancy here two topics. The first topic 
is concerned with whether Brahman has but one characteristic, devoid of all 
the variety of phenomenal manifestations, or It has many features just like 


the universe. It being established that Brahman is devoid of the variety of 
manifestations (B. S. III. ii. 11-14), the second topic (B. S. III. ii. 15-21) 
considers whether Brahman has the characteristic of existence or 
consciousness or both. 

Veddntin : With regard to this we say: Considered from every point of 
view, it is useless to start a fresh topic. If the effort made here is meant 
merely for refuting a multiplicity in the characteristics of Brahman, that has 
already been done under the topic starting with, "Not even according to 
place can Brahman have a twofold characteristic" (III. ii. 11), so that the 
succeeding topic, starring with, "And possessed of consciousness" etc. (III. 
ii. 15) will be uncalled for. Furthermore, it cannot be held that Brahman has 
merely the characteristic of existence and not consciousness; for that would 
set at naught such texts as "impartite Consciousness to be sure" (Br. IV. v. 
13). And how can a Brahman bereft of consciousness be taught (by the 
scripture) as the Self of a sentient individual being? It cannot also be said 
that Brahman is characterized by consciousness only, but not by existence; 
for that would nullify the Upani$adic texts like, "The Self is to be realized as 
existing" (Ka. II. iii. 13). How, again, can a consciousness that has no 
existence be conceived of? It cannot also be argued that the second topic 
proves that Brahman has a dual characteristic, since that would contradict 
what was accepted (by you) earlier. And if Brahman be asserted either to be 
characterized by consciousness devoid of existence or by existence devoid of 
consciousness, it will lead to Brahman's becoming dowered with a variety of 
manifestations, a position already refuted under the previous topic. 

Opponent: That is nothing harmful inasmuch as the Vedic texts declare 
this. 

Vedantin : No, since the same entity cannot have many natures. 

Again, even if it be contended that existence itself is the same as 
consciousness, as also that consciousness itself is existence, so that the one 
does not rule out the other, still the alternative positions taken up, viz 
whether Brahman is characterized by existence, or by consciousness, or by 
both, have no ground to stand on. 



As for ourselves we have grouped the aphorisms under the very same 
topic. 

Moreover, it was seen that if on finding that the Vedic texts, while 
speaking of Brahman, present It as both with and without form, and thus 
land themselves into self-contradiction, one understands them as revealing 
only the formless Brahman, then one has to provide perforce a scope for the 
rest of the texts. The aphorisms starting with, "And like light taking the 
forms of objects" (III. ii. 15), become more purposeful as finding out that 
scope. 

As for the view that even the Vedic texts speaking of Brahman's forms are 
meant merely for leading to the formless Brahman through a sublation of the 
manifested universe, but that they have no independent purpose, it may be 
said that that, too, does not appear to be proper. 

Why? 

Some of the manifestations that are spoken of in a context of the supreme 
knowledge, as in, "For to Him are yoked ten organs, nay hundreds of them. 
He is the organs; He is ten, and thousands-many, and infinite" (Br. II. v. 19), 
etc. may be admitted to be meant for sublation, since the conclusion is made 
with, "That Brahman is without prior or posterior, without interior or 
exterior" (ibid.). But the manifestations revealed in a context of meditation, 
as in "Identified with the mind, having Prkna as his body, and effulgence 
itself by nature" (Ch. III. xiv. 2), and so on, cannotreasonably be held to be 
meant for sublation; for they arekonnected with some injunction for 
meditation forming the subject-matter of the context, as for instance, "He 
should make a resolve" (ibid.). And when the text itself presents these 
attributes as meant for meditation, it is not proper to interpret them 
figuratively as meant for sublation. Furthermore, if all manifestations are 
equally meant for sublation, the statement (in the aphorism), "Brahman is 
only formless to be sure, because that is the dominant note of the 
Upani$ads" (III. ii. 14), where the reason for accepting one of the 
alternatives is presented, will have no ground for its presentation. Besides, 
the results of these meditations are surely known from the instructions as 
being sometimes attenuation of sins, sometimes getting divine powers, and 



sometimes emancipation by stages. Hence it is proper that the texts about 
meditations and about Brahman should have different purposes in view, and 
it is not proper to reduce them to the very same idea. Moreover, (if they 
convey a single idea) it has to be shown how that sameness of. idea can be 
arrived at. 

Op ponent : Since the y ap pear to be connected with a sin g le in j unction .8 
they have to be combined like the injunctions about the (main) Dar§a- 
pumamasa and (subsidiary) Prayaja sacrifices. 

Veddntin : No, for there is no injunction in texts about Brahman. It was 
elaborately proved under the aphorism, "But that Brahman is known from 
the Upanisads, because of their becoming connected with That as their main 
import" (I. i. 4), how the texts about Brahman have only the knowledge of 
the (pre-existing) thing itself as their purport, but they are not meant for 
enjoining any action. Again, it has to be shown what (kind of activity) the 
injunction here should be concerned with; for a man, when he is being 
employed in some duty, is directed with the order, "Do", with regard to the 
duty he has to perform. 

Opponent : The sublation of all the variety of manifestations within 
duality will be the object of the injunction. Since the realization of the reality 
that is Brahman is not achieved so long as the dual world of manifestations 
is not sublated, therefore, the world of manifestations, that is opposed to the 
realization of the reality that Brahman is, stands there as a thing to be 
sublated. As a sacrifice is enjoined as a duty for one who hankers after 
heaven, so the sublation of the world of manifestations is enjoined for one 
who wants liberation. And as darkness, standing as an obstruction to the 
perception of a vessel etc. covered with darkness, is removed by one who 
wants to know the vessel etc., so the world of manifestations standing 
opposed to the realization of Brahman has to be sublated by one who wants 
to realize Brahman; for this phenomenal universe of manifestations has 
Brahman as its essence and not that Brahman has the phenomenal 
manifestations as Its essence. Hence the reality that Brahman is has to be 
realized through a sublation of name and form. 





Vedantin : Here our question is: What is meant by this sublation of the 
universe of manifestations? Is the world to be annihilated like the destruction 
of the solidity of ghee by contact with fire; or is it that the world of name and 
form, created in Brahman by nescience like many moons created in the 
moon by the eye-disease called timira, has to be destroyed through 
knowledge? Now if it be said that this existing universe of manifestations, 
consisting of the body etc. on the corporeal plane and externally of the earth 
etc., is to be annihilated, that is a task impossible for any man, and hence the 
instruction about its extirpation is meaningless. Moreover, (even supposing 
that such a thing is possible, then) the universe, including the earth etc., 
having been annihilated by the first man who got liberation, the present 
universe should have been devoid of the earth etc. Again, if it be said that 
this universe of manifestations superimposed on the one Brahman alone 
through ignorance has to be sublated by enlightenment, then it is Brahman 
Itself that has to be presented through a denial of the manifestation 
superimposed by ignorance by saying, "Brahman is one without a second" 
(Ch. VI. ii. 1), "That is Truth, That is the Self, That thou art (0 Svetaketu)" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 7-16). When Brahman is taught thus, knowledge dawns 
automatically, and by that knowledge ignorance is removed. As a result of 
that, this whole manifestation of name and form, superimposed by 
ignorance, vanishes away like things seen in a dream. But unless Brahman is 
(first) taught (by scripture etc.), neither does the knowledge of Brahman 
dawn nor is the universe sublated even though the instruction, "Know 
Brahman, sublate the world", be imparted a hundred times. 

Opponent : After Brahman has been taught, the injunction may relate 
either to the act of knowing Brahman or to the act of sublating the universe. 

Vedantin : No, since both these objects will be fulfilled from the very 
instruction that Brahman that is free from the universe of manifestations is 
one's Self. For from the very revelation of the nature of the rope, mistaken as 
a snake, follows the knowledge of its real nature, as also the removal of the 
manifestation of snake etc. on it brought about by superimposition through 
ignorance. It cannot be that a thing already achieved has to be done over 
again. Moreover, the individual being, that is known during the state of 
phenomenal manifestation as the person to he directed by the scriptures, 



must either belong to the world of manifestations or to Brahman. On the first 
supposition, when Brahman is taught as devoid of phenomenal 
manifestations, the individual also becomes negated along with the earth 
etc.; and so with regard to whom would you talk of an injunction for the 
sublation of the universe; and of whom would you assert that he is to achieve 
liberation following the injunction? On the second supposition, when 
Brahman is taught by saying that the real nature of the individual being is 
Brahman Itself which is by nature beyond all injunctions and that (the soul's) 
individuality is a creation of ignorance, then from that will follow a 
cessation of all injunctions, since there will be none towards whom 
injunction can be directed. As for expressions like "(The Self) is to be seen" 
(Br. II. iv. 5), which are met with in the context of the supreme knowledge, 
they are meant mainly for attracting one's mind towards Reality, but do not 
aim mainly at enjoining any injunction about the knowledge of Reality. In 
ordinary parlance also, when such directive sentences as, "Look at this", 
"Lend ear to that", etc. are uttered, all that is meant is, "Be attentive to 
these", but not% "Acquire this knowledge directly". And a man, who is in 
the presence of an object to be known, may sometimes know it, and 
sometimes not. Hence a man who wants to impart the knowledge of the 
thing has to draw his attention to the object of knowledge itself. When that is 
done, the knowledge arises naturally in conformity with the object and the 
means of knowledge. It is not a fact that any knowledge (of a given thing), 
contrary to what is well known through other means of valid knowledge, can 
arise in a man even when acting under some direction. And should the man, 
under the belief, "I am directed to know this in such a way", know it 
otherwise, this cannot be true knowledge. 

What is it then? 

It is a mental act (i.e. deliberate fancy). But (apart from injunction), if it 
should arise otherwise by itself, it will merely be an error. Knowledge arises, 
however, from its valid means (like perception etc.), and it conforms to its 
object, just as it is. It can neither be produced by a hundred injunctions, nor 
debarred by a hundred prohibitions. For it is not a matter of personal option, 
it being dependent on the object itself. For this reason also there is no scope 
for injunction (about Brahman). Moreover, if it be asserted that the whole 



scope of the scripture consists in nothing more than its adherence to 
injunction alone, then the position taken up earlier that the individual soul is 
one with Brahman which is beyond all injunction, becomes invalidated. 
Again, if it be held that the scripture itself speaks of the soul's unity with the 
Brahman that is beyond injunction, and it also enjoins a man to know that 
unity, then the very same scripture about Brahman will be open to the charge 
of duplicity or self-contradiction. Again, on the assumption that the 
scriptures are concerned with injunction alone, no one can avoid such 
defects as the rejection of what is heard in the scriptures and imagination of 
what is not heard, and the defect of liberation becoming a result of the 
unseen potency of work and hence impermanent like the results of rites and 
sacrifices. Hence the texts about Brahman have enlightenment alone as their 
goal, and they are not concerned with injunction. Accordingly, it is wrong to 
argue that they impart a single idea (about Brahman), since they come within 
the scope of a single injunction. Even if the existence of injunction be 
presumed in the case of the texts speaking of Brahman, still it remains 
unproved that the very same injunction is present in the instructions about 
the conditioned Brahman and unconditioned Brahman. For when through 
such proofs as the use of different words, a difference of injunctions 
becomes palpable, it is not possible to resort to the plea that the same 
injunction exists everywhere. As for the texts about the Prayaja and 
Dar§apurr amasa, it is proper to accept their unity, since the portion dealing 
with the competence (of their performer) is the same. But here as regards the 
injunctions about the qualified and unqualified Brahman, no such section of 
the text is available that declares the sameness of the qualification of the man 
seeking for them. For such attributes as "effulgence itself by nature" are not 
conducive to the sublation of the universe of manifestation, nor is the 
sublation of the universe helpful to such qualities as "effulgence itself by 
nature"; for they are mutually contradictory. It is not logical to accommodate 
in one and the same substratum such attributes as the sublation of all, and the 
persistence of a part of the phenomenal manifestations. Therefore the 
division made by us of the (separate) instructions about Brahman with form 
and without form is more reasonable. 


TOPIC 6: UNCONDITIONED BRAHMAN AND SOUF 



4 


mm* % 5TO ^ wt: m 

The Upani$ad Afrrfa denies 1- the limitation that is under discussion f 
certainly; and wq A * speaks jtf: something more ffff. after that (negation). 

22. The Upanisad certainly denies the limitation that is being dealt with 
and then speaks of something more. 

The UpaniSad starts with the text . "Brahman has but two forms- g ross and 
subtle , mortal and immortal , limited and unlimited , and defined and 
undefined" ( Br. H. ii. 1 ) . Then havin g divided the five g reat ( subtle ! 
elements under two heads . 1 and havin g revealed such aspects as the 
possession of the colour of the turmeric bv that essence of the subtle form . 
called the infinite Bein g ( Turu$ a).a the text again goes on, "Now therefore 
the description (of Brahman): Not so, not so. Because there is no other and 
more appropriate description than this 'Not so'" (Be. II. iii. 6). Now we ask, 
against what is this negation directed? For nothing is perceived here as 
having been pointed out by saying, "This is that", which can constitute the 
object of negation. But the use of the word "so" seems to indicate that 
something has been presented here as the object of negation. For in the text, 
"Not so, not so", the word "so" is used after the word "not"; and "so", usually 
used in connection with something proximate, is seen to be applied in the 
same way as "this", as for instance in such expressions as, "So has the 
teacher said". And the things we get near at hand here from the force of the 
context are the two forms of Brahman together with their ramifications. And 
Brahman is that which has the two forms. 

Doubt : That being the position, the doubt arises in us: Does this negation 
deny the forms as well as the possessor of forms, or only, one of them? 
Again, if either of the two is denied, then whether Brahman is denied 
keeping intact the forms, or are the forms denied, retaining Brahman? 

Opponent : That being so, and both being the subject-matters under 
discussion, we apprehend that both are negated. Besides, we have here two 
negations, the phrase "not so" being used twice, from which fact the idea 


























arises that by one of them the form of Brahman consisting of the 
phenomenal manifestations is denied, and by the other is denied Brahman, 
the possessor of the form. Or it may be that Brahman Itself, of which the two 
forms are the two aspects, is denied; for being beyond speech and mind, the 
existence of that Brahman cannot be conceived of, and hence It is a fit object 
of denial; but the phenomenal expressions are not fit to be denied as they 
come within the range of perception etc. The repetition (of "not so") is meant 
to show earnestness (or generation of conviction). 

Ved4ntin : In reply to this we say that so far as these alternatives go, the 
denial of both cannot be reasonable, for that would lead to nihilism. 
Something unreal is denied on the basis of something real, as for instance a 
snake etc. on a rope etc. And that is possible only if some positive entity is 
left over (after the denial). For should everything be denied, what other 
positive substratum will be left over? And unless something else outlives the 
denial, the thing sought to be denied, cannot be negated; and hence the latter 
thus become a reality, so that the contemplated denial itself becomes 
impossible. Besides, the denial of Brahman is not reasonable, for that would 
contradict the introduction made with, "I will tell you of Brahman" (Br. III. i. 
1), as also the condemnation contained in such texts as, "If anyone knows 
Brahman as non-existent, he himself becomes non-existent" (Tai. II. vi. 1), 
and the affirmation made in, "The Self is to be realized as existing" (Ka. II. 
iii. 13). That would also lead to overriding all the Upani$ads. As for the 
statement that Brahman is beyond speech and mind, that is not meant to 
imply that Brahman is non-existent. For it is not logical to deny that very 
Brahman after establishing It with a great show of girding up one's loins, in 
such sentences of the Upani$ads as, "The knower of Brahman attains the 
highest", "Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinity" (Tai. II. i. 1); for as the 
popular saying has it, "Rather than wash away the mud, it is much better to 
avoid its touch from a distance". As a matter of fact, the text "Failing to 
reach which, words turn back with the mind" (Tai. II. ix. 1), presents only a 
process of propounding Brahman. The idea expressed is this: Brahman is 
beyond speech and mind; It cannot be classed with objects of knowledge; It 
is one's inmost Self; and It is by nature eternal, pure, intelligent, and free. 
Hence it is to be understood that the phenomenal expression alone of 
Brahman is denied, and Brahman Itself is left over. That very fact is stated in 



the aphorism, "The Upani$ad certainly denies the limitation that is being 
dealt with" etc. The word "so" (iti) denies only that which is the topic under 
consideration, viz the forms of Brahman characterized as gross and subtle, 
which are definable as "this much", that is to say, which are limited. For 
these are the things under discussion and have been elaborated in the earlier 
texts under the headings divine and corporeal. And there is the other form 
growing out of this one. It consists of desires; it is constituted by the essence 
of the subtle aspect; it is referred to by the word Pump; it subsists in the form 
of the subtle body; and it is shown with the help of the illustration of 
turmeric etc. For the subtle body, formed of the quintessence of the fine 
elements, cannot have a visible form. Thus it is understood that by the word 
"so" (iti), indicative of something near at hand, these very aspects of 
Brahman, consisting of phenomenal expression, are placed in apposition 
with "not", the word of denial. As for "Brahman", It is presented in the 
earlier text, with the sixth (genitive) caseending, as a word qualifying "form" 
(in Brahmanah rfipamBrahman's form), but It is not presented in Its own 
right (as the subject of the sentence). And when after the two forms of 
Brahman have been elaborated, the curiosity arises to know the nature of the 
possessor of the forms, then commences the text with "Not so, not so" (Br. 
II. iii. 6). From this it is ascertained that the underlying assumption in this 
text is that the denial of the forms is tantamount to a presentation of the true 
nature of Brahman; for all creation, based on that Brahman, is denied to be 
true by saying "Not so, not so". And it is but proper that all creation should 
be denied by saying "Not so, not so", since from such Upani$adic phrases as 
"originating only in name" (Ch. VI. i. 4) creation is known to be unreal; but 
not so can Brahman be denied, since It is the basis of all phenomena. And 
the misconception has no scope here as to why the scripture itself should 
first show the two aspects of Brahman, only to deny them the next moment 
contrary to the popular adage, "Rather than wash away the mud, it is much 
better to avoid its very contact from a distance". For this scripture does not 
present the two aspects of Brahman as subjects fit for being expounded, but 
it simply refers to these aspects that are superimposed on Brahman and are 
popularly well recognized; and this is done for the sake of denying them and 
establishing the real, pure nature of Brahman. Thus it is all beyond cavil. 
These two negatives deny respectively the two aspects, gross and subtle, 
according to their numeral order. Or it may be that the first negative denies 



the totality of elements, and the second negative, the totality of impressions. 
Or the "Not so, not so" is used in a repetitive sense, implying thereby that 
whatever is guessed on Brahman as "this much" has no reality. For should 
the negation apply only to the limited things already enumerated, the 
question may arise, "If this is not Brahman, what else is?" But when the 
"repetition" is used, all objects of knowledge become denied, and it follows 
that one's inmost Self, that is not an object of knowledge, is Brahman; thus 
the curiosity to know further ceases. Hence the conclusion is that the 
phenomenal expressions, imagined on Brahman, are denied, and Brahman 
stands out as outside the negation. 

This conclusion is arrived at from the further consideration that after that 
denial it is stated again, "There is something other than this which is 
beyond" (Br. II. iii. 6). Were the negation to end in mere non-existence, what 
else could have been referred to by the text as being different and beyond? 
On this interpretation, the words (of the aphorism) are to be construed thus: 
"Having taught Brahman with the words 'Not so, not so' (ibid.), the 
Upani$ad explains that instruction over again." 

What is the meaning of "Not so, not so"? 

The meaning is this: Since there is surely nothing besides this Brahman, 
therefore Brahman is called "Not so, not so". It does not mean that Brahman 
Itself does not exist. And that very fact is shown by asserting that a Brahman 
does exist which is beyond all else and which is not denied. 

The words of the Upani$ad may, however, be construed thus: "Because 
there is no other (and more appropriate) description than this, therefore it is 
called 'Not so, not so' " (ibid.), the meaning being, "Because apart from 
teaching by way of negating the phenomenal world of manifestations, there 
is no better description of Brahman". Then in that case the words of the 
aphorism, "(The text) speaks of something more than that" should be taken 
to mean "Its name"; for the text speaks about the name thus, "Now is Its 
name, 'The Truth of truth'. The vital force is truth, and It is the Truth of that" 
(ibid.). That becomes proper if the negation leads to (i.e. stops short of) 
Brahman. For if the negation culminates in non-existence, what could have 



been mentioned as the "Truth of truth"? Hence our definite conclusion is that 
this denial leads to Brahman and does not end in non-existence. 


k iRW 

da That (Brahman) is a unmanifest, fk for arrq (the Upani$ad) says (so). 

23. That Brahman is unmanifest, for the Upanicad says so. 

Opponent: If Brahman, different from and superior to the manifold world 
of manifestation that has been denied, does exist, why is It not perceived? 

Veddntin : The answer is: Because It is not manifest, because It is 
supersensuous, It being the witness of all. For the Upani$ads declare It thus 
in the texts: "It is not comprehended through the eye, nor through speech, 
nor through the other senses; nor is It attained through austerity or karma" 
(Mu. III. i. 3); "This Self is that which has been described as 'Not so, not so'. 
It is imperceptible, for It is never perceived" (Br. III. ix. 26); "That which 
cannot be perceived and grasped" (Mu. I. i. 6); "Whenever an aspirant gets 
fearlessly established in this changeless, bodiless, inexpressible, and 
supportless Brahman" (Tai. II. vii. 1), and so on. The Smtti also says, "He is 
said to be undetermined, unthinkable, immutable" (Giza, II. 25), and so on. 

3tfo I R*l I 

aft Moreover, (Brahman is realized) #Uqk in samddhi (perfect meditation 
or absorption) x"r-qrqr;qTij as is known from direct revelation and inference. 




24. Moreover, Brahman is realized in samadhi, as is knoum from direct 
revelation and inference. 

Moreover, the Yogins realize, during samrddhana, this Self (i.e. Brahman) 
which is free from the entire universe of phenomenal manifestation and is 
supersensuous. Samrddhana means the act of devotion, contemplation, deep 
meditation, and such other practices (e.g. japa etc.). 

Opponent : How, again, is it known that they experience this during such 
adoration? 

Vedintin : "From direct revelation and inference", that is to say, from 
Vedic texts and Smrtis. To quote from the Vedic texts: "The self-existent 
Lord destroyed (i.e. incapacitated) the outgoing senses. Therefore one sees 
the outer things and not the inner Self. A rare discriminating man, desiring 
for immortality, turns his eyes away and then sees the indwelling Self" (Ka. 
II. i. 1), "Since one becomes purified in mind through the favourableness of 
the intellect, therefore can one see that indivisible Self through meditation" 
(Mu. III. i. 8), and so on. There are also Smrti texts, "Salutation to that 
Effulgence, the Self, that is realizable through Yoga, and is seen by those 
who practise meditation, who are free from sleep (lethargy), who have 
controlled their senses. The Yogins realize that Lord who is eternal", and 
similar texts. 

Opponent: On the assumption of a relationship between the entity 
meditated on and the meditator, the supreme Self and the individual Self 
become separated. 


Veddntin : The reply is, No. 



e And Ate: the effulgent One (i.e. Self) (appears to be different) fvr during 
activity (like meditation) s*w-3fft-qq as is the case with light etc.; 9 yet 
(naturally there is) ar-jks" non-difference; atvq as is evident from repetition. 


25. And the effulgent Self appears to be different during activity, as is the 
case with light etc.; yet (intrinsically) there is non-difference as is evident 
from repetition (of "That thou -art"). 

As light, space, the sun, etc. appear to be diversified in relation to the 
activity taking place in such limiting adjuncts as a finger, a pail, water, etc., 
and yet they do not give up their natural unity, so also this difference in the 
Self is a creation of limiting adjuncts; but in Its own essence It is the one 
Self alone. And thus it is that the non-difference of the individual soul and 
the supreme Self is established repeatedly (in such texts as "That thou art"- 
Ch. VI. viii-xvi). . 

3RftS#T IFfill “ 

ark; Hence (unity) arm with Infinity; fk because r such (is) fW the 
indicatory mark. 

26. Hence (the individual gets) unity with the Infinite; for such is the 
indicatory mark (in the Upaniad). 

"Hence", too, for this further reason that non-difference is natural whereas 
difference is a creation of ignorance, the individual destroys ignorance 
through knowledge and attains unity with the supreme, eternal, conscious 
Self. "For such is the indicatory mark"-contained in such texts as, "Anyone 
who knows that supreme Brahman becomes Brahman indeed" (Mu. III. ii. 
9), "Being but Brahman, he is absorbed in Brahman" (Br. N. iv. 6), and so 



$ But ZW4-044kqll g since both (difference and non-difference) are 
mentioned, (the relationship is) aft-m-ari as between a snake and its coil. 

27. But since both difference and non-difference are mentioned, the 
relationship (between the supreme Self and the individual is) as that between 
the snake and its coil. 

With regard to that very relationship between the entity meditated on and 
the meditator, another view is adduced with the idea of clearing our own. In 
some places a difference between the individual soul and the supreme Self is 
mentioned, as in, "Therefore can one see that indivisible Self through 
meditation" (Mu. III. i. 8), where the difference exists like that between the 
subject and object of meditation or between the seer and the seen; in 
"reaches the self-effulgent Puru$a that is higher than the higher Maya" (Mu. 
III. ii. 8), where the difference is as between the attainer and the goal to be 
attained; in "who controls all beings from within" (Br. III. vii. 15), where 
exists the difference as between the ruler and the ruled. Elsewhere, again, the 
non-difference of those very ones is mentioned, as in, "That thou art" (Ch. 
VI. viii-xvi), "I am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), "This is your Self that is within 
all" (Br. III. iv. 1), "This is the Internal Ruler, your own immortal Self" (Br. 
III. vii. 3-22). Now in the face of this dual mention, if non-difference alone 
be accepted to the exclusion of difference, the mention of difference will be 
left without any substance. So from the mention of both difference and non¬ 
difference, the reality here must be like the snake and its coil. As in the 
illustration, the snake in itself is non-different, but it differs in its having a 
coil, or a hood, or an extended posture; so also is the case here (with 
Brahman). 

WRIWW Ill'll 

qT Or Aflar-alTairr-zq like light and its source mi~ (both) being 
effulgence. 



28. Or they are like light and its source, both being but effulgence. 


Or this is to be understood on the analogy of light and its substratum. Just 
as the sunlight and its substratum, the sun, are luminous, and not entirely 
different, both being equally effulgent, and yet they are thought of as 
different, similar is the case here. 





29. Or (the relationship between the individual and the supreme Self is) as 
already shown. 

Or it may be just as it was presented earlier by saying, "And the effulgent 
Self appears to be different during activity, as is the case with light etc." (III. 
ii. 25); for on that view alone bondage is a creation of ignorance, so that the 
achievement of liberation through knowledge becomes justifiable. If on the 
other hand, it is understood that the individual soul is under bondage in a 
real sense, and that it is a certain state of the supreme Self on the analogy of 
the snake and its coil, or a part of that Self on the analogy of the light and its 
source, then since a bondage that is real cannot be removed, the scripture 
speaking of liberation will become useless. And it is not a fact that the 
Upani$ads declare both difference and non-difference as equally valid in the 
present case; on the contrary the Upani$ads declare non-difference alone as 
the view to be established, while with the idea of speaking of something else 
(i.e. non-difference), they merely refer to difference as a thing already 



conventionally recognized. Hence the real conclusion is this: There is no 
difference "as is the can with light etc." 

30. And on account of the denial. 

And this conclusion is confirmed by the fact that the scripture denies the 
existence of any other conscious entity apart from the supreme Self, in texts 
like, "There is no other witness but Him" (Br. III. vii. 23), and so on, as also 
in, "Now therefore the description of Brahman, 'Not so, not so'," (Br. II. iii. 
6), "That Brahman is without prior or posterior, without interior or exterior" 
(Br. II. v. 19). Since this variety of phenomenal manifestation is denied to 
exist separately from Brahman, and since Brahman alone is left over as the 
only ultimate reality, therefore we understand that this alone is the 
established conclusion. 

TOPIC 7: BRAHMAN ONE WITHOUT A SECOND 

From the fact that the Upani$ads are at variance a doubt arises as to 
whether any reality exists or does not exist which is higher than this 
Brahman that is ascertained to be devoid of the entire variety of phenomenal 
manifestations. Certain sentences, when taken in an apparent sense, seem to 
prove some other entity higher even than Brahman. This is an attempt at 
refuting those texts. 



q: fir* ~ : II@ it 



q9 Superior atcr: to this (Brahman) emi-rt: because of the mention of 
embankment, measure (i.e. limitation), connection, and difference. 

31. There is some entity superior to this Brahman, because of the mention 
of embankment, measure, connection, and difference. 

Opponent: There should be an entity higher than this Brahman. 

Why? 

Because of the reference (in the Upani$ad) to embankment, magnitude, 
connection, and difference. Of these the mention of the term embankment 
occurs in, "Now then, that which is the Self is an embankment, a sustainer 
(or impounder)" (Ch. VIII. iv. 1), where Brahman, referred to by the word 
Self, is declared to be an embankment. And the word embankment is in 
vogue in the world in the sense of a barrage of earth and timber to check the 
flow of a current of water. Here also the word embankment, having been 
used for the Self, leads us to understand that, as in the case of the ordinary 
embankment, something other than it exists, so also something other than the 
Self, called the embankment, does exist. This is confirmed by the use of the 
term "crossing over" in, "having crossed over the embankment" (Ch. VIII. 
iv. 2), from which it is gathered that just as in life somebody crosses (a 
stream) over the embankment to reach solid ground, which is other than the 
embankment, so also one crosses over this embankment, that is the Self, to 
reach something that is not the embankment of the Self. 

There occurs also the mention of measurement ( i.e. limited size ) as in . 
"This Brahman , that is such , has four feet" t Ch. Ill, xviii. 2 ). "Brahman has 
eig ht hoofs , sixteen parts" (Ch. IV. v). It is also seen in common life that 
whatever can be measured (or counted) to be so much, as for instance (the 
coins called) karfdpatws, presupposes the existence of something other than 
itself; so also as Brahman has been measured, there must be something other 
than Itself. 

Thus also there is the mention of connection: "0 amiable one, the 
individual soul then becomes unified with Existence" (Ch. VI. viii. 1), "the 
embodied soul" (Tai. II. iii. 1), "fully embraced by the supreme Self" (Br. IV. 













iii. 21). And limited things are seen to come into contact with a limited 
thing, as for instance human beings with a city. The Upani$ad mentions the 
connection of the individuals with Brahman in sleep. Therefore it is 
understood that there is something unlimited which is superior to Brahman. 

The mention of difference also leads to the same idea. Thus in the text, 
"Now then the golden (effulgent) infinite Being that is seen in the sun" (Ch. 
I. vi. 6), the Lord residing in the sun is mentioned; and then the Lord 
residing in the eye is mentioned separately in, "And the infinite Being that is 
seen in the eye" (Ch. I. vii. 5). Then the forms etc. of the Being in the sun are 
ascribed to the Being in the eye as well:. "Of this latter one the form is the 
same as of the former; He has the same knuckles as the former, and the same 
name as His" (ibid.). The text also refers to the limited Godhood of both of 
them: of the former it is spoken in, "And He rules over the worlds that are 
above the sun, and the things dear to the gods" (Ch. I. vi. 8); of the latter it is 
shown in, "And He rules over the worlds that are below (the earth) and the 
things dear to men" (Ch. I. vii. 6). This is like saying, "This is the domain of 
the king of Magadha, and this of the king of Videha". 

Veddntin : The conclusion having been drawn from these references to 
embankment etc. that there is some entity superior to Brahman, it is being 
explained. 



32. But (the Self is referred to as an embankment) on account of 
similarity. 

The use of the word "but" rules out the conclusion shown. Nothing 
whatsoever can exist separately from Brahman, for that lacks proof. As a 



matter of fact, we do not find any proof of the existence of anything else. For 
it has been ascertained that anything that has an origin derives its birth etc. 
from Brahman. An effect is non-different from a cause;, and nothing apart 
from Brahman can exist that is birthless, because it is definitely stated thus: 
"0 amiable one, before creation all this was but Brahman, one without a 
second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1). And because the assertion is made by the Upani$ads 
that all can be known when the One is known, nothing can be conceived of 
as existing apart from Brahman. 

Opponent : Was it not pointed out by us that the references to 
embankment etc. indicate the existence of some entity different from 
Brahman? 

Veddmin : In answer it is said, no. As for the reference to the 
embankment, it cannot prove the existence of anything outside Brahman; for 
the text simply says that the Self is an embankment, but it does not also aver 
that there is something beyond It. Now the ground for your assumption of 
something superior is that the idea of embankment cannot arise unless there 
is something different from it. But this is not logical. This queer assumption 
of something unknown is sheer dogmatism. Moreover, if on finding the Self 
being referred to as an embankment, one can assume something outside this 
embankment on the analogy of the commonly known embankment, then one 
may as well assume earth and timber as the constituents of this embankment 
(which is the Self). But this is not proper, since that would contradict the 
texts about birthlessness etc. So the proper position that emerges is that the 
word embankment is used with regard to the Self on account of Its similarity 
with the embankment, the point of similarity of the Self with the 
embankment being that the Self holds together the world (as its Inner Ruler) 
and maintains its boundaries (of norms, duties, etc.). In this way the Self 
under discussion is praised by saying that it is like an embankment. As for 
the expression, "having crossed over the embankment" (Ch. VIII. iv. 2), the 
literal sense of going beyond being impossible here, the meaning that stands 
out is that of "attaining", as for instance the expression, "He has crossed over 
grammar" means "He has mastered it", but not gone beyond. 



m{ \\\\\\ 

ift-wi: For the sake of intellectual grasp qmwi like the feet. 

33. For the sake of intellectual grasp (Brahman's magnitude is spoken of) 
just like the feet (of the mind or of space), (or the quarters of the kirrdpana). 

As for the argument that something superior exists on account of the 
mention of magnitude, our answer is this: Even the reference to measure is 
not meant for conveying the idea of some entity other than Brahman. 

What is it meant for then? 

It is meant for intellectual grasp, that is to say, for the sake of meditation. 
How can a man ever have any steady idea that Brahman is possessed of four 
feet, eight hoofs, and sixteen parts? Hence it is (for the sake of meditation) 
that some magnitudes are merely fancied about Brahman with the help of 
changeful things. Not that all men can fix their minds steadily on Brahman, 
changeless and infinite as It is, for men's intellects may be sharp, mediocre, 
or dull. It is like the imagination of the four feet, as it is in the case of mind 
and space, which are mentioned as the two symbols of Brahman on the 
corporeal and divine planes. As speech (nose, eye, ear), etc. are fancied as 
the four feet in the case of mind, and fire, (air, sun, and direction), etc. as the 
four feet in the case of space, so also is the case here. Or padavat means like 
quarters. As in the case of (the coin called) kdr,capon, it is fancied to be 
divided into four quarters in order to facilitate transaction through it, 
inasmuch as all cannot use a whole karapana in all kinds of dealing 
everywhere, the volumes of sale and purchase being variable, similarly in 
the infinite Brahman (magnitude is imagined for the sake of meditation). 



TqK-ft" On account of particular environments (i.e. limiting adjuncts) 
51colql-31ft-qq as in the case of light etc. 

34. (Connection and difference are mentioned about Brahman) from the 
point of view of limiting adjuncts, as in the case of light etc. 

The two objections about the mention of connection and difference are 
met in this aphorism. The statement, too, that was made that from the 
references to connection and difference it follows that something superior to 
Brahman exists, is wrong, for these references can be possible for the very 
same thing from the points of view of particular situations. As for the text 
referring to connection, it means this: Particularized knowledge arises from 
the contact of the Self with particular environments consisting of such 
limiting adjuncts as the intellect. When that particularized knowledge ceases 
on the cessation of the limiting adjuncts, that cessation is metaphorically 
spoken of as the (individual soul's) contact with the Self; this is spoken from 
the point of view of the limiting adjunct, but not from any idea of limitation. 
So also the reference to difference is made from the point of view of the 
diversity of the limiting adjuncts of Brahman, but not from Its own point of 
view. "As in the case of light etc." is said by way of furnishing an 
illustration. Just as a single light, be it of the sun or the moon, undergoes 
diversity owing to contact with conditioning factors, but it is said to become 
united with its source when the conditioning factors are removed, and the 
same light is said to be different owing to the difference in the conditioning 
factors, so also is the case here. Or it is like the mention of connection and 
difference from the point of view of mere limiting adjuncts in such cases as 
the spaces within the eye of a needle, a loop etc. 




3S. And because (such a position alone is) logically justifiable. 

And this kind of connection alone, and not of any other kind, is logically 
sustainable; for it is self-identity that is spoken of as this relation in, "He 
attains his own Self" (Ch. VI. viii. 1). And this is so, since one's own nature 
is inalienable. The relation here cannot be like that between a man and a 
town. But precisely because the true nature has a covering of limiting 
adjuncts, the text, "He attains his own Self", can be logically sustained. So 
also the difference cannot be of any other kind, for that would contradict the 
oneness of God well recognized in numerous Upanigadic passages. It is thus 
also that the Upani$ad explains how there can be a mention of difference in 
the case of the very same space owing to differences of environment, in such 
texts as, "The space that is outside a man" (Ch. III. xii. 7), "The space that is 
within a .man" (Ch. III. xii. 8), and "The space that is within the heart" (Ch. 
III. xii. 9). 



ffm Similarly a -S " from the denial of all else. 


36. Similarly from the denial of everything else (it follows that there is 
nothing but Brahman). 

Having thus set at naught all the reasons, like the use of terms like 
embankment, that were advanced by the opponent, the aphorist now 
concludes by supporting his own position by another reason: "Similarly from 
the denial of everything else", too, it is understood that there is nothing else 
superior to Brahman. Thus there are the texts, "It is He who exists below, it 
is I who exist below" (Ch. VII. xxv. 1), "It is the Self that is below" (Ch. VII. 
xxv. 2), "All oust one who knows it as different from the Self (Br. II. iv. 6), 
"All this is but Brahman" (Mu. II. ii. 11), "All this is but the Self (Ch. VII. 
xxv. 2), "There is no diversity whatever in It" (Br. IV. iv. 19), "That beyond 
which there is nothing either superior or inferior (prior or posterior)" (Sv. III. 
9), "That Brahman is without prior or posterior, without interior or exterior" 
(Br. II. v. 19). These and such other texts, which occur in the contexts 
dealing with Brahman Itself and cannot be interpreted otherwise, rule out 
any thing other than Brahman. And from the text that Brahman is in all 
creatures (Ka. 11. ii. 9-11, Br. II. v. 19) it is understood that there is no other 
Self within the supreme Self. 

3|^f ll^ll 

atW;l Hereby - omnipresence ag(i—alTf: on the strength of words like 
extension etc. 

37. Hereby (is established) the omnipresence (of the Self), (as is known) 
on the strength of (Upaniiadic) words like extension and other sources (i.e. 
Smrti and logic). 

"Hereby", that is to say, from the refutation of (the arguments based on) 
the mention of terms like embankment etc., and with the help of the negation 
of all other things, "is also established the omnipresence of the Self". For it 
cannot be proved otherwise, since on the assumption that the terms like 
embankment etc. are mentioned in a literal sense, the Self will become a 



limited entity, inasmuch as the embankments etc. are themselves limited in 
that sense. Similarly, if the d: nial of all other things (by the scriptures) be 
not a fact, the Self will become a limited entity, since one thing becomes 
delimited by another. And the omnipresence of the Self is known from such 
terms as extensiveness, the word extension being used in the sense of 
pervasiveness. Texts like the following, "The Space (Brahman) within the 
heart is as extensive as the Space outside" (Ch. VIII. i. 3), "He is 
omnipresent like space and eternal", "He is greater than heaven" (Ch. III. 
xiv. 3), "greater than space" (S. B. X. vi. 3.2.), "This one is eternal, 
omnipresent, steady, unchanging" (Gita, II. 24), and similar Upani$adic and 
Smrti texts, as well as logic, teach the omnipresence of the Self. 

Topic 8: FRUIT'S OF ACTION 

Of that Brahman Itself another characteristic is being described that is in 
evidence during phenomenal existence in which occurs a division between 
the ordainer and the ordained. 

q Fruit (of action) aiw: (comes) from this one, 3m: on grounds of logic. 

38. The fruit of action is from Him, this being the logical position. 

Doubt : With regard to the well-known results of actions of creatures 
which fall under three classes-the desirable, the undesirable, and the mixed- 
and belong to the state of transmigration, the thought arises as to whether 
they spring from the karmas (rites etc.) or from God. 

Vedantin : While in this predicament, the reasonable position is that "the 
fruit (of action)" should be "from this one", from God. 



Why? 


"This being the logical position." Since He presides over everything, and 
since He is fully aware of the specific environment and time conducive to 
the different kinds of creation, preservation, and dissolution, it is but logical 
that He should ordain the fruits of works for the people according to their 
merit. But it does not stand to reason that fruits can come at some future time 
from actions which get destroyed the next moment; because something 
cannot come out of nothing. 

Opponent : It may well be that an action, even while it is being destroyed 
produces a result proper to itself, during the time that it lasts, and then only it 
is destroyed; and that result is attained by the agent of the act at some distant 
time. 

Veddntin : That too does not remove the difficulty; for there can be no 
such thing as a result till the agent of the act comes to possess it, inasmuch 
as any happiness or sorrow experienced by any soul at any time is 
recognized in the world to be such a result relatively to that very time. And 
common people do not recognize any happiness or sorrow unrelated to a 
soul to be a result. Again, if it be maintained that though the result may not 
issue just after the action, it can issue (in the future) out of the unseen 
potency emerging out of the act, that too is unjustifiable, for potency, which 
is inert like stocks and stones, cannot act unless stimulated by some 
conscious agent. Besides, such an unseen potency lacks any valid proof. 

Opponent : Presumption from the seen result (artl Patti) is a proof in its 
support. 

Veddntin : No; for God having been proved to be the ordainer of results, 
any presumption is ruled out of court. 




39. (God is the ordainer of results) for the further reason that the 
Upanisads say so. 

It is not merely on grounds of reason that we think of God as the ordainer 
of results. 

On what more-grounds- then? 

We think of God as the ordainer of results, because that is how the 
Upani$ads speak. For instance, there is the text, "That great birthless Self is 
the bestower of food all round and the giver of wealth," (B;. IV. iv. 24), as 
also other texts of this class. 



aM: t For these very reasons if: Jaimini (thinks) eq virtue (i.e. scriptural 
conduct), (to be the cause). 

40. For these very reasons Jaimini considers virtuous deeds to be the 
yielder of results. 



Mimati saka : "The teacher Jaimini, however, considers virtuous deeds to 
be the yielder of results", "for these very reasons", on the authority of the 
Vedas and reason. This fact is mentioned in the Vedas in "One wishing for 
heaven shall perform a sacrifice" (Taudya), and similar texts. That text 
contains an injunction, and since an injunction is understood to have an 
object in view, the sacrifice becomes the object. From this it becomes 
obvious that the sacrifice is the producer of heaven; for else this sacrifice 
would find no performer, so that the instruction about it would become 
meaningless. 

Objection : Has not this viewpoint been refuted by saying that karma that 
has but a momentary existence cannot produce such a result? 

Mitnarhsaka : That is no defect, since there is the Vedic authority. If the 
Vedic authority is accepted, one has to think in the way that would justify the 
kind of relation between action and the result of action that is mentioned in 
the Vedas. Unless the action, while undergoing destruction, produces some 
unseen potency, it cannot produce its result after an interval. Hence the 
inference to be drawn is that there is such a thing called unseen potency 
which may be either some-subtle state of the action itself or some previous 
(seed) state of the result. In this way the position stated earlier becomes 
logical. But the theory that God ordains the results is illogical. For one 
uniform cause cannot produce variegated results; that will lead to partiality 
and cruelty on God's part and the performance of action will be useless. 
Hence the conclusion is that results are produced by virtuous deeds alone. 


Will 

But wrgUz: Badarayaz a (considers) the earlier One 4kqllq owing to (His) 
mention as the cause (even of action). 

41. But Badarayana considers the earlier One (viz God) (as the bestower 
of results), because He is mentioned as the cause of even action. 




But the teacher Badarayat)a considers the earlier One, i.e. God Himself, as 
the bestower of results. The word "but" refutes the views that the result is 
obtained either from the action itself or the unseen potency of action. The 
accepted conclusion is that the result comes from God, be it either by taking 
into account the action itself or the unseen potency, as it may. 

Why? 

"Because He is mentioned as the cause". For God is presented as the cause 
both by way of making others act virtuously or viciously and of bestowing 
the results, in the text, "It is He Himself who makes him do a good deed 
whom He wishes to raise up from these worlds; and it is He Himself who 
makes him do a bad deed whom He wishes to throw down" (Kau. III. 8). 
This fact is mentioned in the Gita as well, "Whichever divine form a devotee 
wants to worship with faith, I ordain for him unswerving faith in that very 
form. Endowed with that faith, he continues in the worship of that form, and 
obtains from it the results he desires, as ordained by Me" (GYta. VII. 21-22). 
In all the Upani$ads creations are declared as the acts of God. And God's 
bestowing of results consists precisely in His creating the creatures 
according to individual merits. The defects of the impossibility of the 
emergence of variegated results from the very same cause, and so on, do not 
arise since God acts by taking into account the efforts made by the creatures. 


SECTION III 

Topic 1: SAMENESS OF MEDITATION 



imparted in Any (particular) conception (for meditation) all the Upani$ads 
(is the same) a'mW-alTfkR on account of the sameness of injunction etc. 

1. Any (particular) conception for meditation (vijfi4na) imparted in all the 
Upam;ads is the same on account of the sameness of the injunction etc. 



The reality of Brahman, that is to be known, has been explained. Now is 
being considered whether the vijnanas differ according to the different 
Upani$ads or not. 

Opponent : Has it not been ascertained that the Brahman to be known is 
devoid of the differences of priority and posteriority (i.e. cause and effect), 
and It is homogeneous like a lump of salt? So how can. a consideration 
about the difference or non-difference of vijn"dnas (conceptions about 
Brahman) arise? For it cannot be that like the variety of rites and rituals, the 
Upani$ads seek to teach any multiplicity about Brahman as well; for 
Brahman is one with a uniform characteristic. It is not possible to have 
different kinds of vijndna of the same Brahman that has a single uniform 
nature. To know a thing otherwise than what it is cannot be anything but 
erroneous. Should the different Upani$ads, however, teach diverse 
conceptions about the same Brahman, one of these conceptions will be 
correct while the rest will be erroneous, so that this will open the gate to a 
loss of faith in the Upani$ads. Hence no such misconception should be 
entertained that the conceptions about Brahman differ in different 
Upani$ads. It is not also possible to affirm an identity of the conceptions on 
the basis of the uniformity of the injunctions, for the knowledge of Brahman 
is such that it cannot be indicated by any injunction. Under the aphorism, 
"But that Brahman is known from the Upani$ads, because of their becoming 
connected with Brahman as their main purport" (I. i. 4), the teacher (Vyasa) 
said that the knowledge of Brahman arises from (Vedic) texts about 
Brahman which do not convey the sense of any injunction, and which 
culminate in the realization of the thing itself. So how can this discussion 
about difference and non-difference be started? 

Veddntin : That is being stated. This discussion about difference and non¬ 
difference of vijndnas relates to the qualified Brahman and to Pram etc., so 
that there is no defect. For in this field there is a possibility of difference and 
non-difference of meditations just as much as in the case of the rites etc. 
Like ritualistic actions, the meditations are also spoken of as having seen and 
unseen results. Some of them lead to liberation by stages by way of giving 
rise to perfect knowledge ultimately. With regard to these there is a 



possibility of the discussion whether a particular vijndna differs from 
Upani$ad to Upanigad or it does not. 


As to that , the reasons from the o p ponent's standpoint are bein g adduced: 
To start with then , names are well known to stand for different conceptions . 
as in the case of such desi g nations as i votir flight, indicatin g the Jyoti$Coma 
sacrifice ) . Here also as re g ards the meditations , en j oined in the different 
U pani$ads . we meet with such differences of names as Taittrivaka . 
Vai asanevaka . Kauthumaka . Kau$itaka . Sat va vanaka . and so on. Similarl y 
also the difference of form is well known to indicate a difference of rites , as 

in such texts . "The coa g ulated milk (g ot by mixin g curd with hot milk ) is for 
the Vi § vadevas tall gods), the cheese-water is to be offered to the sun" 1 . And 
here, (as regards the meditations), a difference of forms is in evidence; for 
instance, in some recensions they read of a sixth and entirely different fire in 
the context of the meditation on the five fires, whereas others have only five. 
So also in the parable of Prdna etc., some have a fewer number of the organs 
such as that of speech etc. , while others have a g reater number. So also it is 
arg ued that a special attribute is su gg estive of a difference in rites as in such 
cases as the Kirlri sacrifice.2 In the context of vijfidnas also, the mention of 
special attributes is met with, as for instance, the vow of holding fire on 
head, enjoined for the followers of the Atharva Veda (Mu. III. ii. 10). Thus 
also other tests like repetition, (met with in the Purva-Mimariisi), which 
mark out one act from another, are to be suitably applied here as well. Hence 
the vijffdnas differ from Upani$ad to Upanisad. 

Veddntin : Such being the position, we say: "The vijn"t nas (conceptions 
for meditation) imparted in all the Upani$ads" must be the same in the 
respective Upani$ads. 


Why? 


"On account of the sameness of the injunction etc.", the "etc." being used 
for implying the reasons (viz connection, form, and name) that determine 
non-difference, as they are contained in the aphorism stating the accepted 
view in that section of the Pdrva-Mimiiiisi that deals with the texts of other 
branches (of the Vedas). The meaning is that the meditations are the same 
because of the similarity of connection, form, injunction, and name. Even as 



















































in the case of the same Agnihotra sacrifice, though occurring in the different 
branches of the Vedas, the same kind of human effort is enjoined by saying 
"one shall sacrifice", similarly the injunction of the followers of the 
Vijasaneya branch is, "He who knows (i.e. meditates on) that which is the 
oldest and greatest" (Br. VI. i. 1), and similar is the injunction of the 
Chandogas (Ch. V. i. 1). The connection with the result also is the same, 
which is, "He becomes the oldest and the greatest among his relatives" (Br. 
VI. i. 1). And the form of the vijffdna in both the places is the same, viz that 
the principal Prana is possessed of the special qualities of being the oldest 
and the greatest. Just as the materials and the deities determine the form (or 
nature) of the sacrifice, so also it is to be known that the form of the vijndna 
(is determined by the object, viz the reality called Prdna). For the vijfidna is 
stamped according to the principle meditated on. The name too is the same 
in both places, namely "the meditation on Prdna". Hence the vijfidnas are 
known to be the same in all the Upanisadic concepts of meditation. The 
same interpretation is to be applied to all such meditations, as the meditation 
on the five fires, the meditation on Vaikvinara, the Sdnyilya-Vidyd, and so 
on. 

As for the ar g ument that ( differences in ) names , forms etc, a p parentl y 
impl y differences , that was refuted in the PurvaMimamsa under the 
a phorisms startin g with . "Rites do not differ , j ust because of the occurrence 
of different names , for they are not used as names for en i oined rites "a (XI. 
iv. 10). 


Apprehending another possible objection, the aphorist refutes that as well: 



*f Owing to difference (in subsidiary matters) or (the vijn"dnas are) not 
the same ift t if such be the view q not (so) a&fqq:i (for) even in the same 
vijn"dna (differences in details are possible). 


















2. If it be said that the vijfidnas cannot be the same owing to the difference 
in details, then not so, for difference can occur even in the same vijn"dna. 

Opponent : It may well be that the sameness of the vijndnas in all the 
Upani$ads cannot be logically upheld on account of the differences in 
details. Thus it is seen that when dealing with the meditation on the five 
fires, the followers of the Vajasaneya branch mention a sixth fire thus, "This 
fire becomes his fire" etc. (Br. VI. ii. 14). The Chandogas do not mention it, 
but they conclude with the number five: "Now then, he who knows (i.e. 
meditates on) these five fires thus" (Ch. V. x. 10). And how can the 
meditations be the same for both those who have that additional factor and 
those who have not? It is not possible to understand that there should be a 
combination of the details (found in both the places for the same thin g). 
since the number five becomes irreconcilable. Similarly in the parable of 
Pran g, the Chando g as read of four other pranas , viz speech , eve, ear , and 
mind , over and above the Prdna that is the g reatest , whereas the 
Vai asanevins read of a fifth as well in . "The seed is Pra i ati ( havin g the power 
of g eneration ) , He who knows it to be such becomes enriched with children 
and animals" tBr. VI. i. 6 ) . Moreover , the entity to be meditated on differs 
accordin g as somethin g is added to or dro p ped out4 ; and from the difference 
of the entity meditated on, the meditation itself differs, just as much as the 
sacrifices differ according to the difference in their deities and accessories. 

Veddntin : That is nothin g dama ging, since this kind of variation in details 
is admissible in the very same meditation. Althou g h ( on account of the 
irreconcilability of the number five ! the sixth fire cannot be added tb v takin g 
it from elsewhere ), still the five fires countin g from heaven bein g in evidence 
in both the places , there cannot be a difference in the meditation , j ust as the 
Atiratra sacrifice does not differ in spite of takin g u p or not takin g u p the 
sacrificial vessel called $oda!5. Moreover , the Chando g as also read of a 
sixth fire: "When he departs for attainin g the world earned by his merit , the y 
carry him to the (funeral ) fire itself" fCh. V. ix. 2 ) . The Vii j asaneyins . 
however , in their ea g erness to eliminate (from the funeral fire ) the 
ima g ination of smoke , faggot, etc, that are associated with the ima g inary five 
fires , read thus: "The ( material ) fire becomes his ( i.e. dead man's ) fire , the 
( material ) fuel his fuel" etc. (B; . VI. ii. 14 ) . That is only bv wav of a 

































































































restatement of a commonly known fact." Or even if this (sixth) fire be meant 
for meditation, then the Chandogas also can add this trait to theirs. And it 
should not be apprehended that the number five will stand in the way; for 
this number, enumerating the five imaginary fires (involved in the meditation 
based on superimposition), is a restatement of the fact already known (earlier 
that the fires are five), so that it is not a part of any injunction. Hence there is 
no conflict. Similarly in the anecdote of the Praha and so on, it is nothing 
contradictory to add somewhere a new trait. It should not be apprehended 
that either the entity meditated on or the meditation differs in accordance as 
a detail is added to or given up; for though a certain small trait may be added 
or deducted from the entity meditated on, yet the meditation is recognized to 
be the same from the (persistence of the) greater quantum of the thing to be 
known. Hence the meditations are the same in the different Upanigads. 

Hwna wfa I? wmWsw w? afm 11311 

(The rite of carrying fire on the head is an appendage) PRWTgq of Vedic 
study; ft because BRli in the Samacara (it is enjoined) ffvn*;r as being so, a 
also stfi" on account of competence, at and ffq_f;fzM: that regulation (is) 1![ 
as in the case of libations. 

3. The rite of carrying fire on the head is an appendage of Vedic study, 
because it is stated to be so in the Samacara, and also because of 
competence. And that regulation is like that about libations. 

It was argued that since the followers of the Atharva Veda acknowledge 
the vow of holding fire on the head, (sitting amidst fires), etc. as necessary 
preconditions for the acquisition of knowledge, while others do not do so, 
therefore the knowledge (vidya) differs. That is being refuted. This is a trait 
of the Vedic study, but not of knowledge. 

How is this known? 

Because the followers of the Atharva Veda read of this also as a Vedic 
vow "stated to be so", mentioned as a feature of the study of the Veda, in the 
Samacara, in the book imparting instruction about Vedic vows. And from the 





text, "One that has not fulfilled the vow (of holding fire on the head) does 
not read this" (Mu. III. ii. 11), which is concerned with the competence of 
the person concerned, and where the word "this" is used and the study of the 
text is clearly mentioned, it is ascertained that this vow is a concomitant 
(feature) of the study of their own Upani$ad. 

Opponent : Since in the text, "To them alone should one expound this 
knowledge of Brahman who are engaged in the practice of disciplines, 
versed in the Vedas, and devoted to Brahman ... and by whom has been duly 
performed the vow of holding the fire on the head" (Mu. III. ii. 10), the vow 
is connected with the knowledge of Brahman, which is the same in all the 
Upani$ads, therefore it follows that this concomitant (trait) will get 
combined with the knowledge everywhere. 

Veddmin : No, for in that text, too, the term "This (knowledge of 
Brahman)" brings to notice the subject under discussion, which is the 
knowledge of Brahman gathered from that particular text; and hence this 
concomitant trait remains associated with a particular text only. 

"And that regulation is like that about the (seven) libations" is said by way 
of citing an illustration. Just as from the fact that the seven kinds of oblation, 
counting from Saurya to Sataudana, have no connection with the three 
(sacrificial) fires mentioned in the other Vedas, but are connected with the 
one fire (called Ekar$i) mentioned in the Atharva Veda, these oblations 
become restricted to the followers of the Atharva Veda alone, so also this 
concomitant feature must be restricted only to a particular kind of Vedic 
study, since it is connected with that. From this also it follows that the 
sameness of knowledge everywhere is beyond cavil. 




4. Moreover, (the scripture) reveals (this fact). 

The Vedas also show the unity of the knowledge, for in all the Upanisads 
the selfsame entity to be known is taught, as it is said in, "That goal which 
all the Vedas with one voice proclaim" (Ka. I. ii. 15); similarly, "The 
followers of the .g Veda (i.e. Hours) discuss this very one in the context of 
the great Uktha (hymn), the priests of Yajur Veda (i.e. Adhvaryus) sacrifice 
to this one in the fire, and the Chandogas (Udgata priests, following the 
Sama Veda) sing to this one in their great vow" (Ai. A. III. ii. 3.12). So also 
the quality of striking terror belonging to God, that is mentioned in the 
Kasha Upanisad in, "The supreme Brahman that is a great terror" (II. iii. 2), 
is seen to be referred to in the Taittiriya Upanisad for the sake of 
condemning the idea of duality, in the text, "Whenever the aspirant creates 
(even) a little difference in this Brahman, he is struck with fear" (II. vii. 1). 
So also the Vaivvanara Self, conceived of in the Brhadarai)yaka (I. i. 1) as 
extending from heaven to earth, is referred to in the Chandogya Upani$ad as 
something already well known: "But he who worships this Vai§vinara Self 
as extending from heaven to earth and recognized as one's inmost Self" (Ch. 
V. xviii. 1). Again, it is seen that by way of demonstrating the unity of the 
purport of all the Upanisads, the Ukthas (collections of hymns) etc. enjoined 
in one Upanigad are adopted in other Upanisads for the sake of meditation; 
and from this it can be concluded, on the logic of frequent occurrence, that 
(like the unity of the knowledge of Brahman) the meditations also are the 
same in all the Upanipds. 


Tonic 2: COMBINATION OF TRAITS 



uft i \m 

' And 3ggr: A combination (is to be effected) flit in similar meditations 
ar*-aaa' owing to non-difference of application f-bq-> like the subsidiaries of 
an injunction. 

S. And in similar meditations (all) the traits are to be combined, for there 
is no difference in application like the subsidiaries of an injunction. 

This aphorism is meant for stating the result of the previous discussion. It 
having been established thus that all the Upanisads present the same ideas 
about all the meditations, the traits of any meditatiou mentioned in any one 
Upani$ad have to be combined with the same meditation everywhere else; 
for their applications are not different. In whatever sense any one of these 
traits becomes helpful to a meditation at one place, it becomes so in the same 
way elsewhere is well; for the meditation is the same in either place. Hence 
"a combination is to be made, like the subsidiaries of an injunction". Just as 
the particular features of such rites as the Agnihotra, which are presented as 
subsidiary matters in connection with the main injunctions (of Agnihotra 
etc.), are combined together because of the sameness of that Agnihotra rite 
everywhere, so also is the case here. Had the meditations been different, the 
(individual) traits would remain tagged on to their separate meditations 
which, however, would not become inter-connected by way of one being a 
primary meditation and the others subsidiary, so that the traits would not 
become combined together. But such is not the case when the meditations 
are the same. 

An elaboration of this very aphorism, stating the result as it does, will be 
made in the aphorisms starting with, "on account of the non-difference of the 
meditation everywhere" (III. iii. 10). 


Tonic 3: DIFFERENCE OF MEDITATIONS 








ar;qej (There is) difference srazt;l on the authority (of the difference) of 
texts I[fTcq if such be the contention q not so aT-ft owing to non-difference. 

6. If it be said that the (Udgitha) meditations (in the Chdndogya and 
Brhaddranyaka Upani~ads) are different on account of the difference of 
(texts), then not so, for there is no difference. 

In the Brhadarapyaka Upani$ad the start is, made thus: "The gods said, 
'Now let us surpass the Asuras (devils) in (this) sacrifice through the 
Udgitha'. They said to the organ of speech, 'Chant the Udgitha for us 1 " (B;. I. 
iii. 1-2), and then the inferior prams (organs) of speech etc. are condemned 
as struck with evil by the Asuras (devils), and lastly the chief Prang (in the 
mouth) is mentioned thus: "Then they said to this (chief) Praha (vital force) 
in the mouth, 'Chant (the Udgitha) for us.' 'All right', said the vital force and 
chanted for them" (Br. I. iii. 7). So also in the Chandogya Upanisad the 
commencement is made with, "Then the gods resorted to the Udgitha, under 
the idea, 'We shall defeat these (devils) by this " (I. ii. 1); after that the prams 
(organs) are condemned as struck with sin by the devils; and then in the very 
same way the preference for the chief Prima (in the mouth) is shown thus: 
"Then they meditated on this vital force, that is in the mouth, as the Udgitha 
(Om)" (I. ii. 7). It can be understood from the eulogy of Praha at both the 
places that what is enjoined is a meditation on Praha. 

A doubt arises in this matter: Do the meditations differ here, or are they 
the same? What should be the conclusion then? 

Opponent : The meditations are the same on account of the arguments 
already advanced. 

Objection : The sameaess of the meditations is untenable because of the 
difference in the manner of starting. The Vajasaneyins start in one way, 
while the Samavedins do in another way. The Vajasaneyins mention Praha as 



the singer of the Udgitha in their text, "(Then they said to this vital force in 
the mouth) 'Chant the Udgitha for us' " (Br. I. iii. 7), whereas the 
Samavedins mention the vital force as Udgitha in, "They meditated on him 
as Udgitha" (Ch. I. ii. 7). So how can there be an identity of the meditations? 

Opponent : That creates no difficulty, for the identity of the meditation is 
not ruled out by this (slight) variation, inasmuch as many more points of 
similarity are in evidence, for instance, the beginning is made with a 
description of the war between the gods and devils, the Udgitha is 
introduced for the sake of defeating the devils, the mention is made of the 
organs like the organ of speech, resort is made to the vital force in the mouth 
after decrying those organs, and the analogy of the stone and a lump of earth 
(smashed by being thrown at the stone) is cited by way of illustrating the 
destruction of the devils by the prowess of the vital force; many other points 
of similarity of this kind are also in evidence in both the places. Even in the 
B;hadaraoyaka we come across an appositional use of Prbna with Udg-itha: 
"This indeed is also Udgitha" (I. iii. 23). Hence in the Chandogya Upani$ad 
also, the agency of Prkna (in singing) is to be inferred metaphorically. From 
this also follows the identity of the meditations. 




n 


B arT Rather not col-*" owing to a difference in subjectmatter qZ:-~— 
aR$-x~ even as in such cases as being higher than the high. 

7. Rather not owing to a difference of subject-matter even as in such cases 
as (meditation on the Udgl ha as) possessed of the quality of being higher 
than the high, (greater than the great). 

Veddmin : The identity of the meditations is not certainly tenable; the 
reasonable position here is that the meditations are different. 


Why? 



"Owing to a difference of prakarana (lit. subject-matter)", that is to say, 
"owing to a difference of prakrama (lit. introduction)-the way the two 
meditations are started with". Thus a difference in the manner of starting is 
obvious here. The Chandogya begins with, "Let one meditate on the letter 
Om as Udgitha" (I. i. 1). Thus the subject introduced is the meditation on 
Om, a letter forming a part of the Udgitha. Then it is expounded as 
possessed of such qualities as being the quintessence. And then that very 
Om, forming a part of the Udgitha is again alluded to in, "Now then starts a 
proximate elaboration of that very letter" (I. i. 10), and proceeding through 
the narration of the war between the gods and the devils the text says, "They 
meditated on Prana as the Udgitha" (I. ii. 2). Now if by the word Udg-ltha, 
occurring there, be meant the entire division of Sama (song, that goes by that 
name), and the priest Udgata be meant as the singer (identified with Prdna), 
then the introduc tion would be contradicted, and a necessity for resort to 
metaphorical interpretation would crop up. It is proper that in the same 
context, conveying a single idea, the conclusion should be in accordance 
with the introduction. Hence in this text what is enjoined is the 
superimposition of the idea of Praia on Om forming a part of the Udgitha. 
But in the Brhadaraiyaka Upani$ad, there being no reason to understand a 
part of the Udgitha from a use of that word, it is presented as a whole (along 
with all its parts). And even in the text, "you chant for us" (Br. I. iii. 2), the 
priest called Udgata, who is the singer of that entire Udgitha is enjoined to 
be looked upon as Praha. Thus the manner of presentation is different. 
Although there, in the Brhadaraiyaka, Praha is placed in apposition with 
Udgitha, yet this is meant for demonstrating the fact that Praha, which has 
been sought to be shown as the priest Udgata, is also the Self of all. So this 
does not lead to an identity of the two meditations. Again, there (in the 
Brhadaraiyaka text), the term Udgitha is used to indicate the whole of it, so 
that there is difference between the two. It cannot be argued that the idea of 
Praha being the Udgata has to be rejected on the ground of impossibility; for 
Praha is taught as the Udgata for the sake of meditation just like its being 
taught as the Udgitha for the same purpose. Besides, it is with the energy of 
Pr&na that the Udgata sings the Udgitha, so that there is no impossibility. 
Thus it is stated by the Upani$ad in that very context, "Indeed he chanted 
through speech and the vital force" (Br. I .iii. 24). Again, when the intended 
meaning is understood to be different (in the two Upani$ads), it is not proper 



to decide on an identity of meaning with the help of mere similarity of the 
language of the sentences. An illustration of this is found in the sentences (in 
Purva-Mimamsa) about the rising of the moon and desire for cattle, where a 
similarity of injunction is found in, "The rice grains are to be divided into 
three parts" (which text deals with moon-rise) and "with those that form the 
middle part, one shall offer a cake in eight potsherds for fire, possessed of 
the quality of a giver" (which sentence deals with the desire for cattle). 
Though in the two sentences there is a similarity of injunction, still owing to 
a difference in the intro ductorv sentences , it is ascertained that in the 
sentence dealin g with moon-rise , the idea implied is a (mere ) chan g e of 
deities , whereas in the sentence dealin g with desires , the in j unction is about 
a sacrifice.? Hence here also the meditations differ owing to a difference in 
the introductory sentences, "just as it is in the case of Udgitha possessed of 
the quality of being higher than the high and greater than the great". 
Although the superimposition of the idea of the supreme Self is similar in 
"Space (Brahman) is indeed greater than these. Space is the highest goal. 
This is the Udgitha that is higher than the high (Prang), and greater than the 
great (Praha), and it is infinite" (Ch. I. ix. 1-2), and in the text superimposing 
the idea of the supreme Self on the sun and the eye, still the meditation on 
Udgttha as possessed of the quality of being higher and greater than the high 
and great is different from the meditation on Udgitha as possessed of the 
quality of being established in the sun and the eye and being possessed of 
golden beard etc. (Ch. I. vi. 7). But even as within the same branch of the 
Vedas, there is no combination of the features of two different meditations, 
so also is it the case with different meditations occurring in different 
branches. 


f rf INI 

(Sameness follows) ;dwm: from (the sameness of) designation its if it be 
said so, has been answered. However, ffq_arfq that also arf that3q, r exists. 


















8. If from the sameness of name, (the two meditations are held to be the 
same), that has already been answered. But that (sameness of name) is met 
with (even with regard to things quite different). 

If it be held now that the meditation is the same here on account of the 
sameness of the name, it being called the meditation on the Udgitha at both 
the places, then that too is not tenable; for it has been already said, "Rather 
not, owing to a difference of subject-matter (i.e. introduction) even as in 
such cases as meditation on the Udgitha as possessed of the quality of being 
higher than the high and greater than the great" (III. iii. 7). That applies here 
more aptly, inasmuch as it conforms to the letters of the Upani$ad, the name 
being used in a secondary sense only by common people dealing with the 
subject, who take their cue from the mere occurrence of the word Udgitha in 
both the places. Moreover, this identity of name is met with even in the face 
of well-recognized differences underlying such meditations as that on the 
Udgitha (i.e. Brahman) as possessed of the qualities of being higher than the 
high and greater than the great, where also the single name "meditation on 
Udgitha" is used. Just as such sacrifices as Agnihotra, Darsapuri}amasa, etc., 
which are well known as different, are seen to be referred to by the common 
name Kathaka, merely because they are read of in the selfsame book of the 
Katha branch of the Vedas, so is the case here. But where no such reason for 
difference is met with, the meditations may well be identical as for instance 
the meditation on Samvarga (merger), etc. 

Topic 4: SPECIFICATION OF OM 

Doubt : In the text, "Fet one meditate on the letter Om (as) the Udgitha" 
(Ch. Li. 1), we hear of an appositional use of Om and Udgitha, from which 
fact one of the four altemativessuperimposition, ablation, identity, 
qualification-may be accepted as the meaning of the apposition. So the 
consideration arises above the appropriateness of any one of these in the 
present context. Of these, superimposition occurs where the idea of one of 
the two things is superimposed on the idea of the other even while the 
individual idea of the latter is not sublated; the idea of the thing on which the 
idea of another thing is superimposed persists even when the superimposed 
idea of the latter is in evidence. For instance , even when the idea of Brahman 







is superimposed on a name ( e.g . Om ) the idea of the name persists and it is 
not ne g ated by the idea of Brahman ; or it is like the superimposition of the 
ideas of Vi$4u and other g ods on ima g es etc. So also it may be that either the 
idea of Ud g itha is superimposed here on the letter Om or the letter Om is 
su perimposed on Ud g itha. Ablation occurs where a thin g has g ot fastened on 
to it a deep-rooted , persistent , unreal idea , and then the true idea dawns to 
drive away the earlier unreal idea. For instance , the idea of Selfhood 
persistin g with re g ard to the assembla g e of body and senses is driven awa y 
b v the subseauent true idea of Selfhood with re g ard to the Self Itself 
springing u p from the ( instruction ). "That thou art" tCh. VI. viii-xvi t: or a 
confusion about directions is removed bv the true idea of directions. So it 
may be that here also either the idea of the Ud g itha is removed bv the idea of 
the letter Om or the idea of the letter Om is removed bv the idea of the 
Ud g itha. Identity means that the connotation and denotation of Om and 
Ud g itha are the same. Neither more nor less , as in the case of synonymous 
terms like , "the best amon g the twice-born" , a "Brahmaoa" . an "earthl y g od". 
The ad j ectival uses can occur in the sense that the letter Om, present in all 
the Vedas and liable to be understood as such, is presented as associated with 
the actions of the Udgata. Just as somebody might say, "Bring the lotus that 
is blue", so here also the meaning is, "Meditate on the Om that is the 
Udgitha". Thus when we think over this sentence presenting an apposition, 
all these alternatives come to the surface. 

Veddntin : Since under this predicament one finds no reason for accepting 
anyone of the alternatives, the aphorism is enunciated: 




q And agick: because of the pervasion (of all the Vedas), it is proper (to 
qualify Om by Udgitha). 






































































9. Since Om pervades all the Vedas, it is appropriate to qualify it by the 
word Udgitha. 

The word "and" , used in place of the word "but" , is meant for rulin g out 
the three other alternatives. The three alternatives , bein g defective in the 
present context , are re j ected , while the ad j ectival alternative alone is 
accented as it is faultless. Now , on accentin g superimposition , the word 
denotin g the idea that is to be superimposed on the other will be sub j ect to a 
metaphorical interpretation . 9 and a result also for it will have to be 
imagined. 

Opponent : But the result is stated by the Upani$ad itself in, "It becomes 
indeed the gratifier of desires" etc. (Ch. I. i. 7). 

Veddntin : No, since it is the result of another thing, it being the result of 
the meditation on (Om as possessed of) the qualities of being the fulfiller of 
desires, and so on, and not of the superimposition of Udgitha. As regards 
ablation also, the absence of a result is equally in evidence. 

Opponent: The result can be the removal of false ignorance. 

Vedantin : No . since that ( neg ation of Om or Ud g itha ) is not known to 
lead to any desirable human g oal. 10 And the idea of Om can never be 
alienated from Om, nor can the idea of Udgitha from Udgitha (since these 
ideas are true). Besides, this passage does not aim at establishing the nature 
of anything, it being meant for enjoining a meditation. 

The other alternative, identity, too is not appropriate, for in that case the 
utterance of two words (Om and Udgitha) would be useless, since one word 
alone could convey the intended idea. Moreover, (the term) Udgitha is not 
known to imply the idea of the word Om as implied by the letter Om, that is 
used along with the acts of the priest Hota (of the gg Veda) or the priest 
Adhvaryu (of the Yajur Veda). Nor is the word Om well known as standing 
for the whole of the second part of a Sama song which is indicated by the 
word Udgiitha, in which case alone the Om could have been a synonym for 
Udgitha. As a last resort, the adjectival alternative is accepted, "on account 
of the pervasion of Om", that is to say, on account of its being common to all 




































the Vedas. Lest the letter Om extending over all the Vedas be taken up here, 
the letter Om is qualified by the word Udgitha, so that the Om, forming a 
part of Udgitha, may somehow be understood. 

Opponent : Is not a metaphorical interpretation necessary even from this 
point of view, since the word Udgitha is metaphorically made to imply a part 
of itself (viz Om)? 

Vedantin : This is quite so : but even in the case of a fi g ure of speech , there 
may be an a p proximation to or departure from the primar y meanin g . In the 
case of superimposition , the idea of somethin g is superimposed on 
somethin g else , so that the fi g ure of speech here involves a departure : 
whereas in the case of the ad j ectival use , a word denotin g a whole is made to 
impl y a part of itself , so that the fi g ure of speech involves a proximit y: for 
words indicatin g the whole are seen to be used with re g ard to the parts as 
well , as in the case of a cloth or a villa g e." Hence it is flawless and 
appropriate that Om, which is common to all the Vedas, should be qualified 
by the term "Udgitha" in the text, "the letter Om". 


Topic 5: SAMENESS OF THE MEDITATION ON PRANA 



i-a Owing to non-difference of all, W4 these (traits) WM3r (are to be 
added) elsewhere. 

10. All (the meditations on Praha) being the some, these traits (found here 
in one) are to be added elsewhere. 

Doubt : In the anecdote of Praha, as related both by the Vajasaneyins and 
the Chandogas, it is enjoined that Praha is to be meditated on as possessed of 












































the quality of being the greatest. And the or g ans of speech etc, are spoken of 
there as possessed of the attributes of bein g vasitha ( most comfortabl y 
accommodated ) etc .12 These attributes are again ascribed to Praia in the 
texts starting with, "The organ of speech said, 'That attribute of being the 
vasi,#ha that I have is yours 1 " (Br. VI. i. 14). But while in other branches of 
the Vedas, for instance in the Kau$Itaki and others, the pre-eminence of 
Praia is mentioned in the anecdotes of Praia in such texts as, "Now then, 
here is the ascertainment of greatness. These gods, such as they were, 
quarrelled about personal greatness" (Kau. II. 14), such attributes as being 
the steadiest are not mentioned. So the doubt arises here: Should these 
attributes of being the steadiest etc. occurring somewhere be added 
elsewhere as well or should they not? 

Opponent: While in this doubt, the acceptable position is that they are not 
to be added to. 

Why? 

Because of the use of the word "thus", for in the respective places, the 
thing to be known (and meditated on) is presented by using the word "thus" 
as in, "Similarly, if anyone indeed, after having known (Prdna) thus (as 
possessed of the quality of being the greatest), (meditates on Prdna), then he, 
through his meditation on Praia as the greatest, (becomes the greatest)" 
(Kau. II. 14). And the word "thus" has a reference to proximate things alone; 
so it has no capacity to present the attributes of a similar nature mentioned in 
other branches. Hence the curiosity (to know what is meant by "thus") has to 
be satisfied by the attributes found in its own context. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the refutation is being given. Some of 
these attributes that have been spoken of, viz that of being the vasi#ha and so 
on, are to be thrown in (i.e. added) elsewhere as well. 

Why? 

"On account of non-difference of all" (everywhere); for everywhere we 
recognize the meditation of Praia as identical, the anecdote etc. of Prdna 












being similar. And when the medita tion is the same, why should not these 
attributes mentioned at some place be added elsewhere? 


Opponent: Was it not said that the word "thus", wherever it may occur, 
indicates that the sets of attributes in those respective places, are to be 
understood separately? 

Veddntin : With regard to this the answer is: Although by the word "thus", 
occurring in the Kaugtaki-Brahmaoa, the set of attributes mentioned in the 
Vajasaneyi-Brahmat a are not referred to, they being far removed from it, yet 
by the word "thus", occurring in the Vajasaneyi-Brahmni a, in the course of 
that very meditation (on Pram), all these attributes are surely intimated; and 
so the set of attributes, even though they be restricted to the selfsame 
meditation in another branch (viz Vajasaneyi) cannot be distinguished from 
the set in one's own branch (viz Kausltaki). And such an interpretation will 
not lead to the defects of imagining something not spoken of by the Vedas 
and rejecting something enjoined by them; for the attributes even though 
they be heard of in one branch, become acceptable everywhere, since the 
possessor of the attributes (viz meditation on Prdna) is the same. For if 
Devadatta is well known in his native land for his qualities of valour etc., he 
does not become alienated from these qualities even when he goes to another 
country where the people are not cognisant of his qualities of valour etc. And 
as from better acquaintance, those qualities of Devadatta can come to be 
recognized in that country as well, so also as a result of better knowledge, 
the attributes to be meditated on in one branch come to be added to the 
meditation in another branch. Hence the attributes associated with the 
selfsame principal entity have to be added in every other branch as well, 
although they are mentioned in one place only. 

Topic 6: COMBINATION AND NON-COMBINATION OF ATTRIBUTES 

OF BRAHMAN 

Doubt : In the texts presenting the real nature of Brahman a few only of 
such characteristics of Brahman as of being naturally bliss itself, impartite 
consciousness, omnipresent, Self of all, and so on, are met with here and 
there. With regard to them the doubt arises: Are only those attributes of 
Brahman such as bliss etc. to be accepted in a particular place just as they 



are specifically mentioned there, or are all the attributes to be accepted 
everywhere? 

Opponent : Under such circumstances, the obvious conclusion is that the 
attributes are to be accepted just as they appear separately under the different 
contexts. 

Veddntin : To this the reply is: 

wm: OTTO 11 til 

aaq-ai=: Bliss and other characteristics siqi of the principal entity (are to 
be combined). 

11. Bliss and other characteristics of the principal entity (i.e. Brahman) are 
to be combined. 

All such characteristics of Brahman as bliss etc. are to be understood as 
belonging to It everywhere (in all the contexts). 

Why? 

Precisely because of non-difference in all the places; for that very 
principal entity, Brahman, is equally the substantive everywhere. Hence the 
attributes of Brahman exist (collectively) everywhere, in accordance with the 
illustration of the valour of Devadatta shown under the previous topic. 

Opponent: In that case all such characteristics as "having joy as the head" 
will also get mixed up everywhere. Thus in the Taittiriya Upani$ad, after 
introducing the self constituted by bliss, it is said, "of him joy is verily the 
head, enjoyment is the right side, hilarity is the left side, bliss is the Self (i.e. 
trunk), Brahman is the tail that stabilizes" (II. v. 1). 


Veddntin : Hence comes the answer: 



foferoifpram# k ft lift 

fq_fqq_ k-alsllfB:There is no addition of such attributes as having joy as 
the head and so on; ff because ww-aiq augmentation and depletion iR 
(occur) in a context of duality. 

12. Attributes such as having joy as the head and so on are not to be added 
everywhere, since (they have) degrees of intensity and feebleness, (which 
are) possible in a context of difference (i.e. duality). 

The attributes of "having joy as the head" and so on, mentioned in the 
Taittirlya Upani$ad, are not to be added elsewhere, since joy, enjoyment, 
hilarity, and bliss are perceived to be of different degrees of intensity or 
feebleness in relation to one another and in respect of the (different) 
enjoyers. Intensity or feebleness co-exist only with difference, whereas 
Brahman is without any difference, as is known from such texts as, "one 
only without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1). And it was taught by us under the 
aphorism, "He who is full of Bliss is Brahman on account of repetition" (I. i. 
12), that these attributes of "having joy as head" etc. do not belong to 
Brahman, but to the blissful sheath. Moreover, these are imagined as means 
for concentrating the mind on the supreme Brahman, but they are not meant 
for realization (as actual characteristics). While this is their purpose, this is 
all the more reason why the attributes of "having joy as the head" and so on 
are not to be added everywhere. But admitting for the sake of argument that 
these are attributes of Brahman, the teacher (Vyasa) has only shown the 
reason why the attributes of "having joy as head" and so on, are not to be 
added elsewhere. This reasoning is to be applied to other attributes also that 
undoubtedly belong to Brahman, and are enjoined for meditation, such for 
instance as, sarhyadvama (resort of all blessings—Ch. IV. xv. 2) and 
satyakama (having inevitable desire-Ch. III. xiv. 2). Even though the 
Brahman to be meditated on is the same in all of them, yet the meditations 
differ according to the different contexts, and as such the attributes found in 
one are not to be transferred to another. Just as the two wives of a king may 
adore him in two ways-one with a chowrie (fly-whisk) and the other with an 



umbrella, and the behaviour of the king may differ there according to the 
mode of adoration, although the person adored is the same, so also is the 
case here. The possession of intensive or feeble attributes is possible in the 
case of the qualified Brahman alone, with regard to whom dualistic ideas 
persist, but not so in the case of the unqualified supreme Brahman. Hence 
the attributes of "having inevitable desires" etc. which are heard of in 
particular contexts are not to be added everywhere. This is the idea. 



V~R The other (characteristics) q however (are to be understood) aiq-a on 
account of identity of purport. 

13. But the other characteristics are to be understood everywhere on 
account of identity of purport. 

But all the other attributes like bliss, which are spoken of for propounding 
the real nature of Brahman, are to be understood everywhere, since they 
have an identity of purport, that is to say, the Brahman, which possesses 
these attributes and which they seek to establish, is the same. Hence there is 
a difference (between the two groups of attributes), inasmuch as these 
(latter) are meant simply for the attainment of knowledge (and not for 
meditation). 


TOPIC 7: PURUSA AS THE HIGHEST IN KATHA 



(Katha verses I. iii. 10 etc. are) at-+q meant for deep meditation (on 
Purup), (and not for stating the relative positions of others) sfft-aiTqR as that 
serves no purpose. 

14. What is mentioned in the Katha Upani~ad is meant for deep 
meditation on Purusa, (and not for stating any gradation), as that serves no 
purpose. 

Doubt : In the Katha Upani$ad, the start is made with, "The sense-objects 
are higher than the senses, and the mind is higher than the sense-objects" (I. 
iii. 10); and then it is said, "There is nothing higher than Puru$a. He is the 
culmination, He is the highest goal" (I. iii. 11). Here the doubt arises whether 
all those things starting with sense-objects are propounded to be each higher 
than the preceding one, or it is propounded that Puru$a is the highest of all. 

Opponent : As to that, the idea gained is that each of these is expounded 
here to be higher (than its predecessor); for the Upani$ad talks of them as 
"such a one is higher than such another", and "such another is higher than 
still another", and so on. 

Objection : If many objects are propounded to be (successively) higher, it 
will result in splitting the unity of idea (conveyed by a single sentence). 

Opponent : That is no fault, since it can well be that there are many 
sentences. For it is but proper that these sentences should be many, so that 
they may speak (separately) of many things possessed of superiority. Hence 
here we have a propounding of the superiority of each of these objects 
individually. 

Veddntin : Such being the conclusion, we say that the reasonable position 
is that Puru$a is proved to be superior to all of them, but not that each one of 
the objects is propounded to be higher (than the earlier one). 

Why? 


"As that serves no purpose", inasmuch as no objective is either seen or 
mentioned in the Upani$ads as being fulfilled by proving the other things to 



have any relative superiority, whereas, when it is established that Puru$a (the 
infinite Being), who is free from all evil, is superior to the organs, the 
achievement of liberation stands out as a discernible fact. In support of this 
is the Upani$adic text, "one becomes free from the jaws of death by 
knowing that which is... ever constant" (Ka. I. iii. 15). Moreover, by denying 
anything higher than Pura$a (I. iii. 11), through the use of such words as 
"culmination" (ibid.), the text evinces a preference for Puru$a, and thereby it 
also makes it obvious that the mention of a chain of graded things is meant 
for explaining Puru$a alone. "For deep meditation" means, "for the sake of 
complete realization through meditation", since meditation is taught here 
only as a means for complete enlightenment, but not as an objective by 
itself. 



q Also lc"-tea q because of the word Self. 

1Y. And (this must be the conclusion) on account of the use of the word 
Self. 

That this mention of the chain of successive superiority (over things) 
starting from the sense-organs, is meant for realizing Puru$a is proved from 
the further fact that the Puru$a under discussion is spoken of as the Self in, 
"He is hidden in all beings, and hence He does not appear as the Self (of all). 
But by the seers of subtle things, He is seen through a fine and pointed 
intellect" (Ka. I. iii. 12). And from this it can be understood that the rest are 
not meant to be spoken of as the Self. That Puru$a Himself is shown to be 
inscrutable and yet comprehensible by the fully purified mind. It is for the 
realization of that Puru$a that meditation is enjoined in, "The discriminating 
man should merge the organ of speech into the mind" etc. (Ka. I. iii. 13). All 
this was explained under the aphorism, "If it be said that in some recensions 



even the inferred entity (Pradhana) is also mentioned, we say no" etc. (I. iv. 
1). Thus it is noticed how variously and abundantly the Upani$ads have for 
their main purport Puru$a and nothing else. Moreover, when it is declared, 
"The man attains the end of the road (i.e. goal of his journey), which is the 
highest place of Vi$ou" (Ka. I. iii. 9), the curiosity arises as to what exactly 
is that "highest place of Vi$ou" which is "at the end of the road". In response 
to this are enumerated the sense-organs etc. serially. So from this it is clear 
that this effort is made for the realization of the "highest place". 

Topic 8: THE SUPREME SELF IN AITAREYA 


m 

a-: The supreme Self is to be understood (in the Aitareya Upanisad) >l-aq 
as elsewhere 3" because of what follows. 

16. The supreme Self is to be understood in the Aitareya Upanilad, just as 
elsewhere (in other texts about creation), on account of the subsequent 
qualification. 

Doubt : In the Aitareya Upani$ad it is mentioned, "In the beginning this 
was but the absolute Self alone. There was nothing else whatsoever that 
winked. He thought, 'Let Me create the worlds'. He created these worlds, viz 
ambhas (region beyond heaven), Marici (sky) mara (earth) apah (nether 
regions)" etc. (I. i. 1-2). With regard to this the doubt arises, whether the 
supreme Self Itself is here referred to by the word Self or some one else. 
What should be the conclusion then? 

Opponent: The supreme Self cannot be referred to here by the word Self. 

Why? 

On account of what is discernible from the trend of the sentence. 




Objection : Is not the connected sequence of the sentence seen to be more 
in favour of the supreme Self, since the assertion is made about the oneness 
of the Self before creation and because of the mention of creation after 
deliberation? 

Opponent : We say no, because this narration is about the creation of the 
worlds. If the supreme Self were to be accepted as the creator, the creation of 
the great fine elements should have been stated first, whereas the creation of 
the worlds is narrated here first. The worlds are only peculiar arrangements 
of the elements. So also ambhas etc. are merely the worlds that are spoken of 
in such sentences as, "That which is beyond heaven is ambhas" (Ai. I. i. 2). 
And from the Vedas and Sm;tis it is gathered that the creation of the worlds 
is the act of some divine being under the direction of God. Thus there occurs 
the Upani$adic text: "In the beginning this universe was but the Self (Viral) 
of the human form" etc. (Br. I. iv. 1). And there is also the Smrti text, "He is 
the first embodied Being, He is called Puru$a. He is the first creator of all 
beings, bom first as Brahma". The followers of the Aitareya branch also 
mention in an earlier context, in the text, "Then follows the creation from 
semen. The gods are the semen (i.e. products) of Prajapati (Virat)" (Ai. Br. 
II. i. 3.1), that the diverse creation is an act of Prajapati. The word Self is 
also found to be used for him, as in, "In the beginning this universe was but 
the Self (Virat) of the human form" (Br. I. iv. 1). The assertion of his unity 
also becomes appropriate when contrasted with the diversity which is his 
product. And his deliberation also is justifiable because he is admitted to be 
conscious. Moreover, the class of particular activities, well known in the 
case of the different common souls, are met with here in such sentences as, 
"For them he brought a cow,... to them he brought a horse.... to them he 
brought a man.... They said" (Ai. I. ii. 2-3). Hence the Self mentioned here 
must be some entity having some limitations. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say: "The supreme Self is to be 
understood here by the word Self, as elsewhere". Just as the supreme Self is 
understood in other Upani$adic texts about creation, such as "From that 
Brahman, which is the Self, was produced space" (Tai. II. i. 1), or as the 
inmost Self Itself is meant by the use of the word Self in common parlance, 
so also must be the case here. But the Self with limitations must be the 



meaning in such texts as that beginning with, "In the beginning this universe 
was but the Self (Virat)" (Br. I. iv. 1), where occur such other qualifying 
terms as "of a human form" (ibid.). Here, however, the subsequent 
qualification that is met with, is itself conducive to the acceptance,of the 
supreme Self, for instance, "He thought, 'Let Me create the worlds'" (Ai. Li. 
1), "He created these worlds" (Ai. I. i. 2), and so on. Hence the reasonable 
position is to accept the supreme Self. 



atrg (It follows) from the trend of the sentences (that the supreme Self is 
not meant) f id if such be the contention, fqr~t it must be so alTZ" because 
of definite statement. 

17. If it be objected that it follows from the trend of the sentences that the 
Supreme Self is not meant, (the reply is that) it must be so because of the 
definite statement (that the Self alone existed in the beginning). 

It was argued that from the trend of the context it follows that the supreme 
Self is not meant. That has to be refuted. "It must be so because of the 
definite statement"-the acceptance of the supreme Self must be appropriate 
here. 

Why? 

"On account of the definite statement"; for the definite statement about the 
oneness of the Self before creation becomes appropriate only if the supreme 
Self is meant, else it wifi become inappropriate. As for the sentence about 
creation of the worlds, we shall interpret it as meaning the creation (of the 
worlds) after the creation of the great elements, as is well known in other 
Upani$ads. As we interpreted the sentence, "That Brahman created fire" (Ch. 
VI. ii. 3), to mean that the creation (of fire) was after the creation of space 
and air well known in other Upani$ads, so also it can be done here. For any 



speciality mentioned in one Upanigad with regard to the same subject has to 
be added to it in the other Upani$ads as well. As for the ascription of a 
particular type of behaviour to the Self in such sentences as, "He brought a 
cow to them", that too has to be understood in a way that is conducive to the 
ascertainment of the idea sought to be imparted. For it cannot certainly be 
held that the mere narration of this anecdote, as a whole, is the only purport, 
since that does not lead to any human goal. But in fact the intended purport 
here is the identity of the (individual) Self with Brahman. And thus it is that 
after imparting instruction about the creation of the worlds and their 
presiding deities like Fire, and then teaching about the sense-organs and the 
body as their seats, the text shows how the creator Himself thought, "How 
indeed can it be there without Me" (Ai. I. iii. 11), and then He entered into 
this body: "Having split up this end (on the head where the parting of the 
hair occurs), He entered through this door" (Ai. I. iii. 12). Again the text says 
that after taking the activities of the organs into consideration thus, "If 
utterance is done by the organ of speech, smelling by the sense of smell" (Ai. 
I. iii. 11), and then having reflected, "What then am I?" (ibid.), "He entered 
through this door, having split up this end (at the parting of hair on the 
crown of the head)" (Ai. I. iii. 12), where the identity of the Self with 
Brahman is categorically asserted by saying "He realized this very Puru$a as 
Brahman, the most pervasive" (Ai. I. iii. 13). Later on too, this very fact of 
the identity of the Self with Brahman is asserted by starting with, "This one 
is the inferior Brahman; this is Indra" etc. (Ai. III. i. 3), where all the things 
within the world of duality, inclusive of the great elements, are enumerated 
one after the other, and then the conclusion is made with, "All these have 
Consciousness as the giver of their reality; all these are impelled by 
Consciousness. The universe has Consciousness as its eye, and 
Consciousness as its end. Consciousness is Brahman" (Ai. III. i. 3). Hence it 
goes without any contradiction that the supreme Self is meant here. 

The other interpretation of the aphorisms beginning with 
"atmagrhitiritaravaduttarat" is this: 



16. The Self is to be understood (in the Chandogya Upanisad), just as in 
the other (Brbadaranyaka) Upanilad, because of the subsequent (instruction 
about identity). 

Doubt : In the Brhadaramyaka Upani$ad it is said, "Which is the Self? 
'This infinite entity (Purina) that is identified with the intellect and is in the 
midst of organs, the self-effulgent light within the heart (intellect) 1 " (Br. IV. 
iii. 7), where the start is made with the word Self, and then by proving that 
very Self to be free from all attachments, it is definitely stated that the Self is 
identified with Brahman. The conclusion is also made accordingly: "That 
great birthless Self is undecaying, immortal, undying, fearless, and 
Brahman" (Br. IV. iv. 25). But in the Chandogya Upanisad the start is made 
thus, "0 amiable one, in the beginning all this was but Existence, one without 
a second" (IV. ii. 1), where the word Self is not used, but the identity (of the 
individual and Brahman) is taught at the end in the words, "That thou art" 
(VI. viii. 7). Now the doubt arises, whether these two scriptural texts have 
the same meaning or not. 

Opponent : The acceptable position is that they have different meanings, 
since the texts are dissimilar. For in a case of textual divergence, it is not 
proper to accept a similarity of meaning, since the meaning should be 
understood in accordance with the scripture. As for the Brhadaramyaka, it is 
obvious from the use of the word Self in the beginning that the instruction is 
about the reality of the Self. But since in the Chandogya the start is made in 
a different way, there is a dissimilarity in the instruction. 

Vedantin : Was it not pointed out that even the Chandogya contains 
instruction about the identity of the (individual) Self and Brahman at the 
end? 



Opponent : You said so, to be sure; but since the conclusion must accord 
with the commencement, it can be considered that this-is- only a fanciful 
conceit of identity. 

Vedantin : That being the position, it is said: "The (supreme) Self is to be 
understood" even by the Chandogas in their text, "0 amiable one, in the 
beginning all this was but Existence, one without a second" (Ch. VI. ii. 1); 
"Just as in the other Upanisad"-Just as the (supreme) Self is implied in the 
Brhadaraiayaka text, "What is the Self?" (IV. iii. 7), so also is it here. 

Why? 


"Because of the subsequent instruction of identity". 



17. If it be argued that the rule about the conformity of the 
commencement and the conclusion leads to the idea that the Self is not 
meant, then we say that it must be so because of the definite statement. 

Opponent : It was pointed out that the conclusion has to conform to the 
beginning; and since the word Self is not used in the beginning, the Self is 
not meant. How would you avoid that difficulty? 

Veddntin : That is being stated: "It must be so because of the definite 
statement". On account of the definite statement, the reasonable position 
here is that the Self is meant. To explain: It is asserted in the text, "That by 
knowing which the unheard becomes heard, the unthought becomes thought, 
and the unknown becomes known" (Ch. VI. i. 1), that everything becomes 
known when the One is known; and then to expound this, the Upani$ad 
starts with, "0 amiable one, in the beginning" etc. That assertion becomes 
established if the (supreme) Self is meant (in the text under discussion); for 
else this Self, that is the supreme entity, remains unknown, so that the 



knowledge of all arising from the knowledge of One remains 
unaccomplished. Hence it is only from the point of view of the assertion of 
the identity (of the Self and Existence) that one can reconcile all such facts 
in the Cbandogya Upanisad as the assertion of oneness before creation, 
reference to the individual being by the word Self, statement of the 
attainment of the state of that Self in sleep, and the definite assertion, "That 
thou art", made again and again in response to (repeated) inquiry; but not so 
if the identity be merely a fanciful conceit. Besides, the argument about the 
concurrence of the conclusion with the commencement should not be raised 
here, for neither any statement nor any non-statement of the Self is in 
evidence in the beginning. And a prelude in a general form cannot be 
contradicted by any special statement in the complementary portion, since a 
general statement raises expectations about the particulars. Moreover, the 
meaning of the word, "Existence", when fully considered, cannot be other 
than the supreme Self, since all other things are unreal by reasons of having 
their origin in speech etc. (B. S. IE i. 14). Even difference in scriptural 
readings (i.e. forms of sentences) cannot give rise to a difference in purport, 
since no such difference of meaning is in evidence in the case of such 
sentences as, "You fetch this vessel" and "This vessel, you fetch". Hence the 
conclusion is that although the process of expounding may differ in passages 
of this class, the thing expounded does not differ. 

Tonic 9: ACAMANA AND MEDITATION ON PRANA 


ll^ll 

;WTj_afTWrgrq Since (the rinsing of the mouth, dcamana, is) mentioned 
as a duty (already known), (it occurs here) aTi in connection with a new 
injunction. 




18. Since dcamana is mentioned as a duty already recognized, it occurs (in 
the Upanisad) in connection with a fresh injunction (of meditation on Prana). 

Doubt : In the anecdote of Prana ( vital force ), the Chando g as as well as 
the Va i asanevins mention that all that is food to the creatures ri g ht down to 
the do g s is the food of the vital force (Trana h and then they mention water as 
its cloth. Subsequently the Chando g as have this text . "It is for this reason 
indeed that people when eatin g cover it up with water j ust before and after 
eatin g " 18 (Ch. V. ii. 2). And the Vajasaneyins have this text, "Therefore wise 
men who are versed in the Vedas sip a little water just before and after 
eating. They regard it as removing the nakedness of the vital force" (Br. VI. 
i. 14); "Hence men possessed of this knowledge shall sip a little water while 
sitting for a meal and sip a little water after finishing the meal. While doing 
so they shall think that they are removing the nakedness of this one (the vital 
force)" (ibid.). Here two acts are met with, viz sipping of water and thinking 
of the removal of Prima's nakedness. Now it is to be considered whether 
both these acts are enjoined, or merely sipping or the thinking of the removal 
of Prana's nakedness. What should be the conclusion then? 

Opponent: The conclusion is that both the acts are enjoined. 

Why? 

Since both these are obvious from the text, and since both these are fit to 
be enjoined as they are unique duties (met with here for the first time). Or it 
may be that the sipping alone is enjoined, since the imperative case-ending 
about it is clear: "Hence a man possessed of this knowledge shall sip a little 
water while sitting for meal, and sip a little water after finishing the meal". 
And the declaration of the removal of nakedness is meant only for the 
eulogy of that act (of sipping). 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say that it cannot be logically 
upheld that this is an injunction about sipping, since the text only alludes to 
this duty that is already enjoined elsewhere. This act of sipping, as it is 
already known from the Smrti as an act meant for purification, is merely 
alluded to here. 



























Opponent: Should not this (very) Vedic text form the basis of that Sm;ti? 


Veddntin : The reply is, no, since the subject-matters differ. The Smrti, 
concerned with a general subject-matter, enjoins sipping of water for all 
persons, and this act is calculated to purify them. But the Vedic text occurs in 
a context of meditation on Prana; if it should at all enjoin a rule about the 
sipping of water, it can at best do so only in connection with that alone. And 
as between a Vedic text and a Smrti text, no one thinks of establishing a 
relationship of the source and its subsequent development, when they deal 
with different subjectmatters. It cannot be held that this Vedic text enjoins 
some unique rule about the sipping of water in connection with the 
meditation on Prd?za, for it is recognized to be the already known sipping 
commonly resorted to by all men. For this very reason too it is not an 
injunction about both. Moreover, if both are enjoined, it will lead to a 
splitting of the unity of idea (that each sentence has). Hence after referring to 
the already known fact of sipping water by people before and after partaking 
of their meals, the present text imparts in the sentence, "While doing so, they 
think that they are removing the nakedness of this one" (Br. VI. i. 14), a new 
injunction about thinking (or fancying) in connection with the meditation on 
Prdila of the removal of the nakedness of Prdna with the water used for the 
sipping. Besides, it is not proper to hold that this statement about the 
removal of the nakedness is meant as a eulogy for the sipping, since the 
sipping is not a matter for injunction here, and since the imagination about 
the removal of nakedness appears on its own right as the subject-matter of 
the injunction. It cannot also be argued that from such a point of view the 
same sipping will come to serve two purposes, viz that of purification and of 
a garment; for these are admitted to be two different acts, inasmuch as the 
sipping as an act in itself is admitted to be meant for the purification of a 
man, while the imagination of the water, used by him for the purification, as 
a cloth for Prdrur, is certainly a separate act which is introduced for the 
purpose of providing a garment for Prdna. Thus this is free from all 
criticism. 

As for the text, "Whatever is (known as) food for all, right down to dogs, 
worms, insects, and moths, is your food" (Br. VI. i. 14), it cannot be 
interpreted to mean that all kinds of food are enjoined for use, since no such 



word of injunction is in evidence, and since this is an impossibility. But the 
injunction is about looking upon everything as the food of Prana. And owing 
to association with this, it is but reasonable to maintain that even in the text, 
"water is garment", no injunction is given for sipping water, but the 
injunction is about looking upon the well-known water used for sipping as 
the garment (of Prana); for there can be no such thing as half murder." 
Moreover, the predicate "(They) sip", having been used in the present tense, 
cannot imply an injunction. 

Opponent : Is not the verb "(they) think" also equally used in the present 
tense? 

Vedntin: That is truly so. But if one injunction alone can be imparted, then 
from the mention of the act of covering by water, it follows that what is 
enjoined here is the unique act of thinking of water as the garment, but not 
so the sipping as it is the selfsame sipping already known. This is what we 
have propounded earlier. As for the argument that the imperative form is 
clearly visible in the case of sipping, that too is refuted on account of sipping 
being followed as a usual course. For this very reason that the sipping has 
not to be prescribed, the text of the Karjva recension stops with, "They 
regard it as the removal of the nakedness of the vital force" (B;. VI. i. 14), 
and they do not have the (additional Madhyandina) text, "Hence a man 
possessed of this knowledge" etc. Therefore in the Madhyandina recension 
also, it is to be understood that what is referred to by "a man having such a 
knowledge" is a meditation on (or imagination about) the cloth of the vital 
force, which is the relevant subject-matter and which is prescribed by taking 
for granted the sipping as a usual practice. It is not proper to suppose that in 
one place the actual sipping and at another the imaginary conception about 
the cloth is enjoined, for the trend of such statements as "water is the 
garment" is the same in both the places. Hence the reasonable position is that 
the imaginary conception of cloth is prescribed here and not sipping. 


Topic 10: SAME MEDITATION IN THE SAME BRANCH 



m $ to^iiuii 

rW In the same (branch) a also similar (sameness of meditation and 
combination of traits) wr4M owing to nondifference (of object). 

19. (The meditations) in the same branch are similarly the same (and their 
traits are to be combined) because of the nondifference of the object. 

Doubt: In the Vajasaneyi branch, under the topic of the "secret knowledge 
of fire", there occurs a meditation stamped with the name of Sandilya (to 
whom it was revealed). In the course of this, we hear of such traits as, "He 
should meditate on the Self as identified with the mind, having the vital force 
as the body, and effulgence for appearance". In the same branch, the 
Brhadaranyaka, again, has this text, "This being, identified with the mind 
and resplendent (is realized by the Yogins) within the heart like a grain of 
rice or barley. He is the lord of all, the ruler of all, and He governs whatever 
there is" (Br. V. vi. 1). The doubt arises here: Is it the same meditation and 
are all the traits found in the "secret knowledge of fire" and the 
Brhadaranyaka to be combined? Or are the meditations different and are the 
traits to be kept apart? What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : The conclusion is that the meditations are different and the 
traits are not to be combined. 

Why? 

So that the contingency of repetition may not arise. Having considered the 
fact that the charge of repetition can be avoided by taking shelter under the 
plea that this repetition occurs owing to a difference among the students and 
the meditators in the different branches of the Vedas, it was determined that 
(despite this fact) the meditation is the same, and it was stated that the traits 



found in excess in one place are to be combined with the other traits (stated 
elsewhere) in connection with the anecdote of Prana etc. But in the case of 
the same branch, this (kind of) avoidance of the charge of repetition 
becomes impossible owing to the absence of any difference among the 
students or meditators (of the very same branch), so that the meditations, 
occurring in remote contexts, cannot be the same. And it is not possible to 
make a division to the effect that one portion of the scripture is meant for 
prescribing meditation and the other for prescribing attributes; for in that 
case dissimilar new traits alone would have been mentioned in different 
places, whereas both similar and dissimilar traits, as for instance "identified 
with the mind", are prescribed at both the places. Hence the attributes are not 
to be combined reciprocally. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: Just as it is proper that the 
meditation should be the same and the traits also should be combined in the 
different branches, so also it should be the case in the same branch, for the 
entity meditated on is nondifferent. We recognize that the very same 
Brahman is to be meditated on in both the places as possessed of the 
attributes of being "identified with the mind" etc. The entity to be meditated 
on determines the nature of the meditation; and when there is no difference 
in nature, we cannot assert that the meditations are different or that the 
attributes differ (and remain restricted) in consonance with the difference of 
the meditations. 

Opponent : Have we not to assert a difference of meditation in order to 
avoid the charge of repetition? 

Veddntin : The answer is in the negative, for a division of purport is 
reasonable, inasmuch as it involves no illogicality to maintain that one of the 
texts is meant for prescribing meditation and the other for attributes. 

Opponent : If such be the case (i.e. if the Brhadaaratyaka prescribes the 
attributes while the "secret teaching about fire" presents the entity to be 
meditated on), then what is not stated in the "secret teaching about fire" 
should alone have been stated in the Brhadarar}yaka, as for instance, "He is 
the lord of all" etc. (Br. V. vi. 1), and what is stated there, for instance, 
"identified with the mind" etc. should not have been stated here. 



Veddntin : That is no defect, since it is with the help of that (similarity) 
alone that we recognize the identity of the meditation occurring elsewhere. 
For it is precisely through the presentation of similar traits that "the 
meditation of !;apdilya" occurring remotely (in the "secret teaching about 
fire") is shown to be the same as the meditation here (in the Brhadaraoyaka); 
and after establishing this fact, the Upani$ad adds to that (earlier) meditation 
this injunction about attributes (in the Bchadarartyaka). Otherwise, how can 
it be said that this (text in the Brhadaraoyaka) is by way of prescribing the 
attributes with regard to that (in the other place)? Moreover, when a sentence 
can be held to have served a purpose by presenting something that was not 
known earlier, the portion therein that presents something already known can 
be logically held to he merely a restatement of a known fact; thus the 
recognition of identity cannot be refuted on that score (of repetition). Hence 
the logical position here is that even though the two texts occur in the same 
branch of the Vedas, the meditation is the same, and the attributes are to be 
combined. 

TOPIC 11: No COMBINATION IN MEDITATION ON SATYA- 
BRAHMAN 


m 

BgTcq On account of connection r (it should be) so arq-; elsewhere qfq 
also. 

20. Elsewhere also (in the case of meditation on SatyaBrahman), (the 
attributes have to be combined) as here (in the case of Sdnctilya-Vidya), on 
account of the very fact of connection (with the same object of meditation). 

Doubt : In the Brhadara p vaka Upani$ad the be g innin g is made with 
"Satva'5 is Brahman" t V, v. 1 ) : and then it as said . "That which is Satva is 
that sun-the Bein g who is in that orb and the Bein g who is in the ri g ht e ve" 

















( V. v. 2 ). where the particular abodes of that very Satva-Brahman is tau g ht in 
the divine and corporeal contexts. Then after the vvahrtis (m ystic svllables- 
bhhh . bhuvah . and svah ) are conceived of as His bod y ( V. v. 3 ). two secret 
(m ystic ) names are tau ght. "His secret name is Ahar." This is in the divine 
context t V. v. 3 ). "His secret name is Aham (T) ."16 This is in the corporeal 
context (V. v. 4). Now the doubt arises: Are these secret names to be 
understood jointly in both the places, or are they to be understood separately, 
one in the divine context and the other in the corporeal? 

Opponent : With regard to this, it is thus surmised by the aphorism itself: 
Just as in the case of the "meditation of Saradilya", a combination of 
attributes has been spoken of although the meditation itself is stated 
separately in two places, similar must be the case elsewhere also where the 
subjectmatter is similar; for they (the traits) are connected with the same 
meditation. For this meditation on Satya, recited under the divine and 
corporeal contexts, is but one, owing to the nondifference of the introduction 
and the mention of the two in an intermixed manner. Why should not an 
attribute mentioned therein belong to that very meditation? For any code of 
conduct that is enjoined in relation to a teacher, for instance in the matter of 
serving him, is equally applicable whether he (the teacher) be in a village or 
in a forest. Hence both the secret teachings (about the names) are to be 
understood at both the places. 

Veddntin : This being the position (of the opponent), the refutation is 
stated in: 



at Rather r not, hlg because of distinction. 

























21. Rather they are not to be combined on account of a distinction. 
Rather both the secret names are not to be added to both. 



Why? 


Because of a distinction, because they are firmly associated with (two) 
distinct places of meditation. 

Opponent: How is there an association with distinct places? 

Veddntin : The answer is this: The Upanipd introduces the Person 
(Puru$a) in the divine plane with the words, "Of this Being who is in the 
solar orb" (Br. V. v. 3), and then recites, "His secret name is Ahar" (ibid.). 
Again, introducing the Being in the corporeal plane with the words, "Of this 
Being who is in the right eye" (Br. V. vi. 4), the Upanipd recites, "His secret 
name is Aham" (Ibid.). Now the pronominal form "of this" refers to a 
proximate object. Hence these secret names are taught in connection with 
particular abodes alone. So how can both be added to both the places? 

Opponent : Is not the infinite Being the selfsame entity on the divine and 
corporeal planes; for two abodes are spoken of with regard to the selfsame 
Satya-Brahman (Hiranyagarbha)? 

Vednntin : This is quite so. Yet since particular secret names have been 
taught for the same Being in relation to the particular modes of that Being, 
the names must belong to Him under those particular modes alone. We have 
a parallel instance of this. Although the teacher continues to be the selfsame 
person, the service rendered to him while he is seated cannot be the same 
while he keeps standing, and what is meant for him while he is standing 
cannot be the same when he is sitting. As for the illustration of the same 
conduct towards the teacher whether he be in a village or a forest, that is 
beside the point. Since the personality of the teacher does not differ in the 
village and the forest, and so no difference in the attributes associated with 
his personality is brought by the village or the forest, the service is the same 
at both the places. Hence the two secret names have to be dealt with 
separately (by restricting each to its own place). 




22. The scripture also indicates the same thing. 

Moreover, signs indicative of the separate treatment of such attributes are 
in evidence thus: "Of this one the form is the same as of the other one, this 
one has the same knuckles as the other one, the same name as the other one" 
(Ch.I. vii. 5). 

Opponent: How can this be an indicator? 

Veddntin : That is being shown: Noticing that the attributes differ 
according to the difference of the solar orb and the eye, and so cannot be 
combined with each other (naturally), the text resorts here to the process of 
extending (notionally) the attributes of the Being in the solar orb to the 
Being in the eye by saying, "Of this one the form is the same as of that one" 
(ibid.) etc. Hence the conclusion is that these two secret names are to be 
dealt with separately. 

Topic 12: ATTRIBUTES OF BRAHMAN IN RANAYANIYA NOT TO BE 

COMBINED ELSEWHERE 




a And —cT-atfq Unchallenged power and pervasion of heaven also (are 
not to be combined) apr: for this very reason. 

23. And (the attributes of Brahman such as) possession of unchallenged 
powers and pervasion of heaven are also not to be added to other meditations 
for the same reason (of association with special abodes). 

In the supplementary text (khila, that contains no injunction or 
prohibition) of the Rar}ayaniya branch (of the Sama Veda) occurs this 
passage: "The powers (of creating space etc.) have Brahman alone as their 
source, and they are held by Brahman without any challenge. That pre¬ 
existing Brahman pervaded heaven in the beginning (even before the birth of 
the Gods)", where mention is made of such exalted qualities of Brahman as 
possession of unchallenged powers, pervasion of heaven, and so on. And in 
their Upani$ad itself are stated such meditations on Brahman as the 
"meditation of Sanuiilya". When the consideration arises as to whether the 
exalted qualities of Brahman are to be added to those meditations or not and 
the conclusion (of the opponent) is that they are to be combined, since they 
are connected with Brahman, the answer (of the Vedantin) is given: Such 
exalted qualities as the possession of unchallenged powers and pervasion of 
heaven etc. are not to be combined with such meditations as that of 
SawJilya, on account of that very reason, viz association with special 
abodes. Thus in the "meditation of Sanclilya", the heart is spoken of as the 
abode of Brahman: "This my Self is within the heart" (Ch. III. xiv. 3). 
Similarly it is so in the meditation on the small one (Dahara-Vidyd) as well: 
"A small abode of the size of a lotus; within that is the small Space 
(Brahman)" (Ch. VIII. i. 1). But in the "meditation of Upakosala", the abode 
is the eve: "The Being that is seen in the eye" (Ch. IV. xv. 1). Thus different 
abodes are discernible on the corporeal plane for these separate meditations, 
whereas the exalted qualities, such as possession of unchallenged powers 
and pervasion of heaven occur on the divine plane. How can these be 
available on the corporeal plane? 

Opponent : But the exalted qualities of the divine plane are heard of in 
connection with these as well, as for instance in, "Greater than heaven, 
greater than these worlds" (Ch. III. xiv. 3), "This one is indeed the bestower 



of effulgence, for this One shines in all the worlds" (Ch. IV. xv. 4), "The 
Space within the heart is as vast as that other Space. Within this are included 
both heaven and earth" (Ch. VIII. i. 3), and so on. Moreover, there are also 
other meditations on Brahman, unassociated with any special abode, such as 
on Brahman having sixteen digits. 

Veddnttin : This is truly so. Yet there is a special reason here for not 
combining the attributes like the possession of unchallenged powers. The 
reasonable position is that when the mention of similar attributes calls up to 
memory (i.e. establishes the identity of) the meditations occurring at remote 
places, then the attributes occurring at remote places have to be taken 
together. But the attributes like the possession of unchallenged powers, and 
the attributes mentioned in connection with the texts of such meditations as 
that of Sandilya are mutually incompatible, and hence they cannot call up 
(i.e. establish the sameness of) the meditations occurring in remote contexts. 
Besides, it cannot be said that by reason of a mere connection with Brahman, 
a meditation occurring in a remote context can be called up; for that logic 
can apply even in a case of actual difference of meditations. The settled 
conclusion is that even though Brahman is the same, It can be meditated on 
differently in accordance with a difference of the exalted qualities; for 
differences are noticeable in the cases of meditations with such qualities as 
"being higher than the high and greater than the great" (in the case of the 
same Udgitha-Vide B. S. III. iii. 7). Hence the attributes of possessing 
unchallenged powers etc. are not to be combined with such meditations as 
that of Sat}4ilya. 

TOPIC 13: PURUSA-VIDYAS IN CHANDOGYA AND TAITTIRIYA 

I l^i I 

-w And (the traits of the Purina-Vidya are not to be added to the 
Taittiriyaka conception) 3MrrTc because- of not having been recited - as 
wfft"in other branches puffj in the course of Puru;a-Vidya (i.e. thinking 
about the aspirant). 



24. And the characteristics of the Purina-Vidya are not to be added to the 
Taittiriyaka because they have not been recited there as it is done in the 
course of the Purufa-Vidya in other branches. 

Doubt : Both in the brahma?ra portions of the Taiaciins and the Paingins, 
dealing with secret teachings, occurs the meditation on guru;a (lit. man, i.e. 
the aspirant himself). There the aspirant is imagined to be a sacrifice; the 
whole span of his life is divided into three parts and are conceived of as the 
three periods of a sacrifice (i.e. savanas, during which the Soma juice is 
extracted); his hankering for food and so on are imagined to be initiation for 
a sacrifice and so on; and some other characteristics, such as prayer and 
utterance of mantras are also met with there (Ch. III. xvi. 1-6). The 
Taittiriyakas also conceive of some sort of purusa-sacrifice in the section 
starting with, "Of that very man of knowledge, fancied as the sacrifice, the 
soul is the sacrificer, faith is the wife" etc. (Tai. A. VI. Iii. 1., Nara. 80). With 
regard to this, the doubt, arises: Are the characteristics of the purusa- 
sacrifice, as stated elsewhere, to be added to those met with in the 
Taittiriyaka, or are they not? 

Veddntin : When the possibility of combination arises from the fact of 
both being purura-sacrifices, we say that the characteristics are not to be 
combined. 

Why? 

Since we fail to reco g nize the one to be of the same form as the other. 
That is why the teacher (V vasa ) sa ys. "As in the purusa-meditation" f in the 
Chando g va Unanisad ) etc. The text about the meditation on purta a. as it 
occurs in some , viz the Taittiriva branch , is not the same as found in sonic 
other branches , viz of the Paiti g ins and Tandins. For in the Taittiri va. the 
conception of the purusa as a sacrifice is seen to he dissimilar to that of the 
others , inasmuch as the latter enumerate a different series consistin g of the 
wife , the sacrificer , Veda , the altar , a bundle of Ku $a g rass , the sacrificial 
stake , the g hee , the sacrificial animal , the priests , and others." As for the 
conception of the savanas, that too differs from others, inasmuch as their text 
is, "Those which arc afternoon, morning, and noon are the savanas" (Nara. 
80), (whereas the Tandins conceive of the life span as such). As for the 










































similarities of the conception of death as the final bath marking the end of 
the sacrifice, and so on, these are so few that they are overridden by a host of 
differences, and as such cannot bring about a recognition of identity. 
Moreover, in the Taittirivaka, the purusa is not spoken of as a sacrifice, the 
text there being "of this sacrifice of the man of knowledge"; and the sixth 
case-endings there (in vidusah yajnasya) are not used in apposition 
conveying the sense of "the man who is the sacrifice". For the purusa 
(aspiring man) cannot he a sacrifice in the primary sense. The sixth 
caseendings are used here in a non-appositional (non-co-ordinate) sense, 
meaning thereby "of the sacrifice of the man of knowledge". For a man can 
have a relation with a sacrifice in the primary sense; and when there is a 
possibility of the primary sense, that alone should be accepted and not any 
secondary sense. And in the sentence "the soul is the sacrificer" (see 
footnote) the text speaks of the man as the sacrificer, thereby showing that 
the sacrificer is related with the sacrifice in a nonappositional sense. 
Moreover, in the face of the text "of the sacrifice of that very man of 
knowledge" (see foot-note), which restates something which is assumed to 
he already known, should anyone hold that the man is identified with the 
sacrifice and that the soul etc. are identified with the sacrificer and others, he 
will open himself to the charge of splitting up the same text into two. 
Besides, when it is noticed that in the earlier text the knowledge of the Self, 
in association with the renunciation of (everything), is taught and then it is 
stated in a regular sequence, "of this very man of knowledge" etc., we 
understand that this text is complementary to the earlier text and not an 
independent one. So also we notice that the same result is shown for both the 
sections, which is, "He attains the greatness of Brahman" (Tai. A. VI. iii. 1). 
But in the case of other (Chandogya) branches, the meditation on purusa is 
presented independently of (and not as complementary to) any other, and it 
has for its result the prolongation of life, for it is said in that very connection, 
"He who meditates thus lives for a hundred and sixteen years". Hence the 
prayer, mantras, etc., spoken of in those other branches as the characteristics 
of the meditation on purusa, are not to he added to the Taittiriyaka. 


TOPIC 14: NON-COMBINATION OF DISPARATE TRAITS 




kq- Piercing etc. (are not to be combined) aTWsince their purports are 
disparate. 

2S. Piercing etc. are not to be applied in meditation, since (the mantras of 
piercing etc. are) disparate in purport. 

At the commencement of the Upanisad of the Atharva Veda is found the 
mantra, "0 deity, destroy my enemy by piercing his body all over-specially 
by piercing the heart, separating the veins and arteries, breaking up his skull 
all around. Let my enemy be disintegrated thus in three ways" etc. The 
mantra occurring in the text of the Tandins is: "0 god Sun, get the sacrifice 
accomplished" etc. The mantra of the Satyayanins is, "0 Indra of the white 
horse, and having a blue hue like sapphire" etc. Of the Kathas and the Taittir- 
lyakas it is, "Let Mitra (Sun) be benign to us, let Varuna be benign to us" 
etc. (Tai. I. i. 1). But for the Vajasaneyins the Upanisad is preceded by the 
Pravargya Brdh7na7Ia thus: "In days of yore, the gods made up their minds 
to perform a satra" (a sacrifice lasting from 13 to 100 days) etc. For the 
Kausitakins also the Agnistoma Brdhmana is read before the commencement 
of the Upanisad thus: "Brahman Itself is the Agnistoma sacrifice; the day in 
which it is performed is also Brahman Itself. TherefQre those who resort to 
this sacrifice every day, attain immortality" (i.e. supreme Brahman, in due 
course) etc. Now we have to consider whether all these mantras, counting 
from, "0 deity, destroy my enemy" etc., and all the rites counting from 
Pravargya are to be combined with the meditations or they are not. What is 
then the conclusion that dawns on us? 


Opponent: These are to be added to the meditations. 



Why? 


Because these occur in the proximity of the Upanisadic texts in which 
meditations predominate. 

Objection : But we do not perceive these to have been prescribed (by any 
injunction) for use in meditation. 

Opponent : Truly so; but though they are not perceived to be so, we infer, 
this on the strength of proximity. For in a case where proximity gives some 
purpose to a sentence, it is not proper to leave it floating in the air 
capriciously. 

Objection : But we do not notice any indication in these mantras 
suggestive of the use of these things in meditation. And how can we 
understand such rites as the Pravargya to be meant for use in meditation also 
when they are palpably enjoined for some other purpose? 

Op ponent : That creates no difficult y, inasmuch as we can infer on the 
stren g th of the use of the term hrdava t heart ) that these mantras have some 
ap plicability in connection with meditations as well. For the heart , etc, are 
very often tau g ht as the places etc, for meditation. In that wa v, the mantras 
" piercin g the heart" and so on . can ver y j ustifiably become contributor y 
factors in meditation. And as a matter of fact , such mantras as . "1 attain the 
earth by this one , b y this one , b y this one" ( Ch. Ill, xv. 3 ). and so on . are 
seen to be used in meditations. Hence , even thou g h the rites like Pravar gya 
are used in other contexts , there is nothin g contradictory in their bein g used 
in meditation , j ust as the BXhaspati-sava (sacrifice ! is used in course of the 
Vaiape va.l 8 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say that these are not to be 
combined with the meditations. 

Why? 

"Since (the mantras about) piercing ett:. are disparate in purport." The 
purports, namely piercing etc. of the heart and so on, that are conveyed by 












































such mantras as, "pierce the heart", are disparate, that is to say, they are 
disconnected with the meditations spoken of in the Upanigads, so that they 
have no capacity to combine with them. 

Opponent : We surely propounded earlier that the heart etc. are connected 
with meditations, and through them, these also become connected with 
meditations. 

Veddntin : The answer is, no. All that could be imagined somehow in this 
wav would be the a p propriateness of the mention of the heart alone ; but the 
mantra here does not mean the heart alone ; for the meanin g as a whole of 
this mantra , viz "piercin g the heart , separatin g the veins" , and so on . cannot 
be connected with the meditations : for it purports to serve as a ma g ic spell 
for a malevolent purpose. Hence the mantra . "Piercin g his body all over" . 
and so on is connected with some malevolent rite. Similarly from the text "0 
g od Sun , accomplish the sacrifice" , which bears the imprint of the 
accomplishment of the sacrifice , it would a p pear that it is connected with a 
rite. As for the particular form of that connection , it is to he known from 
some other valid source. So also is the conclusion with re g ard to the other 
mantras which are known from some indication , explicit words , or some 
other valid means of knowled g e to be a p plicable for other purposes. Even 
thou g h they may be read of in the UpaniSadic parts , they do not form a part 
of those meditations on the g round of mere proximity. For the relative 
unimportance of proximit y in comparison with explicit text etc, has been 
stated in Purva-Mimatitsa in "As amon g explicit statement , indication (or 
word capacit y), s yntactical connection , context , order , and name , when an y 
two of them are at variance with re g ard to anythin g, the succeedin g one is 
weaker than the earlier , since the succeedin g one is put at a disadvanta g e b y 
the predecessor as re g ards the meanin g implied." 19 tJai. Su. III. iii. 13). So 
also the rites like Pravargya, which have their application elsewhere, have no 
scope in the sphere of meditation; for these have nothing in common with 
meditation etc. As for the Brhaspati-sava, its application as an addendum to 
Vajapeya is gathered clearly from, "After performing the Vajapeya sacrifice 
one shall perform the Brhaspatisava". Moreover, this single rite Pravargya, 
enjoined only once, has been assigned by a more powerful valid means of 
knowledge to other rites (viz Jyoti$toma etc.), and hence it cannot be 
























































































assigned elsewhere (to meditation) by a weaker means of knowledge (e.g. 
proximity, order). This would have been the case if the predominance of any 
one of the two means of knowledge were not obvious. But as between two 
strong and weak means of knowledge, it is not possible to have that kind of 
absence of distinction as regards predominance, for strength and weakness 
themselves constitute that distinction. Hence from the mere fact of the 
proximity of the texts, it is not proper to jump to the conclusion that either 
mantras or rites of this kind form part and parcel of meditations. Rather one 
should remain content with the fact that the textual proximity occurs on 
account of some common feature of both, namely that they are recited 
together by people who retire to the forest. 


Tonic 15: REJECTION AND RECEPTION OF MERIT 



q But ~~ when the rejection (is mentioned, acceptance also is implied) 3q- 
—i~ it being connected with the correlative term -Bjv;_~fg_3gIR~_ as in the 
case of kulas (wooden sticks), metres, praise, and recitation; UtT that 3~ has 
been stated. 

26. But where only the rejection of virtue and vice is spoken of, the 
reception of these by others has to be inferred, on account of the term 
reception being a counter-correlative of rejection. And this is on the analogy 
of kusas, metres, praise, and recitation, as has been explained (by Jaimini). 

Doubt : The Tag gins have this Upani$adic text: "Like a horse becomin g 
clean by shakin g away its (dead ) hair (alon g with dust ), or the moon 
becomin g bri g ht by freein g itself from the mouth of Rahu twho causes an 
eclipse ). I shall cast off t i.e. become free from identity with ! the bod y, and 
becomin g identified with the ever-existin g Self . I shall attain the world of 
Brahman" ( Ch. VIII. xiii. 1 ) . So also those belon ging to the Atharva-Veda 
have the text . "Then the illumined one completely shakes off both virtue and 
vice , becomes taintless , and attains absolute equality" ( Mu. Ill, i. 3. 1 .20 
Similarly the Satya yanins have this text: "His sons inherit his properties, the 











































friends his virtuous deeds, and the enemies his vicious deeds". Similarly also 
the Kaugitakins have, "He shakes off both virtues and vices; his beloved 
relatives get his virtues and his hated relatives his vices" (Kau. I. 4). Thus it 
is seen that in some texts virtues and vices are spoken of as being rejected; in 
some texts as being shared separately by the people loved and hated; and in 
some texts both acceptance and rejection are spoken of. 

Opponent : As to that, if both the facts are clearly stated, we have nothing 
to say. Where the acceptance alone is spoken of, but not the rejection, there 
also the rejection is to be understood through "presumptive implication"; for 
when one's good and evil deeds are received by others, their (earlier) 
rejection becomes a necessity. But where rejection alone is spoken of and 
not acceptance, and the doubt arises whether the acceptance will take place 
or not, the conclusion is that it will not take place, since it is not heard of, 
and since what is heard of in another branch belongs to some other kind of 
meditation. Moreover, the rejection of the virtues and vices is by the actor 
himself, whereas their acceptance is by others; now how can rejection imply 
any acceptance where both these are not connected inevitably? Hence 
acceptance is not implied in a case of (mere) rejection. 

Vedantin : This bein g the position , the answer is g iven in the aphorism . 
"But where only the re i ection of virtue and vice is spoken of" etc. Even if 
rej ection alone be heard of in a text , acceptance should become added to it . 
since it forms a counterpart of re j ection ; and in the Kausitaki UpaniSad . the 
word "acceptance" is heard of as a correlative of "re j ection". Hence 
acceptance follows as a matter of course even at other places where the word 
"re j ection" alone is heard of. As for the ar g ument that the one does not 
follow the other , because it has not been mentioned by the Upanisad . 
because it is included in some other meditation , and because there is no 
inevitable connection , that is bein g answered: This pronouncement of 
restriction? 1 would be right in a case where something to be done has been 
spoken of at one place and then it is sought to be extended somewhere else. 
But neither rejection nor acceptance is here declared as something to be 
undertaken, they being spoken of only for the sake of praising knowledge 
thus: This knowledge of Brahman is so glorious that by its power are shaken 
off good and evil from the enlightened man, even though they are the causes 







































of transmigration; and then they get lodgement in his friends and foes 
(respectively). Since this declaration is made by way of praise, and since 
acceptance is mentioned in some texts as occurring immediately after 
rejection, the aphorist thinks that in other texts also, wherever there is a 
mention of rejection, acceptance will also follow consequentially, so that the 
eulogy may be complete. It is a well-known fact that one corroborative 
statement (Arthavdda) derives its application by drawing on another, as for 
instance such passages as, "The yonder sun is the twenty-first counting from 
this earth" (Ch. II. x. 5), and others. How can it be asserted here that the sun 
is the twentyfirst in order unless one draws upon the other corroborative 
statement contained in the text, "The months are twelve, the seasons are five, 
these worlds are three, and that sun is the twenty-first"? Similarly in the 
cases of the corroborative statements like, "The two trigubhs (metres of that 
name) are conceived of for the sake of endowing (the sacrifice, which is 
thought of as a person) with organs", it is noticed that one has to draw upon 
such other corroborative texts as, "Then organ is indeed the triltubha" The 
statement about "acceptance" being meant as a (corroborative) eulogy for 
knowledge, one must not worry oneself too much over the problem as to 
how the good and evil of one can be taken over by others. And by using the 
word "term" in "on account of the term reception being a counter-correlative 
of rejection", the aphorist indicates that the succession of acceptance after 
rejection is mentioned merely for the sake of eulogy; for if the combination 
of the characteristics had been meant, it would have been stated that the 
"thing itself (viz virtue) denoted by the word acceptance follows the "thing" 
(viz vice) denoted by the word rejection. (As a matter of fact, he speaks of 
"term" and not "thing"). Hence in the course of the discussion abort the 
combination of characteristics, this aphorism occurs (as a side issue) by way 
of showing the process of combining the corroborative passages. 

The portion, "on the analogy of kuras (i.e. wooden sticks for keeping 
count of the hymns sung), metres, praise, and recitation" is stated by way of 
citing illustrations. Thus in the text of the Bhallavins, "0 kufas, you have 
been fashioned from the great trees. Such as you are, you protect me (the 
sacrificer)", we hear of the origin of the kusas from great trees in a general 
way; but according to the text of the Saeyayanins, viz "The Kufas are made 
of the Audumbara tree", where a specific mention occurs, the kusas made of 



the Audumbara wood are resorted to. Or take another illustration: In some 
texts about the metres of the gods (having more than nine syllables to a 
quarter) and the metres of Asuras (with nine syllables only to a quarter), 
when the possibility arises of their being used indiscriminately either first or 
last, the decision is taken according to the text of the Paitigins which says, 
"The metres of the gods have precedence" There is still another illustration: 
When in some text no particular time for the chanting of the hymn meant for 
taking up the vessel called $odasin (in the course of the Atiratra sacrifice) is 
in evidence, the particular time is ascertained from the text, "Near about the 
time of the sunrise, the hymn is to be chanted", which occurs in the 
scriptural statement in the Rg-Veda. There is also this other illustration: In 
some texts the chanting of hymns is prescribed for the priests in general; but 
according to the special mention in the text of the Bhallavins that the 
Adhvaryu is not to sing, he is left out. The idea conveyed (by these 
illustrations) is that just as in the cases of these kufa etc., the special 
characteristic has to be borrowed from other texts, so also must "receiving" 
he combined with "rejection". For unless the special characteristic 
mentioned in one Vedic text, be accepted in another, it will lead to an option 
(alternativeness) everywhere; but that is improper where there is a way out. 
Hence it has been said in the Purva-Mimimsi (Jai. Su. X. viii. 15), "What is 
really meant is the ruling out of the other in conformity with the 
complementary passage, for if a simple’ neg ation be the meanin g it will lead 
to alternativeness which is a defect"sa (This is the first interpretation). 

Or the alternative interpretation is this: With regard to these very texts 
about "(vidhflnana) shaking", the point to be considered is whether by this 
mention of "shaking" is conveyed the idea of rejection (i.e. shaking off) of 
good and evil or something else. 

Opponent : As to that, the conclusion to be drawn is that the verb "to 
shake (dbQ)" does not mean rejection, since grammar says that the root 
dhl2n is used in the sense of fluttering, as it is seen in such expressions as, 
"The tips of the flags flutter", when the tips of the flags are moved by wind. 
Hence by vidhonana is meant causing disturbance, and that disturbance 
means the prevention of good and evil results from their fruition, they being 
kept in abeyance for some time. 





Veddntin : After propounding the opponent's view thus, the answer has to 
be given: It is but proper that this word vidbi - nana should mean rejection, 
since it has as its complementary the word acceptance. For unless the good 
and evil accruing to somebody be discarded by him, they cannot be received 
by another. Although it is not possible for the good and evil of one to be 
received by another in the proper sense, still in accordance with the fact that 
it has been declared so by the Upani$ad, it can be ascertained that rejection 
itself is denoted by tddht nano. And even though this reception is heard of 
only in some particular context, in the proximity of vidhftnana (shaking off), 
it becomes a determining factor everywhere in the matter of ascertaining the 
meaning by supplying a lacuna in all those places, even as it is by the Vedic 
passages in the cases of the kufas, metres, praise, and recitation. Moreover, it 
is not possible to shake virtue and vice like the tip of a flag, since they are 
not material substances. Again (in the case of) the horse, when it discards the 
dust by shaking its hair, it also "shakes off" its old hair; and the brahmana 
text is, "Shaking off sin like a horse shaking off its hair" (Ch. VIII. xiii. 1). 
Since a verbal root can have many meanings, there is no contradiction with 
grammar. The portion taduktam has been already explained. 

Topic 16: DISCARDING VIRTUE AND VICE AT DEATH 

pwl flhinwkwi ir'sii 

g4 While departing (from the body) aq-T since nothing remains to be 
attained fk forr so a{.4 others (say). 

27. (A man of knowledge gets rid of virtue and vice) at the time of death, 
since nothing remains to be attained. For thus it is that others (i.e. the 
followers of the other branches) state. 

The Kau$itakins mention in connection with the ParyahkaVidya that the 
aspirant gets rid of his virtue and vice even while going along the path of the 
gods to Brahman, seated on a paryahka (couch). The start is made with, "He 
attains this path of the gods and then arrives at the world of Fire" (Kau. 1.3), 


and then it is said, "He arrives at the river Viraja, which he crosses by the 
mind alone, thereby (i.e. as a result of crossing) shaking off virtue and vice" 
(Kau. I. 4). As regards this, should the text be understood in its obvious 
sense, implying the separation from virtue-and vice on the way itself, or does 
this separation occur even at the beginning when one moves out of the body? 
When this consideration arises and when on the textual authority it appears 
that the obvious meaning should be accepted, the aphorist says, "A man of 
knowledge gets rid of virtue and vice at the time of death" etc. That is to say, 
the aphorist asserts that at the very time of death, at the time of moving away 
from the body, occurs this discarding of virtue and vice as a result of the 
power of knowledge. The reason is given in, "since nothing remains to be 
attained" inasmuch as a man, who has left for the other world, and who 
wants to attain Brahman through illumination, can have nothing to attain in 
the interregnum through the help of virtue and vice, for the sake of which it 
can be imagined that virtue and vice linger intact for a while. As a matter of 
fact, however, they get sublated by the power of knowledge, since their 
result is opposed to that of the latter. And that sublation should occur as soon 
as knowledge is ready to yield its result. Hence though this destruction of 
virtue and vice really occurs earlier (at the time of death), it is stated later (in 
the Kaugitaki). Thus it is that others, viz the Tac}4ins and the Satyayanins 
read of this discarding of virtue and vice as occurring at the earlier state 
itself in, "Having shaken off sin like a horse shaking off its hair" (Ch. VIII. 
xiii. 1), "His sons inherit his properties, the friends his good deeds, and the 
foes his bad deeds". 



-alf4zlqT Since there is no conflict between the two texts (as also between 
cause and effect) c7: (on the admission that virtue and vice can be destroyed) 
by voluntary practices. 



28. As there is no conflict between the two (i.e. two texts, or cause and 
effect) on the admission that destruction results from voluntary effort, 
(therefore such effort must take place before death). 

If it be the case that the destruction of good and evil has to be admitted in 
the middle of the course for an aspirant who has departed from the body and 
is on his journey along the path of the gods, then since, after the death of the 
body, he cannot undertake at will such human efforts as yams, niyama 
(selfcontrol and regulated conduct), pursuit of knowledge, etc., ,on which 
such attenuation of virtue and vice depends, the destruction of good and evil, 
resulting from such human effort, cannot be reasonably upheld as happening 
midway. Hence such means have to be practised voluntarily at an earlier 
period during the stage of aspiration; and it is to be noticed that the 
attenuation of virtue and vice results from that alone. In this way the cause 
and effect can be brought into logical relationship and the texts of the 
Tao4ins and Satyayanins can be reconciled. 

Tonic 17: PATHS OF THOSE WHO KNOW OR Do NOT KNOW THE 

QUALIFIED BRAHMAN 





aqi~ Purposefulness 0: of the (soul's) course (after death) 3f (is) in two 
(different) ways, fk because auj otherwise f:<: (will arise) contradiction. 

29. The soul's course after death must have purposefulness in two ways, 
for else it will lead to contradiction. 

Doubt : In some texts the path of the gods is heard of in the proximity of 
the discarding of virtue and vice; but in other texts it is not. So the doubt 
arises as to whether the path of the gods will follow for all invariably after 
such destruction of good and evil or it will follow differentially (in different 
cases), emerging sometimes and sometimes not (for the followers of the 
qualified and non-qualified Brahman respectively). 



Opponent: As to that, just as the reception of virtue and vice follows in all 
cases of their rejection, so also should the path of the gods follow 
everywhere. 

Veddntin : Faced with this conclusion, we say, "The soul's course after 
death must have purposefulness in two ways", that is to say, it should emerge 
differentially (in accordance with the knowledge of Brahman with or without 
attributes), the course being sometimes available and sometimes not; but it is 
not available invariably. Otherwise if the course be available uniformly for 
all, it will lead to a contradiction; for instance, any path leading to some 
region will stand opposed to the Upani~adic text, "shakes off both virtue and 
vice, becomes taintless and attains absolute equality" (Mu. III. i. 3). For how 
can the taintless one, who has no notion, reach a different region? His goal is 
absolute unity which is not contingent on reaching some other world, so that 
according to us any course to be followed is meaningless in this context. 

(This is) 3ggW: reasonable, r-sl-affil-a because facts, indicative of (a 
soul's journey), are met with, t3 as is the case in common life. 

30. This (differentiation) is reasonable, for facts indicative of a soul's 
journey are met with (in the case of meditation on the qualified Brahman 
alone), just as (much as such a difference is) met with in common life. 

And this possibility of having two aspects, that is to say, the fact that the 
course is purposeful in some cases, but not so in others, is quite intelligible, 
since the "facts indicative of such a journey are met with". For facts 
implying the need of a journey are discernible in such meditations on the 
qualified Brahman as the Parymika-Vidya; for in that connection are 
mentioned many results such as ascending the couch, conversation with 
Brahman seated on the couch, and experience of special kinds of fragrance, 
etc., which are achievable only by going to a different region (i.e. 



Brahmaloka). The journey of the soul has a meaning there; but in the case of 
full illumination, no such fact indicative of such a journey is in evidence. For 
the men who realize the unity of the Self, whose desires all become fulfilled, 
who get all the seeds of evil burnt away even while living, have nothing else 
to look for except the exhaustion through experience of all the residual 
karmas that have begun to yield their results in the present bodies. In their 
case a journey is meaningless. And this division is to be understood in the 
same way as it exists in the world. "Just as in common life" one has to take 
the help of a road leading from one place to another when he wants to reach 
a village, but not so when he wants to get cured, even so is the case here. We 
shall deal with this more elaborately in the Fourth Chapter. 


Tonic 18: THE PATH OF GODS IS FOR ALL WORSHIPPERS OF 

QUALIFIED BRAHMAN 



&Tfizw: Non-restriction; grfhTT;~ (applies) equally to all (meditations); 
afttq. there is no contradiction, as is known from Vedic and Sm;ti jai- 
3ITlTWlsi texts. 

31. (The journey of the souls along the path of the gods is) not restricted 
(to any particular meditation). It applies to all meditations (on the qualified 
Brahman). This involves no contradiction as is known from Upaniladic and 
Smrti texts (lit. direct text and inference). 

Doubt : It has been said that the soul's journey has a meaning in a context 
of meditations on the qualified Brahman, but not so in the realization of the 
absolute Brahman. As for meditations on the qualified Brahman, a journey is 
mentioned in connection with some, as for instance, the Paryanka-Vidya, the 
meditation on the five fires (pancdgni), the meditation of Upakosala, and the 
meditation on the small space (dahara), but not so in connection with others, 
as for instance the meditation on the essence (madhu), the meditation of 
Sandilya, the meditation on Brahman with sixteen digits (sodasakalj), and 



the meditation on Vaisvanara. With regard to this the doubt arises: Should 
the soul's journey be considered to be restricted to those meditations only 
where it is mentioned, or should it be accepted in connection with all the 
meditations of this class? What is the conclusion then? 

Opponent : Restriction. The context being the determining factor, the 
journey should be accepted only where it is heard of. For if the journey 
heard of in one context be extended to another meditation, then the authority 
of the Upanisadic texts etc. will he stultified on account of everything 
becoming acceptable everywhere. Moreover, the selfsame course starting 
with light (i.e. the path of the gods) is read of equally in the meditation on 
the five fires and the meditation of Upakosala. Now, if it were meant for all, 
this repetition would have been meaningless. Hence restriction is to be 
accepted. 

Vedintin : This being the position, the aphorist says, "There is no 
restriction" etc. The path of the gods should pertain to all the meditations on 
the qualified Brahman, calculated as they are to lead to good fortune (i.e. 
Brahmaloka). 

Opponent : Was it not pointed out that unless a restriction is admitted, it 
will lead to a contradiction of the context? 

Vedkntin : "There is no such contradiction, on account of direct text and 
inference," that is to say, the Upani$ads and Smrtis. As for the Upanipdic 
texts, we have this on this point: "Among the qualified people, those who 
know (meditate) thus (reach the path of light)" (Ch. V. x. 1), which 
introduces the path of the gods for people meditating on the five fires; and 
then it is shown in the text, "And those who, while living in the forest, 
meditate thus on faith and austerity" (ibid.), that those others who practise 
other kinds of meditation, follow the same path as the meditators on the five 
fires. 

Opponent : How, again, is it known that this text declares the same path 
for others following other kinds of meditation, that path being possible only 
for those who have faith and austerity, those alone having been mentioned 
there? 



Veddntin : That is no defect, for this path cannot be attained through mere 
faith and austerity, in the absence of the strength of knowledge (i.e. 
meditation), since another Vedic text declares, "Through knowledge (i.e. 
deep meditation) they ascend to that region from where all desires are turned 
back; the people treading the southern path do not reach there, nor do the 
unenlightened men of austerity". Hence meditations, other than that on the 
five fires, are indicated by the words "faith and austerity". The Vijasaneyins, 
moreover, have this in connection with the meditation on the five fires, 
"those who know this as such, and those others who meditate with faith upon 
Satya" (Br. VI. ii. 15), which should be explained to mean, "those people of 
faith who meditate on Satya-Brahman", the word satya being frequently used 
for Brahman. Again, the people meditatin g on the five fires havin g been 
referred to bv the clause "those who know thus" ( Ch. V. x. 1 ). others who 
engag e in other kinds of meditation should be the people mentioned here in 
the second clause (ibid. ) . A g ain , since the text , "while those others who do 
not know those two ways become insects and moths , and these frequentl y 
bitin g thin gs (g nats and mosquitos V t Br. VI. ii. 16 1. shows the painful lowl y 
state of those who deviate from these two paths (of the g ods and manes ). 
therefore it thereby includes these ( meditators ) within the paths of the g ods 
and manes. There a g ain they attain the path of the g ods as an effect of 
excellence in meditation (and the path of the manes as a result of karma ). 
The Smrti also sa ys, "those two paths of li g ht and darkness are there for this 
world throu g h eternit y: going b v the one a man never returns , while going bv 
the other he has to come back" (Gita . VIII. 26 ) . As for the description of the 
path of the g ods , startin g from li ght, twice in the meditation of Upakosala 
and the meditation on the five fires . that is meant for en i pinin g meditation 
even on the path itself.23 Hence there is no restriction (of the path of the 
gods to any particular meditation). 

Topic 19: PEOPLE WITH A MISSION 





































































For people with a mission arr: there is (corporeal) existence qrc-a,f!I9 as 
long as the mission demands it. 

32. Those who have a mission to fulfil continue in the corporeal state as 
long as the mission demands it. 

Doubt: It is being considered whether the man of knowledge does or does 
not get another body after the existing one dies. 

Objection : When knowledge, which is the means to liberation, comes to 
fruition, it is out of place to consider whether liberation is accomplished or 
not. For it is not possible to start cogitating whether food can be got ready 
when all the materials for cooking are already in hand; nor is it doubted 
whether a man's hunger will be appeased even when he has started eating. 

Doubt : This consideration, however, is appropriate since it is seen from 
the histories and mythologies that some men of illumination get rebirth. 
Thus it is mentioned in the Smrti that an ancient seer and Vedic teacher 
named Apantaratamas was bom under Viiu's direction as Kria-dvaipayana, 
at the juncture of the two ages of Kali and Dvapara. And Vasigha, though a 
mind-bom son of Brahma, lost his previous body owing to a curse of Nimi, 
and was again bom of Mitra-Varui a, at the behest of Brahma. It is also 
mentioned in the Smrti that Bhrgu and others, who were mind-born sons of 
Brahma himself, were reborn from the sacrifice of Varuua. Sanatkumara, 
who was also a mind-born son of Brahma, was reborn as Skanda as a result 
of his granting a boon to Rudra. So also in the Smrti are met with many 
anecdotes of the rebirth of Dakp, Narada, and others owing to various 
reasons. In the mantra and corroborative portions of the Vedas also such 
facts are very often met with. Some had rebirth after the original bodies fell, 
whereas others took up other bodies in accordance with the process of 
entering several bodies simultaneously by virtue of their power of Yoga, 
even while retaining their own original bodies. And all of them are 
mentioned in the Smrtis as having the realization of all the truths presented 
by the Vedas. Thus from noticing the rebirth of all of them the conclusion 
seems to be that the knowledge of Brahman sometimes produces liberation 
and sometimes not. 



Vedantin : That being the position, the answer is being given: It is not so, 
since the corporeal existence of Apantaratamas and others, engaged in the 
mission of encompassing the well-being of the world through such works as 
the promulgation of the Vedas and so on, is regulated by the mission itself. 
Just as the divine Sun after fulfilling his mission in the universe for a 
thousand ages, will at the end attain liberation, free from rising and setting, 
as it is declared in the Upani$adic text, "then after that (when his mission is 
fulfilled), he (the sun) will ascend hig her u p f as Brahman ) not to rise and set 
ag ain , but he will be alone existin g in his own Self ( Ch. Ill, xi. 1 ): or j ust as 
some illumined souls of the present time , who have realized Brahman , 
( continue to be free even while livin g and then ) at the end of the exhaustion 
of the karma , producin g their present bodies , experience liberation , in 
accordance with the text . "His delay is for that lon g only as his body does 
not fall : and then he becomes mer g ed in Brahman" (Ch. VI. xiv. 2 ); similarl y 
A pantaratamas and others , thou g h they are divine , are entrusted with their 
respective missions bv God : and hence thou g h they are possessed of full 
vision , leadin g to liberation , they continue in their bodies so lon g as their 
missions demand this and so lon g as their actions are not completed : and 
when that is fulfilled they become freed. Thus there is no contradiction. For 
the fulfilment of their missions they move on from one body to another with 
perfect libert y, as thou g h from one house to another , while riddin g 
themselves of their residual karmas that have started bearin g their fruits once 
for all in those particular lives : and while retainin g an unobliterated memor y 
( of their identity etc. ), they do this bv creatin g new bodies and ownin g them 
either simultaneously or successivel y, for they are the masters of the 
materials that produce the bodies and senses. At the same time , they cannot 
be classed with the ( unenli g htened ) people who ( merel y) remember their 
past lives (i dtismaras i. since it is well known from the Smrti that "they are 
those very ones" .24 For instance it is stated in the Sm;ti that a woman 
discourser on Brahman named Sulabha, who wanted to have a discussion 
with Janaka, gave up her body, entered the body of Janaka, and having 
finished the discussion with him re-entered her own body. 

If it be the case that when the karma, which has once started bearing fruit 
(by producing the present body), has been used up, some other karma, 
productive of a fresh body, can crop up, then any other karma whose seed 



























































































has not been burnt away, may spring up just like it; and in that case only can 
it be apprehended that the knowledge of Brahman may or may not be an 
inevitable cause of liberation. But such an apprehension is not reasonable, 
inasmuch as it is a well-recognized fact in the Vedas and Smrtis that 
knowledge burns away the seed of karma. Thus we have the Upani$adic 
texts: "When that Self, which is both high and low (or cause and effect), is 
realized, the knot of the heart gets untied, all doubts become solved, and all 
one's actions become dissipated" (Mu. II. ii. 8), "When true memory (of 'I 
am Brahman') is regained, all the knots become untied" (Ch. VIII. xxvi. 2), 
and so on. And the Smrti texts are, "0 Arjuna, as a blazing fire reduces the 
fuel to ashes, similarly the fire of knowledge bums away all the karmas" 
(GYta, IV. 37), "As seeds scorched by fire do not sprout again, so also the 
Self is not affected again by the 'evils' consumed by knowledge", and so on. 
It does not logically fol4ow that when the "evils" like ignorance, (egoism, 
etc.) are burnt away, the residual karma, which is the seed of "evil", bums 
away in one part, but sprouts out through the other; for a sdli (rice) seed 
burnt by fire is not seen to sprout in one part. As for the residual karma that 
has begun to yield fruit (in the present body), that ceases from the exhaustion 
of its momentum like an arrow shot from the bow, because it is said, "For 
him the delay is only for that long as the, body does not fall" (Ch. VI. xiv. 2), 
where the waiting lasts till the falling off of the body. Hence it is proper that 
the man with a spiritual mission has the corporeal existence so long as the 
mission demands it. 

But thereby the effect of knowledge does not cease to be inevitable, 
inasmuch as the Upani$adic text shows that liberation follows from 
knowledge in all cases without exception, "And whoever among the gods 
knew it also became that, and the same with the sages and men" (Br. I. iv. 
10). It may well be that some great sages succumb to the lure of other kinds 
of meditation resulting in the acquisition of mystic powers; but later they 
become detached by noticing how these powers decay; and then following 
steadfastly the knowledge of the supreme Self, they attain liberation. This is 
what stands to reason; for the Smrti says, "When the final dissolution comes 
at the end of the reign of Hirar}yagarbha, the men of knowledge, with their 
minds purified, enter into the supreme state of liberation together with 
Brahma Himself". Since knowledge produces an immediately felt direct 



result, there can he no fear of non-acquisition of it. With regard to heaven 
etc., coming (long after) as the result of (past) action, there may be such a 
fear as to whether it will come or not; but the result of knowledge is a matter 
of direct experience, because it is so stated in, "The Brahman that is 
immediate and direct" (Br. III. iv. 1) and because the text, "That thou art" 
(Ch. VI. viii. 7), speaks of it as an already realized truth. For the sentence, 
"That thou art", cannot be construed to mean that you will become That 
(Brahman) after death, because the text "The sage Vamadeva, while realizing 
this (Self) as That (Brahman), knew, V I was Manu, and the sun 1 " (Be. I. iv. 
10), shows that the result of knowledge, consisting in becoming identified 
with all, occurs simultaneously with the rise of complete illumination. Hence 
liberation comes inevitably to a man of knowledge. 

TOPIC 20: CONCEPTIONS OF THE IMMUTABLE 

arcrcfai mte: \\\\\\ 

a_f;R Of the (negative) conceptions about the Immutable, q however, arq: 
(should be) a combination Wgrq.cRZi~ because of the similarity of defining 
and the sameness of object ofgZgiT- like the Upasad sacrifice; 2Iq that ZVij 
has been stated (by Jaimini). 

33. All the (negative) conceptions of the Immutable are to be combined, 
since the process of presentation is similar and the object dealt with is the 
same. This is just as it is in the case of the Upasad sacrifice, as has been 
shown by Jaimini. 

Doubt: In the Brhadaranyaka Upanisad it is said, "0 Gargi, the knowers of 
Brahman say, this Immutable (Brahman) is that. It is neither gross nor 
minute, neither short" (Br. III. :iii. 8) etc. Similarly it is heard of in the 
Mur}daka Upanigad, "then there is the higher knowledge by which is 
realized the Immutable" (Mu. I. i. 5), "That which cannot be perceived and 
grasped, which is without source, features" (Mu. I. i. 6). So also elsewhere 
the supreme Brahman is taught by way of eliminating distinctions. There 
again in some texts some fresh traits are eliminated that are not mentioned 



elsewhere. Now should all these ideas involving elimination of distinctions 
be combined together everywhere, or are they to be restricted to where they 
occur? 

Veddntin : When for resolving such a doubt it is concluded (by the 
opponent) that the Upani$adic texts being different, the ideas too are to be 
treated separately, our answer is: "All the conceptions of the Immutable", 
that is to say the conceptions involving the negation of distinctions, "are to 
be combined" everywhere, "since the process of presentation is the same and 
the object dealt with is the same". For the process of presenting Brahman, 
consisting in the negation of all distinctions, is similar everywhere; and that 
very same Brahman is sought to be explained everywhere. So what is meant 
by saying that the conceptions obtaining at one place should not be 
transferred elsewhere? And this is how it has been explained under the 
aphorism, "Bliss and other characteristics of the principal entity (Brahman) 
are to be combined" (III. iii. 11). But the positive attributes were considered 
there, whereas the negative ones are considered here. And so this separate 
discussion is undertaken here for elaborating this distinction. (Or according 
to a different reading, "This is the distinction. And this separate discussion is 
meant for elaborating this"). 

"As in the case of the Upasad sacrifice" is said by way of illustration. The 
meaning is this: It is enjoined that in connection with the Ahinasatra (lasting 
for more than a day) of Jamadagni, one has to perform the Upasad sacrifice 
in which puro^afas (cakes) have to be offered. Now, the mantras, 
"Agnerverhotram veradhvaram", and so on, which are enjoined to be used 
while offering the cakes, are found in their original form in the Veda of the 
Udgata (i.e. the Sama-Veda, Taradya Br. XXI. x. 1), yet they come to be 
associated (that is chanted) by the Adhvaryu priests (of the Yajur-Veda), 
since the puroddsa has to be offered by the Adhvaryu (and not the Udgata), 
and since the subsidiary sacrifices are regulated according to the main 
sacrifices (in which the Adhvaryu makes the offerings). Similarly here also, 
the attributes of the Immutable, that are dependent on the Immutable, are 
everywhere to be associated with the Immutable, irrespective of the place of 
their occurrence. "That has been said (by Jaimini) in the first part (i.e. the 
Purva-MImarhsa)", in the aphorism, "In a case of disparity between the 



subsidiary text (revealing the mantra for the first time) and the principal text 
(revealing the application), the subsidiary text has to be associated with the 
main injunction, since the former is meant for the litter" (III. iii. 8). 


Topic 21: SAME CONCEPTION IN MUNDAKA AND KATHA 

ymm up 

(The conceptions are the same) Mc-agr-c on account of the mention of 
this much (i.e. limit). 

34. The conceptions (in the Munjaka and Svetdsvatara on the one hand 
and Kalha on the other) are the same, on account of the mention of a 
particular limit. 

Doubt : They of the Atharva Veda, as also the Svetasvataras, recite this 
verse in the context of the body, "Two birds that are ever associated and have 
similar names, cling to the same tree. Of these, the one eats the fruit of 
divergent tastes and the other looks on without eating" (Mu. III. i. 1, Sv. IV. 
6). The Kathas also have this verse: "The knowers of Brahman, the 
worshippers of the five fires, and those who perform the Naciketa sacrifice 
thrice, compare to shade and light, the two enjoyers of the inevitable results 
of work, who have entered into the cavity (of the heart) which is the supreme 
abode of the most High (Brahman)" (Ka. I. iii. 1). The doubt here is whether 
the conceptions are the same or different. What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent: The conceptions are different. 

Why? 


Owing to obvious distinction. In the mantra "two birds" etc., one is 
noticed to be enjoying and the other abstaining, while in the mantra "the two 



enjoyers of the inevitable results of work" etc., both are seen to be enjoying. 
Thus the objects of the conceptions being distinct, the resulting conceptions 
must be distinct as well. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the aphorist says that the conceptions 
are the same. 

How is it so? 

Because in both these mantras, the Upani$ads mention the nature of the 
entity to be known as circumscribed by a limit, and as having a second 
(associate), and (hence) non-different. 

Opponent: Has not the difference in nature been pointed out (by me)? 

Vedantin : The answer is . no : for both these mantras describe God as 
havin g the individual bein g as a second , but they do not describe ( the 
individual as ) somethin g different. To explain; In tls mantra "two birds" etc. . 
the supreme Self that transcends (all feelin g s of ) hun g er etc, is shown in the 
portion "the other looks on without eatin g ", And in the complementar y 
portion of the topic also , in the text "when he sees the other one , the 
worshipful God" tSv. IV. 7 k the very same God is seen to form the sub i ect- 
roatter. Even when the individual bein g en iovs. the supreme Self , thou gh 
transcendin g t all feelin g s of ) hun g er etc. , is spoken of in the text , "the two 
enjo vers of the inevitable results of work" etc. , as ( thou gh) enioying, on the 
analo g y of the statement "the people with umbrella are movin g "25 : and this 
is so because the supreme Self is associated with the individual being. This 
is of course a context of the supreme Self, for the commencement was made 
with, "Tell (me) of that thing which you see as different from virtue and 
different from vice" (Ka. I. ii. 14). And even here the very same subject is 
presented in the complementary portion in, "that which is the undecaying 
supreme Brahman, beyond fear, for those who want to cross over (the 
world)" (Ka. I. iii. 2). This was also elaborated under the aphorism, "The two 
who have entered into the cavity are the individual Self and the supreme 
Self" (I. ii. 11). Hence there is no difference as regards the entity to be 
known, and hence also the meditations are the same. Moreover, all that is 
gathered from a consideration of the trend of all these three Upani$ads is the 















































knowledge of the supreme Self; the individual being is introduced in order to 
reveal its identity (with the Self) and for nothing else. It was stated earlier 
that so long as a discussion is concerned with the supreme Self, there is no 
scope for any consideration as to whether there is any difference-cum- 
nondifference. Hence this (present) attempt is meant merely for elaborating 
that very truth. Hence also it follows that the additional attributes have to be 
combined. 

Topic 22: THE INMOST SELF IN BRIHADARANYAR.A 
3'TM TB*d'[c Rict: II-XIl 

Tw-SITi: About one’s own Self (it has been declared that it is) arp inmost 
of all, zLff-Wq-q-q as in the case of the aggregate of elements (or as in the 
case of all beings). 

35. (The conception of the Self is the same in Brhadaraizyaka 111. iv. 1 
and III. v. 1, since) one's own Self is declared to be the inmost of all as in the 
case of the aggregate of elements. (Or -since one's own Self is declared to be 
the inmost of all, just as it is shown to be the Self of all in SvetY. vatara VI. 
11 ). 

Doubt: The Vajasaneyins recite the text, "Explain to me the Brahman that 
is immediate and direct, the Self that is within all" (Br. III. iv. 1, III. v. 1), 
twice, just one after the other, in course of the question of U$asti and 
Kahola. The doubt arises there whether the conceptions are the same or they 
are different. 

Opponent: The conceptions must be different. 

Why? 

By reason of the repetition; for otherwise it would be meaningless to 
speak twice of the very same thing, neither more nor less. Hence just as rites 
differ in a case of repetition, so also must these conceptions differ for the 
very same reason of repetition. 



Vedantin : That being the position, the aphorist utters the refutation: That 
conception is the same on account of absence of any distinction in the 
presentation of one's own Self as the inmost entity. It is one's own Self, that 
is also the inmost Self, that is questioned about and explained without any 
distinction in both the places. For two Selfs cannot both be the inmost in the 
selfsame body. In that case (that is to say, if there be two Selfs), one of the 
Selfs alone can feasibly be conceived of as being the inmost, while the other 
cannot be the inmost, even as it is the case with the assemblage of elements. 
As in the body, constituted by the five elements, water is inner than earth, 
fire is inner than water, and so on, and thus there can be such a thing as 
existence inside in a relative sense, though none can be the inmost in the 
primary sense, so also is the case here. Or "bhutagramavat-just as it is shown 
to be the Self of all" may refer to another Upanigadic text, "The one Deity 
remains hidden in all beings. He is all-pervasive and the inmost Self of all 
bhutas (beings)" (Sv. VI. 11), in which mantra the selfsame Self is spoken of 
as existing as the inmost Self of all beings. As it is the case there, so also is it 
in both these brahmanas (of the Brhadarauyaka). Hence, from the identity of 
the entity that is to be known, it follows that the knowledge also is the same. 

wt ii# 

araM Otherwise (i.e. unless the conceptions be different), '49-44fM; the 
separate (repetitive) statements cannot be justified Xft' if such be the 
objection, r not so, 3q iwRrz-aq (it being) like another instruction (of this 
kind). 

36. If it be argued that unless difference be admitted the separate 
statements become illogical, the reply is that this is not so, for it can be like 
another instruction of this kind. 

And the argument was advanced that unless the conceptions bt admitted to 
be different, the separate (repetitive) statements cannot be explained. That 
objection has to be met. With regard to this it is said that it does not 
constitute a defect, since this can be reasonably so like some instruction 



elsewhere. In the sixth part of the Upani$ad of the Tat 4ins, it is taught nine 
times, "That is the Self, That thou art 0 Svetaketu" (Ch. VI. viii. 7); still the 
knowledge does not differ. So also must be the case here. 

Opponent : How again does not the knowledge differ even though 
imparted nine times? 

Veddntin : Since the identity of the knowledge can be understood from the 
introduction and the conclusion, since with a view to expounding the very 
same subject, over and over again, it is reopened time and again with the 
(very same) request, "Sir, explain this to me *again" (Ch. VI. v. 4), and since 
a repetition of the explanation more than once can be justified on the ground 
of removing fresh doubts. Here also the beginning and end are seen to be 
concerned with the same subject since the form of the question is identical 
and the end is made in a similar way with the words, "everything else but 
this is perishable" (Br. III. iv. 2, III. v. 1). And by using the word "eva" 
(very) in "the very Brahman that is immediate and direct" (Br. III. v. 1), in 
the second question (of Kahola) as well, the Upanipd shows that the subject- 
matter of the first question is alluded to in the second. Besides, in the earlier 
Brahman (III. iv), the existence of the Self beyond cause and effect (or body 
and organs) is spoken of, whereas in the latter that very Self is spoken of as 
having the distinction of being beyond such worldly characteristics as 
hunger etc. Thus the unity of purport comes out logically, and hence the 
knowledge is the same. 


TOPIC 23: RECIPROCITY OF CONCEPTIONS 



( There should be ) aqf: reciprocit y.26 fk for fiirfj'j (the Upani$adic readers) 
distinctly recite so, VR-qq as in the case of other (attributes). 


37. There should be a reciprocal interchange as in the case of other traits; 
for so the readers (of the scriptures) recite distinctly. 






Doubt: The Aitareyins have this text with regard to the Being in the solar 
orb, "Now, He is the same as I am, and 1 am the same as He is" (Ai. A. II. ii. 
4.6), similarly the Jabalas have this, "0 glorious Deity, I am what you are, 
and you are what I am". The doubt arises here: Should the conception have 
two forms involving a process of reciprocity or should it have one form 
alone? 

The opponent says in this matter that the conception should have one form 
only; for apart from thinking of one's Self as identical with God, there is 
nothing else to be thought of. If, however, any such speciality about the 
thought is to he imagined, viz that the transmigrating soul is identical with 
God and God is identical with the transmigrating soul, then the 
transmigrating soul will get some added excellence through its identity with 
God, whereas God will be reduced in stature by His identity with the 
transmigrating soul. Hence the conception is to be thought of as having one 
form (i.e. one-sided) only. As for the reciprocal reading in the scripture, it is 
meant for emphasizing the unity. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the aphorist refutes it: This reciprocity 
is spoken of in the scripture for the purpose of meditation, just as in the case 
of other attributes. As the other attributes like "being the Self of all" are 
spoken of for the sake of meditation, so also is the case here as well. For thus 
it is that by reciting this either way, "I am what you are, you are what I am", 
the reciters of the passage point this out distinctly; and that becomes 
meaningful if the meditation is to be resorted to in a twofold way; for 
otherwise this specific recitation in two ways becomes useless, one alone 
being enough. 

Opponent : Did we not point out that if the double reading be imagined to 
convey some special meaning, the Deity will become one with the 
transmigrating soul, and will thus become reduced in stature? 

Vedantin : That is nothing damaging, since it is precisely this identity that 
is thought of through such a process. 

Opponent : In that case that very identity of the two (referred to by us) will 
become all the more strengthened. 



Vedantin : We do not avoid this strengthening of identity. 

Object: What do you do then? 

Vedantin : What we seek to establish is that on the strength of the text, the 
meditation is to be resorted to reciprocally (in a double way), and not in one 
way only. As a result the identity also becomes virtually confirmed. The 
point may be illustrated thus. Although such attributes as possession of 
inevitable desire etc. are prescribed for meditation, still God becomes 
established thereby as possessed of those attributes; similar is the case here. 
Hence this reciprocity is meant for meditation (that way); and this process 
has to be applied to similar (other) contexts (where only one way is stated). 

Topic 24: SATYA-BRAHMAN IN BRIHADARANYAKA 

fa f| fW li^li 

k Since Ri t that very same vidya (conception, obtains at both places, 
therefore) qft-3>T: truth etc. (are to be combined). 

38. Since the same Satya-Vidya is taught in both the places (of the 
Brhadaranyaka Upanifad), therefore traits like Satya have to be combined. 

Doubt : In the text be g innin g with . "He who knows this g reat , adorable . 
first-born Bein g ( i.e. Hirai vag arbha ) as the SatvaBrahman" ( Br. V. iv. 1 ). the 
Brhadaarar3vaka UnaniSad prescribes a meditation called the Satva-Vid va. 
tog ether with the meditation on the letters of the name ( Sat va).27 and there it 
is stated, "That which is that Satya is that sun-the Being who is in that orb 
and the Being who is in the right eye" etc. (Br. V. v. 2). Now the doubt 
arises: Are these two different meditations on Satya, or are they one? 



















Opponent : As to that the conclusion is that they are two, for the 
emergence of result occurs separately, for the former it being "(He) conquers 
these worlds" (Br. V. iv. 1), and for the latter, "He who knows as above 
destroys and shuns evil" (Br. V. v. 3). As for reference to (Satya) the subject- 
matter of the previous context, it is done because of the sameness of the 
entity meditated on. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say that this SatyaVidya is but one. 

How? 

On account of the bringing forward of the subject-matter of the former to 
the latter on the basis of the identity of the entity meditated on by saying, 
"That which is that Satya" (Br. V. v. 2). 

Opponent : But it was pointed out that even though the meditations may 
differ, the object of the earlier meditation may be referred to in the latter on 
the basis of the identity of the entity meditated on. 

Vedantin : This cannot be so; for this may be the case where the difference 
of the meditations becomes obvious from some other cogent reason. But 
since it is possible to have it either way in this connection, a reference to the 
matter under discussion is made in "that which is that Satya" (Br. V. v. 2), 
whereby it is known that the Satya, connected with the earlier meditation, is 
alluded to in the latter. Thus the unity of the meditation becomes well 
established. 

As for the argument that the reference to a separate result leads to the 
conclusion that the latter is a separate meditation, the answer is this: This is 
no defect since this mention of a separate result is by way of eulogizing the 
teaching about the other parts of the meditation stated in "His secret name is 
Ahar" (Br. V. v. 3), "His secret name is Aham" (Br. V. v. 4). Moreover, the 
rule is that when the meditation is the same, and the results have to be 
gathered from the corroborative passages, the various results heard of in 
connection with the subsidiaries have to be added to the main meditation 
itself. Accordingly, since that very same Satya-Vidya is spoken of as being 



asso ciated with particular special traits, therefore all the traits such as Satya, 
are to be combined in the same application (i.e. act of meditation). 


In connection with this aphorism , however , some others cite this text 
about the Bein g in the solar orb and the eve as stated in the Brhadarar~vaka 
Upanigad. alon g with the texts . "And then this g olden (efful g ent ! Bein g that 
is seen in the solar orb" tCh. 1. vi. 6 ). and "And then the Bein g that is seen in 
the eve" tCh. IV. xv. 1 ). in the Chando g va Upani gad: and they sav that the 
very same meditation on the Bein g in the solar orb and the eve is contained 
in the latter , and the meditations are the same in both the UpaniSads. Under 
this impression thev think that such traits as Satva mentioned in the 
Brhadaranvaka are to be borrowed from there by the followers of the 
Chando g va. But that does not seem to be proper. For in the Chando gva. this 
meditation is presented in connection with a rite ( viz Jvoti g oma ) and is 
based on the Ud g ^tha ( used in that rite ). inasmuch as indicatory marks 
connectin g it with a rite are met with in the be g innin g, middle , and end. In 
the be g innin g occurs the text . "This (earth ) is the Rk mantra and fire is the 
Sama mantra" tCh. I. vi. 1 ) . In the middle is . "Of Him the Rk and Sama 
mantras are the knuckles : hence it is Ud g itha"28 tCh. I. vi. 8). And at the 
end is, "He who having known thus, sings the Sama song" (Ch. I. vii. 9). But 
in the B;hadarapyaka there is no such sign to connect it with a rite. Since 
thus the meditations differ owing to a difference of the contexts, it is but 
proper that the traits should have separate application. 

Topic 25: COMBINATION OF TRAITS IN BRIHADARANYAKA AND 

CHANDOGYA 

WM-Wft (True) desire etc. (are to be added) WffTsr elsewhere; a and ii-4 
(those) in the other (are to he added here) q_:' on account of abode etc. 

39. Traits like (true) desire etc. (mentioned in the Chdndogya) are to be 
added to the other (viz Brhadaranyaka), and those mentioned there are to be 










































































added here, because of the (sameness of) abode etc. 

Starting with the text, "Now, the dahara (small) house (i.e. heart) of the 
shape of a lotus, that is within this city of Brahman (viz the body), within 
that is a small Space (i.e. Brahman)" (Ch. VIII. i. 1), it is said "this is the 
Self free from sins, and from dirt, death, sorrow, hunger, and thirst, which 
has true desire and irresistible will" (Ch. VIII. i. 5) etc. And the Vajasaneyins 
have this: "That great birthless Self which is identified with the intellect and 
is in the midst of the organs lies in the space that is within the heart. It is the 
controller of all, the lord of all, the ruler of all" (Br. IV. iv. 22) etc. Here the 
doubt arises, whether the knowledge is the same or not, and the conclusion 
arrived at (by the opponent) is that the knowledge is the same. 

Vedantin : With regard to this it is said, "Traits like desires" etc. What is 
meant by "desire" is "(unfailing) true desire", just as one would call 
Devadatta simply Datta, or Satyabhama simply Bhama. The attributes like 
unfailing desires that are met with in the Chandogya Upani$ad, as applied to 
the space within the heart, have to be inserted elsewhere (in the 
Brhadarariyaka) in the text, "That great birthless Self" etc. And the attributes 
like "controller of all", met with in the Brhadarai yaks, have to be inserted in 
the Chandogya text, "This is the Self free from sin" etc. 

Why? 

"Because of the sameness of the abode" etc. For in both the places, the 
heart is equally the abode, God is equally the entity to he realized, and God 
is equally the barrage (seta) serving to maintain the boundaries (of the 
things) of this world, (that is to say, to prevent promiscuity); and so also 
many other similarities are met with. 

Opponent : Are not differences also met with? For the attributes in the 
Chandogya are associated with the space within the heart, whereas (in the 
Brhadaranyaka) they are associated with Brahman within that space. 

Vedantin : Not so . for under the aphorism . "The small space is Brahman . 
on account of the subsequent reasons" ( L iii. 14 ) it was established that the 
term Space means Brahman even in the Chando g ya. Of course there is a 














difference here. For in the Chando g ya Upani$ad a meditation on the 
q ualified Brahman is tau ght, inasmuch as desires etc, are mentioned as 
thin g s to be known alon g with the Self , in the text . "Then , ag ain , those who 
de part from here without knowin g the Self and these unfailin g desires" fCh. 
VIII. i. 6 ). whereas in the Brhadaranvaka . the entity tau g ht is the absolutel y 
su preme Brahman , as is evident from a co-ordinated study of such questions 
and answers as . "Please instruct me further about liberation Itself" ( IV. iii. 
15). "For this infinite Bein g is unattached" (ibid, ) . As for such attributes as 
bein g "the controller of all" , these are declared in the Brhadaranvaka by wa v 
of g lorif ying the ( unqualified ) Brahman. And it is in line with this (mere 
g lorification ) that the conclusion is made later on with the absolute Brahman 
in the text , "the Self is that which has been described as v Not this , not this' " 
( Br. Ill, ix. 26 ) etc. But it has to be noted that since the qualified Brahman is 
the same as the unqualified , a combination of the attributes is mentioned b y 
this aphorism in order to show the exalted nature of cod , but this is not ( to be 
done in the Brhadaranvaka ) for miditation.29 


Topic 26: AGNIHOTR4 TO PRANA 



atiw)q: There can be no omission aTwM because of deference. 

40. There can be no omission (of the performance of the Agnihotra to 
Praia) on account of the respect shown (in the Upanisad). 

Doubt : In connection with the meditation on Vailvanara it is heard in the 
Chandogya Upani$ad, "That morsel of food that comes first is to be offered 
as an oblation. And when he offers that first oblation, he should offer it with 
the mantra, 'Svaha to Praia 1 " (V. xix. 1). Offerings to the five pranas are 
prescribed there. And with regard to them the word Agnihotra is used later 




























































on in, "He who knowing this thus performs the Agnihotra sacrifice" (Ch. V. 
xxiv. 2), as also in, "As hungry boys sit waiting around their mother, so also 
all beings wait for the Agnihotra (i.e. eating of such a man of knowledge)" 
(Ch. V. xxiv. 5). With regard to this the question to be discussed is whether 
the Agnihotra sacrifice offered to Prdna ceases to exist on the day (of 
fasting) when there is no eating, or whether it does not cease. 

Vedantin : Since there is a mention of the connection of the arrival of the 
first morsel of food (with the Agnihotra under consideration) in "that morsel 
of food" etc., and since the arrival of a morsel of food is meant for eating, 
the Agnihotra to Prdna ceases to exist when there is no eating. 

That being the conclusion, the opponent makes the rejoinder that it does 
not cease. 

Why? 

"On account of the respect shown". Thus it is that in connection with this 
very meditation on Vat§vanara occurs this text of the Jabalas: "One (who 
resorts to this Agnihotra to Prdna) shall precede the guests in eating. As one 
might perform another's Agnihotra before performing his own, this (feeding 
of guests earlier) would also be like that". Here by condemning the feeding 
of the guests first, the eating by the master of the house is enjoined first, 
thereby showing a respect for the Agnihotra performed in honour of Prdna. 
And a text which cannot tolerate the omission of the first place for the 
performer of the Agnihotra can tolerate much less the omission of the 
Agnihotra that has such precedence over all. 

Veddntin : Since there is the mention of the coming of the first morsel 
meant for eating, therefore when there is no eating, there can be no 
Agnihotra. 

Op ponent ; No . since that is meant for prescribin g some particular thin g. 
Since in the common A g nihotra . milk etc, are re g ularl y prescribed , so here 
also , from , the use of the word A g nihotra . the possibility may arise that the 
milk etc, used there are to be used here as well in the A g nihotra to Prdna . on 
the analo g y of milk etc, bein g used in the sacrifice of the Kaut4a pavins. 


























called the Masa g nihotra (A u ni hot ra for a month ) and formin g a part of their 
lon g er satra . i ust because the word A g nihotra is used there bv wav of 
courtesy. And hence this sentence "that morsel of food" etc, occurs in order 
to prescribe the subsidiary in j unction about the morsel of food tb v wa y of 
rulin g out milk etch. Thus in accordance with the aphorism . "Althou g h a 
subsidiary may be omitted , not so the main one" (Jai. S. X. il. 63 ). even if 
the subsidiar y, consistin g in usin g the morsel of food , be omitted , not so can 
the main act of performin g Ag nihotra to Prdna.30 Thus the conclusion is that 
even thou g h there may be omission of eatin g, the obli g atory A g nihotra to 
Prana is to be performed by water or some other thin g in accordance with the 
rule of usin g substitutes.31 

Veddntin : Hence comes the aphorist's reply: 






(The Agnihotra is to be performed) aTff; from that itself fad when it is 
present (i.e. served),-wad for so is the declaration. 

41. The Agnihotra is to be performed from that (food) itself when it is 
present, for such is the declaration (of the Upanifad). 

"When it is present", when the food comes; "from that itself", from that 
very eatable thing that presents itself first, the Agnihotra to Prdna is to be 
accomplished. 

Why? 

"For such is the Upanipdic declaration." To explain: By usin g the word 
"that" with re g ard to the morsel of food occurrin g immediately after in the 
text "that morsel of food that comes first is to he offered as an oblation" tCh. 

V. xix. 1 ). as somethin g actuall y present , the Upanisad en j oins that the 
oblations to Prana are to be made with a thin g meant for some other purpose 




































































( viz eatin g) . But how can these oblations call for a substitute when , on the 
omission of eatin g, they themselves become stri p ped of the circumstances 
that make them possible?32 

And it cannot be said that the characteristics of the common Agnihotra 
have to be applied here. In the case of the ay ana (i.e. satra) of the Kauiu 
apayins, the word Agnihotra, appearing in the injunctive text, "One shall 
perform the Agnihotra for a month", may well be accepted as presenting an 
injunction about the common Agnihotra, so that the subsidiary features of 
Agnihotra can become applicable there; but in the present case, the word 
Agnihotra is used in the eulogistic portion, so that it cannot enjoin a similar 
Agnihotra. Again, should, however, the applicability of the characteristics of 
the common Agnihotra be admitted, the production of fire (by rubbing 
wood) also would become applicable; but that is not a possibility. The 
production of fire is meant to provide a place where to offer the oblations, 
but this oblation is not meant to be poured on fire, since that would nullify 
the use of the food for eating. And from the association with the things made 
ready for eating it follows that the oblation is to be made in the mouth itself. 
So also the text of the Jabalas, "one should precede the guests in eating", 
shows that this sacrifice has to be accomplished in the mouth. It is for this 
very reason that here also ( in the Chando gya) the accessories of the 
Ag nihotra are shown as g ot throu g h ideas of superimposition , in the text . 
"His chest is the sacrificial altar , his hair the kusa g rass , his heart the 
Garha pat va fire , his mind the Anvahar va pacana fire , and his mouth the 
Ahavaniva fire" t Ch. V. xviii. 2 ) , The word "altar" here is to be understood 
as meanin g a sacrificial place ( sthandila ) in g eneral ; for the A g nihotra . in the 
principal sense , has no altar , and its accessories are g ot here only with the 
help of notional superimposition. Moreover , owin g to the connection ( of the 
Ag nihotra to Pram ) with the time ( noon and evenin g) fixed for eatin g, there 
is no possibility of its bein g performed at the times (mornin g and evenin g) 
fixed for the ordinar y A g nihotra, Similarly some other characteristics like 
adoration ( or sa ving of pra yer) etc, also would be contradicted in some wa v 
or other. Hence from the association of the mantras , thin gs, and the deities 
with eatin g itself , it follows that these live oblations are to be accomplished 
in that connection. As for the show of respect noticed ( in the Jabala text ). 
that is meant for en j pinin g merely the precedence in eatin g, for the meanin g 





















































































of a sentence cannot be overstressed.as It is not possible on the authority of 
this fact of mere precedence (of the host) here that this Agnihotra has to be 
performed invariably. So when there is an omission of eating, the Agnihotra 
to Prdna is omitted pari passu. 

Topic 27: MEDITATIONS CONNECTED wim RITES ARE NOT 

OBLIGATORY 

(iRrafmiRws^: jqpnfpr m\ 

jfizz-a~f: There is no obligatory rule about that, ffqiC: for so it is seen (in 
the Upanigad), fr for Y separate T" result (arises, which is) qsif: elimination 
of hindrance. 

42. There is no obligatory rule about that (i.e. the meditations becoming 
connected always with rites), for that is obvious from the Upaniad, inasmuch 
as a meditation has a separate result, consisting in the elimination of 
hindrance to a rite. 

Doubt : There are certain conceptions (or meditations) connected with the 
accessories of rites as for instance in "One should meditate on the letter Om 
as Udgitha" (Ch. I. i. 1), and other places. We have to consider whether these 
meditations are the regular features of the rites like the Juhu (the sacrificial 
ladle) made of Palasa wood, or they are irregular like the milking pot (f.n. 
36)? What should be the conclusion here? 

Opponent: They are regular features. 

Why should this be so? 

On account of their occurrin g in the sentences en i pinin g ap plication. For 
althou g h these meditations are not read of in connection w.ilh the 

commencement of an y particular rite , vet by virtue of their connection with 
sacrifices throu g h Ud g itha etc. , they become connected with the in j unctions 
about the performance of the rites , in the same wav as the other subsidiaries 
























become so connected with them. As for the results mentioned in their own 

contexts , as for instance . "He certainly becomes a fulfiller of desires" ( Ch. I. 
i. 7). and so on . they are merely eulo g istic havin g been used with verbs in 
the present indicative mood (and not imperative mood ), as in such scriptural 
statements as . "He hears no evil" , and they have no fruit as their principal 
obj ective. Hence j ust as .in the case of such sentences as . "He whose Juhu 
( ladle ) is made of Palasa wood never hears a sinful verse" , which do not 
occur in their proper contexts and vet g et connected with the sacrifices 
throu g h the medium of the Juhu etc. , and thus become re g ularl y ap plicable 
like other accessories read of in their proper contexts , so also must be the 
case with the meditations on the Ud g itha.84 

Veddntin : That being the position, we say, "there is no obligatory rule 
about that (i.e. the upasanas-meditationsbecoming connected with rites)". 
These phrases that determine the meditation on the true characteristics of the 
accessories (like Udgitha) of the rites, viz that the Udgitha is the 
quintessence, the acquirer, and source of prosperity, that it is the foremost, it 
is Puna, it is the sun, and so on, cannot be regularly connected with rites in 
the same way as their obligatory accessories. 

Why? 

"For that is obvious from the Upanisad." Thus it is that the Upani gad 
shows that meditations of this kind are not obli g ator y, inasmuch as . in the 
text , "Both those who know this Qnr thus (as formin g part of the Ud g itha 
and possessed of the attributes of bein g the Quintessence etc. ), and those who 
do not know thus , perform their rites with this Om" ( Ch. 1. h 10 ). it is 
admitted that the rites can be performed by the uninformed as well. And it is 
seen that the priests Prastota and others . 35 even though ignorant of the 
deities of the Prastava etc., perform the duties of priests as stated in the text, 
"0 Prastota, should you chant the Prastava without knowing the deity 
presiding over the Prastava" (Ch. I. x. 9), "(0 Udgata), should you sing the 
Udg-itha without knowing that deity" (Ch. I. x. 10), "0 Pratihana, should you 
chant the concluding portion (Pratihara) without knowing the deity" (Ch. I. 
x. 11). Moreover, it is mentioned in the Upanigad that for meditations of this 
kind, which are connected with rites, results, other than those for the rites 


































































themselves, accrue, consisting either in removing some obstacle in the path 
of the fruition of a rite or in adding some excellence to its successful 
fruition; "Both those who know this Om thus and who do not know, perform 
their rites with this Om. But different are knowledge and ignorance (i.e. they 
have different results). That alone which one does with knowledge, with 
faith, and with meditation on the deities, becomes more powerful" (Ch. I.i. 
10). From the separation of the under takin g s of the knowers and the non- 
knowers by sa ving. "But different are" etc, and from the use of the 
comparative de g ree in "more powerful" in that text , it is understood that a 
rite bereft of knowled g e is also powerful (effective ) . And that becomes 
possible only if the meditation is not a permanent feature of the rite. Were it 
invariable , how could it have been admitted that a rite bereft of med.ital.ion is 
powerful? For the accepted view is that a rite becomes powerful when it is 
performed alon g with all its subsidiaries. Similarly in such meditations as 
that involvin g the superimposition of the worlds on the Sama ( son gs), results 
are spoken of as fixed for the meditations individuall y, as for instance . "For 
him are ordained the worlds ( of en io vmenf ) both above and below ( the 
earth ) " (Ch. IF ii, 3 ). and so on. And it is not proper to ar g ue that this 
mention of result is by wav of a corroborative statement (i.e. mere eulo gy). 
for in that case it would amount to an attributive corroboration (Gunavdda ), 
whereas in a case where the result is mentioned , one has to admit a eulo gy of 
the main thin g . As for (the eulo g istic interpretation of the results stated in 
connection with ) such subsidiary rites as the Pra vai a etc. , since they are 
necessary for the main rites (viz Darsa-Puruamasa ). which depend for their 
proper performance on the adequate fulfilment of all the subsidiary rites , it is 
but reasonable that the mention of the results alon g with the Pra vai a etc, 
should be taken in the sense of a eulo gy ( of Pra vai a etc. ) And this is also the 
case with the "Pala n a Juhu" etc, which occur in contexts other than that of 
an y rite to be performed. For such thin g s as a Palasa Juhu which are not acts 
b y themselves , cannot be ima g ined to produce any result unless thev be 
based on some rite. But in the cases of the milkin g pot and so on . the 
declarations of results become j ustiliable since these become necessaril y 
connected with such acts as carr ying water that are needed in a rite.36 So 
also in such cases as the sacrificial stake bein g made of Bilva wood . 87 it is 
proper that injunctions about results should be admitted, since they are based 
on such things as stake etc. that are already connected with a relevant 





































































































sacrifice. In the cases, however, of "being made of Palasa" and so on, there is 
no supporting factor connected with a sacrifice under discussion. If in the 
latter case, however, the terms Juhu etc. (occurring in the text) are accepted 
as the ground for the Palasa Juhu becoming connected with a relevant 
sacrifice, and then again on the authority of that very sentence an injunction 
about the result of using the Pala§a Juhu be accepted, that will lead to a 
break in the unity of purport (that every sentence should have). But in the 
case of meditations, since they are themselves acts, they can be the subjects 
of distinct injunctions; and hence the injunctions about the meditations based 
on Udgitha etc. involve no contradiction. Therefore just as the milk pail etc., 
even though dependent on sacrifices, are not permanently connected with 
them, precisely because they have their separate results, similarly also are to 
be judged the meditations based on Udgitha etc. And it is precisely for this 
reason that the authors of the Kalpa-Sutras did not treat such meditations as 
included in the sacrifices. 

Tonic 28: MEDITATIONS ON PRANA AND VAYU 



s-aR Like the offering t to be sure; q that been stated, has 

43. (The meditations on Prana and Vayu or Air are to be kept apart) 
exactly as in the case of offerings, as that has been stated by Jaimini. 

Doubt : In the text, "The organ of speech took a vow, V I shall go on 
speaking' " etc. it has been ascertained in the B{hada rai yaks (I. V. 21) that 
in-the corporeal context Praha (vital force) is the chief among all the organs 
counting from that of speech, and that in the divine context Air 
(Hirapyagarbha) is the chief among all counting from Fire. So also in the 
text, "Air indeed is the place of merger" (Ch. IV. iii. 1), it has been 



ascertained that on the divine plane Air is the place of merger for all 
counting from fire, and in, "Praha indeed is the place of merger" (Ch. IV. iii. 
3), it has been ascertained that Praha is the place of merger of the organs of 
speech etc. on the corporeal plane. Now the doubt arises here as to whether 
this Air and Praha are to be approached (i.e. meditated on) separately or in 
combination. 

Op ponent : While in this predicament , the conclusion is that they are to be 
ap proached j ointl y. for in essential nature they are identical ; and when the 
principle to be meditated on is the same , it is not proper to meditate on it 
se parately. Besides , the Upani$ad shows that the principle is essentially the 
same on the corporeal and divine planes in the text startin g with . "Fire 
entered into the mouth assumin g the form of the or g an of speech" . ( "Vd vu 
entered into the nostrils assumin g the form of Prdna" ) etc. ( Al. 1. ii. 4 ). 
Similarly the text "These are all equal and all infinite" ( Br. 1. v. 13 ) shows 
that the or g ans in the body have divine g lory as their very Self ( i.e. essence ). 
So also in other places the essential non-difference of the divine and the 
corporeal is shown in various ways in the respective contexts. At one place , 
ag ain . Air and Prdna are clearly identified bv sa ving. "That which is Prdna is 
Air". So also in the very context of the Brhadararovaka Upani pd. from 
which some passa g es have been quoted earlier . It is said in the course of the 
concludin g verse , viz "the Gods observed the vow of that from which the 
sun rises and in which it sets" ( Br. 1. v. 23 ). that "the sun indeed rises from 
Prdna and also sets in it" (ibid. ), where unity is revealed by makin g the 
conclusion with Prdna itself.38 This is also confirmed by the text, "Therefore 
a man should observe only a single vow-do the functions of Prdna and 
Apdtta (expiration and inspiration)" (ibid), inasmuch as the conclusion is 
made here with the single vow of Prana. Similarly in the Chandogya 
Upanisad, the place of merger is taught to be but one by saying, "The single 
deity Prajapati (Brahma) who is the protector of the universe, swallowed the 
four great ones (Fire, Sun, Water, and Moon on the divine plane and speech, 
eye, ear, and mind on the corporeal plane)" (Ch. IV. iii. 6); but this text does 
not say that the place of merger for the one group of four is one, while that 
for the other group is another. Hence the meditation is non-different. 














































































Vedantin : Faced with this conclusion, we say: Air and Prana are to be 
meditated on separately. 

Why? 

On account of being taught separately; for this instruction about the 
division on the divine and corporeal plane is meant for meditation; and this 
will be meaningless if the meditations are not to be undertaken separately. 

Opponent : It was pointed out that the meditations should be identical 
owing to the essential non-difference of the entities. 

Veddntin : That is no defect , since even thou g h there is no such difference 
in essence , still there can be difference in instruction based on differences of 
modes ; and hence there can be a difference in meditation accordin g to that 
instruction. Even thou g h the su gg estion in the above concludin g verse ma y 
be reasonably interpreted as showin g the essential unity of Prdna and Va vu. 
still this can have no power to rule out their distinction as two separate 
obj ects of meditation , as has been shown earlier.39 Their difference as 
objects of meditation cannot be nullified also because Prana and Vdyu are 
treated as an illustration and the thing illustrated in, "As is the vital force 
(Prdna) in the body among these organs, so is Vdyu (Air) among these gods" 
(Br. I. v. 22). Hereby is explained the argument about the teachin g of the 
vow.40 The "only" used in "onl y a sin g le vow" tBr. I. v. 23 ) is meant for 
resortin g to the vow of Praha to the exclusion of the vows of the or g ans of 
s peech etc. , for speech etc, are spoken of as baffled in their vows in the text . 
"Death captured them in the form of fati g ue" ( Br. I. v. 21 ); but that is not 
meant for excludin g the vow of Air , since startin g with the text . "Now a 
consideration of the vow" (Br. 1. v. 21 ). it has been ascertained that Pr&na 
and Air both remain equally unbaied in their vows. A g ain , havin g said , "a 
man should observe only a sin g le vow" tBr. I. v. 23 ). it is stated a g ain . 
"throu g h it he attains identity with this deit y, or lives in the same world with 
him" (ibid. ), where the result is shown to be the attainment of ( the deit y) Air . 
thereb y provin g that the vow of Air has not been ruled out. The word "deit y" 
in the above quotation must mean Air , since the result sou g ht here is the 
attainment of identity with the unlimited one . 41 and since it has been used so 
in an earlier text . "Air is the deity that never sets" tBr. I. V. 22 ) . Similarly the 






















































































Chando g ya UpaniSad mentions them separately in . "These two that are such 
are the two places of mer g er-Air amon g the deities , and Prdna amon g the 
org ans" (Ch. IV. iii. 4 ). and the conclusion also is made separately in . "These 
then that are five in one g roup and five in another make up ten , and that is 
Krta"42 tCh. IV. iii. 8). 

Hence the approach (in meditation) must be separate, as in the case of the 
offerings. Thus it is that in connection with the sacrifice called Tripurocla.ini 
(having the offering of three puro4idfas or cakes), as prescribed in the 
passage, "puro4M. as on eleven potsherds are to be offered to king Indra, so 
also it is to be offered to Indra, the super-lord of the organs, and to Indra, 
soverei g n in heaven" ( Tai. S. II. iii. 6 ). there occurs this sentence . "The y 
shall take up the oblations makin g these available for all deities , so that the 
utterin g of the word va . cat may be unfailin g in its result". From this sentence 
and from the fact that the deity Indra is the same , the o p ponent ( of 
Mimamsa ) would conclude that the offerin g s are to be made 
simultaneousl v. 48 whereupon Jaimini concludes that (thou g h Indra is one ). 
the attributes of kin g shi p. ( su per-lordshi p, soverei gnty"), etc, bein g different . 
the vai vd and anuvakva mantras havin g been en j oined to be reversed . 44 and 
the deities being separate as they are separately enumerated, the offerings 
also must be separate. 

Similarly here also, although in reality Prana and Vayu are the same, still 
owing to a difference in the aspects to be meditated on, the meditations also 
differ. And thus it is said in the Devatd-Kdnda of the Purva-Mimamsa, "The 
gods are certainly different, since they are cognized differently". But it is to 
be noted that in the Purva-Mimamsa, the difference among sacrifices is also 
admitted even in accordance with the difference of things and deities; but 
that kind of difference of meditations does not exist here, since from the 
introduction and the end of the instructions on the divine and corporeal 
planes etc. it is obvious that the selfsame meditation is enjoined. And yet 
even though the meditations be the same, the meditator's function differs 
(with regard to them) in accordance with the difference in the divine and 
corporeal contexts, just as it is the case with regard to the Agnihotra sacrifice 
which differs as an act in accordance with the difference of morning and 



























































evening. With this idea in mind it has been said, "As in the case of the 
offerings (in the Purocia§a sacrifice)". 


Topic 29: FIRES IN AGNI-RAHASYA NOT PARTS OF SACRIFICE 



(Fires in the Agni-rahasya are not parts of any rite), f*" on account of 
abundance of indicatory marks k for uq that (mark)}zt: is more powerful 
(than a context), that atfq also (was said by Jaimini). 

44. The fires (of the mind, speech, etc. of Agni-rahasya) do not form parts 
of any rite, on account of the abundance of indicatory marks; for these marks 
are stronger than the context. That also was said by Jaimini. 

Doubt : In the A g ni-rahasya ( esoteric 1 teachin g about the fires ), occurrin g 
in the brahmana of the Va j asanevins . which starts with . "All this was neither 
existent nor non-existent before creation . " it is stated with re g ard to the 
mind . "That mind saw itself as thirtv-six thousand : it saw the adorable fires 
as belon ging to itself , lig hted up bv the mind , and conceived of as identified 
with the mental modes" etc. Similarly such notional fires are read of 
se parately as . "li g hted up b v ( the or g an of speech ), lig hted up b v ( the or gan 
of smell ), lig hted up bv the e ve, lig hted up bv ear , lig hted up bv the hands , 
lig hted up b v t the or g an of ) touch".46 With regard to these the doubt arises 
whether these fires, lighted up by the mind etc., are to be used in connection 
with rites and they form parts of them, or they are independent, existing only 
for meditation. 

Vedantin : Now when from the context it might appear that the fires are to 
be used in rites, the aphorist asserts their independence by saying, "on 
account of the abundance of indicatory marks" etc. For in this Brdhmana are 
to be met with an abundance of indicatory marks su p portin g the view that 
these are meant merely for meditation , as for instance . "That bein g so . 





















































whatever the bein g s think of throu g h their minds , b y all that are li g hted u p 
these very fires" , and "Whether a man of such knowled g e is awake or aslee p. 
all bein g s li g ht up these fires for him for ever".46 Of course, these indicatory 
marks are more authoritative than the context. That too has been stated in the 
Purva—Mi'marhs is "In a case where express statement, indicatory marks 
(word capacity), syntactical connection, context, order, and name" are in 
evidence in groups, those coming later in order are ruled out by the earlier, 
since the meanings imparted by the succeeding ones are checkmated by the 
earlier" (Jai. So. III. iii. 14). 

fwi TOW W\ 

std On the strength of the context (the conceptual fires are to be used as) 
q-fw,: alternatives for the earlier (actually enjoined) fire; Rlqftur they should 
constitute (i.e. form parts of) some rite BTU- like the imaginary (drinking). 

45. On the strength of the context, the conceptual fires are to be used 
alternatively for the actual fire enjoined earlier. They constitute some rite 
like the imaginary drinking (of Soma juice). 

Opponent : It is not proper to say that these fires are independent and not 
parts of any rite. Since these fires are read of in the context of the (actual) 
earlier fire associated with rites, this instruction must be about a particular 
alternative form of that very fire; but it is not an independent instruction. 

Objection : Is not an indicatory sign more authoritative than a context? 

Op ponent : That is true : but even an indicatory mark of this kind is not 
more authoritative than the context ; for it is noticed to be meant for some 
other purpose , it bein g meant for the g lorification of the conceptual fires.47 
Although anything which is indicatory of something else can logically be 
interpreted as presenting some subsidiary matter, when that something else is 
not in evidence, yet it cannot rule out a context. Hence though these fires are 
got through superimposition, yet by force of the context they will subserve 

























some rite. This is like imaginary acts. As on the tenth day (actually the 
eleventh day), called the avivakya (speechless, mantra-less) day of the 
sacrifice which is known as Dasa-rdtra, the sea, imagined to be the Soma 
juice, is taken up in the earth, imagined to be a vessel, for offering to the 
deity Prajapati. In connection with that, the taking up of the Sonia vessel, the 
placing of the vessel on its proper place, the offering of the Soma as libation, 
the taking up of the remainder after the offering, invitation by the priests to 
one another to partake of the Soma, and the drinking of the Soma by them, 
that are mentioned in the Vedas, are all but mental acts. But though that 
imagination of Soma be mental, it becomes a part of the rite, since it occurs 
in the context of the rite. So also must be this imagination of fire in the 
present context. 



46. And (this conclusion is supported) by the fact of extended application. 

And the extended application of the attributes of the actual fire to these 
mental ones, strengthens the case for their use in rites (the extension being 
made owing to the similarity with the accessories of the rites), as shown in, 
"The adorable fires are thirty-six thousand, and each one of them is as great 
as the (sacrificial) fire mentioned earlier". For extension of application is 
based on similarity; and from this it follows that since this text extends the 
application of the fire lighted up on the brick altar to these mental fires, it 
thereby indicates that these latter subserve some rite. 




q Rather (they constitute) fkW r a meditation only fifz-IRj for so it is 
determined. 


47. The fires rather constitute only a meditation, for so it is determined (in 
the Vedas). 

VedJntin : The word "rather" sets aside the opposite point of view. These 
fires, lighted up by the mind etc., ought to constitute a meditation only, and 
be independent of rites; they are not accessories of any rite. That is how it 
has been ascertained in: "All these fires, as such, are lighted up by 
meditation alone" and "For a man of knowledge these fires become surely 
lighted up by meditation". 



48. And owing to the indicatory mark met with. 

There is also an indicatory mark to show that these are independent of 
rites. This was shown earlier under the aphorism, "On account of an 
abundance of indicatory marks" (III. iii. 44). 



Opponent : Even an indicatory mark cannot be authoritative about 
anything when that other thing (other than action i.e. meditation) itself is not 
in evidence. Hence the indicatory mark has to be rejected; and it should be 
concluded on the strength of the context that the fires are accessories of a 
rite. 

Veddntin : Hence the aphorist replies: 


n m: I IV^I I 

' fd—mac Owing to the greater authoritativeness of express statement etc. 
q also, there is no setting aside. 

49. Moreover, the view (that the fires constitute a meditation) cannot be 
set aside owing to the greater authority of express statement etc. 

It is not proper to ascertain on the strength of the context that they form 
parts of some rite and thus to set aside their independence of rites, since 
express statement etc. (indicatory mark, syntactical connection) are more 
authoritative than context; for the conclusion arrived at under the aphorism 
about express statement, indicatory mark, etc., has been that express 
statement, indicatory mark, and syntactical connection are more authoritative 
than context (Jai. Su. III. iii. 14). And these are found here to lead to the 
view about the independence (of the fires). 

How? 

As for express statement, it is, "All these fires, as such, are lighted up by 
meditation alone". Similarly the indicatory mark occurs in, "and whether a 
man of knowledge is awake or asleep, all beings light up those fires for 
ever". Similarly there is syntactical connection in, "By meditation alone are 
these fires lighted up for a man of knowledge". The express statement 




"lighted up by meditation alone" made with a restrictive particle (evaalone) 
will become nullified if these are admitted to be connected with rites. 

Opponent : This restriction should be interpreted to mean that no external 
accessory is to be used (in lighting the fires). 

Vedantin : The answer is in the negative. If that were the implication, then 
that would have been served by simply saying, "lighted up by meditation", 
which would amount to declaring that these fires in essence constitute a 
meditation which is free from external things, so that this restriction (by 
"alone") would be uncalled for, since by nature they would he free from 
external accessories. And yet even though these fires are independent of 
external accessories, there may arise the possibility of their becoming used 
in rites like the mental drinking of Soma. Thus the restriction becomes 
purposeful by serving to rule that possibility out. Similarly the continuity of 
the act noticed in the text, "whether the man of knowledge is awake or 
asleep, all beings light up these fires for him for ever", can be possible only 
if these are independent of rites. Just as in connection with the Agnihotra 
sacrifice performed with the organ of speech and the vital force, through an 
act of mental superimposition, it is first said, "Then he offers the vital force 
to the organ of speech, then he offers the organ of speech to the vital force" 
(Kau. II. 5), and then it is said, "He offers these two unending immortal 
oblations for ever in wakefulness and sleep" (ibid.), similar is the case here. 
But if the fires formed parts of rites, they would not have been thought of as 
being used continuously, since their application in rites would have lasted 
only for a short time. And it cannot he reasonably held that this is a mere 
eulogy. For a simple declaration (without clear injunction) of anything can 
properly be accepted as a eulogy only where one comes across distinct 
indicative marks etc. pointing out an (independent) injunction. But since no 
other clear injunction is discernible here, the application of these meditations 
has to he inferred from the mere declaration itself. And that can be inferred 
only in conformity with the declaration; therefore, by noticing the 
continuous application of the fires, they have to be inferred to be continuous. 
From this it follows that in keeping with this situation, these fires stand 
proved as independent of rites. Hereby is explained the tent, "That being so, 
whatever the beings think of through their minds, by all that are lighted up 



these very fires," etc. So also the syntactical connection contained in, "for a 
man of knowledge", which speaks of the connection of these fires with a 
distinct person only, militates against any connection with a sacrifice. Hence 
the view about independence is more weighty. 

ai3"-3TTfq: Owing to being linked up (with the mind) and such other 
reasons, (the mental fires are independent) even as other meditations have 
their separateness. And l'B: it is seen (that sacrifices are treated as separate); 
q that 3q was stated (by Jaimini). 

50. On account of being linked up with the mind and such other reasons, 
the mental fires are independent even as other meditations are. And it is seen 
that the sacrifices are treated as independent (irrespective of their context), as 
was pointed out by Jaimini. 

The context has to be waived and the independence of the fires, lighted up 
by the mind etc., have to be understood for this further reason that all the 
subsidiary acts presupposed in a rite are linked up here with the modes of the 
mind etc. in the text, "They (the fires) are established merely mentally, built 
up mentally only; mentally only is the Soma vessel taken up; the Udgata 
sings the Sama (song) mentally, the Hod recites the hymns mentally. And 
whatever else has to be done in this sacrifice, that is either indirectly or 
directly conducive to the fulfilment of the sacrifice, all that is but mental, all 
that is to be done mentally (by the man of knowledge) in connection with 
those fires consisting of thoughts and lighted up by the mind". This linking 
up with the mind leads to the conclusion that it is all a case of meditation 
through superimposition. And it cannot be proper that anyone should hanker 
to get the (material) accessories of a sacrifice with the help of imaginary 
superimposition when these materials themselves are physically present. It 
should not be misconceived here that just like the meditation on the Udgitha 
(Ch. I. i. 1), the mental fires are connected with the accessories of a sacrifice, 
and so they should form parts of a sacrifice; for the Vedic texts are 



dissimilar. The text here does not say that a certain accessory of a rite is to 
be taken up and the notion of such and such a thing should be superimposed 
on it; but it merely selects the thirty-six thousand different mental moods and 
imagines them to be fires, vessels, etc., just as it is done in the case of a man 
thought of as a sacrifice (Ch. Ill. xvi.). As for this number, it is to be 
understood that the number as found in the case of the days in the whole 
span of a man's life is superimposed on the mental moods. Thus the fires 
lighted up by the mind etc. are independent of rites owing to their being 
linked up with the mind. 

The portion "and such other reasons" (in the aphorism), is to be 
understood to include "extended application" etc. as far as passible. For 
instance, -the text, "each one of them is as great as the former (fire used in an 
actual sacrifice)", extends the greatness of the fire in an ordinary sacrifice to 
each one of the fires in the meditation, thereby showing a disregard for rites. 
It cannot be argued that the latter (mental fires) can be accepted as 
substitutes for the former (actual fires) on the mere ground of their having 
some connection with rites, for the latter (conceptual fires) cannot be helpful 
to a rite in the very same way as the former (actual) fire is by holding the 
offering, and so on. As for the assertion that the argument about extension of 
application confirms the opponent's view as well, inasmuch as an application 
of the method of extension is possible where there is a similarity, that 
(argument) is refuted by pointing out that in our view also there is the 
similarity of both being fires, for even the imaginary fires are fires. The other 
reasons like "express statement" have already been advanced. 

Thus owin g to such reasons as bein g linked up with the mind , the fires 
lig hted up by the mind etc, are independent of rites even as other meditations 
are independent. As other meditations , for instance , the "meditation of 
Saniil va" , which bein g linked up with their respective related ob j ects , are 
certainly different from rites and are also separate from other meditations . 
similar is the case here. Moreover , it is seen that the rite called Avei . read of 
in the context of the Ra i asuva sacrifice , has more excellence fe.g . wider use ! 
than the context warrants , since it is linked up with the three castes , whereas 
the Ra i asuva sacrifice has to be performed by the kin g s alone. This has been 
stated in the Purva-Mimarimsa in the aphorism . "If it be ar g ued that the 











































Avevi sacrifice forms a part of the Ra i asuva sacrifice , then we say that it is 
not so . since the Avesti is associated with the three castes"48 (XI. iv. 7). 


if f| tstowfa: until 

Not aft even grqTon the ground of similarity (the mental fires become 
pans of rites) Uq s : for it is noticed (that they are useful to a man) zroM as it 
is in the case of death; ft for ff -3 i F!el: the (heavenly) world does not 
become (fire, because of similarity). 

51. Not even on the ground of similarity can the mental fires become 
subservient to rites, since they are noticed to serve human needs, just as it is 
in the case of death; for the world does not become fire just because of a 
similarity. 

It was stated ( b v the o p ponent ) that like the ima g inary Soma j uice etc, the 
mental tires are but substitutes Jbr the lire used in the actual sacrifice (III, iii. 

45) . That is bein g refuted. Not even from the similarity with the ima g inar y 
Soma etc, are the fires , lig hted up bv the mind etc. , to he considered parts of 
a rite , since from the reasons like "express statement" , adduced earlier , the y 
are seen to serve merely human purposes ( he. of the aspirant ) ,4° Not that 
something cannot he similar to something else in some respect; but its 
individual distinction is not obliterated thereby, as in the case of death. Thus 
in the texts "This very Being indeed, that is in the solar orb, is Death" (Sa. B. 
X. v. 2.3), and "Fire is Death" (Br. III. ii. 10), the word Death is used equally 
for fire and the Being in the sun; yet they do not become absolutely the 
same. Again, just as in the text, "0 Gautama, the other world is surely a fire, 
and of this the sun is the fuel" (Ch. V. iv. 1), the world does not become a fire 
just because of the analogy of fuel etc., so also is the case here. 

<frr *r aiftaf iiirii 







































q—ur According to the subsequent (brdhmana text) a also (is known that) 
ar, the scripture has aifi; r:~ that injunction in view; q but app-,%r: the 
connection (with the actual fire) jqfm7 is on account of the abundance (of 
the attributes of the latter that are imagined). 

52. From the subsequent brdhmana text also it is known that the scripture 
has that (prescription of a meditation) in view, but the connection with fire 
occurs because of the abundance of the attributes of fire that have to be 
imagined here. 

Even later on, in the immediately subsequent brdhmana text starting with, 
"This world is surely the sacrificial fire that is lighted up", it is gathered that 
"the scripture has that injunction in view", that the purpose of the text is 
merely to enjoin a meditation, and not imparting any injunction about any 
purely subsidiary part of a ritual. Even there occurs the verse, "They ascend 
there through meditation where all desires get vanquished. People 
proceeding by the Southern Path do not reach there, nor even the ignorant 
people engaged in austerities" (Sa. B.), in which this very fact is shown by 
condemning mere rites and praising meditation. Similarly also even in the 
earlier brahsnana text starting with, "this (solar) orb that scatters heat" (Sa. 
B. H. v. 2.23), the predominance of meditation is noticeable and not that of 
rites, since the conclusion is made with the words, "He who has Death as his 
Self, becomes immortal", which state the result of meditation. (In common 
with them) this must be the case here as well (in the middle portion) because 
of similarity with them. On account of the further reason, however, that quite 
a number of attributes of the sacrificial fire are to be imagined in this 
meditation, the meditation is linked up with that fire; but this is not done so 
owing to its being a part of any rite. Hence it is established that the fires 
lighted up by the mind etc. constitute nothing but a meditation. 

Tonic 30: THE SELF DISTINCT FROM BODY 

w wr rtt i«ii 



t Some (deny) ariis the soul's (existence) -4Tmcq owing to its existence 
qTtR when the body is. 

53. Some deny the existence of the soul, its existence being dependent on 
the existence of the body. 

The existence of the soul, as distinct from the body, is being confirmed 
here in order to establish its aptitude for bondage and liberation. For if there 
be no soul, distinct from the body, there can be no logicality for imparting 
instruction about results to be attained in the other world; and in that case, 
for whom can it be taught that his soul is identical with Brahman? 

Opponent: In the very beginning of the scripture (of PurvaMlmamsa), in 
the first chapter, the existence of the soul, competent to enjoy the fruits 
mentioned in the scriptures and distinct from the body, was spoken of. 

Veddntin : True it has been said so by the commentator : but no aphorism 
occurs there about the existence of the soul , whereas here the existence of 
that soul is established by the aphorist himself after raisin g a doubt about its 
existence. When the teacher Sabarasvaml discussed the existence of the soul 

in connection with the characteristics of valid means of proof in the Purva- 
Mimamsa . he drew upon this aphorism itself. And it is for this reason that 
the g reat Upavar~a cited this one by sa ving. "We shall discuss this in the 
Vedanta-Sutra" . when the occasion arose in the Purva-Mlmathsa to speak of 
the existence of the Self .5° 


Now, here, in the course of discussion of the meditations got from 
injunctions, this existence of the soul is being considered in order to show 
that this question underlies all the scriptures. Moreover, under the previous 
topic it was taken for granted that something could be taken apart from its 
context, and thereby it was shown that the fires lighted by the mind etc. are 
conducive to human good (by forming parts of meditation). It having 
become necessary now to explain who that aspirant is and for whose sake 
these fires lighted by the mind etc. exist, it is being stated here that the soul 
has its existence apart from the body. This first aphorism is presented by way 
of doubting that existence, the idea being that when the statement of refuta 



























lion comes after raisin g the doubt , it produces a firm conviction about the 
sub j ect-matter presented , on the analo g y of drivin g in a peg." 1 

(Opponent:) With regard to this, there are some materialists who identify 
the soul with the body itself, and think that there is no soul distinct from the 
body. Under this belief they consider it possible that although sentience is 
not seen to belong to the external things like earth etc. taken either 
individually or collectively, yet it may belong to the elements transformed 
into bodies, and they say that sentience is but consciousness arising from 
them like the power of intoxication (existing imperceptibly in betels etc.), 
and that a man is nothing but the body dowered with sentience. They also 
assert that apart from the body, there is no soul able to attain either heaven or 
liberation, and that the body itself is both sentience and soul. They adduce 
this reason: "its existence being dependent on the existence of the body". 
Anything whose existence depends on the existence of another, and which 
ceases to be when that other thing is not there, is ascertained to be an 
attribute of the latter, as for instance, heat and light are attributes of fire. As 
regards such attributes as the activities of the vital force, sentience, memory, 
etc., which are held to belong to the soul according to the believers in the 
soul, they too are perceived within the body and not outside; and hence so 
long as any substance other than the body cannot be proved, they must be 
the attributes of the body itself. Hence the soul is not distinct from the body. 

Veddntin : Under such a predicament we say: 



q But not so; (there is) at<fi: distinction - - am7facirq because of non¬ 
existence (of consciousness) even when that (body) exists, zqfff,-qqq as in 
perception. 


54. But this i3 not so; there is-a distinction (between the soul and the 
body) because consciousness may not exist even when the body exists, as it 












is in the case of perception. 

But the fact is not as it is stated, viz that the soul is not distinct from the 
body. For it must be distinct from the body, "since consciousness does not 
exist even when the body is there". If from the fact that the attributes of the 
soul exist when the body exists, you infer that those attributes belong to the 
body, then why should it not also be inferred that they are not the attributes 
of the body owing to their non-existence even when the body is present, they 
being different from the characteristics of the body? For attributes like form 
(or colour) etc., which belong to the body, may very well last as long as the 
body persists; but such characteristics as the activities of the vital force do 
not occur after death even though the body exists. And such attributes of the 
body as form (or colour) etc. are perceived by others (outside the body), but 
not so are such characteristics of the soul as consciousness, memory, etc. 
Moreover, the existence of these attributes can be conclusively determined 
when the body continues during a man's life, but their non-existence cannot 
be so determined from the nonexistence of the body. For even when this 
body has fallen, perchance these attributes of the soul may well persist by 
transferring themselves to some other body. Even (if this be a doubtful 
theory), that doubt can well demolish the opposite point of view. And the 
opponent has to be asked as to what he thinks the nature of this 
consciousness to be that he would fain derive it from the elements. For the 
materialists do not accept any principle over and above the four elements 
(earth, water, fire, and air). 

Opponent : Consciousness is nothing but the perception of the elements 
and the derivatives of elements. 

Veddntin : In that case these elements etc. are objects of perception, and 
hence sentience cannot be an attribute of these elements etc., since a thing 
cannot act on itself. For fire, though possessing heat, does not bum itself, nor 
does an actor (or acrobat), trained though he be, ride on his own shoulder. 
And it cannot be that consciousness which is an attribute of the elements and 
their derivatives, (and is hence one with them), will perceive those elements 
etc. For neither one's own form nor of anybody else is perceived by forms 
etc., whereas external elements and their derivatives are perceived b y 




consciousness. Hence j ust as the existence of this perception of the elements 
and their derivatives is admitted , so also must its separateness from them be 
admitted. Accordin g to us . the soul is bv nature the very essence of 
perception itself : and hence the soul is distinct from the bod y: and , it is 
eternal , because consciousness is uniform bv nature. For , althou g h the soul 
comes to be associated with other states ( i.e. limitin g ad j uncts ), still in such 
ex periences as , "It is I that saw this" , its identity as the perceiver is 
reco g nized ; and this identity has to be admitted so that memory etc, may be 
reasonabl y u pheld.52 As for the argument that since consciousness occurs in 
the body, it must be an attribute of the b9dy, that is refuted in the way we 
have already shown. Moreover, though perception takes place when light 
and other, accessories are present, but not when they are absent, it does not 
follow from this that perception is an attribute of the light etc. That being the 
case, it does not follow that consciousness should be an attribute of the body 
just because it occurs where the body is present and does not occur where 
the body is absent; for the usefulness of the body can be explained away as 
serving merely the purposes of an auxiliary like light etc. Furthermore, the - 
body is not seen to be an absolutely contributory factor in, perception, since 
even when this body lies inactive in dream, many kinds of perception are 
seen to take place. Hence the existence of the soul distinct from the body is 
beyond criticism. 

Topic 31: MEDITATIONS CONNECTED WITH ACCESSORIES OF 

RITES 


* png | sjfafoj m\ 

3T-W4qW: The (meditations) connected with the accessories (of rites), q 
however, q (are) not (to be confined) rjq to the branches (of the Vedas where 
they occur); k because (they are to be adopted) in all the (branches of the) 
Vedas. 


55. But the meditations connected with the accessories of rites are not to 
be confined to the branches of the Vedas in which they obtain, for they are to 








































be adopted in all the (branches of the) Vedas. 

The topic of the soul that cropped up incidentally is finished. Now we 
follow the subject under discussion. 

Doubt : Some meditations that are connected with the accessories of rites 
like Udgitha etc. and are enjoined in all the Vedas in their different branches, 
as for instance, "One shall meditate on the letter Om as Udgitha" (Ch. I. i. 1), 
"One shall meditate on the fivefold Sama by superimposing on it the idea of 
the worlds" (Ch. II. ii. 1), "That which people mention as 'Uktha', ('Uktha', a 
hymn used as a part of a rite) is but this that is the earth" (Ai. A. II. i. 2), 
"This fire that is lighted (in the sacrifice) is but this world" (Sa. B. X. v. 4.1), 
and so on; are these to remain confined to the Udgitha etc. just as they obtain 
in the respective branches, or are they to be extended to all the branches? 
This is the doubt, and it arises from the fact that the Udgitha etc. differ from 
one branch to another owing to a difference in their intonation etc. So what 
should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : They are enjoined in connection with the Udgitha etc. as 
presented in their own respective branches. 

Why? 

Because of proximity. For the curiosity to know the particular (Udgitha) 
after hearing the text, "One shall meditate on Om as the Udgitha" (Ch. I. i. 
1), stated in a general way, is removed by the (proximately) particularized 
(Udgitha) contained in that very branch itself, so that there is no justification 
for skipping over this and borrowing any particular one from another branch. 
Hence the meditations remain confined to the branches where they obtain. 

Veddntin : This being the position, the aphorist says, "But the meditations, 
connected with the accessories" etc. The word "but" rules out the opponent's 
view. These will not remain confined each to the branch of its own Veda, but 
will extend to all the branches. 


Why? 



Because the Vedic text about Udg-itha etc. are stated in a general way. If it 
be confined to its own branch, then the text "One shall meditate on the 
Udgitha", which is stated in a general way and is not meant for any restricted 
application, will remain confined to a particular context on the strength of 
proximity, and thus the general (express) statement will be adversely 
affected. But this is not proper. For an express statement is more 
authoritative than proximity. It cannot also be argued that no concept (and 
hence meditation) is possible with regard to a general factor. Hence though 
there is a difference in intonation etc. (in the different branches), still on 
account of the fact that the Udgitha is one and the same, this kind of 
meditation should be undertaken with regard to the Udgitha etc. in all the 
branches. 



arT Or rather ;lw-ate- as in the case of mantras etc. azJ%r: there is no 
contradiction. 


56. Or rather (they are to be adopted in other branches) like the mantras; 
(and thus) there is no contradiction. 

Or there is no scope for any doubt as to how the conceptions about 
Udgitha etc. occurring in one branch can apply to those in other branches; 
because it can be shown that there is no contradiction in this even as there is 
none in the case of mantras etc. For it is seen that mantras, rites, and 
subsidiaries occurring in one branch are taken over to some other branch. 
Thus even for those (belonging to the Yajur-Veda) who do not have the 
mantra, "Kutarurasi (thou art the kutaru) ", meant for use when taking up a 
stone pestle (for grinding rice), the injunction for its application is seen to be 
stated thus: "He shall take up the stone with the mantra, 'Thou art kutaru' or 
'thou art kukkuta' (i.e. cock)." Similarly even for those (of the MaitrayaUa 
branch) who do not have the scriptural mention (in their own branch) of the 



subsidiary sacrifices, viz Samidh, (Tanunapata, Ida, Barhih, Svahakara), still 
an injunction about the subsidiaries (i.e. about their number) is found there 
in the text, "The five Prayajas (counting from Samidh) are (equal in number 
to) the five seasons (autumn and winter being counted as one), and they are 
to be performed in one and the same place". So also for those (of the Yajur- 
Veda) who have no such mantra as, "The goat is meant to be sacrificed to 
Agni-Soma," stating the class of the animal to be sacrificed, (but simply 
have the mantra, "He shall sacrifice the animal to Agni-Soma"), for them 
also a mantra text suggestive of that particular animal is found in the mantra 
(recited by the Adhvaryu), "0(priest Hotr), chant the hymn for the offering 
of the fat and marrow of the goat". Thus also the mantras, "Agnerverhotram 
veradhvaram-0 Fire, promote the Hod and the sacrifice", originally 
occurring in the Solna-Veda, is seen to be applied to the Yajur-Veda. So 
again the mantra, "He, 0 people, is Indra who from his birth was the greatest 
in virtues and possessed of discrimination", originally found in the Rg-Veda, 
is seen to be adopted in the Yajur-Veda as noted in the text, "The mantra 
starting with, 'He, 0 people', is to be used for application by the priest 
Adhvaryu". Thus as the accessories of rites on which meditations are based 
are seen to be adopted in all the branches, so also should be the meditations 
based on them. And hence there is no contradiction. 

Tonic 32: MEDITATION ON VAISVANARA AS A WHOLE 

TJR: m Ml 

(Meditation) :on the whole has greater importance -*q" as in the case of 
sacrifices, k for car so aimfa (the Upani$ad) shows. 

57. The meditation on the whole is of greater importance just as in the 
case of sacrifices. For so the Upanifad shows. 

Doubt: The meditation on Vai§vanara in parts, as also as a whole, is heard 
of in the anecdote starting with, "PracinaS la, son of Upamanyu" (Ch. V. xi. 
1). As for the meditation on partial aspects, it occurs in such texts as, " 



(Agvapati Kekaya asked), 'O son of Upamanyu, on what do you meditate as 
the Self?' He said, O venerable king, I meditate on heaven itself (as 
Vai§vanara).' 'This Self that you meditate on is (that aspect of) the 
Vaisvanara Self called the effulgent one'" (Ch. V. xii. 1), and so on. Similarly 
also the meditation as a whole occurs in, "Of this Vaikvanara Self, the head 
is the effulgent heaven, the eye is the sun, the vital force is air, the trunk of 
the body is space, the bladder is water, and the feet are the earth itself" (Ch. 
V. xviii. 2). With regard to that the doubt arises, should there be a double 
meditation here, both in parts and as a whole, or should it be only of the 
whole? What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : Owing to the use of the predicate "(you) meditate" in 
connection with every limb counting from heaven, and owing to the mention 
of separate results as in, "In your line would be extracted the Soma juice 
(that is to say, the Soma sacrifice will be performed) well and plentifully" 
(Ch. V. xii. 1), the conclusion to be drawn is that the meditations are to 
proceed in parts. 

Veddntin : Hence it is said: The idea intended to be imparted in this text 
ought to be, "a greater importance", because of the pre-eminence of the 
entire thing, viz of the meditation on Vaisvanara as a whole, comprising all 
His parts; but the idea is not of the meditation on the limbs separately. This 
is "as it is in the case of sacrifices "-this is just as it is in such sacrifices as the 
Dacha-Pumamasa etc. where an integral act, comprising the principal 
sacrifice and its limbs as a whole is intended, but not so the separate 
performance of Prayaja etc., nor even the performance of the principal 
sacrifice along with a particular part alone. 

Why so? 

"Because of the greater importance of the whole. Thus it is that the text 
shows the pre-eminence of the whole inasmuch as the whole text is seen to 
imply a single idea; for from a consideration of the sequence of the narration 
it becomes clear that it imparts a single idea about the meditation on 
Vaihvanara. Thus it is seen that the narration begins with the statement that 
six seers counting from Pricinagala to Uddalaka, who were not able to arrive 
at any complete knowledge about the meditation on Vai§vanara approached 



AMvapati, king of the Kekayas. Then we are told one by one of heaven etc. 
meditated on by these sages separately. Later on the text teaches that these 
are but head etc. of Vaisvanara in such sentences as, "'But this is only the 
head of that Self said he" (Ch. V. xii. 2), and it condemns the separate 
meditations in such sentences as, "Had you not come to me, your head 
would have dropped off" (ibid.). Again, turning back from the separate 
meditations and following the meditation on the total aspect, the text shows 
the result pertaining to the whole in the sentence, "He eats food in all the 
worlds through all beings and through all the souls" (Ch. V. xviii. 1). As for 
the mention of results individually in respect of meditations on heaven etc., 
these are to be considered from this point of view as pertaining to the parts 
of a whole, but getting united in that whole which is the principal factor. 
Similarly the use of the predicate, "(you) meditate" (by Asvapati) in relation 
to each "limb" (of Vaisvanara) is meant simply as a reiteration of the other's 
idea (i.e. of the sage he is speaking to), but it is not meant for prescribing a 
partial meditation. Hence the view advocating the meditation as a whole is 
more weighty. 

Some, however, while establishing here the view that the meditation on 
the whole is more weighty, argue on the very basis of the term "greater 
importance" that the meditation on the limbs is also approved by the 
aphorist. But that is improper. For when a unity of idea is palpable, it is 
improper to resort to a splitting of that unity (by assuming two meanings for 
the same passage). Moreover, that would run counter to such deprecating 
sentences as, "your head would have dropped off" (Ch. V. xii. 2) etc. 
Furthermore, when the meditation as a whole becomes clear from the 
conclusion, it is not possible to deny it from the point of view of the 
opponent. Besides, the statement about "greater importance" in the aphorism 
may well be justified as meant for showing the greater validity of the entire 
meditation as compared with the partial meditation. 


Tonic 33: WHEN MEDITATIONS DIFFER 



M m 

(The meditations are) qT differentf-uqR in accordance as terminology etc. 
differ. 

58. The meditations are different when there is a difference in terminology 
etc. 

Opponent : Under the earlier topic it was stated that the meditation on the 
whole is better in spite of the mention of separate results for meditations on 
heaven etc. From this the idea crops up that other meditations also, even 
though occurring in different Upani$adic texts, have to be undertaken in a 
combined form. Moreover, when the entity meditated on is the same, the 
meditations cannot be cognized as different. Even as the articles and gods 
(associated with a sacrifice) determine the nature of a sacrifice, so also the 
entity meditated on determines the nature of the meditation. And although 
the Upanipdic texts differ, the object of meditation is known in the following 
texts to be the same God alone: "Identified with the mind and having Prim as 
the body" (Ch. III. xiv. 2), "Ka (Bliss) is Brahman, Kha (Space) is Brahman" 
(Ch. IV. x. 5), "Having inevitable desire and irresistible will" (Ch. VIII. i. 5), 
and so on; similarly also in, "Prima is but one", "Prdna is the place of 
merger" (Ch. IV. iii. 3), "Praha is indeed the first-horn and the foremost" 
(Ch. V. i. 1), "Prd?za is the father, and Pavia the mother" (Ch. VII. xv. 1), 
and so on, where we gather from the Upani$ad the oneness of the meditation 
owing to the oneness of the object of meditation. From this point of view the 
diversity of the Upani$adic texts is not useless, since these texts are 
concerned with stating the different characteristics (of the salve entity 
involved in a meditation). Hence for the completion of a meditation, all the 
characteristics prescribed in either one's own branch or other branches with 
regard to the same object of meditation have to be combined together. 



Vedzntin : This being the position, the aphorist holds: "The meditations 
are different" etc. Even though the object of medi tation be the same; still the 
meditations of this class ought to be different. 

Why? 

"Because of the difference of terminolo g y etc." , inasmuch as such 
difference of terminolo g y is met with as "veda t knows Y'. "upasita ( should 
meditate )". "sa kratum kurvita t He shall make a resolve i" t Ch. Ill, xiv. I T 
and so on. And it was ascertained earlier ( in Purva-Mimarnsa H. ii. 1 ). that a 
difference in terminolo g y causes a difference in the rites: "when there is a 

difference of words (conve ying different ideas , e. g._vai ati . dadati . 

i uhotisacrifices . g ives , pours oblation ), the rites differ , since they are 
accepted as denotin g separate actions". From the use of "etc," in the 
a phorism it follows that attributes etc, are also to be understood as makin g 

difference in rites as far as possible.53 

Op ponent: In the case of such words as "veda" . a mere difference of form 
is noticed , but there is no difference of meanin g like " vai ati (sacrifices )". 
etc. , since veda etc, im pl y the same mental mood , and since no other 
meanin g is possible .54 So how can a difference in words lead to a difference 
in meditations? 

Vedantin : That is no fault , since even thou g h there may be no difference 
as re g ards the mental mode implied , still a difference may arise from the 
thin g s they are linked up with.G6 Though God, who is to be meditated on, is 
the same, still different and exclusive attributes are taught about Him in 
different contexts. Similarly even though Prana, as an object of meditation, 
is the same in different contexts, it is to be meditated on in one context as 
possessed of some attributes, and in another context as possessed of still 
others. Thus from the fact that the inj unctions differ in accordance with the 
chain of thin g s with which an ob j ect is linked u p. the meditations also come 
to be known as separate. And it cannot be ar g ued that in such a case , one is 
the in i unction about meditation . while the others are subsidiar y in i unctions 
( about attributes ): for there is no reason determinin g such a division. A g ain . 
since the attributes are quite numerous in each context , it is not proper to call 
into service some meditation already known and add to it the different 
















































































attributes ( in the different contexts , for that .will lead to a break in the unit y 
of idea ) . And from the ( op ponent's ) point of view , there is no i ustification for 
the repeated mention of such qualities as possession of "inevitable desires" 
etc. , since they are the same. Besides , these cannot be combined under a 
sin g le idea , since in every context each separate text proceeds like this . "One 
desirous of such a result shall meditate thus" , and "one who desires such 
another result shall meditate thus" , which leave no lacunae to be tilled up b y 
borrowin g from another context. And unlike the in i unction about the 
meditation on Vaisvanara as a whole , there is no in j unction about meditation 
as a whole in the cases of "the meditation of Saridilva" and so on . on the 
stren g th of which the meditations occurrin g in the different contexts could 
have become subsidiary meditations and could have been thus combined to 
g ive rise to a composite idea. But if any such absolute assertion is made that 
in all cases of the sameness of the ob i ect of meditation , the meditation also 
must be one and the same , then one will be undertakin g the impossible task 
of combinin g all the characteristics (everywhere ) . Hence it is well said . "The 
meditations are different when there is a difference in terminolo g y". Of 
course it is to b g understood that the topic of the unity of idea in the 
U paniSads ( III, iii. 1-4 ). proceeds b y assumin g that this topic is already in 
existence .5 6 


Tonic 34: ALTERNATIVE MEDITATIONS 



(Any one meditation is) faq: an alternative (for others), arf: rd because of 
the indistinguishability (i.e. sameness) of result. 

59. Any one meditation (can be accepted as) an alternative for other 
meditations, because their result is the same. 

Doubt : It having been established that the meditations differ, now it is 
being considered whether the aspirant has the option to undertake them 








































































collectively or alternatively just as he pleases, or it is compulsory to choose 
only one of these alternatives. 

Opponent : Among these alternatives, there is no reason in evidence that 
can decide in favour of a compulsory combination, since the difference of 
meditations is an established fact. 

Objection : But such rites as Agnihotra, Dar§a-Puriiamasa, etc., are seen 
to be combined regularly, even though they are divergent. 

Opponent : That creates no difficulty, since in respect of those rites there 
is a scriptural prescription about their regular combination; but in respect of 
these meditations no such scriptural text about regular combination exists. 
Hence there can be no compulsion about combination. Nor can there be any 
compulsion about accepting only one from among them; for if a man is 
qualified for one meditation he is not debarred thereby from another. As a 
last alternative the meditations can be adopted indiscriminately.- 

Objection : Since these meditations have the same result, they should 
logically be considered alternatives to be chosen from. Thus it is noticed that 
the meditations contained in, "identified with the mind and having Praha as 
the body" (Ch. III. xiv. 2), "Bliss is Brahman, Space is Brahman" (Ch. IV. x. 
5), "having unfailing desire, and irresistible resolve" (Ch. VIII. i. 5), and 
other texts, have the same result consisting in the realization of God. 

Opponent: That creates no difficulty, since it is seen in the case of rites 
leading to heaven that though they bear similar results, yet are undertaken 
according to the option (of the aspirants). 

Vedantin : Thus the conclusion being that the meditations are to be 
undertaken indiscriminately (but not collectively or only one out of many), it 
is being said: Any one of the meditations is individually as good as the 
others; and no combination is needed. 


Why? 



Since the result is the same. For the result of these meditations consistin g 

in the direct perception of the ob j ect of meditation , is the same and when the 
perception of the ob j ect of meditation , be it God or any other entit y, occurs 
as result of a sin g le meditation , the other meditations become useless. 
Moreover , the theory of combination will lead to an impossibility of direct 
perception , since such a combination will lead to distraction of the nnnd. 
And the result , viz illumination that is achievable throu g h direct perception . 
is shown in such UpaniSadic texts as . "An aspirant who has such a vision 
( that he is Brahman ), and has no doubt , attains Brahman" (Ch. Ill, xiv. 4 ). 
"becomin g God (in this life ) he attains Godhood (even after death )" ( Br. IV. 
i. 2 ) etc, , as also bv Smrtis in such texts as . "continuously en gag ed in His 
thou g hts" ( Giti . VIII. 6 ). and so on.57 So an aspirant should choose one of 
the meditations, bearing the same result; and he should continue in it 
wholeheartedly till he attains the result through the direct perception of the 
object of meditation. 

Topic 3.5: MEDITATIONS YIELDING WORLDLY RESULTS 

WJ TOPT qi IIVII 

q But 1 iT: the meditations yielding desired (worldly) results (either) will 
be combined ;qT or not tiwat will, #-t3K since the previous reason does not 
exist. 

60. As for the meditations (based on symbols and) undertaken for 
fulfilment of worldly desires, they may be either combined or not combined 
according to one's option, since the previous reason (of sameness of result) 
does not exist. 

The present aphorism is by way of illustrating the opposite of what was 
stated under, "because their result is the same" (III. iii. 59). In meditations 
(through symbols) which are undertaken for prosperity etc., as mentioned in 
such texts as, "One who knows thus that Air is the calf of the directions, 
does not have to lament for the death of a son" (Ch. III. xv. 2), "He who 
meditates on names as Brahman, moves about freely at will in all places 


























































where names exist" (Ch. VIII. 1. 5), and so on, and which like rites yield 
their own fruits by being first converted into adrga (unseen potential result), 
there is no expectancy of direct perception. These may be combined or not 
combined at will, "since the previous reason does not exist", "since the 
previous reason", viz possession of the same result, "does not exist" here to 
determine an alternative adoption at will. 

Topic 36: MEDITATIONS BASED ON SUBSIDIARIES 

3^ wwnt: ll^ll 

ofiq In the cases of (meditations based on) the subsidiaries, xr-arp_m: 
their position is the same as of their bases. 

61. In the cases of the meditations based on the subsidiaries (of rites), 
their position is the same as of their bases. 

Opponent : The doubt arises as to whether the conceptions prescribed in 
the three Vedas in connection with Udgitha etc., which are the subsidiaries of 
rites, are to be combined or they are to be undertaken at will. The aphorist 
says that "their position is the same as those of their bases". As their bases, 
viz the hymns etc., are applied in groups, so also must be the concepts in a 
meditation, for the concepts are determined by their bases. 



r \ 



62. (The meditations are to be combined), also because they are enjoined 
(in the Vedas). 

Op ponent : Just as the bases of the meditations , viz hymns etc. , are 
enj oined in the Vedas , so also are the meditations based on them. Even from 
the point of view of instruction there is no difference between the 

accessories of rites and the conceptions based on them.58 This is the 
meaning. 



63. (The meditations are to be combined) because of the (indicatory mark 
of the) rectification (of one with the help of another). 

Opponent : The greatness of the knowledge of the sameness of Om and 
Udgitha is stated in the text, (by virtue of his meditation on the unity of the 
Om of the 1 .g-Veda with the Udg-itha of Sama-Veda) "The priest Udgata (of 
the Sama-Veda) rectifies any defect occurring in (his own) singing of the 
Udgitha by borrowing from the well-performed act of the priest Hota (of the 












Ilg-Veda)" (Ch. I. v. 5). While stating here that by virtue of the strength of 
that knowledge the Udgaha rectifies the defects in his own act by borrowing 
from the good action of the Hota, the text implies through this indicatory 
sign that the conception mentioned in one Upani$ad is to be added to the 
conceptions found in other Upani$ads on the basis of a common relationship 
with the object of meditation spoken of elsewhere. 



q And r-UMT-PO: from the Upani$adic declaration that (Om which is) an 
accessory of rites is common to all. 

64. And from the Upanisadic declaration that Om, which is an accessory 
of the Vedic rites is common to all the Vedas, (it follows that the meditations 
based on it must co-exist). 



Opponent : And although Om enters as an attribute, that is to say, though 
Om supplies a basis for the meditation on Udgitha, the Upanipd declares it to 
be common to all the Vedas in, "The rites enjoined in the three Vedas start 
with the utterance of Om. One chants hymns to gods after the utterance of 
Om; uttering Om one praises the gods; by uttering Om one sings the 
Udgitha" (Ch. I. i. 9). From noticing thus that the basis is the same, it can be 
inferred from this indicatory mark, that the meditations based on this are also 
the same. 

Or the aphorism can be explained thus: If these Udgitha and other things, 
constituting parts of rites, were not meant for use in all the rites, then the 
conceptions based on them would not also have occurred together. But as a 
matter of fact, the statements about application, which cover the accessories 
as a whole, mention that these Udgitha and other things are common to all 
the sacrificial acts. Hence from the fact that the bases are common, it follows 
that the meditations based on them are also to be used collectively. 

it it! IIVIII 

RT Or rather q not; "-i$-aii correlation not having been mentioned in :their 
the Upani$ad. 

65. (The meditations are) rather not to be combined, since the Upaniyads 
do not declare this. 

Veddntin : The words "rather not" set aside the (above) opposite view. The 
meditations (based on Om etc.) have not the same state (of co-existence) as 
their bases (B. S. III. iii. 61). 


Why? 



Since their co-existence is not mentioned in the Upani$ads. For there is no 
Vedic text showing the co-existence of the meditations, unlike what is shown 
with regard to the accessories of rites and hymns etc. enjoined in the three 
Vedas, in such texts as, "taking up the vessel or holding aloft the ladle, the 
priest chants the hymn, utters the praise, and then he says, 'O Prastota, you 
sing the Saina song, 0 Hota, you perform this sacrifice 1 ", and so on. 

Opponent : Their co-existence is gathered from the statement about the 
application itself. 

Vedantin : We say, no; since the meditations are meant to subserve the 
aspirant (and not any rite). The statement about application only leads to a 
correlation among the Udg-itha etc. meant for a sacrifice, whereas the 
meditations on Udg-itha etc., though connected with the accessories of rites, 
contribute to the aspirant's personal purpose like the milking pot etc., as we 
said under the aphorism "inasmuch as a separate result belongs to 
meditations" (III. iii. 42). This is precisely the distinction between the 
instruction about the accessories of rites and the meditations based on those 
accessories, that the former are meant for making their contributions to rites, 
whereas the latter are for subserving the aspirant's purposes (by purification 
of his mind). The two indicatory marks (in aphorisms 63 and 64) cannot lead 
to a co-existence of the meditations, since no Upani$adic text or logic is 
found in support. It cannot be that since in every application the bases of the 
meditations are taken up together, therefore the meditations based on them 
have also to be known as meant for being undertaken in combination, for the 
meditations are not applied to those rites. Even though the meditations be 
determined by their bases, so that they may well cease to exist when the 
bases do not exist, still they cannot be combined merely because the bases 
go together. This is so owing to the very reason that there is no Vedic 
declaration about their combination. Hence these meditations are to be 
undertaken according to one's desire. 




66. And (there is no obligation about combination) since the Upani,cad 
shows (contrariwise). 

Moreover, the Upani$ad shows that absence of co-existence among the 
meditations in, "The (priest called) Brahma who knows thus protects the 
sacrifice, the sacrificer, and all the priests from all sides" (Ch. IV. xvii. 10). If 
all the meditations were to be combined, then all the priests would have 
known everything, so that there would not have been any mention of the 
protection of all by (the priest) Brahma, who has that knowledge. Hence the 
meditations can be undertaken collectively or alternatively just as the 
aspirant wants. 


SECrION IV 

TOPIC 1: KNOWLEDGE NOT A SUBSIDIARY OF RITES 

kiMi rcnro util 

p-q-vrq: The highest human goal (i.e. liberation) aRT: is from this 
(knowledge) ql2j on account of Vedic declaration yfi thus (says) off: 
Bidariyat a. 



1. Bddardyana thinks that liberation results from this (knour ledge of the 
Self), (as presented in the Upaniads), beccnise the Vedic texts declare so. 

Now then, the question is whether the knowledge of the Self, presented by 
the Upani$ads, forms a part of rites etc. through the medium of the man 
qualified for them, or it leads independently to some human goal (viz 
liberation). While engaging himself in this discussion, the aphorist starts 
with the conclusion itself in the aphorism, "Bidariyaia thinks" etc. The 
teacher Bidariyaipa thinks that liberation results independently "from this", 
from the knowledge of the Self, as imparted by the Upani$ads. 

How is this known? The aphorist says, "because the Vedic texts declare 
so". Thus the following Upani$adic texts, as also others of this class, speak 
of knowledge alone as the cause of liberation: "The knower of the Self 
crosses over sorrow" (Ch. VII. i. 3), "He who knows that supreme Brahman 
becomes Brahman Itself" (Mu. III. ii. 9), "The knower of Brahman attains 
the Highest" (Tai. II. i. 1), "He knows who has a teacher. For him the delay is 
only that long as his body does not fall; then he merges in Brahman" (Ch. 
VI. xiv. 2). Starting with "That which is the Self, free from sins" (Ch. VIII. 
vii. 1), it is said, "He who realizes the Self after comprehending It from his 
teacher, attains all the worlds and all the desirable things" (ibid.). Again, 
starting with, "The Self, my dear, is to be realized" (Br. IV. v. 6), it is said, 
"This much is (the means of) immortality" (Br. IV. v. 15). 

Against this stands up another (i.e. an opponent): 






ijwe i (The Self) being in subservient relation (to rites etc.), lq: (The 
result of knowledge is merely) a glorification of the agent (of rites) as it is 
w4ft in other cases Xfit this is how f:Ifa: Jaimini (thinks). 

2. Jaimini thinks that since the Self holds a subservient position in rites 
etc., the mention of the result of knowledge is (merely) in glorification of the 
agent, as is the case elsewhere. 



Since the individual Self comes into subservient relationship with 
religious acts by becoming their performer, the knowledge of the Self, too, 
must form a part of the rites etc. even as the purification of paddy by 
sprinkling of water and such other acts become parts of the rites through the 
objects they are related to. Hence the mention of any result that occurs in the 
Upani$ads with regard to this knowledge, whose purpose is ascertained to be 
this, must be by way of eulogy. This is what the teacher Jaimini thinks. This 
is like the Vedic mention of results by way of eulogy, as it is found in such 
texts as, "He whose sacrificial ladle is made of Pala§a wood does not hear 
any evil", "When a sacrificer applies collyrium to his own eyes, he covers 
the (evil) eyes of his enemy thereby", "That the (subsidiary rites) Prayija, 
Anuyaja, etc. are performed, thereby is created an armour for the sacrificer 
and the (main) sacrifice, so that the enemy of the sacrificer may he defeated", 
and so on. 

Veddntin : Since this knowledge of the Self is not spoken of in connection 
with some other topic (e.g. rites), and since for that very reason, nothing like 
context etc. is in evidence to justify its application to any rite, how can it be 
included in a rite? 

Opponent : On the strength of the Vedic text about the result (e.g. "The 
knower of Brahman transcends grief"), it will be included in a rite through 
the medium of the agent (like the fact of being made of Palik getting 
connected with a rite through the ladle, on the strength of the text). 

Veddntin : This cannot be so, since from that sentence (about result) it 
does not logically follow that this knowledge of the Self is to be applied to a 
rite. For things that have not been spoken of in the course of some definite 
topic can be imagined to be applicable to some rite on the strength of some 
sentence (stating a result), only if some invariable medium (like a ladle) is in 
evidence. But an agent is a variable medium, he being common to both 
ordinary and Vedic acts. Hence the knowledge of the Self cannot be proved 
to be connected with sacrifices through the medium of such an agent. 

Opponent: Not so, since the knowledge that the Self is distinct from the 
body has no applicability anywhere else but Vedic rites; for the knowledge 
that the Self is different from the body has no scope in ordinary human acts, 



since men can engage under all circumstances, (i.e. even when identifying 
the body with the Self), in acts having perceptible (worldly) results; but they 
cannot engage in Vedic duties, yielding their results after death, unless they 
have the knowledge that the Self is different from the body. And thus the 
knowledge of this difference has an applicability precisely in such a case. 

Veddntin : The Upanisadic knowledge of the Self to the effect that it is 
free from transmigration, which fact becomes obvious from the use of such 
attributes as "free from sin" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), and so on, cannot be 
subservient to any impulsion to activity. 

Op ponent : Not so . since the instruction is about the realization of the 
transmi g ratin g Self Itself , as is su gg ested throu g h the use of such words as 
"priva t lovableVT (Br. IV. v. 6). As for the attributes like "freedom from sin" 
and so on, they must be meant for eulogy. 

Objection : Has it not been established in the various contexts that the 
transcendental and birthless Brahman is the origin of the world, and that the 
very same Brahman is taught in the Upanisads as constituting the real nature 
of the transmigrating soul? 

Veddntin : True, it has been proved; yet for re-affirming this fact the 
process of objection and refutation, which centres round a discussion of the 
result, (as to whether it is meant for liberation or for subserving rites), is 
resorted to on the analogy of driving in a pile (by alternately driving it down 
and pulling it up so as to make it fixed firmly and deeply in soft ground). 





az-W Because of the revelation of the behaviour. 











3. (This is con firmed) on the strength of what is revealed about the 
behaviour (of the knowers of Brahman). 

Opponent : We meet with the Vedic revelation of connection with rites 
even for the knowers of Brahman in such texts as, "Janaka, emperor of 
Videha, performed a sacrifice in which gifts were freely distributed" (Br. III. 
i. 1), "Sirs, I am about to perform a sacrifice" (Ch. V. xi. 5), which occur in 
other contexts (purporting to deal with the knowledge of Brahman). And this 
is in line with the behaviour noticed in the cases of Uddalaka and others, 
where their connection with a householder's life is inferable from their 
instruction etc. to their sons. If liberation can be achieved through 
knowledge alone, why should they have undertaken (the householder's) 
duties involving strenuous effort, for proverbially it is known, "Why should 
one go to a hill if one has honey at hand?" 



uq-+; Since the Upani$ad declares this. 

4. (This is so) because the Upani,cad declares this. 

In the text, "That rite becomes more powerful that is done along with 
meditation, faith, and secret knowledge" (Ch. Li. 10), knowledge is heard of 
as forming a part of some rite; hence knowledge by itself cannot be the cause 
of liberation. 



-3rl-q Because of following together. 


5. (This is so), because both knowledge and work follow the Self (when it 
transmigrates). 

And knowledge cannot be independent, since in the text, "It (i.e. the 
departing soul) is followed by knowledge, work, (and past experience)" (Br. 
IV. iv. 2), knowledge and work are seen to act in association in producing the 
result. 



6. (And this is so) because rites are enjoined for one who is possessed of 
that (knowledge of the Vedas). 

The Upani$adic texts like the following show that one who is possessed of 
the knowledge of all the things revealed in the Vedas is qualified for 
undertaking rites: "One who comes back from his teacher's house after duly 
reading (i.e. reciting) the Vedas, during the intervals of serving him, and then 
enters the householder's life and continues the study of the Vedas in a holy 
place and performs other prescribed duties, attains the world of Brahman" 
(Ch. VIII. xv. 1). From this also it follows that knowledge cannot produce its 
result independently. 



Objection : In this sentence we find mention of merely the reading (i.e. 
reciting) of the Vedas in the phrase "after reading", and not of the 
comprehension of the meaning. 

Op ponent : That is no defect , since the conclusion arrived at ( in the Purva- 
MTmimsi ) is that the phrase "readin g of the Vedas" includes the idea of 
comprehension of meanin g as well , for the readin g has a perceptible result in 
views 



7. And (this follows) from the restrictive texts. 

From such restrictive injunctions as contained in the texts, "By doing 
religious acts, indeed, should one wish to live here for a hundred years. For a 
man, such as you are (who wants to live thus), there is no way other than 
this, whereby karma may not cling to you" (i§. 2), "That which is known as 
the Agnihotra is a sacrifice that has to be followed till decrepitude and death, 
for one gets released from it either through decrepitude or death", it follows 
that knowledge is a subsidiary of rites. 

Vedintin : Such being the position, the refutation is being stated: 

arfWfclRJ wiww IRI 


















$ But wW—aqkm-q because of being taught to be greater aRqvqvrt (the 
view) of Badarayat a q4zl stands just as it is ffq-qma for so it is revealed. 

8. But Badardyana's view stands unshaken because of the instruction that 
the supreme Self is even greater (than the agent); for so it is revealed (by the 
Upani,cads). 

By the word "but" is rebutted the opposite view. The view held out that 
"the mention of the result of knowledge is in glorification of the agent", 
"since the Self holds a subservient position in rites" (B. S. III. iv. 2), is not 
proper. 

Why? 

On account of something even greater having been taught. Had the 
transmigrating soul alone, inhabiting the body as the agent and experiencer, 
been taught in the Upanipds as something distinct from the mere body, then 
the Upani$adic mention of result could have been a eulogy as elaborated by 
the opponent. But over and above (i.e. greater than) the embodied soul, the 
birthless God, free from such mundane attributes as agentship-the supreme 
Self, possessed of such attributes as freedom from sin-is taught in the 
Upani$ads, as an object to be realized. And His knowledge cannot supply 
any impulsion for work, on the contrary it uproots all works. This fact will 
be stated in the aphorism, "Knowledge is independent of rites, since it 
uproots all worldly distinctions" (III. iv. 16). Hence the opinion of the 
venerable BadarayaOa, as expressed in, "Liberation results from this 
knowledge of the Self, because the Vedic texts declare so" (III. iv. 1), 
remains just as it is, and it cannot be shaken by the fallacious arguments that 
knowledge is a subsidiary of rites, and so on. Thus it is that the Upani$ads 
reveal God, the (supreme) Self, as something over and above the embodied 
soul, in such texts as, "He who is omniscient in general and allknowing in 
detail" (Mu. I. i. 9), "Out of His fear the wind blows, out of fear the sun 
rises" (Tai. H. viii. 1), "A great terror like an uplifted thunder" (Ka. II. iii. 2), 
"Under the mighty rule of this Immutable, 0 Gargi" (Br. III. viii. 9), "That 
deliberated, v let me become many, let me be bom diversely.' That created 
fire" (Ch. VI. ii. 3), and so on. 



And it was argued that the transmigrating soul indicated by such terms as 
"lovable" is again referred to as the object to be known, in such texts as, "but 
for one's own self, all is loved. The self; my dear, should be realized" (Br. IV. 
v. 6); "That which breathes through Praia is your Self that is within all" (Br. 
III. iv. 1); starting with "The infinite Being that is seen in the eye" (Ch. VIII. 
vii. 4), and ending with, "I shall explain this very Being to you again" (Ch. 
VIII. ix. 3); and so on. But this reference to the transmigrating soul cannot 
be meant for absolute difference (between the individual Self and God), in 
the face of the texts occurring in the complementary portions of those 
passages, and meant for imparting instruction about some super-reality, as 
for instance the texts, "The Rg-Veda, Yajur-Veda.... are the breath of this 
infinite Being" (Br. U. iv. 10), "That which transcends hunger and thirst, 
grief, delusion, decay, and death" (Br. III. v. 1), "Just so this placid soul rises 
up from this body and- unites with the supreme Light to get established in its 
own nature" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3). It is known also from such texts as "That thou 
art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), "There is no other witness but this" (Br. III. viii. 11), 
etc. that in its real nature, the embodied soul is but God Himself, while its 
state of embodiedness is a creation of limiting adjuncts. All this was 
elaborately ascertained by us earlier in the appropriate contexts. 

^RJ ll&ll 

But qd the Upani$adic declaration $F9 is equally in evidence. 

9. But the Upanicadic declaration (of conduct) is equally in evidence 
(proving that knowledge is not subservient to religious acts). 


As for the ar g ument that from the UpaniSadic mention of the conduct of 
enli g htened men it follows that knowled g e is subservient to rites t B. S. III, 
iv. 3 ). our re pl y is this: The Upani$adic mention of the conduct of 













enli g htened men is equally in evidence to show that knowled g e is not 
subservient to rites. Thus there is the text . "The Kava$ e va seers , who had 
known this very entit y, said . s Whv need we stud y t the Vedas ), why need we 
perform sacrifices? 1 This is that very entit y, havin g known which , the 
enli g htened of vore ceased to perform the A g nihotra sacrifice" tKau: II. 5 ). 
"Knowin g this very Self the Brahmar ) as renounce the desires for sons , for 
wealth , and for worlds , and lead a mendicant life" (Br. 111. V. 1 ). and so on. 
Moreover , it is known that Ya i navalkva and others , who had realized 
Brahman , did not en gag e in rites , from such texts as . '"This much indeed is 
immortalit y, my dear . 1 sa ying this Ya j navalkva embraced a mendicant's life" 
( Br. IV. v. 15k Moreover , the indication (about the combination of rites and 
knowled ge! as found in the text . "Venerable sirs . 1 am about to perform a 
sacrifice" (Ch. V. xi. 5 ). relates to the meditation on Vai S vanara . and it is 
q uite possible to come across a combination with rites in the domain of 

conceptions re g ardin g the qualified Brahman. But even here , there can be no 
possibility of the knowled g e of Brahman becomin g subsidiary to reli g ious 
acts , for nothin g like context etc, is discernible here f to substantiate a 
contrary view ).3 


As for the argument that the Upani$ads declare this (B. S. III. iv. 4), our 
reply is: 



10. The declaration is not universal. 

The text, "whatever one does with knowledge" (Ch. I. i. 10), does not 
refer to all kinds of knowledge, it being confined to the relevant meditation 
that forms the topic. And the topic under discussion there is the meditation 



















































































on Udgitha as contained in, "One shall meditate on the letter Om as Udgitha" 
(Ch.I.i. 1). 

And it was said (B. S. III. iv. 5) that the text, "He is followed by 
knowledge, work, (and past experience)" (Br. IV. iv. 2), which speaks of the 
pursuit (of the soul by knowledge etc.), is an indication of the subservience 
of knowledge. That is being refuted: 

HUH 

farsnr: (Knowledge and work) are to be divided qffarl like a hundred 
(things). 

H. Knowledge and action are to be divided like a hundred things. 

A division is to be noted here to the effect that knowledge follows one, 
and work another. This is like the distribution of a hundred (things). For 
instance, when somebody says, "Pay a hundred to these two", the hundred is 
given by dividing it into two moieties, fifty being given to one and fifty to 
another. Similar is the case here. Moreover, this text about "being followed 
by" is not spoken of with regard to one who would have liberation, since the 
conclusion is made with reference to a transmigrating soul in the sentence, 
"Thus does the man (transmigrate) who has desires" (Br. IV. iv. 6), and since 
the man hankering for liberation is treated separately in, "But then, as for the 
man who does not desire" (ibid.). Now, the knowledge that is considered in 
that text (about "being followed by knowledge and action"-Br. IV. iv. 2), 
relates to the transmigrating soul and comprises knowledges of both 
kindsenjoined and prohibited; for no reason for distinction exists. The action 
again is considered irrespective of whether it be prescribed or prohibited, the 
text having taken them (knowledge and action) up just as they obtain 
elsewhere. From this point of view (that they relate to the transmigrating 



soul), the text about "being followed" can be justified even without resorting 
to a division. 


It has been stated, "Because rites are enjoined for one who is possessed of 
the knowledge of the Vedas" (B. S. III. iv. 6); hence comes the reply: 



For him who has merely read (i.e. recited) the Vedas. 

12. (Engagement in religious actions is prescribed) f or him only who has 
merely recited the Vedas. 

Since we hear of "reading" alone in the text, "One who comes back from 
his teacher's house after duly reading the Vedas" etc. (Ch. VIII. xv. 1), we 
arrive at the conclusion that the prescription for rites is meant for one who 
has merely recited the Vedas. 

Opponent: In that case a man may not have the necessary qualification for 
rites owing to his lack of knowledge. 

Veddntin : That defect does not arise. We do not rule out the information 
about the rites, acquired in the course of the recital, that endows one with the 
competence for rites. What do we do then? We establish this fact only that 
since the knowledge of the Self, acquired from the Upani$ads, is obviously 
possessed of its own independent purpose, it cannot become a cause for 
generating competence for rites. And this is to be understood in the same 
way as when a man qualified for a certain rite has not to depend on the 
knowledge of some other rite. 

Again, it was stated, "And this follows from the restrictive texts" (B. S. 
III. iv. 7). To this it is replied: 



Not so ejhftq because of the absence of specification. 

13. (The restrictive texts) do not apply (to the man of knowledge), since 
the restriction is made without any specification. 

In the restrictive texts like, "By doing karma, indeed, should one wish to 
live here for a hundred years" (I§. 2) etc. there is no specific mention that 
these apply to the man of knowledge, since the restriction is made in a 
general way. 



qT Or rather: the consent (of action) flff4 is for the glorification (of 
knowledge). 

14. Or rather the consent (accorded) for doing religious acts is meant for 
the glorification of knowledge. 

With regard to the text, "By doing karma indeed" etc. another independent 
interpretation can be advanced thus: Even if on the strength of the context 
this sentence is construed in a way to connect the man of knowledge with 



"doing karma" (as its agent), still it is to be understood that this approval of 
doing work is accorded only by way of eulogizing knowledge; for it will be 
stated later, "Karma does not cling to you".' The idea implied is this: "Even 
though a man of knowledge may perform work during his whole life, work 
does not become a cause of blemish, owing to the presence of his 
knowledge". In this way knowledge is praised. 



And r some (refrain from work)Ttaf according to their own predilection. 

15. Moreover, some refrain from (religious) work according to personal 
predilection. 

Moreover, the Vajasaneyins have a text according to which some 
enlightened men, who have direct experience of the result of knowledge, 
take their stand on that experience and declare out of personal predilection 
that there is no need for them for begetting children and such other acts 
which are meant for other purposes. That text runs thus: "This is the reason 
for it: the ancient sages, it is said, did not desire children thinking, 'What 
shall we achieve through children, we who have attained this Self, this world 
(i.e. result)?"' (Br. IV. iv. 22). Furthermore, it has been declared by us more 
than once that unlike the result of work which comes to fruition after some 
time, the result of knowledge is a matter of direct and immediate experience. 
For this reason also, knowledge cannot be a subsidiary of rites, nor can it be 
held that the Upani$adic mention of the result of knowledge is unreal (i.e. 
eulogistic). 




16. Moreover, (from knowledge comes) the destruction (of the whole 
world). 

Moreover, the scriptures declare that the whole world of manifestation, 
which consists of actions, instruments, and results, bestowing the necessary 
qualification for work, and which is a creation of ignorance, is destroyed root 
and branch by knowledge, as stated in, "But when to the knower of Brahman 
everything has become the Self, then what should one smell and through 
what?" (Br. II. iv. 14), and so on. But should one build his hope of deriving 
the requisite competence for rites from the knowledge of the Self as taught 
in the Upani$ads, he wifi be left only with a destruction of all rites. From 
this also it follows that knowledge is independent of rites. 



a And b:;% (knowledge belongs) to those (monks) observing continence 
fq for q* (they are mentioned) in the Vedas. 

17. And knowledge belongs to the monks, for they are met with in the 
Vedas. 



Moreover, knowledge is heard of in connection with the order of life (i.e. 
Smmydsa, monasticism) in which continence is observed. And knowledge 
cannot become subsidiary to rites there, since (in that order) rites are absent; 
for they (the monks) do not have such Vedic rites as Agnihotra etc. It may be 
argued that there is no such stage of life mentioned in the Vedas as that of 
the continent people. But that argument also has no basis; for they are 
mentioned in such Vedic texts as, "Virtue has three divisions. (All these 
attain the virtuous world, while the one who is fully occupied with Brahman 
attains immortality)" (Ch. II. xxiii. 1), "And those who follow faith 
(meditation), austerities, etc. while living in forests" (Ch. V. x. 1), "Those 
who live in the forest, begging for alms, viz those (forest-dwellers and 
hermits) who resort to the duties of their respective stages of life as well as 
to meditation" (Mu. I. ii. 11), "Desiring this world (i.e. the Self) alone, 
monks renounce their homes" (Br. IV. iv. 22), "One should embrace 
monasticism even from the stage of Brahmacharya" (Jabala, 4), and in such 
other texts, where monasticism is a well-recognized fact in the Upanigads 
and Smrris in the case of those people who might have had either entered or 
not entered earlier the householder's life, as also those who might have had 
or had not repaid their debts (to gods, manes, and seers). For this reason also 
knowledge is independent of rites. 

Topic 2: SANNYASA PRESCRIBED BY SCRIPTURES 

mi ww 

f: Jaimini (thinks) giiq (that to be a mere) allusion (to other stages), alv,r 
(it is) no injunction, a and fq because (the scripture) arqqqN condemns 
(them). 

18. Jaimini thinks that to be an allusion to other stages and no injunction; 
and (this is so) since the scripture condemns then. 

Opponent : The texts starting with, "Virtue has three divisions" (Ch. II. 
xxiii. 1), that were quoted (under the last aphorism) to prove the existence of 



people belonging to an order (of monks) observing continence, cannot 
prove-that fact, since the teacher Jaimini thinks that the texts are reminiscent 
of the other stages of life (as distinct-from that of the householders'), and 
they impart no injunction. 

Why? 

Because nothing, such as a verb in the imperative mood, occurs here to 
indicate an injunction. Moreover, each of them is noticed to imply something 
else. In the text, "Virtue has three divisions" etc. (Ch. II. xxiii. 1), for 
instance, an allusion is made to the stages of life and it is declared that their 
results are not limitless in the sentences, "The first division consists of 
sacrifice, study, and offer of wealth; the second division of austerity; and the 
third of the Brahmacarin living in his teacher's house for life and laying 
down his body there" (ibid.). Then the continuance in Brahman is praised as 
yielding an infinite result in the sentence, "All these attain the virtuous 
worlds; but he who is steadfast in Brahman (that is, meditates steadfastly on 
Brahman with the help of Om) gets immortality" (ibid.). 

Objection : Even though this be a mere allusion, still as a matter of fact, 
the stages of life become known from it. 

Opponent : True, they become known; but their recognition is derived 
from the Smrris and common usage and not from the Upani$ads. Hence in a 
case of conflict with direct Vedic texts, they are to be disregarded or 
accepted as referring to people who are debarred from rites (e.g. the blind, 
lame, etc.). 

Objection : Is not the householder's life also mentioned along with the 
continent in, "The first division consists of sacri ice, study, and offer of 
wealth"? (So the whole passage must be equally authoritative.) 

Opponent : Quite so. Still from the fact that the rites like Agnihotra etc. 
are prescribed for the householder alone, that stage of life exists as a thing 
well recognized by the Vedas. Hence this allusion to other stages is merely 
by way of eulogy (of steadfastness in Brahman), and not by way of an 
injunction. Moreover, the direct Vedic texts denounce any other stage of life: 



"One who gives up the fire is a destroyer of the valour (i.e. a murderer) of 
the gods", "Having offered the desirable wealth to the teacher, do not cut off 
the line of progeny" (Tai. 1. xi. 1), "A man without a son has no world in 
future. All creatures are aware of this", and so on. Thus the texts, "Those 
who undertake faith (meditation), austerities, etc. while living in forest" (Ch. 
V. x. 1), "Those who live in the forest..., who resort to the duties of their own 
stages of life as well as to meditation" (Mu. I. ii. 11), impart instruction 
about the "path of the gods" and not about other stages of life. Moreover, it 
is doubtful if the other stages of life are prescribed in the texts, "The second 
division is austerity" (Ch. II. xxiii. 1) etc. Similarly the text, "Desiring this 
world (i.e. the Self) alone, monks renounce their homes" (Br. IV. iv. 22), is 
not an injunction for monasticism, it being only a eulogy of the world (of the 
Self). 

Objection : Have not the Jabalas a direct and clear injunction about 
renunciation in the text, "One should enter into monasticism even from the 
stage of Brahmacarya"? 

Veddntin : Quite so; but it is to be noted that the present discussion is 
carried on by ignoring this text. 

5^ tout; \\\ i \\ 

Badarayat)aWTqTrziur:zf (thinks) (that other stages also are to be) 
observed -i: Vedic texts being equally extant. 

19. Bddarayana thinks that the other orders of life are also to be observed, 
since Vedic texts speak equally of all the stages of life. 

The teacher Badarayaia is of the opinion that the other stages of life are to 
be resorted to on account of their reference in the Vedas. Since on account of 
the obligatoriness of the performance of Agnihotra etc., a conflict with 
monasticism arises, and it is concluded (by the opponent) that this other 



stage of life is to be resorted to by those (blind, lame, and others) who are 
debarred from Agnihotra etc., therefore Badarayaga refutes this view under 
the belief that one has to admit willynilly the other stages of life just as much 
as the householder's. 

Why? 

Since the texts speak equally of all the sta ges: for the text . "Virtue has 
three divisions" etc, t Ch. 11. xxiii. 1 1. is seen to allude to the other sta g es of 
life equally with the householder's. It is to be noted that j ust as the 
householder's life , prescribed bv other Vedic texts , is alluded to here , so also 
are the other sta g es of life. And this is as in the case of the Nivita and 
Prdcindvita which thou g h prescribed in a separate in j unction are vet 
understood to be referred to alon g with Upavita.4 Hence the pursuit of the 
other stages of life is as valid as the pursuit of the householder's life. 
Similarly in the text, "Desiring this world (i.e. the Self) alone the monks 
renounce home" (Br. IV. iv. 22), renunciation is mentioned along with the 
study of the Vedas etc.; and in "Those who undertake faith (meditation), 
austerities, etc. while living in forests" (Ch. V. x. 1), the stage of living in 
forest is read along with the meditation on the five fires (so that they are 
equally enjoined). 

It was also stated that it is a matter of doubt whether any other stage of life 
is enjoined in the passage; "The second division is austerity" (Ch. II. xxiii. 1) 
etc.; that too is nothing damaging, since a reason for a definite conclusion is 
in evidence. For in the text, "Virtue has three divisions" (ibid.), an assertion 
is made about the threefold division. Moreover, the multifarious virtuous 
deeds like sacrifices, which have diverse (injunctions of) origin, cannot be 
included under the three divisions, unless it be through their association with 
the stages of life. Of these, one division of virtue is the householder's life 
indicated by "sacrifices" etc. In the word "Brahmacdrin" we find a clear 
reference to an order of life. And by the word "austerity" what division of 
virtue can be accepted other than that order of life (of the Vdnaprastha) in 
which austerity preponderates? On the strength of the indicatory word 
"forest" occurring in, "those who undertake faith and austerity, etc. while 
living in forests" (Ch. V. x. 1), an order of life is necessarily to be understood 




























as meant by the words "faith" and "austerity". Hence though the stages of 
life occur by way of allusion only, they are still to be resorted to. 



qT Or rather fkft: an injunction %TKW-ap~ like holding (the sacrificial 
fuel). 

20. Or rather it is an injunction as in the case of holding the sacrificial 
fuel. 

Or rather it is an injunction about the other orders of life, and not a mere 
allusion. 

Opponent : If an injunction be accepted here, the comprehension of a 
unity of idea (of the passage) will be debarred. As a matter of fact, however, 
a unity of idea is obvious, viz that the three divisions of virtue lead to 
virtuous worlds while the steadfastness in Brahman yields immortality. 

Vedantin : This is true ; and vet the a p parent unity of idea has to be 
rej ected and in i unction accepted on account of the unic i ueness of the fact 
( not heard of before ) and the absence of any other in i unction. And in the 
face of a clear comprehension of other sta g es of life , there is no need to take 
shelter under a unity of idea bv su p posin g the text to involve an attributive 
corroboration ( or a g lorif ying eulo gy) j. "As in the case of the holding of the 
sacrificial fuel". In the text, "He shall approach ( the sacrificial altar ) b v 
holdin g the fuel below (the vessel of oblation ); for in a case of sacrifice to 
the g ods , the fuel is held above" , even thou g h the fact of holdin g above 
ap pears to constitute a sin g le idea alon g with the fact of holdin g below , still 
an in j unction is admitted about holdin g above , since it relates to a unique 
fact. Thus it is that in the course of determinin g the subsidiaries ( in the 
Purva-Mlmimsa ) it is said . "But there is an in i unction in the matter of 





















































holdin g above , since the fact is imique"a (Jai. Su. III. iv. 15). Similarly, it is 
inferred that the text alluding to the orders of life is in fact an injunction. 
Even if this be a mere allusion to the other orders of life, still on the strength 
of the eulogy (implied in, "All these attain the virtuous worlds, the man 
steadfast in Brahman attains immortality)", an injunction about 
"steadfastness in Brahman" has to be admitted. And then it has to be 
considered as to whether that steadfastness is meant for anyone belonging to 
any one of the four stages of life or for the monk alone. Now, if by the 
mention of the stages of life down to Brahmacarya-(in "Virtue has three 
divisions" etc.), the monk too becomes alluded to, then it may as well follow 
that anyone belonging to the four stages of life can be steadfast in Brahman, 
since all the four stages are mentioned equally and nobody can logically be 
outside the four. If, however, the monk is not alluded to, then the conclusion 
will be that the monk alone can be "steadfast in Brahman", he alone having 
been left out of the enumeration. 

Some think that the monk also is alluded to in that text by the term 
"austerity", implying thereby the Vaikhdnasas (one of the four classes of 
forest-dwelling Vdnaprasthas). But that is improper; for when there is a way 
out, it is not proper to understand the monk from an attributive word 
signifying the Vanaprastha. It is but proper that just as the Brahmacarin and 
the householder are presented here through their respective distinctive 
attributes, so also are the monk and the Vdnaprastha. And austerity is a 
distinct feature of the order of Vdnaprasthas, since the word austerity comes 
to be applied to it by usage owing to the predominance of the mortification 
of the body among them. But the monks' attributes consisting of control of 
senses etc. are not surely referred to by the term austerity. And it is improper 
that the stages of life, well known to be four in number, should be referred to 
as three. Moreover, it is noticed that they are mentioned separately thus: 
"These three become fit for the virtuous worlds, whereas the other one 
becomes fit for immortality". This reference in a separate way is justifiable 
only if there is a difference. For it cannot be asserted that Devadatta and 
Yajnadatta are dull of intellect, while one of them has a bright intellect; but it 
can well be said that Devadatta and Yajnadatta are both dull of intellect, 
while Vi$oumitra has a bright intellect. Hence it is the people in the earlier 






three stages of life that achieve the virtuous worlds, while the remaining one, 
viz the monk, attains immortality. 

Opponent: How can the term "steadfast in Brahman", used in its 
derivative sense and possible of application to people in all the stages of life, 
be confined to the monk alone? Or should you argue that the term is used in 
its conventional sense to imply a monk, then the conclusion will be that 
immortality is attained by the mere fact of belonging to a certain order of life 
(viz monasticism), so that knowledge will become useless. 

The (Veddntin's) reply here is being given: The term "steadfastness in 
Brahman" implies a consummation in Brahman, a total absorption in 
Brahman, which is the same as the absence of any other preoccupation 
except that. And that is not possible for people in the other three stages, 
since the Vedas mention that one incurs sin by giving up the duties of one's 
own stage of life. But the monk can incur no sin of non-performance of 
duties owing to his renunciation of all duties. But virtues like control of 
senses and organs, which characterize him, merely strengthen his 
steadfastness in Brahman, but do not oppose it. The duty for his order of life 
consists of steadfastness itself ir: Brahman, supported by self-control etc., 
whereas sacrifices etc. are the duties for others; the monk incurs sin by 
transgressing his own duties , f as much as others do by trans g ressin g theirs ). 

In_sup port of this occur these texts: "Monasticism is Brahma 

( Hirao vag arbha k because Brahma is the hi g hest (bein g), and the hi g hest 
Entity has become Brahma. These other austerities are surely inferior : 
monasticism indeed transcended them"7 fNaravapa. 78); "Those to whom 
the entity presented by the Vedantic knowledge has become fully 
ascertained, and who endeavour assiduously with the help of the Yoga of 
monasticism (become free)" (Mu. III. ii. 6), and others. And the Smtti texts 
like, "Those who have their intellect absorbed in that, whose life is that, 
whose Self is that, whose steadfastness is in that, whose consummation is in 
that (attain liberation)" (Giza, V. 17), show that a man who is steadfast in 
Brahman has no duty. Hence the criticism has no scope that since the monk 
gets immortality from the mere fact of his belonging to an order of life, 
knowledge becomes useless. Thus it is that even though the other orders of 
life be merely alluded to (in the text "Virtue has three divisions" etc.-(Ch. II. 




















xxiii. 1), we do gather from it monasticism as well consisting of 
steadfastness in Brahman. 

The teacher introduced this discussion without taking into consideration 
the text of the Jabala Upani$ad which enjoins the other order of life (viz 
monasticism). But as a matter of fact, direct texts do occur which prescribe 
the other order of life, "Having finished the life of the Brahmacarin (i.e. 
bachelor student of the Vedas) one shall become a householder; after 
becoming a householder one shall retire to the forest; after retiring to the 
forest one shall become a monk. Should it, however, happen otherwise (that 
is, should dispassion become ripe), one shall become a monk from the stage 
of Brahmacarya, or from that of the householder, or from that of the 
forestdweller" (Ja. 4). Moreover, it cannot be argued that this Upani$adic 
text refers to those who are debarred from Vedic rites, because the text 
speaks in a general way so it cannot be restricted to a certain category, and 
because a separate prescription is made for the unqualified in the text, 
"Again (one shall renounce) even if one has undertaken a vow or not, one 
who continues or does not continue to serve his teacher even after the 
completion of his study, one who has given up the fire after being a widower, 
or one who has not lighted the fire at all" (ibid.). Moreover, monasticism is 
meant as a subsidiary of the knowledge of Brahman for its full maturity; and 
this is shown in the text, "Then the monk who adopts a discoloured robe, 
shaves his head, desists from accepting wealth, becomes pure, and free from 
enmity, resorts to begging, becomes fit to attain the state of Brahman" (Ja. 
5). Hence is pro'-ed the existence of the stages of life for the continent, and 
hence also is proved the independence of knowledge, it having been 
enjoined for the continent. 

Topic 3: INJUNCTIONS FOR MEDITATION NOT EULOGISTIC 



Rft-" Mere praise 3qmbecause of having been accepted (as subsidiaries of 
ritual acts) gft 4q if this be the contention not so, because of 
extraordinariness. 

21. If it be contended that texts (about Udgitha etc.) are merely eulogistic, 
because of having been accepted as subservient to ritual acts, then not so, 
because of the extraordinariness (of the texts). 

Doubt : With regard to the texts, "That Om, called Udgitha, is the essence 
of all essences; it is the highest; it is the symbol for the highest, and the 
eighth in number" (Ch. I. i. 3), "This (viz the earth) is I,tk, and fire is Sama" 
(Ch. I. vi. 1), "This fire that is lighted up is but this world", "This very Uktha 
(collection of hymns) is this earth to be sure", the doubt arises: Are these 
Vedic texts meant for the eulogy of Udgitha etc., or are they for prescribing 
meditation? 

Opponent : When under such a doubt, the reasonable position is that they 
are meant for eulogy, since the texts are accepted as referring to Udgitha etc. 
that are subsidiaries of rites; and these are on a par with such sentences as, 
"This earth itself is the sacrificial ladle (Juhu)", "the sun is a tortoise (the 
form of the altar)", "Heaven is the Ahavaniya fire", and so on, where they 
are meant for eulogizing the Juhu etc. 

Vedantin : The teacher says that it is not reasonable that the purpose of 
these texts should be merely praise because of the extraordinariness (of their 
content). And this extraordinariness remains intact only if these sentences 
are injunctive, whereas they become useless if they are eulogistic. For it has 
been said in the aphorism, "But since they are in syntactical unity with an 
injunction, they must be meant for the eulogy of the injunction" (Jai. Su. I. ii. 
7), that a eulogy derives its applicability by becoming an appendage to a text 
imparting an injunction. As a result, this eulogy of the Udgitha etc., (as 
contained in the texts cited), that occurs in a different context (i.e. in the 
Upani$ads) will become useless since it cannot be tagged on to the Udgitha 
etc. mentioned in a different context (in the Karma-kdnda). But the text, 
"This earth itself is a Juhu", occurs in the very proximity of an injunction. So 
there is a difference between the present passage and that illustration. Hence 



the Upanigadic texts like the above are meant only as injunctions (of 
meditation). 



22. Moreover, (these must be injunctions) on account of the occurrence of 
words having an injunctional meaning. 

Moreover, words of injunction occur clearly in such texts as, "One should 
meditate on the Udgitha" (Ch. I. i. 1), "One should meditate on Sama" (Ch. 
II. ii. 1), "One should think of oneself as 'I am Uktha' (Tai. A. II. i. 2)". 
These will be set at naught if their only purpose be eulogy. Thus also runs a 
Smrti text of those who are adepts in reasoning; "In all the Vedas these 
(verbal moods) are the invariable signs of injunction, viz 'should do', 'should 
be done', 'must be done', 'may become', 'should be' ". They make this 
statement under the belief that the verbal endings like the lih etc. express 
injunction. Besides, under every topic a result is mentioned (in the 
Upanisads), such as, "He becomes certainly a fulfiller of desires" (Ch. I. i 7), 
"For he is able to fulfil desires by singing the Sama song" (Ch. 1. vii. 9), "All 
the worlds above and below become available for his enjoyment" (Ch. II. ii. 
3), and so on. From this also it follows that the texts about the Udgitha etc. 
are meant for enjoining meditation. 

TOPIC 4: UPANISADIC STORIES 



llfl 


gTfqg_a{: Meant for Pariplava Xfff 4q if this be the contention, 9 not so 
faccq 1 on account of having been specified. 



23. If it be ar g ued that the y ( the Upani . adic stories ) are meant for the 
( ritualistic a p plication called ) Pdriplava .8 Cwe say) that this is not so, on 
account of the stories for the Pdriplava having been specified. 

Doubt : There occur some stories in the Upanigads as recounted in such 
texts as the following: "Now Yajnvalkya had two wives Maitreyi and 
Katyayani" (Br. IV. v. 1), "Pratardana, son of Divodasa, went to the beloved 
place of Indra" (Kau. III. 1), "Jana§ruti, the great grandson of Janasruti, used 
to distribute gifts with reverence; he gave plentifully; he (had food) cooked 
for many people" (Ch. IV. i. 1). With regard to these the doubt arises: Are 
these stories meant for use as a ritualistic act called Pariplava, or are they for 
the easy comprehension of the knowledge imparted along with them? 

Opponent : These Upani$adic stories are meant for Pariplava, for they are 
on a par with other stories, and stories are prescribed for use in Pariplava. 
From this it would follow that the Upani$ads do not have knowledge as their 
main purport, they being meant for application in rites just as much as the 
mantras. 

Vedintin : Not so. 

Why? 

Because certain stories are specified for that (ritualistic) purpose. Thus it 
is that the topic is raised with the sentence, "The priests shall relate the 
stories"; and then only a certain number of stories, counting from the one 
beginning with, "Manu, a descendant of Vivasvan" etc. are specified. Were it 
the case that all the stories are to be used, just because they are stories, this 
specification would have been useless. Hence these Upani$adic stories are 
not meant for Pariplava. 













q And qM_3ga r because of becoming joined through unity of idea crtr in 
that way. 

24. And because (the stories) become connected (with meditations) 
through unity of idea in that way, (therefore they are meant for illuminating 
the proximate knowledge). 

Moreover, if the stories are not meant for use in Pariplava, it is but natural 
that they should be meant for illuminating the proximate knowledge 
(meditation), for they are joined to them by way of unity of idea. Thus it is 
that in the respective contexts they are noticed to be connected with the 
proximate meditations through unity of ideas, by virtue of the interest they 
create in the meditations (or knowledge) and the ease of comprehension that 
they supply. For instance, in the Maitreyi Brdhmand (of the Brhadarariyaka 
Upanisad) the story of Yajnavalkya, Maitreyi, and Katyayani is seen to have 
a unity of idea with the knowledge contained in the text, "The Self, my dear 
Maitreyi, is to be realized" etc. (Br. IV. v. 6); in the story of Pratardana also, 
the unity of idea with the knowledge imparted in, "I am Prana, the Self that 
is consciousness" etc. (Kau. III. 2), is obvious; and the story starting with, 
"The great grandson of Jana§ruti", is connected with the knowledge 
imparted in the text, "Air indeed is the place of merger" etc. (Ch. IV. iii. 1). 
Just as the stories occurring in the ritualistic portion of the Vedas, for 
instance, "He plucked out his own marrow (or omentum)" etc., are meant for 
emphasizing the proximate injunctions, so also is the case here. Hence they 
are not meant for Pariplava. 


Topic 5: SANNYASINS FREE FROM RITUALS 



3ff: q4 For that very reason again w;r-Wmq-a-arqii there is no need of 
"lighting fire" and so on. 



25. For that very reason again, (the Sannydsin has) no need of "lighting 
fire", and such other rites. 

Since the aphorism, "Badarayat)a thinks that liberation results from this 
(knowledge), because the Vedic texts declare so" (III. iv. 1), is applicable in 
this context as well, though it is far removed, therefore, it is being alluded to 
in this aphorism by saying, "for this very reason". "For this very reason", 
from the fact that knowledge is the cause of liberation, the ritualistic works 
like "lighting up a fire" etc., that are enjoined for the different orders of life, 
are not required by knowledge for producing its own result. Thus the present 
topic restates the result of the discussion raised under the first topic; and the 
aphorist does this with a view to adding something more. 

Tonic 6: RITUALS ETC. NEEDED FOR KNOWLEDGE 

Am i iiw i 

tid-aiir All (religious actions) are necessary Q as well iilr-arifk-mO: on the 
authority of the Upani$ad prescribing sacrifices etc. aM-Wq This is like the 
horse. 

26. On the strength of the Upaniradic sanction of sacrifices etc., all 
religious activities as well are necessary. This is the same as in the case of a 
horse (in matters of its adequacy). 

The question to be considered now is whether knowledge derives 
absolutely no benefit from the duties enjoined for the different orders of life, 
or it does derive some benefit. As to that, since it was concluded under the 
previous aphorism, "For that very reason the Sannydsin has no need of 
lighting fire etc.", that knowledge does not at all depend on the performance 
of the duties of the different stages of life for producing its own result (viz 
liberation), therefore the answer is being given, "All religious activities are 
also necessary" etc. As a matter of fact knowledge needs the help of all the 



duties of the various stages of life, and it is not a fact that there is absolutely 
no dependence on them (for purification of heart). 

Opponent : Is it not contradictory to say that knowledge depends and yet 
does not depend on other duties? 

We (Veddntins) answer that there is no contradiction. For once knowledge 
has emerged, it does not depend on any other factor for producing its (own) 
result (viz liberation); but it does depend on others for its own emergence. 

Why so? 

"On the strength of the Upanisadic texts prescribing sacrifice etc." Thus 
there occurs the text, "The Brahmar}as seek to know it through the study of 
the Vedas, sacrifices, charity, austerity consisting in a dispassionate 
perception of senseobjects" (Br. IV. iv. 22), which shows the helpfulness of 
sacrifices etc. to the attainment of knowledge. Moreover, it is understood 
from their association with "seeking to know" (Br. IV. iv. 22), that they act as 
a means for the emergence of knowledge. Furthermore, from the text, "Now, 
again, what is called a sacrifice is really Brahmacarya" (Ch. VIII. v. 1), 
where bachelor-studentship, a means to the acquisition of knowledge, is 
praised by comparing it with sacrifices etc., it appears that the sacrifices etc. 
are also a means to it. Again, such Upanisadic texts as, "I tell you briefly of 
that goal which all the Vedas with one voice propound, which all the 
austerities speak of, and wishing for which people practice Brahmacarya; it 
is this, viz Om" (Ka. I. ii. 15), indicate that the duties of the different stages 
of life are helpful to the acquisition of knowledge. Smrti texts also support 
this, for instance, "The duties result in scorching away sins; the supreme 
goal being knowledge, when sins are scorched by duties, knowledge begins 
to emerge", and so on. 

"As in the case of a horse" is meant for illustrating the adequacy (of 
sacrifices etc.). As from the standpoint of propriety, a horse is not employed 
for drawing a plough, but a chariot, similarly the duties of the different 
stages of life are needed not for the fruition of the result of knowledge, but 
for the emergence of knowledge itself. 



IRISH 

c"iW-a fq Still pnq one should be endowed with calmness, self-control 
etc. $ for a-alv5q they have to be practised perforce, a$-f: they having been 
enjoined "-3<ri as subsidiaries of that (knowledge). 

27. (Even though there be no injunction about sacrifices etc.), still one 
must be endowed with self-control and the like, since these are enjoined as 
subsidiaries of knowledge; and hence have to be practised as a matter of 
course. 

Someone may argue that sacrifices etc. cannot properly be the means to 
knowledge, because no injunction (to that effect) exists, and because the text 
starting with, "They seek to know through sacrifice", is a mere restatement 
(of a fact known otherwise), meant for glorifying knowledge, and not as an 
injunction for sacrifices etc., the meaning implied being this: "So fortunate is 
knowledge that they seek to attain it through those very sacrifices etc." 

We (Veddntins) say : Even if this be so, still a seeker after knowledge 
must be endowed with control of body and mind and such other virtues; 
because control of body and mind, etc. are enjoined as means to the 
acquisition of knowledge in the text, "Therefore he who knows it as such 
becomes selfcontrolled, calm, withdrawn into himself, enduring and 
concentrated, and sees the Self in his own self (body)" (Br. IV. iv. 23), and 
because it is compulsory to undertake what is prescribed (by the scriptures). 

Opponent : Even here there is no injunction but a statement in the present 
tense implying that one sees by being endowed with self-control etc. 

We (Veddntins) answer that it is not so, since the idea of injunction 
becomes clear from the use of the term "therefore" which alludes to the 
praise of the subject-matter under discussion, and since the Madhyandinas 
use a clear injunction in their reading "should see" (in place of "see"). Hence 
even though there be no need of sacrifices etc., self-control etc. are needed. 




As a matter of fact, however, sacrifices etc. are also needed on the strength 
of the Upani$adic text itself that mentions them. 

Opponent: Did we not point out that in the text "(they) seek to know 
through sacrifice" etc. (Br. IV. iv. 22), no injunction is discernible? 

Veduntin : You did say so; still from the uniqueness of the connection, an 
injunction has to be inferred. For this connection of "seeking to know" with 
"sacrifices" etc. is not known from any other source, in which case alone it 
could have occurred here by way of a restatement. And it is by inferring an 
injunction on the strength of the revelation of an extraordinary fact in such 
texts as, "Since the sun is toothless, therefore he has a claim to a share of 
offering that is well crushed", where no injunction is met with, that a 
discussion about an (implied) injunction is introduced in the Parva- 
Mimamsa by saying, "Crushing for the sun in all cases of 'derivative 
sacrifices' (based on the Dar§a-Puri amasa) should become obvious" (Jai. Su. 
III. iii. 34). Similarly also it has been said herein, "Or rather there is an 
injunction (in the text) just as it is in the case of holding sacrificial fuel" (B. 
S. III. iv. 20). And in the Gita and other Smrtis it has been stated elaborately 
that sacrifices etc., when performed without any motive for fruits, become 
the means for the attainment of knowledge by an aspirant who desires 
liberation. Hence sacrifices etc. and self-control etc., which are the duties of 
the respective stages of life, are all but means for the emergence of 
knowledge. And yet among these, such means as self-control etc., which are 
connected with knowledge by the clause, "He who knows it as such" (Br. IV. 
iv. 23), are proximate to knowledge, while the other means, viz sacrifices 
etc., are external (i.e. remote), they being connected with the "seeking to 
know" (Br. IV. iv. 22). This is how these are to be distinguished. 



« 


Topic 7: REsTmcrcoxs ABOUT FOOD 

r \ * 



Uj_W-ft All kinds of food are permitted q only vmai when life is in 
danger -acrd for so it is revealed. 

28. All kinds of food are permitted only when life is in danger; for so it is 
revealed. 

Doubt : In the anecdote of Praha, as contained in the recension of the 
Chandogas, the text occurs, "For a man who knows Praha thus, nothing 
becomes uneatable" (Ch. V. ii. 1). The Vajasaneyins also have the text, "He 
who knows the food of (Praha) the vital force to be such, never happens to 
eat anything that is not food or to accept, anything that is not food" (Br. VI. 
i. 14), the meaning implied being that everything becomes eatable to him. 
Now, is this permission of everything as food meant as an injunction to be 
followed as a means to the acquisition of knowledge like self-control etc., or 
is this a mere declaration by way of eulogy? 

Opponent : When under such a doubt, the conclusion to be arrived at is 
that it is an injunction, for thus alone can this instruction generate a special 
tendency (to act), (so that it is an extraordinary instruction implying 
injunction). Thus it becomes a subordinate part of the meditation on Prdna 
owing to its proximity to that meditation; and by being such a subordinate 
part, it indicates the abrogation of the general rule (about food). 

Objection : If that be the case, it will set at naught the scriptures making a 
division between things that can be eaten and not eaten. 

Opponent : That is nothing damaging, since this contradiction can he 
logically reconciled from the standpoints of a general rule and its exception. 
For instance, the prohibition of animal slaughter is modified by the 
injunction to kill animals in sacrifices, or the general division of women into 
those with whom one can have intercourse and those with whom one cannot 
is modified by the text about not rejecting any woman as contained in, "His 
vow is that he shall not reject any woman" (Ch. 11. xiii. 2), occurring in 
connection with the Vamadevya meditation. So also the scriptural division 
between the eatable and non-eatable can be modified by this text about 
eating all kinds of food occurring in connection with the meditation on 
Pratza. 



Vedantin : To this we say that this is not an injunction permitting the 
eating of all kinds of food, for no word of injunction is met with here, 
inasmuch as the present tense is used in the expression, "For him who knows 
Praha thus, nothing becomes uneatable" (Ch. V. ii. 1). And even when no 
injunction is discernible, one cannot read into it an injunction just out of the 
temptation of making it a generator of a distinct kind of activity. Besides, it 
is only after declaring that the range of food for Praha extends right down to 
that of dogs etc., that the declaration is made, "For him who knows Praha 
thus nothing becomes uneatable". It is not possible for anyone with a human 
body to eat all that is food to dogs etc., though it is possible for one to think 
that all these are food to the vital force. Hence this is only a eulogy meant to 
glorify the knowledge of Pram's food, and it is not an injunction permitting 
everything as food. And the fact, that all kinds of food can be permitted 
when life is in danger is pointed out by the aphorist. The idea expressed is 
this: It is only when in a great calamity one's life itself is in danger, that all 
kinds of food are permitted, for such is the declaration of the Upanilad. Thus 
it is that the Upanisad shows in the brahmana portion starting with, "When 
the crops in the country of the Kurus had been destroyed by hail" etc. (Ch. I. 
x. 1), that the sage Cakrayama was impelled to eat forbidden food when in 
straitened circumstances. A sage named Cakrayana under calamitous 
conditions, ate some bad black pulses, a portion of which had already been 
eaten by an elephant driver; but after the food, he rejected the offered 
drinking water on the plea that the man had already drunk from it. And the 
sage gave the reason for this, "I would not have survived if I had not eaten 
these grains; but drinking water I can have at will" (Ch. I. x. 4). Again, the 
next day, he eats the same stale pulses left over after being eaten by himself 
and another. By recounting thus the eating of the remnant of somebody else's 
food, and the remnant as well as insipid food, the Upani$ad only reveals an 
eagerness to express the idea that when a question of life and death arises, 
one can eat even a forbidden thing for preserving life. But from the rejection 
of the drinking water, it is understood that this must not be done in a normal 
state even by a man of knowledge. Hence the text, "For him who knows 
Prdna thus" etc. (Ch. V. ii. 1), is a eulogy. 




29. And (this should be the interpretation) so that the scriptures (about 
permissible and forbidden food) may not be contradicted. 

And the texts, "when the food is pure, the mind becomes pure" etc. (Ch. 
VII. xxvi. 2) and others, which make a division between what can be eaten 
and what not, will remain uncontradicted if such an interpretation is 
accepted. 



alf$ Moreover pro mentioned in the Sm;tis. 

30. Moreover, the Smrtis support this view. 

Moreover, the Smrtis mention that when a calamity befalls, all kinds of 
food can be eaten indiscriminately by the enlightened and unenlightened 
alike: "Just as a lotus leaf is not drenched by water, so also a man, who eats 
food from wherever he gets it when life is in jeopardy, is not affected by 
sin." So also the Smrti speaks of the avoidance of prohibited food, as in, "A 
Brahmagia shall for ever avoid wine. They should pour hot wine into the 
mouth of a Brahmaua who drinks liquor. The drunkards become worms on 
account of taking prohibited things". 





ar r: Hence also is scriptural text (occurs) ar_vm_vR prohibiting licence. 

31. Hence also occur the scriptural texts prohibiting licence. 

In the samhitd of the Kathas is found a text which forbids the eating of 
uneatable food and purports to check activities dependent on licence: 
"Therefore a Brahma>}a should not drink spirituous liquors". And that text 
becomes all the more logical if the text, "For a man who knows Pra'na thus" 
etc. (Ch. V. ii. 1), be a eulogy. Hence texts of this kind are eulogies and not 
injunctions. 

Tonic 8: DUTIES OF ORDERS OF LIFE SHOULD BE FULFILLED 

Doubt : It was ascertained under the aphorism, "And there is need for all 
duties" etc. (III. iv. 26), that the duties of the different stages of life are 
conducive to knowledge. The question being considered now is whether 
those duties are to be performed or not performed by a man who simply 
sticks to his own stage of life without any hankering for liberation and any 
desire for knowledge. 

Opponent : As to that, the text "The Brahmai as seek to know it through 
the study of the Vedas" etc. (Br. IV. iv. 22), enjoins the duties of the different 
stages of life as means for the acquisition of knowledge and hence the 
obligatory duties are not to be performed by one who does not want 
knowledge but craves for some other result. On the contrary, should these be 
obligatory for him also, then these duties cannot be conducive to knowledge, 
since obligatoriness and unobligatoriness cannot meet at the same point. 


Veddntin : In answer to this, the aphorist says: 



m 

w And (the same time) of r even &TWq_4 duties of the different orders of 
life (are to be performed) Nfjiti-r for these have been enjoined. 

32. At the same time the duties of the orders of life are to be performed 
(by one who does not want liberation), since these have been enjoined. 

The obligatory duties are to be performed even by one who sim pl y sticks 
to an order of life without any cravin g for liberation , for these are en j oined 
b y such texts as . "One shall perform the A g nihotra sacrifice as lon g as one 
lives". And vet from this point of view there can be no such criticism that the 
very same Vedic text is bein g overburdened ( with too man y purposes ).9 

And it was objected that in that case these religious duties will not 
conduce to knowledge. Hence the answer is being given: 


ll^ll 

q And -~^f( because of being jointly the generators (of knowledge). 

33. And (these have to be performed, since these are enjoined as) being 
jointly the generators of knowledge. 

And these must be j ointlv the g enerators of knowled ge j ust because these 
have been en j oined to be so in . "The Brahmaoas seek to know it throu g h the 
study of the Vedas , sacrifices" etc. ( Br. IV. iv. 22 ) . That fact was stated in the 
a phorism . "And there is need for all duties , with due re g ard to adequac y, as 








































in the case of a horse" ( HI. iv. 26 ) . Yet it is not to be concluded that this text 
about the cooperation ( sahakdritva ) lO of the duties of the stages of life with 
knowledge refers to the production of the result of knowledge, as in the case 
of Prayaja etc. (helping in the production of the result of Dar. a-Puruamasa), 
since knowledge can never be a matter for injunction, and since the result of 
knowledge cannot be a product. For rites like Dar§a-PurQamasa alone, 
which can be subjects of injunction, need other cooperating means for 
producing such results as heaven. But knowledge is not of that kind. Thus it 
is that the aphorist said, "And for that very reason there is no dependence on 
such acts as lighting up a sacrificial fire, and so on" (III. iv. 25). Hence the 
only idea implied in speaking of their helpfulness is that they are conducive 
to the emer g ence of knowled g e. Yet there is no scope for a p prehendin g here 
an o p position arisin g from their obli g atory and occasional association ( with 
the same person ), because the association differs althou g h the duties are the 
same. For different is the obli g atory association as it is g athered from the 
texts about lifelon g performance and the like. This does not produce 
knowled g e as its result. A g ain , occasional is the other kind of association as 
g athered from the text . "The Brahmapas seek to know it throu g h the study of 
the Vedas" etc. ( Be. IV. iv. 22 ) . This has knowled g e as its result. This is j ust 
like a sacrificial stake made of Khadira wood which , throu g h its obli g ator y 
association with the sacrifice , serves the purposes of the sacrifice , but b y 
occasional association serves the purposes of the sacrificer-11 



gim Considered in every (i.e. either) way, aifq q however, qq the very 
same (duties are meant) 37Iq-fsg because of the indicatory marks of both 
kinds. 

34. Considered either way, however, the very same religious duties are 
meant for performance, because of the indicatory marks of both kinds. 


















































"Considered either way "-whether they be the normal duties of the 
different orders of life or the cooperators in acquiring knowledge, these very 
same religious acts, viz Agnihotra and the rest, are to be performed. 

What does the teacher rule out then by his emphasis in, "the very same 
duties"? 


We say that he rules out the misconception of these being different from 
the (usual) rites. In the scripture of the Kumciapayin an Agnihotra, different 
from the Agnihotra performed daily, is enjoined in the text, "One performs 
the Agnihotra sacrifice for a month". Unlike that, these are not different here. 
This is the idea. 

Why? 

"On account of the indicatory marks of both kinds", on account of the 
indicatory marks both in the Vedas and the Smrtis. As for the Vedic 
indicatory mark, it occurs in the text, "The Brahmaias seek to know it 
through the study of the Vedas" etc. (Bt. IV. iv. 22), which shows the 
applicability of the very same sacrifices etc. as they already exist with their 
forms well determined, but does not prescribe a new extraordinary form for 
them, as is done by saying "one sacrifices" (i.e. "shall sacrifice"). The 
indicatory mark in the Sm;ti occurs in, "He who performs his bounden duty 
without leaning to the fruit of action" (Gita, VI. 1), which shows how the 
rites, already known as obligatory, become conducive to the rise of 
knowledge. And such text as, "He who has to his credit these eighty-four 
sanctifications" etc., which allude to the fact of these Vedic rites being well 
known as sanctifying, occur in the Smrtis with the idea of showing that 
knowledge arises in one who is sanctified by them. Hence this emphasis on 
nondifference is quite proper. And this presence of the indicatory mark only 
strengthens the view that the rites are helpful to knowledge. 



* wife iivui 

q Moreover, (the Vedas) W*q* show Wq" (the fact of) not being 
overpowered. 

3S. The Vedas also show that one (equipped with Brahmacarya etc.) is not 
overpowered. 

Moreover, the Vedas show in the texts like, "For that Self does not perish 
which one attains by Brahmacarya" (Ch. VIII. v. 3) etc., that one who is 
equipped with practices like Brahmacarya is not overpowered by the 
torments like passion. Hence the conclusion is confirmed that sacrifices etc. 
are not only the duties pertaining to the stages of life, they are also helpful in 
the rise of knowledge. 

Tonic 9: KNOWLEDGE FOR PEOPLE OUTSIDE ORDERS 

The doubt arises as to whether the widowers and others, who do not 
remain affiliated to any order of life because of their lack of the requisites 
like wealth and other resources, have any competence for knowledge or not. 

Opponent : When under that doubt, the conclusion should be that they 
have no competence, since it has been emphasized that the duties of the 
stages of life are helpful to the rise of knowledge, and since these cannot 
possibly perform any duty prescribed for those stages. 

m #r a i w 



I As a matter of fact, however, aim one standing in between two stages 
(is) aiq also (entitled) cr -j: for such cases are met with. 

36. As a matter of fact, a person standing in between two stages is also 
entitled, such cases being met with (in the Upaniiads). 

Veddntin : This being the position, the answer is given by saying, "As a 
matter of fact, a person, standing in between two stages, is also entitled", 
even one occupying an intermediate stage, owing to being debarred from any 
one of them, is also entitled to knowledge. 

Why? 

"Such cases being met with in the Upani$ads"; for Vedic texts are 
noticeable which speak of the possession of the knowledge of Brahman by 
Raikva (Ch. IV. i. iii) Vacaknavi (or Gargi) (Br. III. vi. 1), and others who 
were in similar circumstances. 



37. Moreover, the Smrtis also mention this fact. 


Moreover, in the histories it is mentioned that Samvarta and others, who 
had nothing to do with the duties of the stages of life owing to such habits as 
remaining naked and so on, were still great Yogins. 

Opponent : These are mere indicatory marks found in the Vedas and 
Smitis that have been cited here. But what is the net result derived from 
them? 


Vedantin : That is being stated: 




38. And (in their case) there can be the favour of special factors (like japa 
etc.). 

In the case of those widowers and others also , it is possible for knowled ge 
to be helped bv such virtuous acts as repetition of mantras (japa). fastin g, 
worship of g ods , etc. , which can be resorted to by men in g eneral , and which 
do not clash with the fact of one's standin g outside any sta g e of life. In 
sup port of this occurs the Smrti . "A Brahmapa can succeed merely throu gh 
ja pa. There can be no doubt as re g ards this, A kind-hearted man is called a 
Brahmapa irrespective of whether he does anythin g else or not" ( Manu. IT. 
87). which shows that one can take u p prayer even thou g h the performance 
of the duties of any order of life may not be possible for him. Moreover , it is 
possible for knowled g e to be helped by the virtuous deeds performed in the 
different sta g es of life in earlier lives , as is evident from the Sm : ti: "The 
Yogin. g ainin g perfection throu g h many births , reaches the hi g hest g oal" 
( Gita . VI. 45 ). which shows that particular mental impressions acquired in 
past lives also help knowled g e. And since knowled g e has a directl y 
perceptible result , the mere absence of an y prohibition is enou g h to qualif y 
an aspirant for liberation to undertake "hearin g " etc.12 Hence nothing stands 
in the way of the widowers and others also becoming qualified for pursuing 
knowledge. 













































































I But ate: compared with this wffv[ the win. (is) better flu ii because of 
indicatory mark q as well. 

3.9. But as compared with this, the other one is better, because of 
indicatory sign (in the Upani,cad and Smrtis) as well. 

"But as compared with this", as compared with the fact of continuing in 
the intermediate stages, "the other one", the other state of belonging to some 
stage of life, is "better" as a means to the rise of knowledge, because there 
occurs the indicatory sign in the Upani$ad in, "Any other knower of 
Brahman, who has done good deeds and is identified with the supreme Light, 
also treads this path" (Br IV. iv. 9), as also the indications in the Smrti, 
contained in, "A twice-born man shall not stay outside the stages of life even 
for a day", and "Should one stay outside the stages of life for a year, one 
should undertake some austerity (as a penance)". 

Topic 10: DEFECTION FROM MONASTICISM 

Doubt : It has been established that there are orders of life for the 
continent as well. Now the doubt arises as to whether a man belonging to 
those orders can have any reversion from there or not. 

Opponent : One may even fall back out of a desire to perform the earlier 
virtuous deeds well or owing to passion etc., since no special reason exists 
for not doing so. 

Vedantin : This being the position, the answer is given: 

ii But m-vr for one who has become so, (there can be) no &T-"-: reversion 
from that f—t: on account of restriction, absence of text (sanctioning 
defection), and good precedence. (This is the view) aft even ffi: of Jaimini. 



40. But for one who has become so, there can be no reversion from it, on 
account of restriction, absence of text sanctioning reversion, and absence of 
good precedence. This is the view of Jaimini as well. 

"But for one who has become so", one who has embraced the life of the 
continent (Brahmacarin or Sannyasin), "there can be no reversion from it," 
no falling back from it, under any circumstances. 

Why? 

"On account of restriction, absence of texts about reversion from such a 
life, and absence of good precedence." Thus the restrictive rule occurring in 
the following texts shows the absence of reversion: "One who spends his 
whole life in the teacher's house" (Ch. II. xxiii. 1), "The path indicated by the 
scripture is that one shall retire to the forest; and the esoteric (purport of the 
scripture) about it is that one shall not return from there", "Being permitted 
by the teacher, he shall duly follow one of the four stages of life till the body 
falls off", and others. And though we meet with sentences speaking of 
ascension to a higher order, such as, "After finishing the BrahmacJrin's life, 
one shall become a householder" (Ja. 4), "One shall embrace monasticism 
from the Brahmacarin's life itself" (ibid.), yet we do not come across 
sentences sanctioning reversion. Nor do good precedents exist. 

As for the argument that there can be a falling back from a desire to 
perform well the (wonted) earlier duties, that is invalid, since the Smrti 
declares, "Better is one's own duty though imperfect, than the duty of 
another well performed" (Gita, III. 35). Logic also supports this; for one's 
own duty is that which has been prescribed (by the scriptures) for one, and 
not what one can perform well, since duty is determined by scriptural 
injunction. And there can be no such thing as (exoneration of) defection 
owing to passion etc., for the scriptural restriction is more authoritative. By 
saying "(This is the view) of Jaimini as well", the aphorist points out the 
concurrence of Jaimini and Badarayaoa in this matter, so that our conviction 
may become all the more strong. 

Topic 11: EXPIATION OR TRANSGRESSION OF CELIBACY 




q And atfq even (that expiation) of mentioned in Adhikara-Laksana (Jai. 
Su. VI.) al (is) not (meant) (for him) 4-KM since his fall is inferred (from the 
Smrti) (to be without remedy). ffq-WqJ" (and) hence he has no connection 
with it. 

41. And even an expiation is not available for him, since his fall is known 
from the Smrti to be irremediable, and he has no connection with it. 

Doubt : If a (Naislhika) Brahmacdrin, wedded to lifelong continence, 
breaks his vow through some inadvertence, can he or can he not undertake a 
penance as enjoined in, "A Brahmacirin, falling from his vow, shall sacrifice 
a donkey to Niri"? 

The answer (of the opponent) is, no. As for expiation mentioned in the 
chapter dealing with qualification (in the PurvaMimamsa) in the aphorism, 
"The offering of the animal in the case of a Brahmacarin breaking his vow is 
to be made, as in the upanayana sacrifice, in the ordinary fire; for the time 
for lighting up the Ahavaniya fire (after marriage) is not ripe (in the case of 
the Brahmacarin)" (Jai. Su. VI. viii. 21), that too cannot apply to the lifelong 
Brahmacarin. 

What is the reason? 

Since the Smrti mentions that this fall cannot be set right, "For one who 
after being established in the norm of the lifelong celibate (Nai#hika) falls 
from it, we cannot imagine any expiation by which that self-immolating man 
can be purified"; for no remedy is possible for one whose head is cut off. But 
that expiation is possible for an upakurvana Brahmacarin (who would marry 
after finishing his studies), since that kind of absolute fall is not mentioned in 
his case. 




However Crip some (consider this) 3q-SIT a minor sign, (and admit) 
existence (of expiation), - as in a case of eating (forbidden food); ffl-, so it is 
explained (by Jaimini). 

42. Some, however, consider this to be a minor sin and concede expiation 
as in a case of eating forbidden fooa. So it is explained by Jaimini. 

On the contrar y, "some" , some teachers , think that it is only a minor sin. If 
a lifelon g celibate breaks his vow bv misbehavin g with a woman other than 
his teacher's wife for instance , that does not constitute a ma j or sin 
I mahapdtaka ). since it has not been counted amon g such ma j or sins as 
dishonourin g one's teacher's wife. Hence the y assert that a lifelon g celibate 
can have expiation j ust as much as a upakurvana Brahmacdrin , since the y 
are on the same footin g as Brahmacarins and breakers of their vow. And this 
is as in the case of eatin g prohibited food. Just as a Brahmacann , who breaks 
his vow bv drinkin g wine or eatin g meat , can be purified a g ain , so also is the 
case here. Those who assert that a lifelon g celibate who slips can have no 
ex piation cannot produce any text to that effect. But those who assert that he 
can have an expiation have as their su p port the text . "A Brahmacarin fallin g 
from his vow shall sacrifice a donkev to Nir ; ti" which is a p plicable to both 
classes. Hence the existence of expiation is the more reasonable position. 
And this is in accord with what has been stated in a chapter of the Purva- 
MYmamsa in the aphorisms . "Should it be 'maintained that either can be 
understood as equall y ap plicable" t Jai, Su, I, iii, 8 ). ( then the answer is that ! 
"the comprehension must be accordin g to what is stated in the scripture , for 
virtuous deeds are determined bv them"ts (Jai. Su. I. iii. 9). This being the 
case, the mention of the absence of expiation in the Smrti is to he explained 
as meant for inducing (in the lifelong celibate) an intensity of effort (for 
keeping his vow). Thus also it is to be kept in mind that expiations are 
prescribed for the mendicants and the forest-dwellers in such texts as, 
"Should a forestdweller break the vow of his order, he shall undertake a 








































































penance for twelve days and help in growing grass on the grazing ground", 
"Should a mendicant break his vow, he shall, just like the Vanaprastha tend 
the pasture barring the cultivation of Soma plants, and he shall undertake the 
purificatory rites according to the Vedic branch he belongs to". 

Tonic 12: THEY ARE TO BE EXCOMMUNICATED 

II# 

q But aTfq even a+TW in either case f: (they are to be kept) outside 
(society) fin compliance with Smrti a and erg good conduct. 

43. (Whether their transgression constitutes a major or a minor sin), they 
are to be kept outside in either case in accordance with Smrti texts and 
behaviour of good people. 

Whether the lapse of the continent people from their respective orders of 
life constitutes a minor sin or a major one, in either case they are to be 
expelled from society by the good people, because of the extreme 
condemnation shown in such Smrti texts as, "For one who after being 
established in the norm of the lifelong celibate, falls from it, we cannot 
imagine any expiation by which that self-immolating man can he purified", 
"One shall undertake the Candrayana (expiatory rite) if one happens to touch 
a Brahmana fallen from a higher stage of life, excommunicated from his 
own society, or dead through hanging or by being bitten by some insect". 
This also follows from the behaviour of the good people. For decent people 
do not undertake any sacrifice, study, or matrimonial ceremony in 
association with them. 



Topic 13: MEDITATIONS CONNECTED WITH RITES 




(The meditations subserving religious acts) ;atfir: are for (i.e. are to he 
undertaken by) the sacrificer ,cj 14: the Upani~ads mention the results, ffc? 
thus (says) airq: Atreya. 

44. The teacher Atreya thinks that the agentship for medita tions belongs 
to the master of the sacrifice, since the Upanijads mention their results. 

Doubt : With regard to the meditations connected with the different parts 
of a sacrifice, the doubt arises as to whether they are to be undertaken by the 
sacrificer or the priests. What would be the conclusion here? 

Atreya : They are to be undertaken by the sacrificer. 

Why? 

On account of the mention of results. For the results are stated thus: "Rain 
pours down for him who having such a knowledge meditates on the five 
kinds of Sama as rain; and he can make rain pour down for others also" (Ch. 
II. iii. 2). Logically a result should go to the master, for the ceremony as a 
whole (with its parts) is enjoined for him, and the results of such meditations 
are prescribed for one who is empowered for the main rite. Moreover, from 
the Upani$ad it is known that the result of the meditation belongs to the 
meditators, as stated in, "Rain pours down for him who meditates" (ibid.) 
etc. 

Objection : Is not the priest also seen to derive a result, as stated in, 
"Whatever objects this chanter, possessed of such knowledge, desires either 
for himself or for the sacrificer, he secures by chanting" (Br. I. iii. 28)? 

Atreva : No . because the result accrues there to the priest on the stren gth 
of the text.t* Hence the teacher Atreya is of opinion that the master himself 







of the rite (i.e. the sacrificer) has to undertake the meditations bearing fruits. 



9Irfcd It is the priest's duty ;fiT so says aft~fiN: Audulomi fly for fffj for 
that (work), ofa (he) is retained. 


45. The (teacher) Audulomi says that it is the duty of the priest (to 
undertake such meditations), for he is retained for that. 


The teacher Audulomi is of opinion that there is no such rule that the 
meditations are to be undertaken by the sacrificer. They should be 
undertaken by the priest. 

What is the reason? 


For a priest is retained (by the sacrificer) for the performance of the rite 
together with its parts; and such meditations as on the Udgitha are included 
in that performance, since the competence for the performance of the parts is 
derived from that for the main rite. Hence the meditations have to be 
performed by the priests on such analogy as regulation of the milking of a 
cow (by the priest for one who owns it). It is thus that the Upani$ad shows in 
the following text how the meditation is to be undertaken by the Udgata 
(priest singing the Sama), "Baka, son of Dalbha, knew that Udgiitha, and he 
became the Udgata of the people in the Naimi$a forest" (Ch. I. ii. 13). As for 
the assertion that the result is seen in the Upani$ad to accrue to the sacrificer, 
that creates no difficulty, since the priests act for others, and the fruits cannot 
accrue to them unless,a text says so explicitly • (as an exception). 




46. And from Vedic texts also (this stands confirmed). 

"He said, 'whatever blessing the priests pray for in a sacrifice, they pray 
for it for the sacrificer alone'" (Sa. B. I. iii. i. 28), "Hence an Udgata, 
possessed of this knowledge, will ask, 'What desire shall I fulfil for you by 
singing?'" (Ch. I. vii. 8-9), such texts show that the result of the meditation 
undertaken by the priests accrues to the sacrificer. Hence it is concluded that 
the meditations on things forming parts of a sacrificial act are to be 
undertaken by the priests. 

Topic 14: INJUNCTION ABOUT MEDITATIVENESS 

Doubt : In the Brhadarar}yaka Upanipd (Ill. v. 1) occurs the text, 
"Therefore the Brahmaz}a, having known all about scholarshi p t pan4it va). 
should try to live ( balvena . i.e. ) upon that stren g th which comes of 
knowled g e 14 : having known all about this strength as well as scholarship, he 
becomes meditative (muni); having known all about meditativeness and its 
opposite, he becomes a Brahmama (knower of Brahman)". The doubt arises 
here whether meditativeness is enjoined here or not. 

Opponent : When under such a predicament, the conclusion to be arrived 
at is that it is not enjoined, since the injunction ends with, "should try to live 
upon that strength which cones of knowledge" (ibid.). Beyond that no verbal 











ending, denoting an injunction, is met with in "he becomes meditative" 
(ibid.). Hence this is a mere re-statement of a known fact. 

Objection : How is it gathered that it is a known fact- 

Op ponent : Since the terms "meditative" and "scholar" im pl y knowled ge. 
meditativeness becomes already known in the text , "havin g known all about 
scholarship" (ibid. ) . Moreover , it is obvious that the text , "havin g known all 
about meditativeness and its o p posite , he becomes a Brahmat l a" ( ibid. ). does 
not purport to en i oin Brahmanahood . since the term Brahmana had ocurred 
even earlier. Hence j List as much as "he becomes a Brahmapa" is said by wa v 
of praise , so also should the sentence "he becomes meditative" be a praise 
( of the stren g th that comes from mediate knowled ge), since both have the 
same form of expression. 15 


Vedantin : To this we say: 



An injunction is implied about the other auxiliary (viz meditativeness), 
(which is) 14" the third, ffl-aff: for one who is possessed of that (knowledge) 
qa> in a case of partial application (to knowledge) fgfq-aTft-$q like the main 
injunction (being applicable to the subsidiary acts). 

47. In case of a partial application to knowledge by one possessed of 
(imperfect) knowledge, an injunction is implied in another auxiliary which is 
the third; this is like the main injunction being applied to the subsidiary acts. 

In the case of meditativeness which leads to enlightenment, an injunction 
has to be admitted as much as in the cases of the "strength which comes of 
knowledge" and "scholarship" on account of its uniqueness (of not having 
been heard elsewhere). 

Opponent : Was it not pointed out that meditativeness is already implied 
by the word scholarship? 




































Veddntin : That creates no difficulty, since the term "mmtni" (lit. sage) 
implies an abundance of knowledge, and it is possible to derive the word in 
the sense of "one who contemplates". Moreover, such usage is met with as, 
"Among the munis (con templative sages) I am Vyasa" (Gita. X. 37). 

Opponent : The word "muni" is seen to refer to the highest stage of life 
(monasticism), as in "the householder's life, life iq the teacher's home, life of 
a muni, and life in the forest". 

Vedantin : No . since a different meanin g ta is noticed in such usages as 
"Valmiki, the greatest muni (sage)". In the text quoted above, the word muni 
can be understood to mean the highest stage, for it is mentioned along with 
the others, and monasticism alone remains to be mentioned after them, and 
because this highest stage of life is distinguished by a predominance of 
knowledge. Hence this "meditativeness" which is a third factor counted 
along with "strength arising from knowledge" and "scholarship", and 
consists in an abundance of knowledge, is enjoined here. And the assertion 
was made that the injunction culminates with "the strength arising from 
knowledge". Even so we resort to an injunction in the case of meditativeness 
by construing the sentence to mean, "one should become meditative"; for it 
is unique. Again, from the fact that meditativeness is spoken of as a thing to 
be acquired, it follows that an injunction has to be accepted about it as in the 
cases of "strength" and "scholarship". 

By "for one possessed of that", is to be understood, "for the monk, 
possessed of knowledge". 

Opponent : How is it known that the monk possessed of knowledge is 
meant? 

Veddntin : From the fact that the context deals with him ( i.e. his 
competence ) as is obvious from , "knowin g this very Self the Brahmar-as 
renounce 17 the desire for sons, for wealth, and for worlds and lead the 
mendicant's life" (Br. III. v. 1). 

Opponent : If one has knowledge, the perfection of that knowledge 
follows as a matter of course. So what is the need of prescribing meditation? 













VedJntin : It is hence that the aphorist sa vs, "In case of partial 
ap plication". The idea implied is this: This in i unction is made from the point 
of view of one whose knowled g e cannot achieve perfection owin g to the 
dominance of dualistic ideas. "Like subsidiary in j unctions based on the main 
one "-the idea implied is this: As from the ( main ) in j unction like , "one 
desirin g heaven should perform the Dar § a-Pdriamasa sacrifice" , the 
subsidiary acts like the li g htin g of lire etc, are assumed to be prescribed 
( thou g h no clear in j unction is discernible ). they bein g helpful to the main 
sacrifice , so also it is admitted that meditativeness is prescribed here in this 
context of knowled ge, althou g h in j unction cannot pla y any dominant part 
here. 18 


Opponent : When monasticism with its characteristic of "strength derived 
from knowledge" stands there as a stage of life sanctioned by the Vedas, why 
should the conclusion have been made in the Chandogya text with the 
householder as the last as in, "Having finished his studies and embraced the 
life of the householder, (he attains the world of Brahman)" (Ch. VIII. xv. 1). 
By concluding thus, the Upani$ad displays a preference for him. 

Vedintin : Hence the aphorist replies: 


SWM5 MIC IOTI 

I But ymr_wmq on account of its all-inclusiveness the conclusion (is) with 
the householder. 

48. But the conclusion is made (in the Chandogya Upanifad) ,with the 
householder, since he has an all-inclusive life. 

The word "but" is used to make a distinction. The distinct feature of the 
householder is that he has an all-comprehensive life. For the scriptures have 
prescribed for him many duties of his own stage of life such as sacrifices, 
which involve great effort, and he has also to practise the virtuous duties of 













































other stages, as far as possible, such as non-injury, control of senses, etc. 
Hence it involves no contradiction to end with the householder. 


wii 

3TT Since there is injunction qfv even gar" of the others (i.e. stages of 
life) MIgiR like meditativeness. 

49. Since there is injunction even about the others, just as much as of 
meditativeness. 

Just as much as the two stages of life, viz meditativeness (i.e. 
monasticism) and married life, are approved by the Vedas, so also are the 
other two, viz life in the forest and life in the teacher's home. For the 
relevant text was pointed out earlier: "Austerity is the second, and the third 
is the Brahmacarin living in his teacher's home" etc. (Ch. II. xxiii. 1). Thus 
because the four stages of life are enjoined equally, there is an option of 
belonging to any one of them singly or to all of them successively. The 
plural (rather than the dual number) in the term "others (i.e. other stages of 
life") indicating the two stages of life, occurs because of the variety of their 
sub-divisions or the multiplicity of their adherents. This is how it is to be 
understood. 



Topic 15: THE CHILDLIKE STATE 




(Bilya, i.e. the childlike state means behaviour) wiftTll without display 
(of parts), ara for so it fits in with the context. 

SO. (The word 'balya' in the Brhadaranyaka means that a man of 
enlightenment should behave like a child) without displaying his parts, for so 
it fits in with the context. 

Doubt : In the text, "Therefore the Brahmaip, having known all about 
scholarship (pan,fitya), should try to live a childlike life (balyena)" (Br. III. 
v. 1), balya appears as a thing to he followed. Now the word balya is derived 
from the word bola (child) with the help of a suffix, so that the word means 
either the state of a child or the conduct of a child. But a child's state, 
meaning a certain age, cannot be achieved at will. So it may mean either 
childlike behaviour like answering calls of nature just as they occur or the 
qualities of guilelessness, freedom from egoism and pride, and the 
undeveloped state of the organs? This is the doubt. What should be the 
conclusion then? 

Opponent : The meaning of the word bdlya is more well known in the 
world as behaving, talking, eating at will, and answering calls of nature just 
as they occur. Hence it is reasonable to accept this. 

Objection : It is not reasonable that he should resort to unrestrained 
behaviour, as that would lay him open to the charge of degrading himself 
through such wilful transgression. 

Opponent : No, since a monk with enlightenment will remain free from 
blemish on the strength of scriptural authority, like one-in- such matters as 
killing animals (in a sacrifice). 

Vedantin : This being the conclusion, the answer is that it cannot be so, 
since this text can have some other meaning. For one should not think in 
terms of overriding an injunction in case one can get something else as the 
meaning of balya that does not contradict that injunction. Moreover, an 
auxiliary is prescribed for aiding the main factor. The continuance in 
knowledge is the main thing here that has to be practised by the monks; and 
the pursuit of knowledge will cease to be a possibility if childlike behaviour 



he adopted in its totality. Hence by the term balya is to be understood here 
some inward state of a child such as having immature functional ability etc. 
That fact is referred to by the aphorist in, "without any display". That is to 
say, without showing himself off by parading his wisdom, learning, 
virtuousness, etc.; he should be free from pride, conceit, etc. like a child 
who, owing to the immaturity of his senses, does not try to make a display of 
himself before others. Thus interpreted, the (Upani$adic) text reveals a 
meaning that logically reinforces the main injunction. And thus it has been 
stated by the authors of the Smrtis in, "He is a Brahmapa whom nobody 
recognizes either as an aristocrat or a commoner, either as well-read or not 
well-read, either as well-behaved or not well-behaved. A man of 
enlightenment should resort to unostentatious behaviour while following his 
spiritual practices in secret. He should roam over the earth like a blind man 
(not attracted by sense-objects), like one benumbed (i.e. without the sense of 
taste etc.), like one who is dumb (i.e. without active organs)", and "without 
any outer sign and with unostentatious behaviour" etc. 

TOPIC 16: TIniF, OF FRUITION OF KNOWLEDGE 

3^ null! 

(The fruition may be) aij r even in this life a a gf if there is no obstruction 
to what (means) is adopted; wq-qqqq for so it is seen (in the Upani$ads). 

51. The generation of knowledge takes place even in this life if there is no 
obstruction to the means adopted. For this is what is revealed (by the 
Upani,cads). 

Doubt : The means of knowledge, both higher and lower, have been 
ascertained under the aphorisms starting with, "And all religious duties are 
necessary on the strength of the Upani$adic sanction of sacrifice etc." (III. iv. 
26). Now the question to be considered is whether the knowledge, resulting 
from them, emerges in this very life or sometimes even in a later life. What 
should be the conclusion then? 



Oppmem : It fructifies here itself. 

Objection : What is the reason? 

Opponent : Because enlightenment is preceded by "hearing" etc., and 
nobody engages in "hearing" etc. with the motive, "May enlightenment come 
to me in the next world". As a fact, however, a man is seen to engage in 
them with the purpose of having enlightenment emerge in the very same life. 
Sacrifices etc. also are helpful to the generation of knowledge through the 
medium of hearing etc., since knowledge is generated by its valid means. 
Hence the birth of enlightenment must occur in this very life. 

Veddntin : This being the position, our answer is: "The generation of 
knowledge takes place even in this life if there is no obstruction to the means 
adopted". The idea implied is this: Knowledge is possible even in this life, 
provided the means adopted for -enlightenment are not obstructed in any 
way by some other result of past work that fructifies just then. Should it, 
however, be obstructed, the fruition comes in a subsequent birth. The 
fructification of a past act occurs from a (suitable) concurrence of space, 
time, and causation. And there can be no such rule that the very same space, 
time, and causation that lead to the fruition of one act, also lead to the 
fruition of some other act, since acts can have opposite results. Moreover, 
the scriptures stop by stating merely that a particular act has a particular 
result; they do not enunciate also the peculiar space, time, and causation. As 
a matter of fact, some supersensuous power manifests itself with regard to 
some acts owing to the assiduous application of its means, while the power 
of some other act remains arrested under its influence. It is not a fact that a 
motive for rise of knowledge either here or hereafter cannot be entertained 
equally, since the motive, "May I get knowledge either in this life or the 
next", can be held freely. Even when knowledge emerges from "hearing" 
etc., it arises only after the impediments wear away. This is why the 
Upani$ad shows the inscrutability of the Self in the text, "Of that (Self) 
which is not available for the mere hearing to many and which many do not 
understand, the expounder is wonderful and the receiver is wonderful, and 
wonderful is he who knows under the instruction of an adept" (Ka. I. ii. 7). 
And when the Upani$ad says that Vamadeva realized the state of Brahman 



even when in his mother's womb (Ai. II. i. 5), it only shows that knowledge 
may emerge in a succeeding birth as a result of practices gone through in an 
earlier life; for a child, in the womb itself, cannot possibly undertake any 
practice that is usually gone through in this world. In the Smcti also it is seen 
that, being questioned by Arjuna, "What end does one, failing to gain 
perfection in Yoga, meet, 0 Kta?" (GYta, VI. 37), the Lord Krsi a says, "For 
the doer of good, 0 my son, never comes to grief" (GYta, VI. 40); then again 
he speaks of his (i.e. of the fallen Yogin's) attainment of virtuous worlds and 
birth in virtuous families; and then in the passage beginning with, "There he 
is equipped with the intelligence acquired in his former body", etc. and 
ending with, "gaining perfection through many births he reaches the highest 
goal" (Gita, VI. 43-45), Sri Kra reveals the very same fact. Hence the 
conclusion is confirmed that knowledge arises either in this life or a 
subsequent one depending on the removal of impediment. 

Topic 17: LIBERATION IS UNIFORM EVERYWHERE 

Doubt : In the case of an aspirant for liberation, who adopts the means of 
knowledge, a rule, applicable to each individually, has been discovered to 
the effect that a distinction, as to whether the resulting enlightenment will 
occur in this life or a subsequent one, is created by the relative assiduousness 
in the pursuit of the practices. Now the doubt arises as to whether there is 
any such rule applicable to the aspirants individually that a distinction will 
be created in the resulting liberation as well in conformity with the 
superiority or the inferiority of the knowledge itself. 

Vedamin : Having that doubt in view the aphorist answers: 

(nr ll^ll 

if_i: There is no rule with regard to the result called liberation qarij of this 
kind, aj-T-aw:because that state has been definitely ascertained (to be the 
same). 



52. There is no rule of this kind with regard to the result called liberation, 
because that state has been definitely determined (to be the same), because 
that state has been definitely determined (to be the same). 

With regard to liberation, the result of knowledge, there is no such rule. 
One must not entertain any misconception of any such rule being applicable 
with individual variation in the matter of the resulting liberation. 

Why? 

"Because the Upani$ads have definitely ascertained that state (to be the 
same)". For in all the Upani$ads, the state of liberation is determined to be 
uniform in nature, the state of liberation being nothing but Brahman Itself. 
And Brahman cannot be of many sorts, since Its characteristic indication is 
declared to be uniform by such texts as, "neither gross nor minute" (Br. III. 
viii. 8), "This Self is .that which has been described as 'Not so, not so'" (Br. 
III. ix. 26), "Where one does not see anything else" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), "All 
that is in front is but Brahman, the immortal" (Mu. II. ii. 11), "and all this are 
the Self" (Br II. iv. 6), "That great birthless Self is undecaying, immortal, 
undying, fearless, and Brahman (infinite)" (Br. IV. iv. 25), "But when to the 
knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, then what should one 
see and through what?" (Br. IV. v. 15). Moreover, in accordance with some 
peculiar efficacy belonging to the means of knowledge, they may (possibly) 
impart some excellence to knowledge itself, which is their result; but they 
cannot do so to liberation which is the result of knowledge. For we said it 
more than once that liberation cannot be a product of anything, it being 
realized through knowledge as a fact eternally present in its own right. For 
the matter of that, there can be no such thing as superiority, constituted by 
perfection, even in the case of knowledge, since an inferior knowledge is no 
knowledge, the superior one alone being so. Hence knowledge can possibly 
have only such a distinction A having arisen late or promptly. But in 
liberation there can he no superiority. Again, unlike the differences in the 
results of karma, the result of knowledge can have no difference owing to 
the absence of any difference in the knowledge itself. For unlike karma, 
knowledge as the means to liberation has no difference. But so far as the 
meditations on the qualified Brahman are concerned, as for instance in, "He 



who is identified with the mind and has the subtle body as His body" (Ch. 
III. xiv. 2), they can be different, owing to addition or elimination of 
attributes; and hence there can be a difference among their respective results, 
even as in the case of the results of karma. In support of this is noticeable an 
indicatory mark in the text, "The aspirant becomes just as he meditates on 
Him." Similar also is the Smrti text, "There is no such thing as a higher goal 
for one realizing the absolute Brahman, for they speak of difference only in 
cases where qualities obtain". 

The repetition of "Because that state has been definitely determined (to be 
the same)" indicates the end of this Part. 

SECTION I 

Topic 1: REPETITION OF MEDITATION ETC. 



Chapter IV 

PHALA - RESULT 

The Third Chapter was mostly occupied with a discussion of the practices 
connected with the conceptions (vidyas) of the qualified Brahman and 
absolute Brahman. Now this Fourth wifi be concerned with a discussion 
about the results, and it wifi also consider some other matters stemming out 
of that subject. To start with, however, we shall follow through a few 
sections, some special considerations regarding the practices themselves. 

Doubt : We meet with such Upani$adic texts as, "The Self, my dear, 
should be realized-should be heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon" (Br. 
IV. v. 6), "Knowing about this (Self) alone, the intelligent aspirant after 
Brahman should attain intuitive knowledge" (Br. IV. iv. 21), "He is to be 
searched after. He is to be desired to be known" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), and so on. 
The doubt arises with regard to these, whether the mental act is to be 
undertaken once only, or it is to be repeated. What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : Like the performance of the Prayaja sacrifice etc. the mental 
act is to be undertaken once only; for the requirement of the scripture is 
fulfilled by that much alone. Were one to resort to repetition, even though 
not stated by the Upanisad, one would be doing something not envisaged by 
the scripture. 


Doubt : We quoted above the instructions about the repeated mental acts 
as contained in, "should be heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon" (Br. 




IV. v. 6), and so on. 


Opponent: Even so, one should repeat only as many times as the scripture 
demands. There should be one hearing, one reflection, and one meditation, 
and nothing more. There can be no repetition where the instruction is uttered 
but once with a "He should know" or "He should meditate". 

Veddntin : This being the position, we reply: 



arrW: Repetition (is necessary) ar-tlMRll the instruction having been 
given more than once. 

1. Repetition is necessary, since the Upanisads instruct repeatedly. 

The mental act is to be repeated. 

Why? 

Since the instruction is repeated. Such repeated instruction as "should be 
heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon" indicates a repetition of the 
mental act. 

Opponent: Did we not point out that the repetition should be as many 
times as the scripture demands and no more? 

Veddntin : No, since these have to culminate in the intuitive realization of 
Brahman; for hearing etc. fulfil their purpose of producing a (tangible) 
perceptible result in this case when they culminate in realization through 
repetition, even as husking etc. culminate in producing rice etc. Besides, by 
the word upasand (continuous remembrance, adoration) and nididhydsana 


(profound meditation) are implied acts involving this aspect of repetition. It 
is thus that when in this world somebody follows his teacher and others 
continuously and devotedly, he is referred to by such sentences as, "He 
adores his teacher", "He adores the king". Similarly by the sentence, "The 
woman meditates on her husband who is on a sojourn", a woman is referred 
to who is engaged in thinking of her husband constantly and is anxious about 
him. The verbs vid (lit. to know) and upas (lit. to sir near or to meditate) are 
seen to be used in the Upanigads interchangeably. Sometimes the text starts 
with vid and ends with upas, as for instance in the context starting with, "I 
speak of him also as Raikva who knows what Raikva knew (veda)" (Ch. IV. 
i. 4), where it is said later, "0 venerable sir, instruct me about the God on 
whom you meditate (upasse)" (Ch. IV. ii. 2). Sometimes again the start is 
made with meditation and conclusion with knowledge, as in, "One should 
meditate on the mind as Brahman" (Ch. III. xviii. 1), and "He who knows 
thus becomes resplendent in fame, prowess, and the brilliance arising from 
the Vedic studies" (Ch. III. xviii. 3). Hence repetition has to be resorted to 
even where the instruction occurs only once, while a repeated instruction 
indicates repetition as a matter of course. 



2. And (this is so) on account of the indicatory mark. 


The indicatory sign also conveys the idea of repetition. Thus it is that after 
starting with the meditation on the Udgitha, the meditation on the Udgitha as 



the sun is decried as productive of a single son. Then in the sentence, "You 
meditate repeatedly on the Udgitha (separately) as the (sun and its) rays" 
(Ch. I. v. II), the text prescribes (by the term paryavartaya-meditate 
repeatedly) the meditation on the multiplicity of the rays for getting many 
sons. Thereby the text indicates that the repetition of the mental act is 
assumed as an established fact. Hence from a similarity of this it follows that 
repetition should he the rule in all cases of mental acts. 

The opponent says here: Granted that the mental acts that are productive 
of results may well be repeated when some excellence can be produced in 
them through the repetition. But what purpose can be served by the 
repetition where a (single) mental act about the supreme Brahman calls up 
the supreme Brahman which is eternally pure, intelligent, and free by nature, 
and which is identical with one's own Self? 

Objection : Repetition has to be undertaken, since the realization of the 
identity of Brahman and the Self does not reasonably result from a single 
hearing. 

Opponent: No, since that will not logically follow even after repetition. If 
the hearing of such texts as "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7) once only does 
not generate the realization of the identity of Brahman and the Self, then 
how can it be expected that even a repetition of that will produce it? Again it 
may be argued that a mere sentence cannot produce the direct perception of 
anything, and hence that sentence, helped by reasoning, will produce the 
realization of the identity of Brahman and the Self. But (even so), this 
reasoning also may well lead to a perception of its object after a single 
application. 

(Objection) : It may also be argued that reasoning and the text can only 
produce a knowledge of the general features of the object, but not so of its 
special features. From such a declaration as, "I have a pain in the heart", and 
from such symptoms as the contortion of the body, another person can 
understand in a general way that there is a pain, but he cannot have a full 
experience of the pain like the suffering man. Since an intimate knowledge 
(of this nature) leads to the removal of ignorance, the repetition is needed for 
that purpose. 



Opponent : This cannot be so, since the intimate knowledge cannot 
possibly arise even if that much is done repeatedly. For a special aspect that 
cannot be known from the scripture and reasoning at the first instance, 
cannot he known even after resorting to them a hundred times. So whether it. 
be the intimate knowledge or the general knowledge that is produced by 
scripture and reasoning, it must be so at the very first application, so that 
repetition has no place. And there can be no such rule that nobody can have 
any intimate knowledge at the very first instant, since people who would 
know have divergent intelligence. Again with regard to a thing of this world, 
possessing common and peculiar features, there may be scope for repetition 
inasmuch as a man may understand only one feature at one attempt and 
others at subsequent attempts, as for instance in reading a long chapter. But 
it is not reasonable that there should be any need of repetition for 
comprehending Brahman which is absolute Consciousness without common 
and peculiar features. 

To this we (Vedantins) say: Repetition will be unnecessary for one who 
can realize the Self as Brahman after hearing "That thou art" once only. But 
for one who cannot do so, repetition is a necessity. Thus it is noticed in the 
Chandogya Upanisad that Uddalaka teaches his son, "That thou art, 0 
Svetaketu" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), and then being requested by his son again and 
again, "0 revered sir, explain to me again" (ibid.), he removes the respective 
causes of his (Svetaketu's) misconceptions, and teaches that very fact "That 
thou art" repeatedly. That very process is referred to by citing the text, "It is 
to be heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon" (Br. IV. v. 6). 

Opponent : Was it not stated that if the text "That thou art", uttered once, 
cannot bring about a realization of its meaning, then it will not be able to do 
so even when repeated? 

VedBntin : That difficulty does not arise, for nothing is illogical about 
facts directly perceived. It is a matter of experience that though the meaning 
may be vaguely apprehended from a sentence uttered only once, people 
understand it fully after removing progressively the false ideas standing in 
the way, through a process of sustained consideration. Again, the text "That 
thou art" speaks of the identity of the entity denoted by "thou" with the entity 



denoted by "That". By the word "That" is denoted the Brahman under 
discussion that is Existence, the Witness, and the cause of the birth etc. of 
the universe as is well in evidence in such texts as, "Brahman is Truth, 
Knowledge, and Infinite" (Tai. II. i. 1), "Knowledge, Bliss, Brahman" (Br. 
III. ix. 28), "This Immutable is never seen, but is the Witness, It is never 
known, but is the Knower" (Br. III. viii. 11), "Without birth, decrepitude, 
death", "Neither gross nor minute, neither short nor long" (Br. III. viii. 8), 
and so on. In these texts, changes like birth etc. that befall all things are 
denied by the words, "without birth" etc. and the properties of matter like 
grossness etc. are denied by the words "neither gross" etc. By the words 
"knowledge" etc. it is stated that Brahman is by nature Consciousness and 
Efliulgence. This object called Brahman, which is denoted by the word 
"That", which is free from all mundane attributes, and which is by nature 
Consciousness, is well known to the people who are adepts in the 
Upani$ads. Equally well it has been known by them that the inmost Self of 
the taught (i.e. disciple) is the meaning of the word "thou", which is the seer 
and the hearer, and which is thought of as the inmost entity inhabiting the 
sheaths starting from the gross body, and which is then ascertained as 
Consciousness Itself. That being the case, the sentence "That thou art" 
cannot produce a direct realization of its own meaning in those people to 
whom these two entities remain obstructed by ignorance, doubt, and 
confusion; for the meaning of a sentence is dependent on the meaning of the 
words (constituting it). Thus it is that for such people it becomes desirable to 
resort repeatedly to the scriptures and reasoning that lead to a clarification of 
the concepts. Although the Self to be realized is partless, still many 
constituents are superimposed on It, such as the body, sense-organs, mind, 
intellect, perception of objects, etc. That being so, one false constituent may 
be discarded at one attempt at comprehension, and another at another. In this 
sense the dawn of a conception in a progressive manner becomes justifiable. 
But even this is only the penultimate stage of the realization of the Self. 
Those of sharp intellect on the other hand who have no obstruction like 
ignorance, doubt, and confusion, with regard to the object to be known can 
realize the meaning of "That thou art" even from the first utterance, so that a 
repetition in their case is certainly useless. For the knowledge of the Self 
emerging once for all is able to remove ignorance, and no progressive 
development is admitted here. 



Opponent : This may be proper if anybody can have this realization thus. 
As a matter of fact, however, the idea that one is subject to sorrowfulness 
etc. is strong, so that nobody can realize the absence of sorrowfulness etc. 

Veddntin : No, since the reasonable position is that the selfidentification 
with misery etc. is as unreal as the self-identification with the body etc. For it 
is a matter of direct experience that when the body is cut or burned, one has 
such false identification as, "I am being cut", "I am being burnt". Similarly it 
is seen that when more external objects like sons and friends suffer, one 
superimposes this suffering on oneself by saying, "I am suffering". The self- 
identification with misery etc. must be similar, since like the body etc., 
miserableness etc. are perceived to be separate from consciousness. Besides, 
this does not persist in deep sleep etc., whereas consciousness is present 
even in sleep as stated in, "That It does not see in that state is because, 
although seeing then, It does not see" (Be. IV. iii. 23). Hence the realization 
of the Self means the realization that "I am the Self which is one and is 
characterized as consciousness and freedom from all sorrow". A man who 
realizes the Self thus can have no other duty. Thus it is that the Upani$adic 
text shows the absence of any duty for a knower of the Self in, "What shall 
we achieve through children, we who have attained this Self, this result?" 
(B;. IV. iv. 22). The Smj-ti also says, "But the man who is devoted to the Self 
and is satisfied with the Self and content in the Self alone, has no obligatory 
duty" (GYta, III. 17). But to one to whom this realization does not come 
promptly, this very repetition is meant for bringing about the realization. 
Even there, however, the teacher should not distract him from the 
understanding of the sentence "That thou art" in order to direct him to mere 
repetition; for nobody marries his daughter to a bridegroom for killing him. 
So- long as a man acts under direction, he must have such ideas opposed to 
the ideas of Brahman as, "I am qualified for this, I am the agent of action, 
and I have to do this". For the man who is dull of intellect and discards the 
meaning of a sentence just because it is not obvious to him, it is admitted 
that his mind has to be fixed on the meaning of that sentence through the 
process of repetition etc. as stated (above). Hence even in the case of the 
knowledge of the supreme Brahman, a repetition of the instructions, leading 
to that knowledge, is necessary. 



Topic 2: IDENTITY OF THE SELF WITH BRAHMAN 



I But (the Upani$ads) d44pc4 acknowledge (Brahman) as ancsr the Self ' 
and 'a make (others) understand (It as such). 


3. But the Upani,sads acknowledge Brahman as the Self and cause It to be 
so understood. 


The aphorist discusses whether the supreme Self which is possessed of the 
characteristics as presented in the scriptures is to be realized as identical with 
oneself or different from oneself. 

Opponent : When the word Self is heard of in the Upani$ads as referring 
to the innermost Self, why should any such doubt arise? 

Doubt : The answer is this: This word "Self" can be taken in its primary 
sense only if the Self and God be non-different; otherwise it has to be 
understood in a secondary sense. That is how the aphorist thinks. What 
should be the conclusion then? 


Opponent : It is to be understood as different from T (oneself). For the 
entity, possessed of such qualities as not being blemished by sin and so on, 
cannot be understood to be possessed of the opposite qualities; and the 
entity, possessed of the opposite qualities, cannot be understood to be 
possessed of the qualities of not being blemished by sin and so on. The 
entity, possessed of the attributes of being free from sin and so on, is the 
supreme Lord, while the entity, possessed of the opposite attributes, is the 
embodied soul. Now, if God becomes identical with the transmigrating soul, 
God will cease to exist; and as a result, the scriptures will become useless. 
Similarly if the transmigrating soul becomes God, there will be none to 
follow the scriptures, which will certainly become useless. This will also 
contradict such means of proof as common experience. 



Objection : Even though there he difference, one has to resort to the idea 
of identity on the authority of the scriptures, just as one has to think of Vi$nu 
in images etc. 

Opponent : This may well be so if it pleases you; but then you must not 
lead us to admit that God is the Self of the transmigrating being in the 
primary sense. 

To this we (Vedantins) say that the supreme Lord is of course to be 
realized as one's Self. Thus it is that the Jabalas, while speaking of the 
supreme Lord, present Him as identical with the Self in, "0 blessed Deity, I 
indeed am Thee, and Thou indeed art me, 0 Deity". Similarly also the other 
texts like "I am Brahman" (B;. I. iv. 10) are to be understood as postulating 
the identity of the Self with Brahman. As a matter of fact, the Vedic texts 
make us understand God as our very Self, as for instance, "This is your Self 
that is within all" (B;. III. iv. 1), "This is the internal Ruler, your own 
immortal Self" (B;. III. vii. 3), "That is Truth, that is the Self, and That thou 
art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7). 

As for the argument that on the analogy of an image being Vi§ou, this is 
only a meditation with the help of an image (which in this case is "I"), that is 
improper, since that would amount to a figurative interpretation (of the texts 
about unity). It is also improper because the syntactical forms of the 
passages are different. Where the intention is that a symbol should have an 
idea superimposed on it, a sentence occurs only unilaterally, as for instance, 
"The mind is Brahman" (Ch. III. xviii. 1), "The sun is Brahman" (Ch. III. 
xix. 1). But here the Upani$ad says, "I am Thee, and Thou art me". Hence 
identity is to be understood from this kind of texts that are dissimilar to those 
dealing with symbols. Moreover, the dualistic conception is condemned, as 
in, "While he who worships another God thinking, 'He is one, and I am 
another', does not know" (Br. I. iv. 10), "He goes from death to death who 
sees difference as it were in It" (Be. IV. iv. 19), "All ousts one who knows it 
as different from the Self" (Bi-. IV. v. 7); and there are many other 
Upanisadic texts of this kind which denounce the dualistic conceptions. 


It was argued that the two things of opposite characteristics cannot be 
identical with each other. That is nothing damaging as the reasonable 



position is that the opposition in characteristics is unreal. 


And it is a false argument that God will cease to be so, because one has to 
accept scriptural authority and because such a position is not held by us. For 
we do not admit that the scriptures speak of God Himself as the 
transmigrating soul. 

What do you admit then? 

We hold that the scriptures aim at establishing the identity of the 
transmigrating soul with God Himself by removing from the soul all vestiges 
of transmigration. From this point of view it becomes affirmed that God is 
possessed of the characteristics of being untouched by sins etc., and that the 
opposite characteristics of the soul are unreal. 

The criticism is also unfounded that no one will be left over to practise the 
Vedintic path and that direct perception etc. will be outraged. For the 
transmigratory state is conceded before enlightenment, and the activities like 
perception are confined within that state only, because texts as this, "But 
when to the knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, then what 
should one see and through what?" (Br. II. iv. 14), point out the absence of 
perception etc. in the state of enlightenment. 

Opponent: In the absence of perception etc. the Vedas also will cease to 
exist. 

Vedantin : That is no defect, since that position is admitted by us. For 
according to the texts starting with, "In this state the father is no father" and 
ending with "The Vedas are no Vedas" (Br. IV. iii. 22), we do admit the 
absence of the Vedas themselves in the state of enlightenment. 

Opponent: Who is it then that has this unenlightenment? 

Veddntin : We say that it is you yourself who ask thus. 

Opponent: Is it not stated by the Upanisad that I am God? 

Vedan in : If that is so, you are already an enlightened man, 



and so nobod y has unenli g htenment. Hereby is also refuted the criticism of 
some people who sav that the Self becomes associated with a second entit y 
owin g to the ver y presence of nescience , so that non-dualism becomes 
untenable.' Hence one should fix one's mind on the Self which is God. 

Tonic 3: No SELF-IDENTITY WITH SYMBOLS 

Doubt : Some meditations based on symbols are presented thus: "One 
should meditate about the mind as Brahman. This is on the corporeal plane. 
Then is the meditation on the material plane. One should meditate about 
space as Brahman" (Ch. III. xviii. 1); similarly, "The sun is Brahman. This is 
the instruction" (Ch. III. xix. 1), "He who meditates about name as 
Brahman" (CII. VII. i. 5). With regard to these meditations with the help of 
symbols the doubt arises whether self-identification should be resorted to or 
not even in these cases. What should be the solution here? 

Opponent : It is logical that one should identify oneself with those 
symbols as well (thinking thus: "I am the symbol which is Brahman"). 

Why? 

Because Brahman is familiar in the Upani$ads as the Self and the symbols 
also are forms of Brahman. Since these symbols are modifications of 
Brahman and are hence Brahman Itself, therefore it is but reasonable that 
they should be the Self (of all). 

To this we (the Veddntins) say: 

* raft i ® imi 

q Not (self-identification) srcf in the symbol k because g: he (the aspirant) 
(does) not (comprehend thus). 














4. (The aspirant is) not to identify (himself) with a symbol, for he cannot 
understand himself to be so. 

One should not fix the idea of the Self on symbols, because an aspirant 
cannot think of the separate symbols as himself. The reasoning is hollow that 
the symbols being forms of Brahman are Brahman Itself, and hence are the 
same as the Self; for that would lead to the brushing away of all symbols. 
For it is only when the names etc. are deprived of their transformed states (as 
names etc.), that one arrives at Brahman which is their essence. But when 
names etc. as such are done away with, how can they become symbols and 
how can there be any self-identification? It cannot also be argued that since 
Brahman is the Self, we can have a meditation involving self-identification 
wherever an injunction about contemplation on Brahman occurs; for (in 
meditation) the idea of agentship still remains intact. Brahman is taught to be 
identical with the individual Self after eliminating all mundane 
characteristics like agentship etc. from the latter, whereas meditation is 
prescribed without eliminating these. From this fact also that the aspirant and 
the symbols are equally limited entities, self-identity (with symbols) is not a 
possibility; for a rucaka and a svastika, (which are both different kinds of 
gold ornaments), cannot be identical. But should the aspirant and the 
symbols be the same from the point of view of their Brahmanhood, just as 
much as the two ornaments are from the standpoint of being gold, then we 
have already showed the difficulty that the symbols will cease to exist (as 
such). Hence one is not to identify oneself with a symbol. 

Topic 4: SUPERIMPOSITION OF THE HIGHER ON THE LOWER 

With regard to those very instances another doubt arises. Should the ideas 
of the sun etc. be superimposed on Brahman or should the idea of Brahman 
be superimposed on the sun etc.? 

Why should the doubt arise? 

Because no reason is discernible for these being placed in apposition (with 
the same case-endings). Here we find the word Brahman placed in 
apposition with the words sun etc., the same case-endings being used in the 
texts, "Adityo brahma", "Prano brahma", "Vidyud brahma", and so on. But 



this apposition does not quite fit in here on account of the divergent 
meanings of the words aditya (sun), brahma (Brahman), etc. For there can be 
no such apposition (between a cow and a horse) as would be implied in "The 
cow is horse (i.e. the cow that is a horse)". 

Objection : Just as clay and a plate (made of clay) can be placed in 
apposition (the latter being a modification of the former), so also can be 
placed Brahman and the sun etc., they being related as the material cause 
and its modifications. 

Doubt : The answer is that it cannot be so, since from such an apposition 
(meaning identity) with the material cause, the modified thing will lose its 
individuality, and that will lead to an elimination of symbols, as already 
pointed out. Moreover, in that case, this will amount to a mere statement 
about the supreme Self, so that the scope for meditation will be effaced, and 
the mention in the Upanipd of a limited (i.e. selected) number of 
modifications (of Brahman) will be meaningless. Hence it is a case of 
superimposing the idea of one thing on another, as in sentences like "The 
Brahmama is the Vaikvanara fire". That being so, the doubt arises as to what 
is to be looked upon as what. 

Opponent: Such being the case, there can be no definite decision, because 
no scriptural text is in evidence to help a decision. This is how it has to be 
accepted. Or we can rather decide that the very ideas of the sun etc. are to be 
superimposed on Brahman; for it is thus that Brahman becomes adored (i.e. 
meditated upon) by being looked upon as the sun and the rest; and the 
conclusion of the scripture is that the worship of Brahman is productive of 
fruits. Hence the sun and the rest are not to be looked upon as Brahman (but 
rather Brahman is to be looked upon as these). 


Veddmin : This being the conclusion, we say: 



(The sun etc. are to have) wr-{t: the idea of Brahman superimposed (on 
them) 3a because of the (consequent) exaltation. 

S. The sun etc. are to be looked upon as Brahman because of the 
consequent exaltation. 

The idea of Brahman Itself is to be superimposed on the sun and the rest. 

Why? 

On account of the exaltation; for thus the sun and the other things will 
come to be looked upon as raised in status, because of the superimposition 
on them of an exalted idea. Thus also will be honoured the custom in 
ordinary life, according to which the inferior one is to be fancied as the 
higher, as is evident in honouring a king's charioteer as the king himself. For 
it will not lead to any good result if the king be lowered in estimation by 
being looked upon as the charioteer. That should be the method of approach 
here as well, for a contrary approach will lead to evil. 

Opponent : No possibility of evil should be apprehended here since there 
is the sanction of the scripture; and the scriptural views are not to be 
regulated by common norms. 

Veddmrn : To this the answer is that this would be so in a case where the 
meaning can be ascertained; but when the meaning of the scripture is in 
doubt, it is nothing unbecoming to take the help of the canons of ordinary 
life for arriving at a decision. If in accordance with this the scripture is 
ascertained to mean the superimposition of the exalted status, it is but 
obvious that one will merely court evil by superimposing the idea of the 


lower on the higher. Now, because the words sun (aditya) etc. occur first, 
their primary meanings have to be accepted, for that creates no difficult y. 
And while the intellect remains occupied with these words in their primar y 
senses , the word Brahman makes its a p pearance in these sentences at a later 
sta g e. But since the word Brahman , in its primary sense , cannot stand in 
ap position with the sun etc. , the only remainin g conclusion that stands 
affirmed is that the intention here is to prescribe the superimposition of the 
idea of Brahman. Besides , from the use of the word iti ( meanin g "as" ) after 
Brahman ( in aditvam brabma iti upasita ), this very meanin g becomes 
ap propriate. Thus it is that the Upanisad everywhere uses the word Brahman 
with an iti after it in such sentences as . "Brahma iti ddefah" . "Brahma iti 
u pasita" . "Brahma iti upaste"2 . and so on, while the words aditya (sun) etc. 
are used by themselves. From this it follows that as in the sentence 
"Suktikarit rajatam iti pratyeti-He perceives the nacre as silver", the word 
suktika (nacre) denotes the nacre itself, while the word rajata (silver) denotes 
an appearance of silver by a figure of speech, meaning thereby that the man 
has merely a cognition of silver, though in fact there is no silver, so in the 
present case we understand that one has to look upon the sun etc. as 
Brahman. Again by using the accusative case (after aditya etc.) in the 
complementary portion, the Upanisad shows that the sun etc. are the objects 
of the verb "to meditate", as in: "He who having known thus meditates about 
the sun as Brahman-sa ya evark vidvdn adityarh brahma iti upaste" (Ch. III. 
xix. 4), "He who meditates about the organ of speech as Brahman-yo vacant 
brahma iti upaste" (Ch. VII. ii. 2), "He who meditates about resolve as 
Brahman-yah sankalpain brahma iti upaste" (Ch. VII. iv. 3). 

As for the assertion that the meditation on Brahman Itself is to be 
preferred here for the sake of acquiring the result, that is untenable, since 
according to the above reasoning, the sun etc. are themselves known as the 
objects of meditation. But the result will of course be ordained by Brahman 
in these cases just as much as in the cases of the service to the guests and so 
on, for Brahman is the ordainer of everything. This fact was elaborated 
under the aphorism, "From Him are the fruits of action, since that is 
reasonable" (III. ii. 38). The very fact that the idea of Brahman is 
superimposed on the symbols is a worship of Brahman, just as much as the 











































imagination of the images as Vi*Ou and others is the worship of those 
deities. 


Topic 5: SUBORDINATE PARTS OF RITES AS THE SUN ETC. 

Doubt : Certain meditations occur in connection with the auxiliaries of 
rites as found in such texts as, "Meditate on the sun, that shines yonder, as 
Udgitha" (Ch. I. iii. 1), "Meditate on the worlds as the fivefold Santa" (Ch. 
H. ii. 1), "Meditate on speech as the sevenfold Santa" (Ch. II. viii. 1), "This 
(earth) indeed is Rk, fire is Sam" (Ch. I vi. 1), and others. With regard to 
these the doubt arises as to whether the ideas of Udgitha etc. are to be 
superimposed on the sun etc. or the Udgitha etc., are to be viewed as the sun 
etc. 

Opponent : The conclusion to be arrived at here is that either of the two 
things can be done indiscriminately, since nothing occurs there to decide in 
favour of either of them. No one is understood here as having any special 
exaltation like Brahman. It is possible to understand that Brahman is more 
glorified than the sun etc., It being the origin of the whole universe and 
possessed of the attributes of being free from sin etc. But since the sun, the 
Udgitha, and other things are all equally the modifications of Brahman, 
nothing can be understood (in those contexts) as elevating any one of them 
above the rest. 

Or it may be that the ideas of the Udgitha etc. are ever to be superimposed 
on the sun etc. 

Why? 

Because Udgitha etc. constitute the rites, and because the rites are well 
known as meant for yielding results. The sun etc., when meditated on by 
viewing them as the Udgitha etc. will become part and parcel of the rites and 
will thus produce their results (as a part of the results of the rites 
themselves). Thus it is that in the text starting with, "This (earth) indeed is 
Rk, fire is Santa" (Ch. I. vi. 1), the earth is alluded to by the word Rk, and 
fire by the word Santa in, "That Santa is established on this Rk" (ibid). This 
becomes consistent if the earth and fire are sought to be looked upon as Rk 



and Selma, but not so if Rk and Sama are intended to be viewed as the earth 
and fire (respectively). The word king comes to bear a figurative sense when 
it is applied to his charioteer, but the word charioteer is not thus applied to 
the king. Moreover, from the sentence, "Meditate on the fivefold Selma (as 
existing) among the worlds (lokecu)" (Ch. H. ii. 1), it is obvious that the 
Sama is to be superimposed on the worlds as they are pointed out to be the 
locus (by the use of the locative case-ending-in lokeiu-after worlds). The 
text, "This Gayatri Sams is established among the prams" (Ch. II. xi. 1) only 
confirms this view. In such sentences as, "The sun is Brahman-this is the 
instruction" (Ch. III. xix. 1), the idea of Brahman, coming later, is 
superimposed on the sun etc. occurring earlier. And in such Upani$adic texts 
as, "The earth is hirikara" (Ch. II. ii. 1), the earth etc. occur earlier, while 
hiitkara etc. occur later. Hence the ideas of the auxiliaries of the rites are to 
be superimposed on the sun etc. which are nonauxiliaries. 

Vedintin : To this we reply: 



Rt And all{' c-a-{: the ideas of the sun etc. (are to be superimposed) aon 
the subsidiary part (of rite) 3ggff: for that is reasonable. 

6. And the ideas of the sun etc. are surely to be superimposed on the 
subsidiary parts of the rites, for that is reasonably maintainable. 

The ideas of the sun etc. are of course to be superimposed on such 
subsidiaries as Udgitha etc. 

Why? 

On account of reasonableness. For it is but reasonable that when Ud g itha 

etc, become sanctified bv bein g looked upon as the sun etc. , the rites become 
more fruitful. This is owin g to the proximity of ( parts like ) Ud g itha8 to the 















unseen poten tial results of the rites. The text, "Whatever is done with 
knowledge, faith, and meditation becomes more fruitful" (Ch. Li. 10) shows 
that knowledge leads to an enhancement of the potency of the rites. 

Opponent : This may be so in the cases of those meditations which are 
calculated to enhance the efficiency of the rites. But what about those 
meditations that have independent results as mentioned in the texts 
beginning with, "He who having known this thus, meditates about the worlds 
as the fivefold Santa" (Ch. II. ii. 3), and others? 

Veddntin : Since these meditations are to be undertaken by those who are 
alread y q ualified for the relevant rites , it is proper on the analo g y of the 
milkin g pot4 to assume even in their case that the result emerges in 
association with the result of the rite in question. And the sun etc., standing 
for the results of the rites, are logically more elevated than the Udgitha etc. 
constituting the rites; for the Upani$ads mention the world of the sun and 
such other worlds as the results of rites. Besides, the Udgitha itself is 
presented as the thing to be meditated on in the texts, "Meditate on Udgitha 
as the letter Om" (Ch. I. i. 1), "Up to this is explained the glory of the letter 
Om" (Ch. I.i. 10). After presenting it thus as the entity to be meditated on, it 
is enjoined that it should be viewed as the sun etc. 

The ar g ument was advanced that when the sun etc, are meditated upon 
with the ideas of the Ud g itha etc, superimposed on them , they will become 
constituents of an act and will thus produce results. That is untenable . 
because the meditation itself is an act and can reasonabl y produce a result. 
Moreover , the Ud g itha and the rest do not cease to be the auxiliaries of rites 
even when viewed as the sun and other thin g s. In the portion of the text . "On 
this Rk is established this Sama"a tCh. I. vi. 1), it is only in a fi g urative 
sense that the earth and fire are called Rk and Sams. In a fi g urative use a 
word conveys some sense var ying as far as possible between the senses 
proximate to and remote from its primary sense. Now in that passa ge ( "This 
indeed is Rk . fire is Sams" etc. ). althou g h the intention is that the Rk and 
Sama should be viewed as the earth and fire , still it is definitely understood 
that tin the portion "On this Rk is established this Sams" ! the words Rk and 
Santa are used to im pl y the earth and fire themselves because these latter are 

























































connected with Rk and Santa. This is so understood because the well-known 

Rk and Santa are spoken of separatel y ( In "Therefore they sin g the Santa as 
established on Rk" , so that if Rk and Sdma be meant in the earlier portion 
"On this Rk is established this Santa" , it will involve a repetition ), and 
because the earth and fire occur in their proximit y ( in the still earlier first 
portion "This (earth ) indeed is Rk , fire is Sama" ) . Even the word charioteer 
cannot be prevented from denotin g the kin g fi g uratively when by some 
reason it can come near enou g h to the kin g f as for instance , when the kin g 
himself drives the chariot ) . Moreover , the sentence . "This ( earth ) itself is Rk- 
i vam eva rk" (Ch. I. vi. 1 ) indicates from its very construction that the Rk is 
to be looked upon as the earth : for if the earth were to be looked upon as the 
Rk . the form of the sentence would have been , "i vam rk eva-the Rk . itself is 
this". Besides , the text . "He who havin g known thus sin g s Santa" ( Ch. I. vii. 
7). only concludes a meditation based on an auxiliar y, and not one based on 
the earth. Similarly in the text . "Meditate on the fivefold Santa ( as existin g) 
amon g the words" f Ch. II. ii. 1 ). thou g h the word world is used in the 
locative case dokeru ). still the worlds are to be superimposed on the Santa . 
since the word Santa is used in the accusative case , thereby indicatin g that it 
is the ob j ect of meditation. For Santa becomes meditated on as the worlds 
when the worlds are superimposed on it . while a reversal of this leads to the 
worlds becomin g meditated on as Santa.e Hereby (i.e. on the ground that one 
case-ending alone is to be changed) is also explained the text, "This Gayatra 
Sama is fixed on the pranas" (Ch. H. xi. 1), (where Gayatra has the 
nominative case and pram the locative). Where two words are used equally 
in the accusative case, as in "Atha khalu amum adityariz saptavidhariz sirma 
updsita-Then meditate on this sevenfold Sams as the sun" (Ch. II. bt. 1), 
even there the sun is to be superimposed on the Sama, since the topic that is 
started with is the meditation on Sama, as is evident from, "It is good indeed 
to meditate on the Sama as a whole" (Ch. II. i. 1), "Here ends the meditation 
on the fivefold Soma, then starts that on the sevenfold Soma" (Ch. II. viii. 1). 
And since it is gathered from this very text that the Selma is to be meditated 
on, the idea of the earth etc. are to be superimposed on hihkara etc. even 
when the construction of the sentence is different, as in "prthivi hirikarab-the 
earth is hirikdra" (Ch. II. ii. 1). Hence the conclusion is that the ideas of the 
sun etc., which are not the auxiliaries of rites, are to be superimposed on the 
Udgitha etc. which are the auxiliaries of rites. 





















































































Tonic 6: MEDITATION IN A SITTING POSTURE 


TOT$ null 

(Mental adoration is to he pursued) %Tqg: while in a sitting posture qTw" 
since (it is) possible (in that way only). 

7. One should adore mentally while having a sitting posture, since it is 
possible in that way alone. 

The consideration about the requisite posture etc. does not arise with 
regard to the mental adoration or meditation (upasana) connected with the 
auxiliaries of rites, since that is regulated by the rites themselves. Again, this 
question does not crop up in a context of full enlightenment because 
knowledge is determined by the reality itself. But with regard to other kinds 
of upasana one has to consider whether one should meditate in a sitting, 
standing, or lying posture just as one likes, or always in a sitting poAure. 

Opponent : Now since an updsand is a mental act, the conclusion is that 
there can be no rule about posture. 

Vedantin : Hence the aphorist says that one should adore (mentally) in a 
sitting posture alone. 

Why? 

Since it is possible in that way alone. Upasana consists in setting up a 
current of similar thoughts; and that is not possible for one while walking or 
running, because movement etc. disturb the mind. Even for a standing man, 
the mind remains busy about keeping the body erect, so that it is not able 
then to look into subtle things. A man lying on the ground may suddenly fall 



asleep. But for a sitting man, innumerable troubles of this kind are easy to 
avoid, so that upasana becomes possible for him. 



8. And because of (the possibility of) concentration (in that way). 

Moreover, the meaning of the term concentration is this, namely the 
setting up of a continuous stream of similar thoughts. The verb "to 
concentrate" is applied figuratively to one having his limbs relaxed, gaze 
fixed, and mind concentrated on a single object, as in such sentences as, 
"The heron has its mind concentrated", "The woman who has her lover in 
exile has her mind fixed (on him)". This proceeds easily for one in a sitting 
posture. Hence also upasana is to be undertaken by one when seated. 

3|W( H&H 

-W And af4W from the standpoint of 3«"3icaK motionlessness. 

9. And (meditativeness is attributed) from the standpoint of 
motionlessness. 

Furthermore, in such sentences as, "The earth is in meditation as it were" 
(Ch. VII. vi. 1), the assertion of meditation in the cases of the earth etc. is 
made from the standpoint of motionlessness alone. That also is a sign that 
upasana is to be undertaken by a man when seated. 




10. Moreover, they mention (this) in the Smrtis. 


Moreover, the worthy people mention this in such Sm;ti passages as 
"Having established his seat firmly in a clean place" (Giza, VI. 11). It is 
because of this that the sitting postures like padmdsana (lotus-seat) are 
prescribed in the books on Yoga. 

Topic 7: No RESTRICTION OF PLACE 

tom wtom nun 

zM Wherever qvr= concentration (is possible) ffw there (one should 
meditate) agiq because of the absence of specification. 

11. Meditation is to be undertaken wherever the mind gets concentrated, 
because there is no specification. 

The doubt arises about the direction, place, and time, as to whether there 
is any regulation about them or not. Now somebody may think that since in 
the Vedic rites the directions etc. are noticed to be well determined, the case 
must be similar here as well. 


The answer (of the Vedantin) to such a one is being given. The regulation 
about direction, place, and time is concerned only with that much regarding 



them as conduces to meditativeness. One should meditate facing any 
direction, in any place, at any time that leads to one's concentration of mind 
easily. Unlike the regulations fixing the eastern direction, forenoon, and a 
place sloping down to the east, and so on, as met with in the cases of rites, 
no such specific regulation is mentioned in the Upani$ads; while the one 
thing desirable is that one should always have concentration of mind (while 
engaged in upasana). 

Opponent : Some Upani$ads prescribe even specific rules as in, "One 
should concentrate one's mind on the supreme Self by taking shelter in a 
windless cave or such other places as are level and clean, free from pebbles, 
fire, and sand, free from noise, remote from busy places like water ponds or 
public sheds, and at the same time pleasing to the mind but not oppressive to 
the eyes" (Sv. II. 10). 

Vedantin : True, there are directions like that. But taking for granted these 
directions, the aphorist advises like a friend that with regard to the details of 
these matters there is no hard and fast rule. And the phrase "pleasing to the 
mind" in the above quotation only shows that the place can be anywhere that 
is conducive to concentration. 

Topic 8: MEDITATION TILL DEATH 

Doubt : Under the first topic it was established that repetition is to be 
welcomed in all cases of contemplation. Among them, those contemplations 
that are meant for complete enlightenment can well be understood to have a 
limit to their repetition, inasmuch as they end with the object aimed at, as is 
seen in the process of husking paddy (which stops with producing rice). 
When the result, consisting in full enlightenment, is achieved, no other effort 
can be prescribed, since a man goes beyond the domain of scripture when he 
realizes the oneness of the Self with Brahman. But with regard to those 
meditations which have in view some fruit of the nature of secular prosperity 
this doubt arises: Should one stop after revolving the idea in one's mind for a 
certain time, or should one do so for life? What would be the conclusion 
then? 



Opponent : One should give up the meditation after revolving the idea in 
one's mind for a certain time, since thereby is fulfilled the requirement of the 
texts enjoining the practice of repeated meditation. 

Veddntin : This being the position, we say: 



m 


an-pl Up till the moment of death f for r arfq even then M it is seen (to 
happen in the scripture). 

12. (Meditation is to be repeated) up till the moment of death, for it is 
noticed in the scriptures that it is done so even then. 

One shall contemplate on the idea repeatedly till the moment of death, 
because the acquisition of the unseen potential result of action is dependent 
on the final contemplation on the idea. For even the fruits of past actions 
which are destined to produce a result enjoyable in a subsequent birth, 
arouse at the time of death a pattern of consciousness replete with the 
thoughts conforming to that, as is known from such Upani$adic texts as, 
"Then the soul has consciousness of the fruits in the form of impressions that 
it has to experience, and it goes to the next body which is the fruit associated 
with that consciousness" (Br. IV. iv. 2), "Together with whatever world (i.e. 
result of action) he had in mind (at the time of death) he enters into Prana. 
Prana in combination with Udana and in association with the soul leads him 
to the world desired by him" (Pr. 111. 10). This is so also because of the 
illustration of grass and a leech (Br. IV. iv. 3). What other pattern of 
consciousness can these ideas have at the time of death apart from their 
repetition just as they are? Hence those ideas are to be revolved in the mind 
till death, which are nothing but a contemplation of that very result which is 
to be achieved. Thus it is that a Vedic text shows the repetition of the idea at 
the time of death: "The resolves with which that man departs from this 
world" (S. B. X. vi. 3.1). To this effect occurs the Smrti passage also: 



"Remembering whatever object at the end he leaves the body, that alone is 
reached by him, 0 son of Kunti, because of his constant thought of that" 
(Gita, VIII. 6), "at the time of death, with the mind unmoving" (Gita, VIII. 
10). And "He shall think of these three at the time of death" (Ch. III. xvii. 6) 
shows the last duty that remains to be done at the time of death. 

Topic 9: KNOWLEDGE DESTROYS ALL RESULTS OF ACTIONS 

The topics left over from the Third Chapter are ended. Now arises some 
consideration regarding the result of the knowledge of Brahman. 

The doubt crops up as to whether after the acquisition of the knowledge of 
Brahman, its opposite result, viz sin, is removed or not. What would be the 
conclusion? 

Opponent : Since work is done for some result, it cannot be obliterated 
without producing its result; for from the Vedas it is gathered that action has 
the innate power of ensuring its result. If the work should be destroyed even 
before its fruit is experienced, the Vedas will lose their validity. In the Smtti 
also we have, "For the results of work are not destroyed". 

Objection : In that case the prescription of expiation becomes useless. 

Op ponent : That is no defect , because acts of expiation are to be classed 
with occasional rites? like the sacrifice occasioned by one's house being 
burnt. Moreover, as the acts of expiation are prescribed as a consequence of 
the commission of some guilt, that may as well conduce to the removal of 
that guilt. But the knowledge of Brahman is not prescribed in that way. 

Objection : Unless it is admitted that the results of past actions are washed 
away for the knower of Brahman, he will have to experience the results of 
those actions as a matter of course, so that there will be no liberation. 

Opponent : The answer is in the negative, for just like the results of 
actions, liberation comes out of an adequate combination of place, time, and 
causation. Hence a man is not absolved of his sins by acquiring the 
knowledge of Brahman. 






Vedantin : To this we reply: 


^fwr \\\\\\ 

ff3-atf On the realization of that (Brahman), (there occur) 3Tlsq_fc jnon- 
attachment and destruction (respectively) of the succeeding and earlier sins 
ffq—j4Wqll because it is declared so. 

13. On the realization of That, there occur the non-attachment and 
destruction of the subsequent and previous sins respectively, because it is 
declared so. 

When That, viz Brahman, becomes realized, then come the non¬ 
attachment of subsequent sins and the destruction of the earlier ones. 

Why? 

"Because it is so declared" (in the scriptures). Thus it is declared in the 
course of dealing with the knowledge of Brahman that a future sin that might 
be expected to arise in the usual way does not arise in the case of a man of 
knowledge: "As water does not stick to a lotus leaf, even so sin does not 
contaminate a man possessed of this knowledge" (Ch. IV. xiv. 3). So also the 
destruction of the past accumulated sins is declared in, "Just as the fluffy tip 
of a reed placed in fire burns away completely, similarly all his sins are burnt 
away" (V. xxiv. 3). Here occurs another declaration about the destruction of 
the results of work: "When the Self which is both high and low is realized, 
the knot of the heart gets untied, all doubts become solved, and all one's 
actions become dissipated" (Mu. II. ii. 8). 

It was argued that on the assumption that the results of works get 
destroyed even before being experienced, the purport of the scripture will be 
distorted. But that creates no difficulty; for we do not mean to deny the 
power of works to produce their results. That remains just as it is. But we 
assert that this power is arrested by other factors like knowledge etc. The 
scripture is committed to the existence of the power of work, but not to the 



existence or non-existence of opposing factors. Besides, the Smrti texts, "For 
the results of work are not destroyed", is only a general rule; for the potential 
result of work does not get destroyed except through experience, inasmuch 
as it is meant for that. As a matter of fact it is desired that sin should be 
dissipated by expiation etc. as it is stated in such Vedic and Smrti texts as, 
"He gets over all sins", "A performer of the Asvmnedha sacrifice, as also a 
man possessed of this knowledge, gets over the sin of killing a Brahmaoa" 
(Tai. A. V. iii. 12.1). 

And it was said that the expiatory rites are to be classed with the 
occasional rites (occasioned by certain circumstances; and hence that they 
cannot wash away the sins). But that is wrong. Since the expiatory rites are 
prescribed in connection with certain commissions, they may well have the 
destruction of the resulting sins as their effect; and hence it is improper to 
infer some unseen potency for them (as in the case of occasional rites). 
Again, it was argued that unlike expiatory rites, knowledge is not enjoined 
for dissipating sins. With regards to this we say: In the case of meditations 
on the qualified Brahman, such injunctions are surely in evidence. And in the 
complementary portion of these it is stated that the meditator gets 
superhuman powers and cessation of sin as his reward. Since there is nothing 
to show that these two results are not intended to be indicated, it can be 
ascertained that those meditations lead to the acquisition of divine powers 
after the eradication of sins. But as regards contemplation on the absolute 
Brahman, though there be no such prescription, still it can be concluded that 
the burning away of the results of past karma is the effect of the realization 
that the Self is free from all actions. 

By the term non-attachment the aphorist implies that the knower of 
Brahman has no idea of agentship whatsoever with regard to the actions 
occurring in future. Although the man of knowledge appeared to have some 
ownership of the past works on account of false ignorance, still owing to the 
cessation of false ignorance through the power of knowledge, those works 
also are washed away. This fact is stated by the term destruction. The 
knower of Brahman has this realization: "As opposed to the entity known 
before as possessed of agentship and experiencership by its very nature, I am 
Brahman which is by nature devoid of agentship and experiencership in all 



the three periods of time. Even earlier I was never an agent and experiencer, 
nor am I so at present, nor shall I be so in future." From such a point of view 
alone can liberation be justified. For on a contrary supposition-if the results 
of works flowing down from eternity continue unhampered in their course- 
there can be no liberation. Besides, liberation, unlike the results of work, 
cannot be produced by a concurrence of place, time, and causation, since 
that would make it impermanent. It is also unreasonable that the result of 
knowledge (which is really immediate) should be mediate (as the opponents' 
theory implies). Hence the conclusion is that sin becomes dissipated when 
Brahman is known. 

Topic 10: No REMNANT OF VIRTUE EVEN 

Under the previous topic it was ascertained on the authority of the 
scriptures that when knowledge dawns, it causes the non-attachment and 
destruction of all potential results of works that are naturally calculated to 
cause bondage. But a doubt may arise that the virtuous deeds do not come 
into conflict with the knowledge arising from the scriptures, since they also 
originate from the same source. Taking this doubt into consideration, the 
reasoning of the previous topic is being extended here with a view to 
dispelling it. 



VZK Of the other (i.e. of virtue) aTfq also ini9 this way eRqQ: there is no 
contact; surely (liberation comes) W when (the body) falls. 

14. In the very same way there is no attachment of the other (i.e. of virtue) 
as well. Liberation ?mist follow as soon as the body falls. 

To the man of knowledge occur the non-attachment and destruction "of 
the other as well", of virtue also, as of sin itself. 



Why? 


Since that ma y put obstacles in the path of the fruition of knowled ge: for 
that (virtue ) too is productive of its own result. In the UpaniSadic texts like . 
"He conquers both of them" ( Br. IV. iv. 22 ), the destruction of virtue , j ust as 
much as of vice , is declared , since the destruction of action consequent on 
the realization of the Self that is not an a g ent occurs equally in the cases of 
both virtuous and vicious acts , and since the Upanipd speaks of the 
destruction of all works without any exception in "and all one's actions 
become dissipated" ( Mu. II. ii. 8 ) . Even where the sin g le word vice is used . 
the word virtue is also to be understood , because its result is inferior to that 
of knowled g e. Moreover , in the UpaniSad itself occurs the word vice to 
convey the idea of virtue as well. Thus in the sentence . "Day and ni ght 
cannot reach this barra ge ( which is the Self ) " ( Ch. VIIL iv. 1 ). virtue is 
introduced alon g with vice ; then it is said . "All sins desist from It ( the Self )" 
( ibid. ).8 thereby using the word sin (vice) to indicate virtue as well without 
any distinction. In "pate to", the word to (lit. but) is used to imply emphasis. 
The text emphasizes the fact that since virtue and vice, causing bondage, are 
thus shown to become separated and destroyed by the power of knowledge, 
liberation must come to the man of enlightenment when his body falls. 

Topic 11: PAST ACCUMULATED RESULTS ARE DESTROYED 

Under the previous topic it was ascertained that virtue and vice are 
destroyed by knowledge. Now it is being discussed whether that destruction 
occurs indiscriminately with regard to all the virtues and vices that have 
begun or have not begun to yield their fruits, or they occur specifically with 
regard to those virtues and vices that have not begun to yield fruits. Now 
since in the Upani$adic texts like "He conquers both of them" (Br. IV. iv. 
22), no specification is met with, the destruction may occur indiscriminately 
to all. That being the possibility, the aphorist refutes by saying. 

aMKWitf ip | $ \\\X\\ 
























































Butq (the) past (two) awraq-W144 which have begun to produce results 
not qq alone (are destroyed) ffq- for that (death) is set as the limit of waiting 
for that liberation. 

15. But only those past (virtues and vices) get destroyed which have not 
begun to bear fruit, for death is set as the limit of waiting for liberation. 

After the acquisition of knowledge, those virtues and vices that have not 
begun to yield their fruits and that were accumulated in earlier lives or even 
in this life before the dawn of knowledge are alone destroyed, but not so are 
those destroyed whose results have already been partially enjoyed and by 
which has been begun this present life in which the knowledge of Brahman 
arises. 

How is this known? 

Because the text, "He lingers so long only as he is not freed from the 
body; then he becomes free" (Ch. VI. xiv. 2), shows that liberation is put off 
till the death of the body. Were it not so, the text would not have spoken of 
any waiting till the death of the body. For one would then attain liberation 
immediately after the acquisition of knowledge inasmuch as there would be 
no reason for his continuing in the body after all the works are annihilated by 
knowledge. 

Opponent: If this realization that the Self is not an agent annihilates all 
results of work by its own intrinsic power, how can it demolish only some 
leaving behind others? For when the same kind of contact is present between 
fire and some seeds, it cannot be held that some of the seeds will lose their 
power of germination while others will not. 

Veddntin : The answer is: It cannot be that knowled g e can arise without 
the help of some residual results of actions that have be g un to bear fruit. And 
when it is g ranted that knowled g e is based on that medium (viz the bod y 
produced by the residual results ), it is but natural that knowled g e has to wait 
t for its result ) till the acquired momentum of that medium exhausts itself out 
as in the case of a wheel of a potter : for there is nothin g to stop it in the 
intervenin g period. As for the knowled g e of the Self as the non-performer of 



























an y act , that destroys the results of works by first sublatin g false i g norance. 
This false i g norance , even when sublated . continues for a while owin g to 
past tendencies like the continuance of the vision of two moons .9 

Furthermore, no difference of opinion is possible here as to whether the 
body is retained (after knowledge) for some time or not by the knowers of 
Brahman. For when somebody feels in his heart that he has realized 
Brahman and yet holds the body, how can this be denied by somebody else? 
This very fact is elaborated in the Upanigads and the Smrtis in the course of 
determining the characteristics of "the man of steady wisdom" (sthitaprajna— 
Gita, II. 54). Hence the conclusion is that only those virtues and vices are 
washed away by knowledge which have not begun to bear fruit. 



Topic 



12: AGNIHOTRA ETC. 



I But af-ate Agnihotra etc. -N are conducive to that result r surely ffq- 
qi-;:q for so it is revealed. 


16. But Agnihotra etc. conduce to the very same result, for so it is 
revealed (in the Upanisads). 


The conclusion arrived at about the non-attachment and destruction of sin 
in the case of the man of knowledge was extended to the non-attachment and 
destruction of virtue as well. Lest it be inferred that this extension covers all 
kinds of virtue, it is being refuted by the aphorism, "But (daily) Agnihotra 
etc". The word "but" refutes the misconception. The obligatory daily duties 
like Agnihotra, enjoined in the Vedas, are meant for that very result. The 
idea is that their result is the same as that of knowledge. 


How can this be so? 


From such Upani$adic texts as, "The Brahmanas seek to know It through 
the study of the Vedas, sacrifices, charity, and austerity" (Br. IV. iv. 22). 















Opponent : Since knowledge and works produce divergent results, they 
cannot reasonably have the same result. 

Veddntin : That creates no difficulty; for just as curds and poison, known 
to produce fever and death respectively, become tasteful and nourishing 
when mixed with sugar and mantra, similarly (religious) work also, when 
associated with knowledge, may lead to liberation. 

Opponent : Since liberation has no beginning, how can it be said to be an 
effect of work? 

Veddntin : That objection is hollow, since work helps from a distance (i.e. 
indirectly) in producing the result. As work leads gradually to knowledge, it 
is said by courtesy to lead to liberation itself. Accordingly, the statement that 
knowledge and work produce the same result refers to the work that had 
preceded knowledge, for the knower of Brahman can have no such rite as 
Agnihotra etc. after enlightenment, because as a result of the realization of 
the unity of the Self with Brahman that cannot be the object of any 
injunction, the man of enlightenment has walked out of the pale of 
scriptures. But so far as meditation on the qualified Brahman is concerned, a 
subsequent performance of Agnihotra etc. is possible, since the agentship for 
such a meditator remains intact. Even so, when these are performed without 
any motive and hence have no separate result, they can well be associated 
with meditation. 

Opponent : Well then, to what action does this statement about the non¬ 
attachment and destruction of the results of works refer to? And to what 
action does this Vedic assignment (of results to friends, foes, and others) 
refer to as stated in the following sentence found in a certain branch of the 
Vedas: "His sons inherit his wealth; the friends acquire the merits; and the 
foes get the demerits" (Kau. I. 4)? 


Hence the aphorist replies: 



sratsrt ii t»ii 

3M: Apart from these aM another action aifq also k certainly (exists) $ 
according to some people; (the assignment to friends, foes, and others refers 
to this); ;a: according to both (Jaimini and Badarayaia). 

17. Besides these, there is also another kind of (good) action with regard 
to which some people (make the assignment), according to both Jaimini and 
Badaray Ma. 

Apart from these obligatory rites like Agnihotra etc. other good works 
surely exist that are performed with a motive for results. Of these, the 
appropriation has been indicated by people of a certain (branch of the Vedas) 
in, "The friends acquire the merits" etc. And by saying, "In the very same 
way, there are non-attachment and destruction of the others (i.e. virtues) as 
well" (B. S. IV. i. 14), the non-attachment and destruction of these very 
works have been ascertained. Thus both the teachers Jaimini and 
Badarayat}a agree in accepting the view that this kind of works, done with a 
desire, do not help in the generation of knowledge. 

TOPIC 13: RITES UNACCOMPANIED BY MEDITATION 

Doubt : Under the topic just finished it has been well established that 
when the obligatory duties like Agnihotra etc. are done for the purpose of 
getting liberation by one aspiring for it, they become the cause of exhausting 
the accumulated sins, and thereby the cause for purifying the mind. 
Becoming in this way contributory to the realization of Brahman, which 
leads to liberation, they cone to have the same result as the knowledge of 
Brahman itself. Now these Agnihotra etc. may be performed along with 
meditations that are based on the auxiliaries of rites or without them. For 
from the following texts we know that Agnihotra etc. can be done either 
separately or along with meditation: "One who possessed of such knowledge 
makes a sacrifice", "One who possessed of such knowledge pours the 



oblation", "One who knowing thus chants the hymn", "One who knowing 
thus sings", "Therefore one should select a man possessed of this knowledge 
as (the priest called) Brahma, and not one who is ignorant of this" (Ch. IV. 
xvii. 10), "With that Om both perform rites-the one who knows and the one 
who does not" (Ch. I. i. 10). Now the point to be considered is whether 
Agnihotra and other rites, not just as they are but as associated with 
meditation, become the cause of knowledge to an aspirant for liberation and 
thus come to produce the same result as knowledge, or such rites do so, 
equally without distinction, either by themselves or in association with 
knowledge. 

Why does this doubt crop up? 

Since in the text, "They seek to know it through sacrifice" (Br. IV. iv. 22), 
the rites like Agnihotra are heard of without any reservation as the causes of 
knowledge, and since Agnihotra etc. when associated with meditation are 
known to acquire a special advantage. What should be the conclusion then? 

Opponent : Rites like Agnihotra etc. when associated with meditation can 
alone become helpful to the knowledge of the Self, but not so those that are 
devoid of meditation. For a man of knowledge is known to have an 
advantage over the man without knowledge from such Upani$adic texts as, 
"He who knows as above conquers further death the very day he makes that 
offering" (B;. I. v. 2), and from such Smcti texts as, "Endowed with which 
wisdom, 0 son of P;tha, thou shalt break through the bonds of karma" (Giza, 
II. 39), "Work with desire is verily far inferior to that performed with the 
mind undisturbed by the thoughts of results, 0 Dhanaiijaya" (Gita, II. 49). 

Veddntin : This being the position, the aphorist explains: 

fa fe m 



«zM-" Whatever (is done) fgWM with knowledge"- Off this text f surely 
(shows this). 

18. The Upanisadic text, "whatever is done with knowledge" surely 
indicates this. 

It is true that Agnihotra and other rites when associated with meditation 
are better than the Agnihotra etc. not associated with meditation, just as 
much as a learned Brahmana is better than a Brahmans without learning. 
Even so, Agnihotra and other rites are not absolutely useless when they are 
not associated with meditation. 

Why? 

Since in the Upani$adic text, "They seek to know It through sacrifice" (B;. 
IV. iv. 22), the rites like Agnihotra etc. are heard of without any reservation 
as the means of knowledge. 

Opponent : Since it is known that Agnihotra etc. when associated with 
meditation have a distinct advantage over those without meditation, it is but 
proper to say that Agnihotra etc. when unassociated with meditation are not 
conducive to knowledge. 

Veddntin : That is not so. It is rather proper to think that since Agnihotra 
etc., when associated with meditation, acquire a certain distinction owing to 
the presence of meditation, therefore they have just a special efficacy in 
producing knowledge, while it is not so in the case of mere Agnihotra etc. 
that are not similarly associated; from that, however, one cannot conclude 
that Agnihotra etc., heard of in a general way in the text, "They seek to know 
through sacrifices", as auxiliaries of knowledge, are not their auxiliaries. For 
the passage which declares, "Whatever one does along with knowledge, 
faith, and meditation, becomes more efficacious" (Ch. I. i. 10), speaks of the 
rites like Agnihotra etc. as becoming "more efficacious" in producing their 
own results when they are associated with their own meditations; it thereby 
shows that the very same Agnihotra etc. have at least some efficacy in 
producing their results even when not in association with meditation. The 
efficacy of a rite consists in its being able to fulfil its own purpose. Hence the 



conclusion is this: The obligatory rites like Agnihotra etc., both as associated 
and unassociated with meditation, that were undertaken either in this life or 
the previous life before the dawn of knowledge, with a view to attaining 
liberation by one who hankers after it, become the destroyers as far as 
possible of the accumulated sins that stand in the way of the realization of 
Brahman. Thus indirectly they become the cause of the realization of 
Brahman Itself, so that in collaboration with such proximate causes of 
enlightenment as hearing, reflection, faith, meditation, devotedness, etc., 
they come to have the same result as the knowledge of Brahman has. 

Topic 14: EXPERIENCE OF THE ACTIVE MERIT AND DEMERIT 



m 


I But qgjcaT exhausting Wc-rZ the other two iftq through experiencing 
(them) qrc one merges in Brahman. 

19. But the (enlightened) man merges in Brahman after exhausting the 
other two, (viz merit and demerit that have started fruition), by experiencing 
(their results in the present life). 

It has been said that the virtues and vices that have not begun yielding 
their results get annihilated through the power of knowledge. But from the 
texts like, "He has to tarry so long as the body does not fall, and then he 
merges (in Brahman)" (Ch. VI. xiv. 2), "Being but Brahman, he is merged in 
Brahman" (Br. IV. iv. 6), it is known that the other virtues and vices that 
have already begun to fructify are exhausted through experiencing the 
results, and then the aspirant becomes Brahman. 

Opponent : May it not be that on the analogy of seeing two moons, the 
dualistic vision will persist even when the body falls just as much as that 
vision continues as long as the body lasts even after full enlightenment? 



Veddntin : No, since there is no reason for this. That the dualistic vision 
lasts before the fall of the body is because of the need of exhausting the 
remaining portion of (the result of active virtue and vice) through 
experience. But here after death there is no such factor present. 

Opponent : May not other outstanding virtues and vices produce newer 
experiences? 

Veddntin : No, since their seeds are burnt away. For other outstanding 
results of works can produce a fresh body after the death of the present one 
only when they have false ignorance to prop them up. But that false 
ignorance has been burnt away by full enlightenment. Therefore it is but 
proper that when the effect already produced wears away, liberation comes 
inevitably to the man of knowledge. 

SECTION II 

Topic 1: AT DEATH THE ORGANS MERGE IN MIND 

ll?ll 

WK Speech (merges) B - q * in the mind Iij because it is so perceived a 
andicg from scriptural statement. 

1. The (function) of the organ of speech merges in the mind (at the time of 
death) for so it is seen, and so the Upani,ads say. 

Nov before introducin g the path of the g ods , meant for arrivin g at the 
result of the inferior meditations ti.e. on the qualified Brahman ), the aphorist 
first speaks of the order of the departure tfrom the bod vl as tau g ht bv the 
scriptures. He will say later that the departure is similar for both the man 
who has the knowled g e 1 (of the qualified Brahman) and the man who has 
not. Thus occurs the Upani$adic text about death, "0 amiable one, when this 
man is about to die, his speech is withdrawn into the mind, the mind into the 






















vital force, the vital force into fire, and fire into the supreme Deity" (Ch. VI. 
viii. 6). 

Doubt : Now the doubt arises as to whether the above passage speaks of 
the entry into the mind of the organ of speech together with its functions or 
of the entry of the functions alone. 

Opponent : While under this doubt, the conclusion that can be drawn is 
that the organ of speech itself enters into the mind; for thus would (the 
proper sense of) the passage be honoured, while otherwise one would have 
to resort to a figure of speech. Whenever a doubt arises about the literal or 
figurative meaning of a text, the literal one has to be accepted and not the 
figurative. Hence the withdrawal here is of the organ of speech itself into the 
mind. 

Ved ntin : This being the position, we say that the functions alone of the 
organ of speech are withdrawn into the mind. 

Opponent : How is this interpretation about the withdrawal of the 
functions of the organ of speech arrived at when the teacher's (i.e. aphorist's) 
statement is, "Speech goes into the mind"? 

Vedantin : This is true, but later he will state, "The parts (i.e. the organs of 
the enlightened man), merged in Brahman, become non-distinct from It on 
the authority of the scriptures" (IV. ii. 16). Hence it is understood that what 
is meant here is merely the cessation of the functions (of all in general). If, 
however, the merger of the organ of speech itself be meant, then since the 
non-distinction is the same everywhere (for the enlightened and the 
ignorant), why should the aphorist make a separate mention of it (in the case 
of the enlightened) by saying, "nondistinct" (in IV. ii. 16)? So the intended 
meaning here being the cessation of the functions of the organ of speech, the 
idea conveyed is that the functions of the organ of speech become withdrawn 
even while the functions of the mind continue. 


How can this be so? 



Because it is seen to be so. For it is a matter of experience that the power 
of speech stops earlier even while the power of the mind still continues. Not 
that the withdrawal of the organ of speech together with its functions into the 
mind can actually be seen by anybody. 

Opponent: On the strength of the Vedic text it can be asserted that what is 
spoken of here is the merger of the organ of speech into the mind itself. 

Vedantin : The answer is given by saying, no, since that is not its material 
cause. A thing can merge into what its material cause is, as for instance an 
earthen plate into earth. But there is no valid proof to show that the organ of 
speech originates from the mind; whereas the engagement of the functions in 
activity or their disengagement is seen to be based on something that may 
not be the material cause. For instance, the activity of fire, which is of the 
nature of light and heat, (tejas) may originate from fuel which is by nature 
earth, and it may get extinguished in water. 

Opponent : On such an interpretation, how will the Upani$adic text, 
"Speech is withdrawn into the mind" (Ch. VI. viii. 6) be reconciled? 

Veddntin : That is why the anhorist sa vs. "and so the UpaniSads sa v" t in a 
fig urative sense that is not anta g onistic to reason ) . The idea implied is that 
the UpaniSadie text fits in with this interpretation accordin g to which the 
org an and its functions are understood to be the same in a fi g urative sense.2 

nym irii 

w And 3g: 7W for the same reason ggffur all (the functions of all the 
organs) a follows (i.e. get merged in the mind). 



















2. And for the same reason all the functions of all the organs get merged 
in the mind. 

In the text, "Therefore one who gets his light extinguished (or heat cooled 
off) attains rebirth together with the organs that enter into the mind" (Pr. III. 
9), we hear of the entry of all the organs without exception into the mind. 
Since even here, "for the same reason" (as in the foregoing aphorism), viz 
that just like the organ of speech, the organs of sight etc. are seen to lose 
their functions even when the mind continues to be active, and since it is not 
possible that the organs as such can merge in the mind, and since the 
Upani$adic text also fits in thus, therefore the conclusion is that it is in the 
sense of the cessation of their functions alone that all the organs get 
withdrawn into the mind. Although there is no exception to this withdrawal 
of all the organs into the mind, the separate mention of the organ of speech 
(in the first aphorism) is in accordance with its mention in, "Speech is 
withdrawn into the mind" (Ch. VI. viii. 6). 

Topic 2: MIND MERGES IN PRANA 

Doubt : It is well understood that in the text, "Speech is withdrawn into 
the mind", what is intended to imply is the withdrawal of the functions. 
Now, as regards the succeeding text, "The mind into the vital force" (Ch. VI. 
viii. 6), is it the withdrawal of the functions alone that is meant here as well, 
or is it the withdrawal of the possessor of the functions? 

Opponent : When under such a doubt, the conclusion should be that the 
withdrawal of the possessor of the functions is meant here, since this view is 
supported by Upani$adic texts and since the vital force can well be the 
material cause of the mind. Thus we have, "0 amiable one, the mind is 
derived from food (i.e. earth), food is derived from water" (Ch. VI. v. 4), 
where the scripture mentions the mind as originating from food and food 
from water. There occurs also the Upani$adic text, "And water created food" 
(Ch. VI. ii. 4). So to say that the mind merges in the vital force is the same as 
to say that food itself merges in water; for food is mind, and water is the 
vital force, since a material cause and its transformations are the same. 


Vedmtin : This being the position, we say, 



5PH: 5iw li^ll 

Uq That ;r;r: mind (merges) sTlol in the vital force uwuj as (revealed) in 
the subsequent (text). 

3. That mind merges in the vital force as is revealed in the subsequent 
text. 

From the subsequent portion of the text (cited above) it is to be 
understood that when this mind merges in the vital force, it does so through 
(the absorption of) its functions alone together with the functions of the 
external organs that are withdrawn into it. Thus it is that when a man wants 
to sleep or is about to die, the activities of the mind are seen to cease even 
while the function of the vital force, consisting in its vibration (respiration), 
still persists. Besides, the mind as such cannot merge into the vital force, 
since that is not its material source. 

Opponent: Have we not shown that the vital force is the material cause of 
the mind? 

Vedamin : That is not valid, for it is not logical that the mind should 
merge into the vital force in accordance with the above ratiocination. For 
even so, the mind would have to be absorbed into food (i.e. earth), food into 
water, and the vital force too into water. But even from such a standpoint no 
proof can be adduced to show that the mind originates from water 
transformed into the vital force. Hence the mind as such does not get 
absorbed into the vital force. It'was also shown earlier that the text can fit in 
even if the merger of the functions is meant, for the functions and the 
possessor of the functions are figuratively understood to be the same. 


Topic 3: PRANA MERGES INTO THE SOUL 



Doubt : This much has been established that the functions of one entity 
can be withdrawn into some other entity that is not its material cause, but not 
so can the entity itself be absorbed. Now with regard to the text, "the vital 
force into (tejas) fire" (Ch. VI. viii. 6), the consideration that arises is 
whether the function of the vital force is withdrawn into fire, just as the text 
literally implies, or is it withdrawn into the soul that is the master of this 
cage formed by the body and senseorgans? 

Opponent : As to that, the vital force should get absorbed into fire, since 
the meaning of a Upanisadic text cannot be laid bare to doubts and because it 
is improper to imagine something not heard of. 

Vedantin : This being the position, the aphorist explains: 



g: That (Praha) a* (merges) into the presiding entity (i.e. the Self) -3griff- 
31fk'+.zr: because of such facts as approaching that. 

4. That one (i.e. the vital force) is (known to be) withdrawn into the ruler 
(i.e. the individual Self) from such facts as approaching that (Self at the time 
of death). 

"That one", the vital force that is being considered, subsists in "the ruler", 
in the (individual) Self identified with the intellect and having ignorance, 
past works, and past experiences as Its limiting adjuncts; that is to say, the 
activities of the vital force remain chiefly concerned with It. 

How is this known? 

"From such facts as its approaching that Self." For thus it is that another 
Upanisadic passage shows in a general way how all the pr zas (organs) 
without exception approach the ruler, "All the organs approach the departing 



man at the time of death when breathing becomes difficult" (Br. IV. iii. 38); 
and in the text, "When it departs, the vital force follows" (Br. IV. iv. 2), it is 
specially shown how the vital force, having five functions, follows the ruler; 
and in the text, "When the vital force departs all the organs (pramas) follow" 
(ibid.), it is shown how the other prdiras follow the vital force. Besides, by 
showing in the text, "Then the Self remains equipped with the organs of 
knowledge" (ibid.), that the ruler has consciousness inside, it is made clear 
that the vital force, with the sense-organs merged in it, subsists in that soul. 

Opponent : Since the Upani$ad declares, "The vital force is withdrawn 
into fire" (Ch. VI. viii. 6), how can an erroneous meaning be asserted by 
saying that it-goes-to the ruler? 

Veddntin : That creates no difficulty, since in such activities as leaving the 
body, the soul plays the dominant part and any special point stated in other 
Upani$ads has to be taken into account. 

Opponent : How then is the Upanigadic text to be explained that the vital 
force is withdrawn into fire (tejas)? 


Vedkntin : Hence the aphorist says, 



(The soul stays) ilRI among the elementsthat being so declared in the 
Upani$ads. 

5. The soul comes to stay among the elements, it being so declared by the 
Upani,cads. 



On the authority of the text, "The vital force is withdrawn into fire", it is 
to be understood that this ruler, associated with the vital force, exists amidst 
the subtle elements that are associated with fire and constitute the seed of the 
body. 

Opponent : But that text shows the existence of the vital force in fire, and 
not of the existence of the ruler, accompanied by the vital force, in fire. 

Veddntin : That is no defect , since in the aphorism . "That one is mer g ed in 
the ruler" , it has been pointed out that the ruler also Is to be understood as 
havin g been mentioned by the UpaniSad in between the vital force and fire ; 
for one , who havin g g one from Sru g hna to Mathuri . proceeds then to 
Pataliputra . may well be said to have proceeded from grug hna to Pataliputra. 
Hence the text . "The vital force is withdrawn into fire" is to be understood to 
mean that it is the ruler t i.e. soul ) itself , associated with the vital force , that 
continues to sta y amidst the subtle elements which are the associates of te ias 
(fire) .8 

Opponent : Since fire alone is mentioned in the text, "The vital force is 
withdrawn into fire", how can it be asserted that the ruler exists amidst the 
elements which have fire as an associate? 


Veddntin : Hence the aphorist says, 




Not" in a single one k for 1: both show (otherwise). 

6. (The soul does) not (come to stay) amidst a single element, for both (the 
Upaniiads and Smrtis) show otherwise. 




































It is not a fact that at the time of the soul's desire to attain a new body it 
exists in the midst of a single element, viz fire, for the gross body is seen to 
be formed of many elements. The question and answer also reveal this in the 
passage starting with, "Do you know how water comes to be called man 
when the fifth oblation is poured?" (Ch. V. iii. 3). That fact was explained 
under the aphorism, "On account of water being constituted by three 
elements, the soul goes enveloped by all of them, though water is mentioned 
because of its preponderance, (B. S. III. i. 2). The Upani adic and Smrti texts 
also point to this. The relevant Upanisadic text runs thus: "That Self is 
identified with ... earth, water, air, space, and fire" (Br. IV. iv. 5). The Smrti 
text is, "All this in the universe' emerges, as of yore, along with the five 
subtle elements that are indestructible" (Manu, I. 21), and so on. 

Opponent : With regard to the time when the soul wants to acquire a new 
body after the organs of speech etc. are withdrawn, another Upani$adic 
passage starts with the sentence, "Where is the man then?" (Br. III. ii. 13), 
and then decides that the soul rests on the results of past works (karma) in 
the text, "What they mentioned there was only karma, and what they praised 
there was also only karma" (ibid). 

Veddntin : As to that the answer is: The subject dealt with there is the 
emergence of bondage which is constituted by the senses and sense-objects, 
called the grahas (i.e. perceivers) and atigrabas (i.e. impellers of the 
perceivers-i.e. objects of perception) and which is determined by past works. 
In this sense it is said that the soul rests on karma (work). But the subject 
dealt with here is the creation of a fresh body from the materials, viz the 
elements. In this sense it is said that it rests on the elements. Besides, by 
using the word "praise" in the other text (i.e. Brhadarapyaka) a mere 
predominance of karma is shown there, and it is not that any other resting 
place is also negated thereby. Hence there is no contradiction. 

TOPIC 4: DEPARTURE OF THE ENLIGHTENED AND THE 

UNENLIGHTENED 

Doubt : Is this departure from the body the same for the enlightened and 
the unenlightened persons? Or is there any distinction? 



Opponent: When under such a doubt, the conclusion that can be arrived at 
is that this departure has got a distinction, inasmuch as this departure occurs 
in conjunction with the subtle elements, and it is for rebirth that the elements 
are resorted to. Moreover, there can be no rebirth for the enlightened man, 
for the Upani$ad declares that the man of knowledge attains immortal ity. 
Hence this departure is related to the unenlightened man alone. 

Objection : Since this discussion occurs in the scripture under the topic of 
knowledge, this must be about the man of knowledge. 

Opponent : No, since this departure is described there as a fact already 
known (or a matter of natural occurrence) just like sleep etc. Just as even in a 
context of knowledge, sleep etc., occurring to all creatures, are described in 
such texts as, "When a man comes to be known as 'He sleeps'" (Ch. VI. viii. 
1), "When he comes to be known as 'He wants to eat 1 " (Ch. VI. viii. 3), 
"When he comes to be known as 'He wants to drink 1 " (Ch. VI. viii. 5); and 
this is done so because this is helpful to the comprehension of the subject 
being explained but not for describing the man of knowledge as possessed of 
such distinctions; similarly this departure from the body that is common to 
men in general is being described in order to establish the fact that the 
supreme Deity in which the fire of the departing man merges is the Self and 
that "Thou art That". Besides, this departure is denied in the case of a man of 
knowledge in, "His organs do not depart" (Bt. IV. iv. 6). Therefore this 
departure is of the unenlightened man alone. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say. 

Wfl IMII 

a And (the mode of departure is) BRTrT the same aR-Ift3giig up to the 
beginning of the path; ;w and a<t m;q the immortality (is relative) a without 
burning ignorance. 



7. And the mode of departure (at the time of death) is the same (for the 
knower of the qualified Brahman and the ignorant man) up to the beginning 
of the path (of the gods); and the immortality (that is spoken of) is the one 
that is attained without burning ignorance. 

It is but proper that the departure as described in such texts as, "Speech is 
withdrawn into the mind" (Ch. VI. viii. 6), should be "the same for the 
knower and the i g norant" upto the point where they start for their respective 
se parate paths ; for this is spoken of without any distinctive specification. The 
ig norant man moves on . restin g on the subtle elements constitutin g the seed 
of the next body and under the impulsion of his past works , for the sake of 
fresh experiences in a new body. But the man of knowled ge pursues the path 
throu g h the nerve ( passin g out of the crown of the head4 and) lighted up by 
knowledge and leading to liberation. This fact is stated in the aphorism by 
saying, "Up to the beginning of the path (of the gods)". 

Opponent: The enlightened man has to attain immortality, which does not 
depend on going from one place to another; so how can there be any resort 
to the elements and the commencement of a path? 

Vedantin : As to that, the answer is that this immortality is relative for the 
man whose blemishes have not been totally burnt away-for one who wants to 
attain a relative immortality by virtue of his knowledge of the qualified 
Brahman without completely burning away his ignorance. In such a case 
both reliance on the elements and the commencement of a path are possible. 
For the sense-organs cannot move without something to rest on. Hence there 
is no fault. 


Topic 5: RELATIVE MERGER OF FIRE FTC. 

Doubt : It has been ascertained in accordance with the context that the 
meaning of the text, "Fire gets withdrawn into the supreme Deity" (Ch. VI. 
viii. 6), is that the fire of the dying man, which is under consideration, gets 
merged in the supreme Deity along with the ruler, the vital force, the 
assemblage of sense-organs, and the other elements. Now it is being 
considered what this merger actually is. 
































Opponent : As to that, the conclusion arrived at is that the merger is 
absolute and of the thing itself in its entirety; for that is the reasonable 
position inasmuch as the Deity is its material cause. For it has been 
established earlier that the supreme Deity is the material cause of all things 
that are bom. Hence this attainment of identity is absolute and complete. 
Vedantin : To this we say. 



ffq That (group of elements-fire and the rest) (continues) aTr-a%:till final 
release gUR-vTTcq for there is declaration of the transmigratory state (till 
then). 

8. That group of elements (counting from fire) continues till complete 
liberation; for there is a declaration of the continuance of the transmigratory 
state till then. 

"That", the group of subtle elements counting from fire that supplies the 
basis for the organs of hearing etc., "continues till complete liberation", till 
liberation from the transmigratory state as a result of full enlightenment; for 
the state of transmigration is described thus (for the ignorant alone): "Some 
souls enter the womb for acquiring bodies and others follow the motionless 
in accordance with their (past) works and in conformity with their 
knowledge" (Ka. II. ii. 7). On a contrary supposition all would become 
Brahman in an absolute sense, since at the time of death their limiting 
adjuncts would become extinct. In that case all scriptures of injunction 
would be useless, as also all scriptures about knowledge. Moreover, the 
bondage that arises from false ignorance cannot be removed by anything 
apart from full enlightenment. Accordingly, though Brahman is the material 
cause, still the merger in Existence (Brahman) at death occurs in such a way 
as to ensure the continuance of these (organs etc.) in a latent state (so that 
they can re-emerge) just as it happens during deep sleep and dissolution. 



jrt Hill 

q Andbeing minute sTeju': in (its) size (or measure) cffit such3q**: the 
experience. 

9. That fire (as also other elements) is minute in its nature, as also in size, 
because it is seen to be so. 

And that fire along with the other elements, which constitute a habitat for 
the soul emerging out of its present body, must be subtle in nature and 
measure. It is thus that we gather from the Upani$adic declaration about its 
going out through the nerves that fire (as also the other elements) is a subtle 
element. It is possible for it to move through the nerves because of its 
minuteness in size, and it is unobstructed because of its fineness by nature. It 
is because of this fact again that it is not perceived by people near by when it 
departs from the body. 



Not (is the subtle one destroyed) 3gtly;T by the destruction (of the gross 
body) aT'ic: for this reason. 

10. For this (very) reason the subtle body is not destroyed even when the 
gross one is. 



"For this very reason", just because it is subtle, the other body, "the subtle 
body", "is not destroyed, even when the gross body is destroyed" through 
cremation etc. 

Jim fairofa san nun 

t: This i warmth aifl belongs to this (subtle body) 4w to be sure gq'q: for 
that stands to reason. 

11. And this warmth belongs to this subtle body to be sure, for that stands 
to reason. 

The warmth that people feel by touching a living body "belongs to this" 
one, to the "subtle body, to be sure". Thus it is that when death takes place 
and the body still persists, heat is not perceived even though the other 
attributes of the body like form etc. persist; but it is perceived only when the 
body is alive. Hence it stands to reason that this heat belongs to something 
other than the well-known gross body. In support of this occurs the Vedic 
text, "It is warm indeed so long as it lives, and cold when it dies". 

TOPIC 6: No DEPARTURE FOR A KNOWER OF BRAHMAN 

sfatafcfa fa huh 

(The organs do not depart) Ncfrqirc because of the (scriptural) denial' if it 
be argued thus, then R not so; (for the denial means that they do not depart) 
from the individual soul. 


12. If it be contended that the organs of the man of knowledge do not 
depart from the body because of the denial in the scripture, then (according 



to the opponent) it is not so, for the denial is about the departure from the 
individual soul. 

From the reservation made under the aphorism, "And the immortality 
spoken of is one that is attained without burning ignorance" (IV. ii. 7), it is 
admitted that in the absolute immortality there is an absence of any course to 
be followed and any departure from the body. Still lest there be any 
apprehension of departure owing to some reason or other, that is denied 
through the text, "But the man who does not desire (never transmigrates). Of 
him who is without desires, who is free from desires, the objects of whose 
desire have been obtained, and to whom all objects of desire are but the Self- 
the organs do not depart. Being but Brahman he is merged in Brahman" (Br. 
IV iv. 6). Now since this denial occurs in the context of the supreme 
knowledge, the organs of the man who has realized the supreme Brahman 
have no departure from the body. 

The reply (to this by the opponent) is: No, since this "denial is concerned 
with the departure of the organs from the embodied one", and not from the 
body. 

Objection : How is this known (that the organs depart not from the body 
but from the embodied entity)? 

Opponent : Because in the other (Madhyandina) branch the fifth case¬ 
ending is used (in tasmdt-from him). Since the sixth case-ending (in tasya-of 
him) (in the Kanva recension) is used to imply relationships in general, it can 
be delimited to a particular relationship on the strength of the ablative (fifth 
case ending) (in tasmat) in the other (Madhyandina) recension. And by the 
word tasmat (from him) the embodied soul that is qualified for secular 
prosperity or liberation is referred to, for it is the chief subject (of the 
context), but not so is the body referred to. The idea implied is this: "From 
him", from the individual soul, that is about to depart from the body, the 
organs do not depart; they remain in its company. When the soul departs, it 
departs from the body along with the organs. 


Veddntin : This being the position, it is being refuted: 




(This is not so) fk because q" in the case of the followers of one branch, 
mr: (there is) a clear (denial of the soul's departure from the body). 

13. This is not so, for in case of the followers of one recension there is a 
clear denial of the soul's departure. 

The assertion was made to the effect that even for the man who knows 
Brahman there can be such a fact as departure from the body, the denial of 
departure having been made about the departure (of the organs) from the 
embodied soul. This is not correct, for the denial of the departure (of the 
organs) from the body is clearly met with in a particular recension. Thus in 
the course of answering the question of Artabhlga, "When this one (i.e. the 
body of the liberated man) dies, do the organs then go up from this one, or 
do they not?" it is stated from the point of view of the departure (from the 
body). "'No,' replied Yajnavalkya" (Br. III. ii. 11). Then since the 
misconception might arise that in that case this one does not die because the 
organs do not depart, the assertion of the merger of the organs is made in, 
"they merge in this one only" (ibid); and for establishing this fact it is said, 
"This one swells, this one is inflated, and in that state lies dead" (ibid), where 
swelling etc. are asserted about something that is referred to by "this one" 
(sah) that is under discussion and that forms the basis from which the 
departure can occur. Such descriptions fit in with the body and not the 
embodied soul.6 In conformity with this, the text that has a reading with the 
fifth case-ending, viz "The organs do not depart from this one, they merge in 
this one only" (Madhyandina reading), has to be interpreted to mean that 
though the embodied soul is primarily alluded to by the pronoun (this one), 
still the denial is concerned with the departure from the body that is 
figuratively identified with the embodied soul. But in the case of those (of 




the Kanva recension) who have the reading ("of this one") with the sixth 
case-ending, the departure is denied in relation to the man of knowledge, so 
that the denial in that sentence is concerned with the departure as it is well 
known (in the world); and what is a well-known fact is the departure from 
the body and not from the embodied soul, so that the denial comes to mean 
the denial of the departure (of the organs) from the body. Moreover, the 
departure of the ignorant man from the body and his course of 
transmigration are described elaborately in the text, "The soul departs either 
through the eyes or through the head or through any other part of the body. 
When it departs, all the organs follow" etc; (Be. IV. iv. 2). That topic of the 
ignorant man is ended with, "Thus does the man transmigrate who desires" 
(Br. IV. iv. 6). Then the man of knowledge is mentioned thus, "But the man 
who does not desire" (ibid). Now, should the (latter) text mean that the 
departure from the body (in the earlier text) is meant for him as well, then 
this separate mention becomes incongruous. Hence to make this separate 
mention purposeful, the text is to be explained to signify the denial of the 
departure and the following of a course in the case of a man of knowledge, 
though they are but natural to a man of ignorance. Besides, it is unreasonable 
that a man who has known Brahman and become identified with the all- 
pervasive Brahman and has his desires and results of karma annihilated 
should depart or have any course to follow, for there is no rhyme or reason 
for that. And texts like, "Attains Brahman in this very body" (Be. IV. iv. 7) 
indicate the absence of departure and paths for him. 



14. And the Smrti also says so 




Moreover, the absence of movement and departure is mentioned in the 
Mahabharata : "Even gods become befooled in the course of finding out the 
path of one who has become one with the Self of all beings, who has 
understood all beings truly as the Self, and who has no state to reach." 

Opponent : But the Sm;ti also mentions a path that the knowers of 
Brahman tread: "Once upon a time Suka, son of Vyasa, became desirous of 
liberation and proceeded towards the solar orb. When called back by his 
father who was following him, he responded saying, 'Sir'". 

Vedantin : Not so, for it is to be understood that Suka reached a particular 
region through his power of Yoga even while he was in the body, and there 
he gave it up. For such facts as being seen by all beings are mentioned in 
that connection, whereas nobody can have any visual perception when a 
disembodied soul moves on. It is in line with this that in that very context the 
conclusion is made thus: "But Suka accelerated his speed to more than that 
of wind, moved across space exhibiting his own power, and then he became 
merged in all beings". Hence the knower of Brahman has neither any 
departure from the body nor any course to follow. We shall state later on as 
to whom the Upani$adic texts about courses refer (IV. iii. 7). 

Topic 7: THE ORGANS OF THE KNOWER MERGE IN BRAHMAN 

#r m 95 m 

m{'v Those (organs) q~ (merge) in the supreme Brahman f$ because M so 
(the Upanigad) ai"if says. 

1Y. Those organs get merged in the supreme Brahman, for such is the 
declaration of the Upani;ad. 



And "those organs", called the pravas, as also the (subtle) elements, of the 
knower of the supreme Brahman "merge in the supreme" Self. 

Why is it so? 

Since "such is the declaration of the Upanigad" (as in): "So also these 
sixteen parts (i.e. limbs) of the all-seeing Puruca (i.e. infinite Being) that 
have Puru,sa as their abode get absorbed on reaching PuruFa" (Pr. VI. 5). 

Opponent : Another Upanisadic text, speaking about the man of 
realization, states that the "parts" get merged somewhere other than the 
supreme Self: "To their sources repair the fifteen parts (constituents of the 
body)" (Mu. III. ii. 7). 

Veddntin : Not so, for this (Mui .aka) text speaks from the phenomenal 
point of view, and it means that the constituents that are the products of the 
elements-earth etc.-repair to their own material sources. But the other 
(Prasna) text states frcn the standpoint of the man of realization that (in his 
view) all the constituents get absorbed in the supreme Brahman Itself. Hence 
there is no defect. 

Tonic 8: ABSOLUTE ABSORPTION OF THE CONSTITUENTS 

Doubt : Does the merger of the constituents of the body of the man of 
realization occur wholly as in the case of others, or is some part left out? 

Opponent : Since that is a resorption like any other resorption, their 
potentiality must remain intact. 


Vedintin : To this the aphorist says, 



ar_fq : Non-distinction (with Brahman results) a~ on the authority of 
scriptural declaration. 

16. (Absolute) non-distinction (with Brahman comes about) on the 
authority of the scriptural declaration. 

It is a total unification to be sure. 


Why so? 

"On the authority of the scriptural declaration". Thus it is that after 
relating the merger of the constituents, the Upani$ad says, "When their 
names and forms are destroyed and they are simply called Puruca. Such a 
man of realization is without the constituents and is immortal" (Pr. VI. 5). 
Besides, the constituents that spring from ignorance can have no remnant 
after their resorption through knowledge. Accordingly, they must become 
absolutely unified (with Brahman). 

Tonic 9: DEPARTURE OF ONE WHO KNOWS THE QUALIFIED 

BRAHMAN 




trdtn hi tv* rcfiKQ 1 e n M rcrciriH Ftiir! it V'ltv k tlti'K 

nW|LT. ifcU IllBI.IW till 




There occurs an illumination of the top of its (i.e. soul's) abode (viz the 
heart); Bj-Ste,-t: having the door illumined by that (light), (the soul goes 
out), fiwowing to the efficacy of knowledge a and c->-qd—~tfa_afa~T 
owing to the appropriateness of the constant meditation about the way which 
is a part of that (knowledge), :under the favour of Him who resides in the 
heart, qTff-aatfTT through that (nerve) which is the hundred and first. 


17. (When the soul of the man who has realized the qualified Brahman is 
about to depart), there occurs an illumination of the top of the heart. Having 
that door illumined by that light, the soul, under the favour of Him who 


resides in the heart, departs through the hundred and first nerve, owing to the 
efficacy of the knowledge and the appropriateness of the constant thought 
about the course which is a part of that knowledge. 

Doubt : The incidental consideration of the knowledge of the supreme 
Brahman is concluded. Now, however, the aphorist pursues the reflections 
about the inferior knowledge. It has been stated that the process of departure 
from the body is the same for the man of knowledge (i.e. of one who 
meditates on the qualified Brahman) and the man of ignorance up to the 
point where the path of the gods begins. Now is being considered the entry 
(of the soul) into that course. When the soul, identified with the intellect, that 
has all its organs counting from the organ of speech withdrawn into itself, is 
about to leave the body, then the heart becomes its abode, the place of its 
existence, in accordance with the Upani$adic text, "Completely withdrawing 
these particles of light (i.e. powers of the organs), it comes to the heart" (Br. 
IV. iv. 1). The illumination of the top of the heart and the departure from 
such bases as the eye after that top becomes lighted up are mentioned by the 
Upani$ad in the passage, "The top of the heart of this one brightens. 
Through that brightened top the soul departs, either through the eyes or 
through the head, or through any other part of the body" (Br. IV. iv. 2). Now 
does this departure occur in the same way both in the cases of the 
enlightened and the unenlightened, or is there any distinction in the case of 
the enlightened? 

Opponent : When under such a doubt, the conclusion should be that there 
is no distinction, for the Upani$adic text is the same. 

Veddntin : That being the position, the aphorist says that though the top of 
the heart becomes illumined both for the man of knowledge and the man of 
ignorance, and though the door is illumined thereby, yet the man of 
knowledge departs from the region of the head, whereas the others depart 
from other regions. 

Why? 

Because of the power of knowledge. Should the man of knowledge also 
depart from any region indiscriminately just like the others, he will not attain 



a virtuous world, so that his knowledge will be useless. And this is so 
"because of the appropriateness of constant thought about the course 
forming a part of the knowledge". In connection with certain meditations it 
is enjoined that the soul's path that is associated with the nerve at the top of 
the head and forms a part of the meditation itself has to be reflected on. And 
it is reasonable that by virtue of thinking on it he should emerge through that 
very thing. Therefore the man of knowledge, favoured as he is by Brahman 
which is meditated on as having Its abode in the heart, becomes unified in 
thought with Brahman and emerges out of the body through the nerve 
counted as the one over and above a hundred; but others emerge through 
other nerves. That is why it is stated in the scripture in connection with the 
meditation about the heart, "The nerves of the heart are a hundred and one in 
number. Of them the one passes through the head. Going up through that 
nerve one gets immortality. Other nerves that have different directions 
become the causes of death" (Ka. II. iii. 16, Ch. VIII. vi. 6). 

Topic 10: THE SOUL FOLLOWS THE RAYS OF THE SUN 



Zfw-ar3t" By following the rays (of the sun). 

18. (The soul of the man of knowledge) proceeds by following the rays of 
the sun. 

Starting with the sentence, "Now then, there is the palace of Brahman in 
the shape of the tiny lotus of the heart that is within the body; in that exists 
(Brahman called) the small inner Space" (Ch. VIII. i.« 1), a meditation about 
the heart is enjoined. In the course of describing this meditation, the start is 



made with, "Now these nerves of the heart" (Ch. VIII. vi. 1), and then a 
connection is elaborately shown between the nerves (in the heart) and the 
rays (of the sun) in the passage, "Then when anyone departs from this body 
thus, he goes up along these rays" (Ch. VIII. vi. 5), and again it is stated, 
"Going up through that nerve one gets immortality" (Ch. VIII. vi. 6). From 
this it is known that the soul, while emerging through the hundred and first 
nerve, goes out along the rays. 

Now the doubt arises as to whether the soul follows the rays equally, 
irrespective of the occurrence of the death during the day-time or night, or it 
does so only when dying in the daytime. 

Vedantin : This being the doubt, the aphorist declares that the soul 
progresses by the way of the rays irrespective of the time of death, for the 
Upanigad speaks in general terms. 

fife % wro TOfiniM wfe 3 ntcii 

fifer In the night q there is no (progress along the rays) if it be argued thus, 
then q not so, since there is zrmq-i—TTfzfci a continuance as long as the 
body lasts urgvqfq of the relationship (between the nerve and the rays); a 
also jgfa the Upani$ad reveals this. 

19. If it be argued that the soul departing at night can have no progress 
along the rays, then it is not so, since the connection between the nerve and 
the rays continues as long as the body lasts; and this is revealed in the 
Upanisad. 

Opponent : The nerve and the sun's rays remain connected during the day, 
so that a man dying in the day may well follow the rays (in his upward 
course); but that is not possible for a man dying at night because the 
connection between the nerve and the rays is then snapped. 


Vedantin : Not so, for the connection between the nerve and the rays lasts 
as long as the body itself, for the nerve and the rays remain in association as 



long as the embodied state continues; (the connection is not broken by 
night). This fact is revealed by the Upani$ad in, "Extending from that solar 
orb they (the rays) enter into the nerves, and spreading out from the nerves 
they enter the solar orb" (Ch. VIII. vi. 2). In summer the presence of the 
rays, even during nights, is perceived from their effect of producing heat etc. 
If it is difficult to perceive them during the nights in other seasons, it is 
because they are present in very small measures even as they are in cloudy 
days during winter. The text, "The sun makes of it a day even at night", 
reveals this very fact. Were a man, dying at night, to proceed upward even 
without following the rays, the pursuit of the rays itself would become 
useless. The Upani$ad does not mention separately that those who die in the 
day-time proceed upward by following the rays, while those who die at night 
do so without depending on the rays. On the contrary if it be supposed that 
even a man of knowledge cannot proceed upward owing to the offence of his 
dying at night, then the fruit of knowledge will become uncertain, so that 
men will have no inducement to it, for one cannot regulate the time of one's 
death. It cannot be that a soul that has become detached from the body at 
night, must wait till day dawns; for even when day dawns, its body may not 
come in contact with the solar rays, it (the body) having been already 
consigned to fire etc. The text, "In the little time that the mind takes to travel 
from one object to another, the man of knowledge reaches the sun" (Ch. 
VIII. vi. 5), also shows that there is no waiting (for daybreak). Therefore the 
soul's pursuit of the rays is the same whether it departs at night or in the day. 

Topic 11: SOUL'S JOURNEY DURING THE SUN'S SOUTHERN 
COURSE 



aM: a For the same reason agfk even (when dying) a'arm during the 
southern course of the sun (the soul gets the fruits of knowledge). 



20. For the very same reason (the soul gets the result of knowledge) even 
when departing during the sun's southern course. 

Just because of this-because there is no need for waiting, because the 
result of knowledge is not uncertain, and because the time of death is 
unpredictable-if a man of knowledge should die during the southward course 
of the sun, he will get the result of his knowledge all the same. By this 
aphorism the aphorist demolishes the misconception about the necessity of 
waiting till the sun starts northward that may arise from the facts that the 
sanctity of the northern course is well recognized, that Bhi~ma is known to 
have waited for it, and that the Upani$ad says, "From the bright fortnight he 
goes to the six months during which the sun moves northward" (Ch. IV. xv. 
5). The well-known sanctity is a fact in relation to the men of ignorance. As 
for Bhigma's waiting for departure during the northern course, it was by way 
of showing respect to popular sentiment and demonstrating the validity of 
his father's boon that his death would be at his own command. As for the 
meaning of the Upani$adic text, it will be explained under the aphorism, 
"These are deities conducting the soul for there are indicatory marks to that 
effect" (B. S. IV. iii. 4). 

Opponent : In the Smcti the start is made with the verse, "Now I shall tell 
thee, 0 thou mightiest of the Bharatas, of the time travelling in which, the 
Yogins return, (and again of that taking which) they do not return" (Gita, 
VIII. 23), and then the special times like day, calculated to lead to cessation 
from rebirth, are defined in the main; so how can a man departing at night or 
during the southern course of the sun be freed from rebirth? 

Veddntin : As to that, the answer is: 

aft ^ m ^ ll^ll 

-q And (these times etc.) q~ are mentioned in the Smrti q: s for the 
Yogins; a and i* these two (Samkhya and Yoga paths) are ;Ft mentioned in 
the Smrti (and not the Vedas). 



21. And these times etc. are mentioned in the Smrti for the Yogins; and 
these (paths of) Samkhya and Yoga are mentioned in the Smrtis and not the 
Vedas. 

These limitations of time etc, as leadin g to the cessation of rebirth are 
mentioned in the Smrtis for the Yo g ins. These ( paths of Yo g a and Samkhvaa 
belong to the Smrtis and not to the Vedas. Thus owing to a difference of the 
subject-matters and the special qualifications of the people following them, 
the fixation of time found in the Smrtis is not to be applied to the Upani$adic 
context. 

Opponent: The paths of the gods and the manes, just as they are presented 
in the Upani$ads, can be recognized as recounted in the Smrtis as well: 
"Fire, flame, day-time, the bright fortnight, the six months of the northern 
passage of the sun.... Smoke, night-time, the' dark fortnight, the six months 
of the southern passage of the sun" (GYti, VIII. 24-25). 

Vedantin : The answer is that since a promise about the time is made thus 
in the Smrti, "I shall tell thee of the time" (Giti, VIII. 23), therefore the 
aphorist apprehends a contradiction and so shows how that can be resolved. 
In reality, there will be no contradiction in the Smrti as well if there too the 
gods conducting the souls are meant by those terms (as they are in fact in the 
Upanisads). 


SECTION III 

Topic 1: ONLY ONE PATH TO THE WORLD OF BRAHMAN 

Doubt : It was stated that up to the point where the path (of the gods) 
starts, the order of departure from the body is similar. But the path itself is 
variously described in the various Upani$ads. One course starts from the 
association of the nerves and rays: "Then he rises up along these very rays" 
(Ch. VIII. vi. 5). Another starts with the flame: "They reach (the deity 
identified with) the flame, from the flame (to the deity of) the day" (Br. VI. 
ii. 15). There is another course stated in: "Reaching the path of the gods, he 
comes to the world of Fire" (Kau. I. 3). Yet another is: "When a man departs 
from this world, he reaches the air" (Br. V. x. 1). Still another is: "Free from 








all contaminations they go by the path of the sun to where lives that Puriga, 
immortal and undecaying" (Mu. I. ii. 11). Now the doubt arises: Are these 
paths different from one another, or are they the same one with many 
features? 

Opponent : When in such a predicament, the conclusion to be drawn is 
that these paths are certainly different on account of their occurring in 
different contexts and forming the appendages of diverse meditations. 
Moreover, the categorical assertion in, "Then along these very rays" (Ch. 
VIII. vi. 5), will be nullified if the flame etc. (of Br. VI. ii. 15) are taken into 
consideration. Also the text about quickness, contained in, "He reaches the 
sun as quickly as it takes the mind to move from one object to another" (Ch. 
VIII. vi. 5), will be compromised. Therefore these paths must be different 
from one another. 

Veddntin : To this we say, 



arm:-ifqT Along the path starting from flame (i.e. light) aq-o: that being 
well known. 

1. The soul travels along the path starting from flame, that being well 
known. 

We assert that all who would reach Brahman have to proceed along the 
path starting from flame. 

Why so? 

"That being well known," that path being well known to all men of 
realization. Thus it is that in the text, "And those others as well who meditate 
with faith upon the Satya Brahman in the forest (reach the deity identified 



with flame)" (Br. VI. ii. 15), occurring in a context dealing with the 
meditation on the five fires, we hear of the progress along the path starting 
from flame even in the case of those who practise other kinds of meditation. 

Opponent : It may well be that in the case of those meditations where no 
course is mentioned, this course starting from flame will find its scope. But 
in the cases where other courses are mentioned, why should one resort to this 
course starting from flame? 

Vedantin : To this the reply is that this might have been so if these courses 
were totally disparate. As a matter of fact, however, this course leading to 
the world of Brahman is the same though possessed of diverse features and 
indicated in certain places through a few of these characteristics only. This is 
what we maintain. Since in all the descriptions, the particulars can be 
recognized as so many aspects of the same path, therefore these can be 
comprised in a single conception by considering them as inter-related in a 
successive series of attributes and substantives. Just as in the case of a 
meditation occurring in different contexts, the different aspects have to be 
collected into a single whole, similarly the characteristics of the path also 
have to be integrated. Although the meditations may differ, the path must be 
the same, since it is recognized that it is an aspect of the same path that is 
present in a particular case and since the goal to be reached is the same for 
all. Thus it is that in the different contexts the very same result, viz the 
attainment of the world of Brahman, is shown in the texts, "They attain 
perfection and live in those worlds of Brahman for a great many superfine 
years" (Br. VI. ii. 15), "He lives there (in the world that is free from grief and 
cold) for eternal years" (Br. V. x. 1), "He attains the same victory 
(everywhere) and the same pervasiveness that Brahman (Hiraiyagarbha) 
has" (Kau. 1.4), "Those who attain this world of Brahman throu gh 
Brahn i acharva" (Ch. VIII. iv. 3 ) . As for the contention that the cate g orical 
assertion in . "alon g these very ra ys". ( Ch. VIII. vi. 5 ). will be stultified if the 
path startin g from flame be accepted , that creates little difficult y, since that 
text is meant merely to im pl y the attainment of the ravs. 1 For a single word 
"very" cannot posit the attainment of the rays and also the rejection of the 
flame. Hence it is to be understood that this text merely emphasizes the 
connection with the rays. And the text about quickness (Ch. VIII. vi. 5) is 





















not compromised even if the path starts from flame, for what is meant to 
imply is that in comparison with other goals, Brahman is reached more 
quickly; and this is just as one might say, "I shall reach here in a trice." 
Moreover, the text, "They (i.e. the creatures averse to scriptural duties) do 
not proceed along either of these two paths" (Ch. V. x. 8), which enumerates 
a third state, shows that apart from the path of the manes there is only 
another path, viz that of the gods, which is divided into the stages of flame 
etc. Besides, in the Upanisadic texts that speak of the path as starting from 
flame, the stages in the path are quite a number, whereas they are few in 
other texts; and it is proper that the fewer should be made to fit in with the 
greater. It is from such considerations that it has been said, "The soul travels 
along the path starting from flame, for this is well known." 

Tonic 2: THE DEPARTING Soul, REACHES AIR AFTER YEAR 

1RII 

(The soul of the knower of the qualified Brahman reaches) qTzA air ig 
from the year, a-fglx:mj owing to the absence and presence of specification. 

2. The soul of the knower of the qualified Brahman goes from the year to 
air, on account of the absence and presence of specification. 

In what definite order, again, should the different presentations of the 
progress of the soul (along the path of the gods) be linked up in a chain of 
attributes and substantives? That link is supplied by the teacher acting as a 
friend. The Kausitakins read of their path of the gods thus: "Attaining this 
path of the gods, he comes to the world of Fire; he comes to the world of 
Air, (he comes to the world of Varuna); he comes to the world of Indra; he 
comes to the world of Prajapati (Viral); he comes to the world of Brahma 
(Hiranyagarbha)" (Kau. 1.3). There the term "world of Fire" is synonymous 
with flame (of Br. VI. ii. 15), since both indicate burning, so that one need 
not take any pains for the establishment of an order with regard to these. But 




since (the deity of) air is not heard of in the path starting from (the deity of) 
flame (in the Chandogya), where should it be placed? The answer is being 
given by saying that in the text, "They reach (the deity of) flame, from flame 
(the deity of) day, from day (the deity of the) bright fortnight, from the bright 
fortnight (the deity of) the six months during which the sun moves 
northward, from the six months to (the deity of the) year, from the year to 
(the deity of) the sun" (Ch. V. x. 1), they assign the position of air after the 
year and before the sun. 

Why should it be so? 

"Owing to the absence and presence of specification". Thus it is that the 
air that is not very definitely located in the text, "he comes to the world of 
Air" (Kau. I. 3), is seen to be spoken of definitely in another Upani$ad, 
"When a man departs from this world, he reaches air, which makes an 
opening there for him like the hole of a chariot wheel. He goes upward 
through that and reaches the sun" (Br. V. x. 1). Since in this text air is 
specifically placed before the sun, air is to be assigned a position between 
the year and the sun. 

Opponent : Why again, after noticing the specific mention of air after fire 
(in Kau. I. 3), should not air be placed after flame? 

Vedantin : We claim that there is no such specification. 

Opponent: Was not the text quoted, "Attaining this path of the gods, he 
comes to the world of Fire, he comes to the world of Air, (he comes to the 
world of Varuia)" (Kau. I. 3)? 

The answer is that here the statement is merely in the form of an 
enumeration of the thin g s one after the other , there bein g nothin g indicative 
of an y serial order. The ob j ects reached are alone enumerated here by sa ving 
that he g oes to such and such re g ions , whereas in the other { Brhadaranvaka ) 
text it is stated that he proceeds up throu g h an openin g as bi g as the hole of a 
chariot wheel to reach the sun , so that a sequence is well understood. Hence 
the statement . "Owin g to the absence and presence of specification" , is quite 
reasonable. The Va i asanevins . however , have this readin g, "from the months 






































to the world of the g ods ; from the world of the g ods to the sun" (Br. VI. ii. 
15) . Accordin g to that text , the soul should reach air from the world of the 
g ods , so that the sun mav be reached next. But when the aphorist says that 
the soul reaches air from the year , he has the Chando g va text in view IV. x. 
11 . As between the Chando g va and the Brhadarat t vaka Upanipds . one omits 
the world of the g ods , and the other the year. But since both are 
authoritative , both these have to be added to both ; and while doin g so . it has 
to be borne in mind that the year , bein g connected with the months , has to be 
placed earlier and the world of the g ods later.2 


Topic 3: THE SOUL PROCEEDS FROM LIGHTNING TO VARUNA 



zi": Varuiaa off: atff after lightning qwwq because of (their) connection 
(with water). 

3. Varuna is to be placed after lightning, because of their connection with 
water (i.e. cloud). 

In the text, "He goes from the sun to the moon, from the moon to 
lightning" (Ch. IV. xv. 5), Varuua is to be placed after lightning on the 
authority of the text, "He comes to the world of Varu>}a" (Kau. I. 3); for 
lightning and Varuip (Raingod) are related to each other. When long streaks 
of lightning dance within the bowels of the clouds with sharp thundering 
sounds, then comes down rain, which fact is also noted in the Brahmans text, 
"Lightning flashes and thunder roars; it will surely rain" (Ch. VII. xi. 1). It is 
well known from the Vedas and Smrtis that Varuna is the god of waters. 
After Varuna are to be placed Indra and Prajapati, because the Kaugitaki 
Upaniad recites that way and no other position can be found for them. 
Varuna and others have to be relegated towards the end, since they are fresh 
entrants and have not been assigned any position in the path (in Ch. IV. xv. 5 
or Br. VI. ii. 15) starting with flame and ending with lightning. 


































Topic 4: GUIDING DEITIES 


Doubt : With regard to flame etc. the doubt arises as to whether these are 
marks on the path, or places of experience, or the conductors of the souls 
moving forward. 

Op ponent : As to that , the conclusion to be arrived at is that the flame etc, 
are merely descriptive marks on the path , for by its very nature the 
instruction is concerned with such landmarks. As it occurs in common 

ex perience that when a man wants to g o to a villa g e or a town , he is 
instructed thus: "You should g o to such a hill , then to a banian tree , then to a 
river , and then you will reach the villa g e or town" , so also it is said here . 
"From flame to the day-time , from the day-time to the bri g ht fortni g ht" , and 
so on. Or it may well be that these are places of experience. It is thus that fire 
etc, are associated with the word "world" , as for instance in . "he comes to 
the world of Fire" ( Kau. I. 3 ) . In common parlance , the word "world" is used 
with re g ard to places where the creatures experience (the results of virtues 
and vices ), as for instance , "the world of men , the world of manes , the world 
of g ods" ( Br. 1. v. 16 ). and so on. Even so is the Brahmama text . "The y get 
attached to the worlds of days and ni g hts"$ tS. B. X. ii. 6.8). Hence the 
flame etc. are not the conducting deities. Besides, these cannot reasonably 
conduct the souls as they are insentient; for in common experience it is the 
intelligent men, employed by a king, that escort others who have to be 
guided along inaccessible roads. 

Veddntin : To this we say, 



(These are) f$ : guiding deities ff-fjR because of the indicative mark to 
that effect. 




























































4. (Flame etc. are) conducting deities, owing to the indicative mark to that 
effect. 

These must reasonably be conducting deities. 

Why? 

"Owing to indicatory mark to that effect". Thus the text, "From the moon 
he reaches the deity of lightning. A superhuman (lit. "not belonging to 
Manu's creation") comes, and he escorts them from there to the world of 
Brahman" (Ch. IV. xv. S), reveals this escorting to be an established fact. 

Opponent: That sentence cannot go beyond what it actually states. 

Vedantin : Not so, since the attribute (viz superhuman) is meant simply to 
deny the assumption that this being is human (lit. belongs to Manu's 
creation) which might arise from an already established fact. The adjective 
"superhuman" placed before "being" for the sake of ruling out human guides 
becomes justified if sentient beings are already known as guides in the flame 
etc. and these are also understood to be within Manu's creation. 

Opponent : A mere indicative mark cannot decide thus in the absence of 
any logic behind it. 


Vedantin : That defect does not arise, 



r_fj~: That being established 3 -am" on account of both (the person and 
the path) being unconscious. 

5. Because that stands established on account of both (the traveller and the 
path) being then unconscious. 



Now those who would pass along the path through flame etc. have their 
senses and organs bunched up owing to their separation from the bodies, and 
so they are devoid of independent action. The flame etc. also are not 
independent, they being insentient. So it can be understood that some deities 
who are sentient and identify themselves with (and preside over) the flame 
etc. are engaged in the work of escorting. In common experience too, when 
people become intoxicated or unconscious and have their senses befuddled, 
they are led through their paths by others. Besides, the flame, etc. being 
uncertain, cannot be the indicative marks or features of the path; for one 
dying at night cannot reasonably have an accession of daylight, and it was 
stated earlier that there can be no waiting for the day. But such a defect does 
not arise when these have permanence in their identity with the deities. That 
the deities are mentioned by the words flame etc. can be justified on the 
ground that they identify themselves with these. And such statements as, 
"from flame to the day-time" (Ch. I\. xv. 5, V. x. 1,) do not create any 
difficulty even if the escorting deities are meant, the meaning in that case 
being, "Through the instrumentality of the deity of flame they reach the deity 
of the day-time, through the instrumentality of the deity of the day-time they 
reach the deity of the bright fortnight". In common parlance also people 
impart instruction about the guides on the way thus: "From here you go to 
Balavarman, then to Jayasimha, thence to Kpagupta". Moreover, the 
statement in the beginning is, "They reach the flame", which merely tells us 
of coming in contact, but not of any special form of it. At the end, however, 
comes the statement, "he escorts them to Brahman" (Ch. IV. xv. 6), where a 
special form of contact as between an escort and the escorted is stated. From 
this it can be ascertained that the same kind of contact exists in the beginning 
as well. But owing to the very fact that all the senses then become bunched 
up, no experience is possible there. As for the word "world" (lit. place of 
experience), that can well be used even with regard to the beings who simply 
pass through without getting any experience, inasmuch as these worlds 
supply (real) experiences to their own residents. Hence a man who reaches 
the world presided over by the deity of fire is guided along by the god of fire, 
and the man who reaches the world presided over by the god of air is guided 
forward by the god of air. This is how the passage is to be construed. 



Opponent : On the supposition that the conducting deities are meant, how 
would that view be valid in the cases of Varupa and others? For Varuza and 
others are placed after lightning, and from lightning up till Brahman is 
reached, a super-human being is mentioned in the Upani$ad as acting as the 
escort. 


Vedantin : Hence the aphorist gives the answer: 



c: From there (i.e. from lightning) (they are guided) (from above) ~q 
rrrxlby the very same being who comes to lightning ff*-qi:for so the 
Upani$ad says. 

6. From there they are guided by the very same being who comes to 
lightning; for it is of him that the Upaniiad speaks. 

It is to be understood that "from there", after arriving at lightning, they go 
to the world of Brahman, being led through the worlds of Varuna and others, 
under the guidance of a superhuman being who exists (even) beyond 
lightning; for that very being is mentioned as the guide in the Upani$adic 
text, "A superhuman being comes and escorts them from there to the world 
of Brahman" (Ch. IV. xv. 5). As for Varuna and others, it is to be understood 
that they somehow contribute to the task of that superhuman being by either 
not creating any obstruction or helping positively. Accordingly, it is well 
said that flame etc. stand for the escorting deities. 


TOPIC 5: THE PATH LEADS TO THE CONDITIONED BRAHMAN 




fz: Badari (thinks that the souls are led) rrr to the conditioned Brahman 
aifr-3qq: because of the possibility of becoming the goal arm on Its part. 

7. Bddari thinks that the souls are led to the conditioned Brahman, for it 
(alone) can reasonably be the goal. 

Doubt: With regard to the text, "He escorts them to Brahman" (Ch. IV. xv. 
5), the point to be considered is whether this deity escorts them to the 
inferior, conditioned Brahman or to the superior, unconditioned Brahman 
Itself. 

Why should such a doubt arise? 

On account of the use of the word Brahman and the Upanipdic mention of 
progress. 

Bddari : As to that, the teacher Badari thinks that they are led to the 
inferior, conditioned, and qualified Brahman alone. 

Why? 

"For It can logically be the goal." For this conditioned Brahman can 
properly be a goal to be reached, since It has a locus. But with regard to the 
supreme Brahman there can be no such conceptions as an approacher, a goal, 
and progress towards It, for the absolute Brahman is omnipresent and is also 
the inmost Self of the travellers. 



8. And (the conditioned Brahman must be the goal) owing to the specific 
mention of this. 

Since in another Upanipdic text a specific statement is made thus, "Then a 
being created from the mind (of Brahman, i.e. Hiraoyagarbha) comes and 
conducts them to the worlds of Brahman. They attain perfection and live in 
these worlds of Brahman for a great many superfine years" (Br. VI. ii. 15), 
therefore it can be understood that the path is related to the conditioned 
Brahman only. For it is improper to use the plural number (in "worlds") in 
the case of the supreme Brahman whereas this plural number quite befits the 
conditioned Brahman, since there can be such a thing as difference of states 
in It. Even the Upani$adic use of the word "world", constituting a place of 
experience with its multiple aspects, fits in well with a conditioned entity, 
whereas in the other case (of the absolute Brahman) the word can be used 
only in a figurative sense as in such texts, "0 Emperor, this is Brahmaloka 
(the world that is Brahman Itself)" (Br. IV. iv. 23). Again, to speak in terms 
of a container and a thing contained (as in, "In those worlds of Brahman") 
hardly fits in with the supreme Brahman. Hence this escorting relates to the 
conditioned Brahman alone. 

Opponent : The word Brahman cannot be used even for the conditioned 
Brahman inasmuch as it was established earlier in the First Chapter that 
Brahman is the cause of the origin etc. of the whole universe (I.i. 1). 


Veddntin : As to that the answer is: 




I But -argiq: the designation as such (is) owing to nearness. 

9. But (the conditioned Brahman has) that designation owing to nearness 
(to the absolute Brahman). 

The word "but" is used for removing the objection. Since the inferior 
Brahman is very close to the supreme Brahman, the use of the word 
Brahman with regard to the former creates no difficulty. The established 
practice is that the supreme Brahman Itself is called the inferior Brahman 
when It is conditioned by the pure adjuncts and is taught as though 
possessed of the attributes of being identified with the mind and such other 
features of creation for the sage of meditation by some aspirants under 
certain circumstances. 

Opponent : On the supposition that the aspirants reach the conditioned 
Brahman, their non-retum, as mentioned in the Upani$ad, becomes 
untenable; for unless'it be in the supreme Brahman there can be no such 
thing as ecernal existence. As a matter of fact, the Upani$ads show that an 
aspirant who goes along the path of the gods, does not return: "Those going 
by this path never return to this human cycle of birth and death" (Ch. IV. xv. 
5), "For them there is no return here" (an echo of Bl. VI. ii. 15), "Going up 
through that nerve one attainsimmortality" (Ka. II. iii. 16, Ch. VIII. vi. 6). 


Veddntin : To this we say, 



q;M_WM4 On the final dissolution of the world (of Brahman), (they) " 
together with (Entity) fthelord of that (world) M (attain) the supreme am: 
beyond that agfq on the strength of (Upanipdic) declaration. 

10. On the final dissolution of the world of the conditioned Brahman, they 
attain, along with the lord of the world, wbat is higher than this conditioned 
Brahman, as is known on the strength of the Upanicadic declaration. 

The idea conveyed is that when the time for the final dissolution of the 
world of the inferior Brahman is imminent, the aspirants who have acquired 
full realization there itself attain thereafter, along with Hirai yagarbha, the 
ruler of that world, the supreme state of Visou which is absolutely pure. This 
kind of liberation by stages has to be admitted on the strength of the 
Upani$adic texts speaking of non-return etc. For we established earlier that it 
is incomprehensible that the supreme Brahman should be reached by any 
process of moving forward. 



11. This is confirmed by Smrti as well. 

The Smrti also confirms this view: "When the time of final dissolution 
comes at the close of the life of Hirauyagarbha, all of them, with 
enlightenment already attained, enter into the supreme state along with 
Hirai3yagarbha" (Karma-Purana, Purva-bhaga, XII. 269). Hence the 
conclusion is that the Upanipdic mention about the progress (along a path) 
relates to the conditioned Brahman. 



Doubt: What was the objection in the background, in answer to which the 
conclusion is presented in the aphorisms starting with, "Badari thinks that 
they are led to the conditioned Brahman" etc. (IV. iii. 7)? 

That objection is now being shown by the aphorisms themselves. 

it iiRii 

arfkl: Jaimini (thinks that they are led) qi to the supreme Brahman rg" 
that being the primary meaning. 

12. Jain ini thinks that they are led to the supreme Brahman, that being the 
primary meaning (of the word Brahman). 

But the teacher Jaimini thinks that in the text, "He escorts them to 
Brahman" (Ch. IV. xv. 6), what is meant is that he leads them to the supreme 
Brahman Itself. 

Why so? 

Since "that is the primary sense"; for the supreme Brahman is the primary 
meaning of the word "Brahman", the inferior one being its secondary 
meaning. And as between the primary and secondary meanings, one readily 
understands the primary one alone. 




13. And (this is so) because the Upanisad reveals (this fact). 

And the text, "Going up through that nerve, one gets immortality" (Ka. II. 
iii. 16, Ch. VIII. vi. 6), shows that immortality is preceded by moving 
forward; and immortality is logically possible in the supreme Brahman, but 
not so in the conditioned Brahman, that being subject to destruction. For the 
Upanipdic text runs thus, "Again, that in which one perceives a second entity 
is limited, it is mortal" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1). This movement is mentioned in the 
Katha Upani$ad in connection with the supreme Brahman; for no other 
knowledge is presented in that context, the topic of the supreme Brahman 
alone having been mooted with the text, "that which is different from virtue, 
different from vice" etc. (Ka. I. ii. 14). 

5T * rf fefafa: m 

qr Moreover, Af~gf;{-BTNtrl: the firm resolution about attainment (is) 
not with regard to the conditioned Brahman. 

14. Moreover, the firm resolution about attainment is not concerned with 
the conditioned Brahman. 

"Moreover, the firm resolution about attainment", expressed in the text, 
"May I attain the assembly hall in the palace of Prajapati (lit. 



Hiraoyagarbha)" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1), is not directed towards the conditioned 
Brahman, for the supreme Brahman, as distinguished from the conditioned 
Brahman, forms the topic under consideration, as is clear from the preceding 
text, "He who is known as Space is the manifester of name and form. And 
Brahman is that in which are included these two" (ibid). This is also evident 
from the text, "May I become the fame (or glory) of the Brahmamas, (the 
fame of the K$atriyas, the fame of the Vai§yas)" (ibid), which presents 
Brahman as the Self of everything; for from the text, "That which is called 
the great fame has no parallel" (Sv. IV. 19), it is well known that the supreme 
Brahman alone is called "fame". This arriving at the palace, which must be 
preceded by movement, is described in connection with the meditation about 
the heart (Dahara-Vidyd) in the text, "There exists the palace of Brahman 
called Aparajita (unconquerable), there exists the golden altar made specially 
by the Lord Himself" (Ch. VIII. v. 3). And since the root pad (as contained 
in pratipadye-may I arrive at) conveys the sense of motion, it also shows the 
necessity of taking the help of some path. So the other (opposite) view that 
can be held is that the Upani$adic texts, which speak of the progress along a 
path, are connected with the supreme Brahman. 

Vedantin : These two views have been presented by the teacher (Vyasa) in 
these (two sets of) aphorisms. Of these the one view is contained in the 
aphorisms starting with "Badari thinks ... ; for It alone can reasonably be the 
goal" (IV. iii. 7-11); and the other view is presented in the aphorisms 
beginning with "Jaimini thinks..., that being the primary meaning of the 
word Brahman" (IV. iii. 12-14). Of these two groups of aphorisms, the group 
commencing from "...for It alone can reasonably be the goal" can prove the 
falsity of the other group commencing with "that being the primary 
meaning", and not vice versa. So the earlier point of view has been explained 
as the acceptable position, whereas the second one is held by the opponents 
(of Vedanta). There can be none to command that one must stick to the 
primary sense alone (of the word "Brahman") even when there is no such 
possibility. Besides, with a view to eulogizing the superior knowledge, it is 
quite proper even in a context of the superior Brahman, to describe the path 
connected with the other kind of inferior knowledge, just as it is done in the 
text, "The other (nerves) that have different directions become the causes of 
death" (Ch. VIII. vi. 6). As for the text, "May I reach the hall in the palace of 



Prajapati" (Ch. VIII. xiv. 1), it involves no contradiction to treat it separately 
from the earlier sentence so as to mean a resolution for attaining the 
conditioned Brahman. (From the standpoint of eulogy or meditation) it is 
quite in order to speak even of the qualified Brahman as being the Self of all, 
as is done in, "He who is possessed of all activities, possessed of all desires" 
(Ch. III. xiv. 2, 4). Hence the Upani$adic texts about movement are 
connected with the inferior (qualified) Brahman alone. 

In pursuance of the usual practice, however, some would ascribe the 
earlier aphorisms to the opponent, and the latter ones to themselves. In 
accordance with such an arrangement, they would prove that the texts 
connected with movement are concerned with the supreme Brahman Itself. 
But that is improper since Brahman cannot logically be a goal to be attained. 
The supreme Brahman can never become a goal to be achieved which 
pervades everything, which is inside everything, which is the Self of all, and 
whose characteristics have been thus indicated by the Upani$ads: "All- 
pervasive like space and eternal", "That which is Brahman, immediate and 
direct, that is the Self within all" (Br. III. iv. 1), "The Self Itself is all this" 
(Ch. VII. xxv. 2), "This world is nothing but Brahman the highest" (Mu. II. 
ii. 11). For one cannot reach where one already is. The well-known fact in 
the world is that one thing is reached by something else. 

Opponent : In ordinary fife, a place already reached can still be reached 
again in terms of change of environment, as for instance, a man already on 
this earth may still reach it in terms of altered position. Similarly a boy who 
continues to be the same person may be noticed in terms of change in the 
period of fife to be progressing towards old age occurring to himself. So also 
Brahman may somehow become a goal to be approached by virtue of Its 
being equipped with all kinds of power. 

Veddntin : Not so, for all distinctions are ruled out from Brahman in 
accordance with such Upanisadic and Sm ti texts and logic as, "Without 
parts, without action, calm, free of blemishes, free of taints" (Sv. VI. 19), "It 
is neither gross nor minute, neither short nor long" (Br. III. viii. 8), "Since 
He is coextensive with all that is internal and external, and since He is 
birthless" (Mu. II. i. 2), "That great birthless Self is undecaying, immortal, 



undying, fearless, and Brahman (i.e. infinite)" (Br. IV. iv. 25), "This is the 
Self, which has been described as 'Not this', 'Not this 1 " (Br. III. ix. 26), 
according to which it cannot be imagined that the supreme Self can have any 
connection with any distinct time, space, etc., so as to be reached on the 
analogy of a particular place on the earth or a stage of life. The earth or age 
can well become the goal to be reached in terms of particular place or time, 
since they can have distinct localities and periods. 

Opponent: Brahman can have different powers since the Upani$ads show 
It to be the cause of the origin, continuance, and dissolution of the universe. 

Veddntin : Not so, since the Upanisadic texts denying distinctive attributes 
cannot be interpreted in any other way. 

Opponent : In the same way the texts about origin etc. cannot be 
interpreted otherwise. 

Vedantin : Not so, for their purpose is to establish unity. The scripture that 
propounds the reality of Brahman, existing alone without a second, and that 
proves the unreality of all modifications with the help of the illustrations like 
clay, cannot be meant for establishing the truth of origin etc. 

Opponent : Why again should the texts about origin etc. be subservient to 
t:ie texts denying distinction and not the other way round? 

Vedantin : The answer is that this is so because the texts denying 
distinction lead to a knowledge which is complete by itself (and leaves 
behind no more curiosity to be satisfied). For when one has realized that the 
Self is one, eternal, pure, and so on, one cannot have any more curiosity to 
be satisfied as a result of the rise in him of the conviction that the highest 
human goal has been reached, as is known from such Upani$adic passages 
as, "then what sorrow and what delusion can there be for that seer of 
oneness?" (I§,7), "You have attained that which is free from fear, 0 Janaka" 
(Br. IV. ii. 4), "The enlightened man is not afraid of anything. Him indeed 
this remorse does not afflict, 'Why did I not perform good deeds, and why 
did I perform bad deeds? 1 " (Tai. II. ix. 1). This is confirmed equally by 
noticing the contentment of the enlightened ones, and from the 



condemnation of the pursuit of unreal modifications in, "He who sees as 
though there is difference here goes from death to death" (Ka. II. i. 10). 
Accordingly, the texts denying distinctions cannot be understood to be 
subservient to others. But the texts about origin etc. cannot give rise to any 
such self-contained knowledge (that allays further curiosity). As a matter of 
fact, they are seen to aim at something else. Thus it is that (in the Chandogya 
Upani$ad) the start is made with, "0 amiable one, know this sprout (that this 
body is) to have come out of something; for it cannot be without a root" (VI. 
viii. 3); and then the Upanigad says later (in "with the help of that sprout try 
to find out the root that is Existence" VI. viii. 6) that Existence alone which 
is the source of the universe has to be known. Similar also is the text, "Crave 
to know that from which indeed all these creatures originate, by which they 
are sustained after birth, towards which they advance, and into which they 
merge. That is Brahman" (Tai. III. i. 1), (where also the reality to be known 
is Brahman alone). Thus since the texts about creation etc. are meant for 
imparting the knowledge of oneness, Brahman cannot he possessed of many 
powers and hence also It cannot reasonably be a goal to be reached. Any 
travelling towards Brahman is denied in the text, "His organs do not depart. 
Being but Brahman, he is merged in Brahman" (Br. IV. iv. 6). This fact was 
explained under the aphorism, "For in the case of the followers of one 
recension there is a clear denial of the soul's departure" (IV. ii. 13). 

On the supposition, again, that there is such a thing as travel ling, the 
travelling soul must be a part or—a transformation of Brahman, or something 
different from it; for travelling is impossible in a case of total unity. 

Opponent:. Even if it be so, what does it amount to? 

Veddntin : The answer is that if it be a part, then since the whole 
(Brahman) is a goal ever attained by that part, there can be no such thing as 
going to Brahman. Moreover, since Brahman is well known to be partless, it 
is improper to imagine such things in Brahman as a part and a whole. The 
position is the same even in case the soul be a transformation; for the 
transformed thing is ever present in the material of which it is a 
transformation. An earthen pot can never exist unless it be in identity with 
the earth, for it will cease to exist when it is not so identified. Again, even if 



the soul be either an effect or a part (of Brahman), then since Brahman, the 
possessor of such transformations or parts, remains unchanged, there can be 
no possibility of the soul's entering into the transmigratory state (for the 
parts of an inert stone cannot move, nor can a frog be confined within it). If 
the soul be different from Brahman, it must be either atomic or all-pervasive, 
or of an intermediate size. If it be all-pervasive, there can be no travelling. If 
it be of a medium size (indeterminate size changing with the body), it will 
become impermanent. If it be atomic, any feeling of sensation all over the 
body will be inexplicable. Besides, the views about the atomic and medium 
sizes were previously refuted (under the aphorism II. iii. 29) in an elaborate 
way. If the soul be different from the supreme Brahman, such scriptural 
declarations as, "That thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7) will be nullified. This defect 
is equally in evidence even if the soul be either a transformation or a part. 

Opponent : Since the source and its modifications and parts are the same 
(constituting a single whole), no defect arises from these two points of view. 

Veddntin : Not so, because (in that case) unity in the primary sense 
becomes impossible. Besides, from all these points of view there arises the 
predicament of liberation being entirely ruled out, owing to The non¬ 
eradication of the notion of the identity of the soul with its transmigratory 
state. Or even if that identity should cease, the soul will lose its innate nature 
(by merging in Brahman), since its identity with Brahman is denied (by the 
opponent). 

There are some people who prattle thus: The obligatory and occasional 
rites are performed for the sake of avoiding evil, the optional and prohibited 
rites are given up for avoiding heaven and hell, and the results of works 
which are to be experienced in the present body get exhausted by 
experiencing them; so that when the present body falls, at the same time that 
there is nothing to connect the soul with a fresh body, a man who proceeds in 
this way will achieve liberation consisting in the continuance in his own real 
natural state even without having realized the unity of the individual Self 
with Brahman. 

This is not correct on account of the absence of any valid evidence; for it 
is not established by any scripture that a man wanting liberation should act 



thus. This is a position bom out of one's own intellectual cognition only that 
the transmigratory state is a creation of rites, so that it can cease to exist in 
the absence of these rites. This, again, is not even a matter for inferential 
reasoning, inasmuch as the absence of the causes of the transmigratory state 
is beyond (such) determination. There may be many results of works 
accumulated in past lives by each creature, which have good or bad fruits in 
store for them. But since they cannot be experienced simultaneously owing 
to their results being opposed to one another, some of them which get a 
suitable opportunity produce this life, while others wait for the adequate 
space, time, and cause. And since these remaining ones cannot be exhausted 
by the experiences in the present life, it cannot be asserted that, after the fall 
of the present body, a man will get freed from the causes calculated to 
produce fresh bodies, even though he has followed the course of life 
described earlier (by the opponent). That the results of past works persist 
(even after death) is proved on the authority of such Upani$adic and Smrti 
texts as, "Those who perform virtuous deeds here (obtain excellent births)" 
(Ch. V. x. 7), "With the residual results of these". 

Opponent : It may well be that the obligatory and occasional duties will 
eject them (i.e. the residual results). 

Vedirntin : That cannot be, because there is no opposition between them. 
In a case of opposition alone can something be ejected by something else. 
But the accumulated virtues of past lives are not antagonistic to the 
obligatory and occasional duties, since both are equally meant for 
purification. As for the vices, they may be ejected when they stand in 
opposition, for they are impure by nature; but that does not prove the 
absence of the causes of rebirth, since the virtues can well constitute such a 
cause, and since the vices even are not known to be totally eliminated. 
Besides, there is no proof to show that the performance of the obligatory and 
occasional duties produce no other result apart from hindering the 
emergence of evil; for it is quite possible that a concomitant by-product will 
come into being, as Apastamba mentions in his Smrti, "Just as when a 
mango tree is planted for its fruits, its shade and sweet aroma are produced 
as by-products, so also when virtuous deeds are done, other factors come out 
as by-products". Moreover, until complete enlightenment comes, nobody can 



make a promise of remaining totally free from the optional and prohibited 
acts in the period between birth and death, for subtle lapses are noticed in the 
cases of the most careful men. Maybe all this will be considered a doubtful 
contingency. Even so, it becomes difficult to be convinced that no cause for 
rebirth remains. Besides, unless it is admitted that the soul's identity with 
Brahman is a truism realizable through knowledge, it is idle to expect 
liberation for a soul which is (believed to be) an agent and an experiencer by 
nature; for one's nature can never be given up like heat by fire. 

Opponent : It may well be that it is an evil for the soul to act as an agent 
and an experiencer, but not so is the power itself for the action and the 
experience, so that liberation may come when the expression of the power 
(in the form of action) is stopped while the latency remains. 

Vedmrtin : That too is wrong, for so long as the potentiality remains, the 
manifestation of the power becomes irresistible. 

Opponent : In that case it may well be that the power by itself cannot 
accomplish anything without the aid of other causes, so that even when that 
power abides (potentially) alone, it cannot run into evil. 

Vedantin : That also is wrong since the other causes (like adrra-unseen 
potentiality of past action, as also the potential results) ever remain 
associated (with the soul) through their association with the latency (of 
agentship and experience). Hence there can be no hope of liberation so long 
as a soul persists to be by nature an agent and experiencer when at the same 
time that its identity with Brahman, realizable through knowledge, does not 
exist. And the Upani5ad denies that there can be any other path of liberation 
except knowledge, "There is no other path to reach the goal" (Sv. III. 8). 

Opponent : Even if the soul be non-different from the supreme Brahman, 
this will only result in the annulment of all human dealings (including the 
scriptural instruction), for then there can be no application of the means of 
knowledge like perception etc. 

Vedantin : Not so, for that is possible before enlightenment like the 
behaviour in a dream before awakening. The scripture also speaks of the use 



of perception etc. in the case of the unenlightened man in the text, "Because 
when there is duality, as it were, then one sees something" (Br. II. iv. 14, IV. 
v. 15); and then it shows the absence of this in the case of an enlightened 
man, "But when to the knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, 
then what should one see and through what?" (ibid) etc. Thus since the 
notion of Brahman as a goal to be reached and such other ideas are 
eliminated for one who has realized the supreme Brahman, any movement 
cannot be asserted in his case in any way. 

Opponent: Where then can the texts about movement find proper scope? 

Veddntin : The answer is that their scope is limited within the meditations 
based on attributes. Thus it is that the pursuit of a path is sometimes spoken 
of in connection with the meditation on the five fires, and sometimes with 
the meditation on the couch (of Brahman) or on Vai§vanara. Even where a 
movement is spoken of in connection with Brahman, as in "Prdna (lit. vital 
force) is Brahman, Bliss is Brahman, Space is Brahman" (Ch. IV. x. 4), and 
"Then the tiny lotus of the heart that exists as a place in this city that this 
body is" (Ch. VIII. i. 1), there also a movement is possible, because what is 
meditated on there is but the qualified Brahman Itself, possessed of the 
attributes of being "the ordainer of the results of works", "the possessor of all 
true desires", and so on. But nowhere is any movement indicated in 
connection with the supreme Brahman in the same way as it is denied in, 
"his organs do not depart" (Br. IV. iv. 6). Since even in passages like, "The 
knower of Brahman attains the Highest" (Tai. II. i. 1), where the root¬ 
meaning of "attainment" implies movement, there is no possibility of 
reaching anywhere according to the reasons already adduced, therefore it is 
the very realization of one's own nature that is spoken of as this attainment 
from the standpoint of erasing out this universe of name and form 
superimposed through ignorance. And it is to be understood as having been 
said in the same sense as, "Having been Brahman, he attains Brahman" (Br. 
IV. iv. 6) and similar texts. Again, even if movement has to be explained in 
connection with the supreme Brahman, it must be held to have been asserted 
either by way of inducing the aspirant or for meditation. Now, no 
inducement can be generated by speaking of movement to one who has 
realized Brahman, since that is already an accomplished fact for him by his 



having become established in his own Self, which consummation is brought 
about by the knowledge of Brahman, and which is directly (and not 
mediately) self-evident to himself. Moreover, it does not stand to reason that 
the realization of Brahman, which is not productive of any result, but merely 
presents liberation as an ever accomplished fact, should depend in any way 
on the reflection about a course to be followed. Accordingly, movement is 
possible only in relation to the inferior Brahman. That being so, it is only 
through a failure to distinguish between the superior Brahman and inferior 
Brahman that the texts about travelling that refer to the inferior Brahman are 
ascribed to the superior Brahman. 

Opponent : Are there then two Brahmans-one superior and the other 
inferior? 

Veddntin : Quite so; for we come across such texts as, "This very 
Brahman, 0 Satyakama, that is inferior and superior is but this Om" (Pr. V. 
2). 

Opponent: Which again is the superior Brahman and which the inferior? 

Yedantin : The superior Brahman is spoken of where It is indicated by 
such terms as "not gross" through a negation of all the distinctions of names, 
forms, etc. called up by nescience. That very Brahman becomes the inferior 
Brahman where It is taught as possessed of some distinct name, form, etc. 
for the sake of meditation, as in such words as, "Identified with the mind, 
having prang (i.e. the subtle body) as his body, and effulgence as his form" 
(Ch. III. xiv. 2). 

Opponent: In that case the texts about non-duality will be compromised. 

Vedarnin : Not so, for that objection was met from the point of view of the 
limiting adjuncts created by name and form which spring up from nescience. 
The results accruing from that meditation on the qualified Brahman, 
mentioned in the relevant contexts and consisting in the divine powers over 
the world and so on as heard of in such texts as, "Should he be desirous of 
the world of the manes, the manes come to him at his very will" (Ch. VIII. ii. 
1), however, are confined within the transmigratory state itself on account of 



the continuance of ignorance. Since this result is associated with some 
particular space, any travelling for Its attainment involves no contradiction. 
Even though the Self is omnipresent, we said earlier under the aphorism, 
"On account of its having for its essence the qualities of that intellect" (II. iii. 
29), that a movement comes to be perceived when the limiting adjuncts like 
the intellect move, just as much as space appears to be moving when vessels 
etc. containing it move. Hence the view that stands well established is 
"Badari thinks that they are led to the conditioned Brahman" etc. (B. S. IV. 
iii. 7). And the view contained in, "Jaimini says that the supreme Brahman is 
attained" etc. (IV. iii. 12), is presented merely as an apparent, alternative 
view by way of helping the (student's) development of the power of intellect. 
This is how it is to be understood. 

TOPIC 6: WORSHIP WITH AND WITHOUT SYMBOLS 

Doubt : This is well established that any travelling is concerned with the 
conditioned Brahman and not with the supreme Brahman. Now the doubt is 
this: "Does the superhuman being (Ch. IV. xv. 6) lead to the world of 
Brahman all aspirants without exception who meditate on the conditioned 
Brahman, or does he lead only some of them?" What should be the 
conclusion here? 

Opponent : All these knowers of Brahman must reach a goal other than 
the supreme Brahman; for in the aphorism, "The passage of the soul by the 
path of the gods is not restricted to certain meditations only; it applies to all" 
(III. iii. 31), this path is promised equally for all the other meditations. 

Vedi ntin : To this comes the aphorist's rejoinder: 

MfRHWItHJlIi! || {mi 

(He) ;m leads those who do not depend on symbols Ufa this is what dal: 
Badarayai a (says); ORIM-1 there being no contradiction URW on 
(admitting) this twofold division and (because of the logic of) of 
(becoming) what one resolves. 



15. Badarayana says that the superhuman being leads to Brahman only 
those who do not use symbols (in their meditation), since this twofold 
division involves no contradiction and one becomes what one resolves to be. 


The teacher Badarayaua thinks that leaving out those who meditate with 
the help of symbols, the superhuman being leads all others, who meditate on 
the conditioned Brahman, to the world of Brahman Itself. For it involves no 
contradiction to admit this twofold division, since the reasoning about 
nonrestriction (cited above-B. S. III. iii. 31) is applicable to all meditations 
that are not based on symbols. A confirming reason for this twofold division 
is found in "the resolution for that"; for it is but reasonable that one who 
resolves to be Brahman should get the divine glories of Brahman as it is 
stated in the text, "one becomes just as one meditates on Him". But one 
cannot have the belief of being one with Brahman when meditating with the 
help of symbols, since in such a meditation the symbol predominates. 

Opponent : The Upanigad mentions that even without any resolve about 
Brahman one can reach Brahman, as it is stated in the text, "He leads them to 
Brahman" (Ch. IV. xv. 5), heard of in,.fonnection with the meditation on the 
five fires (and not on Brahman). 


Veddntin : Let this be so where a direct (specific) declaration to the 
contrary is met with. But the aphorist thinks that in accordance with the logic 
of becoming what one wills to be, the general rule is that in the absence of 
any specific declaration, those meditators who entertain a resolution about 
Brahman, alone reach Brahman. 



a And qdzft the Upani$ad reveals fqkq;l a speciality (about results). 



16. And the Upanisad reveals a speciality about the results (of meditations 
with symbols). 

Besides, the Upani$ad shows with regard to the meditations based on such 
symbols as name etc., that the succeeding ones have better results than the 
preceding ones, in such passages as, "(One who meditates upon name as 
Brahman) gets freedom of movement as far as name extends" (Ch. VII. i. 5), 
"The organ of speech is surely greater than name" (Ch. VII. ii. 1), "He gets 
freedom as far as speech extends" (Ch. VII. ii. 2), "Mind is surely greater 
than speech" (Ch. VII. iii. 1), and so on. This distinction about results is 
possible for these meditations as they are dependent on symbols. But if they 
be based on Brahman, how can there be any gradation in the results, since 
Brahman is without such differences? Accordingly, the meditations based on 
the symbols cannot have the same result as the others based on Brahman. 

SECTION IV 

TOPIC 1: NATURE OF FREEDOM 

Doubt : In the Upanigad occurs the text, "Thus indeed does this serene, 
happy being become manifest (or established) in its own real form (i.e. Self 
or nature) after having risen from this body and having reached the highest 
Light" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3). With regard to this the doubt arises, "Does that 
being become manifest with some adventitious distinction as (it happens) in 
some region of enjoyment like heaven, or is it established as the Self alone?" 
What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : That manifestation must be in some fresh form even as in 
other regions, for liberation too is well known to be a result, and the term 
"becomes manifest" is synonymous with "is born". If this be a mere 
establishment in its own form (or nature), then since one's own nature is not 
eliminated even in the earlier stages (of being under other guises), that 
nature should have manifested itself even there. Hence the "being" becomes 
manifest as something distinctive. 


Vedantin : This being the position, we say, 



gsga Having reached (the highest Light) arfft: there is manifestation (of 
the soul)-7q because of the use (in the Upani$ad) of the term (fkr) "in its 
own (Self)". 

1. Having reached the "highest Light", the soul becomes manifest in its 
own real nature because of the use of the term "in its own" (in the 
Upanicad). 

The soul manifests itself just as it really is, but not as possessed of any 
other quality. 

How can this be so? 

Because the word "own" occurs in "becomes established in its own real 
form". Otherwise this specification with the word "own" would have been 
inappropriate. 

Opponent : The word "own" should be interpreted to mean "owned by 
(itself) ". 

Veddntin : No, for that is not under reference here. Had that been meant 
here, then in whatever form that being would become manifest would 
certainly be owned by it, so that the use of the word "own" would be useless. 
But if the meaning "in its Self" be accepted, it serves a purpose inasmuch as 
it implies that the soul becomes manifest merely in its own form and not in 
any adventitious form as well. 

Opponent : What difference is there between the earlier states and this 
(final) one, when the non-elimination of the true form is the same in either 
case? 


Veddntin : Hence comes the reply: 




(The soul is then) is free, srfig that being the declaration. 

2.The soul then attains liberation, that being the (Upanifadic) declaration. 

The entity that is spoken of here as becoming manifest in its Self, 
becomes free from its erstwhile bondage and continues as the pure Self, 
whereas in the earlier state it "seemed to have become blind" (Ch. VIII. ix. 
1), "seemed to be weeping" (Ch. VIII. x. 2), "seemed to have undergone 
destruction" (Ch. VIII. xi. l)-so that it was in a condition of being tainted by 
the three states (of waking, dream, and sleep). This is the difference. 

Opponent: How again is it known that the soul becomes free? 

Veddntin : The aphorist answers by saying, "that being the Upanigadic 
declaration". Thus it is that in the text, "I shall explain it to you over again" 
(Ch. VIII. ix. 3), the promise is made of explaining the Self, free from the 
defects of the three states, and then it is stated, "The being that is really 
without any body is not touched by likes and dis lik es" (Ch. VIII. xii. 1), and 
the conclusion is made with, "It becomes established in Its own Self; that is 
the highest Being" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3). So also at the commencement of the 
story, the text, "The Self that is beyond sin" etc. (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), makes a 
declaration about the free soul alone. Liberation comes to be considered as a 
fruit merely from the point of view of the cessation of bondage, and not from 
the standpoint of production of any fresh result. Although the term "becomes 
manifest" is synonymous with "is born", still that is said by way of contrast 
to the earlier state, just as we would say that a man becomes established in 
health when his disease leaves him. Hence there is no defect. 




(The "Light" is) a cTT~- the Self, q because of the context. 

3. The Light is the Self as it is obvious from the context. 

Opponent : How can the soul be said to be liberated, since the text, 
"having reached the supreme Light" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3), describes it as within 
creation itself? For by usage the word light denotes physical light. One who 
has not turned back from created things cannot become free, since all created 
things are well known as sources of sorrow. 

Vedantin : That is no defect, since from the context it .is obvious that the 
Self Itself is presented here by the word "light". As the topic of the supreme 
Self is made the starting point in the sentence, "The Self that is beyond sin, 
free from all dirt, and free from death" (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), it is not possible to 
jump to the physical light all of a sudden; for that will be tantamount to 
discarding the subject-matter under discussion and introducing something 
foreign to it. The word "light" is seen to be used for the Self as well, as in, 
"Upon that immortal Light of all lights, the gods meditate" (Bt. IV. iv. 16). 
This was elaborated under the aphorism, "Light is Brahman" (I. iii. 40). 

Tonic 2: LIBERATED SOUL INSEPARABLE FROM BRAHMAN 




(In liberation the soul exists) ali$. in a state of inseparableness (from the 
Self) Irq for so it is noticed (in the Upani$ad). 

4. In liberation the soul exists in a state of inseparableness from the 
supreme Self, for so it is noticed in the Upani~ad. 

One would like to know whether the entity which becomes established in 
its own Self after reaching the highest Light remains separate from the 
supreme Self or continues in a state of identification. Now when in such an 
inquisitive mood one might conclude that the being exists separately, 
because in the text, "He moves about there" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3), speaks of 
something holding something else in itself; and in the text,* "having reached 
the Light", a subject and an object are separately mentioned. The aphorist 
explains to such a (doubting) one that the liberated soul remains identified 
with the supreme Self. 

Why so? 

Because it is so noticed in the Upanigad. Thus it is that texts like, "That 
thou art" (Ch. VI. viii. 7), "I am Brahman" (Br. I. iv. 10), "Where one does 
not see anything else" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), "But there is no such second thing 
separate from it which it can see" (Br. IV. iii. 23), etc., reveal the supreme 
Self as non-separate from the (individual) soul. And in conformity with the 
logic of becoming what one resolves to be, the result (freedom) should 
accord with one's (Upanigadic) knowledge. The text, "0 Gautama, as pure 
water poured on pure water becomes verily the same, so also becomes the 
Self of the man of knowledge who is given to deliberation (on the supreme 
Self)" (Ka. II. i. 15), and other texts which set forth the nature of the 
liberated soul, as also the illustrations like the river and the sea (Mu. III. ii. 
8), reveal only this fact of non-difference. As regards any statement 
implying difference, that is possible in a secondary sense even in a context 
of non-difference, as is seen in such texts as, "'0 venerable sir, on what is 
that Infinity established?' 'On Its own majesty'" (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), 
"Delighting in his own Self, disporting in his own Self" (Ch. VII. xxv. 2). 

Topic 3: CHARACTERISTICS OF THE LIBERATED SOUL 



: IN 

WW lor As possessed of the attributes of Brahman aft. Jaimini 3qrr- 
slrfv'W: (says) on account of the references etc. 

S. Jaimini says that from references etc. (in the Upanifads) (it is evident 
that the liberated soul) becomes established in the attributes that Brahman 
has. 

This is well settled now that in the text "in its own form" (Ch. VIII. xii. 3), 
what is meant is that it becomes established in itself as the Self, and not in 
any extraneous adventitious form. But now when the desire to know in detail 
arises, it is being said that "in its own form" means in the form of Brahman 
that is its own real form and that is possessed of the characteristics beginning 
with freedom from sin etc. and ending with true desire (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), as 
also omnipresence and rulership over all. It becomes established in that form 
which is its own. This is how the teacher Jaimini thinks. 

How is this known? 

For such a fact is known from the references in the Upani$ads and other 
reasons (i.e. fresh information etc.). Thus it is that through the very reference 
contained in the text beginning with, "This Self that is beyond sin" etc., and 
ending with, "Having true desires and inevitable will" (ibid.), the Upani$ad 
makes us understand that the individual soul is the same as the supreme Self 
possessing these attributes. Similarly through the (fresh information in the) 
text, "There he roams about eating, playing, and making merry" (Ch. VIII. 
xii. 3), as also, "He gets freedom of movement in all the worlds" (Ch. VII. 
xxv. 2), it presents its form of divine majesty. From this view-point, the 
statements like, "He is omniscient and ruler of all" etc. become quite logical. 




fafa wm wwiWfii; ii^ii 

fafr In consciousness cud-iil'r as that much (i.e. conscious ness) only, 
ffq_arrrwvt" that being its real nature $fcr this (is (what) aftrlf.l: Audulomi 
(says). 

6. Audulomi says that the liberated soul becomes established in 
consciousness as consciousness itself, that being its true nature. 

Although the attributes, such as freedom from sin etc., are enumerated as 
though they are different from one another, still they are based on false 
concepts arising from dependence on mere words; for all that can be 
understood there is a mere negation of sin etc. The real nature of the soul, 
however, is consciousness alone, so that it is proper that the liberated soul 
should be established in that nature only. And thus only the Upani$adic texts 
like, "Even so, my dear, is the Self without interior and exterior, entire and 
pure intelligence alone" (Br. IV. v. 13), become duly honoured. Even though 
"having true desires satyakdma" etc. are spoken of as if they are real 
attributes belonging intrinsically to some entity in the derivative sense of "he 
that is possessed of true desire", still such attributes are dependent on 
association with limiting adjuncts, so that they cannot constitute the true 
nature of the entity like consciousness; for the Self is denied to have many 
forms inasmuch as a diversity of forms is denied about Brahman in the 
aphorism, "Even from difference of place a twofold characteristic cannot be 
predicated of Brahman" (III. ii. 11). Hence even the declaration about eating 
etc. (Ch. VIII. xii. 3) is made merely for praise, meaning thereby only an 
absence of sorrow; and this is just like the phrases, "delighting in his own 
Self" (Ch. VII. xxv. 2) etc. For any delight, play, or merry-making can never 
be described as happening in the Self in the primary sense, since all these 
presuppose the presence of a second entity. Hence the teacher Audulomi 
thinks that the freed soul manifests itself as the Self in which there is no 
trace of phenomenal existence, which is consciousness itself, which is serene 
and happy, and which defies all verbal description. 




tr9 aTfq Even so alf there is no contradiction —1 owing to the persistence 
of the earlier nature 3q-~ITgc in accordance with the Upani$adic reference 
wicgal: (says) Badarayaoa. 

7. Bddarayana says that even so, there is no contradiction, since the earlier 
nature exists according to Upani;adic reference. 

"Even so", even though it be admitted that the soul manifests itself in its 
own real nature of pure consciousness, still (its possession of) the earlier 
form, the divine majesty of (the qualified) Brahman that is known from such 
reasons as Upani$adic reference is not denied from the empirical point of 
view; and hence there is no contradiction. This is what the teacher 
BadarayaUa thinks. 

Tonic 4: FULFILMENT OF DESIRE THROUGH WILL 

Doubt : In connection with the meditation based on the heart it is heard 
from the Upanipd, "Should he desire the world of the manes, the manes 
become associated with him at his mere wish" (Ch. VIII. ii. 1) etc. The doubt 
here is whether the mere wish is the cause of the appearance of the manes or 
it is the cause in association with some other factors. 

Opponent: As to that, although the Upani$ad declares, "at his mere wish" 
still it is proper that in consonance with the affairs of the world, there should 
be dependence on some other factors. Just as in the world we become 
associated with our fathers and others as a result of our desire coupled with 
some other causes like approaching, so also it must be the same in the case 
of the liberated soul. It is only thus that nothing contrary to common 
experience has to be imagined. When it is said, "at his mere wish", it is done 
so from the point of view of the easy availability of the other means that lead 
to the fulfilment of the desire as it is seen in the case of a king. Moreover, the 
manes and others who follow the dictates of one's desires will be as unsteady 


as the other things fancied by the mind, so that they will not be able to 
provide sufficient enjoyment. 

Vedantin : This being the position, we say, 

rorfa i iri 

But" from volition alone @r-o: because such is the Upaniipdic text. 

8. (The fathers and others come) as a result of the will alone, because the 
Upaniiad says so. 

The contact with the fathers and others comes about owing to the will 
alone. 

Why so? 

"Because the Upanisad says so." For such Upani$adic texts as, "the manes 
become associated with him at his mere wish" (Ch. VIII. ii. 1) will be 
compromised if other causes have to be relied on. As for the other factors, 
they may well be there if they come in obedience to his will; but no other 
means that requires an additional effort, can be admitted, since in that case 
the volition will remain infructuous till that other factor comes into play. 
Moreover, in a matter to be known from the Upaniiad, any general argument 
based on empirical experience has no application. Besides, the will of a 
liberated soul is different from any ordinary will, so that through the force of 
their mere volition these (manes and others) can remain steady for as long as 
the occasion demands. Hence this occurs through volition alone. 




w And ag: qw for this very reasonqfa: without any other lord (to rule 
over). 

9. And for that very reason (a man of knowledge has) no other lord (to 
rule over him). 

"For that very reason", just because his will cannot be infructuous, the 
man of knowledge is without any ruler, that is to say, none else can rule over 
him. For even an ordinary man who desires something does not wish that he 
should be dominated over by somebody else so long as he can avoid that. 
The Upani$adic text also reveals this fact in, "Again, those who leave this 
world after realizing the Self and these true desires get freedom of 
movement in all the worlds" (Ch. VIII. i. 6). 


Topic 5: BODY AFTER REACHING BRAHMA-I.OI{A 



artsfz: Badari (asserts) aiz( the absence (of body and organs) fk because 
(the Upani$ad) a has said tray thus. 

10. Badari asserts the absence of body and organs (for one who reaches 
the Brahma-loka-the world of Brahman), for the Upanisad says so. 

From the text, "The manes become associated with him at his mere wish" 
(Ch. VIII. ii. 1) it becomes established that the mind at least exists as the 
instrument of desire (even after realizing the qualified Brahman). Now it is 



being examined whether the body and the sense-organs also exist or do not 
exist for the man who attains divine powers. As to that, the teacher Badari 
thinks that the body and senses do not exist for the man of knowledge who 
becomes thus exalted. 

How can this be so? 

Because the scriptural passage runs thus: "He becomes delighted by 
seeing mentally (through these divine mental eyes) these desirable things 
that exist in the world of Brahman" (Ch. VIII. xii. 5). Were it the case that he 
roamed about with his mind, as well as body and sense-organs, then the 
specific mention of "mentally" would not have occurred. Hence there is 
absence of body and sense-organs after liberation. 



fr: Jaimini (asserts) T9 the existence (of body and sense-organs) fgi- 
arrljpu since the Upani$ad speaks of option. 

11. Jaimini asserts the existence of body and sense-organs (after the 
realization of the qualified Brahman), since the Upani,cad speaks of option. 

The teacher Jaimini thinks that like the mind, the body and sense-organs 
also exist for the liberated man, since in the text, "He remains one, he 
becomes threefold, fivefold" etc. (Ch. VII. xxvi. 2) the Upanisad mentions 
that he has the option of changing his state variously. And diversification 
without a difference of bodies is not easy to accomplish. Although this 
diversification is read of in the Upani$ad as a matter of option in the context 
of the knowledge of the absolute, Infinite (Brahman), still it is presented 
there (in that context) for the sake of eulogizing the knowledge of the 
Infinite, just because this divine power does accrue as a matter of fact in the 
context of the knowledge of the qualified Brahman; and hence this result 



does actually emerge in connection with the meditation on the qualified 
Brahman. 


STCWfe IIRII 

am: Hence for: Badarayai)a (considers the released soul as) 3wq-" of both 
characteristics vRl-aTpq like the Dvddafdha sacrifice. 

12. Hence Badardyarra considers the released souls to be of both kinds 
(i.e. 'with or without bodies and senses) just as it is the case with the 
DvddafJha (twelve-day) sacrifice. 

Veddntin : "Hence" , because both these indicatory marks are noticed in 
the UpaniSad . therefore the teacher Badaravaoa thinks that it is valid both 
wavs. When a liberated soul wishes to have a bod y, he g ets one : and when 
he desires to remain without it . he has none : for his will is true and desires 
are diverse. This is like the sacrifice performed for twelve da ys ( Dvddasaha ). 
Just as a Dvddafdha can be both a satra and an ahinal . because the Vedas 
present indicatory marks of both, so also is the case here. 

W# TOTTO: llftll 


cTl-alq* In the absence of a body, (the fulfilment of desires) gggTF : 
becomes reasonable ast as it is in dream. 

13. In the absence of a body, the fulfilment of desires is reasonably 
possible as in dreams. 




















In the view that the body, together with the sense-organs, ceases to exist in 
liberation, the liberated souls can have their desires for manes and others 
fulfilled (through their minds alone) by merely feeling their presence just as 
one would have them in a dream. For it can be justified in this way: 



RTW When there is existence (of the body etc.), (the fulfilment occurs) 
qty as in the waking state. 

14. When the body exists, the fulfilment of the desires is just as in the 
waking state. 

In the view, however, that the body exists, the liberated soul can 
reasonably have desires for father and others fulfilled by their actual 
presence just as much as in the waking state. 

Topic 6: ENTRY INTO MANY BODIES 

Doubt : In the aphorism, "Jaimini asserts the existence of body and sense- 
organs, since the Upani$ad speaks of option" (IV. iv. 11), it has been stated 
that the liberated soul is possessed of a body. Now when on becoming 
threefold and so on (Ch. VII. xxvi. 2), many bodies are created, one would 
like to know whether these bodies are created lifeless like wooden puppets, 
or they are endowed with animation. 

Op ponent : When this is asked , one may conclude that since the mind and 
the soul cannot be separated .2 and hence they remain (encaged in and) 
associated with a single body, the other bodies must be lifeless. 


Veddntin : Such being the assertion, the aphorist explains: 







arTT: Entry (i.e. animation occurs) Aggc like a lamp; f k for u w so q4-qft 
(the scripture) reveals. 

IS.The released soul can animate different bodies like a lamp, for the 
scripture shows this to be so. 

Just as a single lamp can appear to be many through its power of 
transformation (i.e. lighting up other lamps from itself), so also the man of 
knowledge, though one, can through his divine power become many and 
enter into all the bodies (to animate them). 

How can this be so? 

Because the scripture shows it thus that one can become many: "He 
remains one, he becomes threefold, fivefold," etc. (Ch. VII. xxvi. 2). This 
cannot be possible if the illustration of the wooden puppets be accepted, nor 
can it be possible if these are understood to be animated by other souls. And 
bodies without souls can have no movement. As for the argument that since 
the mind and soul cannot be separated, there is no possibility for the soul to 
become associated with many bodies, that creates no difficulty. For as he is 
possessed of inevitable will, he will create bodies equipped with minds that 
will act in accord with a single mind. When these are created, the same soul 
can also appear as their separate rulers in conformity with the differences in 
the limiting adjuncts. This is the process described in the Yoga scriptures as 
well about the assumption of many bodies by the Yogins. 

Opponent : How again can it be admitted that a liberated man can have 
such divine powers as of entering into many bodies, since texts like, "then 
what should one know and through what? Through what should one know 
that owing to which all this is known?" (Br. IV. v. 15), "But there is not that 
second thing separated from it which it can know" (Br. IV. iii. 30), "It 



becomes transparent like water-one, the witness, and without a second" (Br. 
IV. iii. 32), and other texts of this kind deny the existence of particularized 
knowledge? 

Veddntin : Hence comes the answer of the aphorist: 

k II Wl 

eti' C _04i ( From either of the two viewpoints m-arc"q 4.i: of deep sleep 
and absolute union; fk because agTf cf (this is) made clear (in the 

Upani$ad). 

16. (The declaration of the absence of particularized knowledge is made) 
from either of the two points of view, viz deep sleep and absolute union; for 
this is made clear in the Upaniiad. 

SvJpyaya (lit. merger in oneself) means deep sleep, as is shown in the 
Upani$adic text, "He becomes merged in his Self, and that is why they speak 
of him thus: 'He is deep asleep' (lit. 'He is in his Self)" (Ch. VI. viii. 1). And 
sampatti (lit. attainment of a state) means liberation, as shown by the 
Upani$adic text, "Having been Brahman, he becomes Brahman" (Br. IV. iv. 
6). Having in view either of these two states, it is asserted thus that there is 
an absence of particularized knowledge. This is said sometimes in relation to 
the state of deep sleep and sometimes to absolute liberation. 

How is this known? 

Because this is made clear by the Upani$ad under a context dealing with 
that very subject in such sentences as, "The Self comes out as a separate 
entity from these elements and the separateness is destroyed with them. 
(After attaining this oneness it has no more particular consciousness)" (Br. 
II. iv. 12), "But when to the knower of Brahman everything has become the 
Self" (Br. II. iv. 14), "Where falling asleep he craves no desire and sees no 
dream" (Br. IV. iii. 19, Ma. 5). But the state in which the divine powers are 



asserted is a different state like heaven etc., that comes as a result of the 
maturity of meditation on the qualified Brahman. Hence there is no defect. 

TOPIC 7: ACQUISITION OF DIVINE POwl ttS 

Doubt : Do those people, who attain union with God, while still having 
minds, acquire unlimited or limited di'; ine powers, as a result of meditation 
on the qualified Brahman? What should be the conclusion? 

Opponent : Their divine power should be without any limitation, as is 
obvious from the Upani$adic texts, "He himself gets independent 
sovereignty" (Tai. I. vi. 2), "All the gods carry presents to him" (Tai. I. v. 3), 
"They get freedom of movement in all the worlds" (Ch. VIII. i. 6, VII. xxv. 
2). 

Vedantin : To this the aphorist replies: 

ntwi 

(The released soul gets all the divine powers) T=6glz-aq barring the 
power of running this universe, (as is known) SI1 - arrl from the context and 
artiMpimp from non-contiguity. 

17. The released soul gets all the divine powers except that of running the 
universe (with its creation, continuance, and dissolution), as is known from 
the context (which deals with God) and from the non-proximity (of the 
individual soul). 

It is proper that barring the power of creation etc. of the universe, the 
liberated souls should have all the other divine powers like becoming very 
minute etc. The power, however, of creation etc. of the universe can 
reasonably belong to God alone who exists eternally. 


Why should it be so? 



Since God forms the subject-matter of that topic, the others being far from 
being considered there. For the supreme Lord alone has competence for 
activities concerning (the creation etc. of) the universe, inasmuch as the fact 
of creation etc. is taught in connection with Him alone, and the word 
"eternal" is attributed to Him. The Upanigads mention that others get the 
divine powers of becoming atomic in size etc. as a result of search and 
hankering for knowing Him. Thus they are remotely placed from the 
activities connected with creation etc. of the universe. Moreover, from the 
very fact that the liberated souls are equipped with minds, they cannot have 
any unanimity, so that someone may at one time want the continuance of the 
universe and someone else its destruction; in this way they may at times be 
opposed to one another. If then one should seek a reconciliation by making 
all other wills dependent on one will only, then that reconciler will perforce 
arrive at the conclusion that all other wills are dependent on God's will 
alone. 


rt&nfefa WwfwwfoR ii^ii 

(The powers of the liberated soul are unlimited) Wetei-d4hl owing to 
direct scriptural declaration Wfff 4q if this be the objection, then not so, 
since it is (the attainment) of Him (i.e. God) who appoints others as lords of 
the spheres and resides in those spheres that is spoken of. 

18. If it be held (that the powers of the liberated soul are unlimited) owing 
to direct scriptural declaration, then it is not so, since it is (the attainment) of 
Him (i.e. God) who appoints others as lords of the spheres and resides in 
those spheres that is spoken of (in the Upanifad). 

The statement was made earlier that from such direct teaching as "He 
himself gets independent sovereignty" (Tai. I. vi. 2), it is but reasonable to 
conclude that the liberated souls get unfettered divine powers. That has to be 
refuted. As to that, it is said that this is nothing damaging, "since it is God, 
appointing others to their respective spheres and Himself residing in those 
spheres that is spoken of" (iri the Upanisad). It is declared that this 
bestowing of independent sovereignty is at the disposal of God who ordains 



others to be the rulers of particular spheres and who resides in such special 
abodes as the orb of the sun. It is because of this that a little later the 
Upani$ad says, "He attains the lord of the mind" (Tai. I. vi. 2), which 
amounts to saying that he attains God who is the lord of all minds and who is 
ever present there as a pre-existing reality. It is in line with this that the 
Upani$ad says still later, "He becomes the ruler of speech, the ruler of eyes, 
the ruler of ears, the ruler of knowledge" (ibid). Thus in other places also the 
texts are to be construed as far as possible to mean that their divine powers 
are attained at the behest of God alone who exists eternally. 

forotft i m f; faferns iittii 

W And (there is a form of the supreme Lord which) fk aiwf i does not 
abide in the effect, k because a (the Upani$ad) has stated ffgfdi( (His) 
existence ffW in that manner. 

.19. And there is another form of the supreme Lord that does not abide in 
the effect, for so has the Upanijad declared. 

And it is not a fact that the supreme Lord resides merely in the solar orb 
etc., within the range of effects (i.e. changeable things); He has also another 
aspect which is eternally free and transcendental to all changes. Thus it is 
that the scripture speaks of His existence in two forms in, "His divine 
majesty spreads that far; the whole universe of all these beings is but a 
quadrant of His. But Purina (the infinite Being) is greater even than that, His 
three immortal quadrants being established in His own effulgence" (Ch. III. 
xii. 6), and other passages. It cannot be asserted that this changeless aspect is 
attained by those who stick to the other (qualified) aspect, for they have no 
desire for that. Hence it is to be understood that just as with regard to the 
supreme Lord, possessed of two aspects, one may continue in. His qualified 
aspect possessing limited powers without attaining His unqualified aspect, so 
also one can exist in His qualified aspect with limited divine powers without 
acquiring unfettered powers. 



^PTW I R°ll 

;g And WzW-3ggrW direct knowledge (i.e. Upani$ads) and inference (i.e. 
Smrti) adz; show g4 thus. 

20. And both the Upanisadic and Smrti texts show thus (that the supreme 
Light is beyond all changing things). 

The Upani$adic and Smrti texts also show that the supreme Light is 
transcendental to all changes, in such passages as, "There the sun does net 
shine, neither do the moon and the stars, nor do these flashes of lightning 
shine. How can this fire? He shining, all these shine; through His lustre are 
all these variously illumined" (Ka. II. ii. 15, Sv. VI. 14, MMu. II. ii. 10)? 
"The sun does not illuminate that, nor the moon, nor fire" (Gita, XV. 6). Thus 
it is a well-known fact that the supreme Light is beyond all changing things. 
This is the idea. 



Also from the indicatory mark (in the Upanipds) about the equality of 
mere experience. 

21. Also from the indicatory mark in the Upanisads about the equality of 
experience alone (it is known that the liberated souls do not get unfettered 
powers). 

Here is an additional reason to show that those who hold on to the effect 
(i.e. the conditioned Brahman) do not get unfettered powers; for from the 



indicatory marks declaring their difference as contained in the following 
Upanisadic passages, it is clear that all that they have in common with the 
eternally existing God is an equality of experience only: e.g. "He (i.e. 
Hirapyagarbha) said to him (when he had reached His world), 'The liquid 
nectar alone is enjoyed by Me, for you also it is the thing to be enjoyed'" 
(Kau. I. 7), "As all beings adore this Deity, so do they adore him (who 
knows Him)" (Br. I. v. 20), "Through it he attains (gradual) identity (or 
equality of body) with the Deity, or lives in the same world with Him" (Br. 
1. v. 23). 

Opponent : From such a point of view the powers will have degrees and 
so they will be subject to termination. Hence these liberated souls will be 
liable to returning to this world. 

Veddntin : Hence follows the reply of the venerable teacher Badarayana: 

3RTf%: mi m\ 

aTFt: There is no uo-m on the authority of scriptures, aT9Tftr:fm4Ta no 
return on the authority of scriptures. 

22. There is no return for the released souls on the strength of the 
Upanisadic declaration; there is no return for the released souls on the 
strength of the Upanisadic declaration. 

Those who proceed along the path of the gods, associated with the nerves 
and the rays of the sun and divided into the stages of light etc., reach the 
world of Brahman as described in the scripture thus: In the world of 
Brahman, existing in the third order of heaven (i.e. Brahma-loka) counted 
from this earth, there exist two seas called Ara and Nya, where is to be found 
a lake full of delightful food, where exists a banian tree exuding ambrosia, 
where is to be seen a city of Brahman called Aparajita (the unconquered), 
and where stands a golden palace made by the Lord Himself (Ch. VIII. v. 3). 
That world is also spoken of variously in the mantra and eulogistic 



(arthavada) portions. After reaching there, they do not return as others do 
from the world of Moon when deprived of their enjoyment (i.e. having run 
through their quota of experience). 

How is this known? 

From such Upanisadie passages as, "Going up through that nerve one gets 
immortality" (Ka. II. iii. 16; Ch. VIII. vi. 6), "They no more return to this 
world" (Br. VI. ii. 15), "Those who proceed along this path of the gods do 
not return to this human cycle of birth and death (in Manu's creation)" (Ch. 
IV. xv. 5), "He reaches the world of Brahman and does not return here" (Ch. 
VIII. xv. 1). And even though their powers come to an end in time, it was 
shown how one has no return under the aphorism, "On the final dissolution 
of the world of the conditioned Brahman, they attain along with the Lord of 
that world what is higher than that conditioned Brahman" (IV. iii. 10). But 
non-return stands as an accomplished fact for those from whom the darkness 
(of ignorance) has been completely removed as a result of their full 
illumination and who therefore cling to that liberation as their highest goal 
which exists ever as an already established fact. The non-return of those who 
take refuge in the qualified Brahman becomes a fact only because they too 
have that unconditioned Brahman as their ultimate resort. The repetition of 
the portion, "There is no return on the strength of the Upani$adic 
declaration", shows that the scripture ends here. 



INDEX TO SOTRAS 

{'Figures indicate Chapter, Section, and Sutra respectively) 



3T^ 1T R^T^ *T ?j TlH e> 

^ff^i ^ i r> 

atr-r-^1 rf^»rf^T*iS IrRr^ 

3? i^ ; T o 

<h sq^rrs^rnT^: 

grrij^" 

a TET 1 ?^ ^T 
smq^ ^r 

^(TTfrsv-rrf^o 
^TcTTr^r ^T^-Jlffecqi^T: 

STcTq,^ ^1,4 ^ I O 

'T ^mr ~^i 

STTW: 

3Tcr: !T^rtftS^TTr^ 

sra^r^r^rFr ^ferof 
*l^TV c ^ 
arRr^vT^^ - 
sjfrt>r^ r 'T frn^° 
arnlsrqrPr ^r^yin 
arar 

armefr *f^rf^r?mrr 

=4£Vi| l<T _ 
st^rt rj 
srf^r^r ^r^*rr^T<^ 
etFets3T=TT-1N M tA AH 


II. ili. 43 
IX.lv. 11 
III. ili- 33 
I. ill. lO 
XV. i. 16 
III. i- 4 

III. iii. 55 
II. IT B 

III* iii- 61 
rv. i. 9 
II. iv. 7 
II. iv. 13 
I, iii- 29 

IV. Ii. 2 
III- iv- 25 
IV. iv. 9 
III. ii. 1G 

I. ii- 27 
I. 1. 23 

III. ii. S 

IV. U- 20 
III. iv. 39 
III- iii. 46 

III. it. 26 

IV. L 17 
I. ii. 9 
I. i. 1 
X. ii. 21 

IT. iii. 51 
II. i. 22 
III. iv. S 
IT. ii. 39 
III. Iv. 1£ 




rrs° 


3Tpi *-&. if^T'+i I RU| | J-| |I| o 


^r^lTRT:^!^ ^ifo. 

==r flnxVc: 
rT^r: Trar*> 
ari^Jq nf |(5 ^Rpin ci 


3R*r ?nr 'usc 5 !^ 0 
5T??rT -JRRTi": 
sr^m -i !m g 
arrm 

3r-^J4f4-R rqr4^TTf^j^ 


3[-4^l>TNr^ 'To 
ST^rRTr^r *l*<lfeE|o 

^ —r*j( r-^^iHPo fr%® 

y^iTur^i ^ri yy 

ar^TTfwf^E^I^ 

3T=n*f 5 

qxrn^h 


III. Iv. 35 
I. ii. 17 

IV. L 15 

III. iv. 50 

IV. iv. 22 
III. iii, 31 
III, i. 12 

I. ill. 22 
II. iii. 4S 
L Ii- 3 
III. ill. 50 
III. iv. 19 
I. ii. 30 
II. ii. 25 
III. ii. 37 
I. ii. 13 
III. iv. 36 
III - iii. 35 
IT. iii- 1 5 
I. ii. IS 
II. ii. 44 
I . i. 20 
II. ii. 36 
II. ii 5 

nr. m. 6 
II. ii. 9 
III. iii. 36 
I. iii. 12 
III. i. 2-1 
I. iv. 1© 
I. iii. 20 
1 IL_ iii. 17 
IX. Ii. 17 



*r(V ^ 

I. 5 i i. s >3 

? 7 7 * 

II. aii. 43 

?> 7 7 

in. iv. so 

3 > _ T* 

III. lv. 37 

nfr 

III, ii. 13 

■tf^i -r trT^rer?r s^r^ 

III. ii. 24 

sprWr ^Rpra^n^o 

II. i. 3 


sffn =h r f-i "-'J L i ^ vi ^ o 


'TTTTT 


IV. 

iii. 

13 

nr. 

iv. 

29 

TV. 

i V- 

to 

!. 

m 

IV. 

24 

XL 

B* 

JL_ 

3 

I. 

ii» 

20 

JL-Ett 

UL 

52 

II. 

n_ 

& 

III. 

iL 

19 

III- 

iL 

14 

IV, 

liL 

1 


^fSMlT ^r^Tq; 


r^O 


5nrr*rT^rr#fiT 




srfer 3 


I . 

lii 21 

ir. 

lit, 24 

i. 

1^. 22 

rv. 

Iv. 4 

IV. 

li - 16 

ii. 

m. 23 

in. 

i. 23 

ii. 

i, 23 

in. 

i_ 6 

ii. 

ii. 21 

ii. 

i. 7 

ii. 

i. 17 

rr. 

lii ■ 49 

ir. 

iii. 9 

ITT. 

iv. 1 O 

11. 

551- 2 

r I- 

L 19 

IV. 

^1 

r 

M 





SEfT 


.1 <.*. 


** M I 

T 1 . tp^ a *-n i^| 

*1TcH-+^" "=l fV'-VIH id 


arrc^rf^r f^hmg 

STTctir SN>^llfl 


I. 

ix 

i. 

m 

rv. 

i. 
IIX. 

n. 

tSL 


3H^<1 


srfr 


I CT : ^TMUt^l s> 


3TTT: 

3TTHl’4 u l I ’dr ^TL H-l 

=*r 

arrRT^f^ ^ ^ 3T5=| 

*i i ^ 

11 ^ 

^TT^fV-T: 

3TT^ ^1 L ^ *X. 


XV. 

XTT. 

IV, 

m. 

I. 

III. 

nr. 

X. 

XI. 

IV. 
IX- 

I. 

XII. 

IV. 

IV. 

Ill- 


L 22 
51. 24 
iii. 41 
Lv » 

iii. 4 

iv. "26 
iiif. IS 

i, 26 
iii. 1 5 
■lv 3 
i. 3 
Iii. 40 

1. e 

iii. 14 

i. 12 

113. 1 1 

i. lO 
lv. 1 
iii- II 
L J2 
iiL SO 

ii. 32 

iv. 45 
L 1 
I. 7 

H. IS 






^art 

SW^TT N L4'4 : 


I. iiL JLB 

II. i. 21 
IV- i. 14 
XI. ii. 19 
III- iii. 1 3 
II, i. 2 

III. iii. 34 





I. Iii, 13 

I. i. 5 





-d *hi»i *th 4 rq; 

^T4 LV1 f^T %-jro 

^=TMH 5^“T 


L. iv, 21 
II ili. ID 
T. iiL 1& 
II. Ii. 20 
II- ii- 42 
If. ii. 27 
I. i-27 
III- Li. 35 


^TRRl ^[^RrswT^ ^ II- i. 36 
*3T*T ^<rdl^ 3i U 11 *Pf =T 54 oIII. iii. 30 


ol -l^ Hi Rf IfT^* 

III. iv. 42 

^r 

II. iv. 16 


II. iii. 37 


XI. i. 24 

1 5 p 

in. iii- 5 

vIM n?MSicKdtfo 

TII. iii- 41 

ds i'<; i ^rtcf 

II. i[i. 35 

^TPHT^TT 'W 

II. ii, ]6 

^trttctt ^ tW^ 

II. ii. 23 

|Th ^TtTI-p 

II. Li. 12 

^>f iTfl ° 

III. ii. 27 

3'spT^aTrjft^rtra- 

IV. iii. 5 

*?r 

HI. iv. 17 

^iT?*nr: ^rrfc-^o 

III. iii. 53 

t^r ^T^rft^Tir'* 

11. iii . 3 

sfrr: srrzjw- 

11. a. 3 

f* 1 te 14 Pvj £-1 S 

II. ]. 12 

i^r ^ sqwrm'o 

i; iv. 2S 


II. ii. 34 


III, iv. 52 


IV. iv. 7 

tJ «<-M H t^£cr ® 

111. Iv. 51 

^iMHItl 

I- iii, 3SJ 

T ■v*!^ ■—r^r <3 

II. ii. 40 



*f>a f 

^t*T5T>7^1T^T ■=■ 

^T H '5i i '^r^T l ■ ; f ^ 

^T RT^'f 1 "T l'f-^1 I 

-M Hl<1^ o 
-M l-M Nrr£ ffKTTo 

-hr< l JT^FT -=j ren 
^TRT 41 «f<***i 
HJU 14*41 

4*1 mT-Vh^J j^^CTS^Trro 
: ^5^5T^ r ^TT ^PET€^ « 

■j^ri 

.!_ ::."T TfT r ^TrT ^ 

’j.vi.+iH w “i r^-Tm ^ 
^rPT^=TT==^ 

^Tf^ J 4v4 J I Jh^hj 


TI. iii. 33 
I. ii. 4 

I. 3 V. 1 Q 

30. Iv. 15 

I. i IS 
IO. iii- 39 
III* liip GO 

L iv- 14 
iv. iii. y 
IIL iii. IS 
IV, ill. LO 
TI- iiL 42 
III. i. S 
III. iv. 4K 

II. i .26 
II. 1L 31 

I. iii. 3-5 


’i I PI 1 *M f "■ 
ttPH-H I H 1-4 lt¥ 
n^T^im^pmo 
Tjirna .4. 
y^i Isil 

^f JH 14^141 o 
jfWzr?r«ra itcx 

rw^ d 

43 4d fr »rrer 

f^rf%r ^Vh i>i sh ur o 

F^ffT^HT^^T fRTWFo 


I- iii, IS 
I. L lO 
III. IEI. 2^ 
III_ iii. 64 
II. iii. 25 
I. ii. 11 
E. I. 6 

II. iii. 3 
II. iv. 2 
II. IVr lO 
I. iv. S 

III. i. 9 
IT. iii. 16 

IV. iv. 6 


^T2fr^ On rri 


III. iii. 28 
I. i.25 


vHIIdUrMI irH-jT HJi^i-'llda 


I. iv. 16 
IV. iv. 17 


< i-i qa 
?pqT* 

_*■ !* * 


siTtffrfar KTT^rra^ 

Nt^T ^^r*H *H rH ^T 


5f^ ^'IT 


L. iv. 4 
IT _ iii. 1 S 
U. L V, 14 
I. iv. 9 
I. iil - 40 
1- E_M 
I. 33E_ 32 
I. iv, 13 




t*- i ’ Rf cra^rfrm?; Q 
^ref 

cixns^rsrftp^q 
cf*TT srr^fT: 

-fr^rh^rnrr ^ 


II. iv. 

Til. iv_ 

IV. iii. 

I. i. 
II. iv. 
ri. iv. 
III. i. 
II- SEi- 

IO_ iv. 

III. ii. 
II. iv. 

IV. i. 
i.. iv. 


iv. IT 
iv. 4 

iii. 3 

i. 4 

iv. 4 

iv. 3 

i- 16 

iii. 27 
iv 24 
Ii. 3<5 

iv. I 
I. 13 


"H+iTJ I- i. 14 
gr^^TTTTHr-i t*V i^Rso in. i. i 

ITI- li. 7 

q r 4 ~*T M F*mf*7*f E- iii. 37 

tJ -l l 4 15.4 rj -31 ^ IHH :II .ill. 13 

aT4=if^?rnT^ III. ii, 23 

i;r4l5ci^t: IV. ii. s 

^#p| 41 ^ <.14 ul:* I. Iii.. 2<> 

riftsTl -rt-i dtn =T -k l 3 VI. ii. 17 

S^ipRrr^TW IL iii- 29 


c| 11^1 

^rs^rY F^^rmT^i 


r:II. Iii. 13 

III. il. 23 

IV. ii. s 
I. iii- 26 

VI. ii. 17 

» ii. 3ii. 29 

I, i. 14 
III. iv. 40 
ITI. iv- 6 




a^FTf^r: 3TTOF WTRT 
a^nqr^ ^N=i*^rTTfr: 
la - a r^rr ^M *** * * r^ 


^ r^i t^i 5t^i<!_ 

aifrT qr^ sr*rr 

yftwtrn Ctm : *r*?ft' 

■4 +-cP t r ffj i || 

^rrn'ri^ra 3 



Tir.. fir, 42 
r. i. 7 
IV. ii. 3 
IV. iir, 13 

IX- LI1 

IT, ir. 16 

rv. ii. is 

HI. siv. 9 
III, t.2l 
II. LLi. IO 
I.. iv, 6 
rir. i. 2 


^;m i 1 *** 


T .■■ 




J 1 

=^pfx ^r ^H4ia 

*?Ft% 

T^TTS f ^XTsFr 

T*r4T-si*t 

^ rwrr^^frcriVEf o- 


m 

in 

iur 

oi 

IV 

IV. 

nx 

in. 

in. 

i. 

n 

ii 

in. 

i. 

iv 


i. 20 
ii, 21 
iiift 4S 
LiL, 66 
lii. 13 
i-VPSO 
iii. 4- 

i lIt 22 
17 
14 
. i. 6 
. I- 25 

ill. 6 

iii- 1 

_ iv. 12 


411 

. 

ill 


er=f t3,-=t 

v+iT^^ra^r 

Trf^i-^iv4i f^ra 

^rr^TT^r 


III. Ii, 40 
I. Iii, 9 
1. iii. 16 

IV. L S 


*T 

*T 

a 

a 


M PM Rfd 
«*■ ■+ KVI*1 


II. i, 35 
It. Ei. 43 
IV. iii, 14 

IT. ii. 35 



^ v *lld Td4Hi r> T ? H i\. 19 

TT L f<^ih H‘[h ^ HI- iv, 4-1 


'T" cT £ tkzf. 5 1 -O £•£ 

J ^J^TM - 

*T 5T^^» 

'T TThTi ^l-n. ^ t- 1 i 
?T : 

■T Wftfil W Jl^+^o 

5f ■^= 

*r ^rr n <*w ^i vr^i^-T<1 *> 

■I *tbtF^ 

?T ^i*R^; 

?f Hi 

5t wWWy ^^i ift s 
=t ^ 

pt r^tiYsF^H tfA^ 

^ Rfcl #5To 
fTTfgrNr^T 

■= 

srr^fi 


^T*^+s a^ *f-a ^*^1 rf 
^T^THT 'd L l«-+t< : 

^iH-eri^-E^-qir^ 

tlJ-Tll W *"4 s*fivT*> 


nr ■yrr^TEf^^ 
fHfti =tl^T u 4. -i -ti vj * 


i ^tT-F^ ^T*?T=* r -TT rT ^ 
-=TlH -H ^-1 L Tt t 


ir_ 

i. 9 

in. 

5. IS 

IV. 

i. 4 

ii. 

i_ 32 

ii- 

i 5.3-0 

iii- 

ii- 12 

i. 

i. 29 

in. 

iii. 65 


OTh IJ] - 7 

IT- iv. 9 
III. iii. 21 

II. iii. i 
11, i- 4 

I. i v_ 11 
III. ail. 51 

lit- El- I 1 

II, iii. 21 

III. I. 23 
II. iii. 17 

HI. ill, 5B 

I. iii. 3 

n. a. 2 s 

III. iv. 13 
H. U. 26 
II- Li. 14 
II, iii. 32 
in. iv. 7 

III. U 2 

IV. El- 19 
I. i. 1G 

iv. a. g 

II. u. 33 
TV. 55. lO 




n. iv. 12 

II- i. 19 



T cij i h 

4 d~l ■* 4 n -t 11"^ 

m ^ j a 

tto; 

^if^wfMiTf fir^lF^TD 
'TOT^ ^it^Tt^l ^’t-^-fTa 
9"'</ j i ^ 5T>^s j - , T n¥*? 

^ i rt>« ^ i ^f^r *mu 
I M El^fto 

^r^!r4jrM4 ^<1^# 

3^ ?* sfr^^nraft = 

g^hrsr 

■^rfbL**<^r: ET^c^nr^s 

'JV^H 5*11 c^ 

sr^:*rr^ 

SH -I* -t^LT-rj^ 

5f=+iL^|cf ^ [Jq*JlTr|_ 
et^t^ t I^^h i -4 5t^f ^ 
y i Rw^r^f 'TT: 

H^ iwj i VI li- 4 4 l t^qn^s^ 
ET^Rf«T ^feTTlRTo 
ET^T?fdJ-J^' 

ErfinfrTfcT3r < ^^Rz^q-i 

sf f^i^i i ^i Id ^*r o 

wf^i^rrf^r^r -4^*» 

^ ^-ciwWTra ■ fefif ^Ff*- 

n g* ^ s &ra t>h F^ R t 

!T$?nftrfir ■^w^nitTr^ 


I. iLi. 43 
rr. ii. 37 
IT. Ii, 3 
IV. iEi. 12 
in. iL 3i 
II. iii. 41 
III. ii. 5 
III. iv. 18 
III- iii- 52 
III. iv. 23 
II. iii, 31 
III. =1L 24 

Til ,[v. 1 

II. Ei. 7 

HI. Lt. 41 

iii. [1.29 

III_ Iii. 45 
II. iii- 2S 
IT- ILi. 12 
I. ii. lO 
1. iii. -6 
III. Li. 15 

III- iin 25 
II. Lii. 

III. ii. 2S 
I. iv. 23 

in. ii, 22 

I. iv. 20 
LI. iii. 6 

III. ii. 30 

IV- ii. 12 
II. ti, 22 

IV. ivt I& 

in. i. 5 

III- iii. 43 
IV. iv. 15 
II- UL 53 




TTrW^rTT =1 

fsrrf^L - m * i *i w i f%o 


IT. H. 2 

I- ill, 17 
LII. i. 3 

I. iii. 4 

II. iv, 15 

I- i. 2S 
I i.v„ 12 
m. iii. i2 




m. ii-33 




iT-UNIsfro 
H T c| 


^rra-*r = 


IT I- iv. 43 

III. ii. 33 

IV. i_ 5 
IV, av. 5 


■^TT^f 5CT ^ Tc*Tffl t ^ a 
-ssrr^f # fM Th f4 -r^'TT * 
•=rr^ ^ ^ i<^i4ijfrsft?f 

>TT^ -ji f j j 

T^^Tt <a 

t^tttttJT r| zi r-fy 

^p^nTTF^e 


^^r^far ^ ^4^Err*ifV 


9i i *4 4.ftnr i j i ■ 4 ^ o 
+TThT 4 (Vq ■n't 5TT Pwe^T ■» 


III. i. 7 

IV. i’v, 1 1 
I. ill. 33 

m. iv. 22 
ir. i. 15 
IV. iv. 14 
I. i.26 
IV. ii. 5 
I. iii. 3 

III. iii. 57 
I. a. 17 
I. 3.21 
I. tii. 5 

II. iv. 1& 
III iii. 2 
II. i. 13 

IV. iv. 21 
IV. i. 1^ 



ci u i ^ 

imf^eTSTsfiT^tii: 


*n£^r<*r3T 


i. iii. 31 
II. ill. 44 
HI. iii. 56 

II. ii. II 



1 'l M ^ ^ 

TTFrmnr ^ ttcf^to 
erfriVi i -i f^ 
r£ ^ 'H" T'-L -*| '-<4^*41 ^ 'HJ I 
* r^y grj-*i TtY - 'tF^t^ 


I, ±v. 7 

ir, tv, 21 

I. i. 15 

III. i i. 3 

IV. iv_ 2 
I- iii. 2 

III. Ii. lO 
III. iv,49 


IH-crT 

r wr 4 crafY 3 T 2 r i TT 

^T'TT ^ ^[tTl Pt 

^rS^r RgeiURt 

*n*J <ft| ^ | <t| f t* a 


fToi 

^l M TiE^PfT IT f^TT'fr^ 
^T^TSfrrr^r 
t?Vf*T=T: ilTrt V f H Ef^r^ 

4h?t 


ift%: vi Cl ^ 



^r>pqT?rr^ 

q>ftW 


^TI^H LH^ 

r r^Rm 


Frt ^ 4 ^jui 7 r T^j rFrf^: 4^r 

sns^ftRr 

^ I -+i| T—m i ^ 

E^ + ^ipi Lvit^ 

Rl 4*4-41 ift ftr'iHi W<4 I <1 

Ri-m 'U-rRr ^r^rrfs 


IV 

■ 

a. 

11 

o. 

iii. 

40 

11. 

L 

20 

IV. 

i. 

IS 

III. 

ili. 

32 

II. 

lii. 

30 

II. 

ill. 

7 

II. 

I 

IS 

rv 

i5. 

21 

T. 

iv. 

27 

nr. 

i. 

27 

n. 

il. 

I 

IV. 

ii. 

IS 

rt 

■ - 
aa- 

15 

j. 

ii. 

23 

hi. 

HI 

a.. 

26 

hi. 

iii. 

44 

rv. 

i_ 

2 

n. 

■ 

a. 

33 

i 

iv_ 

5 

i. 

iv. 

19 

IV. 

-B- ■ 

11, 

1 

IV. 

iii. 

2 

IT 

i_ 

31 

III. 

iii.. 

59 

rv. 

iv. 

19 




r^f -r tT r?r*rr^Tre 
"err -l.'jl * 1 ^ 

f*s 4^4sj ■ 


In Hi j r: 

m w * 

T*i =i Jcii ^4 

f^r^Fr m -^ccj-leRt 

F»^lt o 

fNftl’^LT^T 


F^nrThl 


h 5 j, i ^ KTT-^ mi - a ° 
S^TT^T ^^IfT 

S-?r^arrr^l 
^ sp-hT^ ^isi ^t-a u 1 ^ 

W r*f l ^OT5.l ->T * 

^T TJ tTT^TT4"I^ 


1^1=:rfi f^t"i\i ^’R^' <= 
*L0M^qi;v^- f?f=rrqt ?r< 


II 


ELI, 

m. 

in. 

II. 

H. 

XI. 

Ill- 

I. 

T. 

IV, 

I. 

I, 

HJ-. 

IV. 

II. 

in. 

HI. 

III. 

IV. 

u. 

II- 

II- 

I. 

II. 

III. 

IX 

II- 

ni- 

II. 

III. 


:3 

XL 44 


i. 17 
HL 47 
Iv. 20 
Iti. 14 

if. 4-5 
Li. IO 
iv- II 
Iii. 27 
is. 2 
ili. I 6 
u. 22 

ii. 12 
iv. 33 
iii. B 
iii. 3 4 
iv- 3 2 
ii. 20 
iii. 25 
ill. O 

ii. 29 
iv- J.^ 
iv- 22 

ii. 24 
i. 34 

iii. 54 
ii. 4 

. HE. 26 

- iii- 37 
iii. 36 

- iii. 9 



si ^.(7.1 4^ vTTtT- 5P4"< 

01+4^4 41 »H 

l*fE5Sfrr*r^ 


H, iii- 38 
I. iii, 28 
I. ii. 5 

III. iv 3J 
IT- iii. 4 


= 3rfmrr& 

^TT^WlTr^sFq 

■nti t^vr ^-4 5 m~t^ 

5TT^r=ftf^?srTc( 

oprFiT 

^W^'Ti^.^rrtqr^ * 

m 4 r« w fti^-Errq; 

I—* 

53\LtM | ' U M 


t. ii.ae 

I. iii, 24 
IH. iv. 27 
I. £S. 20 
I- i. 30 
I. i. 3 

III - ili , es 
I. Lii. 34 
III. iv. 2: 
I, iii- 3& 
I. i.ll 
Iir. ii. 39 


fH *I ■Mf i -T*TTc 


W^TTfV^ 


ni. iv. 4-6 
II. i. 27 
I. ii. 16 
III. iii. 49 
II. iv. S 


*S I cl 5 ^ T* ^-=H1 H f*Tl tT& 

53 % -k^t a 

#^TTJT? - <.T k|^lT^<H14 i ■= 


3T TT^ *T Ti HT^'tr^f^T'O 

S*t *t 1 


«* N4 a i\ i VF^i ** i "'"* ° 

^r*rr=ir^ir[ 

+1 ■H 114 M'^l 

^HTT^r tr=T =srr^^T^ 



9-ftrdT 

^nTT^n^ 

flT 3 T’eir<r>i ^frrF=To. 




HI, iii. £ 

II. iv-30 
III i. 13 

I. iiL 36 

III. ii. 9 

IV. £v. S 

II. i. 16 

III. ij. I 
XI- iv. 5 
ITI. iv. 5 
II. ii 13 
I. iv. 15 
XI. iii- 39 

III. lii. 19 
r. iii. 30 

TV. ii. 7 
III iii 63 
IT. ii. 16 
I. Ji. 31 

IV. iv. 1 





HI. iii. 20 
IX ii- 38 
III, ill. 23 

I. ii. S 
I* iL 1 

II. ii. 32 
III- iv. 34 
ri. L 37 

III. iii, I 
III. iv- 2S 
III- iv. 26 
ni, iii. lO 
II. i. 30 
XU. iv. 3 3 
III. iv. 47 
I. iv. 25 
I. ii. 2S 
I. iii. 11 
III. i. 22 
III. ii, 32 



IV. iii. 9 

■o III. iii. 27 

III. L 1 1 

o I. ii* 15 

I- iii- 42 

I* iv* 2 

O iv. ii* 9 



in* ii. 4 

III. iii* 38 

IV. ii. 4 



III. tv, 14 
CL t*v. 21 
in. IX- 34 

I. ii, 14 

I-Hi, 7 

rv, ii. 13 

II. iii. 47 

III. i- 14 

IV. I. IO 

IV. Ii. 14 
in. i. i9 

1. IL 25 
I. ii. 6 

IV. HI, 11 

II. t. 1 




'Non-Self or matter, and Self or Consciousne respectively. 


'For instance, "This is my body", where the attributes of the body are 
superimposed on the Self. In the first case (previous f. n.) the separateness of 
the body and Self is forgotten; in the latter they are kept apart, but the 
attributes get mixed up. 

'Which witnesses the intellect etc. 

'For instance, "I am this body", where the body as such is superimposed 
on the Self, conceived of as "I". Or "This body is I", where a relationship 
with the Self is superimposed on the body. 

'The attribute of matter is insentience, and of the Self, Consciousness. 
These attributes cannot have any relation of identity or non-difference. 

° Or the interpretation is: "It is somewhat like a recollected thing 
emerging from the impression of some past experience." The two 
interpretations are from the points of view of subjective and objective 
awareness. 

'Four alternative theories follow successively. Of these the first two - 
Anyathdkhycti and Atmakhydti—are comprised within the present view. 
According to Anyathakhyati, subscribed to by the NylyaVaisegika schools, 
we have at first a vague awareness of "this" with regard to the rope in front. 
As the mind is not satisfied with this alone, it craves for a distinct perception. 
But some defect in the cognizer, his instruments of perception, or 
environment debars this, at the same time that the similarity of the rope and 
the snake calls up the memory of the latter. This memory conjures up the 
visual perception of the snake, and so the 'this" is apprehended as "This is a 
snake". According to some Buddhists who hold the Anyathakbyati theory of 
error, the "this" of the externally perceivable rope is superimposed on the 
mentally present snake to form the erroneous judgment, "This is a snake". 
Their psychological explanation is this: It may so happen that owing to the 
past impression inhering in consciousness, there may be a simultaneous flow 
of the consciousness of the external "this" and the internal snake, in which 
case the two get mi xed up. The Buddhists call this Atmakhyati. 



'This view of Akbyiti is held by the followers of Prabhakara, who assert 
that there is no such thing as erroneous knowledge, for a contrary 
supposition will paralyse human action by raising doubt at every turn as to 
whether a particular cognition is valid or not. In a case of so-called error, we 
do not really have a single cognition, but two, though we err by failing to 
recognize the difference between the two. On the one side we have the 
knowledge of the "this" in its absoluteness, occurring in the judgment "This 
is nacre". The nacre fails to come within the range of cognition owing to 
some defect in the factors concerned and some similarity between nacre and 
silver, because of which latter fact, the contact between the eyes and the 
nacre calls up to memory the silver seen in a shop. But the silver is 
remembered not in association with its time and locality, but simply as silver. 
So the two cognitions of "this" and silver synchronize, at the same time that 
their difference is not apprehended. This non-perception of difference 
prompts certain reactions in the perceiver. 

"The Self is known as "I" to all people, learned or ignorant, and nobody 
has any doubt as to this. 

'Since it is a product of nescience and is sublated by vidyi (illumina tion). 
The commentary refers to superimposition, which is a product of Maya, 
rather than to Maya itself, because the latter is a source of evil in its derived 
forms and not in its unevolved states, e.g. sleep, whereas superimposition is 
directly so. 

'This view of Asatkhyiti is held by the Buddhist Nihilist, according to 
whom, the non-existing silver appears on the non-existing nacre. 

" Pratyak-itmi is interpreted by Ratnaprabhi as that (ExistenceKnowledge- 
Bliss Brahman) which stands opposed to non-existence, insentience, and 
sorrow (i.e. sorrowful ego etc.). 

As an object, directly perceived through the senses. 

Since superimposition is a product of nescience. 



1° If the Self, with the superimposition of "I" on It, be subject to 
ignorance, then the instruments of knowledge and scriptures, depending on 
It, become vitiated and lose their validity. 

"For empirical activit.,s, a vague idea about one's soul is quite enough, 
and no knowledge of the absolute Self is needed. On the contrary, when one 
knows the absolute Self, one loses all kinds of self-identification, and 
therefore actions become impossible. 

"Brahma-jijnasa literally means a wish to know Brahman. A wish follows 
spontaneously from the knowledge that something is achievable by effort, 
and that when achieved, it will lead to desirable results. Thus a wish cannot 
be begun like a pot, for instance. So by implication the phrase means "a 
deliberation on (the nature of) Brahman"; and to complete the sentence, we 
have to supply "is to be undertaken". According to this interpretation also, 
atha cannot mean commencement, that idea being implied in the verb itself 
that has to be supplied (f. n. 26). 

"Like the auspicious sound of a conch. 

"Purva-prakrta-apekcd may mean the broaching of a later topic by 
presupposing something broached earlier, as for instance in enumeration. 
But this meaning is inadmissible, since nothing is broached before this 
aphorism. Or it may mean the anticipation of a later factor by the former. But 
in that case we come to causality. 

The word avadana means the cutting off of a limb of the sacrificial animal 
for offering as an oblation. Annotators interpret it as "taking up". The text is: 
Hrdayasya afire avadyati atha jibvayih atha vaksarah. Now these limbs 
cannot be taken up simultaneously; and so an order has to be followed, 
which is made clear by the text by using the word atha in the sense of "then". 

"Senn is the whole (or principle) and seta a part (or subsidiary). The two 
deliberations are not related that way; nor is there any derivative 
competence, as when a man becomes competent to perform the Soma 
sacrifice by virtue of his having performed the Darla-Purnamiisa sacrifice. 
The performer of the sacrifice is the same person where either of these two 



relations is in evidence. But as both these are ruled our here, the persons 
undertaking the two kinds of deliberation can well be different. 

n "A deed is held to be dbarma that has no association with undesirable 
consequence even from the standpoint of its result, it being the cause of bliss 
alone" (loka-vartika, I. i. 2, 268-269). 

"An injunction gives rise to its meaning in the mind of a hearer, which 
leads the hearer to think first, "This text wants me to act in a certain way", 
and then, "I should act in a certain way in accordance with this injunction", 
the second thought being prompted by a desire for the result (e.g. heaven). 
Then he learns about the form of the rites leading to the result, as also their 
instruments, accessories, subsidiary acts, etc. Thus from the two kinds of 
thought follows the knowledge about the virtuous deeds, and then action. 

' Just as we see through our eyes, so also we know Brahman through such 
Vedic texts as, "This Self is Brahman" (Ma. 2). Vedic texts are thus valid 
means of knowledge just like direct perception. 

The literal meaning is "wish to know Brahman"; but by implication, the 
meaning is, "for getting a direct knowledge of Brahman one should 
undertake a deliberation on the Upanisadic texts". "Wish" figuratively means 
"the deliberation resulting from the wish"; "knowledge" means "the special 
kind of direct knowledge"; and the verb "is to be undertaken" has to be 
supplied. 

'Both the verbs "wish (or want)" and "know" are transitive and must have 
objects. Wish has knowledge for its object, and knowledge has Brahman. A 
man must first know something in order that he may wish for it so that 
knowledge becomes both a cause and an effect of wish. The difficulty is 
obviated by saying that the causal knowledge is an unripe and indirect 
apprehension, whereas the resulting knowledge is a mature one culminating 
in the revelation of Brahman (f. n. 30). 

Arthdpatti, a means of valid knowledge, as for instance, "Plump 
Devadatta does not eat in the day-time", where by implication we know that 
he eats at night. 



An object is "that which is the most desired (in a sentence) by the subject 
of the verb". 

' An apparent knowledge of Brahman, that one gathers from the scriptures 
etc. and entertains as a common-sense point of view, is the cause of the 
deliberation on Brahman; and the resulting realization of the form "I am 
Brahman" is the effect or aim of that deliberation. Thus mediate and 
immediate knowledge can be the cause and effect of the deliberation. 

° An unanalysable mental modification that expresses itself as a direct 
awareness of the form, "I am Brahman" 

"The root brash means growth, and the suffix man, added to it, signifies an 
absence of limitation (in expanse). So Brahman derivatively means that 
which is absolutely the greatest. And etemality etc. follow as a matter of 
course from this limitlessness. 

"Bhoga and Bhoktd are generally translated as enjoyment and enjoyer. But 
the terms are meant to include both enjoyment and suffering of happiness 
and sorrow; hence experience and experiencer are nearer the mark. 

'The deliberation based on the Upanisads can be commenced (a) since 
from the fact of the universality of bondage it follows that there can be such 
a result as freedom, as also such a subject-matter as the unity of the 
individual Self and Brahman; (b) since the subject-matter of this book is not 
included in a deliberation on nbarrna; (c) since a class of specially qualified 
persons can exist; (d) and since the general familiarity with Brahman 
supplies a subject-matter etc. for the book. 

As is known from the text, "This Self is Brahman" (Br. H. v. 19). 

"Brahman has no definition and hence cannot be deliberated on. 

'In "pitdmbaram pasya-see the man with a yellow cloth", the man is 
known along with his yellow cloth. But in "drstasamudram inaya-bring the 
man who saw the sea", the man alone can be brought, but not the qualifying 
clause. 



" The other modifications are: Growth, transformation, and decay. Growth 
and transformation are really forms of new birth (or evolution), while decay 
is a form of death. 

'° Yaska's Nirukta mentions six kinds of modification-birth, continuance, 
growth, transformation, decay, death. The aphorism, however, enumerates 
the three mentioned in the Upani~ads, so as not to get involved in any other 
philosophy. 

"The naturalists cannot argue that a thing originates by itself, for that is a 
fallacious use of the term "originate". A thing cannot originate causelessly, 
for that contradicts experience. 

11 The inference presented in the earlier sentence-"Apart from ... any 
other factor:' 

Omniscience, omnipotence, etc. 

"Ascertainment of the true meaning and the possibility of the thing to be 
known. 

" When properly considered, the Upanigadic texts are seen to point to 
Brahman. 

to A man , led away from the Gandhara countr y b y robbers , with his eyes 
covered , is left in a forest , bound hands and feet. Some passerby then takes 
pit y on him , frees him , and tells him of the road to Gindh3ra. If he is 
intelli g ent enou gh ( pattdita ) to understand that instruction , and if he can use 
his deliberative faculty to guard against false steps, he can reach Gandhira. 
Similar is the case of a man under ignorance in this world that is like a 
forest. A teacher tells him, "You are Brahman." If he is intelligent enough to 
understand that and uses his reasoning faculty adequately, he reaches 
Brahman. 

"Its possibility is to be established through reasoning. 




















"The meaning of a particular passage has to be determined with the help 
of direct assertion, indicatory mark, syntactical connection, context, position, 
and designation. The above six means, as also reasoning, etc., determine the 
meanings of Vedic passages about Brahman, and through the individual 
competence of each test, they give rise to a particular mental state that is of 
the nature of the knowledge of Brahman. That state again destroys ignorance 
and culminates in the revelation of Brahman. 

The mental modification having the form, "I am Brahman", culminates in 
the revelation of the real nature of Brahman. 

"'The inference of the opponent may be either, "Whatever is an effect is a 
product of Brahman" or "Whatever is an effect has a cause", from either of 
which he may try to arrive at the existence of Brahman. But no such general 
idea, as implied in the first statement, is possible with regard to Brahman, 
since Brahman is imperceptible. 

"For instance, Mu. I. i. 10, Br. III. ix. 28, etc. 

The first aphorism presents the deliberation on Brahman as a task to be 
undertaken by a competent person; and for him the second aphorism 
presents the definition of Brahman. That this is the purpose of the aphorism 
becomes obvious from the order followed in the Taittiriya Upani$ad, where 
Bhrgu comes as an inquirer and to him Brahman is presented as the cause of 
the origin etc. of the universe. This is a tatastha definition of Brahman, 
where the characteristics mentioned are not an intrinsic part of the thing 
defined, though they distinguish it from others for the time being. The 
svarftpa definition is presented in such sentences as, "Brahman is Truth, 
Knowledge, Infinite" (Tai. II. i), where the words Truth etc., though 
generally meaning empirical truth etc., imply here by a figure of speech a 
transcendental entity which is Truth Itself. 

61 Works on mythology, logic, discussion on religious and social duties, 
.fikfc, kalpa, vydkarana, nirukta, chandab, jyotis. 


Not fully omniscient, being within Maya. 



6$ The validity of a means of knowledge consists in its revealing 
something that is not known through other means and is not sublated later. If 
a thing known through perception etc. is again revealed by the Upani*ads, 
the latter lose their validity. "A thing already in existence" means some 
positive thing which is an established reality, and as such, it has no 
connection with any fresh effort for production. An action is needed for 
producing something, but not after it is already there. 

"This is of three kinds- (a) Guna%dda . attributive corroborative statement . 
e.g._"The sun becomes the sacrificial stake" F B. II. i. 5.2), where the 
statement contradicts experience and is taken tw mean "a stake shining like 
the sun"; (b) Anuvdda, reassertive corroborative statement, e.g. "Fire is the 
remedy for cold", which is a mere restatement of a known fact; (c) 
Bhutarthavdda, factual corroborative statement, e.g. "Indra raised his 
thunder-bolt against Vrtra", which fact is known from the Vedas only. 
Arthavida is also classified as expressing eulogy, condemnation, heroic 
performance, and past incident. 

"This is the view of Kumirila Bhatta. 

The portion of the Vedas, presenting the unity of the Self and Brahman, is 
different from the portion presenting rites etc. 

"For the purification and concentration of mind, for emancipation by 
stages, and for the attainment of the respective results, the Upanipds speak in 
some contexts of such deities as Praia, qualified Brahman, as well as of the 
subsidiary factors and the results of such meditations. But that does not 
mean that the Upan4ads are concerned with these alone. As a matter- of fact, 
their main concern is to reveal the unity of the Self and Brahman. 

" So far as their own purport, viz Brahman, is concerned. 

' In illustration of a universal proposition from which the inference 
follows. The Vedas, perception, inference, etc. are valid means of 
knowledge, each within its own domain; none of these need depend on 
another for proving its validity within that domain. 





' How can Brahman become a factor in an injunction about meditation? 


• This is the opponent's interpretation. The Vedantic interpretation is: 
"One who knows Brahman becomes Brahman." 

"Sravana, manana, and nididhydsana, according to the Vedantins, are not 
merely acts of hearing, reflection, and profound meditation as ordinarily 
understood. Sravana means a mental activity conducive to the apprehension 
of all Upanisadic texts as leading to their only import, Brahman. And this is 
achieved by an examination of the texts through six tests (upakrama- 
upasmrishara etc .-see f. n. 69). Manana is also a mental activity consisting in 
the employment of favourable arguments for the removal of the apparent 
contradictions that such a purport may raise against other means of valid 
knowledge. And nididhydsana is a mental activity consisting in withdrawing 
the mind from other things and concentrating it on Brahman. 

"Since the Vedas convey some meaning leading to some results, therefore, 
after the study of the Vedas, should be commenced an inquiry about the 
meaning of the Vedic texts, that is conducive to the ascertainment of the 
virtuous deeds. 

"Northern Course-also known as the Path of Gods; and Southern Course 
or the Path of Manes. Igta-Agnihotra and Viivedeva sacrifices, austerity, 
truthfulness, study, hospitality, etc. Punta-Digging of wells, construction of 
rest-houses, temples, etc. Datta-Charity, protection of the weak, non-injury, 
etc. 

'Where an inferior factor is thought of as a Superior factor on account of 
some similarity. The superior predominates, and the inferior is almost 
ignored, e.g. the Visvedevas occupy the mind for the time being. 

"Where the factor superimposed (say, Brahman) occupies a subsidiary 
position, while the locus (say, the mind or sun) predominates. 

"Where the two factors, air and vital force, remain distinct, though 
thought of as one owing to similarity of action, viz merger of all things into 
air during dissolution and into the vital force during sleep. 



• The knowledge "I on Brahman" is not meant for the mere purification of 
the individual being, viz the sacrificer. 

70 Known, i.e. effect; unknown, i.e. cause. 

• Meaning ascertained through the six tests-commencement-ending, 
repetition, uniqueness, result, eulogy, reason. 

"The idea is expressed thus in the Brhadaranyaka commentary (IV. iv. 20): 
"The scriptures too describe the Self merely by the negation of the activities 
of the subject, the evidences of knowledge, and so on; ... and not by 
resorting to the usual function of a sentence in which something is described 
by means of names. Therefore even in scriptures, the Self is not presented 
like heaven or Mount Meru for instance.... The knowledge of Brahman too 
means only the cessation of the identification with extraneous things (such as 
the body)." Thus since Brahman is not presentable positively by saying, 
"This is so", It cannot be the object of scriptural knowledge in this sense. But 
Jr can be presented negatively as "Not this, not this", and thus It can be 
known from the scriptures, which are a valid means of knowledge. This is 
technically explained thus: 

Brahman is comprehended in the unanalysable mentation (vrtti) of the 
form, "I am Brahman", that arises from hearing the great Upanisadic saying, 
"That thou are'. And yet Brahman is said to be inexpressible by words, 
because It is not comprehended by the "resulting consciousness" or 
"apprehending consciousness" (phala), which is defined as the mentation 
with the reflection of Consciousness on it. In common experience, the 
menration of the form of a pot, with the reflection of Consciousness on it, 
goes out of a person to envelop the pot. Then that mentation destroys the 
ignorance about the pot; still the witnessing Consciousness is needed to 
reveal the pot through a manifestation of the identity of the Consciousness 
underlying the pot and the apprehending Consciousness. The mentation 
about Brahman destroys the ignorance about and the ignorance subsisting on 
It. But the apprehending Consciousness cannot reveal Brahman, the (phala) 
mentation being included in ignorance itself as the latter's product, so that it 
gets destroyed along with that ignorance and can have no further action. 



"The individual Self reflected on nescience. 


"Production, acquisition, transformation, and purification. 

" It is not an injunction but a sort of eulogy, the apparent injunction being 
meant for inducing the hearer to the knowledge of Brahman. By producing 
in his mind a current of thoughts directed towards the indwelling Self, this 
inspires the man to "hear, reflect, and meditate" about the Self, these 
processes being the means of generating the knowledge of Brahman. The 
Viawrana school does not admit any injunction in the case of knowledge; but 
a Niyama-vidhi, in the primary sense, is admitted in the case of "hearing"; in 
the case of reflection and meditation, this is admitted in a secondary sense. 

TM As the ultimate reality into which all thin g s can be reduced , this 
Purusa remains unchanged, and into Him all things enter like the false snake 
etc. entering into the rope etc. 

"Objection : Curd as such may have no purpose; but when used in a 
sacrifice, it helps in the production of the result set forth in the Vedas. But 
Brahman has no such connection with action, and is therefore absolutely 
useless. 

Answer : Not so, for the instruction about Brahman serves its own 
purpose, viz removal of ignorance. 

" From the prohibition the hearer gets the idea, "It dissuades me from the 
act of killing a Brihmana. This leads to inactivity, which is the very nature of 
the Self. The prohibition removes the idea that he entertained of gaining 
something from the murder, so that when the idea of nonexistence of gain 
dies away, the proclivity does not recur. 

In the "Vow of Prajapati" a young man, about to enter the householder's 
life after finishing his studies, is asked not to look at the rising sun, the sun 
under an eclipse, the sun reflected in water, and the sun at the zenith, and not 
to cross over the tether of a calf. Here the meaning of the negative is not 
mere withdrawal from activity; for in the text, the prohibitions are preceded 
by a positive injunction for undertaking a vow. Hence such instances are 







exceptions to the general meaning of the negative as non-existence. This is 
the Ved-antic standpoint, whereas the opponent will say that in all cases of 
prohibition, the meaning is not a mere negation of some act, but the 
injunction of its opposite. Thus "A Brahmana should not be killed" means, 
"Non-killing of a Brahmana is to be resorted to". 

"Which statement removes the fear of the snake. 

00 Sorrow is destroyed not by mediate but by immediate knowledge. If 
one does not get immediate knowledge- from the Upani~ads, nothing is 
wrong with them, but it is caused by the imperfect state of the hearer's mind. 

m The argument in a circle can be avoided on the analogy of the seed and 
the sprout-the merits of a previous birth can produce the experiences of the 
next birth and vice versa. But this leads to au unjustifiable infinite regress; 
for the relation of the seed and sprout is a perceived reality, whereas the 
relation of merit etc. with the Self, which is unattached, is fanciful. 

Through a reappearance of what is sublated by the knowledge of 
Brahman, like the repetition of a mirage after being known to be false or the 
continuance of the semblance of a cloth produced by the burnt yarns still in 
position. 

Since the knowledge of Brahman is useful like the useful knowledge, 
"This is a rope and not a snake". 

"Reflection and profound meditation are enjoined for one who does not 
realize from the first hearing. This is owing to his own mental defects. The 
illumination dawns when there is no defect. By hearing is removed the doubt 
from an unprepared mind that the Upanigads cannot impart the knowledge 
of Brahman. Reflection removes the doubt that the Self and Brahman cannot 
be one. Through meditation the mind is withdrawn from distraction and all 
things other than Brahman, and then Brahman stands revealed. Thus hearing 
etc. generate knowledge, and knowledge brings liberation. Reflection and 
meditation deal with the thing known from hearing. They are not meant for a 
fresh knowledge. 



°6 Since such a determination clears the way for an inquiry about things 
conducive to sacrifices and human objectives, therefore the second inquiry 
starts after the first. 

" The means of knowledge are valid so long as the final illumination does 
not occur. 

t7 For instance, "0 amiable one, try to find out Existence as the root (of 
all) with the help of Its product fire" (Ch. VI. viii. 4). 

From the common experience that all things are the products of insentient 
Nature, and that insentient things remain associated with sentient beings, as 
for instance, a chariot. 

°"In the beginning there was non-existence only" (Ch. VI. ii. 1), and so 
on. 

'Also translated as "thinking", "knowledge", "vision", "wish" (see 1. iii. 
13). 

Vital force, faith, space, air, fire, water, earth, organs and senses, mind, 
food, vigour, austerity, mantras, works, worlds, name. 

Used by Jaimini in his aphorism VII. iv. 1, where yajati figuratively means 
a sacrifice and not the mere root "to sacrifice". 

"The objection may mean either, (i) Brahman has no eternal 
consciousness, or (ii) Brahman does not know eternally. The next two 
sentences give the answers. 

"Omniscience and knowing do not conflict, since omniscience can express 
itself through the acts of knowing. 

"In the beginning, Brahman's limiting adjunct Maya undergoes a change 
conducive to creation. The causes that had brought about the dissolution 
become exhausted then, thus clearing the way for the creative tendency 
inherent in Maya. And Brahman then visualizes all the future objects that lie 



buried in Maya in a subtle form. That being an act and the objects of vision 
being present, God is an agent in the primary sense. 

"The vigour of knowledge-the clear reflection of Consciousness on the 
transformation of Maya. 

"Brahman is not the material cause of the universe, since the 
characteristics of the universe are different from those of Brahman. 

"Thinking of Existence-Brahman as identified with oneself. 

W A blind man lost his way in a forest. A wicked man accosted him 
courteously and, thus gaining confidence, brought a heifer and asked the 
blind man to take hold of its tail, assuring him that it would lead him out of 
the forest. In good faith the blind man followed the advice, holding on to the 
tail tenaciously. As a result he was dragged over rough ground and brambles, 
getting cuts all the time. 

The Chandogya Upanisad cites this example (VI. xiv). When somebody, 
accused of theft, denied the charge, a red-hot axe was brought for testing 
him. If he was truthful, the truth protected him, and he was not harmed by 
taking hold of it. So he was released. But if he lied, the lie did not protect 
him; the axe burnt him, and he was punished. The point is that truth saves a 
man. So also one holding on to Brahman, that is Truth, becomes liberated. 

101 Where something inferior is thought of as some other superior thing 
owing to some similarity and not identity (see f.n. 65). 

101 So that the premise, "All is known by knowing one", will be falsified. 

'The chan g es occurrin g in the mind in relation to sense-ob j ects arc the 
limiting ad i unets of the Self. Throu g h them It comes into contact with g ross 
objects like pot etc. Through that relationship It perceives those objects, 
including the body, and mistakes the body as Itself. This is Its waking state. 

'Thus merger really means freedom from limiting adjuncts and not 
becoming something else. 










"The derivation here is not a mere figure of speech, but it points to a fact, 
even as the Upanisadic derivations do in other places. 

'For instance, worship of symbols, meditation on Brahman as confined in 
the heart, meditation on Udgitha respectively. 

107 Quality-e.g. Brahman as possessed of true resolve, etc. Conditioning 
factors-e.g. Brahman as existing in the heart. 

1° In "He eats wheat with ve g etables' what is meant is that the 
modification of wheat te.g. bread) is being eaten with curries. Thus the 
original words may denote their modifications. So by a reverse process 
Anandamaya denotes dnanda itself. The opponent denies this position. 

'The Bliss that is Brahman, the "of' being used by fancying a difference, as 
in "The body of a building". 

10 Stated in that context of attainment (Tai. II). In reality, upasarhkramana 
means transcendence or sublation according to Sarhkara, and not attainment. 

"'Lit. "modification", but here "modified form" in the derivative sense of 
"that form through which anything evolves". 

' The remaining sutras are to be explained thus: 

15. q And N the very Brahman mentioned in the mantra ifIT is declared 
(in the portion about the tail). 

16. cl{~t: The other (Blissful One) is not meant, 39ggir: owing to 
impropriety. 

17. a And M owing to the teaching of difference between the two (viz that 
the Blissful One becomes joyous by getting the Bliss that is Brahman). 

18. W And ' TRe owing to the use of kdma (i.e: Bliss) in the sense of 
Brahman no I14TTT need of inferring the Blissful One to be Brahman. 





' Puru;a is the all-pervasive entity, seen as a Person by the worshippers. 
Golden in that context means, made of light, i.e. self-effulgent. 

'The instrument of cognition, owing to identity with which the soul thinks, 
"I know". 

' Because Om, a part of Udgitha, is great, it being the essence etc. of all 
and superior to all other letters. 

'This is U$asti's warning to Cakriyai a. 

" In deep sleep, the soul, having the mind as its limiting adjunct, becomes 
unified with Prcna or Brahman. 

Prdna or Brahman imparts existence and expression to the vital force. 

'Eye etc. stand for the corresponding organs which are the products of the 
elements. 

10 Because Prdna is shown to be non-different from the individual soul, at 
the same time that It is the place of merger of all things. Again, Prdna, 
considered as a transformation of elements, cannot have the elements 
merged in itself. 

"'Since emphasis is placed on Prana by saying, "Praha only", and since it 
is declared to be the material source of all things, therefore it is Brahman. 

'" Pure light cannot be seen. Gross light is a mixture of the three elements- 
light, water, and earth-though light predominates. So also with other gross 
elements. 

' That is to say, there can be no unmixed light after creation takes place. 

'Because of the mention of carana in the sense of "foot" and not 
"conduct". 


Hence the attributes do not really belong to Brahman. 



The Upanisads declare that people get whatever results they want from the 
worship of Brahman. 

" According to the previous explanation, the word Gayatri in the earlier 
text means a metre in the primary sense, and also Brahman by a figure of 
speech called Ajahallaksani, where something more in addition to the 
original meaning of the word is meant. According to the present 
interpretation, no such figure of speech is implied. Gayatri does not refer to 
the metre at all, but to Brahman directly. The aphorism, accordingly means: 
The metre Gayatri is not meant, cetorpananigadatbecause Brahman is spoken 
of by the word Gayatri standing as a medium for the dedication of the mind 
to Brahman, tathk-on the strength of the similarity of both having four feet. 

'"In playing with dice, when one wins with the dice called Krta having 
four figures, the other figures of the other dice, viz three, two, and one of 
TretJ, Dvapara, and Kali respectively enter into it; so that the figure of Krta 
is converted to ten. The metre Virdt has ten letters to a foot. So Virdt and 
Krta are the same. Also the Vedas declare that Virat is food; and Krta is the 
eater of all figures. So Virdt is both eater and eaten. 

' This sentence, occurring just after, "That much is His glory", shows that 
the mantra speaks of Brahman. 

10 At the openings of the heart are posted the five vital forces as 
gatekeepers of Brahman to whom this city of the body belongs. Brahman, 
called Gayatri, has to be meditated on in the heart in this way. 

That which lifts up (utthnpayati) the body is Uktha, i.e. Prdna. 

" By the word "Prnjird" is meant here the intellect bearing on it the 
reflection of the Self. All things perceived through that intellect become 
unified in the Self which is the basis of the intellect. 

'The Selfs reflection on intellect, called the soul, is the real subject 
perceiving the universe of names. And this constitutes half of its body. It is 
also the subject perceiving the forms constituting the universe of forms. This 



is the other half of its body. The intellect, with the reflection of the Self on it, 
acts in relation to the universe of names through the vocal organ. 


Similarly it becomes a seer etc. 

13' Ratnaprabha rejects this view and states that this is the l'rttikara's 
interpretation, Sankara's own having been given earlier. 

'For that would undermine the unity of purport of a sentence. 

When we split up the compounds, pranasarirah and manomayah thus - 
This one which his Prang as the body and this one which has mind as Its 
adjunct-the pronoun "This one which" readily brings Brahman to our mind, 
since that pronoun refers to something near at hand. 

'Any indication of the individual found here is ruled out, since an entity 
subject to grief cannot be an object of meditation, such an act being illogical. 

'The result of intending a meaning is its comprehension as such. That 
possibility of comprehension being present in the case of the attributes under 
discussion, they are "intended". 

Where the same meditation occurs. 

'Meaning antardtmani, within the embodied soul, the dropping of the 
seventh case-ending being a Vedic licence. 

' If you stand by the Vedic text, then follow it to the bitter end, and there 
can be no half-way house. 

'The word "food" is used figuratively for destructible things; and this 
figurative meaning becomes obvious from the use of the word death in its 
vicinity. Food is destructible, and so are all beings subject to death. 

' Upakosala stayed with his teacher Satyakama J3bila for twelve years. 
But the teacher went out on a sojourn without instructing Upakosala about 
Brahman. This upset the boy. But the four sacrificial fires, tended so long 
with care by him, revealed their individual secrets to him, instructed him 



saying, "Praha is Brahman" and so on, and concluded by saying that the 
teacher would tell him of the course. Then the teacher returned, and starting 
with, "The One that is the Puruga seen in the eye", told him of the course 
(see text below). 

'° This is initially the state of Hiranyagarbha, identified with the cosmic 
and microcosmic subtle bodies. This, again, is in essence, the immortal, 
fearless, all-sustaining absolute Brahman. So they first realize the 
conditioned and then the absolute Brahman. 

"The question of rulership arises from the point of view of empirical 
difference. In reality Brahman is not different from the individual, and hence 
no question of rulership and infinite regress arises. Again, empirically, God 
is recognized as the absolute ruler. To assume another ruler over Him is to 
ignore the Vedas. 

"Sixteen priests, the sacrificer, and his wife. 

"Making a difference between God and the creatures. 

"For thereby you speak of Maya only, though under another name, 
Pradhina, which term may bear the etymological sense of "that which is 
perceived as the products". Even if the opponent should say that the aphorist 
refutes this very Pradhana, and not the Pradhana of the Samkhyas, still there 
is nothing to quarrel about, for the Satinkhya view stands negated along with 
that. 

"The text implies that the all-comprehensive Hiranyagarbha, mentioned 
in, "The indwelling Self of all" (,Mu. II. i. 4), emerges from Him who is the 
source of all things (Mu. H. i. 3). So Hiranyagarbha has birth just like any 
other thing. 

"The assertion, "all karma and knowledge (i e. meditation) are but 
Puruga" amounts to presenting an entity inherent in everything. And so 
the text leads to the comprehension of the supreme Lord as the source 
of all things. 



"Five Brihmanas-Pricinasila ._ Saryayajna, Indradyumna, Jana, 

Bu4iladiscussed this problem among themselves. As they found no adequate 
answer, they went to Udd-alaka, who also did not know the full answer. 

"The six. Brihmanas went to kin g Asvapati and said this to him. In answer 
to the king's question, the Brihmanas related their own conceptions of 
Vaisvinara, as stated below seriatim. 

" Meaning "the entity filling up everything, present everywhere, and 
Consciousness by nature". 

'In the first case, fire is a symbol, in the second it is a limiting adjunct. 

a The word Vaisvinara stands for Brahman, and does not mean the 
ordinary fire at all (see fin. 19). 

"The limbs of Purusa are said to be in Purusa, though the limbs constitute 
His body and are not separate from it. Since God is superimposed on the 
limbs of Purusa, His conformity to Purusa's limbs amounts to His residence 
inside Purusa. 

2Divine-counting from heaven to the earth; bodily-counting from the 
crown of the head to the chin. God is inside all, in the sense of being their 
witness. 

"Raksas and Rdksasa both mean demon; vayas and vdyasa both mean 
crow. 

" Or that which makes the world attain birth; or that which goes everywhc 
re. or knows everything. 

"That which is measured (mita) by the mind, existing in the space 
(pradesa) in the heart, is pradeiamdtra. 

The spatial limitation of the heart becomes superimposed on the 
remembrance by the mind. And since God too is present in the same 
remembrance (or meditation), this limitation becomes superimposed on Him 
as well. 







"It will be shown later that the texts have to be reconciled by adding to 
one the qualities mentioned in the other. Thus both the texts have to accept 
heaven as both brilliant and all-surpassing. Or it may be said that, though 
the attributes differ, the meditation is the same. 

"This place is to be meditated on as the link between the two. Some read 
bhruvob pranasya ca in place of bhruvorghranasya ca, where pram means 
gbrana (nose). 

'On Brahman is transfixed Viriit . embodied in the three worlds ; and on It . 
again, .is transfixed Hiranyagarbha, embodied in all the subtle minds. These 
two are meant by the references to the gross heaven etc., and the subtle mind 
etc., respectively. 

'To remove the false conception of a stump as a thief, somebody may say, 
"Your thief is a stump", which statement denies the existence of the thief, 
and is not meant to establish the identity of the thief and the stump. So in the 
present case, the apposition does not imply that Brahman and creation are 
equally true. 

'Viz that "Self, used in apposition with omniscience (in Mu. II. ii. 7), can 
mean God alone. 

'Although the "not" borrowed from the earlier aphorism connects these 
together, still the fourth one is independent, since the individual soul is dealt 
with here as well as in the succeeding ones, and not Pradhana as in the third 
one. 

' Girhaparya fire as Apana, Anvaharyapacana as V yin a, Ahavaniya as 
PrOna (Pr. IV. 3). 

'Which is inadmissible. The direct text is "satvena-bv rei ving on truth". A 
direct statement is more authoritative than inference through context. 

For in the Brhad-ararayaka, Maitreyi is seen to question Yaii5avalkya 
repeatedly about the very same Self. And in the illustration of the knowers of 








the Vedas, the subject-matter is changed even without the help of question 
and answer. 

' Ratnaprabad interprets "vijnana" as nididhydsana (deep concentration) 
and "etc." as manna (reflection), faith, sravana (hearing), purity of mind,- 
steadfastness, and efforts for attaining these. 

'So it cannot be considered that the object of meditation is Hirazayagarbha 
and the object of seeing is Puruga (which word means either the "All- 
pervasive Entity" or the "Entity residing in this city of the heart"). 

"Tasmin, inside that, may mean in the heart, or in the individual soul, or in 
the material space; in all cases Brahman is the Entity inside. The opponent 
construes it thus. The Vedintin says that the small space Itself is Brahma:. 

"Or the meaning is: Since the object of being searched for, mentioned in 
"That which is inside" etc., is taken to imply the supreme Self, dahara cannot 
mean Brahman. 

' Vidbrti in the Upani$ad means an impounder or supporter. Dhrti in the 
aphorism, however, means holding together or supporting, the suffix here 
being ktin, imparting a cognate sense in the feminine gender to the root. 
Dam (setu) implies the idea of not allowing intermixture, while vidhrti 
implies keeping in position. 

" The Vedantic explanation of this text is: The man of knowledge 
completely detaches himself from the assemblage of body and senses and 
realizes the detached Self as Brahman, which is his true nature. Thereby he 
attains that supreme Light, his knowledge and attainment being the s:vne. 

"viz to draw attention to Brahman to which the soul repairs in sleep. 

' Prajna (individual soul) in a causal body and witnessing it through its 
own consciousness. It is the witness by virtue of imparting existence and 
sentience to others; but it is not free, since ignorance still persists. 


'° Reduces the universe to mere nescience. 



"Prajipati said to Indra and Virocana, "You ask me about whatever you do 
not understand regarding your Self after looking at yourself in a plate full of 
water:' After this had been done, Indra argued, that a thing, casting a 
reflection, is itself subject to growth and decay, as was evident from the 
reflection itself presenting the changes in the body. Thus the body could not 
be the Self. Prajapati confirmed this. 

"Ratnaprabha makes no distinction between Maya and Avidya, though it 
is admitted that the juxtaposition of the two terms implies a difference 
between the two powers of Maya-of covering and disturbing-which fact may 
give rise to different terminology. But others would maintain that Maya 
refers to cosmic nescience and Avidyd to individual ignorance. 

'0 Rites etc. are meant for the unenlightened, still groping in ignorance. 

Even if Prajapati refers to the individual for proving its Brahman, hood, 
there is no contradiction. Since the individual as such is not dealt with by 
Praj3pati, one cannot conclude that the individual forms the subject-matter 
of discussion here. 

° The blissful sheath which is higher and brighter than the other sheaths- 
bodily, vital, mental, and intellectual. 

OTaintless-free from adventitious defects; pure-free from natural defects. 

"If there can be some light in whose presence the sun etc. can be dimmed, 
then the opponent can raise the question, "Is it that light or some other light 
that is mentioned here?" As a matter of fact, the Upani*ad mentions only 
Brahman, so that the question of any other light cannot arise at all. 

"The opponent is misled by thinking that the word tatra in the text -"Na 
tatra suryo M46-there the sun shines not"-means, "If He be there", that is to 
say, "in His presence"; and so he argues, "If Brahman be there and nothing 
can shine in Brahman, then the sun etc. will never shine, for Brahman is 
eternally present". The Vedantin says, "Tatra means, with regard to that as an 
object". So the idea is, "Brahman is not an object that can be illumined". The 
locative case in tatra is not sati-saptami, but vifayasaptami. 



"Living with a teacher for the study of the Vedas under a vow of 
continence. 

"As Prailpati recollects the words in the beginning of creation, the 
meanings of the words call up to His mind the things thus: ete -these, a 
pronoun, indirectly reminds Him of the gods; asrk means blood, so asrgram 
stands for men, since they delight in the body in which blood predominates; 
indu-moon, points to the manes living in the lunar world; pavitra_Soma, 
tirahpavitra-the grahas (planets) that hide this Soma within themselves; Rk 
hymns set to music are diavah; the fascias used after the hymns are vifva; 
those who are blessed everywhere are recollected through saubbaga. 

'He reflected on creation as revealed in the Vedas. 

"The impression created in the mind on hearing a sound (e.g. cow) 
expressive of meaning and itself expressed by the letters constituting the 
sound (e.g. cow). 

iDFor it is not a fact that the utterance of a single letter conveys the 
meaning; and if a single letter suffices, the others will be useless. 

n Each letter, as it is uttered, lasts for one moment, and hence the letters 
cannot form a totality. 

UThis will be arguing, in a circle, the impressions being known from the 
comprehension of meaning and the comprehension of meaning being 
dependent on the apprehension of impressions. The memory of the meaning 
of a word can occur after the knowledge of the word. So the knowledge of a 
word, defined as the knowledge of the last letter in association with the 
impressions of earlier letters, cannot produce the knowledge of the word. 

"The impressions, inferred from the recollections occurring in sequence, 
will have a sequence, and will thus fail to form a single entity. 

"just as the secret of gems flashes in a mind trained through repeated 
observations. The sphota emerges in the form of the apprehension, "This is a 



single word", without further cogitation in a mind that has been prepared 
thus. 

"Better than to say that (1) each letter is infinite in number, (2) on those 
infinite letters the species inheres individually, (3) in them adventitious 
differences are created by pitches-high, low, medium, etc. 

N But the sound of the letters differs. Accordingly, letters and sound are 
different. Thus nobody thinks of the unuttered letters as intonated or of the 
music in a visrd as letters. 

"The obvious fact that letters express an idea, and the fanciful fact that 
there is such a thing as spbola. 

" Vi4nu-Purina, I. v. 59-61; Mbh. §i, 231.48-49. 

"Nescience being the only power admissible. 

The mind is the sixth organ (Giza, XV. 7). It has no distinct object of its 
own, for happiness etc. are cognized by the Witness. So "fancying objects 
for the sixth organ" means thinking of a nonentity. Or the meaning is that 
there is no sixth organ in addition to the eye etc., and so there can be no 
question of the existence of its objects. As for the other sense-organs and 
sense-objects, there is a fixity of relation; for instance colour cannot be 
perceived by the ear, in any cycle of creation. 

"The sacrificer performing the sacrifice with the idea, "I shall become fire, 
the eater of food", becomes the god Fire in the next cycle, and hence he is 
called Fire even when he is a sacrificer. 

"For instance, "As long as the sun will rise in the east and set in the west", 
occurring at the end of Madhu-vidyd. 

Mahibhirata, Moksadharma, where the Gandharva Viivivasu inquires and 
learns about Brahman. So also in other places (e.g. in the story of Prahlida 
and Ajagara) non-human beings get this knowledge. 


"For instance, "Fire cures cold"-Anuuada. 



"For instance, "The sun is the sacrificial stake", where the meaning is: 

"The stake is bright like the sun"-Gunavdda. 

" For instance, "Indra with a thunder in hand-Bhutirthavdda. (See f.n. 54, 
I. i. 4), where Indra's existence is admitted. 

IT A mantra is to be taken in its literal sense when it is not a recapitulation 
of something already known and it does not contradict known facts. Thus a 
god can have a body, since the mantras and corroborative statements say so. 

Should it be postulated that the mantras mention only the forms (species) 
but not any person, the answer is: A form cannot exist without a person. 

"Thinking on the different parts of the body as the five elements (from the 
soles of the feet to knees-earth; knees to navel-water; navel to neck-fire; 
neck to where the hair of the head starts-air; from there to the crown of the 
head-space), and bringing them under control through such thoughts of 
identity. 

One born of a mixed parentage-from a Sudra father and Ksatriya mother 
or of a slave woman-whose duty was to drive chariots, wait on princes, and 
so on. 

° Etc.-study, service of the teacher, and so on. 

" Gau.Dh.su., XII. 4 

" V3sistha, 18 

Manu . N. 80 
-A Ibh. Sa.,327.49 

a Gau. Dh. Su., XII. 4 


OOGau.Dh.SU., IX. 1 



'The embodied Sun cannot be this goal, and establishment in one's own 
nature does not mean becoming something else. So the Self, and not the Sun, 
is the goal. 

' Graha is that which perceives, hence an organ. Atigraha is that which is 
greater than a graba, hence sense-objects determining the nature of the 
perception. 

' That power of Miyi has to be admitted whose presence makes birth, 
death etc., possible, and whose cessation brings about liberation. 

'The senses etc. are mentioned in Ka. I. iii. 3-4 and 1. iii. 10, and the gross 
body in Ka. I. in. 3. 

' Ascertained that it is not the Self, that is to say eliminated. 

'This freedom from grief does not fit in with thoughts on mabat. 

'This transcendence of ignorance is not possible for mabat. 

'Born of eggs, moisture, uterus, and earth. 

° Maya, though one, has parts, constituting the limiting adjuncts of 
individuals. This Maya is not Pradhana, for Maya has only one ruler, God; 
but the Samkhyas believe in many purulas (souls). 

'Seven modifications-mahat (i.e. intellect), egoism, and five subtle 
dements (space, air, fire, water, earth); they are both modifications and 
sources. Mahat evolves from Pradhina and evolves into egoism. The subtle 
elements evolve from egoism and evolve into gross elements. The sixteen 
evolved products are the five gross elements and the eleven organs. 

lOthe panca of pancajandh cannot be detached to be construed separately 
with pafica (five) to make twenty-five. 

"Even if pancajandh be not a compound word, so that its panca can be 
treated separately, still one panca cannot qualify the other panca, since both 



are numerals qualifying janah. Even if the two fives are construed with jandh 
we get only ten jan3h. 

"Pan-cajanup is not a compound. But five is not connected with another 
five directly, nor are both fives construed separately with jandh. One five is 
first joined to janah, and this phrase is then qualified by another five, thus 
making 25 jandp. 

In pancapuli we have the samahara-dvigu compound (with a numeral in 
the first part); and so i is added at the end (Pa. Sil. II. i. 52, IV. i. 21). But in 
pancajanJh there is no i at the end, which fact clearly shows that it is not a 
dvigu compound. 

" For as shown, jandh has its own numeral adjective. 

""That in which the five of the quintuplet and space are placed, that very 
Self I regard as the immortal Brahman:' 

10I)ak;inagni (lit. the south-fire, i.e. the 'fire having that name), Saptarfit 
(i.e. a group of seven well-known sages, who are also conceived of as the 
seven stars of the Great Bear). 

"Which does not mean seven times seven, or forty-nine rfis, but simply 
seven rfis constituting the group called Saptar}is. 

' Though udbbid may mean other things in other contexts, the association, 
obvious in "by sacrificing", points out that it is the name of the sacrifice 
itself. 

"From association with "splitting", the word "stake" here means some 
timber fit to be shaped into a stake. 

""Altar" here means not the finished altar, but some sacrificial place yet to 
be sanctified, which meaning follows from its association with the word 
"prepares". 

'The opponent may say that in Atiratra we are concerned with action, 
where alternatives are admissible, but not so when the knowledge of things 



is concerned. The answer will be that here also we are concerned with the 
act of meditation, in which Brahman becomes an object, thought of as the 
abode of five things, viz Prhna etc. and either food or light. 

The Ved-antic interpretation of these two texts are: (1) This universe of 
name and form did not exist as such before its manifestation; it remained in a 
causal state without the differentiation of name and form. From that state 
emerged the gross universe as we see it. (2) The universe remained identified 
with Brahman before creation. In that causal state came a stir, as it were; and 
then from that emerged a sprout, as it were, the very first subtle state of 
creation. 

"The opponent argues: "The cause must be doubtful, since the effects are 
so." The Veddnrin can say: "Dreams differ and they are false; should then 
the dreamer also be different and false?" 

"This must be a fact realizable by the enlightened ones, for this is 
supported by the Upani;adic texts, and the result of this realization is 
confirmed by them. 

i.e. the synonyms of the vital force-Brhat, p}niaravisa, soma, rdjan. 

The sun etc. give him light etc., and he offers them oblation etc. 

"For in etat karma (this work), etat is neuter and singular, whereas 
puru{dh (persons) is plural and masculine. 

In the earlier half of the text, "...who is the creator of these purufas" (Kau. 
IV. 19), the activity of creation and the result of producing the persons are 
already mentioned. So "this work", occurring in the second half cannot refer 
to these. 

"That occurs to the mind as the object of activity. 

"A second mention is redundant. 

On the assumption that Brihmanas alone can become mendicants, when 
some one says, "Feed the Brihmanas and the mendicants", the word 



Brihmanas is to be understood as meaning all Brihmanas who are not 
mendicants. So also "work" here implies the creation of all except the 
Purufas, they having been mentioned separately. 

Such lovable objects suggest that they have some one, a soul, as their 
enjoyer. 

"Since the enjoyer is the master of the enjoyable things, it is said 
figuratively that all enjoyable things become known when the enjoying soul 
is known. 

"Both partial difference and partial non-difference exist between the two 
Selves. To fulfil the declaration, the individual is made the starting point, 
keeping the eye only on those of its aspects that are non-different from the 
supreme Self-this is how A§marathya thinks. 

An imaginary difference can be removed by knowledge; but the assertion 
of any real difference rules out that possibility. Besides, the acceptance of 
origin and annihilation for the soul will militate against the earlier assertion 
of birthlessness and immortality for it. 

'The text, "(One should realize that God) who saw the seer Kapila 
emerging out" etc. (Sv. V. 2), enjoins the realization of the supreme Self, so 
that the mention of the perception of the omniscience of Kapila is only by 
way of restating a fact known otherwise. Now, if that fact cannot be proved 
on some independent ground, the present text, which is a mere reiteration 
(Anuvdda), cannot prove it either. 

' Agaka, a kind of obsequial ceremony, is neither mentioned in the Vedas 
nor prohibited there. So it is inferred that since the Smrtis are meant for the 
followers of the Vedas, the Smrti enjoining the ceremony had its source in 
some lost Vedic text. Hence it is undertaken accordingly. 

' Derivatively Sirhkhya means full knowledge, and Yoga means constant 
meditation of "I on Brahman", and not mere "Stoppage of mental trans. 
formations", as Pataiijali says. 



'The gross fire is a mixture of the subtle elements-fire, water, and earth, 
which are red, white, and black in colour respectively. The gross fire gets all 
these colours from its constituents, and when analysed back, it is seen as 
nothing but those subtle elements with their own characteristics. 'Food' here 
means earth. 

'After seeing oneself in a dream as possessed of a grotesque body, one 
wakes up to see oneself in another body, but even then one remembers, "I 
dreamt thus". This recognition of oneself in different bodies would not have 
been possible if the cognizing Self did not exist as the changeless witness in 
all the states, and different from the bodies. 

The letters of the alphabet are known from the spoken lan guages, thou gh 
they are represented by symbolical lines on paper. These scribblings are not 
the real letters. 

So unity and diversity cannot coexist. The Upanisads are an independent 
means of a unique knowledge of non-duality, which cannot be sublated by 
other means of knowledge, whereas this ultimate knowledge eradicates all 
ideas of duality. 

• According to the declaration that one becomes just what one meditates 
Brahman to be. 

Not only is the existence of the effect dependent on the existence of the 
(material) cause, but its perception also is dependent on the perception of the 
material. 

"Where we lack perception, the cause has to be inferred thus from the 
effect: "The thing under consideration must be non-different from its 
material cause, for it is a product, just as much as a cloth." 

"Is the special quality (latency or potency) an attribute of the effect or 
cause? In the former case, the effect, as possessed of an attribute even before 
creation, cannot be pronounced non-existent. 






"If the potentiality be different from both cause and effect or if it be non¬ 
existent, it may produce anything rather than the effect, for its features of 
being different and non-existent are equally present in relation to other 
things. 

To the objection that if cause and effect be (substantially) different, they 
should be perceived as such, the opponent may reply that the difference is 
not perceived owing to the relation of inherence (invariable concomitance) 
between them. 

"According to Nyiya philosophy, the relation between substance and 
quality, genus and individuals, etc. is inherence. But two things become 
joined through conjunction, which becomes connected with each through 
inherence. Conjunction is an attribute and not a relation. 

10 When one says, "The pot moves", the pot is the agent in the sense of 
providing the basis for the act of moving. So when one says, "The pot 
originates, the pot must precede the act so that it can be the agent providing 
the basis for the act of origination. So also the creative action has to take 
place on some material. Without the material, action can have no meaning. 

"Neither the parts nor the whole has any birth or death as such; but that 
kind of terminology is used on account of the addition or diminution of 
parts. If the opponent still argues that even if this be the meaning of birth and 
death, still the things experiencing them are substantially different and have 
no identity, then this is wrong. 

"The three qualities acting as a whole cannot produce a heterogeneous 
world, so that each must have some free hand in creation. Now does each 
change wholly or partially? Either point of view is open to the above 
objection. 

"The combination of the second with the first leaves the first alone, which 
has no dimension. 

'In soft earth a pole is first forced in and then pulled out to force it down 
still deeper. This process is repeated many times till the pole reaches firm 



ground and is held fast in position. 


'The inferences take such forms: "Diverse things like earth has an 
unmanifested cause, they being limited like a pot." "Mahat and others must 
have emerged from the potency in their cause like pot etc., from the potency 
of their material." "The effect is seen to evolve from a cause, as a pot from 
clay." "All things merge successively into finer and finer material sources." 
"All variety must have some unity as its source on account of causal relation 
and the principle of merger of the effect into the material cause." 

'The Sithkhya's argument was that Pradhina is that principle where the 
series of division between the cause and effect terminates. But the Vedintin 
holds that the series can as well end in either Brahman or Miyi. The series 
does not end in an insentient principle that has no intelligence to guide it, for 
what is noticeable is that all articles are produced by intelligence. 

'For instance, a sleeping man does not look up and begin to run just 
because a piece of cloth is thrown on his body. So all tendency to act is 
based on the insentient. 

'For there is no adventitious ground for these changes of mood, merit and 
demerit also bein a pan and parcel of Pradhina, and not an extraneous 
compelling force. 

'For Pradhana will not be working for it. 

'The soul being naturally free. 

For Pradhina, when acting for liberation, has no such purpose in view. 

' The soul being a knower, and Pradhana the object of knowledge. The one 
presupposes the other. 

' Whether the purpose be experience, or liberation, or both? 

70 Consisting in reciprocal domination and subordination. 



" Non-discrimination between the soul and the intellect. Bondage arises 
from this error of identity, and liberation from a knowledge of their 
difference. Bondage and liberation really belong to the intellect; but just like 
the figurative ascription of victory and defeat of the army to the king, 
bondage and liberation are asserted about the soul. 

"If sattva and rajas be the afflicted and the afflicter, the soul need not 
strive for liberation. And this affliction cannot pass on to the soul by reason 
of its non-discrimination from the afflicted sattva, for the soul being 
unattached, cannot get attached to sattva etc. at all. 

"The "cause" is ignorance consisting in the non-perception of the 
distinction between Nature and soul; it is tamas. The "contact"-i.e. the union 
between Nature and soul, which means "the idea that the soul has the 
attributes of sattva, rajas, tamas "-coexists with that "non-perception" or 
tamas. 

"The magnitude of the triad follows from the multiplicity of the dyads; the 
magnitude of the pot follows from the magnitude of earth; and the volume of 
a large heap of cotton follows from the volume in the smaller heaps making 
it up. 

The imperceptible atom is opposed to magnitude which is perceptible; 
multiplicity and volume are also absent from the dyad. The idea of duality, 
present in God's mind resulting in relational judgment, is the cause of the 
duality in the dyad. 

Impulsion, weight, acceleration, elasticity, etc. 

"The incoming atom will be wholly absorbed in the one in site, so that no 
additional space will be covered by the two. 

"Conjunction is as much dissimilar to the things conjoined as inherence is 
to the things inhering, hence both must be classed together. 

There can be no such rule that whatever subsists on a substance must be a 
quality like colour etc., for action etc. also exist on substances. And if, owing 



to the denial of inherence in the case of conjunction, the latter ceases to be a 
quality, the Ved-antin loses nothing thereby. 

The denial of permanence in the product by saying, "This product is 
impermanent", would not be possible if the causes, the ultimate atoms, were 
also impermanent; for existence and non-existence are correlative terms. 

"For otherwise a ghost spoken of as residing in a tree would become true. 

'"For the causes of the dyad, viz two ultimate atoms, also are 
imperceptible; and imperceptibility of the cause is adduced by you as a 
ground for the eternality of the effect. 

The explanation now will be, "Want of knowledge, consisting in not 
knowing any substance as the cause of those causes whose effects" etc. The 
atones being known as the causes of the dyads, the dyads will not become 
eternal. 

" A cloth is destroyed by the destruction of its non-inherent cause, viz 
coniunction among yarns, or by the destruction of its inherent cause, viz the 
yarns. Both these causes are impossible for an ultimate atom which has no 
parts. Hence it is eternal. 

"They are related through inherence having been born simultaneously. 

:Or "The bowl and the berry tree (near it)" where the two things determine 
each other's position. 

The VaL*ika thinks some things are permanent while others get destroyed 
and vanish into nothing. This partial nihilism being unacceptable, full 
nihilism is unacceptable all the more. 

"Of these, egoism is called citta, and the other four groups go by the name 
of caittas. 


"So there will be no liberation. 



" Or according to a different reading, "experiencer and accomplisher of 
combination". 

In the case of a perception of blueness, blue is the alambana-pratyaya, eye 
is the adhipati-pratyaya, light is the sahakari-pratyaya, and the impression of 
a similar earlier perception is the samantarapurva-pratyaya. 

" In a pot, potsherd, and dust, the same earth is recognized as the common 
material. 

Doubt may arise, for instance, in the case of the seed becoming the sprout, 
but the process of inference with regard to persistence of earth, can be 
extended to this case as well. 

0 For, a negation presupposes the existence of its counterpart. 

"This, that, and the similarity. 

"True judgement requires a consideration of both points of view, and that 
cuts at the root of the theory of momentariness, since such a consideration 
spreads over several moments. 

'Consciousness itself appearing as the imaginary blue colour becomes the 
perceived object; as awareness it becomes knowledge; as the power of that 
revelation it becomes the means of knowledge; and as the repository of that 
knowledge it becomes the knower. 

'Are not perceived as possessed of the qualities of a pillar, e.g. unity, 
solidity, etc. 

For momentary consciousness would not then be reasonably associated 
with an object that is different from it. 

O The previous knowledge occurring in a beginningless chain creates the 
impression (or tendency). Through its force, a variety of cognitions, in the 
form of blueness etc., can occur even after the interval of several moments. 



"What people understand from the Buddhist teaching is that to the 
Buddhist the internal awareness of an object appears as occurring outside. 
That understanding itself is a proof of their awareness of externality. 

'The Buddhists argue that external objects cannot logically exist because a 
pillar, for instance, cannot be proved to be either different or nondifferent 
from the atoms constituting it. But the Buddhist view is illogical; for 
according to them, consciousness alone exists, and it is not gross. So it 
cannot have for its content things that are many and gross; hence there can 
be no idea of external things according to their theory. 

° As soon as a mode (vrtti) occurs in the mind as a result of contact 
between the senses and objects, the object and this mental cognition (vrtti- 
jndna) become revealed by the witnessing Self. An object cannot reveal 
itself, it being inert; the mental apprehension also cannot reveal itself, being 
equally inert. But when the existence of the witness gets revealed on that 
mental apprehension, there can be no further question of revealing the 
witness. This witness is different from the mental cognition. Thus there is no 
infinite regress. 

"To substantiate the difference among your momentary cognitions you 
have to admit the witness which stands aloof to see this difference. 

"The whole chain of one tendency creating another will start with the 
initial defect of the first tendency being created without an external object. 
Thus, being basically illogical, it cannot help you out of the rut. The analogy 
of the seed-and-sprout is illogical; for both seed and sprout are perceived as 
causing each other interminably, both backward and forward; but you do not 
admit that an object produces a perception. 

For instance, both being "substances". 

"Unity and permanence somehow may exist, may not exist, may both 
exist and not exist, and so on. When the intention is to speak of a thing as 
successively existing and non-existing, they use the third mood. But when 
the intention is to speak of existence and non-existence simultaneously, the 
two states being inexpressible at the same time, they call it indescribable. 



For the soul etc. are averred these seven alternative moods as also their 
own characteristics of being the soul etc. Now, are these "existence" and 
"non-existence" constant or are they spasmodic? In the first case, the 
position is untenable, since it contradicts such perceptions as, "This pot does 
exist". In the second case, there can be no definite knowledge of anything. 

"Ratnaprabad has "Akartsnyam-Madhyama-parimirnatvam"; Bhcmati has, 


"Akrtsnatvam-paricchinnatvam". Madbyama-parimbza is a dimension 
changing according to the body; and pariccbinna means limited. 

Covering knowledge, covering vision, deluding, and screening-which four 
are called ghati-karma. These are explained thus: (1) belief that liberation 
does not follow from knowledge of reality, (2) belief that liberation does not 
follow from the hearing of the Jaina tenets (3) not finding any speciality 
about the path shown by the Jaina teachers, (4) hindering the progress in the 
path of liberation. Aghati-karmas are: (1) vedaniyam-belief that I have to 
know the reality, (2) namikam-belief that I have such a name, (3) gotrikam- 
the idea that I have entered into the rank of your disciples, (4) ayuskam-work 
done for the maintenance of the body, or it means the body made of blood 
and semen. Gotrika may also mean-making this body fit for the realization of 
truth. 

In order that there may be no incompatibility among the three sizes, the 
earlier bodies must have the same size as the ultimate one, for if the bodies 
differ in size, the soul's conformity to them will be impossible, as already 
shown. 

00 The Vedantins also adopt this logic of the beginninglessness of the 
world for escaping out of the defect of a logical seesaw (B. S. II. i. 34). But 
to them the world is unreal, and their argument amounts to showing that 
everything is indescribable. Everything is within Mily3-God, creation, 
creatures, and all. Others say, they are true (See p. 436 top). 


a It has not been proved so far that the universe is a creation of Prakrti 
(Nature) under the promptings of God. So the relationship of God with 




Nature cannot be proved from the existence of creation. 

"Your M3y3 and Brahman also are both pervasive and partless, and you 
do not admit inherence as a relationship. 

'Just as the Chandogya contradicts Taittiriya, so also the latter contradicts 
the former. First, the precedence of fire in Ch3ndogya is irreconcilable. 
Secondly, in Taittiriya, air is the source of fire; in Chindogya, the Self is the 
source. 

' If it means the creation of fire, it cannot also mean the non-creation of 
space. 

'We are not open to the charge of making one sentence of Chandogya 
serve two purposes; we rather rely on two sentences. 

All modifications of clay are known by knowing clay. So this should 
constitute all-knowingness. And vessels being non-different from clay, clay 
should be "w'thout a second". But this is absurd, because the Vedas are not 
meant for such commonplace information. 

'Does the one who would deny the Self exist or not? If he exists, he is 
himself the Self; if he does not exist then the denial is not possible. 

'Its existence and revelation are not dependent on any other cause. It could 
be denied if it were a dependent effect. 

"The all-pervading Self is self-effulgent" (Br. IV. iii. 9), "By his light all 
this is lighted variously" (Ka. II. ii. 15). 

"On what need one depend for proving the existence of that Self, through 
Whose giace all such things as the knower, means of knowledge, object of 
knowledge, and cognition derive their substance?"-Surevar3crya. So the Self 
precedes all these means of knowledge, and they are valid by depending on 
It. 


'Conjunction is the non-inherent cause of a dyad (produced through the 
conjunction of two atoms); and it is also the cause of cognition (produced by 



the conjunction of mind and soul). For these conjunctions, an initial activity 
is admitted in the atom and the mind respectively. 

'The Self possesses such impermanent qualities as will, intelligence, 
endeavour; and yet your Vedantins call the Self eternal. 

"The reference is to such Upani$adic passages as, "The illustration is: just 
as space is infinite so also is the Self infinite", where the Self being a greater 
entity cannot be equated with a lesser entity like space, possessed of origin 
and destruction as it is. 

" Or "the ordainer of the ordainers of the sense-organs" according to a 
different reading. 

"Unless some cause is admitted, chance will have full sway. Unless a 
beginningless cause is accepted the door will be opened for infinite regress. 
To accept a cause without a beginning will lead to our belief in Brahman, for 
all such causes as primordial Nature were negated earlier. 

" "From this is born vital force, mind, and all the senses, and space, air, 
fire, water, and the earth that supports all." 

"Brahmans alone can be mendicants. So when somebody says 
"Brahmanas and mendicants", he means by the word Brahmana those that 
are not mendicants. So "elements" are those that have not become "senses". 

" In enumeration, things have to be told off one after the other. That 
sequence does not represent any definite order. 

14 The five fine elements constitute the body of Hiranyagarbha. So they 
exist earlier; the senses come later from Hiranyagarbha. 

7° This is the Madhyandina reading. The K3nva reading is, "all gods and 
all beings emanate". 

"The Sanskrit word is strimaya, where the suffix mayaf is used in the 
sense of abundance, the man being almost full of, i.e. identified with women 
(sex). Similarly are to be understood vijnanamaya etc. 



"The sense-organs change, but consciousness continues invariably. This 
cannot be so unless there is a soul which is eternally conscious. 

For 9ankara's interpretation, see his commentary on the Upani~ad. 

'The previous verse being, "It is not comprehended through the eye, nor 
through speech, nor through the other senses.... Since one becomes purified 
in mind through the favourableness of the intellect, therefore can one see 
that indivisible Self through meditation" (Mu. III. i. 8). 

"As the Vedic injunction (about sacrifices etc.) can change a human being 
into god, so it can change an agent into non-agent. 

"In the earlier argument it was conceded for argument's sake that the soul 
takes up the organs when entering sleep. That activity too is denied here. 

s The sacrifice emerges from mental thought followed by the utterance of 
mantras through speech. Here also the agent of the sacrifice is the intellect. 

"We say, "Rice is cooking", "fuel is burning", "the vessel contains" and so 
on. The fuel is an agent so far as its own action is concerned, but as regards 
cooking, it is an instrument. 

Ten organs of perception and action, five vital forces, mind, and intellect. 

• An intellectual conception of the difference between the body and soul 
cannot remove the notion of the identity with the body that one actually has. 
Till that notion is removed by direct, actual realization, one is well within 
scriptural domination. 

"Intelligence, happiness, sorrow, desire, dislike, effort, merit, demerit, and 
impression. 

iD Inert Nature cannot study the desires of the souls; and the liberation 
that is still in the womb of futurity and is itself inert cannot give rise to any 
individual adjustment. Hence this adjustment is accepted by you not from 
the point of view of any valid reason, but from that of utility for serving an 
unproved hypothesis. 



"Any part of the soul, determined by the body, as also the contact between 
mind and soul, is common to all souls, they being omnipresent. So any 
particular body can determine the parts for all the souls, and any mind can be 
in contact with all the souls. Thus experiences cannot be kept distinct. Even 
an unseen potential result does not mend matters, for the part of the soul 
where this result arises does not move about; and if this fixity be conceded, 
then it has to be admitted that other souls can have the same experiences at 
that very locality, for that is what we an in ordinary life. Moreover, that 
particular part being motionless, the result acquired in a BrThmana body 
cannot move to heaven for fruition. 

" Colour is nothing but its own material, viz the element "light"; smell is 
nothing bur "earth", taste is nothing but "water"; and so on. Apart from these 
substances, there is no such thing as a flower. Besides, colour, taste, etc. 
differ among themselves, but not so the souls, which have the same 
characteristics. Thus the illustration falls through. 

'The creation, nature, and number of pranas will be decided. The word 
prdna has several meanings, of which three will be considered in this 
section-organs, vital force in each individual, and Prana in its cosmic aspect. 

' If Brahman be the material cause in a figurative sense, all things will not 
be known even when Brahman is known. 

' "From Him originate (joyate) Prom as well as the mind, all the senses, 
space, air, fire, water, and earth that supports everything" (Mu. H. i. 3), 
where the origin of Prom is spoken of in the primary sense earlier than the 
origin of space etc. in the primary sense. 

"'All the organs, all worlds, all gods, and all beings emanate from this 
self.,, 

(i) The five vital forces, (ii) the five subtle elements, (iii) the five organs of 
actions, (iv) the five organs of perception, (v) the mind in its four aspects, 
(vi) ignorance, (vii) desire, and (viii) action. 



'The organs are the karanas, which term is defined as a cause serving best 
to produce the effect. For instance the eye is a karana of vision, and hands of 
grasping. 

v If the organs be all-pervasive, then it cannot be proved that the soul 
comes to be considered as atomic owing to its association with the organs. 

' According to the opponent, Snit means "breathed or vibrated"; but the 
Vedantin interprets it as "asit-existed". 

Becomes manifest and active in its own sphere. 

"'There is nothing to prove that the ears etc. act in a way to produce life. 
Also there is no proof that all of them act simultaneously. 

"In the body earned by the soul by its past actions. 

" Just as a lamp helps the eye, so also Fire helps the organ of vision. 
Similarly in other cases. The lamp has no experience, neither has Fire, the 
deity of the eye. 

"Unless the soul be one, there can be no such recognition of identity as, "I 
who saw the colour hear the music." 

"Two-thirds of each of the three subtle elements-fire, water, and earth-are 
mixed with one-sixth of each of the other two to form the three gross 
elements perceived by us. This process is technically called trivrtkarana. 

'The first section will deal with dispassion. Through a consideration of the 
states of dream etc. the second section will ascertain the nature of the 
individual and Brahman. The third will determine the meaning of the 
innhdvdkyas and discuss the different kinds of meditation. And the fourth 
will discuss liberation. 

'Since transmigration, following as a result of work, is an evil, the 
enlightened man should have a repulsion for the results of works. This is 
said at the end of the meditation on the five fires. 



' Death pangs make one forget the present body etc. Past actions then 
create in the soul a dream-like expectancy of the future body-or a body made 
of thought. The soul mentally attaches itself to that body. 

'Water (i.e. liquids) is a means for the performance of the rites, and is thus 
associated with them. After being poured as oblation, it assumes a subtle 
(potential) form, moves about by virtue of its subsistence in the soul, and is 
called "faith" (potential result of rites). That faith, along with the 
impressions of past rites, first fire, is poured as oblation in the heaven, and 
thus it p"educes a lunar body. 

'Janaka asks Y3jnavalkya six questions about the Agnihotra: "Do you 
know how the two oblations in the morning and evening-(l) rise up, (2) 
move, (3) bring about establishment, and (4) satisfaction, and (5) return, and 
how (6) the body takes form? Y3jnavalkya replies, "(1) These two oblations 
rise up after being offered, (2) then they go to heaven through the sky, (3) 
they establish the Ahavaniya as heaven, (4) they satisfy heaven, (5) then they 
return from there and are poured in the bodies of man and woman, and then 
(6) they assume human form." 

• They drink cup after cup of Soma, filling it and emptying it. 

'Unlike a lamp revealing colour, death reveals nothing; but in the absence 
of a stronger result, a weaker result becomes predominant at the time of 
death. 

' No other relationship but that of similarity is possible between two all- 
pervasive things-space and soul. Hence the Upanisad speaks of two entities- 
soul and space. The soul cannot be both soul and space at the same time, as 
milk converted into curd cannot be both milk and curd at the same time. And 
unless the soul and space remain distinct, the soul cannot re-emerge from 
space as the soul to follow its further course. The same relationship of 
similarity holds good in the case of air etc. 

'When the senses are withdrawn at the time of death, the dying man has no 
sense-perception; yet at that time he remembers this world as a sort of 



mental impression, and in that mind flashes a picture of the next world which 
is expected as a result of his actions. This is the juncture. 

'The palace contains the couch which helps sleep. Their purposes are 
different; and yet both help sleep indirectly and directly and thus become 
associated. 

'About the sublation of the universe by one who wants illumination. 

' (1) Gross-earth, water, fire; (2) fine-air, space. 

"Hiranyagarbha, the Being in the sun and the right eye, and identifying 
Himself with the organs, i.e. the subtle body, known otherwise as Prang. 

'The first part consists of the four directions; the second of earth, sky, 
heaven, and sea; the third of fire, sun, moon, and lightning; the fourth of eye, 
ear, speech, and mind. Each foot has two hoofs; thus there are eight hoofs, 
and each foot has four parts, thus making up sixteen parts. The feet are 
called bright, unlimited, luminous, and spacious respectively. 

' The assumption is that the second portion, "cheese-water" etc. is not just 
an appendage of the Vifvedeva sacrifice, but it suggests a different sacrifice. 

'Students of the texts about the Kiriri sacrifice (meant for rainfall), who 
belong to the Taittiriya branch, eat on the ground, but not so the others. 
Some, when reading of the sacrificial fire, carry the water jar of the teachers, 
others do not. Now such differences in conduct cannot be useless. Hence 
these sacrifices differ according to their attributes. 

'The names Kihaka, Kal3paka, for instance, are not the names of the rites, 
but have reference to boob. Even slight differences in form also do not make 
the rites different. The special characteristics mentioned there relate to study 
and not to any rite. 

' Awipa-adding something from another injunction, and udvaparrejeeting 
something enjoined somewhere. 



In regard to this sacrifice two contradictory injunctions about using and 
not using the $o4asi are met with; still the Mixn msakas argue that the 
sacrifice is the same, the use of the $odafi being optional. 

• That the common fire bums the dead meditator. This is not a fire to be 
meditated on, the five foregoing ones only being meant for that. 

'The Darsa sacrifice takes place on the new-moon night (the fifteenth day 
of the dark fortnight). Now if by mistake it is done on the fourteenth day, 
and the moon rises afterwards, the sacrificer is faced with evil consequences. 
To get over this, the sacrificer shall divide the rice grains into three parts. Of 
these the medium portion will be offered to Fire, the bigger portion with 
curds to Indra, and the smaller cooked into a pudding with milk to Visnu. 
But this is not a new sacrifice, the deities alone being changed. The text 
dealing with desire for cattle also has a similar ending. Still it is different 
from the above. 

'Distinguishing something from other things of the same class. 

'But this is inadmissible when a direct meaning is possible, that being 
more authoritative. 

"Cessation of ignorance brings abort a cessation of evil and attainment of 
bliss. But the negation of the ideas of Om and Udgitha by one another can 
bring no such result. 

u Even when a portion is burnt, people say, "The cloth is burnt", "The 
village is burnt". 

"An attractive speaker lives happily. 

""The sipping of a little water from the palm of the hand serves as a cloth 
for Prana"-this is how it is to be fancied. 

' "One cannot both eat the cake and have it," The si p pin g cannot be an 
inj unction for physical action and "all food" an injunction for meditation. 





lOSat means the imperceptible elements-earth, water and fire; tyat means 
air and space. So Satya means Brahman as Hiranyagarbha identifying 
Himself with the imperceptible five elements. 

"Ahar is derived from ban or hA meaning to kill or shun (evil); and Aham 
points to the inmost Self. 

" "Of that very sacrifice of the man of knowledge, the soul is the sacrificer, 
faith is the wife, the body is the fuel, the chest the altar, the bundle of Kuia is 
the tuft of hair on the head; the heart is the sacrificial stake, desire is ghee, 
anger is the animal, austerity is fire, the quietening self-control is daksina 
(payment to the priests), speech is the priest called Hota (pourer of the 
oblation), Puna is the priest Udgiti, the eye is the priest Adhvaryu, the mind 
is the Brahma (Tai. A. VI. Iii. 1). 

"The Brhaspati-sava leads to the attainment of Brabmavarcas. Yet though 
having an independent result, it is also enjoined as a part of the Vajapeya 
sacrifice. 

"For getting at the meaning, the succeeding means of knowledge depends 
on the earlier and not vice versa. 

"Some editions quote Mu. III. ii. 8. 

When the conceptions differ, the • traits remain confined to their 
contexts; but when the conceptions are the same, they are combined. 

"It is enjoined that the mantra, "We also perform the sacrifice" is to be 
used in all the sacrifices; and it is also enjoined that in an Anuyija this 
mantra is not to be used. Somebody may, however, conclude that since an 
Anuyija is also a sacrifice, the mantra should be used there; and this will 
give rise to an alternativeness. The conclusion is that the injunction is not a 
simple negation, but a restriction—the mantra is to be used in all sacrifices 
other than an Anuyija. 

Or-In connection with the Jyotigoma sacrifice it is enjoined; 'The initiated 
man (dik(ita) shall not offer any gift, shall not perform any sacrifice, shall 



not cook". But this contradicts the injunction that "one has to perform the 
Agnihotra sacrifice as long as one lives." Hence the meaning is not a simple 
negation in the first sentence, but rather "A man other than a dik;ita shall 
perform the sacrifice etc." 

By this interpretation, the optional use in either case is avoided. 

" It is known from the context that the meditation on the path is a part of 
the main meditation. 

" A jdtismara is one who has perforce to leave the earlier body and enter 
another, and yet in the new body remembers the experiences of his past life. 
The enlightened man is, however, independent in his movements, and he 
remembers his identity under all circumstances. 

When a king moves with ope umbrella held over his head, his followers 
are referred to as "the people with umbrella", though they have none. 

"The noun and adjective being mutually interchangeable. 

""This name Satya (lit. truth) consists of three letters (Sa, ti, ya). The first 
and last letters are truth. In the middle is untruth. The untruth is enclosed on 
either side by truth." (Br. V. v. 1). 

"l,tk and Sima mantras, referred to by the word Udgitha, having been 
presented as the knuckles, we can conclude that it is the supreme Self that is 
referred to by the word Udgitha. 

The Ch5ndogya and Brhad-aranyaka mention the attributes for meditation 
on and glorification of God respectively. It involves no contradiction, rather 
it suits these purposes to assume these attributes at both the places. But while 
they have to be added to the former from the latter, in the latter they are 
implied by the text itself. 

'On the analogy of the M .sa-Agnihotra, . milk etc. are liable to be used in 
the Prana-Agnihotra. This would be a general application. But the 
prescription about the morsel of food conies as an exception to this. Hence 



the rule about the morsel of food being an exception, when there is omission 
of food, the subsidiary, viz morsel of food, also becomes omitted, and yet the 
primary act of Agnihotra cannot be omitted, since in the absence of an 
exception to the contrary, that Agnihotra can be performed with milk etc. 

An obligatory rite that is once commenced, must be finished. So if the 
prescribed things are not available the rite should be completed even with 
substitutes. 

"There can be Agnihotra only if there is eating, but not otherwise; for the 
offerings are mere consequences of the main act of ,fitting for meal. 

The Vedas and Smrtis enjoin that a man should eat after his guests. That 
precedence is altered in the case of a man who performs the Agnihotra to 
Prdna; but this cannot become a general rule, on the strength of which the 
Agnihotra can become a daily act. 

"In such cases, Palasa, Juhu, etc. help the sacrifice and thus contribute to 
the origin of the remote fruit of the sacrifice, so that the mention of the 
proximate result has to be understood otherwise, that is to say, the result, viz 
"non-hearing of sinful verse" is said by way of a eulogy. So also the fulfilling 
of desires in the case of the Udgitha is a eulogy. 

"The Prastoti chants the first portion, Prastiva; the Udgiti sings the middle 
portion, Udgitha; and the Pratihart3 chants the final portion, Pratihira. 

"The injunction is "When the water is being carried, it should be done in a 
milking pot for a man who desires cattle, and in a bronze (Kamsya) vessel 
for one who wants the holiness (or the eminence of a Br-ahmana)" The 
milking pot is not an absolute requisite in a sacrifice, a camasa being quite in 
order. So this is not a eulogy but a fresh injunction. 

"The injunction runs thus: "The sacrificial stake of one who wants food to 
eat should be made of the Bilva wood, but of one wanting prowess, it should 
be made of catechu (Khadira) wood." 



• The previous paragraph ends with Viyu (i.e. Hirarayagarbha) that knows 
no setting. The verse quoted here refers to that VJyu. Hence Vdyu and Pruna 
are one. 

The sunrise and sunset being dependent on Air (cosmic Energy), and 
Prana being non-different from Air, it is said that the sunrise and sunset 
occur owing to Prina. But from this the verse can have no power to overrule 
the two meditations separately on the divine and corporeal planes, as stated 
by the Upanicad itself. 

'°Just as the above verse speaks of the oneness of the entity, but not of the 
meditations, so also the mention of the oneness of the vow is from the 
standpoint of the oneness of the entity, but not of the meditations. 

Fire etc. are delimited by Air, since they merge in Air. But Air is not so 
delimited by them. So merger in the unlimited means merger in Air. 

"The four sides of the dice are marked with 4, 3, 2, and 1, which figures, 
when added up, make ten, and are collectively called Krta. 

If the offerings be made one by one for the same deity, the succeeding 
offerings become useless; but this is not so when simultaneous offering is 
made. 

"The mantra read after the Adhvaryu's direction "Yaja" (sacrifice) is yajyi, 
and the mantra read after his direction, "anubruhi 1 " (utter) is anuvikya. In this 
sacrifice, the yajya in the first offering becomes the anuvakyd in the second, 
the anrrvikyi of the first becomes the yajya of the second. 

"First the creation of mind is spoken of. Then it is said, "the mind saw 
itself"; and then "it saw the fires". Although the mental modes are infinite, 
still they are delimited by the human life having a span of a hundred years, 
divided into 36,000 days. Hence the mental modes are also 36,000, which 
are thought of as the bricks of the altar, on which the fire is lighted up by the 
mind itself. The mind saw its own modes, conceived of as bricks. Similarly 
speech etc. also saw their modes as so many fires, since the fires are lighted 
up by those modes, thought of as bricks. 



"When one's meditation of the form, "My mental fires are lighted up by all 
the mental moods of all beings" becomes well established, then by all the 
thoughts of all beings are lighted up the mental fires of that meditator. 

The first text indicates that the fires form parts of a meditation only and 
not of any rite, since "doing anything whatsoever" cannot form part of a rite, 
which latter act can be known only from an injunction. Similarly the second 
text speaks of actions by all for ever, whereas an accessory of a rite is 
regulated as to its time, place, and occasion by an injunction. 

'4 An indicatory sign occurring in an injunction can rule out a context, but 
not so one occurring in a eulogy. "All beings think for ever" is a eulogy after 
all. This sentence has to be construed with an injunction, for a eulogy cannot 
present a new accessory for any rite. 

In the course of prescribing the Rajasuya sacrifice, the Avesti sacrifice, to 
be performed by the three castes is mentioned. The Rajasuya is to be 
performed by a Ksatriya only, but the Avesti can be performed by 
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas. Hence it is independent of and better 
than the Rajasuya. 

"And not the purposes of a sacrifice. 

'° When the truth of the text, "the sacrificer, armed with sacrifices, goes to 
heaven", had to be proved by showing the existence of the soul and no 
aphorism was in evidence in the Purva-Mim3msa, Sabarasv3mi had to 
depend on the present aphorism. That he did so, is clear from what Upavaqa 
says. 

'When driving in a post into soft ground, one repeatedly pulls it out and 
forces it into the ground, so that it may get fixed deep and firm. 

In dream, a man has no consciousness of the gross body; still selfidentity 
persists. Even if it be argued that he is conscious of his dream body, then let 
us take the case of memory, wish etc., where the identity of the perceiver and 
the one who remembers or wishes has to be admitted perforce. 



The meditations are different according to the (1) different characteristics 
attributed to the object in different contexts, (2) the difference of results, (3) 
difference of names, or (4) impossibility of combining all the characteristics. 

11 Vid may either imply knowledge or meditation; but no injunction about 
knowledge is possible, and hence veda means "meditates". 

Sacrifice, gift, pouring oblation, etc. do not differ as meaning acts; yet 
they have their specific differences. So "veda", "upasita" etc. may not differ 
as mental moods, and yet may differ for reasons shown in an earlier footnote 
(53). 

"Logically this topic should head this chapter, though it crops up here as a 
side issue connected with other topics. 

"The aphorism deals with aham-graha-upasana, meditation based on self- 
identity with divinity. The opponent can argue that these meditations yield 
results through adrsfa just like rites; and hence direct perception is uncalled 
for. But the texts quoted show that aharit-graha-updsand leads to direct 
perception. 

6° The meditations are to be combined like the accessories, since they are 
enjoined similarly. 

' The Brhadlrai yaka text shows that the Self that is to be realized is the 
entity for whose enjoyment all things exist, thereby suggesting that there can 
be no Self which is not an experiencer and hence subject to transmigration. 

' The injunction, "He shall pound the paddy" has in view the making of 
rice by removing the husk, for the perceptible result sought for is the making 
of cakes (for the sacrifice) with the rice. So also the perceptible result of 
reading is the comprehension of meaning. An imperceptible result comes 
through apurva-unseen potential result. Thus Brahman becomes known to a 
student during his study of the Vedas, even though he becomes a 
householder afterwards. 



'The enlightened man may continue performing his usual acts for setting 
an example to others. But his is no ordinary work, as he lacks the usual ideas 
of "I and mine". 

'The sacred thread held round the neck like a garland is called Nhv ta; 
when held from the right shoulder, across the chest and passing under the 
left arm, it is Prdcindvita; the opposite position from the left shoulder to the 
right gives the Upavita. The sentence, "Nivita is meant for rites performed 
for men (i.e. guests), Pracinivita for rites for the manes; for rites for the gods 
the Upavita is used", is interpreted to mean that the injunction here is only 
about the Upavita, the use of the other two being known otherwise. These 
known uses are referred to here for eulogizing the Upavita. 

'Gunavada, as in, "The sun is the sacrifical stake", which glorifies the 
stake by saying that it shines like the sun. The opponent interprets the 
Chindogya passage under discussion, to mean, "Steadfastness in Brahman, 
yielding infinite result, is eulogized by decrying the other orders of life as 
yielding limited results". Thus the passage has, according to him a unity of 
idea. An Amrvida restates a known fact, as in, "Fire is the remedy for cold". 
A Bhutarthavcda states something which neither contradicts nor confirms a 
known fact, as in "Indra holds a thunder in hand". Contradiction leads to 
Gunavada, and confirmation to Anuvnda. 

'When the ghee placed in the souk is carried to the Ahavaniya fire .in a 
Mahipitr-sacrifice or a Pretignihotra, then this injunction is to be followed, 
"One shall approach by holding the fuel" below that ghee. Hence the text 
about holding the fuel above may be taken as a mere eulogy of this holding 
below. But in fact a fresh injunction is admitted about holding above, by 
breaking the unity of the sentence. 

'Monasticism being equated with the Highest, must itself be the highest;, 
and this monasticism consists in remaining steadfast in Brahman, the 
meaning of Qin, by giving up all other activities. 

There is an injunction that in the course of the horse-sacrifice, the priests 
should tell stories to the sacrificing king and his family and councillors. On 



the first day is to be related the story of Vaivasvata Manu, on the second of 
Vaivasvata Yama, and on the third of Varupa and Surya. 

For the sentence enjoining obligatory duties is not interpreted to enjoin 
them as helpful to knowledge, nor is the sentence admitting helpfulness 
interpreted to mean that all duties are so under all circumstances. 

1° Sabakdritva means cooperation. But Ratnaprabba prefers a derivative 
meaning as given under the aphorism. 

"The stake is to be made according to injunction from Bilva, Khidira, or 
Pala wood to serve the purposes of the sacrifice. This is the general rule. But 
for a sacrificer who wants valour, the stake must be of Khidira. This is a 
special rule. The two rules do not contradict each other, but have their 
special fields. 

"An injunction is necessary for unseen results like heaven etc., but not so 
for the immediately perceptible results like cessation of ignorance. 

"A passage in the Veda speaks of pudding made of yava. Now yava, 
generally meaning barley, sometimes means a different kind of grain. 
Following such popular usage the opponent would have the pudding made of 
either. But the conclusion, drawn from another Vedic passage, which clearly 
describes yava as meaning barley, is that barley alone is to be used, for that 
conforms with the scripture. 

"That text states an exception to the general rule; it does not override that 
rule. 

" Bdlyena may also mean, "through childlike innocence and purity of 
heart". Knowledge here means mediate knowledge, which leads to 
immediate knowledge, enlightenment. 

" According to the Ved-antin, pa~:ditya (scholarship) implies sravana 
(hearing), bhlya (strength coming from knowledge) implies 7nanana, 
consisting in eliminating the idea of impossibility with the help of-rcasoning; 
and tnuni means one engaged in nididhyiisana. The Vedantin maintains that 



a man aspiring for liberation must undertake nididbyasana. The opponent 
denies this. 

'°Mauna, according to the opponent means knowledge or monasticism, 
which are spoken of elsewhere, and so need no fresh injunction. The 
Vedjntin says: It means excellence of knowledge, which is a new idea 
needing a new injunction. 

"After an intellectual comprehension they renounce for complete 
enlightenment: A monk alone can be fully meditative. 

The opponent argues: "When a man has known from the scripture and 
reasoning that Brahman alone is real and all duality is unreal, the striving for 
fall enlightenment will follow from the aspiration itself of the man, so that 
an injunction about meditativeness is uncalled for." The Vedantin answers: 
"The topic here is of monasticism and .5ravana etc. are its complements. The 
unique fact about all of them here is that they are causes of enlightenment. 
And this uniqueness calls for an injunction. Although an injunction is 
unnecessary for one who is already enlightened, it is necessary for one 
whose knowledge has not matured. 

'Nescience is indeterminate and hence ceases to exist on the rise of 
enlightenment. 

I "The instruction is, 'It is as Brahman'", "It should be meditated on as 
Brahman", "He who meditates as Brahman". 

Udgitba, sanctified by being looked upon as the sun, leads to a better 
result, but the sun, looked upon as the former cannot do so; the sun is not a 
part of the rite. 

'The whole passage is: "This (earth) itself is R k, fire is Sam; thus on this 
Z2k is established Sam; therefore they sing the Sama as established on i;2" 
(Ch.I.vi. 1). 

A sacrificer who wants cattle should bring the water in a milking pot when 
he is already engaged in some specific sacrifice. This getting of cattle is not 



an independent result, nor the bringing of water an independent act. The act 
produces its result in association with the result of the main sacrifice. So also 
here. 

The opponent's explanation involves a change in the case-ending of both; 
ours involves a single change (in lokesu, but not in s0ma). 

'SO an expiation does not absolve a man of his sins. 

The full text is, "Now then, that which is the Self is a barrage that holds 
apart, so that the worlds may not get mixed up. Day and night cannot reach 
this barrage, nor old age and death and sorrow, nor virtue and vice. All sins 
desist from It, since this is the world of Brahman unafflicted by sin." 

'For a man who had suffered from eye-disease, the false idea may persist 
for some time even after the defect is removed. 

'Although the text speaks of "vidvin", Anandagiri takes it in the sense of a 
meditator on the qualified Brahman, while Ratnaprabhi uses the term 
"upisaka-meditator" as its synonym. 

' The literal sense being impossible, a resort to a figure of speech is quite 
logical. 

'So "fire" actually means the subtle elements, or rather the subtle body, 
where the soul subsists, as also does Prams through its existence in the sod. 

'The ignorant move through the other inferior nerves-this is the 
difference. 

"Even though the word used is purura (man), it means the body; for the 
soul cannot have swelling etc. that are stated about it by referring to it by the 
term "this one". 

Yoga means the performance of the obligatory daily duties like Agnihotra 
as an offering to God; Sbhkbya means a feeling of not being the agent of any 
work (vide Git3). Both these are different from the Upani*adic meditation. 



'To imply that a man dying even at night proceeds along the rays. Thus it 
denies only the possible non-attainment of the rays. It cannot also deny the 
progress through flame etc. 

'So the order is: Months, year, abode of gods, air, sun. 

'The men of rites and meditations get their results in the worlds 
figuratively called days, nights, etc. 

' The same rite Dvddaidba is sometimes spoken of (with the verbs 
upayanti, dsiram) as resorted to by many sacrificers, in which case it 
becomes a sacra; again it is enjoined (with ydjayet) that a man desiring 
progeny should be made to perform the Dvadaidba sacrifice, in which case it 
becomes an abina, because of the injunction about the sacrifice itself and the 
specification of the sacrificer. 

' The soul, though all-pervading, resides only in one mind that bears the 
impressions of all past actions. The new minds cannot have these 
impressions. 






£ "*' 


RRaHMA sutras 
According to Sri Shank am 
by Swami Viretwaraoanda 

C ontains the Sutras (555) in Devanagari characters, 
word-for-word Eiglidi ici dciing followed by a runn¬ 
ing translation togethc* with exhaustive rotes based 
on the commentary of Sri Shankaracharya and the 
glosses of later scholastics on his commentary. 
rp.4M+lir Pri«*: R». 75 

BRAHMA SUTRAS 
According to Sri itamamija 
by Swami V iro^m anaiaLi and Swami Adidoananda 

Sri Ramanuja. taking tlicsc Sutias to tc 544 in 
number, elucidated them m hu tamous commentary, 
Sri Riashya, from a theisiir standpoint. Introduce on 
contains t comparative study of the commentaries of 
Shankara, Rsmanuja. Vallabha, Nimharka and 
Madhya. Text in Devanagari, English t-unslation 
w.th extensive explanatory notes based on Ramanuja's 
commentary on Brahma-Suiias, as well as his other 
works, Vedanta-tara and Vedanta-dipa, and later 
glosses on his waitings. 

Yf. S12+xx!v Prise; R». IM 


Pricet Rs. 170 


ISBN *1-750!- 105-1 


The phrases "by mixing up" and "as a result of superimposing" mean the 
same thing. The implied sequence points out the chain constituted by 
superimposition, its impression on the mind, and subsequent 
superimposition, which succeed one another eternally like the seed and its 
sprout. 



Showing that the source of all is also the inmost Self of all. 
"Non-existence cannot be the subject or object of any action. 



Table of Contents 


Preface 

Foreword 

List of Abbreviations 

Preamble 

1. Deliberation on Brahman 

2. Ori g in etc, of the Universe 

3. Scripture as Source of Knowled g e of Brahman 

4. UpaniSads Reveal Brahman 

5. The First Cause Possessed of Consciousness 

6. The Blissful One 

7. The Bein g Inside 

8. Space 

9. Praia 

10. Li ght 

11. Pratardana 

1. The Entity Known Everywhere 

2. The Eater 

3. The Two in the Cavity of the Heart 

4. The Person in the E ve 

5. The Internal Ruler 

6. The One That Is Unseen etc. 

7. Vai ^ vanara 

1. The Abode of Heaven . Earth , etc. 

2. Bhuman (Infinite . Plenitude ) 

3. Immutable 

4. The Ob j ect of Seein g 

5. Dahara ( The Small Space ) 

6. Actin g in Accordance 

7. The Measured One 

8. Gods 

9. Pseudo-Sudra 

10. Vibration 





















































11. Li g ht as Declared in the UoaniSad 

12. Space Is Brahman . Bein g Different from Name and Form 

13. Sleep and Death 

1. The Inferred Entit y 

2. The Bowl 

3. Statement of Number 

4. Causalit y 

5. Balaki 

6. Correlation of Passa ges 

7. Brahman as Material Cause 

8. Explanation of Everythin g 

1. Conflict with Smrti 

2. Refutation of Yo ga 

3. Difference in Nature 

4. Non-acceptance bv the Wise 

5. Brahman Becomin g an Experiencer 

6. Ori gin 

7. Non-performance of Good 































