THE 


SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS 


Translated by various Sanskrit Scholars. 


KDXTBD BY 

Major B. D. BASU, I.M S. 
(Retired.) 


VOL. VIII. 

THE NYAYA SUTRAS OF GOTAMA 


PUBLISHED BY 

sudhindranAtha vasu 

FROM THE PACINI OFFICE, BffUVANHS'WARI Ae'RAMA, BAHADDRGA.VJ 

Hllababab 

Pmttn'BC vt Aporva Krishna Bose at the Indian Press 

1913 



NYAYA SUTRAS OF GOTAMA 


ntAJNSLATKD BY 

MAHAMAHOPADHYAYA SATlH CHANDRA VIDYABHUSANA, 

M.A., Ph.D. 

Principal, Sanskrit College, Calcutta 


PUBLISHED BY 

the panini office, bhuvaneswari Asrama, BAHADTJRGANJ 


HUababab 

Printed by Apurva Krishna Bose at the Indian Prbss 

1913 




.TABLE OF CONTENTS, 


INTRODUCTION ... 

BOOK I, CHAPTER 

The Sixteen categories 
Release ( ) ... 

Means of knowledge ( nw ) 

Perception ( w*re ) defined ... 

Inference ( styira ) defined ... 

Comparison ( sthr ) defined 

Word or verbal testimony ( si** ) defined 

Objects of knowledge ( ) 

Soul ( ww* ) defined 
Body ( ) defined 
Sense ( *£**) defined 
Element ( ) defined 
Qualities ( jr ) of earth etc. ... 

Intellect ( jf| ) defined 
Mind ( *pi: ) defined 

Activity ( nsrfn ) defined and explained ... 

Fault ( $i*t ) defined ■ 

Transmigration ( famra ) defined 

Fruit (*«) defined 

Pain ( 3:3 ) defined 

Release ( wran ) defined 

Doubt ( ) defined and explained 

Purpose ( jftrosi ) defined 

Example or familiar instance ( sjnu ) ... 

TenetJjf^nn ) defined 

A dogma of alTthe Schools ( e* 4 wsf*grc! ) 

A dogma peculiar to some School ( nfniwsfiigwi ) 

A hypothetical dogma ( «ftsrwf$5P*t ) - ... 

An implied dogma ( 

Member* of a syllogism ( w*w ) 

Proposition ( ) 

Reason (^3) ... 

Homogeneous or affirmative reason ( «ns*% ) 
Heterogeneous or negative reason ( ) 


Page. 

I 


1 

2 

2 - 

2 

3 

3 

4 

4 

5 
5 
5 
5 

5 

6 
6 
6 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 

7 

8 
8 
8 
9 
9 
9 

10 

P 

10 

11 

11 

a 



( ii ) 


Example ( stop.* ) 

Homogeneous or affirmative example ( swtfqwro ) ... 
Heterogeneous or negative example ) 

Application, affirmative and negative ( w« ) 
Conclusion ( fairo ) 

Confutation ( nf ) 

Ascertainment ( fro* ) 

BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

J Discussion ( ) 

| Wrangling (vrev) 

2 Cavil ( firor ) ... 

j Fallacies of reason ( ) 

3 The erratic ( ’trofTOw ) 

The contradictory ( fro® ) . . . 

The controversial or equal to the question ( junto* ) 
The reciprocal or unproved ( unro* ) 

The mistimed ( wswm ) 
j Quibble ( wi ) ... 

Quibble in respect of a term ( ) ... 

Quibble in respect of a genus ( si*p*» ) 

Quibble in respect of a metaphor ( mvw* ) 

>' Futility ( ) ... 

5 An occasion for rebuke ( ) 


BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 


Doubt ( to* ) examined 

The means and objects of knowledge ( JPiw-Jnta ) examined 

Perception ( ) examined 

Special kinds of knowledge ( wsfiS* ) . . . 

The relation of perception and inference ( J KW i yroq. ) 

The whole ( wwfaq ) and its part ( wro ) 

Inference ( «jj*m ) examined 

The time present, past and future ( *n*r*, wftn, wito ) examined 
Comparison («rom ) examined 
Word or verbal testimony ( toi ) examined 
The Veda ( )*exam‘med 
Injunction ( Sf* ) 

Persuasion ( 1*53 ) 

Praise ... 

Blame ... 

Warning ( TOft ) 


Page. 

II 

11 

12 
12 
12 
13 
13 


14 

15 
15 
15 

15 

16 
16 
16 
17 
17 

17 

18 
ic 

19 

20 


.. 22 
... 24 

... 29 

... 31 

... 31 

... 32 

... 33 

... 34 

... 35 

.. 36 

... 39 

... 41 

41 

... 41 

... 41 

41 




* • • 







( in ) 


Prescription ( jww ) ... ... ... ... ... 41 

Reinculcation ( wjpm ) ... ... ... ... ... 41 

Tautology ( yro* ) ... ... ... ... ... 42 

The Medical Science ( W3% ) ... ... ... ... 42 

BOOK 11, CHAPTER II. 

Means of knowledge ( ) examined ... ... ... ... 43 

Rumour ) ... ... ... ... ... ... 43 

Presumption ( ) ... ... ... ... ... 43 

Probability ( ) ... ... ... ... . 43 

Non-existence ( 'shts ) ... ... ... ... ... 43 

_ The nature of sound ( ) examined ... ... ... ... 45 

Otherness (*rm) ... ... ... ... 51 

Letters, their modifications and substitutes ( ) ... ... 54 

Word(^) ... ... ... ... .... ... 59 

Individual ( srfw ) ... ... ... ... ... 59 

Form ( ) ... ... ... ... ... ... 59 

Genus (mfh) ... ... ... ... ... ... 59 


BOOK 111, CHAPTER 1. 

Sense ( ) is not soul ( ) 

Body ( nffc ) is not soul ( wwj ) 

Duality of the eye ( to: ) 

Remembrance 

Mind ( «ni: ) is not soul ( wi?*pi ) 

The soul ( wm* ) established 
The body ( sift* ) is earthy ... 

The eye-ball ( ) is material 
The senses ( tfapi ) are material ( ) . . . 

The eye ( ) and its ray ( xft’C ) 

The senses ( ) are more than one ... 

Touch ( ) 

The senses are five ( ) 

The qualities of the elements ( nrryf ) ... 


BOOK III, CHAPTER 11. 

Intellect or knowledge ( 3$ is not- eternal .. ... ... 83 

Knowlqdgo is not momentary ... ... ... ... g6 

The nature of knowledge ) ... ... ... gg 

Recollection ... - ... ... ... ... gg 

Desire and aversion ( )- ... ... ... ... g4 

The mind ( to ) is not the seat of knowledge ... ... ... 93' 


63 

63 

65 

66 

67 

68 
7 C 
70 
72 
72 
75 
75 

77 

78 



( it, ) 


Memory ( wa ) and its causes 

Knowledge ( wr ) is not a natural quality of the body 

Non-siraultaneousness of knowledge ( uf qft i nqqj ) 

The mind ( to: ) is atomic ( swj ) 

Desert ( *®$$«to ) producing the body ... 

BOOK LV, CHAPTER 1. 

Activity (jwfn) ... 

Faults (^w) 

Stupidity ( ) 

, Transmigration ( fcrora ) 

Entity does not arise from non -entity ( n qftrprin: ) 
G-od(ton:) 

Production from no-cause ( stflifornb ^ rlrrvfn : ) 

All are not non-eternal ( n ) 

All are not eternal ( * ) 

All are not distinct ( ’iwt ) • 

Self-existence ( wuraSfg ) and relative non-existence ( rrnftmro ) 
No fixity of number ( ) 

Fruit ( to ) examined 
Pain ( g:u ) examined 
Release ( wii ) examined ... 

Debts and troubles ( wro ifo ) 

BOOK IV, CHAPTER 11. 

The rise of true knowledge ( WTOPhrqfn ) 

The whole and its nn.rt.sl wswsiaoft* 1 
Atom ( wj ) 

The non-reality of things ( totot qnjir^iwjwfe. ) 

False apprehension ( ) 

Meditation ( TOifu: ) 

Discussion, wrangling and cavil ( ) 

BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

Futility ( wfii ).. . 

Balancing the homogeneity ( ) . . . 

Balancing the heterogeneity ( $'**%*n ) . . . 

Balancing an addition ( ©ww ) 

Balancing a subtraction ( qrorfrot ) ... ... # 

Balancing the questionable ( ) 

Balancing the unquestionable ( wHror ) 

Balancing the alternative ( Iwtroi ) ... 


Page. 
... 96 

... 99 

- ... 102 
... 103 
... 103 


108 

108 

109 

109 

110 
112 
112 

113 

114 

115 

117 

118 
119 
122 
123 
123 


... 127 
... 127 
... 130 
... 133 
... 135 
... 136 
... 138 


... 140 
... 141 
... 141 
... 142 
143 
... 143 
... 144 
... 144 



( T ) 


Balancing the reciprocity ( «m« ) 

Balancing the co-presence ( ) 

Balancing the mutual absence ( srarfj*n» ) 
Balancing the infinite regression ( ) 

Balancing the counter-example ( a ffl g gp r m i ) 
Balancing the non-prod uced ( ay s f v mi ) 
Balancing the doubt ( ssmr ) 

Balancing the controversy ( ) ... 

Balancing the non-reason ( ) 

Balancing the presumption ( s mhf n e ^t ) ... 
Balancing the non-difference ( afi faw i ) 
Balancing the demonstration ( srofrwit ) 
Balancing the perception ( swfrwi ) ... 
Balancing the non-perception ( sijwfiepir ) 
Balancing the non-eternal ( siRwn ) ... 
Balancing the eternal ( Stow) 

Balancing the effect ( w*fer»n ) 

Admission of an opinion ( ^ranjw ) 

Six-winged disputation ( ) 

BOOK V, CHAPTER 

Occasions for rebuke ( Rnfwi ) 

Hurting the proposition ( sfwsmtR ) 

Shifting the proposition ( affliwit ) 

Opposing the proposition ( sfnwfirirn ) ... 
Renouncing the proposition ( afimww ) . . . 
Shifting the reason ( tyvnn ) ' 

Shifting the topic ( srHvch) 

The meaningless (fata) ... 

The unintelligible ( ) 

The inopportune ( wmmrn ) ... 

Saying too little ( vyi ) 

Saying too much ( wfiwi ) ... 

Repetition ( ywsr* ) 

Silence ( srujptm ) 

Ignorance ( Wi ) 

Non-ingenuity ( srcffmr ) 

Evasion ( Wq ) ... 

Admission of an opinion ( ) 

Overlooking the censurable ( ) 

Censuring the non-censurable ( ft ql i wqjm ) 
Fallacies of a reason ( fcmn ) ... 

I 


Page. 

... 145 
147 
... 148 
... 149 
... 149 
... 150 
... 152 
... 153 
,. 153 
... 155 
... 158 
... 157 
... 158 
... 159 
... 180 
... 161 
... 162 
... 184 
... 185 


... 187 
... 187 
... 188 
... 169 
... 169 
... 189 
... 170 
... 170 
... 171 
... 171 
... 17k 
... 172 
... 172 
... 173 
... 173 
... 174 
... 174 
... 174 
... 174 
... 175 
... 175 




INTRODUCTION 


I.-GOTAMA THE POUNDER OP NYAYA PHILOSOPHY. 

PAnini, the celebrated Sanskrit grammarian, who is supposed to have 
flourished about 350 B. C., ilf derives the word 
pEed. 0rd “ NyfiyaeX " “Nyaya ”f from the root “i” which conveys the 

same meaning as “gam” — to go. “Nyaya” as 
signifying logic is therefore etymologically identical with “ nigama ” the 
conclusion of a syllogism. Logic is designated in Sanskrit not only by 
the word “ Nyaya” but also by various other words which indicate diverse 
aspects of the science. For instance, it is called “ Hotu-vidya or “Hetu- 
SAstra” the science of causes, “ Anvlksiki ”§ the science of inquiry, 
“ Pramana-^astra ” the science of correct knowledge, “ Tattva-Sastra ” the 
science of categories, “ Tarlca-vidyA ’’ the science of reasoning, “ Vadartha " 
the science of discussion and “ Phakkildi-Sastra ” the science of sophism. 
Ny&ya-sfltra is the earliest work extant on NyAya Philosophy. 


♦Panini is said to havo been a disciple of Upavar^a, minister of a King of the Nanda 
dynasty about 850 C. 0., as is evident from the following : — 

tprsN spfa Rt w i gmf rcppjs, i 

a* «3PF.' II 

(Kathfisarit-sdgara, Chapter IV., verse 20). 

Dr. Otto Boehtlingk observes : — 

“ We need therefore only make a space of flfty years between each conple of thorn, 
in order to arrive at the year 850, into tho neighbourhood of which date our grammarian ia 
to bo placed, according to the Kathfisarit-s&gara."— Goldstucker’s Paninl, p. 85. 



(Panlni’g AstAdhySyi 8-8-122.) 

I fond 

tRr$ wap? jpurfoS fo Rnrirf 

*3^.^.....?^ ihRrcm qgi RRiwj^ u 

(Lalitavistara, Chapter XII., p. 179, Dr. Rajondra Lai Mitra’a edition). 
(Araarakoga, avargavarga, verse, 155), 




( 11 ) 

The Nyfiya or logic is said to have been founded by a sage named 
Gotama.* He is also known as Gautama, Aksap&daf 
cajSt GoteS", Gafima* and Dirghatapas 4 The names Gotama and Gau- 
Akfapftda or Dirghata- tama point to the family to which he beloiiged. 

while the names Ahsapada and Dirghatapss refer 
respectively to his meditative habit and practice of long penance. . 

In the Rigveda-samhita as well as the $athapatha-Brahmana of the 
_. , „ ^ white Yaiuiveda. we find mention of one Gotama 

who was son of Rahugana § and priest of the Royal 
family of Kuru-simjaya for whose victory in battle he prayed to Indra. 
Nodhfih, j| son of Gotama, was also called Gotama who composed several 
new hymns in honour of Indra. The sages sprung from the family of 
Gotama are designated Gotamasah ^1 who were very intelligent ; and Agin, 

•grad m fdranrarai guagd raf i gfa : i 

dram Hradik w fk w 11 

(X&isadhacharitam 17-75.) 

sup! g wrer' ddfH' | 

drad*r ?ran snd g 1 11 

(Padmapnrana, Cltarakhnnda, Chapter 263.) 

dram: m ft i 

(Skanda-purAna, Kfilika Khanda, Chapter XVII.) 

gsfimm smra mndr i 
as urn f^rawt: 11 

(Udyotakara’s Nyayavartika, opening lines). 

In the Sarvadarsanasanigraha Nyfiya philosophy is called the Aksapftda system. 

J Kalidasa’s Ragliuvivmssm 11-33. 

i draw §* ?rgf ^1% mraftg; 1 drt 

royt mf: m ?pf m grader tgqr ^srctorari sw sr pfa ran dR t 1 <q 

mmadfdRwisirapj; 1 dram s d mfmm smd’d *i’ 5 wrcf sh%?i mrcfo* 11 

(Rigvcda-sanihita, Mandala 1, SAkta 81, mantra 3, fe'fiyana’s commentary). 

fdddt y uradrsfw Irarara *pd wit i 
draidr mfmur raft: fitter mm it 

(Satapatha Brfihmana of the white Yajnrvcda, Kfinda 1, Adhyfiya 4, MAdhyandinfya 
recension.) 

|| mramd dram yftdira*iT 3 i 

gdtanw m: sraram drm: raram^ f^nrr qgwwra t it 

(Rigveda-samhita, Mandala 1, Sflkta 63, Mantra 18.) 

stynfdi dramrdr i 

(Rigveda-samhitfi, Mandala 1, S6kta 61, Mantra 16). 

^fadfadfaraW ftdfarrate mraidfi: t 

m 13 ms* ‘frrarac m mm m 3ft:* *nf% dmmfaldwm 11 

(Rigveda-samhitA, Mandala 1, Sfikta 77, Mantra 6). 



pleased with' their adoration, gave them cattle and rice in abundance; 
It is related that Gotaina, once pinched with thirst, prayed for water of the 
Marut-Gods, who out of mercy, placed a well* before him transplanted 
from elsewhere. The water gushing out copiously from the well not only 
quenched his thirst but formed itself into a river, the source of which 
was the seat of the original well. 

In the Rigveda-samhita the descendant's of Gotama as already 
noticed are also called Gotama while in later Vedic 
Gautama 5 * 01 * 618 ° aIled literature they are called Gautama. The Vatfisa- 

Brfihmana of the Samaveda mentions four members 
of the Gotama familyf among the teachers who transmitted that Veda to 
posterity, viz., the Radba-Gaulama, Giitr-Gautama, Sumanta-bfibhrava- 
Gautama and Samkara* Gautama ; and the Cliiindogya IJpani§ad of the 
same Veda mentions another teacher named Ihiridnimata-Gautamaj: who 
was approached by Satya-K&ma J a villa to be his teacher. The Gobhila 
Gfhya Sutra of the Sumaveda cites the opinion of a Gautama § who held 
that during the winter season there should be three oblations offered to the 

?rar Au rora i 

(Rig vcda-samhitA, Mainlala I, Sflkta S3, Mantra 11.) 

SAyana In commenting on Rigveda samhitA, Maintain 1, SOkfca 77, Mantra 10, 
observes 

sreratmraTfotR i Arto srfb: faqraro ro* tree 35* rrto i wpftrf 
«ra h Arto suftfatifA sr %r Atrar sufostflA stqrv* 

«tfra* ^ frai gfrorog rA rojfV cnroNa^: i qratrafrowr rwar 

st irfcwraA i 

The well (utsadhi) is alluded to in the Rigveda, Mainlala 1, Sftkta 88, Mantra 
4, thus .* — 

wg i P r »jht: <ra? 9 wrg%ii fro srrefaf w sAf i 
an At ArtotAt firasf : 11 

farerar Artot^iAi AriAt ro g Akraiq . Arto: i 

Sfinmvedlya Vaum-BrAhmana, Khan da 2, Satyavrata SAmasvarols edition p. 7.) 

gtRWS ^.«rar^ Artori. giRcft sisAt Artoj i 

. (Sfimavedlya Vamsa-Brahmana, Khanila 2). 

Arwrj^ Arto i 

(SAmavediya Vamsa-Brahmana, Khanda 3.) 

t a w A ra rotofarai snp^ra* wrafh strangforf *mqs*«8ifA 11 | ti 

(ChAndogya Upaniiyad, Adhyaya 4 , Khanrla 4 ). 

ii v H 

raw u « u 

ott A i ww i Wtfi II * II 

(Gobhila Gj-hya Sfttra 8-10.) 



( ivr ) 

dead ancestors. Another Gautama was the author of the Pitfmedha Sfitra* 
which perhaps belongs to the S&maveda. The Bj-hadarariyaka t of the 
white Yajurveda mentions a teacher named Gautama, while in the Kafjho- 
paniijad of the Black Yajurveda the sage Naciketasf who conversed with 
Yama on the mystery of life, is called Gautama which evidently is a 
generic name as his father is also called Gautama in the same work. A 
•Gautama§ is mentioned as a teacher in the Kausika sfitra of the 
Atharvaveda while to another Gautama is attributed the authorship of 
the Gautama Dharnia sutra || an authoritative work on the sacred law. 

We need not take any notice of one Gautama^f who, at the bidding 
of his mother as stated in the Makabharata, cast into the Ganges his old 
and blind father Dirgliatamas who was however miraculously saved. 

The RamAyana mentions a Gautama® 0 who had his hermitage in a 
grove at the outskirts of the city of Mithilft where 
Gautama, husband he lived with his wife Ahalya. it is well-known how 
of AhalyA. Ahalya for her flirtation with Indra, was cursed by 

her lord to undergo peuanco aud mortiDcation until 

n * An incomplete manuscript of tho I’itrmodha <5 (Ur a is contained in the Library of the 
Calcutta Sanskrit College, but tlie work was printed iu America several years ago, 

t HRRI: 111 I ^ I ^ II 

tBrhad&vanyaka, AdhyAya 4.) 

?t & srawfir gn* m swept** i 
*i*n w hwt sot hew ii $ n 

(Kathopaniijad, Valli 5). 

jufter ^ ^m?r spot si i 

(Kathopanisad, Valli 5.) 

§Vide Weber’s History of Indian Literature, p. 153. 

||Thetextof the Gautama Dharma-sOtra has been printed several timos in India 
while an English translation of it by Dr. G. Buliler has appoared in the Sacred Books of 
the Bast Series. 

Ifa * *rm gn qi gfi w w a u ** u 

jTigr: rraf ^ few it ** 11 
Bwf ■•ctww njf Jim siRwft** » 
a 5^ snrarara *tioti^ hcotot: || j| 

(MahAbhArata, Adiparva AdhyAya 104). 

Htr wsot cot i 
p 4 §feg?Rt* u n ii 
ft* fN? gfewiftfaq i 

wrur: ii h 

Wffil fr OTfrsra : gtife II H II 

(RAmAyana, AdikApda, Sarga 48). 



( *-> 

her. .emancipation at the happy advent of Rfima. The Adhyfttma R&m(U 
yaga, while repeating the same account, places the hermitage of Gautama* 
on the banks of the Ganges ; and our great poet KalidSsa follows the 
R&mayanic legend describing Gautama* as Dirgkatapas, a sage who prac- 
tised long penance. 

The Vayupurapa describes a sage named AksapAdaJ as the disciple 
of a Bralimana named Soma Sarma who was Siva 
Aksap&da. incarnate and well-known for his practice of austerities 

at the shrine of Prabhasa during the time of Jathkarnya 
Vyfisa. This Aksapada mentioned along with Kanflda is evidently no 
other person than Gotama or Gautama who founded the Nyaya philosophy. 
As to the origin of the name Aksapada (“having eyes in the feet”) as 
applied to Gautama, legend has it that Gautama was so deeply absorbed 
in philosophical contemplation that one day during his walks he fell 
unwittingly into a well out oE which he was rescued with great difficulty. 
God therefore mercifully provided him with a second pair of eyes in his 
feet to protect the sage from further mishaps. Another legeud§ which 

nhsjwrswr ftrsrnrtf u iv 11 

(Adliy&tma Rdmayara, SdikAnila, adhyfiya 8). 

t & ftr% agfanaiv^fa: I 

# 4 aro: qftsrtr 

wnsnhnw'ar: ftrantfi i 
m 33: s f%«r ftsftyj ftg q l 

inwiwiwiiif: li 11 

(Raghuvaiin'a, Sarga 11). 

t aafe'flfo $ stir trfcra' jrjoti^ i 

«n$i atow: n 3°? 11 

^riott ftwftwa: u u 

jot £ 3*1 i 

eainsar m ^ 11 11 

(Vayupuraiia, Adhyaya 23). 

§ 4a$T ft «OT5W gsnpfe a sfarw 

wwi «n^a Jrarfta: «rft otfwt iwi^ *ft ^wftrttwri 

(Ny&yakoga, 2nd edition, by M. M. Bhimficirya Jhftlakikar, Bombay). 



( vi ) 

represents VyAsa, a disciple of Gautama, lying prostrate before his master 
until the latter condescended to look upon him, not with his natural eyes, 
but with a new pair of eyes in his feet, may be dismissed with scanty 
ceremony as being the invention of a later generation of logicians, anxious 
to humiliate VySsa for vilification of the Nyaya system in his Mahabh&rata- 
and Ved&nta sfitra. > 


The people of Mithila (modern Darbhanga in North 13ehar) ascribe 
the foundation of Nyaya philosophy to Gautama, lius- 
Local tradition. band of Alialyii, and point out as the place of his birth 
a village named Gautamasthana where a fair is held 
every year on the 9th day of the lunar month of Cliaitra (March-April). 
It is situated 28 miles north-east of. Darbhanga and has a mud-hill of 
considerable height (supposed to be the hermitage of Gautama) at the 
base of which lies the celebrated “Gautama-kunda” or Gautama’s well 
the water whereof is like milk to the laste and feeds a porennial rivulet 
called on this account Ksirodadhi orKhiroi (literally the sea of milk). Two 
miles to the cast of the village there is another village named Alfalya- 
sthfina where between a pair of trees lies a slab of stone identified with 
Ahalya in her accursed stale. In its vicinity there is a temple which 
commemorates the emancipation of Ahalya by Rama Chandra. Tho 
Gautama-kunda and the Ksirodadhi river, which are still extant at 
Gautama- sthAn a verify the account of Gotama given above from the 
Rigveda while the stone slab and the templo of Rama at AlialyS.-stha.na 
are evidences corroborative of the story of Ahalya as given in the RfimS- 
yana. There is another tradition prevalent in the town of Oliapra that 
Gautama, husband of Ahalya and founder of (ho Nyaya philosophy, resided 
in a village now called Godna at the confluence of the rivers Ganges and 
•Sarayfi whero a Sanskrit academy called Gautama Thomson Pathasala 
has been established to commemorate the great sage. 

It seems to me that Goutama, sou of Rahugana, us mentioned in the 
Rigveda, was the founder of the Gautama family from 
The founder of which sprang Gautama, husband of Ahalya, as narrated 
ldentifled. PhllOS01>hy i u the RamSyana. It is interesting to note that 
» &atftnauda° son of Gautama by AhalyA, is a priest in 

tho royal family of Janaka much in the same way as Goutama, son of 

3 sf 'pr.sHW Mgre ren i 

(RSmftyan*, AdikApda, Sarga 50). 

irawfltl apwwt i 

(Uttara R&tua oharltam). 


Raliflgactfi is a priest in the royal family of Kurusj-njaya. The fields waving 
with paddy plants which greet the eyes of a modern traveller near and 
round Gautama-stb&na bear testimony to Agni’s gift of rice and cattle in 
abundance to the family of Gant'ama. The Ny&ya philosophy was, op 
the authority of the tradition prevalent in MithilA, founded by Gautama 
husband of Ahalyfi. The same Gautama has been designated as Ak^apAda 
in the VAyu PurAria already referred to. Ak§apada has been identified 
by Anantayajvan* with the author of the Pitrmedha Sfitra as well as with 
that of the Gautama Gharma sutra, and it is possible that he is not other 
than the Gautama referred to in the Kausfika sfitra of the Atharva Veda. 
The other Gautamas mentioned in the Bnihmanas, Upanisads etc., appear 
to be the kinsmen of their illustrious name-sake. 


His residence. 


The RAmayana, as we have found, places the hermitage of Gautarna, 
husband of AlialyA, at Gautama-stliAna twenty-eight 
miles north-east of DarbhA/igft while the AdhyAtma 
LwmAyana places it on the bauks of the Ganges at its confluence with the 
Sarayfi off the town of Chapra. The VayupurAna fixes the residence of 
Ak§apfkla, supposed to be identical with Gautama, at PrabhAsaf beyond 
Girnar in Kathiawar on the sea-coast. To rcconcilo these conflicting 
statements it has been suggested that AksapAda otherwise known' as 
Gotama or Gautama was the founder of the Nyaya philosophy, that he was 
born at Gautaraa-sthAua in Mitliila on the river Ksirodadhi, lived for 
some years at the villago now called Godna at the confluence of the 
Gauges and Sarayft until his retirement into Prabhasa the well-known 
sacred place of pilgrimage in Kathiawar on the sea-coast. 


*To the Gphya Sfltrns of the Sftmavcdu probably belong also Gautama’s Pitpmedha* 
afltra (Cf. Burnell, p. 57 ; the commentator Anautayajvnn itlentillcs the antlior with Aksapfida 
the author of the NySya-sfttra;, and the Gautama-dharma-siHra. — Weber’s History of 
Iudirtn Literature, p. 85. 

t Prabhfisa washed on its western side by the river Sarasvati and ropnted as the 
residence of Kfisna, is mentioned in the Srimad Bkagavata thus 

*r i 

(Bbfigavata, Skandha II, adhyaya 6.) 

smrtr m ims ti a ii 

•v 

(Bhfigavata, Sknndha II, adbyfiya 80). 

Prabhfisa was situated boyond the rock of Girnar in Kathiawar where we come across 
all the edicts of As'oka as well as an inscription of Rudradfima supposed to be the first 
inscription in Sanskrit dated about 100 A. 1). which mentions Chandra Gupta and As'oka by 
names. There are also some inscriptions in Gupta characters, and there is no dOQbt 
that Prabhfisa situated on the Sarasvati acquired celebrity in very old times. 

This Prabhfiaa is not to be confounded with another town called Prabhfisa in KaU- 
sAmbi near Allahabad on the Jnmna where there is an inscription, dated abont the 2nd 
century B. O., of A§adasena, a descendant of Sonakfiyana of Adhiochatra, (vide Dr. Fohrer’* 
Pabhosa inscriptions in Epigraphia Indica, Vol, II, pp. 242-248.) 



vm ) 

The Satapafcha BrShmana mentions Gautama along with Asurdyaija 
and the Vayupurfina (already quoted) states that 

s age a ufc B50 B. C. ^ksap&da, a n as Q 0 t a ma or Gautama, flourished 

during the time of J&tfikarnya Vyasa. Now, Jatflkarnya, according to the 
MadhukSnda and Yajfiavalkya K-inda of the Satapatha Br&hmana 0 
(Kftnva recension) was a pupil of Asurayana and Yaska who are supposed 
to have lived about .550 B, C. This date tallies well with the time of 
another Gautama who, together with Aranemi, is described in the Divyll- 
vadftnaf, a Buddhist Sanskrit work translated into Chinese in the 2nd 
ceutury A. I)., as having transmitted the Vedas to posterity before they 
were classified by Vy&sa. It does not conflict with the view that Aksapada 
is identical with Gautama author of the Gautama Dharma-Sutra which 
is " declared to be the oldest of the existing works on the sacred law$. M 
Aksapada-Gautama, founder of the Nyaya Philosophy, was almost a 
contemporary of Buddha-Gaufama who founded Buddhism and Indra- 
bhfiti Gautama who was a disciple of Mahavira the reputed founder of 
Jainism. 

The fourfold division of the means of knowledge (Pram&na) into 
perception, inference, comparison and word found in the Jaina Prakfta 
scriptures such as the Nandi-Sutva, Sthuniifiga-Sutva§ and Bhagavati- 

* Vide Weber’s History of Indian Literature, p. 140. 

In the MAdltyandiniya recension of the Satapatha BrAhmana a teacher intervenes 
between YAska and JAtAkarnya, viz. BhAradvAja. Cf. 

qrcrcrsqfg qrcrarcqf 5ngq»« i ?s a i g q >g q f «ms:i3nwg?wurn9 

(datapath a BrAhmana, MAdhyandiniya recension, Kfinila 14, ndhyAya 5.) 

f The 8Srd chapter of the DivyAvadanr called MAtanga SAtra, in Chinese Mo-tar-nu- 
oin, waa translated into Chincso by An-ahi-kao-cio of the Eastern Han dynasty in A. D. 
148-170. (Vide Bnnjiu Nanjio’s Catalogue of the Chineso Tripitaka). In it we read 

*WT iwwro: muuflf ur i 

i nuifrffrilq uT sfs^g’ uruuu: i v 5* qfarr 
‘iru*# i ipps qfaRwg*? w 1 

(DivyfivadAna, Chap. XXX11I). 

J Buhler observes These arguments which allow us to place Gautama before both 
BaadhAyana and VAaljtha are, that both these authors quote Gautama as an authority 

on law ^fliose facts will, I think suffice to show that the Gautama Dharma SAtra 

may be safely declared to be the oldest of the existing works on the sacred law.” (Buhler’s 
Gautama, Introduction, pp. XLIX and LIV, S. B. E. series).' 

§ vcm trafafc tow w sw 

(Ith&nAuga-SAtra, Page 809, published by Dhanapat Sing), 



( IX ) 


Sqtra compiled by Indrablifiti-Gautama finds its parallel in the NyAya- 
Sfitraof Aksap&da-Gautama leading to the conclusion that this particular 
doctrine was either borrowed by Indrabhuti from Ak^apada or was the 
common property of both. Tn the PAli and Prdkfta scriptures Gautama 
is called Gotama,, and a Pali Sutta mentions a sect called “ Gotamakfi./* 
who were followers of Gautama, identified perhaps with the founder of 
the Ny&ya Philosophy. The Pali Canonical scriptures such as the 
Brahmajala Sutta, f Udana etc., which embody the teachings of Buddha, 
mention a class of Sramanas and Brahmanas who were “ takkt ” or 


‘‘ takkika ” (logiciaus, and “ 


vlmatnsi” (casuists) and indulged in “ takka” 


(logic) and vimamsa (casuistry), alluding perhaps to the followers of 


Aksapada-Gautama described as “ Gotamaka.” 


" The Kathavatthuppakarana +, a Pali work of the Abhidhammapitaka, 
composed by Moggaliputta Tissa at the third Buddhist Council during 
the reign of Asfoka about 255 B. C., mentions “ patififta ” (in Sanskrit : 
“pratijfia,” proposition), “Upanaya” (application of reasons), “Niggaha” 
(in Sanskrit: “ Nigraha,” humiliation or defeat) etc., which are the 
technical terms of Nyaya philosophy or Logic. Though Moggaliputta Tissa 
has not made any actual reference to Logic or Nyaya, his mention of some 
of its technical terms warrants us to suppose that, that philosophy existed 
in some shape in India in his time about 255 B. C, These facts lead us 
to conclude that Gotama, Gautama or Aksapnda, the founder of Nyaya 
Philosophy, lived about the year 550 B. C. 


* Vide Prof. T. W. Rhys David's Introduction to the Kassapa-Sihauada Sutta, 
pp. 220-222. It is observed : - 

“ The only alternative is that some Brahmana, belonging to the Gotama Gotra, is here 
referred to as having had a community of Bhiksus named after him.” 

TfeiH «Tf ^ m -gift” i 

(Brahmajfila Sutta 1-82, edited by Rhys Davids and carpentor). 

sr afifcn gsrePa * ■gift ttowt, jffrgt it 

jwrqgi**ft i 

(Ud&na, p. 10. edited by Paul Steinthai, P. T. 8. edition). 

t The terms “ Pa^iafia ” (pratijfiS, proposition) and “ niggaha ” (nigraha, defeat) ooour 
in the following passages 

«t * m twt qfeg nq wn & i 

(Kath&vatthuppakarapa, Siamese edition, p. S). 

« JJiggaha-Catukkam ” is the name of a section of the first chapter of the KathAvat- 
thbppalc&rapa while “ tJpanaya-Catukkam ” is the name of another section of that work. 



( * ) 

It NYAYASOTRA THE FIRST WORK ON NYaYA PHILOSOPHY. 

To Gotama, Gautama or AksapAda, of tvhoin a short account has 

„ been given above, is attributed the authorship of 

The earliest contnbu- ~ , „ 

tion to the sfitra the Nyava-Sutra the earliest work on Nyaya 

Philosophy. Sanskrit literature in the Sfitra or 

aphoristic style was presumably inaugurated at about.. 550 B. C., and the 

NyAya-SQtra the author of which lived, as already stated, at about that 

time, must have been the first® contribution to that literature. The 

“ Sutta” or Sutra section of the Pali literature reads very much like a body 

of sermons bearing no affinity with the Sutra works of the BrAhmanas. 

The Nyaya-Sfitra is divided into five books, each containing two 
, , , chapters called ahnikas or Diurnal portions. It is 

meat of the Nyfiya- believed that Aksapada finished his work on Nyfiya 

in ten lectures corresponding to the ahnikas referred 
to above. We do not know whether the whole of the Nyaya-Sutra, as it 
exists at present, was the work of Aksapada, nor do we know for certain 
whether liis teachings were committed to writing by himself or transmit- 
ted by oral tradition only. It seems to me that it is only the first book 
of the Nyaya Sutra containing a brief explanation of the 16 categories 
that we are justified in ascribing to Aksapada, while the second, third 
and fourth books which discuss particular doctrines of the Vai4e§ika, Yoga, 
Mlmamsa, Vedanta and Buddhist Philosophy bear marks of different 
hands and ages. In these books there are passages quoted almost verbatim 
from the Lafikavatara-Sutra t, a Sanskrit work of the Yogficfira Buddhist 
Philosophy, from the Madliyamika Sutra of NagArjunaj and from the 
J$ataka§ of Ary a Deva — works which were composed in the early 
centuries of Christ. The fifth book treating of the varieties of futile 
rejoinders and occasions for rebuke was evidently not the production of 
Aksapfida who dismissed those topics without entering into their details. 
The last and most considerable additions were made by Vfitsyftyana other- 
wise known as PaksilaSvami, who about 450 A *D, wrote the first regular 
commentary, “ Bhasya”, on the Nyaya Sutra, and harmonised the 
different and at times conflicting, additions and interpolations by the 
ingenious introduction of Sfitras of his own making fathered upon Ak^apAda. 


* Kaplla is stated in the Sfinikbyit-Kfirikfi, verse 70, to have taught Jiis philosophy 
to Asuri who is mentioned in tiio Satapntba Brfihmana as a teacher. Asurfiyana and 
YSska who folldtaed Asuri were the teachers of Jfitfikarnya, a contemporary of Aksapfida- 
Gautama. Kapila therefore proceeded Aksapada by at least three generations. Kapila's 
Philosophy is believed to have come down by oral traditions and was not perhaps 
committed to writiug in his life-time. Hence the Nyfiya- Sfitra has been stated tc be 
the first work of the Sfitra period. 

t Vide Nyfiya Sfitra 4-2-28, which quotes the Lankfivatara Sfitra (dated about 800 A.D.) 
t Vide Nyfiya-Sfitra 2-1-80, 4-1-80, and 4-1-48, which criticise the Mfidhyamika Sfitra. 
I Vide Nyfiya-Sutra 4-1-48 which oriticises £ a taka of Aryadeva. 



( » ) 


The Ny&ya-Sfitra has, since its composition, enjoyed a very great 
popularity as is evident from the numerous com men ta- 
Ny^yarsStra. 108 ° n the ries that have from time to time, centred round it. 

A few of the commentaries are mentioned below : — 


TEXT. 

1. Nyfiya-Stttra by Gotama or Aksapfida (660 B. 0.) 

Commentaries. 

2. Kyfiya-B hfisya by. Vfitsyfiyana (450 A D.) 

3. Nyfiya-Vfirtika by Udyotnknra. 

4. Nyfiya-Yfirtika talparya-tika by Vficaspati Misra. 

6. Nyaya-Yflrtika-tatparyacika-parHuddhi by Udayana. 
6. Pari-iuddiprukfisfi by Vardhauifina. 

■7. Vardhamfinendu by Padmanfibha Misra. 

8. Nyfiyfilaiikfira by ferikantha. 

0 Nyfiyfilaiikfira Yptti by Jayanta. 

10. - Nydya uiaiijari by Jayanta. 

11. Nyfiya-Vrtti by Abhayatilakopfidhyfiya. 

12. Nyfiya-Vrtti by Yisvunfitha, 

13. Mitfibhasini Yj’tti by Mabfideva Vedfinti. 

14. Nyfiyaprakasa by Kesava Misra, 

15. Nyfiyabodhiut by Govardhana. 

16. Nyaya Sfltra Vyakhyfi. by Mathurfin&tha. 


III. RECEPTION ACCORDED TO THE NYaYA PHILOSOPHY. 

It appears from the Chandogya-upanisad, Brhadaranyaka-upani^ad 
and Kausitiki Bra h man a® that Pliilosophy (Adliyfit- 

ated h S^menfbev S n o7the m»-ViclyA) received its first impetus from the 
military caste. Ivsatriyas (members of the military caste) who 

carried it to great perfection. King Aj&tastitru m 
an assembly of the Kiim-Panealas consoled a Bnilimana named £$vctaketu, 


* Kausitaki-BrShmana 2-1, 2; 10, 4. 

Brihadaranyaka 2-1-20, 2-“!-8. 

(Chsndogya 8-t4-l ; 6-11, 24 ; 1-8, 9 ; 1-9-3, 7-1-3, and 5-11. 

?r sins gn %rr asnjssirg 

am trare n « n 

(Chfindogya-upauisad 6-3). 

Professor P. .llcnsseii observes : — 

In this narrative, preserved by two different Vedic schools, it is expressly declared 
that the knowledge of tho Brahman as fit man, the central doctrine of the entire Vedfinta, 
la possessed by the King ; but, on the contrary, is not possessed by the Brfihmaua “famed 
as a Vedic scholar.”— Philosophy of tho Upanishails, pp. 17—18. 

Again, he remarks Wo are forced to conclude, if not with absolute certainty, yet 
with a very high degree of probability, that as a matter of fact tho doctrine of the fltman 
standing as it did in such sharp contrast to ail the principles of the Vedic ritual, though 
the original conception may have been duo to Brahraauas, was taken up and cultivated 
primarily not in Urfibmana but in Ksatriya circles, and was first adopted by the former In 
later time#— Philosophy of tho Upanishads, p. 19. 

w* atjH n W m i i I Sts* mp i 

- These four pregnant expressions (Alahfivakya) originated from the Brfihmanas, whence 
it ‘may be . concluded Nlrguna-Brabma-Vidya or knowledge of abaoluto Brahma was 
confined among them. It was the Saguna-Brahma-Vidyi or knowledge of Brahma limited 
by form and attributes that is said to have been introducted by the Ksatriyas, 



( xii ) 


son of Aruni of the Gautama family, that lie had no cause of being sorry 
for liis inability to explain certain doctrines of Adliyatma-Vidyit which 
were known only to the Ksntriyas. It may be observed that Mahavira 
and Bnddha who founded respectively .Jainism and Buddhism — two 
universal religions based on philosophy or Adhyatma-VidyA— were also 
Ksatriyas. Kapila is rejmted to he the lirst. Brahmana who propounded 
a sytem of philosophy called SAmkhya, hnt his work on the subject not. 
having come down to 11s in its original form we are not in a position to 
ascertain what relation it. bore to the Vedas or what kind of reception was 
given to it by the orthodox Brihmanas We know for certain that the 
most powerful BrAlunaria who undertook to study and teach philosophy 
openly was Gotama, Gautama or AksapAda the renowned author of the 
NyAya-Sutra. l lo founded a rational system of philosophy called “ NyAya” 
which at its inception had no relation with the topics of the Vedic Samliifa 
and Brahmana. At this stage the NyAya, was pure Logie unconnected with 
the scriptural dogmas. AksapAda recognised four means of valid 
knowledge, viz,, perception, inference, comparison and word of which the 
last signified knowledge derived through any reliable assertion. 

This being the nature of NyAya or Logic at its early stage it was not 
received with favour by the orthodox community of 
vecefvedwU.h g favonr. 0t BrAlimanaa who anxious to establish an organised so- 
ciety, paid their sole attention to theSanihitasand Brali- 
inanas which treated of rituals, ignoring altogether the portions which had 
nothing to do with them. The sage Jaimini 3 in his JIlmAinsa-Siitra dis- 
tinctly says that, the Veda having for its sole purpose the prescription of 
actions, those parts of it which do not serve that purpose are useless.’' 
We are therefore not surprised to lirnl Maim f enjoining ex-communication 
upon those members of the twice-born caste wlm disregarded the Vedas and 
Dharma-Sutras relying upon the support of Iletu-b’Aslra or Logie. Similarly 
Viilraiki in his Ramayana $ discredits those persons of perverse intellect 
who indulge in the frivolities of Anvikgiki the science of Logic regardless 
of the works of sacred law (Dharma-sAstra) which they should follow as 

♦wrareet srmstesp* 1 s t * t s t 

(Mimi'misa-SOf ra). 

1$rsw^3 # # ^rrarra?n^fs:«.* 1 

ft JTtfe^T ft 

(Maim, adliyAya 2, vor.se It). 

ftirfcaresrg fowtftg p *T! I 

straj 3 it p 11 

(RSmayana, Ayodhyfi Ktlmla, .Sarga 100). 



( Xiii ) 


their guide. Vyasa in the Mah&bliSrata,* S/lntiparva, relates the doleful 
story of a repentant Brahmana who, addicted to Tarkavidyft (Logic) 
carried on debates divorced from all faith in the Vedas and was on- 
that account, turned into a jackal in his next birth as a penalty. In 
another passage of tlio $&ntiparva,+ Vyasa warns the followers of the 
Vedanta Philosophy against communicating their doctrines to a Naiynyika 
or Logician. VyAsaJ does not care even to review the NyAya system 
in the Brahma-sutra seeing that it has not been recognised by any 
worthy sage. Stories of infliction of penalties on those given to the study 
of NyAya are related in the Skanda Parana, § and other works ; and in the 
Naisadha-carita'I we find Kali satirising the founder of NyAya Philosophy 
as “ Goldina ” the “ most bovine ” among sages. 

*W?JTT& trftr^r tcf$T I 

^rsflftsFf fosfonj; n 11 

smster ^ wsraredg ^ u vs u 

^ JJtl: I 

hwHt qwrftf'fo: »»irarrci 11 v« n 

(Mabilbli&rata. Siiritiparva, adiiyilya 180.) 

In the Uandharva tanfcm we litirl 

iTNrasfhpmw^fSRrtT: *rf m* fe i 

srniMf iWsrarw: n 

(Quoted in lYliuatnsinitantrn ). 

stnaf gsrrgsrrapn* i 
x x x x 
w s^rreFpvrpt fagrara ^ 11 iw 11 

i Malialiliitrata, Sfiiilipurvn ndbyaya 218). 

( VedSuta -wOtru 2-2). 

§*rkm: <$HT guiwq, f£ I 

snjfsq gRPirwra ftMlWi Hlmf^ra I 
3*r»Tg^Hhs^T wf^r?[P5Ri%?n i 
m wrei* wfWa it 

(Skanda I'uriiiia, KfilikfikhanUa, adhyfiya 17;, 

ligw;^ q: ftnsnrara unw g d wsrijfti i 

draw awdiw *mr fdw w 11 



( Xiv ) 

Gradually however this system of philosophy instead of relying 

„ . entirely upon reasoning came to attach due weight 

Nyflya reconciled with , f 

scriptural dogmas. to the authority oi the Vedas, and later on after 

its reconciliation with them, the principles of Ny&ya 

were assimilated in other systems of philosophy such as the Vaitfe&ika,* 

Yoga, Mimftmsft,t SHihkliyaJ etc 

Henceforth the Nyaya was regarded as an approved branch 
of learning. Thus the Gautama-I)harma-sfltra,§ 
branch Of knowledge! 4 prescribes a .course of training in Logic (Nyaya) 
for the King and acknowledges the utility of Turku 
or Logic in the administration of justice though in the case of conclusions 
proving incompatible ultimate decision is directed to be made by reference 
to persons versed in the Vedas. Manu|| says that dharma or duty is to be 
ascertained by logical reasoning not. opposed to the injunctions of the 
Vedas. He recommends Logie (Nyfiya) as a necessary stndy for a King 
and a logician to be an indispensable member of a legal assembly 
Y&jna-valkya^J counts “ Nyaya ” or Logic among the fourteen principal 
sciences while Vyasa|| admits that lie was able to arrange and classify the 


* Vaiaesika-sfltra 1-1-4, 2-1-15, 2-I-16-. 2-1-17, 2-2-17, 2-2-32, 8-1-15, 0-2-3, 0-2-4. 
(JayantirAyatia TarkapancAnan’s edition). 

t MimAmsa-sOtra 1-1-4, 1-3-1, 1-3-2, 1-3-3, 1-4-14, 1-4-35, 1-5-8, 3-1-17, 3-1 20, 4-3-18, 
5-1-8, 10-8-85. 

J SAmkhyA-sOtra 1-00, 1-101, 1-108. 5-10, 5-11, 6-12. 

Yoga-sfltra 1-5, 0. 

§*tht sn grc py , i 

wrunfand q$te=yrT!i: i foiwj® quran* 1 t&sjfgf'wj; 

ftmga ftvi 1 

(Gautanmdha rtna-sAtra, adhylya 11), 

® vrf'* ^ ii 

(Maun, adhydya 12, verse 108). 

|{ fomg; apwfifag stnRfa; i 

“* (Mami,adliydya 7, verse 43). 

ufiwl f gprewtf vp^qril®: I 

UUSTbtfJuu: qfag, ^I^IWi II 

(Manu, adbydya 12, verso 111). 

5f w^nrarnFftrf«raT: i 

wmft fimrzf vrafer ■u sr it 

(YajnAvalbya san’ihitd, adhydya 1, verso 3). 

|| auhrfi m ura qfcthf g qrfVW 1 

wsnftr writ ara qp 11 

(Mahdbh&rata quoted by Visvan&tha in his Vfltti on Nyftya-sfltra 1 1-1), 




( XV ) 

Upanisads with the help of the ‘ Anvik§iki’ or Logic. In the Padma-purana* 
Logic is included among the fourteen principal branches of learning 
promulgated by God Visnu, while in, t the Matsya-purana,f Nyaya-vidya 
together with the Vedas is said to have emanated from the mouth of 
Brahma himself. In fact so wide-spread was the study of Nyaya that 
the MahabhArata is full of references to that science- 

In the Adiparva of the Mahabharata Nysiya* or Logic is mentioned 
along with the Veda and Cikitsa (the science of medicine), and the 
hermitage of KAs'yapa is described as being filled with sages who were 
versed in the Nyaya-tattva (logical truths) and knew the true meaning of 
a proposition, objection and conclusion. The Santi-parva§ refers to 
numerous tenets of Nyaya supported by reason and scripture while the 
Asvamedha-purvaij describes the sacrificial ground as being resounded 
by logicians (ITetu-vadin) who employed arguments and counter-argu- 


tr Rq ura simem « 

(I’adma-purana, vide Muir's Sanskrit text Vol. Ill, p, 27). 

t w s rew g ^i*cw i 


jfhiraT ^ swrarre^^cii it 

(ilatsya-purftna 3-2). 

| mrafensT fafomi ^ 31* figw am i 

$3^1 5PB f fo - m i gctafo a q it tt 

(MahiibhArata, Adiparva, adhyaya 1). 

II II 

II V* II 

: $TO3TTHf^[TTtt : II SS II 

(Mahabharata, Adiparva, adhy&ya 70). 

■ i 

aftriFran* || 11 

(Mah&bhlrata, Santiparvft, adhyftya 210). 

| afto* *nf ufTr 1 3 t^rf^sn i 

11 11 

(Mah&bhftrata, Aavamedhaparva, adhyftya, 85), 




( *ri ) 


uients to vanquish one another. In the Sabha-parva* the sage N&rada 
is described as being versed in logic (Nyayavid) and skilful in distinguish- 
ing unity and plurality' (“ aikya ” and “ nfinfttva ”) conjunction and 
co-existence (“ sariiyoga ” and “ samavaya genus and species (“ para- 
para ”) etc, capable of deciding questions by evidences (Pramana) and 
ascertaining the validity and invalidity of a 11 ve-membered syllogism 
(Pancavayava-vakya). 


In fact the NyAya (Logic) was in course of time deservedly 
held in very high esteem. If it were allowed to 
The course of Nyaya. follow its original course unimpeded by religions 
dogmas it would have risen to the very height of perfection. Never- 
theless the principles of Nyiiya entering into the different systems of 
philosophy gave them each its proper compactness and cogency just 
as Bacon’s Inductive Method shaped the sciences and philosophies of a 
later age in a different country. It is however to be regretted that during 
the last five hundred years the Nyaya has been mixed up with Law 
(smriti', Rhetoric (alahkiira), Vedanta, etc., and thereby has hampered the 
growth of those branches of knowledge upon which it lias grown up as 
a sort of parasite. 


Sanskrit College, Calcutta. 1 SATIS CHANDRA VIDVABHL'SANA. 
The 7th November , 1913, ’ 


frwtflHMMM WHWfa girep H 3. H 
*fRr surer**! ffcrnft ?*£fvwrer?rf^ spfq: i 
«rem^r*n*Rff: smrorfaf*rare: n v n 
8rre*rt«r i 

^ u * it 

(Mafia l)li A rata, Sahhaparva, adhydya a). 




THE NYAYA-SCTTRAS. 


Book I. — Chapter 1. 

rTrWRT- 

IUUUU 


1. Supreme felicity is attained by the knowledge 
about the true nature of sixteen categories, viz., means of 
right knowledge (pramana), object of right knowledge (pra- 
meya), doubt (samsaya), purpose (prayojana), familiar instance 
(drstanta), established tenet (siddlianta), members (avayava), 
confutation (tarka*), ■ ascertainment (uirnaya), discussion 
(vada), wrangling (jalpa), cavil (vitanda), fallacy (hetvabliasa), 
quibble (eliala), futility (jati), and occasion for rebuke 
(nigrahasthana) . 


Knowledge about the true- nature of sixteen categories j* means true 
knowledge of the “ enunciation,” “ definition ” and “ critical examination ” 
of the categories. Book l (of the Nyftya-Satra) treats of “ enunciation ” 
and “ definition,” while the remaining four Books are reserved for “ critical 
examination.” The attainment of supreme felicity is preceded by the 
knowledge of four things, viz., (1) that which is fit to be abandoned ( viz ., 


♦The English equi valent for “tarka" is variously given as “ confutation,” “ argu- 
mentation ," “ reductio ad absurduui,” “hypothetical reasoning," etc. 
t VStsyayana observes 

f^n^r *msar sorerei srsftr i i 

— (NySyadarsana, p. 0, Bibliotheca Indica Series). 


2 BOOK I, CHAPTER T. 


pain), (2) that which produces what is fit to bo abandoned [viz., misappre- 
hension, etc.), (3) complete destruction of what is fit to be abandoned 
and (4) the means of destroying what is fit to be abandoned (viz., true 
knowledge*). 

lit i mu 

2 . Pain, birth, activity, faults and misapprehension — 
on the successive annihilation of these in the reverse order, 
there follows release. 

Misapprehension, faults, activity, birth and pain, these in their 
uninterrupted course constitute the “world.” Release, which consists in 
the soul’s getting rid of the world, is the condition of supreme felicity 
marked by perfect tranquillity and not tainted by any defilement. A 
person, by the true knowledge of the sixteen categories, is able to 
remove bis misapprehensions. When this is done, his faults, rig., affection, 
aversion and stupidity, disappear. Hois then no longer subject to any 
activity and is consequently freed from transmigration and pains. This 
is the way in which his release is effected and supreme felicity secured. 


3. Perception, inference, comparison and word (ver- 
bal testimony)— these are the menus of right, knowledge. 

[The C;irv;'ikas admit only one means of right knowledge, viz., 
perception (pralynkoi), the Vaisfesikas and Bauddhas admit two, vis., 
perception and inference (aimniAna), the SA/ikhyas admit three, viz., per- 
ception, inference and verbal testimony (Agama or sfahda) while the 
NaiyAyikns whose fundamental work is the NyAya-sufra admit four, viz., 
perception, inference, verbal testimony and comparison (lipamrtna). The 
Priibhaknas admit a fifth menus of right knowledge called presumption 
artlmpatti), the Bhattas and VodAntins admit a sixth, viz . , non-existence 
(abhava) and the PaurAnikas recognise a seventh and eighth means of right 
knowledge, named probability (sambbava) and rumour (ailihya)]. 


km* 

qro re re r nwisn 


•t* at* mana atsfansu** tpi^-ma sr?f qarfa 


(Nyayadare'ana, p. 2). 


THE & Y A Y A-St)TR AS. 3 

4. Perception is that knowledge which arises from 
the contact of a sense with its object and which is deter- 
minate, unnameable and non-erratic. 

Determinate. — This epithet distinguishes perception from indetermi- 
nate knowledge; as for instance, a man looking from a distance cannot 
ascertain whether there is smoko or dust. 

Unnameable . — Signifies that the knowledge of a thing derived 
through perception lias' no connection with the name which the thing 
bears. 

Non-erratic. — Tn summer the sun’s rays coming in contact with 
earthly heat quiver and appear to the eyes of men as water. The know- 
ledge of water derived in this way is not perception. To eliminate such 
cases the epithet 11011-erratic has been used. 

[This aphorism may also be translated as follows : — Perception 
is knowledge and which arises from the contact of a sense with its object and 
which is non-orratic being either indeterminate (nirvikalpaka as “ this is 
something”) or determinate vsavikalpaka as “ this is a Brahmana ”)]. 

“Btf^wguR” yfyg §i T»<MWMdl 

ss ^ iiwmi 

5. Inference is knowledge which is preceded by per- 
ception, and is of three kinds, viz., a priori, a posteriori and 
‘ commonly seen. ’ 

A priori is the knowledge of ellect derived from the perception of 
its cause, e. g., one seeing clouds infers that there will be vain. 

A posteriori is the knowledge of cause derived from the perception 
of its effect, e. g., one seeing a river swollen infers that there was rain. 

[‘ Commonly seen ’ is the knowledge of one thing derived from the 
perception of another thing with which it is commonly seen, e. g., one 
seeing a beast possessing horns, in fora that it possesses also a tail, or 
one seeing smoke on a hill infers that there is fire on it]. 

Vutsyayana takes the last to be “ not commonly seen ” which he 
interprets as the knowledge of a thing which is not commonly seen, c. g., 
observing affection, aversion and other qualities one infers that there is a 
substance called soul. 

“ aquwft ” uuotu 

6. Comparison is the knowledge of a thing through 
its similarity to another thing previously well known. 



4 


BOOK I, CHAPTER I. 

A man hearing from a forester that a bos gaoaeus is like a cow 
resorts to a forest whore he sees, an animal like a cow. Having recollected 
what he heard lie institutes a comparison, hy which he arrives at the con- 
viction that the animal, which he sees is has gavaeus. This is knowledge 
derived through comparison. Some hold that comparison is not a 
separate means of knowledge, for when one notices the likeness of a 
cow in a strange animal one really performs an act of perception. In 
reply it is urged that we cannot deny comparison as a separate means of 
knowledge, for how does otherwise the name bos gavaeus signify the 
general notion of the animal called bos gavaeus. That (he name bos 
gavaeus signifies one and all members of the hos gavaeus class is not a 
result of perception but the consequence of a distinct knowledge called 
comparison. 

srrefa&sr: uimvsn 

7. Word ( verbal testimony) is the instructive asser- 
tion of a reliable person. 

A reliable person is one — maybe a risi, ftrya or m leech a, who as an 
expert in a certain matter is willing to communicate his experiences of it. 

[Suppose a young man coming to the side of a river cannot ascertain 
whether the river is fordable or not, and immediately an old experienced 
man of the locality, who lias no enmity against him, comes and tells him 
that the river is easily fordable : the word of the old man is to he accepted 
as a means of right knowledge called verbal testimony]. 

“*t n wit; ii 

8. It is of two kinds, vis., that which refers to matter 
which is seen and that which refers to matter which is not 
seen. 

The first kind involves matter which can bo actually verified. 
Though wo are incapable of verifiying the matter involved in the second 
kind, we can somehow ascertain it by incans of inference. 

[Matter which is seen, e.g., a physician’s assertion that physical 
strength is gained by taking butter]. 

[Matter which is not seen, e.g., a religions teacher’s assertion that one 
conquers heavwi by performing horse-sacrifices]. 



wfag umit.ii 



THE NYAYA-SUTBA& 


A 


9. Soul, body, senses, objects of sense, intellect, 
mind, activity, fault, transmigration, fruit, pain and release — 
are the objects of right knowledge. 

The objects of right knowledge are also enumerated as substance, 
quality, action, generality, particularity, intimate relation [and non- 
existence which are the technicalities of the Vaislesika philosophy]. 

“smwt 

nmi?°u 

10. Desire, aversion, volition, pleasure, pain and 
intelligence are the marks of the soul. 

[These abide in the soul or rather are the qualities of the substance 
called soul]. 

nwnsii 

11. Body is the site of gesture, senses and sentiments. 

Body is the site of gesture inasmuch as it strives to reach what is 
desirable and to avoid what is hateful. It is also the site of senses for 
the latter act well or ill, according as the former is in good or bad order. 
Sentiments which comprise pleasure and pain are also located in the 
body which experiences them. 

IIUUWI 

12. Nose, tongue, eye, skin and ear are the senses 
produced from elements. 

Nose is of the same nature as earth, tongue as water, eye as light, 
skin as air and ear as ether. 

13. Earth, water, light, air and ether — these are the 
elements. 

“tifliMlftjjqi:” II? 10*811 

14. Smell, taste, colour, touch and sound are objects 
of the senses and qualities of the earth, etc. 

Smell is the object of nose and the prominent quality of earth, taste 
is the object of tongue and quality of water, colour is the object of eye and 
quality of light, touch is the object of skin and quality of air, and sound 
is the object of ear and quality of ether. 



6 BOOK I, CHAPTER I. 

“ffe:” ii q i \ mti 

15. Intellect, apprehension and knowledge — these 
are not different from one another. 

[The term apprehension ( upalabdhi ) it? generally used in the sense 
of perception { pratyaksa ). According to the S/tnkhya philosophy, 
intellect ( buddhi ), which is the first thing evolved out of primordial 
matter < pvakriti ), is altogether different from knowledge (jnana), which 
consists in the reflection of external objects on the soul (puru§a) the 
abode of transparent consciousness.] 

y rq ^ra i ^f rT: “jhut imw«n 

16. The mark of the mind is that there do not arise 
(in the soul) more acts of knowledge than one at a time. 

It is impossible to perceive two things simultaneously. .Perception 
does not arise merely from the contact of a sense-orgau on its object, 
but it requires also a conjunction of the mind. Now, the mind, which 
is an atomic substance, cannot be conjoined with more than one sense- 
organ at a time, hence there cannot, occur more acts of perception than 
one at one time. 

17. Activity is that which makes the Amice, mind 
and body begin their action. 

There are three kinds of action, viz., vocal, mental and bodily, each 
of which may be sub-divided as good or bad. 

Bodily actions which are bad are : — (1) killing, (2) stealing, and (3) 
committing adultery. 

Bodily actions which are good are : — (1) giving, (2) protecting, 
and (3) serving. 

FocaZ actions which are bad are : — (1) telling a lie, (2) using harsh 
language, (3) slandering, and (4) indulging in frivolous talk. 

FocaZ actions which are good arc: — (1) speaking the truth, (2) 
speaking what is useful, (3) speaking what is pleasant, and (4) reading 
sacred books. 

Mental actions which are bad are : — (I) malice, (2) covetousness, 
and (3) scepticism. * 

Mental actions which are good are : — (1) compassion, (2) refraining 
from covetousness, and (3) devotion. 



THE NYlYA-SOTRAS. 


7 


18. Faults have the characteristic of causing activity. 

Tlie faults are affection, aversion, and stupidity. 

’JTO'lfo: “stemur:” inmuil 

19. Transmigration means re-births. 

Transmigration is tlie scries of births and deaths. Birth is the 
connection of soul with body, sense-organs, mind, intellect, and sentiments, 
while death is the soul’s separation from them. 

20. Fruit is the thing produced by activity and 

faults. 

Fruit consists in the enjoyment of pleasure or suffering of pain. 
All activity and faults end in producing pleasure, which is acceptable, 
and pain, which is fit only to be avoided. 

stnrere rero ffa uu*i*ui 

21. Pain has the characteristic of causing uneasiness. 

Pain is affliction which every one desires to avoid. The aphorism 

may also be translated as follows: — 

Pain is the mark of hindrance to the soul. 

“wWfs” uumui 

22. Release is the absolute deliverance from pain. 

A soul which is no longer subject to transmigration is freed from all 
pains. Transmigration, which consists in the soul’s leaving one body 
and taking another, is the cause of its undergoing pleasure and pain. 
The soul attains release as soon as there is an end of the body, and, con- 
sequently, of pleasure and pain. Those arc mistaken who maintain that 
release enables tlie soul not only to get rid of all pains but also to attain 
eternal pleasure, for pleasure is as impermanent as pain and the body. 

«r “eroq:” immui 

23. Doubt, which is a conflicting judgment about the 
precise character of an object, arises from the recognition 
of properties common to many objects, or of properties not 



8 


BOOK I, CHAPTER I. 


common to any of the objects, from conflicting testimony, 
and from irregularity of perception and non-perception. 

Doubt is of five kinds according as it arises from — 

(1) Recognition of common properties — e.y., seeing in the twilight a 
tall object we cannot decide whether it is a man or a post, for the property 
of tallness belongs to both. 

(21 Recognition of properties not common — e.g., hearing a sound, one 
questions whether it is eternal or not, for the property of soundness abides 
neither in man, beast, etc., that are non-eternal nor in atoms wkieh are 
eternal. 

(3) Conflicting testimony, e.g., merely by study one cannot decide 
whether the soul exists, for one system of philosophy affirms that it does, 
while another system states that it does not. 

(4) Irregularity of perception, e.g., we perceive water in the tank 
where it really exists, but water appears also to exist in the mirage where 
it really does not exist. 

A question arises whether water is perceived only' when it actually 
exists or even when it does not exist. 

{')) Irregularity of non-percept ion, e.g., wc do not perceive water in 
the radish where it really exists, or on dry land where it does not exist. 

A question arises, whether w r ater is not perceived only when it does 
not exist, or also when it does exist. 

qufr i fo gs q s ra&i ^ “ wswg ” ntaiwu 

24. Purpose is that, with an eye to which one proceeds 

to act. 

Purpose refers to the thing which one endeavours to attain or avoid. 

[A man collects fuel for the purpose of cooking his food]. 

MOUVII 

25. A familiar instance is the thing about which an 
ordinary n*m and an expert entertain the same opinion. 

[With regard to the general proposition “ wherever there is smoke 
there is fire ” the familiar instance is a kitchen in which fire and smoke 
abide together, to tlie satisfaction of an ordinary man as well as an acute 
investigator.] 

“ftrspa:” m i ? i H n 



THE NYAYA-StTRAS. 


26. An established tenet is a dogma resting on the 
authority of a certain school, hypothesis, or implication. 



TOKt M I t I w II 

* 27. The tenet is of four kinds owing to the distinction 

between a dogma of all the schools , a dogma 'peculiar to some 


school, a hypothetical dogma, and an implied dogma. 





*99 


Mill ^ II 

28. A dogma of all the schools is a tenet which is not 
opposed by any school and is claimed by at least one school. 

Tho five elements (viz., earth, water, light, air and ether), the five 
objects of sense (viz., smell, taste, colour, touch and sound), etc., are tenets 
which are accepted by all the schools. 


M I \ I II 

29. A dogma peculiar to some school is a tenet 
which is accepted by similar schools but rejected by oppo- 
site schools. 

“A thing cannot come into existence out of nothing ” — this is a 
peculiar dogma of the S'lhkhyas. [The eternity of sound is a peculiar 
dogma of the Mimsimsakas]. 



II 

30. A hypothetical dogma is a tenet which if 
.^accepted leads to the acceptance of another tenet. 

“ There is a soul apart from the senses, because it can recognise one 
and the some object by seeing and touching.” [f you accept this tenet 
you must also have accepted the following: — (1) That the senses are 
more than one, (2) that each of the senses has its particular object, (3) 
that the soul derives its knowledge through the channels of the senses, 
(4) that a substance which is distinct from its qualities is the abode of 
them, etc. 


10 


BOOK I, CHAPTER L 


» \ i n *ui 

31. An implied dogma is a tenet which is not 
explicitly declared as such, but which follows from the 
examination of particulars concerning it. 

The discussion whether sound is eternal or non-eternal presupposes 
that it is a substance. “ That sound is a substance ” is here an implied 
dogma. [The mind has nowhere been stated in the Ny/iya-sutra to he a 
sense-organ, but it follows from the particulars examined concerning it 
that it is so]. 

“gperen” im 1 1 ** u 

32. The members (of a syllogism) are proposition, 
reason, example, application, and conclusion. 

[1. Proposition. — This hill is liery, 

2. Reason. — Because it is smoky, 

3. Example. — Whatever is smoky is fiery, as a kitchen, 

4. Application.— So is this hill (smoky), 

5. Conclusion.— Therefore this hill is fiery]. 

Some lay down fire more members as follows : — 

1 (a) Inquiry as to the proposition (jijfnis.'i). — Is this hill fiery in all 
its parts, or in a particular part ? 

2(a) Questioning the reason (saih^aya). — That which you eall smoke 
may be nothing but vapour. 

3 (a) Capacity of the example to warrant the conclusion v^akya- 
prapti). Is it. true that smoke is always a concomitant of fire? In a kitchen 

there are of course both smoke and fire, but in a red-hot iron-ball there is 
no smoke. 

4 (a) Purpose for drawing the conclusion (prayojana). — Purpose con- 
sists in the determination of the true conditions of the hill, in order to 
ascertain whether it is such that one can approach it, or such that one 
should avoid it, or such that one should maintain an attitude of indiffer- 
ence towards it. 

4 (fe) Dispelling all questions (saihdayavyudf.sa). — It is beyond all 
questions that the hill is smoky, and that smoke is an invariable 4 concomi- 
tant of fire. 

“srf^rr m « u n # 



TfiE NYlYA-SOTRAS. ll 

\&3. A proposition is fclie declaration of what is to be 
established. 

Sound is non-eternal— this is a proposition. 

“tl:” KldWi 

34. The reason is the means for establishing what is 
to be established through the homogeneous or affirmative 
character of the example. 

Proposition. — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason. — Because it is produced, 

Example (homogeneous). — Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a 

pot. 

The example “ pot ” possesses the same character as is implied in 
the reason, vis., “ being produced," inasmuch as both arc non-eternal. 

“<raT” ami v, ii 

35. Likewise through heterogeneous or negative charac- 
ter. 

Proposition. — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason. — Because it is produced, 

Example (heterogeneous). — Whatever is not non-eternal is not pro- 
duced, as the soul. 

The example “ soul ” possesses a character heterogeneous to that 
which is implied in the reason, vis., “ being produced,’’ inasmuch as one 
is eternal and the other non-eternal. 

« m i w h 

36. A homogeneous (or affirmative) example is a 
familiar instance which is known to possess the property to 
be established and which implies that this property is in- 
variably contained in the reason given. 

Proposition — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason — Because it is produced, 

Homogeneous example — Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a 
pot. t • 

Here “ pot ” is a familiar instance which possesses the property of 
non-eternality and implies that whatever is “ produced ” is attended by 
the same property (non-eternality). 



12 


BOOK I, CHAPTER t. 

afei&isr “fWfcra.” 

37. A heterogeneous (or negative) example is a 
familiar instance which is known to he devoid of the pro- 
perty to be established and which implies that the absence 
of this property is invariably rejected in the reason given. 

Proposition — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason — Because it is produced, 

Heterogeneous example — Whatever is not non-eternal is not produced, 
as the soul. 

Here the soul is a familiar instance which is known to be devoid of 
the property of non-eternality and implies that if anything were produced, 
it would necessarily be deprived of the quality of etemality, i.e., ‘being 
produced ’ and ‘ eternal ’ are imcompatible epithets. 

sr wr stwro 

h u % i v ii 

38. Application is a winding up, with reference to 
the example, of what is to be established as being so or 
not so. 

Application is of two kinds: (l) affirmative and (2) negative. The 
affirmative application, which is expressed by the word “so,” occurs when 
the example is of an affirmative character. The negative application, 
which is expressed by the phrase “ not so,” occurs when the example is of 
a negative character. 

Proposition — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason — Because it is produced, 

Example — Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a pot, 

Affirmative application . — So is sound (produced!, 

Conclusion. — Therefore sound is non-eternal. 

Or: 

Proposition — Sound is not eternal, 

Reason-**Becanse it is produced, 

Example — Whatever is eternal is not produced, as the soul, 

Negative application .— Sound is not so {i.e., sound is not produced), 
Conclusion.— Therefore sound is not eternal. 



THE NYAYA-SttTRAS. 13 


39. Conclusion is the re-stating of the proposition 

after the reason has been mentioned. 

Conclusion is the confirmation oE the proposition after the reason 
and the example have been mentioned. 

Proposition — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason — Because it is produced, 

Example — Whatever is produced is non-eternal, as a pot, 
Application — So is sound (produced), 

Conclusion . — Therefore sound is produced. 

It I ti II 

40. Confutation, which is carried on for ascertain- 
ing the real character of a thing of which the character is 
not known, is reasoning which reveals the character by 
showing the absurdity of all contrary characters. 

Is the soul eternal or non-eternal ? Here the real character of the 
soul, viz., whether it is eternal or non-etornal, is not known. In ascertain- 
ing the character we reason as follows : — If the soul were non-eternal it 
would be impossible for it to enjoy the fruits of its own actions, to undergo 
transmigration, and to attain final release. But such a conclusion is 
absnrd : such possibilities are known to belong to the soul : therefore, we 
must admit that the soul is eternal. 

“fMhn” » 1 1 u « » 


41. Ascertainment is the removal of doubt, and the 
determination of a question, by hearing two opposite sides. 

A person wavers and doubts if certain statements are advanced to 
him by one of two parties, but opposed by the other party. His doubt 
is not removed until by the application of reasons he can vindicate either 
of the parties. The process by which the vindication is effected is called 
ascertainment. Ascertainment is not, however, in all cases preceded by 
doubt, for instance, in the case of perception things are ascertained 
directly. So also we ascertain things directly by the authority of scrip- 
tures, or through discussion. But in the case of investigation, doubt must 
precede ascertainment. 





!t« 



14 BOOK 1, CHAPTER It 

Book I. — Chapter II. 

q j^ | «W^ q q« 8 

q^fylrlMtdqRn^i “q^:” 

1. Discussion is the adoption of one of two oppos- 
ing sides. What is adopted is analysed in the form of five 
members, and defended by the aid of any of the means of 
right knowledge, while its opposite is assailed by confuta- 
tion, without deviation from the established tenets. 

[A dialogue or disputation (katha) is the adoption of a side by a dis- 
putant and its opposite by his opponent. It is of three kinds, viz., 
discussion which aims at ascertaining the truth, wrangling which aims at 
gaining victory, and cavil which aims at finding mere faults. A dismtient 
is one who engages himself in a disputation as a means of seeking the 
truth]. 

Au instance of discussion is given below 

Discutient — There is soul. 

Opponent — There is no soul. 

Discutient — Soul is existent (proposition). 

Because it is an abode of consciousness (reason). 

Whatever is not existent is not an abode of consciousness, 
as a hare’s horn ( negative example). 

Soul is not so, that is, soul is an abode of consciousness 
(negative application). 

Therefore soul is existent (conclusion). 

Opponent— Soul is non-existent (proposition). 

Because, etc. 

Discutient — The scripture which is a verbal testimony declares the 
existence of soul. 

Opponent 

Discutient — If there were uo soul, it would not be possible to appre- 
hend one and th# same object through sight and touch. 

Opponent 

Discutient — The doctrine of soul harmonises well with the various 4 
tenets which we hold, viz., that there are eternal things, that everybody., 
enjoys pleasure or suffers pain according to his own actions, etc. There- 
festo there is soiil. 



15 


THE NYAYA-StTRAS 

[The discussion will he considerably lengthened if the opponent 
happens to be a Buddhist who does not admit the authority of scripture, 
and holds that there are no eternal tilings, etc.]. 



H \\ R I R II 


2. Wrangling, which aims at gaining victory, is the 
defence or attack of a proposition in the manner aforesaid 
by quibbles, futilities, and other processes which deserve 
rebuke. * 


A wrangler is one who, engaged in a disputation, aims only at vic- 
tory, being indifferent whether the arguments which he employs support 
his own contention or that of his opponent, provided that he can make out 
a pretext for bragging that lie has taken an active part in the disputation. 



“firawr” moiu 


3. Cavil is a kind of wrangling which consists in 
mere attacks on the opposite side. 

A caviller does not endeavour to establish anything, but confines 
himself to mere carping at the arguments of his opponent. 



wsrr:” m mu » ii 


4. Fallacies of a reason are the erratic, the contra- 
dictory, the equal to the question, the unproved, and the 
mistimed. 


h 1 1 * m « 


5. The erratic is the reason which leads to more 
conclusions than one. 

An instance Of the erratic is given below : — 

Proposition — sound is eternal, 

Erratic reason — Beeause it is intangible, 

Example — Whatever is intangible is eternal as atoms. 

Application — So is sound (intangible), 

Conclusion. — Therefore sound is eternal, 



16 


BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 


Again : 

Proposition — Sound is non-eternal, 

Erratic reason. — Because it is intangible, 

Example. — Whatever is intangible is non-eternal, as intellect, 
Application. — So is sound (intangible), 

Conclusion. — Therefore sound is non-eternal (intangible). 

Here from the reason there have been drawn two opposite conclusions, 
viz . : that sound is eternal, and that sound is non-eternal. The reason or 
middle term is erratic when it is not pervaded by the major terra, that is, 
when there is no universal connection between the major term and 
middle term, as pervader and pervaded. Intangible is pervaded neither 
by ‘eternal ’ nor by ‘non eternal.’ In fact there is no universal connection 
between ‘intangible’ and “eternal ’ or ‘non-eternal.’ 

1 1 * i % « 

6. The contradictory is the reason which opposes 
what is to be established. 

Proposition. — A pot is produced, 

Contradictory reason. — Because it is eternal. 

Here the reason is contradictory because that which is eternal is 
never produced. 



“g q re g wr 


♦ 

♦ 


K \\ R I « It 

7. Equal to the question is the reason which pro- 
vokes the very question for the solution of which it was 
employed. 

Proposition. — Sound is non-eternal, 

Reason which is equal to the question — Because it is not possessed of 
the attribute of eternal ity. 

‘Non-eternal’ is the same as ‘not possessed of the attribute of 
eternality.’ In determining the question whether sound is non-eternal 
the reason givaa is that sound is non-eternal, or in other words the reason 
begs the question. 

“qisrani” uuki 

8. The unproved is the reason which stands in 
need of proof in the same way as the proposition does. 



THE NYlYA-SCrTRAS. 


if 


Proposition — Shadow is a s ubs tance. 

Unproved reason. — Because it possesses motion. 

Here unless it is actually proved that shadow possesses motion, we 
cannot accept it as the reason for the proposition that shadow is a sub- 
stance. Just as the proposition stands in need of proof so does the 
reason itself. It is possible that the motion belongs to the person who 
causes that obstruction of light which is called shadow. 

II * I * I « 

50. The mistimed is the reason which is adduced 
when the time is past in which it might bold good. — 9. 

Proposition — Sound is durable. 

Mistimed reason — Because it is manifested by union, as a colour. 

The colour of a juris manifested when the jar comes into union with 
a lamp, but the colour existed before the union took place, and will con- 
tinue to oxist after the union has ceased. Similarly, the sound of a dram 
is manifested when tho drum comes into union with a rod, and the sound 
must, after the analogy of the colour, bo presumed to have' existed before 
the union took place, and to continue to oxist after tho union lias ceased. 
Henco sound is durable. Tho reason adduced here is mistimed, because 
the manifestation of sound does not take place at the timo when the drum 
comes into union with the rod, but at a subsequent moment when the 
union has ceased. In the case of colour, however, the manifestation takes 
place just at the time when the jar comes into union with the lamp. Be- 
cause the time of their manifestation is different, the analogy between 
colour and sound is not complete, therefore, the reason is mistimed. 

Some interpret the aphorism as follows: — The mistimed is the 
reason which is adduced in a wrong order among the five members, 
for instance, as, if the reason is stated before tho proposition. But this 
interpretation, according to Vittsyayana, is wrong for a word bears its 
legitimate connection with another word (in a Sanskrit sentenco) even if 
they are placed at a distance from each other, and, on the other hand, even 
the closest proximity is of no use if the words arc disconnected in their 
sense.® Moreover, the placing of members in a wrong order is noticed 
in the Nyaya-sfltx-a as a nigrahasthana (occasion for rebuke) called 
aprdpta-hdla (inopportune). 

51. Quibble is the opposition offered to a proposi- 
tion by the assumption of an alternative meaning. — 10. 

* (Quoted by Vatasyayaua in tho Nyaya-bhd^ya, p. 260). 

1*857 


a 



i$ 


BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

II t I R I U « 

52. It is of fierce kinds, viz., quibble in respect of 
a term, quibble in respect of a genus, and quibble in res- 
pect of a metaphor. — 11. 

sni” h u ^ i v< H 

53. Quibble in respect of a term consists in wil- 
fully taking the term in a sense other than that intended 
by a speaker who has happened to use it ambiguously. — 12. 

A speaker says : “ this hoy is nava-ltambala (possessed of a new 
. blanket).” 

A quibbler replies: “this boy is not certainly nava-hambala 
(possessed of nine blankets) for he has only one blanket. 

Here the word nava which is ambiguous was used by the speaker 
in the sense of “ new,” but has been wilfully taken by the quibblor in 
the sense of “nine.” 

54. Quibble in respect of a genus consists in assert- 
ing the impossibility of a thing which is really possible, 
on the ground that it belongs to a certain genus which is 
very wide. — 13. 

A speaker says : “ this Brahmana is possessed of learning and 
conduct.” 

An objector replies : “ it is impossible, for how can it be inferred 
that this person is possessed of learning and conduct because he is a 
Br&hmana. There aie little boys who are Brnhmanas, yet not possessed 
of learning and conduct. 

Here the objector is a quibbler, for lie knows well that possession 
' of learning and conduct was not meant to be an attribute of the whole 
class of Brahmanas, but it was ascribed to “ this ” particular Brnhmaya 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 19 

who lived long enough in the world to render it possible for him to 
pursue studies and acquire good morals. 

aim i»« 

55. Quibble in respect of u metaphor consists in 
denying the proper meaning of a word by taking it literally 
while it was used metaphorically, and vice versa . — 14. 

A speaker says : “ the scaffolds cry out.” 

An objector replies: “ it is impossible for scaffolds to cry out for they 
are inanimate objects.” 

Here the objeetor is a quibbler, for he knew well that the word 
scaffold was used to signify those standing on the scaffolds. 

ii li R i ih * 

56. It may be said that, quibble in respect of a 
metaphor is in reality quibble in respect of a term, for the 
first is not different from the second. — 15. 

57. But it is not so, for there is a distinction between 
them. — 16. 

Words are taken in their direct (literal) meanings in the case of 
‘ quibble in respect of a term ’ while they are taken in their direct (literal) 
as well as indirect (secondary) meanings in the ease of ‘ quibble in 
respect of a metaphor.’ 

58. If you do not admit that one is different from 
another simply because there is some similarity between 
them, then we should have only one kind of quibble. — 17. 

If - quibble in respect of a metaphor’ were not different from 
‘ quibble in respect of a term,’ then these two also would not be different 
from ‘ quibble in respect of a genus ’ because there is some similarity 
among all of them. This is absurd, hence the three kinds of quibble 
are different from one another. 

“snfa:” 



20 BOOK I, CHAPTER II. 

59. Futility consists in offering objections founded 
on mere similarity or dissimilarity.— 18. 

A disputant says : “ the soul is inactive because it is all-pervading 
as ether.” 

His opponent replies : “ if the soul is inactive because it bears simi- 
larity to ether as being all-pervading, why is it not active because it 
bears similarity to a pot as being a seat of union ?” 

The reply is futile, because it overlooks the universal connection 
between the middle term and the major term which is existent in the 
arguments of the disputant, but wanting in the arguments of the opponent. 
Whatever is all-pervading is inactive, but whatever is a scat of union 
is not necessarily active. 

Or again : 

Disputant — Sound is non-eternal because unlike ether it is a product. 

Opponent — If sound is non-eternal because as a product it is dis- 
similar to ether, why it is not eternal because as an object of auditory 
perception it is dissimilar to a pot ? 

The reply is futile because it overlooks the universal disconnection 
between the middle term and the absence of the major term. There is a 
universal disconnection between “ a product ” and “ not non-eternal,” 
but there is uo such disconnection between “ an object of auditory per- 
ception” and “not eternal.” 

“ Pmwwy nunu 

60. An occasion for rebuke arises when one mis- 
understands or does not understand at all. — 19. 

If a person begins to argue in a way which betrays his utter 
ignorance, or wilfully misunderstands and yet persists in showing that 
he understands well, it is of no avail to employ counterarguments. He 
is quite unfit to be argued with, and there is nothing left for his opponent 
but to turn him out or quit his company, rebuking him as a blockhead 
or a knave. 

An insfSnee of occasion for rebuke : — 

Whatever is not quality is substance. 

Because there is nothing except colour, etc. (quality). 

A person who argues in the above way is to be rebuked as a fool, 
for his reason (which admits only quality) opposes his proposition 
(which admits both quality and substance). 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 


21 


Another instance : 

Disputant — Fire is not hot. 

Opponent — But the evidence of touch disproves such a statement. 

Disputant, in order to gain the confidence of the assembled people, 
says — “0 learned audience, listen, I do not say that firo is not hot,” ete. 

It is only meet that the opponent should quit the company of a 
man who argues in this way. 

I* I v « 

61. Owing to the variety of kinds, there is multipli- 
city of futilities and occasions for rebuke. — 20. 

There are 24 kinds of futility and 22 kinds of occasion for rebuke 
which will be treated respectively in Chapter I and Chapter II of Book V. 



22 


BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

Book II. — Chapter I. 

STOP 

Rumi 

62. Some say that doubt, cannot arise from the re- 
cognition of common and uncommon properties whether 
conjointly or separately. — 1. 

Conjointly . — It is said that doubt about an object is never pro- 
duced if both the common and uncommon properties of the object are 
recognised. For instance, if we see in the twilight a tall object which 
moves we do not doubt whether it is a man or a post. Wo at once decide 
that it is a man, for though tallnoss is a property possessed in common 
by man and post, locomotion is a property which distinguishes a man from 
a post. 

Separately . — Likewise doubt about an object is said never to be pro- 
duced ii only the common or the uncommon properties are recognised. For 
instance, if we see a tall object in the twilight, we have no reason to doubt 
whether it is a man or a post. Tallness is certainly a property possessed 
in common by man and post, but the tallness of a man is not identical 
with that of a post : it merely resembles it. Now the knowledge of simi- 
larity between the tallness of a man and that of a post presupposes a 
knowledge of the man and the post, of which the two kinds of tallness are 
attributes. If there is already a knowledge of the man and the post, 
there cannot be any doubt about them, for knowledge is the vanquisher 
of doubt. 

n * i ? i * # 

63. It is further said that doubt cannot arise either 
from conflicting testimony or from the irregularity of per- 
ception and non-perception. — 2. 

^ ii * i * i * « 

64. In the case of conflicting testimony there is, 
according To them, a strong conviction (on each side). — 3. 

Suppose a disputant (NaiyAyika) says : there is soul. His opponent 
(Buddhist) replies : there is no soul. • 

The disputant and his opponent are quite sure that their respective 
statements are correct. Hence there is no doubt, but on the contrary 
there is conviction, in the minds of both. 



THE NYAYA-SOtRAS. 


23 


M n i ? i » » 

65. Doubt, they say, does not arise from the irregula- 
rity of perception and non-perception, because in the 

irregularity itself there is regularity. — 4. 

An irregularity may bo designated as such with reference to some- 
thing else, but witli reference to itself it is a settled fact. If the irregularity 
is settled in itself, it is regular and cannot cause doubt. On the other 
hand, if the irregularity is not settled in itself, it is devoid of its own 
character and cannot cause doubt. 




66. Likewise there is, they say, the chance of an end- 
less doubt owing to the continuity of its cause. — 5. 

Recognition of properties common to many objects is, for instance, 
a cause of doubt. The common properties continue to exist and hence 
there will, they say, bo no cessation of doubt. 





gnsra r- 


ii r i w % ii 

67. In reply, it is stated that the recognition of pro- 
perties common to many objects, etc., are certainly causes of 
doubt if there is no reference to the precise characters of the 
objects : there is no chance of no-doubt or of endless- 
doubt. — 6. 


It is admitted that doubt does not arise from the recognition of 
common and uncommon properties conjointly. Aphorism 2-1-1 brings 
forth the objection that doubt is not produced oven by the recognition 
of common or uncommon properties alone. It is said that while we see 
a tall object in the twilight, wc at once think of a man and a post, both 
of which are tall. Thus there is knowledge rather than doubt about 
the man and post suggested by the tall object. The present aphorism 
dismisses the objection by stating that there is certainly a common (non- 
distinctive) knowledge about a man and a post suggested by the tall 
object, but there is no precise (distinctive) knowledge about them. Precise 
knowledge (that is, knowledge of the precise character which distinguishes 
a man from a post) being absent, doubt must arise. Similar argu- 
ments will apply to doubt arising from the recognition of non-common 
properties alone. 



24 BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 


Aphorisms 2-1-2 and 2-1-3 raise the objection that doubt does not 
arise from conflicting testimony, as the disputant and his opponent are 
both confident of their respective contentions. The present aphorism 
disposes of the objection by pointing out that in the case of conflicting 
statements one is led to believe that both statements are worth consi- 
deration, but is unable to penetrate into the precise characters of the 
statements. Hence though the disputant and his opponent remain fixed, 
the umpire and the audience are thrown into doubt by their conflicting 
statements. 

Aphorism 2-1-4 raises the objection that doubt cannot arise from 
the irregularity of perception and non-perception as the irregularity is 
settled in itself. The present aphorism meets the objection by stating 
that the irregularity canuot be concealed by mere verbal tricks. The 
irregularity though settled in itself does not lose its own character un til 
the objects which cause it are removed. 

Aphorism 2-1-5 gives rise to the fear that there is the possibility of an 
endless doubt inasmuch as the cause is continuous. The present aphor- 
ism removes the fear by stating that though materials of doubt, such as 
common properties, etc., continue to exist, we do not always recognise 
them. Unless there is recognition of the common properties, etc , there 
cannot be doubt. 


*T5T II R M I V II 

68. Examination should be made of each case where 
there is room for doubt. — 7. 


It has been stated that knowledge about the true nature of the cate- 
gories consists in the true knowledge of their enunciation, definition, and 
examination. In case of well-known facts admitted by all, there should be 
no examination. We are to examine only those cases where there is room 
for doubt. The author explains, therefore, first the nature of doubt, aiid 
then proceeds to examine the other categories, lest there should be any 
room for doubt in them. 

Merenfomramuw u * i \ \ q ii 

69. Perception and other means of knowledge, says 
an objector, are invalid as they are impossible at all the 
three times. — 8. 

According to the objector, perception is impossible at the present, 
past and future times, or in other words, perception can neither be prior 
to, nor posterior to, nor simultaneous with, the objects of sense. 



THE NYAYA-&0TRA& 




u * i t i * n 

70. Tf perception occurred anteriorly it could not, he 
says, have arisen from the contact of a sense with its object. 
-9, 


With reference to the perception of colour, for instance, it is asked 
whether the colour precedes perception or the perception precedes colour. 
If you say that perception occurred anteriorly or preceded the colour, you 
must give up your definition of perception, oiz., that perception arises 
from the contact of a sense with its object. 

* JWT%«T: gft qiQfe : t H Ip II 

71. if perception is supposed to occur posteriorly 
you cannot, he continues, maintain the conclusion that 
objects of sense are established by perception. — 10. 

The objection stands thus : — Tlio means of right knowledge are 
stated by you to be perception, inference, comparison and verbal testi- 
mony. All objects of right knowledge are said to be established by them. 
The objects of sense, for instance, are supposed to be established by per- 
ception: colour is said to be established by visual perception. This 
conclusion will have to be abandoned if you say that perception occurs 
posteriorly to the objects. 

II * i s j s s II 

72. If perception were simultaneous with its object 
there would not, says the objector, be any order of succes- 
sion in our cognitions as there is no such order in their 
corresponding objects. — 11. 

Various objects of son so can oxist at one time, e.g., colour and smell exist in a flower 
at the same ’time. If we hold that perception is simultaneous with its object we must 
admit that the colour and the smell can be perceived at tho same time, that is, our per- 
ception of colour must be admitted to be simultaneous with our perception of smell. 
This is absurd because two acts of perception, nay, two cognitions cannot take plaee 
( 



26 BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

at , the samo timo. As there jn an order of succession in our cognitions, perception cannot 
be simultaneous with its object. The aphorism may also be explainodas follows : — 

In knowing a colour we perforin, we may say, two kinds of know- 
ledge simultaneously, viz., perception and inference. As soon as our eye 
comes in contact with the colour, perception results which does 
not, however, enable us to be aware of the colour. The colour is brought 
home to us by inference which, we may say, is performed simultaneously 
with the perception. Now, says the objector, perception and inference 
being two different kinds of knowledge cannot be simultaneous, as the 
mind which is an atomic substance cannot be instrumental in producing 
more than one kind of knowledge at a time. — 11. 

ifonwfol: it r i ? i ? * n 

73. In reply, it is stated that if perception and other 
means of right knowledge are impossible, the denial of them 
is also impossible. — 12. 

Owing to absence of the matter to be denied, the denial is inoper- 
ative. 



II s i i i \\ II 


74. Moreover, the denial itself cannot he established, 
ilyou deny all moans of right knowledge. — 13. 

Jf you are to establish anything («.</., denial), yon can do so only 
by one or more of the means of right knowledge, viz., perception, infer- 
ence, comparison, etc. If you deny them there will be left nothing 
which will lead you to the establishment of the thing. Hence you will not 
be able to establish the denial itself. 

uurmnpt * u & mro rafEfo : n * i * i s s u 

75. If you say that your denial is based on a certain 
means of right knowledge, you do thereby acknowledge the 
validity of the means. — 14. 

Suppose you deny a tiling because it is not perceived. You do there- 
by acknowledge that perception is a means of right knowledge. Similarly 
inference, etc., are also to be acknowledged as means of right knowledge. 



THE NYAYA-SttTRAS. 


27 


lumnil 

76. The means of right knowledge cannot, therefore, 
be denied. They are established in the manner that a drum 
is proved by its sound. — 15. 

There is, says Vatsyayana, no fixed rule that the means of right 
knowledge should precede the objects of right knowledge or should suc- 
ceed them or be simultaneous with them. The order of precedence is 
never uniform. Look at the analogous cases : a drum precedes its sound, 
and illumination succeeds the sun, while smoke is synchronous with fire. 

nfcrar ^ n * I ? i n 

77. The character of an object of right knowledge re- 
sembles that of a balance by which a thing is weighed. — 16. 

Just as a balance is an instrument for measuring weight but is a 
measured object when it is itself weighed in another balance, so the 
senses, etc., arc said to be instruments of right knowledge from one point 
of view, and objects of right knowledge from another point of view. The 
eye, for instance, is an instrument of perception as well as an object of 
perception. So also the means of right knowledge may, if occasion arises, 
be also regarded as objects of right knowledge. 

swraRtfedh smrarRT uaroRrclhfejwf: im 1 1 w u 

78. If an object of right knowledge, continues the 
objector, is to be established by a means of right knowledge, 
this latter needs also to be established by another means of 
right knowledge. — 17. 

The objection stands thus : — 

You say that an object of right knowledge is to be established by a 
means of right knowledge. L admit this and ask how you establish 
the means of right knowledge itself. Since a means of right knowledge 
may also be regarded as an object of right knowledge, you are required 
to establish the so-called means of right knowledge by another means of 
right knowledge and so on. 

smraribfe'kdRHfi!; u r n i is u 

79. Or, he continues, if a means of right know- 
ledge does not require another means of right knowledge 
for its establishment, let an object of right knowledge 



28 BOOK II, CHAPTER l 

be also established without any means of right knowledge. 
—18. 

A means of right knowledge stands in the same category as an 
object of right knowledge, if you are to establish either of them. 
If the means of right knowledge is accepted as self-established, 
the object of right knowledge must also, according to the objector, be 
accepted as self-established. In such a contingency perception, inference, 
etc., will be superfluous. 

?r 11 * i t i n 

80. It is not so : the means of right knowledge are 
established like the illumination of a lamp. — 19. 

A lamp illumines a jar and our eye illumines the lamp. Though 
it is sometimes the lamp, and sometimes the eye, that illumines, you are 
bound to admit a general notion of illuminator. Similarly you must admit 
a general notion of the means of right knowledge as distinguished from 
that of the objects of right knowledge. The means will not, of course, 
be regarded as such when included under the category of an object. 

[The aphorism is also interpreted as follows: — Just as a lamp 
illumines itself and the other objects, tho means of right knowledge 
establish themselves and the objects of right knowledge. Hence percep- 
tion establishes itself and the objects of sense]. 

Note .— Objections raised in aphorisms 8,9, 1.0, 11, 10, 17 and 18 emanated from the 
Buddhist philosophy. The reply given in aphorisms 12, 13, 14, 15 and I!), represents the 
views of llrahmanic philosophers who regard perception as a real aet and objects as 
self-existent ontitics. According to tho Buddhist philosophers, howevor, neither percep- 
tion nor objects havo any self-existence. They acquire an apparent or conditional 
existence in virtue of a certain relation which exists between them. Cause and effect, 
long and short, prior and posterior, etc., are ail relativo terms. Tho whole world is a 
network of relations. The relations themseives are illusory as tho objects which are 
related havo no self-existonco. Hence the world is an illusion or has a more conditional 
existence. Bnt whore there is conditionality there is no truth. Truth and conditionality 
are Incompatible terms. That which neutralises all relations is tho void or absolute 
which lies beyond tho conditional world. To speak tho truth, the world is an absolute 
nothing though It has a conditional existence. Vide my Translation of the Madhyamlka 
aphorisms in tho Journal of tho Umldhist Text Soeioty, Calcutta, for 1895, 1898, 1897, 1898 
and 1899. V 

II * M I *0 II 

81. An objector may say that the definition of per- 
ception as given before ip untenable because incomplete. 
- 20 , 



THE NYAYA-StITRAS. 


29 


Perception lias been defined as knowledge which arises from the 
contact of a sense with its object. This definition is said to be defective 
because it dees not notice the conjunction of soul with mind, and of 
mind with sense, which are causes of perception. 

H II R I * M* II 

82. Perception, it is said, cannot arise unless there 
is conjunction of soul with mind.— 21. 

From the contact of a sense with its object no knowledge arises 
unless, it is said, there is also conjunction of soul with mind. A sense 
coming in contact with its object produces knowledge in our soul only if 
the sense is conjoined with the mind. Hence the conjunction of soul 
with mind should be mentioned as a necessary element in the definition 
of perception. 

j r^r#i m i i im * i «« h 

83. Were it so, we reply, then direction, space, time 
and ether, should also be enumerated among the causes of 
perception. — 22. 

Direction, space, time and ether arc also indispensable conditions in 
the production of knowledge. But even the objector does not feel the 
necessity of enumerating these among tlic causes of perception. 

srunrta: uunu 

84. The soul, we point out, has not been excluded 
from our definition inasmuch as knowledge is a mark of 
the soul. — 23. 

Perception has been described as knowledge, and knowledge implies 
the sou! which is its abode. Consequently in speaking of knowledge the 
soul has, by implication, been mentioned as a condition in the production 
of perception. 

d Riff *b| 1*1 H Ri 1 1 H 

85. The mind too has not been omitted from our 
definition inasmuch as we have spoken of the non-simul- 
taneity ^of acts of knowledge. — 24. 

Perception has been defined as knowledge. An essential character- 
istic of knowledge is that more than one act of knowing cannot take place 
$t a time. This characteristic is due to the mind, an atomic substance. 



30 


BOOK IT, CHAPTER L 


which is conjoined with the sense, when knowledge is produced. Hence 
in speaking of knowledge we have by implication mentioned the mind as 
a condition of perception. 


II R I \ I H 

86. The contact of a sense with its object is mention- 
ed as the special cause of perception. — 25. 


There are many kinds of knowledge, such as perception, recollection, 
etc. Conjunction of soul with mind is a cause which operates in the 
production of all kinds of knowledge, while the contact of a sense with its 
object is the cause which operates only in perception. In our definition 
of perception wc have mentioned only the special cause, and have omitted 
the common causes which precede not only perception but also other 
kinds of knowledge. 



H R I \ I II 


87. The contact of a sense with its object is cer- 
tainly the main cause as perception is produced even when 
one is asleep or inattentive. — 26. . 

Even a sleeping person hears the thundering of a cloud if his ear is 
open to it, and a careless person experiences heat if his skin is exposed 
to it. 


[Aphorisms 25 and 26 are omitted by VAtsy&yana, the earliest 
commentator, but are noticed by Udyotakara, Vachaspati, Vislvanatba and 
other subsequent annotators]. 


u au'&rit qrafaftwroi « * 1 1 1 w « 


88. By the senses and their objects are also distin- 
guished the special kinds of knowledge. — 27. 

The special kinds of knowledge are the five varieties of perception, 
viz,, by sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch. These are distinguished 
by the senate in whose spheres they lie or by the objects which they 
illumine. Thus the visual perception is called eye-knowledge or colour- 
knowledge, the auditory perception is called ear-knowledge or sound- 
knowledge, the olfactory perception is called nose-knowledge, or smell- 
knowledge, the gustatory perception is called tongue-knowledge or taste- 
knowledge and the tactual perception is called skin-knowledge or touch- 
knowledge. 



'The nyAya-sotras. 


w * I l I R< II 

89. It may be objected that the contact of a sense 
with, its object is not the cause of perception, as it is in- 
efficient in some instances. — 28. 

An objector may say that the contact of a sense with its object is 
not the cause of perception, as we find that a person listening to a song 
may not see colour though it comes in contact with his eye. 

[Vatsyayaua interprets the aphorism as follows: — If the conjunction 
of soul with mind is not accepted as the cause of perception, a well-known 
conclusion will be debarred, viz., the mark of the mind is that only one act 
of knowledge is possible at a time. This interpretation, here inappro- 
priate, is based on the Bh/Uya-comincutary published by the Asiatic 
Society of Bengal in 1865. 1 fully agree with those who hold that the 

real Bh&jya-commentary of Vatsyayaua is not yet available to ns.] 


90. It is not so because there is pre-eminence of some 
particular object. — 29. 

It is admitted that a person while listening to a song may not see 
colour though it comes in contact with his eye. Yot the instance does not 
prove that the contact of a sense with its object is not the cause of percep- 
tion, for it is to be understood that his intent listening prevents him 
from seeing the colour. In other words, the auditory perception 
supersedes the visual perception, because the song is more attractive than 
the colour. 

[Vatsyayaua interprets the aphorism thus : — The conjunction of soul 
with mind is not rendorod useless, evon if there is predominance of 
the senses and their objects. If perception is produced when a person is 
asleep or inattentive, it is because there is then the predominance of his 
sense and its object though oven then there is a faint conjunction of soul 
with mind. - This interpretation is based on the Bhasya-commentary as 
available to us. It is ingenious but out of place here]. 

« i u i v i 

91. Perception, it may be urged, is inference because 
it illumines only a part as a mark of the whole. — 30. 

We are said to perceive a tree while we really perceive only a part of 
it; This knowledge of the tree, as a whole, derived from the knowledge 
of a part of it is, according to the objectors, a case of inference. . ... . 



feOOK II, CHAPTEfe 1. 


32 

* r \k » m 

92. But this is not so, for perception is admitted of 
at least that portion which it actually illumines. — 31. 

The objectors themselves admit that a part is actually perceived. 
Hence perception as a means of knowledge is not altogether denied and it 
is accepted as different from inference. 

* wfcqyw mmu 

93. Moreover, the perception is not merely of a part, 
for there is a whole behind the part. — 32. 

The perception of a part does not exclude perception of the whole 
of which it is a part. If you touch the hand, leg or any other limb of a 
person you are said to touch the person. Similarly, if you perceive a part 
of a thing you are said to perceive the thing. A part implies the whole, 
and perception of a part implies perception of the whole. 

94. There is, some say, doubt about the whole, 
because the whole has yet to be established. — 33. 

The objectors say that parts alone are realities and that there is no 
whole behind them. A tree, for instance, is yellow in some parts and 
green in other parts. If the tree was one whole, then the contradictory 
qualities of yellowness and greenness could not have belonged to it 
simultaneously. Hence the parts alone must, according to them, be 
regarded as real. 

ii r i 1 1 it 

95. If there were no whole there would, it is replied, 
be non-perception of all. — 34. 

All signifies substance, quality, action, generality, particularity and 
intimate relation. None of. these would be perceptible if the whole were 
denied. Sujjpose that the parts alone are real. Then since a part is not 
of fixed dimensiou, it may itself be divided into parts, these latter again 
into further parts and so on until we reach the atoms which are the 
ultimate parts. Now the atoms which possess no bulk are not perceptible. 
Similarly, the quality, action, etc., which inhere in the atoms are also not 
jjerceptible. Consequently if wo deny that there is a ‘ whole ’ neither the 
substance nor quality, etc., would be perceptible. 



THE NriYA-SCTEAS. 


« h i mn » 

96. There is a whole because we can hold, pull, 
etc. — 35. 

If there were no whole we could not have held or pulled an entire 
thing by holding or pulling a part of it. We say, ‘ one jar,’ ‘ one man,’ 
etc. This use of ‘ one ’ would vanish if there were no whole. 

97. The illustration from an army or a forest does 
not hold good, for atoms cannot be detected by the senses. 
—36. 

If any one were to say that just as a single soldier or a single tree 
may not be seen from a distance but an army consisting of numerous 
soldiers or a forest consisting of numerous trees is seen, so a single atom 
may not be perceptible but a jar consisting of numerous atoms will be 
perceptible, and these atoms being called ‘ one jar,’ the use of ‘ one ’ will 
not vanish. The analogy, we reply, does not hold good because the 
soldiers and trees possess bulk and so are perceptible, whereas the atoms 
do not possess bulk and are individually not perceptible. It is absurd 
to argue that because soldiers and trees are perceptible in the mass, atoms 
are perceptible in the inass also : to avoid this conclusion we must admit 
the existence of a whole beyond the parts. 

hi \ i v*i 

98. Inference, some say, is not a means of right 
knowledge as it errs in certain cases, e.g., when a river is 
banked, when something is damaged and when similarity 
misleads, &c. — 37. 

If we see a river swollen we infer that there has been rain, if we see 
the ants carrying off their eggs, we infer that there will be rain and if we 
hear a peacock scream, we infer that clouds are gathering. These infer- 
ences, says an objector, are not necessarily correct, for a river may be 
swollen because embanked, the ants may carry off their eggs because their 
nests have been damaged, and the so-called screaming of a peacock may 
be nothing but the voice of a man. 

im h 

99. It is not so, because our inference is based on 
something else than the part, fear and likeness. — 38. 



34 BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

The swelling' of a river caused by rain is different from that which 
results from the embankment of a part of it ; the former is attended by a 
great rapidity of currents, an abundance of foam, a mass of fruits, leaves, 
wood, etc. The manner in which ants carry off their eggs just before 
rain is quite different from the manner in which they do so when their 
nests are damaged. The ants run away quickly in a steady line when 
rain is imminent but fear makes them fly in disorder when their nests are 
damaged. The screaming of a peacock which suggests gathering clouds 
is quite different from a man’s imitation of it, for the latter is not natural. 
If in such cases any wrong inference is drawn, the fault is in the person, 
not in the process. 

mow 

100. There is, some say, no present time — because 
when a thing falls we can know only the time through 
which it has fallen and the time through which it will yet 
fall.— 39. 

Inference has reference to three times. In the a priori inference we 
pass from the past to the present, in the a posteriori from the present to 
the past and in the ‘ commonly seen ’ from the present to the present. It 
is, therefore, proper that we should examine the three times. The reason 
which leads some people to deny the present time is that when a fruit, for 
instance, falls from a tree we recognise only the past time taken up by the 
fruit in traversing a certain distance and the future time which will yet 
be taken up by the fruit in traversing the rcmaining/iistance. There is no 
intervening distance which the fruit can traverse at the so-called present 
time. Hence they say there is no present time. 

101. If there is no present time there will, it 
is replied, be no past and future times because they are 
related to it. — 40. 

The past is that which precedes the present and the future is that 
which succeeds i^. Hence if there is no present time there cannot be any 
past or future time. 

nm«« 

102. The past and future cannot be established by a 
me^ mutual reference. — 41. 



THE NYAYA-STTTRAS. 


35 


If the past is defined as that which is not the future and the future 
is defined as that which is not the past, the definition would involve a 
fallacy of mutual dependency. Hence we must admit the present time to 
which the past and future are related. 

*rc&TRPTI% mtiwii 

103. If there were no present time, sense perception 
would be impossible, knowledge would be impossible. — 42. 

If you deny the present time there cannot be any perception which 
illumines only what is present in time ; and in the absence of perception 
all kinds of knowledge would be impossible. Hence the present time is 
established by confutation or the principle of reduetio ad absurdum. 

104. We can know both the past and the future for 
we can conceive of a thing as made and as about to be 
made. — 43. 

The present time is indicated by what continues, the past by what 
haB been finished and the future by what has not yet begun. 

105. Comparison, some say, is not a means of right 
knowledge as it cannot be established either through 
complete or considerable or partial similarity. — 44. 

On the ground of complete similarity we never say “ a cow is like a 
cow,” on the ground of considerable similarity we do not say that “ a 
buffalo is like a cow,” and on the ground of partial similarity we do not 
say that "a mustard seed is like Mount Merit.” Hence comparison is 
regarded by some as not a means of right knowledge, for it has no 
precise standard, 

106. This objection does not hold good, for compari- 
son is established through similarity in a high degree. — 45. 

The similarity in a high degree exists between such well known 
objects as a cow and a bos gavaeus, etc. 



30 


BOOK n, CHAPTER I. 

ii su *nM 

107. Comparison, some say, is not different from 
inference, for both seek to establish the unperceived by 
means of the perceived. — 46. 

We recoguise a bos gavaeus at first sight through its special 
similarity to a cow which we have often perceived. This knowledge 
of a previously unperceived object derived through its similarity to a per- 
ceived object is, it has been said, nothing but a case of inference. 

•njsr# m n*»i 

108. It is not in a bos gavaeus unperceived that we 
find the real matter of comparison. — 47. 

The matter of comparison is similarity, e.g., between a cow and a 
bos gavaeus. The bos gavaeus in which we notice the similarity is first 
perceived, that is, on perceiving a bos gavaeus we notice its similarity to a 
cow. Hence comparison supplies us with knowledge of a 'perceived thing 
through its similarity to another thing also perceived. This characteristic 
distinguishes it from inference which furnishes us with knowledge of an 
unperceived thing through that of a thing perceived. 

uiiiki 

109. There is no non-difference inasmuch as com- 
parison is established through the compendious expression 
“ so.”— 48. 

It is not true that comparison is identical with inference because the 
former is established through the compendious expression "so." ‘As 
is a cow, so is a bos gavaeus ’ — this is an instance of comparison. This 
use of ‘ so ’ makes it clear that comparison is a distinct means of right 
kndwledge. 

hi tiwi 

110. Verbal testimony, say some, is inference be- 
cause the object revealed by it is not perceived but inferred. 
—49. 

Inference gives us the knowledge of an unperceived object through 
the knowledge of an object which is perceived. Similarly, verbal testi- 
mony enable? ns .to acquire the knowledge of an unperceived object 



THE NYAYA-StTTRAS. 37 

through the knowledge of a word which is perceived. The verbal testi- 
mony is, therefore, supposed by Bomo to be inference, as the object 
revealed by both is unperceived. 

111. In respect of perceptibility the two cases are 
not, continues the objector, different. — 50. 

In inferenco as well as in verbal testimony we pass to an unperceived 
object through an object which is perceived. In respect of perceptibility 
of the object through which we pass, the. inference does not, continues the 
objector, differ from the verbal testimony. 

* * ft i hi i 

112. There is moreover, adds the objector, the same 
connection. — 51. 

Just as in inference there is a certain connection between a sign («.;., 
smoke/ and the thing signified by it (e. g., fire), so in verbal testimony 
there is connection between a word and the object signified by it. So 
inference, says the objector, is not different from verbal testimony. 

w ii h mVhh wmh&w i nmwi 

113. In reply we say that there is reliance on the 
matter signified by a word because the word has been used 
by a reliable person. — 52. 

In reference to the objections raised in aphorisms 49 and 50 we say 
that we rely on unseen matter not simply because it is signified by words 
but because they are spoken by a reliable person. There are, some say, 
paradise, nymphs, Uttarakurus, seven islands, ocean, human settlements, 
etc. We accept them as realities not because they are known through 
words, hut because they are spokeu of by persons who are reliable. Hence 
verbal testimony is not inference. The two agree in conveying knowledge 
of an object through its sign, but the sign in one is different from the sign 
in the other. In the case of verbal testimony the special point is to 
decide whether the sign (wordj comes from a reliable person. 

Aphorism 51 speaks of a certain connection between a word and 
the object signified by it. The present aphorism points out that the 
oonnectiqn is not a natural one. We acknowledge that a word indicates 
a certain object, but we deny that the object is naturally or necessarily 
connected with the word. Hearing, for instance, the word " cow," we 



38 BOOK H, CHAPTER I. 

think of the animal signified by it, nevertheless the word and the animal 
are not connected with each other by nature or necessity. In the case of 
inference, however, the connection between a sign ( e.g ., smoke) and the 
thing signified ( e . g., fire) is natural and necessaiy. Therefore the connec- 
tion involved in inference is not of the same kind as that involved in 
verbal testimony. 

n * i t i ** n 

114. There is, in the case of verbal testimony, no 
perception of the connection. — 53. 

The connection between a sign and the thing signified, which is the 
basis of inference, is obvious to perception. For instance, the inference 
that “ the hill is fiery because it is smoky ” is based on a certain connec- 
tion between smoke and fire which is actually perceived in a kitchen or 
elsewhere. The connection between a word and the objects signified by it, 
which is the basis of verbal testimony, is not obvious to perception. The 
word Uttarakuru, for instance, signifies the country of that name, but the 
connection between the word and the country is not perceived, as the 
latter lies beyond our observation. Hence verbal testimony is not 
inference. 

115. There is no natural connection between a word 
and the object signified by it, as we do not find that the 
words food, fire and hatchet, are accompanied by the ac- 
tions filling, burning and splitting. — 54 

If a word were naturally connected with the object signified by it, 
then by uttering the words food, fire and hatchet we should have found 
our mouth filled up (with food), burnt (with fire) and split (by a hatchet). 
Bat such is never the case. Hence there is no natural connection between 
a word and the object signified by it, and consequently verbal testimony 
, ib not inference. 

A 

116. It cannot, says an objector, be denied that there 
is a fixed connection between words and their meanings. — 55. 

A particular word denotes a particular meaning, e.g., the word 1 cow ’ 
denotes the animal of that name, but it does not denote a horse, a jar or 
any other thing. There is, therefore, in the case of verbal testimony, a 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 


39 

fixed connection between a word and its meaning as there is in the case 
of inference a fixed connection between a sign and the thing signified. Hence 
verbal testimony is considered by the objector to be a case of inference. 

i*t i 1 <*m 

117. We reply it is through convention that the 
meaning of a word is understood. — 56. 

The connection between a word and its meaning is conventional and 
not natural. The connection though fixed by man is not inseparable and* 
connot therefore be the basis of an inference. 

* 1 1 ■ 

118. There is no universal uniformity of connection 
between a word and its meaning. — 57. 

The risis, ftryas and mlecclias use the same word in different senses, 
e.g., the word “ yava ” is used by the Sryas to denote a long-awned grain 
but by the mlecchas to denote a panic-seed. So the connection between 
a word and its meaning is not everywhere uniform and consequently 
verbal testimony cannot be considered as inference. 

« * m v « 

119. The Veda, some say, is unreliable as it involves 
the faults of untruth, contradiction and tautology. — 58. 

The Veda, which is a kind of verbal testimony, is not, some say, 
a means of right knowledge. It is supposed by them to be tainted with 
the faults of untruth, contradiction and tautology. For instance, the 
Veda affirms that a Bon is produced when the sacrifice for the sake of a 
son is performed. 

It oftep happens that the Bon is not produced though the sacrifice 
has been performed. 

There are many contradictory injunctions in the Veda, e.g., it de- 
clares “ let one sacrifice when the Bun haB risen,” also ’‘let one sacri- 
fice when, the sun has not risen,” etc. There is such tautology as 
“let the first hymn be recited thrice,” “let the last hymn be recited 
thrice,” etc. 

120. The s6-called untruth in the Veda comes from 
some defect in the act, operator or materials of sacrifice. — 59. 



46 BOOK a CHAPTER I. 

Defect in the act consists in sacrificing not according to rules, defect 
in the operator (officiating priest) consists in his not being a learned mail, 
and defect in the materials consists in the fuel being wet, blitter being 
not fresh, remuneration (to the officiating priest) being small, etc. A son 
is sure to be produced as a result of performing the sacrifice if these 
defects are avoided. Therefore there is no untruth in the Veda. 

mu 

121. Contradiction would occur if there were altera- 
tion of the time agreed upon. — 60. 

Let a person perform sacrifice before sunrise or after sunrise if he 
has sgreed upon doing it at either of the times. Two alternative courses 
being open to him he can perform the sacrifice before sunrise or after 
sun-riBe according to his agreement or desire. The Veda cannot be charged 
with the fault of contradiction if it enjoins such alternative courses. 

n * h i M n 

122. There is no tautology, because re-inculcation is 
of advantage. — 61. 

Tautology means a useless repetition, which never occurs in the 
Veda. If there is any repetition there it is either for completing a certain 
number of syllables, or for explaining a matter briefly expressed, etc. 
" Let the first hymn be recited thrice,” “ let the last hymn be recited 
thrice ” such instances embody a useful repetition. 

n * it 1 n 

123. And because there is necessity for the classifica- 
tion of Vedic speech. — 62. 

It is necessary to divide the Vedic speech into classes based on 
special characters. 

n i \ 1 ii 

124. The Vedic speech being divided on the principle 
of injunction, persuasion and re-inculcation. — 63. 

The two main divisions of the Veda are (1) hymn and (2) ritual. 
Tbqjritual portion admits of three sub-divisions, viz., injunctive, persua- 
sive and re-inculcaiive. 



a HE EYAYA-SETRAS. 


41 

(ftft:) fa*im: n * 1 1 1 <311 

125. An injunction is that which exhorts us to adopt 
a certain course of action [as the means of attaining good]. 
—64. 

The following is an injunction: — “Let him who desires paradise 
perform the fire-sacrifice.” This is a direct command. 

srrasq (a&ne :) iui 1 1 

126. Persuasion is effected through praise, blame, 
warning; and prescription. — 65. 

Praise is speech which persuades to a certain course of action by 
extolling its consequences, e.g., “ By the Sarvajit sacrifice gods con- 
quered all, there is nothing like Sarvajit sacrifice, it enables us to obtain 
everything and to vanquish every one, etc.” Here there is no direct com- 
mand but the Sarvajit sacrifice is extolled in such a wav that we are 
persuaded to perform it. 

Blame is speech which persuades us to adopt a certain course of 
action by acquainting us with the undesirable consequences of neglecting 
it, e. g., “ One who performs any other sacrifice neglecting the Jyotb$oma 
falls into a pit and decays there.” Here one is persuaded to perform the 
Jyotistoina sacrifice the neglect of which brings about evil consequences. 

Warning is the mentioning of a course of action the obstruction of 
which by some particular person led to bud consequences, e.g., on pre- 
senting oblation one is to take the fat first and the sprinkled butter 
afterwards, but alas ! the Cbaraka priests first took the sprinkled butter 
which was, as it were, the life of fire, etc. Here the foolish course of action 
adopted by the Charaka priests should serve as a warning to other priests 
who ought to avoid the course. 

Prescription implies the mention of some thing as commendable on 
account of its antiquity, e.g., “By this the Brabmanas recited the 
Sanaa hymn, etc.” 

(figqr?:) n r i \ i u ii 

127. Re-inculcation is the repetition of that which 
has been enjoined by an injunction. — 66. 

Re-inculcation may consist of (l) the repetition of an injunction, or 
(2) the repetition of tint which has been enjoined. The first is called 
verbal re-inculcation and the second objective re-inculcation. In the Veda 



42 BOOK II, CHAPTER I. 

there is re-inculcation as in ordinary use there is repetition. “Non-eternal, 
not eternal ” — this is a verbal repetition. “ Non-eternal, possessing the 
character of extinction ” — this is objective repetition. 

u 3 i t i lu n 

128. There is, some say, no difference between re-in- 
culcation and tautology, as there is in either case a repetition 
of some expression already used. — 67. 

Re-inculcation is supposed by some to be a fault inasmuch as it 
does not, according to them, differ from tautology. 

n * 1 t 1 11 

129. There is a difference, because re-inculcation 
serves some useful purpose, e.g ., a command to go faster. — 68. 

Tautology consists of a useless repetition but the re-petition in the 
case of re-inculcation is useful, e. g., “go on, go on” — signifies “go faster.” 

ikukui 

130. The Veda is reliable like the spell and medical 
science, because of the reliability of their authors. — C9. 

The spell counteracts poison, etc., and the medical science prescribes 
correct remedies. The authority which belongs to them is derived from 
their authors, the sages, who were reliable persons. The sages them- 
selves tvere reliable becauso (1) they had an intuitive peiccption of truths, 
(2) they had great kindness for living beings and (3) they had the desire 
of communicating their knowledge of the truths. The authors [lit., the 
seers and speakers) of the Veda were also the authors of the spell and 
medical science. Hence like the spell and medical science the Veda must 
be accepted as authoritative. The view that the Veda is authoritative 
because eternal, is untenable. 

Jtanwsfa'srotSr 11 ^ 1 * 11 



THE NYAYA-SCTHAS. 


43? 


Book ii-^-Chapter ii. 

H *t I * I Ml 

131. Some say that the means of right knowledge 
are more than four, because rumour, presumption, proba- 
bility and non-existence are also valid. — 1. 

In Book I, chapter I, aphorism 3, the means of right knowledge 
have been stated to be four, viz., perception, inference, comparison and 
verbal testimony. Some say that there are other means of right knowledge 
such as rumour, presumption, probability and non-existence. 

Humour is an assertion which has come from one to another without 
any indication of the source from which it first originated, e.g., in this 
fig tree there live goblins. 

Presu mption is the deduction of one thing from the declaration of 
another thing : e.g., from the declaration that ‘ unless there is cloud there 
is no rain’ we deduce that ‘there is rain if there is cloud.’ [A more 
familiar instance of presumption is this : the fat Devadatta does not eat 
during the day time. Here the presumption is that he eats in the night 
for it is impossible for a person to be fat if he does not eat at all]. 

Probability consists in cognising the existence of a thing from that 
of another thing in which it is included, e.gr., cognising the measure of 
an a<lhaka from that of a drom of which it is a fourth part, and cognis- 
ing the measure of a prastha from that of an arjhaka of which it is a 
quarter. 

Of two opposite things the non-existence of one establishes the 
existence of the other, eq., the non-existence of rain establishes the 
combination of wind and cloud. When there is a combination of wind 
and cloud, di’ops of water cannot fall in spite of their weight. 

mm m ii 

132. This, we reply, is no contradiction since rumour 
is included in verbal testimony, and presumption, probabi- 
lity and non-existence are included in inference. — 2. 

Those who maintain that rumour, presumption, probability and 
non-existence are valid, do not really oppose our division of the means 
of right knowledge into four, viz., perception, inference, comparison and. 
verbal testimony. 



44 


Book ij, chapter it 

Rumour partakes of the general characteristics of verbal testimony 
and is a special kind of it. 

Presumption is explained as the knowledge of a thing derived 
through the consideration of it from the opposite standpoint. For ins- 
tance, the fat l)evadatt.a does not eat during the day time : here the 
presumption is that he eats in tiie night. The fact of his eating in the 
night has not been expressly stated but is ascertained from this consi- 
deration that a person who does not eat during the day cannot be 
strong unless he eats in the night, it. is evident that presumption like 
inference passes from a perceived thing to an unperceived olie because 
tliey are in some way connected. 

Probability is inference because it is the cognizance of apart from 
knowledge of a whole with which it is inseparably connected. 

Non-existence is inference inasmuch as it really infers the obs- 
truction of a cause from the non-existenco of its effect through a certain 
connection, viz., if the obstruction occurs the effect cannot occur. 

Hence rumour, etc., are not independent means of right knowledge 
but. are included iu the four enumerated in Book I, Chapter], aphorism 3. 

n =< i ? i ^ n 

133. Presumption, some say, is not valid because it 
leads to uncertainty. — 3. 

“ If there is no cloud there will be no rain” — from this we are 
said to presume that if there is a cloud there will be rain. But it often 
happens that a cloud is not followed by rain. So presumption does not 
always lead to certainty. 

u r i % i a n 

134. We reply: if there is any uncertainty it is due 
to your supposing that to be a presumption which is not 
really so. — 4. 

“ If there is no cloud there will be no vain.” ' From this we are 
‘ entitled to presume that if there is rain there must have been cloud. 
But if you pretajid to presume that “ if there is a cloud there will be 
raiu” your so-called presumption will be an invalid one. 

135. The objection itself, we say, is invalid because 
it leads to uncertainty. — 5. 



THE NYAYA-SHTRAS. 


45 


•** Presumption is not valid because it leads to uncertainty’’ — this 
is your objection. In it there are two points for consideration, viz., 
(1) the validity of presumption and (2, the existence of presumption. 
Your objection refers to one of the points, viz., the validity of presumption. 
So you do not deny the existence of presumption. In some instances, 
however, your objection may refer to more points than one. In fact 
the nature of your objection is not definite in itself, or iu other words, 
it leads to uncertainty. Hence your objection is invalid. 

*rr n * i ? i * « 

136. Or, if that he valid, then onr presumption is 
not invalid. — 6. 


Perhaps you will say that your objection is valid because you can 
ascertain iu each case whether one or more points are referred to by the 
objection. Similarly, we shall say that onr presumption is not invalid 
because wo can ascertain in each case whether the presumption is capable 
of leading to more conclusions than one. Hence if you say that your 
objection is valid, wc shall say that our presumption is also valid. 


sirawnuupf sJmrfat: ii i * i vs ii 

137. Some say that non-existence is not a means 
of right knowledge because there is no object which is 
known by it. — 7. 



agJwfafo: ell 


138. Non-existence, we reply, selves to mark out 
an object unmarked by the mark which characterises other 
objects. — 8. 


Suppose a person wants to bring a pot which is not bine. The 


absence of blueness is a mark which will , enable him to mark out the 
particular pot he wants to bring and to exclude the other pots which 
are blue. Thus an object may be known through the non-existence 
(absence) of its mark. 

II 5 I \ | «. || 

139. If you say that the non-existence (absence) of 
a mark is* impossible where there was no mark at all, it is, 
we reply, not so, because the non-existence (absence) is 
possible in reference to a mark elsewhere. — 9., 



46 


BOOK II, CHAPTER It. 


We can, says an objector, talk of a mark being non-existent (absent) 
if it was previously existent (present). A pot is said to be not blue only 
in reference to its being bine previously. In reply we say that it is not 
so. “Not-blue” is no doubt possible only in reference to “ blue ” but 
that blueness may exist elsewhere. For instance, we can talk of this 
pot being not-blue, in -contrast to that pot which is bine. 



n * it n® u 


140. Though a mark may distinguish the object 
which is marked, the non-existence (absence) of the mark 
cannot, some say, distinguish the object which is not 
marked. — 10. 

A blue pot is distinguished by the blueness which is its mark. But 
how can we, says the objector, distinguish an unmarked object by the 
non-existence (absence) of the mark which it does not possess ? 

* 5r ! 5r»!rraft«rur^^nftr%:ii h i t i n 

141. This is not so, because the non-existence (ab- 
sence) of a mark serves as a mark in relation to the pre- 
sence of the mark. — 11. 

We can speak of a pot being not blue in relation to one which is 
blue. Hence though not-blueness is not a positive mark it serves as a 
(negative) mark in relation to blueness. 

ii * i t m* ii 

142. Moreover we perceive non-existence as a mark 
antecedent to the production of a thing. — 12. 

There are two kinds of non-existence, viz., antecedent non-existence 
and subsequent non-existence. When we say that there will be a jar, 
we perceive the mark of non-existence of the jar in the halves which are 
destined to compose it. This is antecedent non-existence. Similarly, when 
we say that a jar has broken, we perceive the mark of non-existence of the 
jar in the parfi> which composed it. This is subsequent non-existence. 

^ ii * i \ i * || 

143. There is doubt about the nature of sound be- 
cause there are conflicting opinions supported by conflicting 
reasons. — 13. 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 


47 


Some say that sound is a quality of ether and that it is all-pervading, 
eternal, and capable of being manifested. Others say that sound like 
smell, etc., is a quality of the substance in which it abides, and is capable 
of being manifested. Sound is said by others to be a quality of ether 
and to be subject to production and destruction like knowledge. Others 
again say that sound arises from the concussion of elements, requires no 
abode, and is subject to production and destruction. Hence there arises 
doubt about the true nature of sound. 

u ^ i \ i« n 

144. Sound is not eternal because it has a beginning 
and is cognised by our sense and is spoken of as artificial. — 

14 

Sound is non-eternal because it begins or arises from the concus- 
sion of two hard substances e. < j. an axe and a tree, etc. Another ground 
for the non-eternality of sound is that it is cognised by our sense. More- 
over we attribute to sound the properties of an artificial object, e.g., we 
speak of a sound being grave, acute, etc. This would be impossible if 
it bad been eternal. 

Some say that the so-called beginning of a sound ,is merely a 
manifestation of it, that is, sound docs not really begin but is merely 
manifested by the concussion of two hard Substances. In reply we say 
that the concussion does not manifest but produces sound. You cannot 
suppose the concussion to be the manifester and sound the manifested 
unless you can prove that the concussion and sound arc simultaneous. 
But the proof is impossible as a sound is heard at a great distance even 
after the concussion of the substances has ceased. So sound is not mani- 
fested by the concussion. It is, however, legitimate to suppose that sound 
is produced by the concussion, and that one sound produces another sound 
and so on until the last sound is heard at a great distance. 



HR I \ I *RH 

145. Some will not accept this argument because the 
non-existence of a jar and the genus of it are eternal, and 
eternal thipgs are also spoken of as if they were artificial. — 
15. / 

Some say that it is not true that whatever has a beginning is non- 
eternal. Look ! the non-existence 'destruction) of a jar which began when 



48 


BOOK H, CHAPTER II. 


tli© jar was broken is eternal (indestructible). Whatever is cognised by 
our sense is non-eternal ; this is also said to be an unsonnd argument. 
WheD, for instance, we perceive a jar we perceive also its genus (i.e., jar- 
uess) which is eternal. It is further said that we often attribute to eternal 
things the properties of an artificial object, e.g., we speak of the extension 
of ether as we speak of the extension of a blanket. 

* R i 1 1 « 

146. There is, we reply, no opposition because there 
is distinction between what is really eternal and what is 
partially eternal. — 16. 

That which is really eternal belongs to the three times. But the non- 
existence (destruction) of a jar does not belong to three times as it was 
impossible before the jar was broken. Hence the non-existence (destruc- 
tion) of a jar which has a beginning is not really eternal. 

(<n) g; m ■ ? 1 * 

147. It is only the things cognised by our sense as 
belonging to a certain genus that must, we say, be inferred 
to be non-eternal. — 17. 


The objectors have said that things cognised by our sense are not 
necessarily 11011-eternal, e.g ., as we perceive a jar we also perceive its 
genus jar-ness which is eternal. In reply we say that, not all things 
cognised by our sense are non-eternal, but only those that belong to a 
certain genus. A jar, for instance, is 11011-eternal because we perceive it 
as belonging to the genus jar-ness. But jar-ness which is cognised by 
our sense is not 11011-eternal because it does not belong to a further genus 
named jar-ness-ness. Similarly, sound is non-eternnl because it is cog- 
nised by onr sense as belonging to the genus called sound-ness. 

The aphorism may also he interpreted as follows : — Sound is non- 
eternal because it is inferred to advance in a series. 

We do not say that whatever is cognised by onr sense is non-eternal : 
our intention is to say that things cognised by our sense as advancing in 
a series am non-eternal. Sound is cognised in that manner {i.e., sound 
advances like a wave) and hence sound is non-eternal. 


ffit) H * I 'I *C H 

148. We further say, that only artificial things are 
designated' by, the term extension. — 18. 



THE NYAYA-SOTRaS. 


49 


When we speak of the extension of ether we really mean that the 
extension belongs to an artificial tiling which has for its substratum the 
ether. Hence we do not in reality attribute to eternal things the properties 
of artificial objects. 

RimMi 

149. Sound is non-eternal because neither do we 
perceive it before pronunciation nor do we notice any veil 
which covers it. — 19. 

If sound were eternal it would be perceived before pronunciation. 
You cannot say that sound really existed before pronunciation but was 
covered by some veil, for we do not notice any such veil. 

H R I \ i il 

150. The veil, some say, really exists because we 
do not perceive the non-perception thereof. — 20. 

The objectors say : — If you deny the veil because it is not perceived, 
we deny the non-perception of the veil because it is also not perceived. 
The denial of non-percoption is the same as the acknowledgment of 
perception, or in other words, the veil is acknowledged to be existent. 

II s* I * I R* II 

151. If you assert non-perception of the veil though 
the non-perception is not perceived we, continue the objec- 
tors, assert the existence of the veil though it is not per- 
ceived. — 21. 

You admit non-perception of the veil though you do not perceive it 
(non-perception). Similarly, we, the objectors admit the existence of the 
veil though we do not perceive it. 

152. This, we reply, is no reason, because non-per- 
ception consists of absence of perception. — 22. 

A veil is a thing fit to be perceived. Our non-perception of it 
indicates its absence. On the other hand, the non-perception of a veil is 
not a thing fit to be perceived. Hence non-perception of the non-percep- 
tion leads us to nothing real. 

7 


50 BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

153. Some say that sound is eternal because it is 
intangible. — 23. 

Ether which is intangible is eternal. Sound must similarly, accord- 
ing to some, be eternal because it is intangible. 

5T II * I H w II 

154. This we deny, because action is non-eternal. — 24. 

Action is non-eternal though it is intangible. Hence intangibility 
does not establish eternality. 

?TT^J ii ^ U i ^ H 

155. Anatom, on the other hand, is eternal though 
not intangible. — 25. 

Tangibility is not incompatible with eternality, e.g., atoms are 
tangible yet eternal. 

^FPPsr^ran^ * ^ 1 1 1 ^ « 

156. Sound, some say, is eternal because of the 
traditionary teaching. — 26. 

A preceptor could not lia^e imparted knowledge to his pupils by 
means of sounds if these were perishable (non-eternal). In fact the tra- 
ditionary teaching would, according to the objectors, be impossible if 
the sounds were non-eternal. 

rrcscurenjj'ras’fotS: um»i 

157. This is, we reply, no reason because sound is not 
perceived in the interval. — 27. 

Suppose a preceptor delivers certain sounds (in the form , of lec- 
ture) which are received by his pupil. The sounds are not audible In 
the interval between the preceptor giving them and the pupil receiving 
• them. They would never he inaudible if they were eternal. 

it ^ i ^ i ii 

158. This, say the objectors, is no argument because 
there is the teaching. — 28. 

The objectors say : — If the sounds as soon as they came out of the 
preceptor were destoyed and did not reach the pupil, there could not be 



THE NYlYA-StJTRAS. - 51 

any teaching carried on. But there is the teaching, hence sound 
does not perish or in other words it is eternal. 

159. In whichever of the two senses it is accepted 
the teaching does not offer any opposition. — 29. 

The word “ teaching” maybe interpreted either as (I) the pupil’s 
receiving the sounds given by his preceptor, eras (2) the pupil’s imitat- 
ing the sounds of Iris preceptor as one imitates dancing. Neither of these 
interpretations would support the eternality of sound. In consonance 
with tire first interpretation we shall say that the sound corning out of 
the preceptor produces another sound and so on until the last sound 
reaches the pupil. This would make souud non-eternal. It is obvious 
that the second interpretation similarly proves the non-eternal ity of souud. 

h * i ^ i v i 

160. Sound, continue the objectors, is eternal because 
it is capable of repetition. — 30. 

That which is capable of repetition is persistent or not perishable, 
e.g., one and the same colour can be repeal edly looked at because it is 
persistent. One and the same sound can similarly be repeatedly uttered, 
hence it is persistent or not perishable. 

» * i v « 

161. It is, we reply, not so because even if sounds 
were “ other” (different), repetition could take place. — 31. 

Repetition does not prevent perishableness because repetition is 
possible even if the things repeated are “other” or different, e.g., he 
sacrifices twice, he dances thrice, etc. Here the two sacrifices are different 
and yet we use the repetitive word twice, similarly the three dancings 
are different and yet we use the repetitive word ‘ thrice.’ 

162. Some say that there is no such thing as other- 
ness because what is called “ other” in reference to some 
other is .not other in reference to itself. — 32. 

' We maintain that repetition is possible oven if the things repeated 
are “ other” or different. Our position is said to be untenable ' the term 
“other” is described as unmeaning, as nothing is other than itself. 



52 BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 

aqi RtumiWfc i -si : nnn\> 

163. In the absence of otherness there -would, we 
reply, be no sameness because the two exist in reference to 
each other. — 33. 

If there was no otherness there would be no sameness. This would 
lead us to absurdity as it would disprove both persistency and perish- 
ableness. Hence we must admit otherness, and if there is “ other” there 
will be no flaw in our expression, viz., repetition is possible even if things 
were “ other” or different. 

164. Sound, some say, is eternal because we perceive 
no cause why it should perish. — 34. 

Whatever is non-eternal is destroyed by some cause. Sound is said 
to have no cause of destruction, hence sound is held by some to be not 
non-eternal, ( i.e ., is regarded as eternal). 

H R i ^ i v* H 

165. But by the same argument we are afraid that 
non-peiception of the cause of inaudition would mean 
constant audition. — 35. 

If non-perception is to establish non-existence we should not 
cease to hear because we do not perceive any cause of our not hearing. 
But such a conclusion is absurd. 

| 5(1 : ii * i ft 

166. Your position, we further say, is untenable 
because there is no non-perception, on the contrary there is 
perception, of the cause of inaudition. — 36. 

Suppose that a sound is produced by an axe striking against a tree. 
This sound will perish after producing another sound which will again 
perish giving rise to another and so on until the last sound is destroyed 
by some obstacle. In fact every sound that is produced is destined to 
perish.* Hence there is no non-perception of the cause of inaudition, on 
the contrary there is perception of such a cause. Consequently sound 
is not eternal. 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 


5 $ 


q i fafafa qrsp &q ni^wifc *: » % > ^ « t» « 

167. There is, we again say, no non-perception be- 
cause the sound [of a gong] ceases on the contact of our 
hand [with the gong]. — 37. 

You cannot say that there is non-perception of the cause of cessation 
of sound, because we actually perceive that by the contact of our hand 
we can stop the sound of a gong. * 

168. We call a thing eternal (persistent) if it con- 
tinues to exist, and if we cannot perceive any cause why it 
should cease. — 38. 

Sound does not continue to exist and its cause of cessation is also 
perceived. Hence sound is not eternal. 

II * 1^1 V. II 

169. That the substratum of sound is intangible is no 
counter-argument. — 39. 

Sound has not for its substratum any of the tangible substances, 
viz., earth, water, fire and air, for it is found to be produced even where 
these do no exist. For instance, sound is produced in a vacuum which 
is devoid of smell, taste, colour and touch which are the qualities of 
tangible substances. The reason why the sound produced in a vacuum 
does not reach our ears is that there is no air to carry it. Hence the 
substratum of sound is an intangible substance, viz., ether. 

it is a peculiarity of sound that it cannot co-abide with colour, etc. 
A tangible substance (e.g., earth) which is the abode of smell may also 
be the abode of colour, taste or touch. Hut the substance, in which 
sound abides, cannot be the abode of any other qualities. This distin- 
guishes the substratum of sound from the subtrata of other qualities. 
This peculiar substratum is called ether. 

The fact of having an intangible substratum is no bar to the non- 
eternality of sound. Sound, though its substratum is the intangible ether, 
is produced by the contact of twodiard substances. One sound produces 
another sound (or a certain vibration) which again causes another sound 
(or vibration) and so on uutil the last sound (or vibration) ceases owing 
to some obstacle, Sound is therefore non-eternal. 



54 


BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 


» * i *i «• * 

170. Sound cannot be supposed to co-abide with 
other qualities, for there are varieties of it. — 40. 


In each tangible substance there is only one kind of smell, taste, 
touch or colour. If we suppose that sound abides with one or more of 
these qualities in a tangible substance, we must admit that sound is of 
one kind only. But sound is of various kinds such as grave, acute, etc. ; 
and even tfie same sound may vary in degrees according to the nature of the 
obstruction it meets. This proves that sound does not abide with other 
qualities in a tangible substance. It further proves that sound is not 
unalterable or eternal. 

Also signifies that this aphorism is to be considered along with 
aphorism 2 — 2—80 in which a reason for the non-eternality of sound is 
given. 



II R I * I 9* li 


171. From the injunction about modification and 
substitute there arises doubt. — 41. 


The word ‘ dadlii ’ conjoined with the word ‘ atra ’ becomes ‘ dadh- 
yatra ’ by the rule of Sanskrit grammar. Looking at ‘ dadhi-atra’ and 
‘ dadhyatra ’ we notice that there is i in the former and y in the latter. 
Here some say that i undergoes modification as y while others say that y 
comes as substitute for i. Consequently we are thrown into doubt whether 
letters really undergo modifications or take up substitutes. 



II * I VI 8* II 


172. If letters underwent modification an increase of 
bulk in the original material would be attended by an in- 
crease of hulk in the modification. — 42. 

Jf we accept the theory of modification the letter y which originat- 
ed from the short i must be supposed to be less in bulk than the y which 
originated from the long l. But in reality the y in both the cases is of 
the same bulk. H^nce it is concluded that letters do not undergo modi- 
fication but take up other letters as substitutes. 

TOsfrffawn g ralg : n * i i n 

173. The foregoing argument, some say, is futile be- 
cause we find modifications less than, equal to, and greater 
than, the original material. — 43. 



THE NYlYA-SttTRAS. 


55 


The bulk of the modification does not, in all cases, correspond to 
the bulk of the original material, e.g., thread is of less bulk than cotton 
which is its original material, a bracelet is equal in bulk to the gold of 
which it is made, and a banyan tree is greater in bulk than the seed from 
which it springs. Hence the argument against the theory of modification 
is, according to the objectors, baseless. 


te+KfiwsMrg; n h i ^ i w n 

174. It is, I reply, not so because I spoke of those 
modifications which originated from different materials. — 44. 

A modification may not correspond in bulk to its original material. 
But if the original materials are different their modifications are ex- 
pected to be different. Here i being different from i their modifications 
are expected to be different. But y issues from i as well as 1 Hence 
y is not a modification of i or i. 





i s i ** n 


175. There is, says an objector, difference between a 
letter and its modification as there is between a substance 
and its modification. — 45. 


According to the objector there is difference between the letter i 
(or ?•) and its modification y as there is difference between the substance 
cotton and its modification thread. 

u n * i * i n 

176. In reply I say that it is not so because the 
character of a modification does not exist here. — 46. 

A modification must be of the same nature with its original 
material, though the former may not correspond in bulk to the latter. 
A bracelet is no doubt a modification of gold or silver but g horse is not a 
modification of a bull. Similarly y which is a semi-vowel is not a modi- 
fication of i (or i) which is a full vowel. 

faro t TMHW ’ Hntlfo ii i ^ i n 

177. A thing which has undergone modification does 
not agajn return to its original form. — 47. 

Milk modified into curd does not again attain the state of milk. 
But i. having reached the condition of y may again revert to its original 
from. Hence y is not a modification of i. 



56 BOOK II, CHAPTER IX. 


u * i * i ac 11 

178. Some say that this is untenable because golden 
ornaments may again be converted into their original forms. 
—48. 


A golden bracelet is converted into a mass of gross gold which 
again may be modified into a bracelet. The objector relying on the 
analogy of golden ornaments says that in the case of letters the theory of 
modification does not suffer by i reaching the condition of y and again 
returning to its original form. 

«i(i [ g>mqi n * i r i at u 

179. The analogy, we say, is inapt because the modi- 
fications of gold (called ornaments) do not relinquish the 
nature of gold. — 49. 


A mass of gold when made into ornaments does not relinquish its 
own nature. But i when converted into y loses its own nature. Hence 
the analogy is unsuitable. 

mmNi 


> 


180. There is, according to the objector, no inaptness 
in the analogy as the modification of a letter does not 
relinquish the general notion of letters. — 50. 


Just as gold is modified into a bracelet without relinquishing the 
general notion of gold, so the letter i undergoes modification as y without 
relinquishing the general notion of letters. 

> u i u i ^ at ii * i h i ii 

181. A quality belongs, we reply, to a thing possessing 
a general notion but not to the general notion itself —51. 

A bracelet is a modification of a ring inasmuch as both of them are 
gold which possesses the general notion of goldness. The letter y cannot 
be a modification of the letter i because they have not as their common 
basis another letter which possesses the general notion of letterness. 


faerer ^h=u'mhi< ii * i si vut u 

,182. If the letter were eternal it could not be modified, 
and if it were impermanent it could not abidelong enough to 
fKurm^the material for modification.-^ 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 


57 

On the supposition of the letters being eternal i cannot be modified 
into y, and on the supposition of their being impermanent i must perisli 
before it can be modified into y. 

wwdl fowwswifira i gnu WfosnraruT- 

II * m i ^ u 

183. Though the letters he eternal their modification, 
says an objector, cannot be denied, as some of the eternal 
things are beyond the grasp of the senses while others 
possess a different character. — 53. 

Just as some eternal things (as ether! are supersensuous while others 
(such as cowliood) are cognisable by the sense, so some eternal things as 
ether may be unmodifiable while others as letters may be susceptible to 
modification. 

*rawf^*4#ie{^4Tiui<hihM'iRi: ii * i * i mu 

184. Even if the letters are impermanent their modi- 
fication, like their perception, is, according to the objector, 
possible. — 54. 

Even if you say that letters are impermanent you admit that they 
abide long enough to be capable of being perceived. Why then cannot 
they abide long enough to be capable of being modified ? 

srfil^r: n * i * i **n 

185. In reply we say that our position is unassailable 
because there is no eternalness where there is the character 
of modification and because your so-called modification 
presents itself at a time subsequent to the destruction of 
the original material. — 55. 

The letters cannot be modified if you say that they are eternal 
because modification is the reverse of eternalness. When a thing is modi- 
fied it assumes another nature, abandoning its own. Again, the letters cannot 
be modified if you say that they are impermanent because there is no time 
for' i (of dadhi) to be modified into y when q. (of atra) follows. The sound 
‘dadhi’ is produced (pronounced) at the first moment, exists (continuesly) 
during the second moment and perishes at the third ihoment. The sound 


8 



68 BOOK n, CHAPTER II. 

(atra) is produced (pronounced) at the second moment, exists (continues) 
during the third moment and perishes at the fourth moment. Now, i (of 
dadhi) cannot be modified into y until a (of atra) has come into existence. 
But a comes into existence at the third moment when i has already 
perished. So on the supposition of impermanency of letters, modification 
is impossible. 

» * i * i m n 

186. Letters are not modified because there is no 
fixity as to the original material of their modification. — 56. 

In the case of real modifications there is a fixity as regards their 
original materials, e.g. t milk is the original material of curd but not vice 
vei'sa. In the case of letters, however, there is no fixed rule, e.g., i is the 
original material of y in dadhyatra (dad hi + atra) but y is the original 
material of * in vidhyati (vyadh+ya+ti). Hence the operation of modi- 
fication is not really applicable to letters. 

PwuanPnw n * i * i u 

187. Some say that there is no lack of fixity because 
the absence of fixity itself is fixed. — 57. 

1 is sometimes modified into y and y sometimes into i. So in res- 
pect of letters there is no fixity as to the original materials of their modi- 
fication. This much, however, is fixed that there is no fixity, or in other 
words, the absence of fixity is fixed. Hence the objector, who is a quibbler, 
contends that there is fixity at least as to the negative aspect of modifica- 
tion. 

Pm i fttmfa<iMnEeih PewwmPm : iu u i yq n 

188. By saying that the absence of fixity is fixed 

you cannot set aside our reason, because the fixity and its 
absence are contradictory terms. — 58. 

Our reason is that in respect of letters there is no fixity as to their 
.modification. You contend that though there is no fixity, the absence of 
fixity is fixed. Our reply is that though the abseuce of fixity is fixed it 
does not establish Wxity as a positive fact, because fixity is incompatible 
with the absence of fixity. 

II * m n 



THE NYAT^-StTBAS; 50 


189. There is an apparent modification of letters in 
the case of their attaining a different quality, taking up 
substitutes, becoming short or long and undergoing diminu- 
tion or augmentation. — 59. 

A letter is said to attain a different quality when, for instance, the 
grave accentuation is given to what was acutely accented. As an instance 
of a letter accepting a substitute we may mention gam as becoming gaeeh. 
A long vowel is sometimes shortened, e.g., nadi (in the vocative case) 
becomes nadi. A short vowel is lengthened, e.g., ‘ muni ’ (in the vocative 
case) becomes ‘mune. ’ Diminution occurs in such cases as ' as+tas’ 
becoming ‘ stas. ’ In ‘ devftnSm ’ (deva+am) na is an augment. 


^ fewappaTi n * i * i to n 

190. The letters ended with an affix form a word. — 60. 

Words are of two kinds : nouns and verbs. A noun ends in a sup 
affix, e. g. Ramns (Rf.ma+su) while a verb ends in a tin affix, e.g., bhavati 
Cbliu + ti). 

Il%l3l<tll 

191. There is doubt what a word (noun) really means 
as it invariably presents to us an individual, form and 
genus. — 61. 


The word ‘ cow ’ reminds us of an individual (a four-footed animal), 
its form (limbs) and i is genus (cowhood). Now, it is asked what is the 
real signification of a word (noun) — an individual, form or genus? 


n s i * i m n 

192. Some say that the word (noun) denotes indivi- 
dual because it is only in respect of individuals that we can 
use “that,” “collection,” “giving,” “taking,” “num- 
ber,” “waxing,” “waning,” “colour,” “compound” and 
“ propagation.” — 62. 


“ That cow is going "—here the term “ that ” can be used only in 
reference $o an individual cow. Similarly it is only in respect of indivi- 
duals' that we Can use the expressions “ collection of cows ” " he gives 
the cow, ” “he takes the cow, " " ten cows, ” " cow waxes, " “ cow wanes,” 
“red cow,” “cow-legs" and “cow gives birth to cow, ” 


BOOK II, CHAPTER II. 


60 


* ^RW T RT^ II R I V I II 

193. A word (noun) does not denote an individual 
because there is no fixation of the latter. — 63. 


Unless we take genus into consideration, the word cow will denote 
any individual of any kind. Individuals are infinite. They cannot be 
distinguished from one another unles.s we refer some of them to a certain 
genus and others to another genus and so on. In order to distinguish, a 
cow-individual from a horse-individual, we must admit a genus called 
cow distinguished from a genus called horse. 

11 * 1 s 1 ti 

194. Though a word does not literally bear a certain 
meaning it is used figuratively to convey the same as in 
the case of Brahmana, scaffold, mat, king, flour, sandal- 
wood, Ganges, cart, food and man in consideration of 
association, place, design, function, measure, containing, 
vicinity, conjunction, sustenance and supremacy. — 64. 


If the word dues not denote an individual how is it that we refer to 
an individual cow by the expression “ that cow is feeding”? The answer 
is that though the word cow r may not literally mean an individual we may 
refer to the same figuratively. There are such instances as ‘ Feed the 
staff’ means ‘feed the Brahmana holding a staff,’ ‘the scaffolds shout’ 
means “ men on the scaffolds shout ,’ ‘ lie makes a mat ' means ‘ he aims at 
making a mat,’ ‘Yama’ (chastiser) means ‘a king,’ a bushel of ‘flour’ means 
flour measured by a bushel, ‘ a vessel of sandal-wood ’ means ‘ sandal- 
wood placed in a vessel,’ ‘cows are grazing on the Ganges ’ means ’ ‘cows 
are grazing in the vicinity of the Ganges, ’ ‘a black cart’ means a cart 
marked with blackness, ‘ food ’ means ‘ life ’ and ’ this person (Bharadv&ja) 
is a clan ’ means ‘ this person is the head of a clan.’ 



nregtrw q reftdh 11 su tv 11 


195. Some say that the word (noun) denotes form by 
which an entity is recognised. — 65. 

We use such expressions as ‘ this is a cow ’ and ‘ this is a horse * 
only with reference to the forms of the cow and the horse. Hence it is 
alleged by some that the word denotes form. 



THE NYAYA-StiTRAS. 61 


i f tot ism anfa: 


u * i * i u ii 

196. Others say that the word (noun) must denote 
genus, otherwise why in an earthenware cow possessed of 
individuality and form do we not find immolation, etc. — 66. 

We can immolate a real cow but not an earthenware cow though 
the latter possesses individuality and form. The distinction between a 
real cow and an earthenware one is that the former comes nuder the 
geniis cow but the latter does not. Hence it is urged by some that a 
word (noun) denotes genus. 

II * I R I ivs II 

197. In reply we say that it is not genus alone that 
is meant by a word (noun) because the manifestation of 
genus depends on the form and individuality. — 67. 

The genus abides in the individual and the individual cannot be 
recognised except by its form. Hence genus has reference both to the 
form and individual, or in other words, the genus alone is not the significa- 
tion of a word. 



qvnJ: ii * i * i 4c ii 


198. The meaning of a word (noun) is, according to 
us, the genus, form and individual. — 69. 


The word (noun) signifies all the three though prominence is given 
to one of them. For the purpose of distinction the individual is pro- 
minent. In order to convey a general notion, pre-eminence is given to 
the genus. In practical concerns much importance is attached to the form. 
As a fact the word (noun) ordinarily presents to us the form, denotes the 
individual and connotes the genus. 


sqfe i & o fafr q ra Eft if%: n * i ^ i u 

199. An' individual is that -which has a definite form 
and is the abode of particular qualities. — 69. 

An individual is any substance which is cognised by the senses as 
a limited abode of colour, taste, smell, touch, weight, solidity, tremulousness, 
velocity or elasticity. 


w i gft ra tftifa greqT ii m i «« u 



62 BOOK II, CHAPTER H. 

200. The form is that which is called the token .' 

the genus. — 79. . 

The genus, cowhood for instance, is recognised by a certain colloca- 
tion of the dewlap which is a form. We cannot recognise the genu« of a 
formless substance. 

WNHSKMiRmW snfrf; U R M I ^ H 

201. Genus is that whose nature is to produce the 
same conception. — 71. 

Cowhood is a genus which underlies all cows. Seeing a cow some- 
where we acquire a general notion of cows (*.&, derive knowledge of 
cowhood). This general notion enables us on all subsequent occasion* to 
recognise individual cows. 



THE NYAYA-StTRAS. 63 

Book HI.— -Chapter I. 

i faw&i i i »h> gnn% u x < t » t n 

X. A sense is not soul because we can apprehend 
an object through both sight and touch. 

“ Previously I saw the jar and now I touch it:” such expressions 
will be meaningless if “I” is not different fawn eye which cannot touch 
and from skin which cannot see. In other words, the “I” or soul is 
distinct from the senses. 

"U fttUM'IWMIg' II vi ? i * H . 

2. This is, some say, not so because there is a fixed 
relation between the senses and their objects. 

Colour, for instance, is an exclusive object o£ the eye, sound of 
the ear, sinell of the nose, and so on. It. is the e 3 r e that, according to 
the objectors, apprehends colour, and there is no necessity for assuming 
a soul distinct from the eye for the purpose of explaining the apprehen- 
sion of colour. 

u * i % \ \ ii 

3. This is, we reply, no opposition because the exis- 
tence of soul is inferred from that very fixed relation. 

There is a fixed relation between the senses an l their objects, eg., 
between the eye aud colour, the oar aud sound, and so on. It is the oye 
and not the ear that can apprehend colour, and it is the ear aud not the eye 
that can apprehend sound. If a sense were the soul it could apprehend only 
one object, but “I” can apprehend many objects, that is, “ I ” can see 
colour, hear sound, an l s ) on. Herico the “ I ” or soul which confers 
unity on the various kinds of apprehension is different from the senses 
each of which can apprehend only one object. 

Tre m u re r g ; Hainan 

4. If the body were soul there should he release from 
sins as soon as the body was burnt. 

If a person has no soul beyoad his body he. should he- freed from 
sins when the body is destroyed. But in reality sins pursue him in his 
subsequent lives. Hence the body is not soul. 



64 BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

The aphorism admits of another interpretation : — 

If the body were soul there could arise no sin from 
killing living beings. 

Our body varies in dimension and character with every moment. 
The body which exists at the present moment is not responsible for the 
sin which was committed at a previous moment inasmuch as the body 
which committed the sin is now non-existent. In other words, no sin 
would attach to the person who killed living beings if the soul were 
identical with our transient body. 

cTWR: ^T^iSRTfsftr M n u II 

5. There would, says an objector, be no sin even if 
the body endowed with a sonl were, burnt for the soul is 
eternal. 

In the previous aphorism it was shown that the commission of 
sins would be impossible if we supposed the body to be the soul. In the 
present aphorism it is argued by an objector that wc should be incapable 
of committing sins even on the supposition of the soul being distinct 
from our body, for such a soul is eternal and cannot be killed. 

5T u \ [ \ k n 

6. In reply we say that it is not so because we are 
capable of killing the body which is the site of operations 
of the soul. 

Though the soul is indestructible wo can kill the body which is 
the seat of its sensations. Hcnco we are not incapable of committing 
sins by killing or murder. Moreover, if we do not admit a permanent 
sonl beyond our frail body wo shall be confronted by many absurdities 
such as “ loss of merited action ” (krita huui) and “gain of unmerited 
action (ak pi tabby again a). A man who has committed a certain sin may 
not suffer its consequences in this life aud unless there is a soul continuing 
to his next life he will not suffer them at all. This is a “loss of merited 
action. Again, we often find a man suffering the consequences of action 
which he neve?*did in this life. This would he a “gain of unmerited 
action unless we believed that his soul did the action in his previous life. 

II ^ \ \ \ 

i, .[There is a soul beyond the sense] because what 
is seen by the left eye is recognised by the right 



THE NYAYA-SUTRAS. 65 

A thing perceived previously by the left eye is recognised now by 
the right eye. This would, have been impossible if the soul were identical 
with the left eye or the right eye on the principle that the seat of recog- 
nition must be the same as the seat of perception. Consequently we 
must admit that there is a soul which is distinct from the left and right 
eyes and which is the common seat of perception and recognition. 

fesufhuHi s n a i t i =: n 

X 

8. Some say tliat the eyes are not two : the conceit of 
duality arises from the single organ of vision being divided 
by the bone of the nose. 

The objectors argue as follows : — 

If the eyes were really two, viz., right and left, we would have been 
bound to admit a soul distinct from, the senses as the common seat of 
perception and recognition. But there is only one eye which, is divided 
by the bridge of the nose and which porforms the two functions of 
perception and recognition. Hence there is, according to the objectors, 
no soul beyond the eye. 

n- 3 i t i e. 11 

9. The eyes, we reply, are really two because the 
destruction of one does not cause the destruction of the 
other. 

If the organ of vision • was only one, then on the destruction of that 
one (i.e. } one eye) there would he total blindness. 

MU 1 11 

10. This is, some say, no argument for the destruc- 
tion of a part does not cause the destruction of the whole. 

The objectors say : — J ust as a tree does not perish though a branch 
of it has been destroyed, so there may not be total blindness though 
one eye (a part of the organ of vision) has been destroyed. 

m 1 ? 1 ?? 11 

11. This is, we reply, no opposition to our argument 
inasmuch as your illustration is inapt. 

Tlie illustration of a tree and its branch is not quite apt for a tree- 
f ■ does not exist in its entirety but assumes a mutilated condition when 



m; book m, chapter j. 

a branch of it is cutoff. The right eye, on the other hand, remains in 
a perfect condition and performs the full function of an eye even when 
the left eye is destroyed. 

gfigqiwfoKRH n ^ t t i t’t n 

12. The soul is distinct from the senses because 
there is an excitement of one sense through the operation 
of another sense. 

When we see an acid snbstance, water overflows our tongue. In 
other words, in virtue of the operation of our visual sense there is an 
excitement in the sense of taste. This would be impossible unless there 
was a soul distinct from the senses. The soul seeing the acid substance 
remembers its properties ; and the remembrance of the acid properties 
excites the sense of taste. 

& a 11 \ i % i \\ it 

13. It is, some say, not so because remembrance is 
lodged in the object remembered. 

Remembrance, according to the objectors, is lodged in the thing 
remembered and does not necessarily presuppose a soul. 

II ^ 1 1 i t? II 

14. This is, we reply, no opposition because remem- 
brance is really a quality of the soul. 

Remembrance is based on perception, that is, one can remember 
only that thing which one has perceived. It often happens that seeing 
the colour of a thing we remember its smell. This would be impossible 
if remembrance was a quality of a sense, e.g., the eye which has never 
smelt the thing. Hence remembrance must be admitted to be a quality 
of a distinct snbstance called soul which is the common seat of perceptions 
of colour and smell. 

w l fafWRW m i t i 

15. Also because the things remembered are innu- 
merable. 

If memory were lodged in things, we could remember innumerable 
things at a time. But none can remember more things than one at a time. 
Hence memory must be supposed to be a quality of a separate substance 
called soul (endowed with a mind). 



THE NTAYA-SOTBaS, 

HT^ g frmTrl^ r u < 1 tut 

16. There is, some say, no soul other than the mind 
because the arguments which are adduced to establish the 
“ soul” are applicable to the mind. 

The substance of the objection is this : — 

We can apprehend an object by both the eye and the skin. It is 
true that the acts of seeing and touching the object by one agent cannot 
be explained unless we suppose the agent to he distinct from both the eye 
and the skin ( i.e ., from the senses), let however the agent be identified 
with the mind. 

n v 1 1 n 

17. Since there is a knower endowed with an instrumpit 
of knowledge it is, we reply, a mere verbal trick to apply 
the name “ mind” to that which is really the “ soul.” 

To explain the acts of seeing, touching, etc., you admit an agent, 
distinct from the senses which are called its instruments. The sense or 
instrument by which the act of thinking is performed is called the 
“ mind.” The agent sees by the eye, hears by the car, smells by the nose, 
tastes by the tongue, touches by the skin ami thinks by the “ mind.” 
Hence we must ndmijt the agent (soul) over and above the mind. If you 
call the agent as “ mind,” yon will have to invent another name to 
designate the instrument. This verbal trick will not, after all, affect our 
position. Moreover, the mind cannot be the agent as it is atomic in 
nature. An atomic agent cannot perform the acts of seeing, hearing, 
knowing, feeling, etc. 

fiemsr Prcgmsr: n \ i ? i n 

18. Your conclusion is moreover opposed tQ inference. 

We admit a mind apart from the soul. If you deny anyone of them 
or identify one with the other, an absurd conclusion will follow. Unless 
you admit the mind you will not be able to explain the internal percep- 
tion. By the eye you can see, by the ear yon can hear, by the nose- you can 
smell, by the tongue you can taste and by the skin you can touch. By 
what sense do yon carry on internal perception, vis., thinking, imagining, 
etc. ? Unless you admit the mind for that purpose your conclusion will 
be opposed to inference. 



m BOOK III, CHAPTER L 

.... '■ 

f§*mfcfi^5Tfa<T%:l! * I % tit 

19. (The soul is to be admitted) on account of joy, fear 
and grief arising in a child from the memory of things 
previously experienced. 


A new-born child manifests marks of joy, fear and grief. This is 
inexplicable unless we suppose that the child perceiving certain’ things 
in this life remembers the corresponding things of the past life. The 
things which used to excite joy, fear and grief in the past life continue to 
do so in this life. -The memory of the past proves the-provious birth as 
well as the existence of the soul. 

20. It is objected that the changes of countenance in a 
are like those of expanding and closing up in a lotus. _ 
The objection stands thus : — 


Just as a lotus which is devoid of memory expands and closes up 
by itself, so a child expresses joy, fear and grief even without the recollec- 
tion of the things with which these were associated in the previous life. 



21. This is, vve reply, not so because the changes in 
inanimate things are caused by heat, cold, rain and 
season. 


The changes of expansion and contraction in a lotus are caused by 
heat and cold. Similarly the changes of countenance in a child must be 
caused by something. What is that thing? It is the recollection of 
pleasure and pain associated with the things which are perceived. 

^ i ? i « n 

22. A child’s desire for milk in this life is caused by the 
practice of his having drunk it in the previous life. 

A child jHet bom drinks the breast of his mother through the 
remembrance that he did so in the previous life as a means of satisfying 
hunger. The child’s desire for milk in this life is caused by the re- 
membrance of his experience in the previous life. This proves' that the 
child's soul, though it has abandoned a previous body and lias accepted 
a new one, remembers the experiences of the previous body. 


THE NYAfA-SOTRAS. 60 

11 * i u ’tvn 

23 . Some deny the. above by saying that a new-born 
child approaches the breast of his mother just as an iron 
approaches a loadstone (without any cause). 

The objection runs thus : — 

Jufit as an iron approaches a loadstone by itself, so does a child 
approach the breast of his mother without any cause. 

?TT*I5r II ^ It I R# II 

24. This is, we reply, not so because there is no 
approach towards any other thing. 

You say that there is no cause which makes an iron approach a 
loadstone, or a child the breast of his mother. How do you then explain 
that an iron approaches only a loadstone but not a clod of earth and a 
child approaches only the breast of his mother and not any other tliiiT^^ 
Evidently there is some cause to regulate these fixed relations. 

II ^ I \ I ** II 

25 . We find that none is born without desire. 

Every creature is born with some desires which are associated with 
the things enjoyed by him in the past life. In other words, the' desire 
proves the existence of the creature or rather of his soul in the previous 
lives. Hence the soul is eternal. 

U'jWMo'Mi^fdsN^yifrl: II ^ I % I ^ II 

2G. Some say that the soul is not eternal because it may 
be produced along with desire as other things are produced 
along with their qualities. 

The objection stands thus : — 

Just as a jar, when it is produced, is distinguished by its colour, etc., 
so the soul, when it is produced is marked by its desire, etc. Hence the 
desires do not pre-suppose the soul in the previous lives or, in other 
words, the soul is not eternal. 

3 u q i ^fafaTre n 5 ni i #» i u, n % i % i n 

27. This is, we reply, not so because the desire in a 
new-borp child is caused by the ideas left in his soul by 
the things he enjoyed in his previous lives. 

The desire implies that the soul existed in the previous lives or, in 
other words, the soul is eternal. 



70 BOOK Ilf, CHAPTER I. 

qr$r# n a i $ i** o 

28. Our body is earthy because it possesses the 
special qualities of earth. 

la other worlds there are beings whose bodies are watery, fiery, 
airy or ethereal. Though our body is composed of all the five elements 
we call it earthy owing to the preponderance of earth in it. 

n ^ i t • !• 

29. In virtue of the authority of scripture too* 

That our body is earthy is proved by our scripture, fn.the seetion 
on “ Dissolution into the primordial matter,” there are such texts as : 
May the eye be absorbed into the sun, may the body be absorbed into the" 
earth, etc. Tho suit is evidently the source of the eye and the earth of 
the body. 

\ 1 ! I II 

30. It is doubtful as to whether a sense is material 
or all-pervading because there is perception when there is 
(contact with) the eye-ball and there is perception even when 
the eye-ball is far off. 

The eye-ball is said by some to be a material (elemental) substance 
inasmuch as its function is limited by its contact. A thing is seen 
when it has contact with the eye-ball but it is not seen when the eye-ball 
is riot connected. In other words, the eye-ball, like any other material 
substance, exercises its function only in virtue of its contact with things. 
Others hold that the eye-ball is a non-material all-pervading substance 
in as much as it can perceive things with which it has not come in 
contact. The eye-ball does not touch the things which it sees from 
a distance. Hence the question arises as to whether the eye-ball is 
a, material or au all-pervading substance. 

ii w ft 

31. It is contended that the eye-ball is not a material 
substance because it can apprehend the great and the small. 

If the eye-ball had been a material substance it could have appre- 
hended only those things which coincided with itself in bulb. But we 
find it can apprehend things of greater and smaller bulk. So it is 
contended, that the eye-ball is not a material substance. 



THE NYlYA-SOIRAS. 71 


W-qvfcl ftl » \ I R I A* H 

32. (The Naiyayika’s reply to the above is that) it is 
by the contact of the ray that the things, great and small, are 
apprehended. 

The Naiyayikas say that even on the supposition of the eye-ball 
being 4 material substance the apprehension by it of the great and the 
small will riot be impossible. Their explanation is that though the eye- 
ball itself does not coincide with things which are greater or smaller in 
bulk, yet the rays issuing from the eye-ball reach the things in their 
entire extent. Hence in spite of the eye-ball being a material substance 
there is no impossibility for it to apprehend the great and the small. 

n ^ i t i ^ ii 


33. Contact is not the cause because we do not per- 
ceive the ray. 


The contact of a ray with a thing is not the cause of apprehension 
of the thing because we perceive no ray issuing from the eye-ball. 


ll\n I II 


34. That we do not apprehend a thing through percep- 
tion is no proof of non-existence of the thing because we 
may yet apprehend it through inference. 


The ray issuing from the eye is not perceived as it is supersensuous. 
But it is established by inference like the lower half of the earth or the 
other side of the moon. 


II ^ I \ I II 

35. And perception depends upon the special cha- 
racter of the substance and its qualities. 

A substance unless it possesses magnitude, or a quality unless it 
possesses obviousness is not perceived. From the absence of magnitude 
and obvious colour the ray of the eye-ball is not perceived. 

\\\\ % i n 

36. A colour is perceived only when it abides in 
many things intimately and possesses obviousness. 

The sun’s ray is perceived as it possesses an obviousness in respect of 
colour and touch. But the ray of the eye-ball is not perceived as it is 

obvious neither in respect of colour nor in respect of touch. 

in 



72 BOOK 111, CHAPTER I, 

s$g; hvh! i sii 

37. And the , senses subservient to the purposes of 
man have been set in order by his deserts. 

The older referred to is as follows : — 

The eye emits ray which does not possess the quality of obviousness 
and cannot consequently burn the thing it touches. Moreover, had there 
been obviousness in the ray it would have obstructed our vision by stand- 
ing as a screen between the eye and the thing. This sort of arrangement, 
of the senses was made to enable man to attain his purposes according to 
his merits and demerits. 

38. The senses are material substances inasmuch as 
they invariably receive obstruction. 0 

Nothing can oiler obstruction to a non-material all-pervading sub- 
stance. The senses receive obstruction from wall, etc., and are therefore 
material snbstances. 

39. Some say that the ray of the eye (possesses obvi- 
ousness of colour but it) is not perceived just as the light of 
a meteor at midday is not perceived. 

The light of a meteor though possessing obviousness of colour is* not 
perceived at midday because it is then overpowered by the light of the 
eun. Similarly, some say, the ray of the eye possesses obviousness of 
colour but it is not perceived during the day time on account of its being 
overpowered by the light of the sun. 

ST II ^l$l«o || 

40. It is, we reply, not so because even in the night 
the ray of th» eye is not perceived. 

Had the ray of the eye possessed obviousness of colour it would have 
been perceived during the night when it cannot be overpowered by the 
light of the sun. As the ray of the eye is not perceived even during the 
night we must conclude that it does not possess obviousness of colour. 

* No. 8§ appears to be a part of the commentary pt.Yfttaytyana. 



THE NYAYA-8CTRAS IS 

it n 


41. The ray of the eye is not perceived in conse- 
quence of its unobviousness but not on account of its total 
absence because it reaches objects through the aid of exter- ' 
nal light. 

In the eye there is ray which does not however possess an obvious 
colour. Had the eyo possessed no ray it could not have perceived any 
object. Since the eye perceives objects, it possesses ray in it, and since it 
requires the aid of external light (such as the light of the sun) to perceive 
them it follows that the ray does not possess the quality of obviousness. 
This aphorism answers the objection raised in 3-1-33. 


u utis* 11 

42. And the invisibility of the ray of the eye cannot 
be due to its being overpowered (by an external light such 
as the light of the sun) because the overpowering is possible 
only of a thing which possessed obviousness. 

It is only a thing which possesses obviousness or manifestation that 
can be overpowered or obscured. But how can we throw a thing into 
obscurity which never possessed manifestation ? We cannot therefore say 
that the ray of the eye is not perceived on account of its having been 
overpowered by an external light. 



w \\\m n 


43. There must be ray in the eye of man as we see 
it in the eye of animals that move about in the night. 

We see that animals wandering by night, such as cats, possess ray 
in their eyes. By this we can conjecture that there is ray in the eye of 


man. 


u imtiwi 


44. Some say that the eye can perceive a thing even 
without tomirig in contact with it by means of its rays just 
as things screened from us by glass, mica, membrane or 
crystal are seen. 


BOOK in, CHAPTER I. 


74 


The objection raised in this aphorism controverts the Ny&ya theory 
of cod tact (in pratyaksa) and seeks to prove that the senses are not 
material substances. 


45. The foregoing objection is not valid because we 
cannot perceive what is screened from us by walls. 


The eye cannot really perceive a thing without coming in contact 
with it by means of its rays. For instance, a thing which is screened 
from us by a wall is not perceived by our eyes. 

11 ntis* 11 

46. There is a real contact because there is no actual 
obstruction (caused by glass, mica, membrane or crystal). 

The ray issuing from the eye can reach an external object through 
glass, mica, etc., which are transparent substances. There being no 
obstruction caused by these substances, the eye comes really in contact 
with the external object. 

II \\\\^ II 

47. A ray of the sun is not prevented from reaching 
a combustible substance though the latter is screened by a 
crystal. 

This is an. example which supports the theory of contact, viz., a ray 
issuing from the eye passes actually through a crystal to an object lying 
beyond it. 

II II 

48. It is, some say, not so because the character of 
one presents itself in the other. 

The objection stands thus : — 

If a ray issuing from the eye can reach an object screened by a 
crystal, why can it not reach auother object which is screened by a wall ? 
According to tjre objector the property of the crystal presents itself in the 
wall. 



lunmn 

49. In reply we say that the perception of a thing 
screened b,y arcrystal takes place in the same manner as that 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 75 

of a form in a mirror or water owing to the possession of 
the character of transparency. 

The form of a face is reflected on a mirror because the latter 
possesses transparency. Similarly, a thing is reflected on a crystal inas-. 
much as the latter is transparent. A wall which does not possess trans- 
parency can reflect nothing. It is therefore entirely due to the nature of 
the screens that we can or cannot perceive things through them. 





50. It is not possible to impose injunctions and pro- 
hibitions on facts which are perceived or inferred to be of 
some fixed character. 


A crystal and a wall are found respectively to be transparent and 
non-transparent. It is not possible to alter their character by saying 
“ Jet the crystal be non-transparent ” and “ let the wall be transparent.” 
Likewise, a ray of the eye in passing to a thing is obstructed by a wall 
but not by a crystal. This is a perceived fact which cannot be altered 
by our words. Hence the theory of contact remains intact. 

51. Since many things occupy many places and since 
also one thing possessing different parts occupies many 
places, there arises doubt as to whether the senses are more 
than one. 

There is doubt as to whether there are as many senses as there 
are sensuous functions or whether all the functions belong to one sense 
possessing, different parts. 


• 52. Some say that the senses are not many as none 
of them is independent of touch (skin). 

The eye, ear, nose and tongue are said to be mere modifications of 
touch (skin> which pervades them, that is, there is only one sense, viz., 
touch (skin), all others being merely its parts, 



76 BOOK 111, CHAPTER I. 

53. It is, we reply, not so because the objects of other 
senses are not perceived by touch (skin).* 

If there had been only one sense, viz., touch (skin) then it could 
have seen colour, heard sound and so on. But a blind man possessing 
the sense of touch cannot see colour. Hence it is concluded that senses 
are many. 

tftoi ' j.ulMHfcw-asqafow i u 1 1 vw 

54. Perception of various objects of sense is compar- 
able to that of smoke by a special part of touch.* 

Just as smoke is perceived by a special part of touch located in the 
eye, so sound, smell etc., are perceived by special parts of touch specially 
located. 

55. This is, according to us, absurd as it involves 
contradiction.* 

It has been said that touch is the only sense by the special parts of 
which special functions are performed. Now it is asked whether the 
special parts of touch do not partake of the nature of senses. If they do, 
then the senses are many. If on the other hand they do not partake of 
the nature of senses, then it is to be admitted that colour, sound, etc., are 
not cognisable by the senses. 

1 1 U u 

56. Touch is not the only sense because objects are 
not perceived simultaneously. 

Had there been only one sense, viz., touch, it would have in con- 
junction with the mind produced the functions of seeing, hearing, smell- 
ing, tasting etc., simultaneously But we cannot perform different func- 
tions at once. This proves that the senses are many : the mind whioh is 
-an atomic substance being unable to come in contact with the different 
senses at a t»me»#annot produce different functions simultaneously. 

57. Touch cannot be v the only sense prohibiting the 

functions of other senses.f . 

* This is not really an aphorism bnt a part of the commentary of V&tsytyana, 
t This seems to bp a part of the commentary of V4tsy4yana, 




THE KYiTA-SOTBAS. 7f 

Touch can perceive only those objects' vbioh are near (cotttaguous) 
but it cannot perceive objects which are far off. As a fact we can per- 
ceive colour and sound from a great distance. This is certainly not the 
function of touch but of some other sense which can reach distant objects. 

58. Senses are five because there are five objects. 

There are five objects, viz., colour, sound, smell (odour), taste 

(savour) and touch which are cognised respectively by the eye, ear, nose, 
tongue and skin. There are therefore five senses corresponding to the 
five objects. 

a nutiKtu 

59. Some say that the senses are not five because there 
are more than five objects. 

The objects of sense are said to be many such as good smell, bad 
smell, white colour, yellow colour, bitter taste, sweet taste, pungent taste, 
warm touch, cold touch etc. According to the objector there must be 
senses corresponding to all these objects. 

n^n^oii 

60. There is, we reply, no objection because odour 
(smell) etc. are never devoid of the nature of odour (smell) etc. 

Good odour, bad odour, etc. are not different objects of sense but 
they all come under the genus, odour. It is the nose alone that cognises 
all sorts of odour — good or bad. Similarly all colours— white, yellow, 
blue or green— are cognised by the eye. In fact there are only five 
objects which are cognised by the five senses. 

61. Some say that there is only one sense as the so- 
called different objects of sense are not devoid of the charac- 
ter of an object. 

The objection raised in this aphorism is as follows : — 

The so-called different objects, viz., colour, sound, smell (odour), 
taste (savour) and touch agree with one another in each of them being *n 
object of sense. As they all possess the common characteristic of bgin. 
an object of sense, it is much simpler to Say that the object of sense 
is only one. If there is only one object of sense, the sense must also 
be one only. 



78 BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

62. It is, we reply, not so because the senses possess 
a five-fold character corresponding to the characters of know- 
ledge, sites, processes, forms and materials 

The senses must be admitted to be five on the following grounds 

(а) The characters of knowledge — There are five senses correspond- 
ing to the five characters of knowledge,^., visual, auditory, olfactory, 
gustatory and tactual. 

(б) The sites — The senses are five on account of the various sites 
they occupy. The visual sense rests on the eyeball, the auditory sense 
on the ear-hole, olfactory sense on the nose, the gustatory sense on the 
tongue, while the tactual sense occupies the whole body. 

(c) The processes — There are five senses involving five different 
processes, e. g., the visual sense apprehends a colour by approaching 
it through the (ocular) ray while the tactual sense apprehends an object 
which is in association with the body, and so on. 

(d) The forms — The senses are of different forms, e.g., the eye 
partakes of the nature of a blue ball, and the ear is not different from 
ether, etc. 

(e) The materials— The senses are made up of different materials: 
the eye is fiery, the ear is ethereal, the nose is earthy, the tongue is watery, 
and the skin (touch) is airy. 





63. The senses are essentially identical with the 
elements in consequence of the possession of their special 
qualities. 

The five senses, viz., the eye, ear, nose, tongue and skin C touch) 
are essentially identical with the five elements, viz., fire, ether, earth, 
water and air whose special qualities, viz., colour, sound, smell (odour), 
aavour (taste) and tangibility are exhibited by them. 




64. Of odour (smell), savour (taste), colour/ tangibi- 
lity (touch) and sound those ending with tangibility belong 
to earth, . ^ each preceding one in succession they 



THE NYAYA-BOTRAS. 


belong respectively to water, fire and air ; the last (sound) 
belongs to ether. , 

The earth possesses four qualities, viz., odour (smell), savour (taste), 
colour and tangibility. In water there are three qualities, viz., savour, 
colour and tangibility ; colour and tangibility are known to be the qualities 
of fire while tangibility and sound belong respectively to air and ether. - 

65. An objector says that it is not so because an 
element is not apparently found to possess more than one 
quality. 

The substance of the objection is that the earth does not possess 
four qualities but only one quality, viz., odour (smell) which is apprehended 
by the nose. Water does not possess three qualities but possesses only 
one quality, viz., savour (taste) which is apprehended by the tongue. 
Similarly the other elements do, each of them, possess only one quality. 



66. The objector further says that the qualities be- 
long to the elements, one to one, in their respective order 
so that there is non-perception of other qualities in them. 

The substance of the objection is this : — 

Odour (smell) is the only quality of the earth. Consequently the 
other three qualities, viz., savour (taste), colour and tangibility alleged to 
belong to the earth, are not found in it. Savour (taste) is the only quality 
of water, hence the other two qualities, viz., colour and tangibility alleged 
to belong to water are not found in it. Colour is the ouly quality of fire, 
and hence the other quality, viz., tangibility alleged to belong to fire is 
not found in it. Tangibility is of course the quality of air and sound 


of ether. 





67. And it is through their commixture, continues 
the objector, that there is the apprehension of more than 
one- quality. 

The objector further says as follows - ■ 

The earth possesses only odour (smell), and if sometimes savour 'taste) 
is also found there it is because the earth is than naixed with water. 

11 ' ’ 



80 BOOK III, CHAPTER I. 

Similarly if there is odour (smell) in water it. is because : the earth is mixed 
with it. 

fts gw i y for inui^n 

68. Of the elements one is, according, to the objector, 

often interpenetrated by others. 

The objection is explained as follows : — 

The earth is often interpenetrated by water, fire and air and is 
consequently found to possess savour (taste), colour and tangibility besides 
odour (smell). Similar is the case with water ete. 

e srereratg; nutitn 

69. It is, we reply, not so because there is visual per- 
ception of the earthy and the watery. 

• The Naiyayikas meet the foregoing objections by saying that the 
earth really possesses four qualities, water three, fire two, air one, 
and ether one. Had the earth possessed only odour (smell) and the 
water only savour (taste) then it would have been impossible for us 
to see the earthy and watery things. We are competent to see only 
those things which possess colour, and if the earth and water had 
not possessed colour how could wo have seen them ? Since we can 
see the earthy and the watery it follows that they possess eolour. If you 
say that the earth and water are visible because they are mixed with 
the fiery things whieh possess colour, why then the air and 'ether are 
also not visible? There is no rule that it is only the earth and water 
that can be mixed with fiery things hut that the air and ether cannot be 
so mixed. Proceeding in this way we find that the earth etc. do not 
each possess only one quality. 

70. Owing to the predominance of one quality in an 
blemefit, a sense is characterised by the quality which pre- 
dominates in corresponding element. 

The nose is characterised by odour (smell) which predominates in 
its corresponding element the earth; the tongue is characterised by 
savour (taste) which predominates in its corresponding element the water ; 
the e ■ is characterised by colour which predominates in its correspond- 
ing eiSfpnt the fire ; the skin (touch) is characterised by tangibility 
which Abides ip its corresponding element the ph while ;the e$r iq 



THE NYAYA-SUTEAS. SI 


characterised by sound which is the special quality of its corresponding 
element the ether. 

af s q w r w s g \\w vs\\\ 

71. A sense as distinguished from its corresponding 
element is determined by its fineness. 

A sense (e. g., the nose) which is tho fine part of an element (e. g-, the 
earth) is able to perceive a special object (e.g., odour) owing to the 
act-force ( sansk&ra , karma) of the person possessing the sense. A sense 
cannot perceive more than one object because it possesses the predo- 
minant quality of an element, e. g., the nose possesses only odour which is 
the predominant quality of the earth, the tongue the savour of water, the 
eye the colour of fire, and so on. 


72. A sense is really called as such when jjt is at- 
tended by its quality. 

Some may say why a senso (the noso for instance) cannot perceive 
its own quality (odour). The reply is that a sense consists of an element 
endowed with its quality. It is only when a sense is attended by the quality 
that it can see an object. Now in perceiving an object the sense is 
attended by the quality but in perceiving its own quality it is not so at- 
tended. Consequently a sense cannot perceive its own quality. 


73. Moreover an object is never perceived by itself. 

An ey^e can see an external object but it cannot see itself. On the 
same principle a sense cannot perceive its own quality. 

sr nuttwtii 


74. It is, some say, not so because the quality of 
sound is perceived by the ear. 

The objection stands thus 

It is not true that a sense cannot perceive its own quality. The ear, 
for instance, can perceive sound which is its own quality. 

75. The perception of sound furnishes a contrast lo 
that of other qualities and their corresponding substrata. 



0 BOOK rtt, CHARTER I. 

The nose, tongue, eye and skin can respectively smell earth, taste' 
tvj^er, see colour and touch air only when they are attended by their 
own qualities, viz, odouv (smell), savour (taste), colour and tangibility. 
■But an ear when it hears sound' is not attended by any quality. In fact 
the ear is identical with the ether and hears sound by itself. By indirect 
inference we can prove that sound is the special quality of the ether : 
Odour is the predominant quality of the earth, savour of water, colour of 
the eye, and tangibility of the skin (touch) : Sound must therefore be the 
quality of the remaining element, viz., the ether. 



T SM NYAYA-SOTRAS. 8S 


Book III, Chapter II. 

wi: n \ i * i ? ii 

76. Since the intellect resembles both action and 
ether there is doubt as to whether it is transitory or perma- 
nent. — 1. 


Inasmuch as the intellect bears likeness to both action and other 
in respect of intangibility, there arises the question whether it is transi- 
tory like an action or permanent like the ether. We find in the intellect 
the function of origination and decay which marks transitory things as 
well as the function of recognition which marks permanent things. “ I 
knew the tree,” “I know it ” and “ I shall know it ” — these are expres- 
sions which involving the ideas of origination and decay indicate our 
knowledge to be transitory. “ I who knew the tree yesterday am knowing 
it again to-day ” — this is an expression which involving the idea of 
continuity indicates our Icnowledgo to be permanent. Hence there is 
doubt as to whether the intellect which exhibits both kinds of knowledge 
is really transitory or permanent. 


ftM<IM«ll*l?IHIfll II ^ I H I VII 

77. Some say that the intellect is permanent because 
there is recognition of objects. — 2. 


The S&tpkhyas maintain the permanency of the intellect on the ground 
of its capacity for the recognition of objects. A thing which was known 
before is known again now — this sort of knowledge is called recognition. 
It is possible only if knowledge which existed in the past continues also 
at the present, that is, if knowledge is persistent or permanent. Recogni- 
tion would have beon impossible if knowledge had been transitory. Hence 
the Saipkhyas conclude that the intellect which recognises objects is 
permanent. 



n \ r i \ u 


78. The foregoing reason is not, we say, valid inas- 
much as it requires proof like the very subject in dispute. — 3. 

- Whether the intellect is permanent or not — this is the subject 
in dispute. The Samkhyas affirm that it is permanent and the reason 
adduced by them is that it can recognise objects. The Naiy&yikas dispute 
not only, the conclusion of the S^rpkhyas but aleqtheir reason. They . 



84 BOOit lit, CHAPTER It 

say that the intellect does not recognise objects but it is the soul that doea 
so. Knowledge cannot be attributed to an unconscious instrument, the 
intellect, but it must be admitted to be a quality of a conscious agent, 
the soul. If knowledge is not a quality of the soul, what else can be its 
quality ? How is the soul to be defined ? Tlxore is therefore no proof as 
to the validity of the reason, viz., that the intellect recognises objects. 


n ^ i * 1 9 -n 

79. Knowledge is neither a mode of the permanent 
intellect nor identical with it because various sorts of know- 
ledge do not occur simultaneously. — 4. 

The S&mkhyas affirm that knowledge is a mode of the permanent 
intellect from which it is not different. Knowledge, according to them, 
is nothing but the permanent intellect modified in the shape of an object 
which is reflected on it through the senses. The Naiyayikas oppose this 
view by saying that if knowledge as a mode of the permanent intellect is 
not different from it, then we must admit various sorts of knowledge to be 
permanent. But as a fact various sorts of knowledge are not permanent, 
that is, we cannot receive various sorts of knowledge simultaneously. 
Hence knowledge is not identical with the permanent intellect. 

sisRqfi^rtft ^ ftrarwn?: » ^ I * I * ii 


80. And in the cessation of recognition there arises 
the contingency of cessation of the intellect. — 5. 

If knowledge as a mode of the intellect is not different from it, then 
the cessation of recognition which is a kind of knowledge should be' 
followed by the cessation of tho intellect. This will upset the conclusion 
of the SSqihhyas that the intellect is permanent. Hence knowledge is not 
identical with the intellect. 



n \ i vi < n 


81. The reception of different sorts of knowledge is 
non-simultanechis owing, according to us, to our mind com- 
ing in contact with different senses in succession; — 6. 

The Naiyayikas say that if knowledge as a mode of the permanent 
intellect had been identical with it, then there would have been neither a 
variety of knowledge nor origination and cessation of it. The different 
aorta of knowledge dunQt occur simultaneously because they are produced, ; 



THE NY&tA-StJTRAS. 85 

according to the Naiy&yikas, hy the mind which is atomic in dimension 
•coming in contact with the senses in due succession. 

anwftfliH ar n ^ i * i vs.n 

82. Tlie recognition (or knowledge) of an object 
cannot take place when the mind is drawn away by another 
object. — 7. 

We cannot hear a sound by our ear when the mind conjoined with 
the eye is drawn away by a colour.. This shows that knowledge is 
different from the intellect, and that the mind which is atomic in dimen- 
sion serves as an instrument for the production of knowledge. 


* n ^ m i q u 

83. The intellect cannot be conjoined with the senses 
in succession because there is no motion in it. — 8. 

The mind which, according to the Naiyayikas, is atomic in dimension 
can move from one sense-organ to another in succession to produce 
different kinds of knowledge. This is impossible in the case of the 
intellect which, according to the Saipkhyas, is not only permanent but 
also all-pervading and as such cannot change its place, that is, does hot 
possess the tendency to be conjoined with the different sense-organs in' 
succession. In fact there is only one internal sense called the mind, the 
other two so-called internal senses — intellect (Buddhi) and self-conceit 
(Ahamk&ra) — being superfluous. It is not all-pervading, and knowledge 
is not its mode. Knowledge classified as visual, olfactory etc. is of 
different kinds which belong to the soul. 



I vt * H 


84. A conceit of difference is said to arise in the 
intellect in the same way as the appearance of difference in 
a crystal. — 9. * 


As a single crystal appears to assume the different colours of different 
objects which are reflected on it, so the intellect though one appears, 
according to the Samkhya, to be modified into different sorts of knowledge 
under the influence of different objects reflected on it through the senses. 

• ii \ i * u» » 

85. It is, we reply, not so because there is nq 
proof. — 10, 



86 BOOK- IIT, CHAPTER II. 

The S&ipkhya says that the -variety of knowledge arises from the , 
same intellect appearing to be, modified by the various objects which aw 
reflected on it through the senses. The various modes which the intellect 
undergoes, that is, the various kinds of knowledge are not real but only 
apparent. The Naiyayikas dispose of this view by saying that there is 
no proof as to the unreality of the modes, that is, the various kinds of 
knowledge inasmuch as they are found to originate and cease in due 
<brder in consequence of the contact of senses and their objects and pice 
versa. 





: 11^1*1* tH 


86. It is said to be absurd even in the case of a crys- 
tal being replaced by newer and newer ones which grow 
up owing to all individuals being momentary — 11. 

Tbe Sarpkhya says that as a crystal seems to be modified by the 
colours which are reflected on it, so the intellect seems to he modified by 
tbe objects which are reflected on it through the senses. In reality there 
is, according to the Sarpkhya, neither any modification of the crystal 
nor that of the intellect. This theory has in the preceding aphorism 
been, controverted by the Naiyayikas arid is in the present aphorism 
opposed by the Buddhists. According to^the latter all things, including 
even our body, are momentary. A thing which exists at the present 
moment grows up into another thing at. the next moment so that there 
is no wonder that in the course of moments there should grow up crystals 
of different colours or intellects of different modes. Hence the conclusion 
of the Sarnkhyas that a crystal remains unaltered is, according to the 
Buddhists, untenable. 


87. Owing to the absence of any absolute rule we 
shall give our assent according to the nature of each occur- 
rence — 12^ 


It is not true that in every case there are at each moment newer, 
growths. Our body no doubt undergoes increase and decrease bufc# 
piece of stone or a crystal does not,, so that the doctrine of grdwth applies ' 
to the first case hut not to the second. Hence there is no general rule 
that a thing at the lapse 6£ a moment should be replaced by 
which gmwa-afSa its place. 





THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 87 

/ 

II ^ I * I \\ II 

88. There is no absence of link as we perceive the 
cause of growth and decay— 13. 

The growth of a tiling is the increase of its parts while the decay 
is the decrease of them. An ant-hill gradually increases in dimension 
before it attains its full growth while a pot decreases in dimension before 
it reaches its final decay. We never find an instance in which a thing* 
decays without leaving any connecting link for another thing which 
grows in its placo. There is in fact no linkless growth or linkless decay. 

ayroftr: u * i * i n 

89. The growth of newer crystals in the place of an 
old one is comparable, according to some, to the growth of 
curd in the place of milk the cause of whose decay is not 
perceived — 14. 

The Buddhist says that there are things which grow and decay 
without the gradual increase and decrease of their parts. Of such things 
we do not find the cause of the first growth (origination) and the last 
decay (cessation), that is, there is no link between the thing which ceases 
and another thing which grows in its place. The milk, for instance, 
ceases without leaving any connecting link for the curd which grows in 
its place. Similarly new crystals grow to take the place of an old one 
which decays without leaving any mark. The crystal which exists at 
the present moment is not the same ono that existed at the previous 
moment. There is no connection whatsoever between them. 

faffstag miOT i g re rtan n ^ i * i tvui 

90. There is no non-perception of the cause of final 
decay as it is cognisable by its mark — 15. 

The Naiyayikas say that it is not true that we do not perceive the 
final decay of the milk which is the cause of the first growth of the curd. 
The .mark attending the final decay of milk (that is, the disappearance 
of sweet flavour) is the cause of the destruction of the milk, and that 
attemft8g..the first growth of curd (that is, the appearance of acid flavour) 
is the cause of its production. So through the mark yre really perceive 



88 BOOK Til, CHAPTER H. 

the cause of decay of milk and growth of card. Rut there is no such 
mark perceptible in the case of a crystal which at the lapse of a moment 
is said to be replaced by another crystal of a different character. 

?r m ii v i * n < ir 

91. There is, it is alleged, no destruction of the milk' 
hut only a change of its quality — 16. 

The S&qikhya says that the milk as a substance is not destroy- 
ed to produce another substance called curd. Iu reality a quality of 
the milk, viz., sweet flavour, is changed into another quality, viz., acid 
flavour. 

II ^ M It'S II 

• 92. Seeing that a thing grows from another thing 
whose parts are disjoined, we infer that the latter thing is 
destroyed — 17. 

Seeing that a thing grows after the component parts of another 
thing have been disjoined, we infer that the latter thing has really been 
destroyed. The curd, for ' instance, is not produced until the component 
parts of the milk have been destroyed. This shows that the growth of 
curd follows the decay of milk. 





IM I * I tc II 


93. There will he an uncertainty of conclusion on the 
assumption that the cause of destruction is perceived in 
some cases and not perceived in others — 18, 

In the case of a jar being produced out of a piece of clay you say 
you perceive ^Jie cause of destruction of the clay and production of the 
jar, but in the case of the curd growing out of milk you say that you do 
not perceive the cause of destruction of the milk and production of the curd. ! 
This sort of perception in certain cases and non-perception in. others will 
lead to an uncertainty of conclusion. As a fact in every case there is 
perception of the .cause of destruction. Milk, for instance, is destroyed 
when tbeire is Jhfccontact. of an acid substance, 



94. Knowledge "belongs neither to the sense nor to 
the object because it continues even on the destruction 
thereof. — 19. 

If knowledge had been a quality of the sense, it. could not continue 
after the sense lias been destroyed. But knowledge in the form of memory 
is found actually to abide even after the sense has perished. Hence the 
sense is not the abode of knowledge. Similarly it may , be proved that 
knowledge does not abide in the object. 

95. It does not also belong to the mind the existence 
of which is inferred from the knowables not being perceived 
simultaneously. —20. 

As two or more things cannot be known (perceived) simultaneously, 
it is to be concluded that the mind which is an instrument of our know- 
ledge is atomic in dimension. If we supposed this mind to be the abode 
of knowledge we could not call it an instrument in the acquisition of the 
same ; and knowledge as a quality of an atom would in that case be- 
come imperceptible. An atomic mind as the abode of our knowledge 
would stand moreover in the way of a yogi perceiving many things simul- 
taneously through many sensuous bodies formed by his magical power. 

96. Even if knowledge were a quality of the soul it 
would, says some one, give rise to similar absurdities. — 21. 

The objection stands thus: — If the soul which is all-pervading 
.were the abode of knowledge, there would be the simultaneous perceptions 
of many things in virtue of different sense-organs coining in contact with 
the soul simultaneously. But two or more things are never perceived 
simultaneously : the soul cannot therefore be the abode of knowledge) 
that is, knowledge cannot be a quality of the soul. 

97. There is, we reply, non-production of simultane- 
ous cognitions on account of the absence of contact of the 
mind with many sense-organs at a time.— 22. 



96 BOOK III, CHAPTER IT. 


The NaiySyikas say that the soul cannot perceive an object unless 
the latter comes in contact with a sense which is conjoined with the 
mind. Though many objects can come in proximity with their corres- 
ponding senses simultaneously, the mind which is atomic in dimension 
can come in conjunction with only one sense at a time. Hence two or 
more things are not perceived simultaneously although ths soul which 
perceives them is all-pervading. 


\\\\W\ \\ 

98. This is held by some to be untenable as there 
is no ground for the production of knowledge. — 23. 


The objection stands thus : — It has been argued by the Naiyayikas 
that there is absenco of production of simultaneous coguitions on account 
of the lack of contact of the senses with the mind. An opponent takes 
exception to the word “ production ” and says that knowledge cannot be 
said to be produced if it is regarded ns a quality of the soul which is 
eternal. 

s faeragaf Ft Hawaii 

99. If knowledge is supposed to abide in the soul 
there is the contingency of its being eternal as there is 
perceived no cause of its destruction. — 24. 

Knowledge can never be destroyed if it is supposed to be a quality 
of the soul. A quality may be destroyed in two ways — (1) either by the 
destruction of its abode, (2) or by the production of an opposite quality in 
its place. In the case of knowledge neither of these is possible as the 
soul, which is its abode is eternal and as wc find no opposite quality taking 
its place. Hence it follows that if knowledge is a quality of the soul it is 
eternal. But as knowledge is not eternal it is not a quality of the soul. 


100. Cognitions being found to be non-eternal there 
is, we reply, destruction of one cognition by another like 
that'of a sound. — 25. 

We realizll that cognition (knowledge) is not eternal when we 
observe that at one time there arises in us a certain kind of cognition 
(knowledge) and at the next time that cognition (knowledge) vanishes 
giving rise to another kind of cognition (knowledge). It has been asked 
how cognitions undergo destruction. Our reply is that one cognition 
vanishes as soon qs it is replaced by another cognition which is opposed 



THE NYAYA-SHTRAS. 91 

to it jtistas a sound-wave is destroyed by another sound-wave which takes 
its place. * 

gnq ^frt : n^mH n 

101. Since recollection (memory) is produced, accord- 
ing to some, by the conjunction of the mind with a certain 
part of the soul in which knowledge (impression) inheres, 
there is no simultaneous production of many recollections. 
—26. 

If knowledge bo a quality of the soul there is the possibility of many 
recollections being produced simultaneously inasmuch as the many 
impressions deposited in our soul by our past perceptions are liable at once 
to be revived and developed into recollections by the mind whose contact 
with the soul always remains constant. Some say that there is no such 
possibility of simultaneousuess because recollections are produced accord-* 5 
ing to them, by the mind coming in contact with particular parts of the 
soul in which particular impressions inhere. As the mind cannot come in 
contact with all parts of the soul simultaneously, the many impressions 
deposited in different parts of the soul are not revived- and developed into 
recollections at once. 

IIV’UV 8 II 

102. This is, we reply, not so because it is within 
the body that the mind has its function. — 27. 

It has been said in the preceding aphorism that recollections are 
produced by the mind coming in due order in conjunction with particular 
parts of the soul in which impressions inhere. This is, according to the 
Naiy&yikas, untenable because the mind cannot come in conjunction with 
the soul except in the body, and if the conjunction takes place in the body 
then there remains the possibility of simultaneous recollections. 

ll^MURc II 

103. This is, some say, no reason because it requires 
to be proved. — 28. 

The, Naiyayikas say that the mind comes in conjunction with the 
soul only within the limit of the body. Some oppose this by saying that 
until they receive sufficient proof they cannot admit that the conjunc- 
tion takes place only in the body. 



n BOOK Hi, CHAPTER II. 

104. It is, we reply, not unreasonable because a per- 
son is found to sustain his body even while he performs an 
act of recollection. — 29. 

If we suppose that a recollection is produced by the mind coming in 
conjunction with a particular part of the soul outside the body, we cannot 
account for the body being sustained during the time when the recollec- 
tion is performed. The body in order that it may be sustained requires 
an effort which is supplied by the mind coining in conjunction with the 
soul. Now the effort which arises from the conjunction is of two kinds, 
viz., (1) the effort for sustaining, and (2) that for impelling (setting in 
motion). The body will be devoid of the first kind of effort if we suppose 
the mind to wander away from it for conjunction with the soul. 

5T rWrgnfafcfRWU: II 

105. This is, some say, not so because the mind 
moves swiftly. — 30. 

Some meet the objection raised in the preceding aphorism by saying 
that the mind while producing a recollection by its conjunction with the. 
soul outside the body can, on account of its swift motion, come hack at 
once to the body to produce the effort required for the sustenance of the 
same. 

5f WWWaiPMWKJ. II II 

106. It is, we reply, not so because there is no fixed 
rule as to the duration of recollection. — 31. 

The Naiyftyikas oppose the view expressed in the foregoing aphorism 
on the ground that the mind, if it is to bo conjoined with the soul outside 
the body, may take a pretty long time to produce a recollection there, 
so that it may not come buck to the body with sufficient quickness to 
produce the effort required for the sustenance of it. 

m Sr uqfaftita: ii^i^ii 

107. There is no peculiar conjunction of the soul 
with the mind either in virtue of the former sending the 
latter in search of what it wishes to recollect or through 
the latter being cognizant of what is to be recollected or 
through ftrbitrMiness. — 32. 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 


n 


If we suppose tbe soul to send the mind to recollect a particular 
thing we encounter the absurdity of admitting that the soul already 
possesses the memory of what it is going to recollect. If on the other 
hand we suppose the mind to move out of its own accord for a particular 
recollection, wo shall have to assume that the miud is tire knower but in 
reality it is not so. Wo cannot even hold that the mind comes in 
conjunction with the soul arbitrarily for in that case there will remain 
no order then as to the occurrence of the objects of recollection. 

108. This is, some say, parallel to the particular 
conjunction which occurs in a man who while rapt in mind 
hurts his foot. — 33. 


If a inau while looking eagerly at dancing hurts his foot with a 
thorn, he feels pain because bis mind comes instantly in conjunction 
with his soul at the foot which has been hurt. Similarly the peculiar 
conjunction referred to in tho foregoing aphorism takes place, according 
to some, through the mind being cognizant of what is to be recollected. 

109. Recollections are not simultaneous owing to 
the non-simultaneousness of the efforts of attention, opera- 
tions of stimuli etc.— -34. 

A recollection is produced by the mind coming in conjunction with 
the soul in which impressions inhere. The production of recollection 
“also presupposes efforts of attention, operations of stimuli etc. As these 
do not occur simultaneously there is no simnltaneonsness of recollections. 

110. [It is not true that] there is possibility of 
simultaneousness in the case of recollections which are 
independent of the efforts of attention etc., just as in the 
case of cognitions derived from impressions of equal 
vividness not dependent on stimuli. — 35. %£ wntfsa 

Some say that recollections which are not dependent on the efforts 
of attention etc., may be simultaneous like several cognitions or acts of 
knowledge that are produced from impressions of equal vividness without 
the aid of external stimuli. But this view is untenable because neither 
..'the recollections nor the several acts of knowledge are simultaneous, Th$ 




BOOK III, CHAPTER IT. 


acts of knowledge though derived from impressions of equal vividness, 
wfll | appear in succession according to the amount of attention paid 
to them, and the recollections though not dependent on the efforts of 
attention will appear one after another in proportion to the strength of 
stimuli that revive them. 





111. Desire and aversion belong to the soul inas- 
much as they are the causes of its doing an act or for- 
bearing from doing the same. — 36. 


The Samkhyas say that knowledge is a quality of the soul (Puru§a) 
while desire, aversion, volition, pleasure and pain are the qualities of 
the internal sense (the mind). This is, according to the Naiy&yikas, 
unreasonable because a person does an act or forbears from doing it on 
account of a certain desire for or aversion against the same. The desire 
and aversion again are caused by the knowledge of pleasure and pain 
respectively. Hence it is established that knowledge, desire, aversion," 
volition, pleasure and pain have all of them a single abode, that is, 
they are the qualities of a single substance called the soul. 


112. It cannot, some say, be denied that desire and 
^aversion belong to the body inasmuch as they are indicated 
by activity and forbearance from activity. — 37. 

The Carvakas say that activity and forbearance from activity are 
the marks respectively of desire and aversion which again are the effects 
of knowledge. Now the body which is made of earth etc., is the abode 
(field; of activity and forbearance from activity. Hence it is also the 
abode of knowledge, desire, aversion etc. 




113. This is, we reply, unreasonable because activity 
and forbearance from activity are found in the axes and 
the like. — 3$. 

Just as an axe, which is fonnd sometimes to split a tree and at 
other times not to split it, is not a receptacle of knowledge, -desire and 
aversion, so the body which is made of earth etc., is not an abode of 
knowledge etc., though we: may find activity and forbearance from activity 
in it. 



THE mrltA-StJTKAS 95 

114. It is unreasonable also on account of the non- 
perception of knowledge in pots and the like. — 39. 

In a pot there is activity indicated by the conglomeration 61 
different earthy parts while in sands there is forbearance from activity 
indicated by the disruption of the parts from one another. Yet there is 
no knowledge, desire or aversion in a pot or sand. Hence the . body is 
not the seat of knowledge, desire or aversion. 

115. The regularity and irregularity of possession 
demarcate the soul and matter. — 40. 

A material thing is by nature inactive but becomes endowed with 
activity when it is moved by a conscious agent. There is no such irregu- 
larity or uncertainty as to the possession of activity etc., by the soul. 
Knowledge, desire, aversion, etc., abide in the soul through ah intimate 
connection, while these belong to matter through a mediate connection. 
We cannot account lor the function of recognition etc., if we assume 
knowledge to abide in the material atoms a conglomeration of which forms 
the body. Those who suppose the body to be the seat of knowledge cannot 
admit the efficacy of desertg ahd can offer no consolation to sufferers. 

iiuhisui 

116. The mind is not the seat of knowledge on ac- 
count of reasons already given, on account of its being 
subject to an agent and owing to its incapacity to reap 
the fruits of another’s deeds. — 41. 

The mind cannot be the seat of knowledge because it has already 
been shown in aphorism 1.1.10 that desire, aversion, volition, pleasure and 
pain are the marks of the soul. Had the mind been the abode of know- 
ledge it could have come in contact with the objects of sense independent of 
any agent Since it cannot do so it is to be admitted to be a material thing, 
serving the purpose of an instrument in the acquisition of knowledge. If 
you say that the mind itself is the agent you will have to admit that it is 
npt an atom but possessed of magnitude like the soul so that it can ap- 
prehend knowledge etc-, which are its qualities. In order to avoid the 
simultaneousness of many perceptions it will further be necessary to 
ttfeaume an internal sense of an atomic dimension like the mind as we 
understand it. These assumptions will-lead you to accept in some shape 



98 BOOK III, CHAFFBft II. 

the tenets of the Naiy&yikas. On the supposition of the mind (or body) 
being the seat of knowledge and consequently of merits and demerits, 
it will be possibe for work done by a person not to produce its effects on 
him after death and it may even necessitates person to suffer for work* 
not done by him. Hence the mind is not the seat of. knowledge, desire, 
aversion, volition, pleasure and pain. . 

117. Knowledge etc., must be admitted to be 
qualities of the soul by the principle of exclusion and on 
account of arguments already adduced.- — 42. 

Knowledge is a quality which inheres in a substance. That sub- 
stance is neither the body nor the sense nor the mind. It must therefore 
be the soul. The body cannot be the abode of knowledge because it is a 
material substance like a pot, cloth etc. Knowledge cannot belong to the 
sense as the latter is an instrument like an axe. Had the sense been the 
abode of knowledge there could not be any recollection of things which 
were experienced by the sense before it was destroyed. If knowledge 
were a quality of the mind many perceptions could be simultaneous. 
j But this is impossible. Hence the abode of knowledge is not the mind, 
but it is the soul which is permanent so that it can perceive a thing now 
as well as remember one perceived in the past. 





118. Memory belongs to the soul which possesses 
the character of a knower. — 43. 


. The soul is competent to recollect a thing because it possesses the 
knowledge of the past, present and future. ' , 

% u s i«8 ji 

l- 119. "Memory is awakened by such causes as atten- 
tion, con text, exercise, signs, marks, likeness, possession,' 
relation of refuge and refugee, immediate subsequency/ 
separation, similar employment, opposition, excess, receipt, 
intervention^ pleasure and pain, desire and aversion, fear, 
-entreaty, apt en, (.affection and merit and demerit.— 44. 


THE NfiSyA-SUTRAS. 

Attention— enables ua4o fix the mind on one object by checking it 
fro.m wandering away to any other object. 

Context— is the connection of subjects such as proof, that which 
is to be proved etc. 

Easerciae-^is the constant repetition which confirms an impression. 

Sign— may be (1) connected, (2) inseparable (intimate), (3) correla- 
ted, or (4) opposite e. g., smoke is a sign of fire with which it is 
connected ; horn is a sign of a cow from which it is inseparable ; 
an arm is a sign of a leg with which it is correlated ; and the 
non-existent is a sign of the existent by the relation of opposi- 
tion. 

Mark — a mark on the body of a horse awakens the memory of the 
stable in which it was kept. 

Likeness —as the image of Devadatta drawn on a board reminds us 
of the real person. 

Possession — such as a property awakens the memory of the owner 
and vice versa. 

Refuge and refugee— such as a king and his attendants. 

Immediate subsequeney — as sprinkling the rice and pounding it 
in a wooden mortar. 

Separation — as of husband and wife. 

Similar employment — as of fellow-disciples. 

Opposition — as between a snake and ichneumon. 

Excess — awakening the memory of that which exceeded. 

Receipt — reminding us of one from whom something has been or 
will be received. 

Intervention — such as a sheath reminding us of the sword. 

Pleasure <£nd pain— reminding us of that which caused them. 

Desire and aversion— reminding us of one whom we liked or hated. 

Fear — reminding us of that which caused it, e. g., death. 

Entreaty — reminding us of that which was wanted or prayed 
for. 

Action — such as a chariot reminding us of the charioteer. 

Affection — as recollecting a son or wife. ^ 

Merit and demerit— -through which there is recollection of the 
pauses of joy and sorrow experienced in a previous life. 



» BOOK 111, OHAPTEB It 

120. Knowledge perishes instantly because all actions 
are' found to be transitory, — 45. 

Does knowledge perish instantly like a sound or does it continue 
liko a pot ? Knowledge perishes as soon as it is produced in virtue of its 
being an action. In analysing an action; such as the falling of an arrow, 
We find that the arrow undergoes a series of movements in the course of 
its falling on the ground. Similarly in examining an act of knowledge 
we find that a series -of steps are undergone by the act in the course of its 
production. These steps perisli one after another in duo succession. 
Hence' it is clear that knowledge is transitory. If knowledge were 
permanent we could say, “ I am preceiving a pot" oven after the pot has 
been removed from our sight. Since we cannot use such an expression 
we must admit that knowledge is not permanent but transitory. 





121. If knowledge were permanent it would always be 
perceptible so that there would be no recollection. — 46. 


If there is knowledge it is perceptible aud as long as there is percep- 
tion there is no recollection. Hence on the supposition of knowledge 
being permanent there would be a total absence of recollection. 





nvtiswi 

122. An opponent fears that if knowledge were 
transitory no object could be known distinctly just as there 
is no distinct apprehension of colour during a flash, of 
lightning. — 47. 

The fear of the opponent arises thus : — If knowledge were transitoiy 
it could not at a moment apprehend an object in its entirety, that is, could 
not apprehend the infinite number of its properties at once. Hence the 
object could o?Hy be known indistinctly. Asa fact, however, we can 
know things distinctly.. Hence knowledge is not transitoiy. ' 

123. From the 'argument advanced you have, we 
reply, to admit Jthat which you went to disprove.— 48, 



In tlie previous aphorism the opponent /eared that if knowledge 
were transitory no object could be apprebeuded distinctly. The Naiy&yika 
removes the fear by saying, that objects are apprehended indistinctly not 
owing to the transitoriness of knowledge but on account of our apprehend- 
ing only their, general qualities. The knowledge which takes cognizance 
of objects as possessed of both the general and special qualities is distinct 
but that which concerns itself only with the general qualities is indistinct, 
The aphorism may be explained in another way : — The very illustra- 
tion cited by you, viz., that there is indistinct apprehension during a 
flash of lightning leads you to admit the transitoriness of knowledge which 
yon went to disprove. 


srfWir: 11^1 

124. Although knowledge is transitory there 
distinct apprehension through it as there is one through the 
series of momentary rays of a lamp. — 49. 


is 


Though the series of rays emitted by a lamp are transitory the 
apprehension through them is distinct. Similarly though our knowledge 
is transitory there is no obstacle to our apprehension being distinct. 

125. From our perceiving in a substance the quali- 
ties of itself as well as of others there arises, says an oppo- 
nent, a doubt as to whether the knowledge perceived in 
our body is a quality of its own. — 50. 


In water we perceive liquidity which is one of its natural qualities 
as well as warmth which is an adventitious one. One may therefore 
ask as to whether the knowledge perceived in our body is a natural 
quality of the latter or is a mere adventitious one. 


126. [Knowledge is not a natural quality of the body, 
because it furnishes a contrast to] colour etc. which as 
natural qualities of the body do exist as long . as the latter, 
continue^. — 51. 

Knowledge, according to the NaiyAyika, is not a natural quality of 
the body because it may not continue quite as long as the b6dy does. 
But~such is not the case with colour etc. v&ick as natural qualities of 


m BOOK: III, CHAPTER II. 

tbebodydo always exist with it. Hence knowledge is merely an adventi- 
tious .quality of the body. 

h t res n p r re i fo ’ re li um’U'oui 

127. It is, says an opponent, not so because other 
qnalities produced by maturation do arise.— 52; 

It has been stated that a substance ancl its natural qualities co*exist 
with each other and that knowledge not being always co-existent with the 
oody is'not a natural quality of the latter. An opponent in order to main- 
tain that a substance and its natural qualities are not necessarily 
coexistent cites the instance of a jar whose natural colour is blue but 
which assumes a red colour through maturation in fire. 

sr fe g fcgfatu trewTramfifor: n^i=tiv^n i 

128. This is, we reply, no opposition because matura- 
tion occurs if there is production of opposite qualities. —53. 

A jar which was blue may through maturation become red but it 
is never totally deprived of colour which is its natural quality .' But & 
body (dead) may be totally devoid of knowledge which is therefore hot a 
natural quality of it. In the case of maturation moreover a quality is 
replaced by an opposite one with which it cannot co-abide e. g, the 
blueness of a jar may through maturation assume redness but cannot*co- 
abide with the same. In the case of the body however knowledge is . not 
replaced by an opposite quality. Hence knowledge is not a natural quality 
of the body. 

ufasqrfasng lURtMit 

129. [Knowledge, says an opponent, is a natural 

quality] because it pervades the whole body.— 54. . : 

The opponent tries to prove that knowledge is a natural quality’ 
of the body because it pervades, according to him, the . whole body and 
the numeroua parts of it. But this, according to the Naiy^yika, is un- 
reasonable as it leads to the assumption of numerous seats of knowledge, 
that is, souls in! tl^g body destructive of all order and system as to the 
feeling of pleasure, pain etc. 

11 * 1 * 1 ** 11 ' 

130. [Knowledge does not pervade the whole body], 
99 it. is not found in the hair, nails etc. — 55, 



THti NtlYA^OTRAS. idl 

Knowledge does hot pervade the whole body, & it is not found 
in the hair, nails etc. It cannot therefore be a natural quality of the 
body. 

This aphorism may also be explained as follows 

It is not trne that a substance should be entirely pervaded by its 
natural qualities. Colour, for ihstance, is a natural quality of the body 
but it does not pervade the hair, nails etc. 

fowsnffrwu i ft iukiwii 

. 131. The body being bounded by touch (cuticle) 
there is, says an opponent, no possibility of knowledge 
abiding in the hair, nails etc. — 56. 

The hair, nails etc. are not, according to the opponent, parts of the 
body as they are not bounded by touch (cuticle). Knowledge cannot conse- 
quently abide in them. 

The aphorism may also he interpreted as follows : — 

The body being bounded by touch (cuticle) there is no possibility of 
colour abiding in the hair, nails etc. 

132. Knowledge, we reply, is not a quality of the 
body because of its difference from the well known qualities 
of the same. — 57. 

The Naiyayika says : — 

The qualities of the body are of two kinds, viz : (1) those which are 
cognised by the external senses, e.g., colour, and (2) those which are not 
cognised by them, e.g., gravity. Knowledge does not come under either 
of the categories as it is uncognizable by the external senses and is at 
the same time cognizable on account of our being aware of the same. 

The. aphorism may also be explained as follows: — - 

The qualities of the body are cognized by the external senses but 
knowledge is not so cognized. Consequently knowledge . cannot be a 
quality of the body. 

3 nw*cn- 

133. This is, says the opponent, not so because of 
tbe mutual difference in character of the colour, etc.-— 58. 

' The opponent argues': — 

If you say that knowledge is not a quality of the ' body because it 
differs in character from other well known qualities .of the same, I should 



Bcx>k m, cHAmitit / ^ 

say that the well kpown qualites themselves differ from each other, e.<jr., 
the colour is cognized by the eye but the touch is not. You cannot on 
; this ground say that colour is a quality of the body but touch is not. 

IIUHIV.8.U 

134. There is, we reply no objection to colour, etc. r 
being qualities of the body because these are cognized by 
the senses.— 59. 

The colour, etc., may differ from touch etc. in respect of certain 
aspects of their character but they all agree in one respect, viz., that they 
are all cognizable by one or another of the external senses. But know- 
ledge is not so cognized and cannot therefore be a quality of the body. 

^ _ ^ ♦ __ 

wv* w \ i h i < © u 

135. The mind is one on account of the non-simul- 
taneousness of Cognitions.— 60. 

If there were more minds than one, they could come in contact with 
many senses at a time so that many cognitions could be produced simul- 
taneously. As many cognitions are never produced at once the mind 
must be admitted to be one. 




ft in m U 11 

136. It is, says an opponent, not so because we do 
cognize many acts simultaneously. — 61. 


The objection stands thus -A certain teacher while walking on 
a road holds a waterpot in his hand. Hearing wild sounds he, out of 
fear, looks at the read, recites a sacred text and thinks of the nearest place 
of safety. The teacher is supposed in this instance to perform visual 
perception, auditory perception, recollection, etc., simultaneously. This 
would be impossible if there were only one mind. 

n * i 4 1 14 a 

137. The appearance of simultaneousness is, we - 
reply, due t<v the mind coming in contact with different 
senses in rapid succession like the appearance of a circle of 
firebrand.— 62. * 


Just as a firebrand while whirling quickly appears to form a conti- 
nuous circle, so the mind moving from one sense to another in rapid • 
' ; succession appears lo come in contact with them simultaneously. Hence 



ME NYAYA-StiTRAS. 103 

the cognitions produced by the contact appear to be simultaneous though 
• in reality they are successive. 

n ^ i s i u 

138. And on account of the aforesaid reasons the mind 
is an atom. — 63. 

If the mind were possessed of magnitude it could come in contact 
with many senses at a time so that many cognitions could take place 
simultaneously. Since this has been found to be impossible the mind 
is an atom. 

n ^ I * i 48 u 

139. The body is produced as the fruit of our previous 
deeds (deserts). — 64. 

Our present body has been made up of elements endowed with the 
fruits of merit and demerit of our previous lives. 

afy re wa; n 3. i vi 4 *h 

140. The formation of our body of elements, says 
an opponent, resembles that of a statue of stone, etc. — 65. 

The objection stands thus : — Just as a statue is formed of stone, 
clay, etc., which are deviod of deserts, our body has been made up of elements 
which are not endowed with the fruits of our previous merits and 
demerits. 

* ii \ i * i n 

141. It is, we reply, not so because the statement 
requires proof. — 66. 

To prove that our body is formed of elements which are devoid of 
deserts, the opponent cites the instance of a statue made up of clay or 
stone, which is supposed to bear no connection whatsoever with deserts. 
The Naiy&yika replies that the very example cited requires to be verified 
for clay etc. are made of atoms which have actually a reference to desert 
as they comport themselves in such a way as to work out the designs of 
Retributive Justice. 

II 4 I *1 4*9 II 

142. Not so because father and mother are the causp 
of its production. — 67. • 

14 



104 BOOK lit OHAPT^K it 

The formation of our body cannot be compared to that of a clay- 
statue because the body owes its origin to fhe sperm and blood of our 
father and mother while the statue is produced without any seed at all. 

m ^ n 

143. So too eating is a cause. — 68. 

The food and drink taken by the mother turns into blood which 
develops the embryo (made up of the sperm of the father) through the 
various stages of formation of the arbuda (a long round mass) mdihsa-peSt 
(a piece of flesh), kalala (a round lump), hawlard (sinews), kirali (head), 
■pdm (hands), pddn (legs), etc. Eating is therefore a cause of production 
of our body but not of a clay-statue. 

srrart mmui 

144. And there is desert because of uncertainty even 
in the case of union. — 69. 

All unions between husband and wife are not followed by the produc- 
tion of a child (body). Hence we must acknowledge the desert of the child 
to be a co-operative cause of its birth. 

dqUrUnfa fafa rr ii uw® « 

145. Desert is the cause not only of the production 
of the body but also of its conjunction with a soul. — 70. 

Just as the earth, etc., independent of a person’s desert are unable 
to produce his body, so the body itself as a seat of particular pleasures 
and pains is unable to be connected with a soul without the intervention 
of the desert of the latter. 

ST^tE: » ^ i ^ i vs? ii 

146. By this the charge against inequality is 
answered. — 71. 

Some persons are found to possess a healthy body while others an 
unhealthy one ; a certain body is beautiful while another ugly. This 
inequality in the formation of the body is due to the desert acquired by 
the persons in their previous lives. 

The aphorism may also be interpreted as follows : — 

146. By this the charge against uncertainty is answered. — 71. 

It is due entirely to the interference of the desert that the union 
between husband and wife is not always followed by the production of 
a child (body)., 



THE NYAYA-SOTBAS. 105 

3vrarsr nfeqfrr : n ^ I *u w n 

147. And the separation between the soul and the 
body is effected by the termination of the deserts. — 72. 

It is in virtue of its deserts that a soul is joined with a particular 
body and it is by the exhaustion: of the deserts that the separation 
between the two takes place. The soul cannot be separated from the 
body until it attains perfect knowledge through the cessation of ignorance 
and lust. 

ii ^ i * u 

148. If the body was attached to a soul only to re- 
move the inexperience of the latter, then the same inex- 
perience would recur after the soul had been emanci- 
pated (released). — 73. 

An opponent says that there is no necessity for admitting the desert 
and that the body which is made up of elements is connected with a soul 
only to enable the latter to experience objects and realize its distinction 
from matter (prakriti). As soon as the soul satisfies itself by the ex- 
perience and attains emancipation (release) it is separated from the body 
forever. *The Naiyayika asks: “Why is not the soul, even after em- 
ancipation (release), again connected with a body to regain its experiential 
power?” Since the opponent does not admit desert there is nothing 
else to stop the connection. 

<M*!J M I H I V9« II 

149. It is not reasonable, because the body is found 
to be produced in case of both fulfilment and non-fulfilment 
of its ends. — 74. 

In the previous aphorism it was stated that the body was produced 
only to enable the soul to experience objects and to realize its distinction 
from matter (prakpti). In the present aphorism the Naiy&yika points 
out the worthlessness of the statement by showing that the body is 
produced irrespective of the fulfilment or non-fulfilment of its ends, that 
is, it is produced in case of the soul experiencing objects and realizing 
its distinction from matter as well as in the case when the soul remains 
enchained on account of its failure to realize its distinction from matter. 

In a certain school of philosophy the desert is supposed to be a 
quality of the atoms and not of the soul, In virtue of the desert atoms 



100 BOOK III, CHAPTER II. 

are said to combine together into a body (endowed with a mind) to enable 
the soul to experience objects, and realize its distinction from matter. 
This school of philosophy fails to explain why the soul after it has 
attained emancipation (release) is not again connected with a body 1 
inasmuch as the atoms composing the body are never devoid of deserts, 

u 3. 1 * 1 w 11 

150, And there will be no cessation of the conjunc- 
tion if it is caused by the desert of the mind. — 75. 

Those whp maintain that the desert is a quality of the mind cannot 
explain why there should at all. be a separation of the body from the 
mind which is eternal. If it is said that the very desert which connected 
the body with the mind does also separate it therefrom, we shall be 
constrained to admit an absurd conclusion that one and the same thing 
is the cause of life and death. 


H ^ I ^ I V9^ U 

151. Owing to there being no reason for destruction 
we should find the body to be eternal. — 76. 


If the body is supposed to be produced from elements independent 
of deserts, we should not find any thing the absence of which frill cause 
its destruction. Tn the event of the destruction being arbitrary, there will 
be no fixed cause to effect emancipation or rebirth thereafter as the 
elements will always remain the same. 

wig; 11 ^ 1 * 1 w 11 

152. The disappearance of the body in emancipation 
(release) is, according to an opponent, eternal like the 
blackness of an atom. — 77. 

• The opponent says : — Just as the blackness of an atom suppressed 
by redness through contact with fire does not reappear, so the body which 
has once attained emancipation (release) will not reappear. 


\\ \ i s i vss n 

153. 'Shis is, we reply, not so because it would lead 
us to admit what was undemons trable. — 78. 

The argument employed in the previous aphorism is, aocording to 
the Naiy&yika, futile for it cannot be proved that the blackness of an- 
atom is suppressed by redness through contact with fire for it is possible 
that the blackness is altogether destroyed. 



THE NYlYA-SOTRAS. 10 % 

The aphorism may also be interpreted as follows : — 

153. This is, we reply, not so, because it would lead us to acknow- 
ledge the consequence of actions not done by us. — 78. 

Unless we acknowledge deserts there will be no principle governing 
the enjoyment of pleasure and suffering of pain. The absence of such a 
principle will be repugnant to all evidences — perception, inference and 
scripture. * 



Book IV.— Ghapteb I. 


s#nfcrhf>r ii a i % it n 

1. Activity, as it is, lias been explained. — 1. 

The definition of activity is to be found in aphorism 1-1-17. 

#TT: 11 8 I \\ * II 

2. So the faults. — 2. 


The definition of faults lias been given in aphorism 1-1-18. The 
faults which co-abide with intellect in the soul are caused by activity, 
produce rebirths and do not end until the attainment of final release 
(apavarga). 

un^Wnret^fiTvmTrr ii n i \ i ^ ii 

3. The faults are divisible in three groups, as all 
of them are included in affection, aversion and stupidity. — 3. 

The faults are divided in three groups, viz., affection, aversion and 
stupidity. Affection includes lust, avarice, avidity and covetousness. 
Aversion includes anger, envy, malignity, hatred and implacability. 
Stupidity includes misapprehension, suspicion, arrogance and careless- 
ness. 


I \ \ 2 II 

because they are the 


II 3 

4. It is, some say, not so, 
opposites of one single thing. — 4. 

The objection stands thus:-- There is no distinction between 
affection, aversion and stupidity, as all of them are destructible by one 
single thing, vis., perfect knowledge. The three, in so far as they are 
destructible by one single thing, are of a uniform character. 

ii 8 i % i v n 


5. This reason, we reply, is not good, because it is 
, erratic. —5. 

To prove that there is no distinction between affection, aversion and 
stupidity, the opponent has advanced the reason that all the three are 
destructible by one single thing. This reason is declared by the Naiy&- 
yika to be erratic, because it does not apply to all cases, e. gr„ the blue, 
black, green, yellow, brown and other colours, although they are different 
from one another, ore destructible by one single thing, vis., contact With 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS, 1Q0 

cTOT iftf : U 8 1 t I < II 

6. Of the three, stupidity is the worst, because in 
the case of a person who is not stupid, the other two do not 
come into existence. — 6. 

There are three faults, viz., affection, aversion and Stupidity, of 
which the last is the worst, because it is only a stupid person 'who may 
be influenced by affection and aversion. 

suumR ^fawninwi'sit 

7. There is then, says an opponent, a difference 
between stupidity and other faults owing to their inter- 
relation of cause and effect. — 7. 


The opponent argues as follows : — Since stupidity is the cause of 
the other two faults, it must be different from them. In fact there cannot 
be the relation of cause and effect between two tilings which are not 
different from each other. 


8. It is, we reply, not so, because faults as already 
defined include stupidity. — 8. 

Stupidity is indeed a fault because it is homogeneous with or 
possesses the character of the same as defined in aphorism 1 - 1 - 18 . 


ti 8 1 \ i «.i 

9. And there is, we reply, no prohibition for homo- 
geneous things to stand in the relation of cause and 
effect. — 9. 


It is not proper to exclude stupidity from the faults on the mere 
ground that they stand to each other in the relation of cause and effect. 
In fact the homogeneous things such as two substances or two qualities 
may stand to each other in the relation of cause and effect, e. g., in the 
case of a .jar being produced from its two halves we notice the relation 
of cause and effect between the jar and the halves which are homogeneous 
with each other. 


it « i \ i s« n 

10. Transmigration is possible if the soul is eter- 
nal. — 10. 



UO BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

Transmigration defined in 1-1-19 belongs to the soul and not tp 
the body. The series of births and deaths included in it is possible 
only if the soul is eternal. If the soul were destructible, it would meet 
with two unexpected chances, viz., destruction of actions done by it 
(kfita-h&ni) and suffering from actions not done by it (akjitflbhyagama). 

sgTRr^rrhjHf 5r^srmmrg[ n s i \ \ \ \ w 

11. There is evidence of perception as to the produc- 
tion of the distinct from the distinct. — 11. 

It is found that jars, etc., which are distinct are produced from 
earth, etc., which are also distinct. Similarly our body is produced from 
the elements. 

* sreif II 9 I n II 

12. It is, some say, not so, because a jar is not pro- 
duced from another jar. — 12. 

Ihe objection stands thus: — You cannot say that there is the 
production of a distinct thing from another distinct thing,, e. g. t a jar is 
not. produced from another jar. 

Haitian 

13. There is, we reply, no prohibition for a jar being 
produced from a distinct thing. — 13. 

A jar may not be pupduced from another jar but it ■ is certainly 
produced from auotfaer distinct thing, viz., from its bowl-shaped halves. 
Thei rs is theiefoie no bar against the production of the distinct from the 
distinct. 

ni fu’Hi^ u « 1 1 i *8ii 

14. — Some say that entity arises from non-entity, as 
there is no manifestation unless there has been destruc- 
tion. — 14. 

A sprout cannot come into existence, unless the seed from which it 
comes has bee* destroyed. This shows that there is no manifestation 
of effect without the destruction of its cause. 

swuouwihi: II a i Y i tx II 

_ It 1 is. we reply, nut so, because such rui expression, 

inconsistent as it is, cannot be employed. — 15. 




THE NYAyA-SCTRA8, 11| 

To say that a thing comes into existence by destroying another 
thing which is its cause, is a contradiction in terifis, for if that which, 
according to you, destroys the cause and takes the place thereof, was not 
existent prior to the destruction, then it cannot be said to be a destroyer, 
and if it existed prior to the cause, then it cannot be said to come into 
existence on the destruction thereof. 

witftdwwaqh OT3f>uwst4hif^ « « i u H n 

16. There is, says the objector, no inconsistency, 
because terms expressive of action are figuratively applied 
to the past and future. — 16. 

The objector says as follows: — There is no impropriety in the 
statement that a thing comes into existence by destroying another thing 
which is its cause, for terms expressive of action aro figuratively employed 
to denote that which is not oxistent now but which existed in the past or 
will exist in the future, e. g., he congratulates himself on the son that is 
to be born. In the sentence “ a sprout comes into existence by destroying 
its causo ” — tho term expressive of destruction is figuratively applied to 
the sprout that will come into existence in the future. 

5T II 9 I * I II 

17. It is, we reply, not so, because nothing is produc- 
ed from things destroyed. — 17. 

A sprout docs not spring from a seed already destroyed. Hence, 
we can lay down the general rule that entity does not arise from non- 
entity. 

18. There is no objection if destruction is pointed 
put only as a step in the processes of manifestation.— 18; 

In connection with earth, water, heat etc., a seed undergoes destruc- 
tion of its old structure and is endowed with a new structure. A sprout 
cannot grow from a seed, unless the old structure of the seed is destroyed 
and p/pew structure is formed. It is in this sense allowable to say that 
map$fejattatitm is preceded by destruction. This does not preclude a seed 
-from 'being the cause of a sprout. But we do not admit an unqualified 
assertion that production springs from destruction or entity arises from 
non-entity. ' 

15 



H2 BDUJK. XV, CHAPTER I. 

Iwt: srcw 11 « i n ? $. n 

19. God, says some one, is the sole cause of fruits, 
because man’s acts are found occasionally to be .unattended 
by them. — 19. 

Seeing that man does not often attain success proportionate to his 
exertions, some one infers that these are entirely subservient to God who 
alone can provide them with fruits. 

sr gswubul ii « i % i n 

20. This is, some are afraid, not so, because in the 
absence of man’s acts there is no production of fruits. — 20. 

The fear referred to arises tlms : — If God were the only source of 
fruits, man could attain them even without any exertions. 

n a i \ i n 

21. Since fruits are awarded by God, man’s acts, we 
conclude, are not the sole cause thereof. — 21. 

Man performs acts which aro endowed with fruits by God. The 
acts become fruitless without His grace. Hence it is not true that man’s 
acts produce fruits by themselves. 

God is a soul specially endowed with qualities. Ho is freed from 
misapprehension, carelessness, etc., and is enriched with merit, knowledge 
and concentration, lie possesses eight supernatural powers (such as the 
power of becoming as small as an atom) which are the consequences of his 
merit and concentration. His merit, which conforms to his will, produces 
merit and demerit in each person and sets the earth and other elements 
in action. God is, as it were, the father of all beings. Who can demonstrate 
the existence of Him who transcends the evidences of perception, inference 
and scripture? 

wfltfiw at vrratafrr: ^qg^N i wRq&ir(i. ii sum u 

22. From an observation of the sharpness of thorn, 
ptc., some «ay that entities are produced from no cause. 
— 22 . 

The objectors argue as follows : — Thorns . are by nature sharp, hills 
beautiful, and stones smooth. None lias made them so. Similarly our 
oodies, etc., are fortuitous effects which did not spring from a cause, that 
is, were not madu ; by God. ' 



TOE NYAYA-SOTRAO 113 


«mi u 11 

23. Entities cannot be said to be produced from no- 
cause, because the no-cause is, according to some, the cause 
of the production. — 23. 

An opponent has said that entities are. produced from no-canse. 
Some critics point out that the use of tho fifth case-affix in connection 
with no-cause indicates that it is the cause. 

II » i i I *8 II 

24. The aforesaid reason presents no opposition, be- 
cause cause and no-cause are two entirely different things. 
—24. 


Cause and no-cause cannot bo identical, e. g., a jar which is water- 
less cannot at the samo time be full of water. The doctrine involved in 
this aphorism does not differ from the one explained in 3-2-70 according to 
which our body cannot be made up independent of onr desert (Karma). 

u5§uf^ *^R i ftsi3iq«4*<aid. it » i t i **. n 

25. All, says some one, are non-eternal, because they 
possess the character of being produced and destroyed. 
—25. 


All things including our body which is material and our intellect 
which is immaterial are non-oternal inasmuch as they aro subject to the 
law of production and destruction. All things which aro produced and 
destroyed are non-eternal. 



im u H ii 


26. These are, we reply, not so, because of the non- 
eternalness being eternal. — 26. 

If non-eternalness pervades all things you must admit it to be 
eternal. Hence, all are not non-eternal, for there is at least one thing, 
viZi, non-eternalness which is eternal. 

ftniw i &ftawrafr ii « i % i ii 

27! Some hold non-eternalness to be not eternal on 
the analogy of a fire which dies out after the combustibles 
have perished.— 27, 



m BOOK IV, OHAPTEB. lt 

The objection is explained as follows : — Just as a fire dies out as 
soon as the things which caught it have perished, so the non-eternalxies 
disappears as soon as all non-eternal things have passed away. Hence, 
OOn-eternalness is not eternal. 

HU I \ I . RC I! 

28. There is no denial of the eternal, as there is a 

regulation as to the character of our perception.-— 28. 

Whatever is perceived to be produced or destroyed is non-eternal 
and that which is not so is eternal, e. g., there is no perceptual evidence 
as to the production or destruction of ether, time, space, soul, mind, 
generality, particularity and intimate relation. Consequently these are 
eternal. 

u«f ii « i x i *«. n 

29. Some say that all are eternal, because the five 
elements are so. — 29. 

The elements which are the material causes of all things arc eter- 
nal, consequently the things.themselves aro eternal. 

11 « i x Mo II 

30. These are, we reply, not so, because we perceive 
the causes of production and destruction. — 30. 

All things are non-eternal because wo find them to bo produced 
and destroyed. Whatever is produced or destroyed is non-eternal. 

agwnvd'uvsifaW. n «im \\ ii 

31. This is, some say, no refutation, because the 
character of the elements is possessed by the things which 
are produced-or destroyed. — 31. 

The objector says as follows : — A thing which is made up of an 
element, possesses the character of tlio element. Since the element^ 
eternal, the thing also must be so. 

atwfWsruiit'rassh ii 8 i n ^ n 

32. TSis is, we reply, no opposition, because we 
perceive production and the cause thereof. — 32. 

An effect inherits the character of its cause but the two are not 
identical, e. g., ether is the cause of sound, although the former is eternal 
and the latter non-eternal. 



Moreover, we actually perceive that things arc produced tvhieli con- 
vince us of their non-eternal ness. If production is regarded naa mere vision 
of aidteaxn, then- the whole world is ho better than an illusion which can 
serve no practical purpose. 

If all things were eternal, there could be no effort or activity on our 
part to attain any object. "Hence all are not eteriial. 

•i it a i % i ^ II 

.33. If all things were eternal there would be no 
regulation of time. — 33. 

Some . say that things are eternal, because they existed even before 
they were produced and will continno even after they are destroyed. 
But this view, contends the Naiyayika, is absurd. It destroys all regu- 
lations with regard to time, for if all tilings were perpetually existent, there 
could not be any use of such expression as .“ was produced” and “ will 
be destroyed,” which presuppose a tiling which was non-existent to como 
into existence or one which is existent to lose its existeneo. 

usl unit. nun 

34. Somo say that all are aggregates because each 
consists of several marks. — 34. 

A jar, for instance, is an aggregate consisting of soveral parts, such 
as bottom, sides, back, etc., and several qualities, such as, sound, -smell, 
taste, colour, touch, etc. There is not a single entity devoid of its several 
parts or qualities. 

[This refers to the Buddhist doctrine which denies a substance apart 
from its qualities and a wholo apart from its parts as is evident from the 
writings of Nfigarjuna*, Arya Deva f and others.] 

B*Htpunh'S5F?t?t f^TE* $f$RT f^ft II 

(M&dhyamika Sfltra. Chap. I, page 64 ; Prof. Poussin’s, edition.) 

Ww&tf&or q*n f*$r *r ftufl i 

wn w ftuaf 11 n 

(Mfidhyamika Sfltra, Chap. I, pago 71 ; Poussin's edition.) 

ri ft strad i 
VTCtiflftvN! UZ: Sfcfljr u 
gnfor i 

{&$aka quoted ip the MddhyamikA Yfitti, p. 71.) 



116 BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 

35. These are, we reply, not so because by several 
marks one single entity is constituted. — 35. 

The Naiyayika says that there is certainly a substance apart from its 
qualities and a whole apart from its parts, e.g., we must admit an entity 
called jar as the substratum of its several qualities, such as colour, smell, 
etc., and its several parts such as bottom, sides, back, etc. 

[The Buddhists* oppose this view by saying that the substance 
independent of its qualities and the whole independent of its parts admitted 
by the Naiyayikas arc opposed to reason and cannot be accepted as realities 
though there is no harm in acknowledging them as “ appearances for 
the fulfilment of our practical purposes.] 

H8UIHU 

36. There is, moreover, no opposition on account of 
the very distribution of the marks. — 36. 

The Naiyayika says as follows : — Our conclusion is unassailable 
owing to the marks abiding in ono single entity. A jar, for instance, 
possesses two marks, viz., tangibility and colour, by each of which it can 
be identified. 

If there were no jar beyond its tangibility and colour wo could not 
use such expression as “ I see tho jar which 1 touched yesterday." To 
enable us to ascertain the identity tlioro must bo a substance called jar 
beyond its tangibility and colour which are two distinct qualities belonging 
to the same substance. 

The opponent has said that “ all are aggregates.” Whence, we ask, 
does the aggregate arise if there are no units ? The very, reason given 
that “ each consists of several marks " presupposes an “ each ” or unity 
or entity beyond the marks or aggregate. 

gffcftpr: w m tegwqT smut: « « 

(Midhyamikil Vfltti, Chap. I. p. W; Poussin's edition.) 

OTffWpfr qd tanwrawwi gnq, it 
Mdg n>i rai$ i<WT ft» srsnrafirfSr ^ i qqmfo gt wisrre wl *r gn> 

{M*dhyamlkft Vfitti, p. 70, Chap. 1 ; Poussin’s edition,) 



THE NYAi'A-SOTKAS; 11? 

37. All are non-entities because the entities are 
non-existent in relation to one another. — 37. 

In the expression “ a horse is not a cow ” there is the non-existence 
of “ cow ” in the “ horse ” and in the expression “ a cow is not a horse ” 
there is the non-existence of “ horse ” in the “ cow.” As a fact every 
thing is non-existent in so far as it is not identical with another thing. 

3 ii 8 i^ i^cii 

38. It is, we reply, not so because the entities are 
existent in reference to themselves. — 38. 

A cow is a cow though it is not a horse : a thing is existent in 
reference to itself though it is non-existent in so far as it is not another 
thing. 

3 H3HIUU 

39. Some say, that entities are not self-existent inas- 
much as they exist in relation to ono another. — 39. 

The objection is oxplained as follows : — 

A thing is called short only in relation to another thing which is long, 
and vice versa ; the long and short are inter-related. 

[This refers ito the M&dhyamiM Buddhist doctrine^of “ relation ” 
according to which all things are inter-dependent and nothing is 
self-existent.] 

40. The doctrine, we reply, is unreasonable because 
it hurts itself. — 40. 

If the long and short are inter-dependent then neither of them 
can be established in the absence of the other ; if neither of them is self- 
existent, then it will be impossible to establish the inter-relation ; and in 
the absence of all relations the doctrine of the opponent will fall to the 
ground. 

[The Madhyamikas s ay that there is no realityf underlying any 
“ “ #rf swra: gw: 

stow W & sfw wrawrffc gsn ii 

(MAdhyynik4 Sfltra, Chap. XV, p. 98 ; B. T. Society's edition.) 

t **$ fori wfswsTTOc » 

(Arya RatnAkara S&tra quoted in MAdhyamUcA Vfitti, Chap. 24 ; B. T. Society’s 
edition.) 


fii B00& IV, CHAPTER T. 

entity, and that the entities exist only by virtue of their mutual relations 
which are mere illusions. Viewed from the standpoint of absolute truth 
the world is void, Sflnya,* but measured by the standard of “relation or 
“condition ” it possesses an. apparent existence which serves all our 
practical purposes.] 

iwtut 

41. Neither through the reason being given nor 
through the reason being omitted there is the establishment 
of the fixity of number.— -41. 

Some say, that there is only one thing ( Brahma) pervading all 
the so-called varieties. Others say, that things are of two kinds, viz , 
the eternal and the non-eternal. Certain philosophers find three things 
viz., the knower, knowledge and the knowable, while others treat of four 
things, viz., the agent of knowledge, means of knowledge, object of 
knowledge and act of knowledge. In this way the philosophers indulge 
themselves in a fixed number of things. The Naiyayikas oppose them by 
saying that there is no reason to establish the fixity of number. The fixed 
number is the Sadhya or that which is to bo proved and the reason is 
that which is to prove it. Now is the reason included in the Sadhya or 
excluded from it ? In either case the fixity of number will be unfixed; 
If, on the other hand, the reason is not different from the Sctdhya, there 
is no means to establish the Sadhya. 



42. This is, some say, not so, because the reason is a 
part of the number. — 42 ; 

The objection is this : — 

The number of things is fixed, and there is no disturbance of the 
fixity on the score of the reason being included in, excluded from, or 
identical with, the number for the reason is a part of the number and as 
such is riot different from it. 

43. The reason, we reply, is not valid because there 
is no part available for tho purpose.— -43. 

* wrong Mwg i mufa u i 

Midhyimfe S&tr*, Chap.XV, p. 96 ; E T. Society's edition.) 


THU NYATA^tJTllA^ Ilf 

The opponent has argued that the number is fixed and that the 
reason is only a part of it. The JSfaiyayika counterargues that the number 
cannot be fixed until the reason is fixed and it will be absurd toflx the 
number with ' an unfixed reason. The reason which is asserted by the 
opponent to be a part of the number will remain unfixed until the number 
itself is fixed. 

The doctrine of the fixity of number, opposed as it is to the evidenc- 
es of perception, inference and scripture, is a false doctrine which 
cannot refute the variety of things established through the speciality 
of their characters. If there is an agreement as to the number of things 
on the ground of their general characters, and difference on the ground 
of their special characters, then the doctrine of fixity is admittedly to 
be abandoned. 

uraraft ^ : 11 ai t m « 

44. There arises doubt as to the fruit which is 
produced either instantly or after a long interval. — 44. 

Seeing that some action such as cooking produces its effect imme- 
diately while another action such as ploughing does not bring about any 
effect until sometime has passed away, a certain person asks whether 
the fruit of maintaining the sacred fire will be produced immediately or 
after a considerable lapse of time. 

•i ntttiwn 

45. The fruit, we reply, is not immediate because 
it is enjoyable after a lapse of time. — 45. 

The fruit of maintaining the sacred fire is the attainment of heaven 
which is not possible until the time of death when the soul departs from 
our body. 

46. It cannot, says some one, be produced after a 
lapse of time because the cause has disappeared. — 46. 

The objection is this : — 

The fruit (viz., the attainment of heaven) cannot be produced after 
onr death because the action (oiz., maintaining the sacred fire) calculated 
to produce the fruit was destroyed before our death. 

47. This fruit, before it is produced, bears analogy 
to the fruit of a tree.— <47. 



BOOK IV, CHARTER I, 

as a tree, whose roots are now nourished with water, will be 
able to produce fruits in the future, so the sacred fire which is maintained 
now wjlf enable the maintainer to attain heaven after death. The- 
doctrine involved hero has been explained in aphorism 3-2-64. 

48. Some say that the fruit, anterior to its produc- 
tion, is neither existent nor non-existent nor both, because 
existence and non-existence are incongruous. — 48. 

The fruit (or any effect) anterior to itB production was not non- 
existent because the material causes are so regulated that each 
one thing is not produced from each other thing promiscuously. 
We cannot suppose the fruit to have been existent prior to its production 
because a thing cannot be said to come into existence if it had already 
an existence. The fruit was not both existent and non-existent prior to 
its production because existence and non-existence are incompatible with 
each other. 

[This aphorism refers to the Madhyamika Buddhist philosophy 
which maintains that the effect, before it is produced, is neither existent 
nor non-existent nor both, as is evident from the writings of Nagarjuna® 
and Arya Devaf.] 




49. It is, we reply, a fact that the fruit before it was 
produced was non-existent because we witness the produc- 
tion and destruction. — 49. 

When a jar is produced we find that it was non-existent prior to 
the production. 


**m ura g wiftiwww w gastf i 
w wwrasw'fit » 

ns ra wfa gwri i 

*r nmm h 

(Ntgirjuna’s Mkdhyanrika SAtra, Chap. VII, p. 61 ; B. T. Society’s edition.) 

not il 

(Arya Deva’s slataka quoted in the Mldhyamiki Vfittl, Chap. I, p. 4 ; B. T. Society’s 
edition.) 




THE NYA¥A-S0TRAS:' 191 

n«ni*oH 

50. That it was non-existent, |is establi$her(t>by our 
understanding. — 50. 

It is only when a thing is non-existent that we can apply ourselves 
to the production of it by means of suitable materials. A weaver, for 
instance, sets himself to work for a web which is non-existent but which, 
he knows, he can make by means of threads. 


51. Some say that the analogy to the fruit of a tree 
is ill-founded because a receptacle is awanting. — 51. 


It has been stated that the fruit obtainable from maintaining the 
sacred fire bears analogy to the fruit of a tree. An opponent finds fault 
with the analogy by showing that the tree which produces fruits now is 
the same tree which was previously nourished with water, but the body 
which is alleged to attain heaven after death is not the same body which 
maintained the sacred fire. The two bodies being different their analogy 
to the tree is ill-founded. 




52. The foregoing obj ection, we reply, is unreasonable 
because the soul is the receptacle of happiness. — 52. 

It is not our body thatmaintains the sacred fire or attains heaven. 
In reality the soul is the receptacle for both these acts. The soul which 
maintained the sacred fire is identical with the soul which enjoys happi- 
ness in heaven. Consequently a receptacle is not awanting and the 
analogy to the tree is not ill-founded. 


53. — The soul, some say, cannot be the receptacle for 
the fruits which are mentioned, viz., a son, a wife, cattle, 
attendants, gold, food, etc. 

The objection is this : — 

If the fruit consists merely of happiness it can be lodged in the 
soul. But the soul cannot be the receptacle for such fruits as a son, a 
wife, cattle, etc. which are mentioned in the scripture. 



18* BOOK IV, CHAPTER I. 


awwpsng. MwMi'wiu H8iti*»H 

54. The fruit, we reply, is. attributed to them because 
it is produced through their conjunction. — 54. 

In reality the fruit is happiness. We attribute the name fruit to 
a son, a wife, etc., because happiness is produced through them. 

SFSfalft: U8IVI88II 

55. Birth is a pain because it is connected with 
various distresses. — 55. 

Birth is stated to be a pain because it signifies our connection with 
the body, the senses and the intellect which bring us various distresses. 
The body is the abodo in which pain resides, the senses are the instru- 
ments by which pain is experienced, and the intellect is the agent which 
produces in us the feeling of pain. Our birth as connected with the 
body, the senses and the intellect is necessarily a source of pain. 

a II8I?IX$U 

56. Pleasure is not denied because it is produced at 
intervals. — 56. 


We cannot altogether deny tho existence of pleasure which often 
arises amidst pains. 





11813 00911 


57. This is, we reply, no opposition because dis- 
tresses do not disappear from a person who enjoys ope 
pleasure and seeks another. — 57. 

The substance of the Naiyayika’s reply is this : — Pleasure itself is 
to be regarded as pain because even a person who enjoys pleasure is 
tormented by various distresses. His objects may be completely frustrated 
, or fulfilled only partially, and while he attains one object he cannot resist 
, the temptation of pursuing another which causes him uneasiness, 

j pnfiwmre ii 8 i ? i vq it 

58. And because there is conceit of pleasure in what is 
only another name for pain. — 58. 

Some persons thinking that pleasure is the summum lonutn are 
addicted to the world which causes them various distresses through birth, 



THE NYAVA-SOTRAS. im 

infirmity, disease, death, connection with the undesirable, separation 
from the desirable, etc. It is therefore clear that one who pursues 
pleasure does in reality pursue pain, or in other words, pleasure is a 
synonym for pain. 

n a i % i u 11 

59.. There is, some say, no opportunity for us to at- 
tain release because of the continual association of our debts, 
troubles and activities. — 59. 

The objection stands thus : — The scripture declares that as soon as 
we are born we incur three debts which we must go on clearing off until 
the time of our decay mid death ; and troubles are our constant compa- 
nions, while activities pursue ns throughout our life. There is then no 
opportunity for us to attain release. 

The three debts are : — ' 

Debt to sages ( llish i-rina)— which can he cleared off onjy by under-' 
going a course of student life. 

Debt to gods (Deva-pna)-— from which we can be freed only by 
performing sacrifices. 

Debt to our progenitors (Pi tp-ripa)— which cannot be cleared off 
except by begetting children.- 

Activity has been defined in 1-1-17 and 1-1-18. 

8 ii it> 

60. If an expression is inadmissible in its literal 
sense we are to accept it in its secondary meaning to suit 
blame or praise. — 60. 

“As soon as a person is born he incurs three debts” — this expression, 
inadmissible as it is in its literal sense, is to be taken in its secondary 
meaning, viz., “ as soon as a person enters the life of a householder, he 
incurs three debts the clearing off of which brings him credit.”' The ex- 
pression “ until the time of our decay and death ” signifies that “ as long 
as we do,not arrive at the fourth stage when we are to adopt the life of a 
mendicant.” If the scriptural texts are interpreted in this way, it be- 
comes clear that our whole life does not pass away in the mere clearing 
off of our debts. 



184 BOOK IV, CHAPTER 1. 

grffarcra Rw i mwgl , h a i v i It n 

61, An injunction must be appropriate to its occasion 
just as a topic must be appropriate to the treatise which 
deals with it. — 61. 

A treatise on Logic which is to deal with its own special problems 
cannot be expected to treat of etymology and syntax which form the 
subject of a separate treatise. A sacred book which professes to deal 
with the life of a householder can appropriately bestow every encomium 
on him. A certain Vedic text extols karma by saying that immortality is 
attained by the force of one’s own acts, while another text lays down as a 
compliment to asceticism that immortality cannot be attained except 
through renunciation. Some text declares emphatically that it is by the 
knowledge of Brahma alone that one can attain immortality, there is no 
other way to it. There are again certain texts which attach an equal 
importance to study, sacrifice and charity each of which is to be perform- 
ed by us at the different stages of our life. Hence a text which aims at 
extolling the life of a householder can, without creating any misappre- 
hension in us, lay down that as soon as we are born we incur three debts 
which we must go on clearing off until the time of our decay and death. 

wn<l*HTi*iwqsiRito u $ 1 1 i In n 

62. There is no lack of opportunity for our release 
because the sacrifices (to be performed for clearing off our 
debts) are trusted to the soul. — 62. 

A Brahman, while old, should refrain from all searches after sons, 
wealth and retinue. Sruti (Veda) instructs him to retire from the world 
when he has trusted to his soul the sacrifices which he used to perform 
to clear off his debts. By so doing he will imagine that his soul is the 
sacrificial fire in which his physical actions are offered as oblations. 
Freed from all debts, he will live on alms and find an ample opportunity 
.for effecting his own release. 

As regards the division of life into four stages, there is the authority 
of Itih&sa, Fur&jp and Dharma fkstra. 

§S«w fc i wuiwwh II s i t i <vu 

63. As there is no distress in a person who is sound 
asleep and sees no dream, so there is no association of 
troubles in one who attains release. — 63 



THE NY&YA-S0TRA8. 125 

A person who has, through the knowledge of Brahma, attained 
release, is freed from all bonds of lust, pleasure, pain, etc. 

£The word klesa (here rendered as trouble) is a technical term very 
extensively used in the Buddhist Sanskrit and Pali literature to signify 
depravity, defilement, corruption or passion. Klesa, called in Pali kUeso, 
is the cause of all sinful actions and consequently of re-births. Arhatship 
consists in the annihilation of klesa. The Pali Pitakas enumerate ten 
kileeaa, of which five are prominent. The ten kilesas are : — 

SWirr (greed), (hatred), (stupidity), WPlr (pride), 

(heretical view), fefeftsg? (doubt), (sloth), (arrogance), 

(shamelessness) and (recklessness). 

The BuddhiBt Sanskrit books enumerate six klesaa and twenty-four 
upaklesas. 

TClfsiT: II 

Km nfcT^rT mJtafW %rEr h 

(Dharmasatngraha LXV1I,) 

5n: i grew r u 

irNi 5rwrifcr w snrrar *am*t srrau' *rrur 

wn wwra rranr cratfr hhi^t $r rtshswiwi rarac 

II 

(Dharmasatngraha LXIX.) 

The word klesa used in the Nyuya Sfitra 4-1-59, 4-1-63, 4-1-64 and 
4-1-65 evidently conveys the meaning of moral depravity. Hina-klesa 
(talfa ) used in 4-1-64 rings in my ears as a phrase borrowed from 
the Buddhist philosophy.] 

51 II 9 I ? I 49 II 

64. The activity of one who has got rid of the troubles 
does not tend to obstruction. — 64. 

Activity does not present any obstacle to release (apavarga) in 
respect of a person who is freed from the troubles of lust, hatred and 
Stupidity. In hiB case activity produces neither merit nor demerit, and 
consequently no re-birth. 

si iawsRut: emKi ftsw i q , II 9 i t i 4k II 

65. There is, some say, ho end of troubles because 
these are natural.-r-65. 



m book CHAma f; 

The objection raised here is this None can attain release because 
it is impossible to get rid of troubles which are natural (beginninglesa). 

66. Even the natural, says some one, are non-eternal 
like the non-existence that was antecedent to produc- 
tion. — 66. 

The objection raised in the previous aphorism is answered b$r some 
one as follows : — 

A non-existence antecedent to production is natural (beginningless) 
but it disappears as soon as the production takes place. Similarly the 
troubles are natural (beginningless) but they terminate as soon as release 
is attained. 

A jar before it is produced is non-existent. This non-existence is 
called antecedent non-existence. It has no beginning but it has an end 
for it disappears as soon as the jar is prodneed. The troubles like the 
antecedent non-existence are beginningless but not endless. 

[It is only an existence, that is, an existent thing that can be called 
eternal or. non-eternal. We cannot apply the epithets “ eternal ” and 
“ non-eternal ” to non-existence except in a figurative sense.) 

u u i t i » 

67. Or non-eternal like the blackness of an atom. — 67. 

An earthy atom, which is naturally' black, changes its colour when 
it is baked red in the kiln. Likewise the troubles which are natural 
disappear as soon as release is attained. 

3 u « i % i h 

68. It is, we reply, not so because affection etc. are 
caused . by misapprehension. — 68. 

The Naiygyika says : —There is no necessity for us here to admit 
that a thing which is natural (beginningless) may not be endless. The 
troubles are not in fact natural (beginningless) because they are caused by 
activity which springs from our affection, aversion and stupidity. These 
tt*t are generated by our misapprehension. The troubles not being 
natural, there is no lack of -opportunity for us to at tain release. 


THE NYlYA-StTRAS. 137 

Book IV. — Chaptfr II. 

fl q fofaRiH i a wg Rnrgsprft#T; im r 1 1 « 

69. Through knowledge about the true nature of the 
causes of faults, there is cessation of egotism — 1. 

Egotism is a stupidity of the form “ I ain.” It consists of the notion 
“ I am,” entertained by a person who is devoid of self. It disappears as 
soon as we attain knowledge about the true nature of the faults which are 
caused by all objects such as body etc. enumerated in aphorism l—l — 9. 

smNfhrr wT’it fowl: egsqsm: n sirir ii 

70. The colour and other objects, when regarded as 
good, become the causes of faults — 2. 

It is only when we look upon colour or any other object as a source 
of enjoyment that it becomes a cause of our affection, aversion or stupidity. 

u 8 i r i \ ii 

71. The faults are caused through a conception of 
the whole apart from its 'parts. — 3. 

The faults are produced if a man or woman looks upon each other 
as a whole, viz., as a male or female with all his or her paraphernalia of 
teeth, lips, eyes, nose, etc., together with their secondary marks ; and they 
are shunned if he or she looks upon each other by parts only, viz., upon 
his or her hair, flesh, blood, bone, nerve, head, phlegm, bile, excrement 
etc., all of which are frail. The notion of the lohole engenders lust while 
that of the ■parts produces equanimity. We must regard every thing from 
the standpoint of evil e. g. the rice boiled with poison is looked upon by 
a wordly man as rice and by an ascetic as poison. 

fail i itfaa n^ Arpt: ii 9 i r i s ii 

72. Owing to the apprehension and non-apprehension 
being each of two kinds, there arises a doubt as to the exist- 
ence of a whole apart from its parts. —4. 

There are two kinds of apprehension, oiz., real and unreal. The 
apprehension of water in a tank is real while that of mirage as a mass of 
water is unreal. The non-apprehension is also of two kinds, vis., real and 
unreal. The non-apprehension of a hare’s horn (which is non-existent) is a 
real, non- apprehension while that of the ether (which is existent) is an 
unreal non-apprehension. The apprehension and non-apprehension being 
both real and unreal there arises a doubt as to whether there is really a whole 
17 



m BOOK IV, CHAPTER II. 

*part from its parts. If we apprehend a whole apart from its parts* 
our apprehension may be unreal. IE we do not apprehend a whole, our 
non-apprehension too may be unreal. 

11 $ i * i vui 

73. There is no room for doubt with regard to the 
existence of a whole already established through arguments. 
—5. 


No one has yet set aside the arguments employed in aphorism 
2—1 — 34 to establish a whole apart from its parts. 

eft e n a i * i $. n 

7 4. There is, says some one, no room for doubt even 
with regard to the non-existence of a whole on account of 
the impossibility of the whole residing any where. — 6. 

In the preceding aphorism the NaiyAyika has said that there is no 
doubt a3 to the existence of a whole apart from its parts as demonstrated 
in aphorism 2 — 1—34. In the present aphorism his opponent says that 
there is no doubt as to the non-existence oE a whole apart from its parts 
because neither the whole can reside in its parts nor the latter in the 
former. One affirms that there is a whole while the other affirms that 
there is no whole. In either case there is no room for doubt. 


: II $ 1 ^ I V9 || 

75. There is, says the objector, no whole because 
its parts reside in it neither totally nor partially. — 7. 

A part does not occupy the whole in its totality owing to the differ- 
ence of their dimensions ; neither does it occupy the whole partially 
because the part can reside neither in itself nor in another part. 


iniuicn 

76. Also because the whole does not, continues the 
objector, reside in its parts. — 8. 

The whole does not reside in each of its parts separately on account 
of the differenc^of their dimensions. Neither does it reside in some of 
its parts collectively because in that case it loses its connection with the 
other parts. 

TOF; U * I R I A II 

77. Owing to the lack of residence, affirms the 
objector, there is no whole apart from its parts. — 9. 



THE NYAYAdSOTRAS. tm 

The whole does not exist as the relation between it andits parts 
is not that of the container and the contained. 

«T «■! ^ l-to 

78. And the parts are not the whole.— -10. 

The objector says that the relation between the whole and its parts 
is not that of identity. No one says that the thread is the web or the pillar 
is the house. 

ft ? amtt n 

79. There is, we reply, no room for the question 
owing to the impropriety in the use of the term “ variety ” 
in reference to what is one. — 11. 

In aphorism 4 — 2—7 an opponent raised the question as to whether 
the whole occupied its parts totally or partially. The Naiyayika disposes 
of the question by saying that there is no room for it because the terms 
“ totally " and “ partially ” cannot be applied to “ one." The term 
“ totally ” is employed only in the case of several things of which no one 
has been left out while the word “ partially ” refers to an aggregate of 
which some parts have been left out. Now, neither the term “ totally ” 
nor the term “ partially ” is applicable to what is “ one ”, that is, to a 
“ whole.” In the case of a whole the employment of language implying 
variety is unjustifiable. 

ii a i ^ i n 

80. The question, we further reply, is unreasonable 
because even if one part could be the residence of another 
part, it would not be the residence of the whole. — 12. 

When we speak of a whole residing in its parts we must not under- 
stand that the term residence refers to any space, in fact it refers to the 
relation of refuge and refugee. A refuge is that with which the refugee 
is . inseparably connected and without which it can never exist. Hence 
there is no impossibility of the whole residing in its parts. 

m a m wit 

81* The perception of a “ whole ” bears analogy to 
that of a collection of hairs by a person affected with a dim- 
ness of sight.— 13. 



130 BOOK IV, CHAPTER II. 

Just as a person of dim sight cannot perceive hairs separately but 
can perceive them in a mass, so we cannot perceive the atoms separately 
but can perceive them in a mass in the form of a jar or the like. . 

n * i t i t? ii 

82. A. sense is inoperative in reference to what is not 
its object because its acuteness or dullness of apprehension 
is restricted to its own object which it cannot trans- 
cend. — 14. 

The eye, whether it is acute or dim, cannot apprehend a sound. 
Similarly the ear, sharp or dull, cannot see a colour. All senses have 
their special objects to which their operation is restricted. An atom 
which is supersensuous, cannot be apprehended by any of our senses — no 
matter whether these are acute or dim. Each hair being perceptible, its 
collection also is capable of being perceived whereas the atoms being 
imperceptible their collection canuot be perceived. As we can perceive 
the collection of atoms in the shape of a jar or the like, we must admit 
that the collection or the whole is a reality independent of’ its parts 
(the atoms). 

U $ I ^ \ \ V, \\ 

83. The whole and its parts should in that case be 
supposed to continue up to the time of annihilation. — 15. 

Even if we admit the existence of a whole and its parts, we cannot 
suppose them to continue for ever because they are subject to destruc- 
tion at the time of annihilation. A whole has got its parts and the 
parts again have their parts which do not cease until they become non- 
existent at the time of annihilation. 

* » « iA i U n 

84. Tljere is, we reply, no annihilation because there 
are atoms.— 16. 

There will never come a time when there will be an utter annihi- 
lation, for things will even then continue to exist in the state of atoms. 
An atom is a thing of the smallest dimension, that is, a thing which is 
not capable of being of smaller dimension, 



THE NYAYA-S0TRA8, Vtl 

sj^. ii 8 i *1 11 

85. An atom is that which is not capable of being 
divided. — 17. 

An atom is not divisible into further parts. 

[Two atoms make a dvyarjtika (dyad) and three doymjuhas make 
a tryasareij.il (triad). All things which we perceive are computed of 
tryasreijus. An atom (anu) is finer than a doyaijuha and the latter finer 
than a tryasarem .] 

trcgqqfai n « i * i ii 

86. There is, says some one, an impossibility of 
such a thing, as it is divided throughout by ether. — 18. 

The Naiyayika defines the atom as a whole which has no parts, 
that is, a thing which is not divisible into further parts. Some one 
controverts the definition by saying that an atom is not devoid of parts 
because it is intersected by ether within and icithout. 

sirefircme&na?# *ni ? i % i ii 

87. Else there would not be the omnipresence of 
the ether. — 19. 

The ether would not be called omnipresent if it could not reside 
within the atoms. 

t re nif ls r s i TW'WHHiW'U l 

awra: II 8 i * I =lo II 

88. There is no “ within” or “ without” of an eter- 
nal thing. The terms are applicable only to factitious 
things inasmuch as they imply constituents other than 
those which are seen. — 20. 

The word “within” refers to that constituent of a thing which is 
enclosed by another constituent thereof while the word “ without” refers 
to that constituent which encloses another constituent, but is not enclosed 
by it. These terms cannot be applied to eternal things such as atoms 
which do not possess constituents some of which may enclose the rest. 

u<4wiiau«ife*rara ii 8 i r i ** ir 

89. The ether is omnipresent because of the univer- 
sality of its conjunction which is a cause of sound. — -21. 



* 8 * BOOK IV, OHAHTEK II. 

Owing to soutfcl being produced everywhere it is inferred that 
the ether is omnipresent. If a certain place were devoid of contact with 
ether there would be no sound there. There is in .fact a conjunction of 
ether everywhere. 

II 8 I S I V* H 

90. The ether possesses three properties ; viz. that 
it is not repelled, that it does not obstruct and that it is all- 
pervading. — 22. 

The ether is not. repelled because it does not possess any form, 
it does not obstruct because it is intangible, and it is all-pervading 
because it is omnipresent. 

w'ni.il<m3<=KM«-#re: n 8 i * i n 

91. There are, says some one, parts in an atom 
because a thing that is endowed with a form must also 
possess a collocation of parts. — 23. 

The objection stands thus : — 

An atom is divisible into parts because it possesses a form, that is, 
it 18 of a limited dimension. 

The ether, soul, space and time being of unlimited dimensions are 
not divisible into parts.] 

n 9 i * t *9 u 

92. An atom, continues the objector, must possess 
parts because it is capable of being conjoined with another 
atom. — 24. 

The objection is this : — 

The fact that atoms possess the quality of conjunction proves that 
they have parts, because an atom can come in conjunction with another 
only in some of its parts. 

wwa^ifr^ i wwiauM^ ma T^ r; ns i hi n ti 

93. Tile doctrine of the indivisibility of atoms cannot, 
we reply, be refuted because such a refutation would give 
rise to a regresaus ad infinitum which is not proper.; — 25 

If you say that an atom is divisible into parts, you will have to 
admit that those parts again are divisible into further parts. Thin 
would give rise tc $& regremi,$ ad infinitum which should, if possible, he 



avoided.. If all things were indefinitely divisible we should find a large 
thing and a small' one to be of equal dimensions as both possess an infinite 
number of parts. A thing although indefinitely divided should not lose 
itself, There must remain a particle, oh, anatom which should not perish 
even at the time of annihilation. 

fwr vtrrt 

94. Things, some say, do not possess a reality if they 
are separated from our thoughts, just as there is no reality 
in a web separated from its threads. — 22. 

The objection is this 

Things do not possess a reality independent of our thoughts just 
as a web does not possess' a reality independent of its threads. Hence 
it is onr thoughts alone that are real, the external things are all unreal. 
[This aphorism refers to the doctrine of the Yogacara Buddhist 
philosophy explained in the LahkftvatAra Sutra].* 

s qf franfe : II 9 I t I *V9 II 

95. The reason, we reply, is not good as it hurts 
itself. — 27. 

The NaiySyika says that his opponent’s reason, viz, that things 
do not possess a reality if they are separated from our thoughts, 
is self-destructive because if things are capable of being separated from 
our thoughts they cannot be said to be unreal, and on the other hand 
if things are unreal they are incapable of being separated from our 
thoughts. The opponent commits a contradiction by saying that things 
are unreal and at the same time by going to separate them from our 
thoughts. 

qro rroi^ni^H, n 9 i * i n 

96. There is, we reply, no separate perception of a 
refuge and its refugee. — 28. 

Mtamrant i 

with asm? vuRwiufreft $ftrerrs i 

( tgpr, * qg ) 

fttsrorarsi $ftrcn* h 

to go tt^ i 



134 BOOK tV, CHAPTER II. 

A web being die refuge of its threads, the perception of the ^former 
includes that of the latter so that there 'are no separate perdCpjiipns - of 
them. If bur thoughts were the refuge of external things, then there 
Would.be no separate perceptions of them. But the opffatienfV . argu* :• 
ment viz., that “ if things are separated from our thoughts,” rpakes. 
it manifest that our thoughts are not the refuge of external things. 

n a i ^ i h If 

97. And things are established by evidences,— ^29; 

The reality of things is proved by evidences such as perception. Every 
thing requires an evidence for its establishment. The very assertion that 
“things are not real if they cannot be separated from our thoughts” must 
be based on an evidence if it is to commend itself to our acceptance. 
Hence we cannot deny things if they are established by evidences. 

98. The non-reality of things is demonstrated neither 
by evidences nor without them. — 30. 

The proposition that “ there is nothing” cannot be proved in any 
way. If you say that there is an evidence to prove it, you hurt your 
own proposition, viz, that, there is nothing. If again you say that there 
r ‘.is no evidence, how do you then establish your proposition ? 

wrifrra t fiwiqwi swmafonfiww ; h a i * i \% ii 

99. The concept of the means and the objects of know- 
ledge, says some one, bears analogy to that of things in a 
dream. — 31. 

The means and the objects of knowledge are as delusive as things 
appearing in a dream. 

[The aphorisms 4-2-31 and 4-2-32 evidently refer to the Buddhist 
doctrine of “ non-reality ” expounded in the Arya-Upftli-pficcha, Samfidhi- 
raja-stitra, Arya-gagana-gan j a-s ft tra , Madhyamika-sutra, Arya-ratnavali, 
Lalitavistara-sfltra and other Mahayana works.®] 

w mm aw ’Wit am i 

SW* *TW Wtpcaq. » (Mddhyamika-Sdtra, Oiiap. VII.) 

a$* aftfawr a$a mar gfta a$a i 

(Quoted in M&dhyamikA Vvitti, p. 57). 

mm mitt ft fiwraq: 1 (Arya-Up&lipficcha, quoted in M. V. 58) 

mt f i q i lf I (Arya-Samldhirija-Blu*- 

tiraka quoted iu M&dbyamikft Vfitti, Chap. XXI.) 




THE KYiYA-SCTRAS. 185 

II * I * I ^'11 

100. It may, continues the objector, be likened to 
jugglery, Ihe city of the celestial quiristers or a mirage. — 32. 

The means and the objects of knowledge are as unreal as things ex- 
hibited in jugglery, etc. 

II « i r i ^ II 

101. This cannot, we reply, be proved, as there is no 
reason for. it. — 33. 

There is no reason that the concept of the means and the objects of 
knowledge should bear an analogy to the concept of things in a dream 
but not to that of things in our wakeful state. If you, to prove the un- 
reality of things in a dream, adduce the reason that these are not perceived 
in our wakeful state, we would, to prove the reality of the means and 
the objects of' knowledge, adduce the reason that these are perceived in 
our wakeful state. 

n s i h i ii 

102. The concept of things in a dream arises in the ., 
same way as remembrance and imagination. — 34. 

The things that appear in a dream are not unreal. We can conceive 
of them in a dream just as we can do in our wakeful state. Our concept 
of things in the dream is due to our memory and imagination. 

It is by a reference to- the knowledge in our wakeful condition, 
that we ascertain our knowledge in the dream to be unreal. But in the 
event of there being only one condition, viz., that of wakefulness, the ana- 
logy to the dream would not be appropriate. 

Riwj't4Hb.y^HiiiiWT^5ii-ii^^nPmtiibi*iMy«iiiiu- 

n a i r i s* H 

103. Our false apprehension is destroyed by a know- 
ledge of the truth, just as our concept of objects in a dream 
comes to an end on our awaking. — 35. 

In the case of jugglery, the city of the celestial quiristers and 
the mirage, our apprehension, if it is false, consists of our imputing “that” 
to what is “ not that ” just as when we mistake a post for a man. The 
objects of the apprehension are, however, not unreal, inasmuch as they 
arise from our memory and imagination, 

18 



m BOOK TV, OHAPTERI1. 


Jugglery (m&y&) consists of a false apprehension produced in others 
by an artificer through the use of materials Similar to those originally 
announced by him. 

Just as our concept of objects in a dream passes away as soon as we 
fre awake, so also our false apprehension of objects disappears as soon as 
we attain a true knowledge of those objects. 


it « i * i U n 

104. There is therefore no denial of false knowledge, 
inasmuch as we perceive that there is a cause for that 
knowledge.— 36. 

It has already been shown that our concept of objects in a dream is 
unreal, inasmuch as we do not actually perceive them at that time, but 
that the objects of the dream are not unreal, inasmuch as they arise from 
our memory and imagination. In fact, the objects that give rise to false 
knowledge are never uureal, although the knowledge itself may be false. 


iraswroiw Ri>wii^'?A«iiMMRi: n a i * i vs n 

105. And false knowledge involves a two-fold 
character on account of the distinction between the essence 
and appearance of its object. — 37. 


. When we mistake a post for a man, our knowledge assumes the 
form “ that is man.” Our knowledge of the post,, in so far as it is called 
“ that ” is a true knowledge but in so far as it is described as “ man ” 
is a false knowledge. This falsity of knowledge is due to our recognition 
of certain properties common to the post and the man. 

uwfafaStaTwnura: n u i ^ i 

106. The knowledge of truth is rendered habitual by 
a special practice of meditation. — 38. 

Meditation is the soul’s union with the mind abstracted from the 
senses whose contact with objects does not produce’ any perception. The 
knowledge of the truth is rendered habitual by the repeated practice of 
this meditation. 

n * i * i u it 

107. Meditation, some say, is not practicable by 
.reason of the predominance of certain external objects. — 39. 

There are innumerable obstacles to meditation, e, g., hearing the 
thundering noise of a cloud, one is prevented from practising .meditation. 



fwWf*c: iwm* n « i * i it 

108. And by reason of our being impelled to actio® 
by hunger, etc. — 40. 

Hunger and thirst, heat aind cold, disease, etc., sometimes prevent 
us from practising meditation. 

109. It arises, we reply, through possession of the 
fruits of our former works. — 41. 

We acquire a habit of practising meditation in consequence of our 
good deeds of a previous life. 

qt*Tr*TT^rq^r: u 9 i q i ?q ji 

110. We are instructed to practise meditation in 
such places as a forest, a cave or a sand-bank. — 42. 

The meditation practised in these places is not seriously disturbed 
by any obstacle. 

STCTf: II 9 I q I II 

111. Such possibilities may occur even in release. 

—43. 

Even a person who has attained release may be disturbed by the 
violence of an external object. 

?r fa sq ff Tqq q^ifa^ tgc u 9 i q i 99 h 

112. It is, we reply, not so, because knowledge must 
spring up only in a body already in the state of formation, 
—44. 

A violent external object produces knowledge only in a body whicli 
has been formed, in consequence of our previous deeds and which is 
endowed with senses, etc. 

n tm ii 


113. And there is absence of a body in our release. 

—45. 

? 

Our # merits and demerits having already been exhausted, we cannot 
get a body after we have attained release. Release is the perfect freedotp 
from all sufferings : it consists in a complete destruction of all. the seeds 
Kid seats of suffering. 


138 BOOK IV. OHABTBB II. 

qaPww wiaaiwii 

<rfe: II 8 1 SI 81 II 

114. For that purpose there should be a purifying of 
our soul by abstinence from evil and observance of certain 
duties as well as by following the spiritual injunctions 
gleaned from the Yoga institute. — 46. 

In order to attain release we must practise meditation after our soul 
lias been purified by our abstinence, etc. The injunctions gleaned from 
the Yoga institute refer to penances, the controlling of our breaths, the 
fixing of our mind, etc. 

HSFWp] I*-*! lew lS$sr II 8 I * I 8V9 II 

115. To secure release, it is necessary to study and 
follow this treatise on knowledge as well as to hold discus- 
sions with those learned in that treatise. — 47. 

The spiritual injunctions furnished by the Yoga institute caunot be 
properly assimilated unless we have already acquired a true knowledge 
of the categories explained in the Nynya fkstra. It is therefore very 
useful to study the Nyaya lustra and to hold discussions with persons 
learned in the S&stra. 

i ft i9 $i 

u $ i * i sc ii 

116. One should enter upon discussions with unenvi- 
Ous persons, such as disciples, preceptors, fellow-students 
and seekers of the aurnmum bonum. — 48. 

The epithet “ unenvious ” excludes those who do not seek truth but 
desire victory. Discussion has been defined in aphorism 1— 2r~l, 

sreNtHi^fW u $ i n 

117i In case of a necessity for the search of truth, 
discussion may be held even without an opposing side.— 49. 

A person desirous of knowledge may submit his viewB /or exami- 
nation by Bimply expressing his curiosity for truth without an attempt 
to establish the views. 




THE NYltA-SOTRAS. 

ref 

wrtf w^TiT^rrw^if^ u % i * i *'• « 

118. Wranglings and cavils may be employed to 
keep up our zeal for truth just as fences of thorny boughs 
are used to safe-guard the growth of seeds. — 50. 

Certain talkative people propound philosophies which are mutually 
opposed, while others violate all sense of rectitude out of a bias for their 
own side. Seeing that these people have not attained true knowledge 
and are not freed from faults, we may, in our disputation against them, 
employ wranglings and cavils which do not in themselves deserve any 
profit or encomium. 





BOOK V, CHAPTER 1 
Book V, Chapter I. 

tsraif n fdtaMi^^ 

qii'iwHfs II < ' " 


1. Futilities are as follows :-(l)' Balancing the 
homogeneity, © balancing the heterogeneity, (3) balancing 
an addition, ( 4 ) balancing a subtraction, (5) halanoing t e 
questionable, (6) balancing the unquestionable, (7) balancing 
the alternative, (8) balancing the reciprocity, (9) glancing 
the co-presence, (10) balancing the mutual absenee, (11) ba- 
lancing the infinite regression, (12) balancing the counter- 
example, (13) balancing the non-produced, (14) balancing 
the doubt, (15) balancing the controversy, (16) balancing 
the non-reason, (17) balancing the presumption, (18) balanc- 
ing the non-difference, (19) balancing the demonstration, 
(20) balancing the perception, (21) balancing the non- 
perception, (22) balancing the non-eternality, (23) balanc- 
ing the eternality and (24) balancing the effect.— 1. 

Futility, which is a fallacious argument, has been in general terms 
defined in aphorism 1-248. The twenty four kinds of futility enun- 
ciated here will each be defined in due course. The fallacious character 
of the twenty four kinds will also be exposed in separate aphorisms. 

n «. 1 1 1 vn 

2. If against an argument based on a homogeneous 
or heterogeneous example one offers an opposition 
the same kind of example, the opposition will .be called 
‘‘balancing the homogeneity” or “ balancing the heterpg^ ; 

neity.’V^* 


Balancing the homogeneity.-— X certain person, to prove the non- 
eternality of sound, argues as follows 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a ppt. 

A certain, other person offers the following futile opposition :-r- 
Sound is eternal, 
because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky.” 

The argument, viz., sound is non-eternal, is based on the homo- 
geneity of soijnd. with the non-eternal pot on the ground of both being pro- 
ducts. The opposition, viz., sound is eternal, is said to be based on 
the homogeneity of sound with the eternal sky 'on tho alleged ground of 
both being incorporeal. This sort of opposition, futile as it is, is called 
“ balancing tho homogeneity” which aims at showing an equality of the 
arguments of two sides in respect of the homogeneity of examples 
employed by them. 

Balancing the heterogeneity . — A certain person, to prove the non-eter- 
nality of sound, argncs as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is a product, ' 

whatever is npt non-eternal is not a prodnet, 

as the sky. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is incorporeal, 

whatever is not eternal is not incorporeal, 

as a pot. 

Tho argument, viz., sound is non-eternal, is based on the heterogeneity 
of sound from the not-non-eternal sky which are mutually incompatible. 
The opposition, viz., sound is eternal, is said to be based on the heteroge- 
neity of sound from the not-incorporeal pot which are alleged to be in- 
compatible with each other. This sort of opposition, futile as it is, is called 
“balancing- the heterogeneity” which aims at showing an equality of 
the arguments of two sides in respect of the heterogeneity of examples- 
employed by them. 

iiv m 1 1 ii 

3. That is, we say, to be established like a cow 
through cowhood (or cow-type). — 3, 



U2 BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

The Naiy&yika says: — If the opposition referred to in the previous 
aphorism is to be valid it must be based on the example, homogeneous 
or heterogeneous, exhibiting a universal connection betweeh the reason and 
the predicate such as we discern between a cow and cowhood or a universal 
disconnection between the reason and the absence of the predicate such as 
we discern between a cow and absence of cowhood. In the argument— 
“ sound is non-eternal, because it is a product, like a pot” the homogeneous 
example “pot ” exhibits a universal connection between productivity 
and non-eternality, all products being non-eternal ; but in the opposition 
— “sound is eternal, because it is incorporeal, like the sky” — the homo- 
geneous example sky does not exhibit a universal connection between 
incorporeality and oternality because there are things, such as intellect 
or knowledge, which are incorporeal but not eternal. A similar obser- 
vation is to bo made with regard to the opposition called “ balancing the 
heterogeneity.” In the opposition “ sound is eternal, because it is incor- 
poreal, whatever is not eternal is not incorporeal, as a pot ” the 
heterogeneous example pot does not exhibit a universal disconnection 
between incorporeality and absence of eternality because there aro 
things, such as intellect or knowledge, which are incorporeal but not 
eternal. 



II * I \ I 8 II 

4. The subject and example alternating their charac- 
ters or both standing in need of proof, there occur 
(futilities called) “ balancing an addition” “ balancing a 
subtraction” “ balancing the questionable,” “ balancing 
the unquestionable” “ balancing the alternative ” and 
“ balancing the reciprocity.” — 4. 

Balancing art addition.— If against an argument based on a certain 
character of the example one offers an opposition based on an additional 
character thereof the opposition will be called “ balancing an addition.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues 
as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 



THD NYAYA-SOTRAS. 143 

A. certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

Sound is non-eternal (and corporeal), 
because it is a product, 

like a pot (which is non-eternal as well as corporeal). 

The opponent alleges that if sound is non-eternal like a pot, it 
must also be corporeal like it : if it is not corporeal let it be also not 
non-eternal. This sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing an 
addition ” which aims at showing an equality of the arguments of two 
sides in respect of an additional character (possessed by the example and 
attributed to the subject). 

Balancing a subtraction . — If against an argument based on a 
certain cha ract er of the example one offers an opposition based on 
another character wanting in it, the opposition will be called “ balancing 
a subtraction.” 

A certain person, to prove the 11011-eternaIity of sound, argues 
as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers the following futile opposition • 

Sound is non-eternal (but not audible), 
because it is a product, 

like a pot (which is non-eternal but not audible.) 

• The' opponent alleges that if sound is non-eternal like a pot, it 
cannot be audible, for a pot is not audible ; and if sound is still held to 
be audible, let it be also not non-eternal. This sort of futile opposition is 
called “ balancing a subtraction ” which aims at showing an equality of 
the arguments of two sides in respect of a certain character wanting in 
the example (and consequently also in the subject), 

Balancing the questionable . — If one opposes an argument by main- 
taining that the character of the example is as questionable as that of the 
subject, the opposition will be called “ balancing the questionable.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues 
as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 





144 BOOK V, CHAPTER i. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

A pot. is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like sound. 

The opponent alleges that if the non-eternality of sound is called in 
question, why is not that of the pot too called in question, as the pot 
and sound are both products ? His object is to set aside the argument 
on the ground of its example being of a questionable character. This 
sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the questionable” which 
aims at showing an equality of the arguments of two sides in respect 
of the questionable character of the subject as well as of the example. 

Balancing the unquestionable . — If one opposes an argument by 
alleging that the character of the subject is as unquestionable as that 
of the example, the opposition will be called “balancing the unques- 
tionable.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows:—. 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

A pot is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like sound. 

The opponent alleges that if the nou-eternality of a pot is held to 
be unquestionable, why is not that of sound too held to be so, as the pot 
and sound are both products ? His object is to render the argument 
unnecessary on the ground of its subject being of an unquestionable 
character. This sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the 
unquestionable ” which aims at showing the equality of the argu- 
ments of two sides in respect of the unquestionable character of the 
example as well as of the subject. 

Balancing the alternative . — If one opposes an argument by attri- 
buting alternative characters to the subject and the example, the opposi- 
tion will be called “ balancing the alternative.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 



THE NKAXA-SUTBAS. 145 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

'"Sound is eternal and formless, 
because it is a product, 

like a pot (which is non-eternal and has forms;. 

The opponent alleges that the pot and sound are both products, 
yet one has form and the other is formless : why on the same principle 
is not one (the pot) non-eternal and the other (sound) eternal ? This sort 
of futile opposition is called “ balancing the alternative ” which aims 
at showing an equality of the arguments of two sides in respect of the 
alternative characters attributed to the subject and example. 

Balancing the reciprocity. — If one opposes an argument by alleging 
a reciprocity of the subject and the example, the opposition will be called 
“ balancing the reciprocity.” 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it. is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

A pot is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like sound. 


The opponent alleges that the pot and sound being both products, 
one requires proof for its non-eternality as much as the other does. 
Sound is to be proved non-eternal by the example of a pot and the pot 
is to be proved non-eternal by the examples of sound. This leads 
to a reciprocity of the pot (example) and sound (subject) resulting in 
no definite conclusion as to the eternality or non-eternality of sound. 
This sort' of futile opposition is called “ balancing the reciprocity ” which 
brings an argument to a stand-still by alleging the reciprocity of the 
subject and the example. 


rnunuii 

5. This is, we say, no opposition because there is a 
difference between the subject and the example although the 
conclusion is drawn from a certain equality of their cha* 
racters. — 6. 


The Naiy&yika says:— The futilities called “ balancing an addition,” 
“balancing a subtraction,’' “balancing the questionable,” “balancing 



UG BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

the unquestionable ” and “ balancing the alternative ” are all based 
on the false supposition of a complete equality of the subject and the. 
example. Though there is no denial of an equality of the subject and 
the example in certain characters, there is indeed a great difference 
between them in other characters. 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

In this argument although there is an equality of “sound” and 
“pot ” in respect of their being both products, there is a great difference 
between them in other respects. A cow possesses some characters in 
common with a bosgameus bnt there is no complete identity between them. 
No body can commit the futilities mentioned above if he bears in mind 
the equality of the subject and the example only in those characters which 
are warranted by the reason (middle term). In the case of the futility called 
“ balancing an addition ” it is clear that the equality supposed to exist 
between the pot and sound in respect of corporeality is not warranted by 
the reason (viz. being a product), because there are things, such as 
intellect or knowledge, which are products but not corporeal. Similarly 
with regard to the futility called “balancing a subtraction,” the reason 
(viz. being a product) does not justify an equality of sound and pot in 
respect of their being not audible. As regards the futilities called 
“ balancing the questionable ” and “ balancing the unquestionable,” we 
cannot ignore the difference between the subject and the example without 
putting an end to all kinds of inference. The futility called “ balanc- 
ing the alternative ” introduces an equality between the pot and sound 
in respect of a character (viz. being eternal) which is not warranted by 
the reason viz. being a product. 


v. it it n 

6. And because the example happens to surpass the 

subject. — 6 ► 

The futility called “balancing the reciprocity” is based on the 
false supposition that the example stands exactly on the same footing os 
the subject. Tbit that one surpasses the other is evident from aphorism.. 
1-1-25 which states that the example does not stand in need of proof 
as to its characters. 


Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
JiJre a pot. 



THE NYAYA-SUTRAS. 147 

In tliis argument sound (the subject) may not be known by some 
to be non-eternal but a pot (the example) is known by all to be a product 
as well as non-eternal. “ Balancing the reciprocity ” is therefore a falla- 
cious argument. 


uro msmrai *u%ub arurr 
s wnwa s m sreq snfa uat 11 * i t i « n 

7. If against an argument based on the co-presence 
of the reason and the predicate or on the mutual absence of 
them one offers an opposition based on the same kind of 
co-presence or mutual absence, the opposition will, on 
account of the reason being non-distinguished from or being 
non-conducive to the predicate, be called “ balancing the 
co-presence ” or “ balancing the mutual absence.” — 7. 

Balancing the c o-presenee . — If against an argument based on the 
co-presence of the reason and the predicate, one offers an opposition based 
on the same kind of co-presence, the opposition will, on accouut of the 
reason being non-distinguished from the predicate, be called “ balancing 


the co-presence.” 

A certain person, to prove that there is fire in the hill, argues as 
follows : — 


The hill has fire, 
because it has smoke, 
like a kitchen. 


A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 
The hill lias smoke, 
because it has fire, 
like a kitchen. 


The arguer has taken the smoke to be the reason and the fire to be 
the predicate. The opponent raises a question as to whether the smoke 
is present at the same Elite which is occupied by the fire or is absent from 
that site. If the smoke is present with fire at the same site, there 
remains, according to the opponent, no criterion to distinguish the 
reason from the predicate. The smoke is, in his opinion, as much a 
reason for the fire as the fire for the smoke. This sort of futile opposi- 
tion is called “ balancing the co-presence ” which aims at stopping an 
argument On the alleged ground of the co-preaence'of .the reason and the 
predicate, 



148 BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

Balancing the mutual absence . — If against an argument based on 
the mutual absence of the reason and the predicate, one offers an opposi- 
tion based on the same kind of mutual absence, the opposition will, on 
account of the reason being non-condncive to the predicate, be called 
“ balancing the mutual absence.” 

A certain person, to prove that there is lire in the hill, argues as 
follows: — 

The hill has fire, 
because it lias smoke, 
like a kitchen. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

The hill has smoke, 
because it has fire, 
like a kitchen. 

The opponent asks : “ Is the smoke to be regarded as the reason 

because it is absent from the site of the fire ?” “ Such a supposition is 

indeed absurd.” The reason cannot establish the predicate without 
being connected with it, just as a lamp cannot exhibit a thing which' is 
not within its reach. If a reason unconnected with the predicate could 
establish the latter, then the fire could be as much the reason for the 
smoke as the smoke for the fire. This sort of futile opposition is called 
“ balancing the mutual absence ” which aims at bringing an argument 
to a close on the alleged ground of the mutual absence of the reason and 
the predicate. 

: II K I 3 I q II 

8. This is, we say, no opposition because we find the 
production of pots by means of clay as well as the oppres- 
sion of persons by spells. — 8. 

A potter cannot produce a pot without getting clay within his 
reach but an exorcist can destroy persons by administering spells from 
$ distance. Hence it is clear that a thing is accomplished sometimes by 
the cause being present at its site and' sometimes by being absent from 
it. “ Balancing $Jie co-presence ” and “ balancing the mutual absence” 
■which attach an undue importance to the proximity or remoteness of 
sites, are therefore totally fallacious arguments. 




THE NYAYA-SCttRAS. 149 

9. If one opposes an argument on the ground of the 
example not having been, established by a series of reasons 
or on the ground of the existence of a mere counter-example, 
the opposition will be called “ balancing the infinite regres* 
sion” or “ balancing the counter-example. ' - 9. 

Balancing the infinite regression. — A certain person, to prove the 
non-eternality of sound, argues as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

If sound is proved to be non-eternal by the example of a pot, how 
is the pot again to be proved as non-eternal ? The reason which proves 
the non-eternality of the pot is to be proved by further reasons. This 
gives rise to an infinite regression which injures the proposition “sound 
is non-eternal ” not less than the proposition “sound is eternal.” This 
sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the infinite regression ” 
which aims at stopping an argnnieut by introducing an infinite regression 
which is said to beset the example. 

Balancing the counter-example. — A certain person, to prove the noil-, 
eternality of sound, argues as follows : — • 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. - 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

Sound is eternal, 
like the sky. 

The opponent alleges that if sound is held to be non-eternal by the 
example of a pot, why it should not be held to be eternal by the example 
of tlie sky ? If the example of the sky is set aside, let the example of 
the pot too be set aside. This sort of futile opposition is called “ balanc- 
ing the counter-example” which aims at setting aside an argument 
by the introduction of a counter-example. 

II * It IS • U 

. 10.- The example does not, we say, require a ’series of 
reasons for its establishment just as a lamp does not require 
a series of lamps to be brought in for its illumination.-?— 10. 




150 fiOOK V, CHAPTER t 

The Naiyayika says : — 

An example is a thing the characters of which are well-known to an 
ordinary man as well as to an expert. It does not require a series , of 
reasons to reveal its own character or to reveal the character of the sub- : 
ject with which it stands in the relation of homogeneity or heterogeneity. 
In this respect it resembles a lamp which illumines itself as well as the 
things lying within its reach. 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

In this argument the pot is- the example which is so well-known that 
it requires no proof as to its being a product or being non-eternal. 

Hence the opposition called “balancing the infinite regression” 
is not founded on a sound basis. 

u * i t 1. 1 1 n 

11. The example, we say, cannot be set aside as un- 
reasonable only because a counter-example is advanced as 
the reason. — 11. 

The Naiyayika says : — 

The opponent must give a special reason why the counter-example 
should be taken as specially fitted to lead to a conclusion, and the example 
should not be taken as such. Until such a special reason is given, the 
counter-example cannot be accepted as leading to a definite conclusion.- 
In fact a mere counter-example without a reason (middle term) attending 
it cannot be conducive to any conclusion. Hence we must rely on an 
example attended by reason but not on a counter-example unattended by 
reason. 

Sound is eternal, 
like the sky. 

This opposition which is founded on a mere counter-example is' 
therefore to be rejected as unreasonable. 

sng?i%: ii *. i \ i ** n 

12. If one opposes an argument on the ground of the 
property connoted by the reason being absent from the thing 
denoted by the subject while it is not yet produced, the op- 
pgsltiop will be called “ balancing the non-produced.” 



THE NYAYA-SUTRAS. 151 


A certain person, to prove that sound is non-eternal, argues as 
follows 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is an effect of effort, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is a non-effect of effort, 
like the sky. 

.The opponent alleges that the property connoted by the reason, 
viz., being an effect of effort, is not predicable of the subject, via., 
sound Awhile it is not yet produced). Consequently sound is not non- 
eternal, it must then be eternal. There is, according to the opponent, 
an apparent agreement between the two sides as to the sound being non- 
eternal on account of its being a non-effect-of-effort. This sort of futile 
opposition is called “balancing the non-produced ” which p reft ends 
to show an equality of the argnraeuts of two sides assuming the thing 
denoted by the subject to be as yet non-produced. 





13. This is, we say, no opposition against our reason 
so well predicable of the subject which becomes as such 
only when it is produced. — 13. 


The Naiyt\yi lea disposes of- the futile opposition called “ balancing 
the non-produced ” by stating that the subject can become as such only 
wjien it is produced, and that there is then no obstacle to the property 
<4 the reason being predicated of it. The opposition, vis., “ sound 
(while non-produced) is eternal, because it is not then an effect of effort,” 
carries no weight with it, since we do not take the sound to be the subject 
before it is produced. Sound, while it is produced, is certainly an effect 
of effort and as such is non-eternal. 



r\ r\ g 


mmm n t i t* n 


14. . If one opposes an argument on the ground of a 
doubt arising from the homogeneity of the eternal and the 

non-eternal consequent on the example and its genus (or 
ao 



152 BOOK V, CHAPTER 1. 

type) being equally objects of perception, the opposition 
will be called “ balancing the doubt.” — 14. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — * 

Sound is non-eternal or eternal (?) 

because it is an object of perception, 
like a pot or pot-ness. 

The opponent alleges that sound is homogeneous with a pot as well 
as pot-ness inasmuch as both are objects of perception ; but the pot 
being non-eternal and pot-ness (the genus of pots or pot-type) being eternal 
there arises a doubt as to whether the sound is non-eternal or eternal. 

. This* sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the doubt ” which 
aims at rejecting an argument in consequence of a doubt arising from 
the homogeneity of the eternal and the non-eternal. 

ii « i t nun 

15. This is, we say, no opposition because we do not 
admit that eternality can be established by the homogeneity 
with the genus : a doubt that arises from a knowledge of 
the homogeneity vanishes from that of the heterogeneity, 
and that which arises in both ways never ends. — 15. 

The Naiy&yika says : — 

Sound cannot be said to be eternal on the mere ground of its homo- 
geneity with pot-ness (the genus of pots or pot-type) but it must be 
pronounced to be non-eternal on the ground of its heterogeneity from 
the same in respect of being a product. Though on the score of 
homogeneityVe may entertain doubt as to whether sound is eternal 
or non-eternal, but on the score of heterogeneity we can pronounce it 
•undoubtedly to be non-eternal. In this case we must bear in mind that 
we cannot ascertain the true nature of a thing unless we weigh it in 

* The term a&mauya In the sense of “general notion, genus or type ” was 
evidently taken from the Vaise$ika philosophy. 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. 153 

respect of its homogeneity with as well as heterogeneity from other 
things. If even then there remains any doubt as to its true nature, that 
doubt will never end. 

SRiwrcm: II Vtl % I u il 

16. “Balancing the controversy” is an opposition 
which is conducted on the ground of homogeneity with (or 
heterogeneity from) both sides. — 16. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternal ity of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus 
Sound is eternal, 

because it is audible, 
like soundness. 

The opponent alleges that the proposition, viz. sound is non-eternal, 
cannot be proved because the reason, viz., audibility which is homo- 
geneous with both sound (which is non-eternal) and soundness (which is 
eternal), provokes the very controversy for the settlement of which it was 
employed. This sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the con- 
troversy ” which hurts an argument by giving rise to the very controversy 
which was to be settled. 

— 

II * i t i tvs u 

17. This is, we say, no opposition because it pro- 
vokes a controversy which has an opposing side. — 17. 

The Naiy&yika says The opposition called “ balancing the con- 
troversy ” cannot set aside the main argument because it leads to a 
controversy which stipporta one side quite as strougly as it is opposed 
by the other side. 

n * 1 1 i ts n 

18. * “Balancing the non-reason” is an opposition 
which is based on the reason being shown to be impossible 
at all the three times. — 18. 



154 BOOK V, CHAPTER L 


A certain person, to prove the uon-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-^ernal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

Here “ being a product ” is the reason or sign for “ being non- 
eternal ” which is the predicate or significate. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

The reason or sign is impossible at all the three times because it 
cannot precede, succeed, or be simultaneous with the predicate or 
significate. 

(а) The reason (or sign) does not precede the predicate (or signi- 
ficate) because the former gets its name only when it establishes the latter. 
It is impossible for the reason to be called as such before the establish- 
ment of the predicate. 

(б) The reason (or sign) does not succeed the predicate (or significate) 
because what would be the use of the former if it latter existed already. 

(c) The reason (or sign) and the predicate (or significate) cannot 
exist simultaneously for they will then be reciprocally connected like 
the right and left horns of a cow. 

This sort of futile opposition is called “ balancing the non-reason ” 
which aims at setting aside an argument by showing that the reason is 
impossible at all the three times. 


* UT'arfa^ifiMlfhnsi: {I V. I % I H II 

19. There is, we say, no impossibility at the three 
times because the predicate or significate is established by 
the reason or sign. — 19. 


The Naiyayika says : — The knowledge of the knowable and the 
establishment of that which is to be established take place from reason 
which must precede that which is to be known and that which is to be 
established. 


afiitasgn i fafo it * i \ i h 

20. There is, we further say, no opposition of that 
which is to be opposed, because 'the opposition itself is 
impossible at all the three times. — 20. 

It being impossible for the opposition to precede, succeed or be 
aiinulfiineous with that which is to be opposed, the opposition itself is 
invalid and consequently the original argument holds good. 



THE NYAYA-SOTHAS. 16S 

wiImRm: n-V. m » 

21. If one advances an opposition on the basis of a 
presumption, the opposition will be called “ balancing the 
presumption. ” — 21 . 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

Sound is presumed to be eternal, 
because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

The opponent alleges that if sound is non-eternal on account of its 
homogeneity with non-eternal things {e.g. in respect of its being a pro- 
duct), it may be concluded by presumption that sound is eternal on 
account of its homogeneity with eternal things {e.g. in respect of its being 
incorporeal). This sort of futile opposition is called “balancing the 
presumption ’’ which aims at stopping an argument by setting presump- 
tion as a balance against it. 

II v i % \ ^ II 

22 If things unsaid could eoine by presumption, there 
would, we say, arise a possibility of the opposition itself 
being hurt on account of the presumption being erratic and 
conducive to an unsaid conclusion. — 22. 

Sound is eternal, 
because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

Tf by presmnption we could draw a conclusion unwarranted by the . 
reason, we could from the opposition cited above draw the following 
conclusion: — 

Sound is pr esum ed to be non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 


156 


BOOK V, CHAPTER I 


This would hurt the opposition itself. In fact the presumption as 
adduced by the opponent is erratic. If one Bays that “sound is 
non-eternal because of its homogeneity with non-eternal things ”, the pre- 
sumption that naturally follows is that “sound is eternal because of its 
homogeneity with eternal things ” and vice versa. There is no rule that, 
presumption should be made in one case and not in the case opposed to 
it ; and in the event of two mutually opposed presumptions no definite 
conclusion would follow. Hence the opposition called “ balancing the 
presumption ” is untenable. 

<Qj|«ran ; ii m ? i ^ n 

23. If the subject and, example are treated as non- 
different in respect of the possession of a certain property on 
account of their possessing in common the property con- 
noted by the reason, it follows as a conclusion that all things 
are mutually non-different in respect of the possession of 
every property on account of their being existent : this sort 
of opposition is called “ balancing the non-difference.” — 23. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

If tho pot and sound are treated as non-different in respect of non- 
eternality in consequence of their both being products, it follows as a 
conclusion that all things are mutually non-different in respect of the 
possession of every property in consequence of their being existent. 
Therefore, no difference existing between the eternal and the non- 
eternal, sound may be treated as eternal. This sort of opposition is called 
“ balancing the n ^-difference ” which aims at hurting an argument by 
assuming all things to be mutually non-different. 

3>fo<S»T|tgqq%i II HI? I || 

24. This is, we say, no opposition because the property 
possessed in common by the subject and the example 



THE NYAYA-SOTBAS. 157 

happens in certain instances to abide in the re&sou while in 
other instances not to abide in it. — 24. 

Sopnd is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

Here the pot and sound possessing in common the property of being 
a product are treated as non-different in respect of the possession of non- 
eternality. On the same principle if all things are treated as non-different 
in consequence of their being existent, we would like to know in what 
respect they are non-different. If they are treated as non-different in 
respect of uou-eternality, then the argument would staud thus : — 

All things are non-eternal, 
because they are existent, 
like (?) 

In this argument “ all things” being the subject, there is nothing 
left which may serve as an example. A part of the subject cannot be cited 
as the example because the example must be a well-established thing 
while the subject is a thing which is yet to be established. Tiie argument, 
for want of an example, leads to no conclusion. In fact all things are 
not non-eternal since some at least are eternal. In other words, nou- 
eternalily abides in some existent things and does not abide in other 
existent things. Hence all things are not mutually non-different and the 
opposition called “balancing the non-difference” is unreasonable. 

II V I { I 

25. If an opposition is offered by showing that both 
the demonstrations are justified by reasons, the opposition 
will be called “ balancing the demonstration.” — 25. 

A certain person demonstrates the non-eternality of sound as 
-follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers an opposition by the alleged demons- 
tration of the eternality of sound as follows : — 

Sound is eternal, 
because it is incorporeal, 
like the sky. 

The reason in the first demonstration supports the non-eternality 
of sound while that in the second demonstration supports the eternality 



158 BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

of sound, yet both the demonstrations are alleged to be' right. The 
opponent advanced the second apparent demonstration as a balance 
against the first to create a dead lock. This sort of opposition is called 
“ balancing the demonstration.” 

u * i t i *4 n 

26. This is, we say, no opposition because there is 
an admission of the first demonstration. — 26. 

The Naiyayika says : — 

The opponent having asserted that both the demonstrations are 
justified by reasons, has admitted the reasonableness of the first demons- 
tration which supports the nou-eternality of sound. If to avoid the 
incompatibility that exists between the two demonstrations, he now deqies 
the reason which supports non-eternality we would ask why does he hSt 
deny the other reason which supports the eternality of sound, for he can 
avoid incompatibility by denying either of the reasons. Hence the op- 
position called “ balancing the demonstration ” is not well-founded. 

n y i % i n 

27. If an opposition is offered on the ground thdt we 
perceive the character of the subject even without the inter- 
vention of the reason, the opposition will be called “balancing 
the perception.” — 27. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 


Sound is non-eternal, 
because it. is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

Sound can be ascertained to be non-eternal even without the reason 
that it is a product, for we perceive that sound is produced by the branches 
of trees broken by wind. This sort of opposition. is called “ balancing 
.the perception ” which aims at demolishing an argument by setting up 
an act of perception as a balance against it. 



u v i \ i u 


28. This is, we say, no opposition because that 
character can be ascertained by other means as well'. — 28. 

The Naiydyika says that the argument, viz., “ sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, like a pot, implies that sound is proved to be 



THE NYAYA-StFTRAS. 159 

non-eternal through the reason that it is a product. It does not depy 
other means, such as perception etc., which also may prove sound to be 
non-eternal. Hence the opposition called “ balancing the perception ” 
does not set aside the main argument. 

srf&RW II It I t I HI II 

29. If against an argument, proving the non-existence 
of a thing by the non-perception thereof, one offers an 
opposition aiming at pro ving the contrary by the non-percep-r 
tion of the non-perception, the opposition will be called 
“ balancing the non-perception.” — 29. 

In aphorism 2-2-19 the Naiyayika has stated that there is no veil 
which covers sound for tve do not perceive such a veil In aphorism 2-2-20 
his opponent has stated that there is a veil because vve do not perceive the 
non-perception thereof. If the non-perception of a thing proves its non- 
existence, the non-perception of the 11011 -perception must, in the opinion 
of the opponent, prove the existence of the thing. This sort of opposition 
is called “ balancing the non-perception” which aims at counteracting 
an argument by setting up non-perception as a balance against it. 


iun i ^ « 

30. The reasoning through non-perception is not, 
we say, sound, because non-perception is merely the nega- 
tion of perception. — 30. 


The Naiyayika says : — Perception refers to that which is existent 
while non-porception to that which is non-existent. The non-perception 
of non-perception which signifies a mere negation of non-perception cannot 
be interpreted as referring to an existent thing. Hence the opposition 
called “ balancing the non-perception” is not well-founded. 


wramra^wi^Miiam. n it i ? i ii 

31. There is, moreover, an internal perception of the 
existence as well as of the non-existence of the various kinds 
of knowledge. — 31. 


There are internal perceptions of such forms as “ I am sure,” “I 
am not sure,” “ I have doubt,” '* I have no doubt” etc., which prove that 
we can perceive the non-existence of knowledge as well as the existence 



160 BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

thereof. Hence the non-perception itself is perceptible, and as there is 
no non-perception of non-perception, the opposition called “ balancing the 
non-perception” falls to the ground. 

hi? i ^ II 

32. If one finding that things which are homogeneous 
possess equal characters, opposes an argument by attributing 
non-eternality to all things, the opposition will be called 
“ balancing the non-eternality.’ — 32.’ 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

If sound is non-eternal on account of its being homogeneous with 
a pot which is non-eternal, it will follow as a consequence that all things 
are non-eternal because they are in some one or other respect homogeneous 
with the pot — a cousequonce which will render all inferences impossible 
for want of heterogeneous examples. This sort of opposition is called 
“ balancing the non-eternal” which seeks to counteract an argument on 
the alleged ground that all iliingsare non-eternal. 

* i ? i \\ ii 

33. The opposition, we say, is unfounded because 
nothing can he established from a mere homogeneity and 
because there is homogeneity even with that which is oppos- 
ed.— 33. 

The Naiyayika says : — 

We cannot ascertain the character of a thing from its mere homo- 
geneity with another thing : in doing so we must consider the logical 
connection between the reason and the predicate. Sound, for instance, 
is non-eternal not merely because it is homogeneous with a non-eternal 
pot but because there is a universal connection between “ being a pro- 
duct” and “ being non-eternal.” Hence it will be unreasonable to 
conclude that all things are non-eternal simply because they are homo- 



THE NYAYA-SDTRAS. 161 

geneous with a non-eternal pot in some one or other respect. Similarly 
a mere homogeneity of all things with the eternal sky in some one or 
other respect, does not prove all things to be eternal. The opposition 
called “ balancing the non-eternal ” is therefore not founded on a sound 
basis. * 

=5r ftwrarw#! surras wfo 

n vt. i % i 11 

34. There is, we say, no non-distinction, becan.se the 
reason is known to be the character which abides in the 
example as conducive to the establishment of the predicate 
and because it is applied in both ways. — 34. 

The Naiyityika says that we are not justified in concluding that 
all things aro non-eternal because there is no character in respect of 
which “ all things ” may be homogeneous with a pot. In order to arrive 
at a correct conclusion we must consider the reason as being that 
character of the example (and consequently of the subject) Which bears 
a universal connection with the character of the predicate. The pot 
possesses tio such character iu common with “all things.” The reason 
moreover is applied in the homogeneous as well as in the heterogeneous 
ways. We cannot draw a conclusion from a mere ■ homogeneity of the 
subject with tho example in a certain respect. The opposition called 
“ balancing the non-eternal ” is therefore unreasonable. 

ftw r fii wu re re P igi : u * i ? i mi 

35. If one opposes an argument by attributing eter- 
nality to all non-eternal things on the ground of these being 
eternally non-eternal, the opposition will be called “balanc- 
ing the eternal.” — 35. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 
because it is a product, 

like a pot. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus You say 
that sound is non-eternal. Does this non-eternality exist in sound always 
or only sohietimes ? If the non-eternality exists always , the sound must 
also be always existent, or in other words, sound is eternal. If the non- 
eternality exists only sometimes , then too the sound must in the absence 



162 BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

of nott-eternality be pronounced to be eternal. This sort of opposition; 
is called “balancing the eternal” which counteracts an argument by 
setting up eternality as a balance against it. 

siWlWTR: II v. i \ i H II 

36. This is, we say, no opposition because the thing 
opposed is always non-eternal on account of the eternality of 
the non-eternal. — 36. 

The Naiyayika says 

By speaking of eternality of the non-eternal you have admitted 
sound to be always non-eternal and cannot now deny its non-pternality. 
The eternal and non-eternal are incompatible with each other : by admit- 
ting that sound is non-eternal you are precluded from asserting that it 
is also eternal. Hence “ balancing the eternal ” is not a sound opposi- 
tion. 

a m ? i V9 u 

37. If one opposes an argument by showing the 
diversity of the effects of effort, the opposition will be called 
“ balancing the effect.” — 37. 

A certain person to prove the non-eternal ity of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

A certain other person offers a futile opposition thus : — 

The effect of effort is found to be of two kinds, viz. (1) the produc- 
tion of something which was previously non-existent, e.g. a pot, anti 
(2) the revelation of something already existent, e.g. water in a well. 
Is sound an effect of the first kind or of the second kind ? If sound is an 
effect of the first kind it will be non-eternal but if it is of the second 
kind it will be eternal. Owing to this diversity of the effects of effort, 
it is not possible t,o conclude that sound is non-eternal. This sort of 

opposition is called “ balancing the effect.” 

tv ,, v , ■ _r\ ’■v 

II V. I 
l I ^ U 

38. Effort did not give rise to the second kind of 
effect, because there was no cause of non-perception. — 38. 



THE ^Y&YArSttTRAS. 163 

The NaiyAyika answers the opposition called “ balancing .the effect” 
as follows : — , ■ 

We cannot say that sound is revealed by our effort because we are 
unable to prove that it existed already. That sound did not exist 
previously is proved by our non-perception of the same at the time. You 
cannot say that our non-perception was caused by a veil because veil 
covered sound. Hence sound is an effect which is not reveled but 
produced. 

UURt II * I ? I U II 

39. The same defect, we say, attaches to the opposi- 
tion too. — 39. 

A certain person argued : — 

Sound is non-etern.al, 
because it is an effect of effort. 

A certain other person opposed it saying that sound would not be 
non-eternal if “effect ” meant a thing revealed. 

The NaiyAyika observes that if an argument is to bfe set aside 
owing to an ambiguous meaning of the word “effect”, why is not the 
opposition too set aside on the same ground ? The reason in the argu- 
ment is as erratic as that in the opposition. Just as there is no special 
ground to suppose that the “ effect ” in the argument signified “ a thing 
produced and not revealed,” so also there is no special ground to suppose 
that the word in the opposition signified “a thing revealed and not 
produced.” .Hence the opposition called “balancing the effect ” is self- 
destructive. 

us s BNn. unit i n 

40. Thus everywhere. — 40. 

If a special meaning is to be attached to the opposition, the same 
meaning will have to be attached to the original argument. In this 
respect there will be an equality of the two sides in the case of all kinds 
of opposition such as “ balancing the homogeneity ” etc. 

a fofrrefrra y N i unit i st n 

41. Defect attaches to the opposition of the opposi- 
tion just as it attaches to the opposition. — 41. 

A certain person to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is non-external, 

because it is an effect of effort. 



m BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

A certain other person, seeing that the effect is o£ diverse kinds 
offers an opposition thus : — 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

(Here “ effect ” may mean “a thing revealed by effort.”) 

The argner replies that sound cannot be concluded to be eternal 
because the reason “ effect ” is erratic (which may mean “ a thing pro- 
duced by effort.”) 

The opponent rises again to say that sound cannot also be conclud- 
ed to be non-eternal because the reason “ effect ” is erratic (which may 
mean a thing revealed by effort). So the defect which is pointed out in 
the case of the opposition, may also be pointed out in the case of the 
opposition of the opposition. 

CN -V * r , T1 . r . v . ■■i fN . 'W , -.f S ..rO^ _ , ■ ■ , > L Ti l.. 

sutrasT sfrawwsruw euni srw- 

sra# umgsuii vi. i \ i it 

42. If one admits the defect of his opposition in 
consequence of his statement that an equal defect attaches 
to the opposition of the opposition, it will he called “ admis- 
sion of an opinion.” — 52. 

A certain person lays down a proposition which is opposed by a cer- 
tain other person. The first person, viz. the disputant charges the opposition 
made by the second person, viz. the opponent, with a defect e.g. that the 
reason is erratic. The opponent instead of rescuing his opposition from the 
defect with which it has been charged by the disputant, goes on charg- 
ing the disputant’s opposition of the opposition with the sarpe defect. 
The counter-charge which the opponent brings in this way is interpreted 
by the disputant to be an admission of the defect pointed out by him. 
The disputant’s reply consisting of this kind of interpretation is called 
“ admission of an opinion.” 

wuww ft ffa II v i \ i »V II 

43. “ Admission of an opinion ” also occurs when the 

disputant instead of employing reasons to rescue his side from 
the defect with which it has been charged, proceeds, to admit 
the defect in consequence of his statement that the same 
defect belongs to his opponent’s side as well. 



THE NYlYA-SUTRAS. 165 

Six-winged disputation (§atpakal kath&). 

Disputant — to prove tlie. non-eternality of sound says : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

This is the first wing. 

Opponent — seeing that the effect is of diverse kinds, offers an 
opposition thus : — 

Sound is eternal, 
because it is an effect of effort. 

(Here “ effect ” means a thing which already existed and is now 
revealed by effort). 

This is the second wing. 

Disputant — seeing that the reason “ effect ” is erratic, charges the 
opposition with a defect thus : — 

Sound is not eternal, 

because it is an effect of effort. 

(Here the reason “ effect” is erratic meaning (L) either a thing that 
did not previously exist and is now produced (2) or a thing .that already 
existed and is now revealed by effort). 

This is the third wing. 

Opponent — finding that the reason “effect,” which is erratic, 
proves neither the eternality nor the non-eternality of sound, brings a 
counter-charge against the disputant thus : — 

Sound is also nob non-eternal, 
because it is an effect of effort. 

He alleges that the defect ( oiz . the erratieity of the reason) with 
which his opposition (oiz. sound is eternal) is charged, also attaches to 
the opposition of the opposition made by the disputant (viz. sound is not 
eternal or non-eternal). 

This is tho fourth wing. 

Disputant — finding that the counter-charge brought against him 
amounts to his opponent’s admission of self-defect says : — 

The opponent by saying that “ sound is also not non-eternal ” 
has admitted that it is also not eternal. In other words the counter-charge 
has proved the charge, that is, it has indicated that the opponent admits 
the disputant’s opinion. 

This is the fifth wing. 

Opponent — finding that the disputant instead of rescuing his 
argument .from the counter-charge has taken shelter under his opponent’s 
admission of the charge says : — 

The disputant by saying that “sound is also not eternal” has 
admitted that it is also not non-eternal. Xu other words, if the counter- 



166 BOOK V, CHAPTER I. 

charge proves the charge, the reply to the counter-charge proves th6 
counter-charge itself. 

This is the sixth wing. 

The first, third and fifth wings belong to the disputant while the 
second, fourth and sixth to the opponent. The sixth wing is a repetition 
of the fourth while the fifth wing is a repetition of the third. The sixth 
wing is also a repetition of the meaning of the fifth wing. The third and 
fourth wings involve the defect of “ admission of an opinion.” All the 
wings except the first three are unessential. 

The disputation would have come to a fair close at the third wing 
if the disputant had pointed out that the word “ effect ” had a special 
meaning'; vis., a thing which did not previously exist but was produced. 

The disputant and the opponent instead of stopping at the proper 
limit has carried on their disputation through six wings beyond which no 
further wing is possible. After the six-winged disputation has been 
carried on, it becomes patent that neither the disputant nor the opponent 
is a fit person to be argued with. 



THE NYAYA-S0TRAS. W 


Book V. — Chapter II. 

st fanf i fa ; sfagreu sfosnfafbr. 

^.run'iiW ft<4^afe^rai*iMMi^s 9i a5 i re i *gt- 
g ^T E ^g ffl q^H^nwa f rW T Pr^vt *ra^tr 

Pi l«i«itam;j<ibita v i (till'd) %?^TW- 

wsr Pw^qre i Pi it *. i * i % it 

1. The occasions for rebuke are the following : — 
1. Hurting the proposition, 2. Shifting the proposi- 
tion, ,3. Opposing the proposition, 4. Renouncing the pro- 
position, 5. Shifting the reason, 6. Shifting the topic, 
7. The meaningless, 8. The unintelligi ble, 9. The incoherent, 
10. The inopportune, 11. Saying too" little, 12. Saying 
too much, 13. Repetition, 14. Silence, 15. Ignorance, 
16. Non-ingenuity, 17. Evasion, 18. Admission of an 
opinion, 19. Overlooking the censurable, 20. Censuring 
the non-censurable, 21. Deviating from a tenet, and 
22. The semblance of a reason. — 44. 


The definition of “ an occasion tor robuko” lias been given in apho- 
rism 1-2-19. “ An occasion for rebuke” which is the same as “ a ground 
of defeat”, “ a place of humiliation” or “a point of disgrace” arises generally 
in connection with tho proposition or any other part of an argument and 
may implicate any disputant whether lie is a discutient, wrangler or 
caviller. 


an^rrfT^r: n * m > n 

2. “ Hurting the proposition” occurs when one admits 

in one’s own example the character of a counter-example. 
—45. 

A disputant argues as follows 

Sound is non-eternal, 

Because it is cognisable by sense, 

Whatever is cognisable by sense is non-eternal 

as a pot, 

Sound is cognisable by sense, 

Therefore sound is non-eternal. 


22 



168 BOOK V, CHAPTER n. 

A certain other person offers an opposition thus : — 

A genus (e.g., potness or pot*type), which is cognisable by sense, 
is found to be eternal, why cannot then the sound which is also 
cognisable by sense, be eternal ? 

The disputant being thus opposed says : — 

Whatever is cognisable by sense is eternal 

as a pot, 

Sound is cognisable by sense, 

Therefore sound is eternal. 

By thus admitting in his example (pot) the character of a counter- 
example (genus or type;, he has hurt his own proposition (viz. sound is 
non-eternal). A person who hurts his proposition in this way deserves 
nothing but rebuke. 

C ^ CfN _ Ctw _ 

STlaqU- 

l II * I * I ^ II 

3. “ Shifting the proposition ” arises when a proposi- 

tion being opposed one defends it by importing a new 
character to one’s example and counter-example. — 46. 

A certain person argues as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense 
like a pot. 

A certain other person offers an opposition thus : — 

Sound is eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense like a genus (or type). 

The first person in order to defend himself says that a genus (or type) 
and a pot are both cognisable by sense, yet one is all-pervasive and 
the other is not so : hence the sound which is likened to a pot is non- 
all-pervasively non-eternal. 

The’ defence thus made involves a change of proposition. The 
proposition originally laid down was : — 

Sound is nbn-eternal, 
while the proposition now defended is : 

Sound is non-all-pervasively non-eternal. 

A person who shifts his proposition in this way is to be rebuked 
ki as au$ph as lie has not relied upon his original reason and example. 



THE NYAYA-SttTHAS. 169 ? 

sifaitfedst h x ( \ i * u 

4. “ Opposing the proposition” occurs when the 
proposition and its reason are opposed, to each other. — 47. 

Substance is distinct frora,quality, 

because lt is perceived to be non-distiuct from colour etc. 

In this argument it is to be observed that if substance is distinct 
from quality, it must also be distinct from colour etc. which constitute the 
quality. The reason olz. substance is non-iistinet from colour etc., is opposed 
to the proposition, oiz. substance is distinct from quality. A person .who 
thus employs a reason whtch opposes his proposition is to be rebuked as 
a fool. 

iRrsjfa^ uftnrrarormtf ii * i * m » 

5. A proposition being opposed if one disclaims its 
import, it will be called “ renouncing the proposition.” — 48. 

A certain person argues as follows : — 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense, 

A certain other person offers an opposition thus : — 

Just as a genus (or type) is cognisable by sense and is hot yet non- 
eternal, so a sound is cognisable by sense and is jiot yet non-eternal. The 
first person, as a defence against the opposition, disclaims the meaning of 

his proposition thus : 

“ Who says that sound is non-eternal ? 

This sort of denial of the import of one’s own proposition is called 
“ renouncing the proposition ” which rightly furnishes an occasion for 

rebuke. 

V. I S I * II 

6. “ Shifting the reason” occurs when the reason of 
a general character being opposed one attaches a'fpgQigl 
character to it. — 49. 

A certain person, to prove the non-eternality of sound, argues as 

follows : — * 

Sound is non-eternal, 

because it is cognisable by sense. 



lfO BOOK V, CHAPTER It 


A certain other person sayB that sound cannot be proved to be 
non-eternal through the mere reason of its being cognisable by sense, just 
as a genus (or type) such as pot-ness (or pot-type' is cognisable by sense 
and is not yet non-eternal. 

The first person defends lwmseif by saying that the reason,., viz. 
being cognisable by sense, is to be understood as signifying that which 
comes under a genus (or type) and is as such cognisable by sense. 
Sound comes under the genus (or type) “sotmdness” and iB at the same 
time cognisable by sense ; but a genus or type such as pot-ness or pot- 
type does not come under another genus or type (such as pot-ness-nesB 
or pot-type-type) though it is cognisable by sense. Such a defence, which 
consists in shifting one’s reason, rightly furnishes an occasion for 
rebuke. 


h vi i * i « ii 

7. “ Shifting the topic” is an argument which setting 

aside the real topic introduces one which is irrelevant. — 50. 

A certain person, to prove the eternal ity of sound, argues as 
follows : — 

Sound is eternal (proposition), 

. because it is intangible (reason). 


• ’ Being opposed by a certain other person he attempts, in the absence 
of any other resource, to defend his position as follows : — 

Iletu, which is the Sanskrit equivalent for “reason,” is a word derived 
from the root “hi” with the suffix “tu”. A word, as a part of a speech, may 
be n noun, a verb, a prefix or an indeclinable. A noun is defined as etc. etc. 

The defence made in this way furnishes an instance of defeat 
through non-rclevaney. The person who makes it deserves ‘rebuke. 


/ 



II * | * | q || 


8. “The meaningless” is an argument which is based 
on a non-sensical combination of letters into a series. — 51. 

A certain person, to prove the eternal ity of sound, argues as 
follows : — ^ 

Sound is eternal, 

because k, c, t, t and p are j, v, g, d and d, 

like jh, bh, gh, dh and dh. * 


As the letters k, c, t etc. convey no meaning, the person who employs 
them in his argument deserves rebuke. #> 



THE NyAya-SOTEAS. 


lututulilt fcumtEdtiil id mji. 


v. \ * i * u 

9. “ The rniintelligible” is an argument, which al- 
though repeated three times, is understood neither by the 
audience nor by the opponent. — 52. 

A certain person being opposed by another person and finding no 
means oE self-defence, attempts to hide his inability in disputation by 
using words of double entendre or words not in ordinary use or words 
very quickly uttered which as such are understood neither by Iris opponent 
nor by the audience although they are repeated three times. This sort of 
defence is called “ the unintelligible” which rightly furnishes an occasion 
for rebuke. 

10. “ The incoherent” is an argument which conveys 
no connected meaning on account of the words being strung 
together without any syntactical order. — 53. 

A certain person being opposed by another person and finding no 
other means of self-defence, argues as follows : — 

Ten pomegranates, six cakes, a bowl, goat’s skin and a lump of 
sweets. 

This sort of argument, which consist of a series of unconnected 
words, is called “ the incoherent ” which rightly presents on occasion 
for rebuke. 

ii vm =u ?? ii 

11. “ The inopportune” is an argument the parts of 
which are mentioned without any order of precedence. — 54. 

A certain person, to prove that the hill lias fire, argues as follows : — 

The hill has fire (proposition'. 

Whatever has smoko has fire, as a kitchen (example). 

Because it lias smoke (reason). 

The hill has fire (conclusion). 

The hill has smoke (application)/, 

This sort of argument is called “ the inopportune” which rightly 
presents an occasion for rebuke. Since the meaning of an argument is 
affected by the order in which its parts are arranged, the person who 
overlooks the order cannot establish' his conclusion and is therefore 
rebuked. 


lit BOOK % CHAPTER It 

gpa. ii v i $ 1 ii 

12. If an argument lacks even one of its parts, it is 
called “ saying too little.” — 55. 

The following is an argument which contains all its five parts: — 

1. The hill has fire (proposition), 

2. Because it has smoke (reason), 

3. All that has smoke has fire, as a kitchen (example), 

4. The hill lias smoke (application), 

5. Therefore the hill has fire (conclusion). 

As all the five parts or members are essential, a person who omits 
even one of them should be scolded as “ saying too little.” 

ii v i =i i n ii 

13. “ Saying too much ” is an argument which consists 
of more than one reason or example. — 56. 

A certain person, to prove that the hill has fire, argues as follows : — 
The hill has fire (proposition), 

Because it lias smoke (reason ), 

’And because it has light (reason), 
like a kitchen (example), 
and like a furnace (example), 

In this argument the second reason and the second example are 
redundant. 

A person, who having promised to argue in the proper way (accord- 
ing to the established usage), employs more than one reason or example 
is to be rebuked as “ saying too much.” 

flwnfcrh ii vi * i '*« ii 

14. “ Repetition ” is an argument in which (except in 
the case of reinculcation) the word or the meaning is said 
over again. — 57. 

Repetition of the word — Sound is non-eternal, 
sound is non- eternal. 

Repetition o^ the meaning —Sound is non-eternal, 

echo is perishable, what is heard is impermanent, etc. 

A person who unnecessarily commits repetition is to be rebuked 
as a fool. 

Reinculcation has been explained in aphorism 2-1-66. 



THE NYAYA-SOTRAS. lfr 

U**TO.I§Wt^ II H HI. t* II 

15. In reineuleation there is no repetition in as much 
as a special meaning is deduced from the word which is 
repeated. — 58. 

The hill has fire (proposition), 

Because it has smoke (reason \ 

All that has smoke has fire 

as a kitchen (example), 

The hill has smoke (application), 

Therefore the hill has fire (conclusion). 


In this argument the “conclusion” is a mere repetition of the 
“ proposition ” and yet it serves a special purpose. 

Wq fensre i n * i r i H u 

16. “ Repetition ” consists also in mentioning a thing 

by name although the thing has been indicated through 
presumption. — 59. 

“A thing possessing the character of a product is non-eternal ” 
—this is a mere repetition of the following : — 

“ A thing not possessing the character of a product is not non- 
eternal.” 





jra. ii ini s's ii 

17. “Silence” is an occasion for rebuke which 
arises when the opponent makes no reply to a proposition 
although it has been repeated three times by tie disputant 
within the knowledge of the audience. — 60. 

How can a disputant carry on his argument if his opponent main- 
tains an attitude of stolid silence? The opponent is therefore to be 
rebuked. 

gi ft g raw njt raa ii \ i j i % c ii 

18. “ Ignorance ” is the non-understanding of a 
proposition. — 61. 

Ignorance is betrayed by the opponent who does not understand a 
proposition although it has been repeated three times within the know- 



m BOOK V, CHAPTER II 


ledge of the audience. How can an opponent refute a proposition the 
meaning of which lie cannot understand ? He is to be rebuked for his 
ignorance. 


n II ^ I H I ^ v || 

19. “ Non-ingenuity ” consists in one’s inability to 

hit upon a reply. — 62. 


A certain person lays down a proposition. If his opponent under- 
stands it and yet cannot hit upon a reply, he is to be scolded as wanting 
in ingenuity. 


saneifig; fNta im 11 

20. “ Evasion ” arises if one stops an argument in 

the pretext of going away to attend another business. — 63. 

A certain person having commenced a disputation in which he 
finds it impossible to establish his side, stops its further progress by 
saying that lie has to go away on a veiy urgent business. He who stops 
the disputation in this way courts defeat and humiliation through 
evasion. 


21. “ The admission of an opinion ” consists in charg- 
ing the opposite side with a defect by admitting that the 
same defect exists in one’s own side. — 64. 

A certain person addressing another person says: — “You are a 
thief.” 

The other person replies : — “ You too are a thief.” 

This person, instead of removing the charge brought against him, 
throws the same charge on the opposite side whereby he admits that the 
charge against himself is true. This sort of counter-charge or reply is 
an instance of “ admission of an opinion ” which brings disgrace on the 
person who makes it. 

* i * rh ii 

22. “ Overlooking the censurable ” consists in not 
rebuking a person who deserves rebuke. — 65. 

It is not at all unfair to censure a person who argues in a way which 
furnishes an occasion for censure. Seeing that the person himself does 
not confess his short-coming, it is the duty of the audience to pass a 



ttfiE tfrAYA-StJTRAS. lIS 

Vote of, censure on him. If the audience failed to do their duty they 
would earn rebuke for themselves; on account of their “over-looking the 
censurable.” 

* i * i n 

23. “ Censuring the non-censurable” consists in 
rebuking a person who does not deserve rebuke. — 66. 

A person brings discredit on himself if he rebukes a person who does 
not deserve rebuke. 

« hr i ii 

24. A person who after accepting a tenet departs 
from it in the course of his disputation, is guilty of 
“ deviating from a tenet.’’ — 67. 

A certain person promises to carry on his argument in consonance 
with the Sankhya philosophy which lays down that (1) what is existent 
never becomes non-existent, and (2) what is non-existent never comes into 
existence etc. A certain other person opposes him by saying that all human 
activity would be impossible if the thing now non-existent could not 
come into existence in the course of time and that no activity would cease 
if what is existent now could continue for ever. If the first person being 
thus opposed admits that existence springs from non-existence and non- 
existence from existence, then lie will rightly deserve rebuke for his 
deviation from the accepted tenet. 

n * i r i w ii 

25. “ The fallacies of a reason” already explained do 
also furnish occasions for rebuke. — 68. 

From aphorism 1-2-4 it is evident that the fallacies are mere 
semblances of a reason. A person who employs them in a disputation do 
certainly deserve rebuke. 

There .are infinite occasions for rebuke of which only twenty-two 
have been enumerated here. 




Alphabetical Index to the Sutras. 


iii 2 

iv 1 


PAGE 

77 106 
67 126 




Gft: 

ii 

i 

44 

35 

wa arvlsfi fafaaaaata aSa'af 

«n «s 

'mm 

- 



await a 

i 

i 

5 

3 

dvairoj favni faqaarcaa 

iv 

i 

61 

124 

aramaiqaiafo: 

ii 

2 

28 

50 

aaalwraafoaRaraia . . . 

ii 

2 

4 

44 

nfifta: 

iv 

2 

25 

132 


WV e r w rfVF ^ n 3SjTVHpKiqni|qitflV- 

vfrt: ii 2 54 57 

atSnfOT^ Pi^r- 

. v 2 23 175 

■o • • • * ' 

«fvrVr^§T^^a37VTO(|at3i: sn^- 

aa ... ... iii 2 25 90 

*fafanm ai«'2aiaw D aT%- 


saia 

iv 1 22 

112 

• >1 mfwifcfaFtr arniPi frtia : 

iv 1 23 

113 

wRjpt fiaaraiPiaa: 

ii 2 57 

58 

wawaHafari: 


WPaavai^ialw: ... 

v 1 22 

155 

aaq«*aiwagai^w»fr$3: 

ii 1 22 

49 


v 1 30 

159 

aaaqaaEt^aqvrfsv^TaniTawyptfFi' 


vytavata ... 

ii 2 21 

49 

sgqi^ fqvww' ajs^i«jRl^V 



raWw; 

v 2 15 

173 

*r*ai%raror*t ... 

ii 1 61 

40 




^rwfiv: » 

iii 1 36 

71 

aifywfcffl: vrPWtv: 

i 2 5 

15 

ail4j*WJ WWiRWI^ 


«rp 5 wiara: 

iv 2 20 

131 


nrara: ... n 6 

. . . iii l 

areftRjaxvawaa afjjil'aiOqvavvv- 
wRigaa: ... ... i 1 

araavstSla stag: ... iv 2 

sjwrchaTJHT oj5 - 

airsreaft’rc: ... iii 1 


ii 2 32 51 
ii l 15 66 


i 1 31 10 

iv 2 43 137 


jfiTsreafe'rc: ... iii 1 64 78 

asttfafera a forara-msm- 

ajjra ... iii 2 7 85 

aiaraarai^ a laaTsraaif: iii 2 5 84 

ainaa spgrrr aiiaPTOjawc'tii ttRJlm- 

... ... iii 1 44 73 


... ... in 1 

arniaift^Rfir^aq^Mg- 

afara ... iv 1 

aiRsra) ■atRiaiam ... iii 1 

sawn ... ... ii 2 

ai*ax)?a aira^ %vavata. . . ii 1 
aia%r saxsaspaifHnawxja- 

awi ... iii 1 

’SHto’rn^Tjfaaif^a $Tnrvat%r- 

vi&: ... iv 2 

a a l Ej mn ja valna^ v 2 

awnfro: HiansKisN^T- 

afiwa: ... v 1 


14 110 
42 73 

30 51 

60 40 


iii 1 23 69 


42 137 
16 173 


21 155 
3 44 


iii 2 62 102 


iimaarif sujwwm+h^j: iii 1 10 


smt’orv-'i 

araaapatiaPl 


wRww n ^ iv 5 
❖japsw: 
Mliawa VTW’Pl 


V 2 11 171 

iv 2 12 129 

v 2 15 130 
rawrar- 

i 1 40 13 

v 2 18 173 



page 


< ii ) 


ft. fcca>« r. > 

wvHnifnfi 

... i 2 12 18 

**$: ... i 2 17 19 

nftK^niT %th sfifagf fai)«i front 

... • • • v 2 6 1 G9 

^suwwjro! ••* iii 2 47 98 

* ifwci* tmttntr 

Shfiwri: iii 1 38 72 

'»•>* ”'«nnf*» «wlwflfnr|Tai 

rant: ... ii 1 4 23 

sr^jrifigi>?fw5tPi mni- 

W: ... iv 2 22 132 

itnjf: ... ii 2 35 52 

nront qfft «n*«wq%r- 
rofc ... ii 2 9 15 

(«w5m ... ... ii 2 23 50 

... ii 2 39 53 

VI. 

... iv 2 18 131 

w«irara3»mrt nt ... iv 2 19 131 
•3tf»f?i^tm%r.tw ... ii 2 70 01 

^rstara win- 


ds': ... ii 2 65 60 

&ronfiiT 3 : ... iv 1 10 109 


... iii 2 32 92 

wmSft%«n&tf3pw tudf^rntw- 
qqragiwwif^ nSfcrg i 1 9 4 

gpiwf5«i: ... ... iii 1 49 74 

wf^nro^: Wwirw^im sfro? 

^ ifiram t n ... ... iii 1 47 74 


VtTO| 


>.. ii 2 14 47 

... i 1 7 4 


vroi: ... ii 1 52 37 

... iv 1 51 121 


PAGE 

ftfn ... i 1 10 5 

vr^wrcferan ... Hf 1 12 66 

t ifr ytr ira t jcw n ... iii 1 58 77 

s fWpff iiq fiwi ' trt m' iwwqq^Pisi- 
froR spreror*!^ 

stttrag. ... i 1 4 2 

sBftrerebnniri?- 

rotrt: ... iii 2 22 89 

>Cl 

i 

f*|T: ypwmhRtt- 

tpihtn ... iv 1 19 112 

<r 

gm «m tfa q f m nftirct .. , v 2 19 174 

swr^api^wn ... iv 1 46 120 

Sg: ... i 1 34 11 

*Sr*vRfi'f?TW «I fltlffl tff 

swShnpra: ... i 1 38 12 

aqqfmratwjgvT^-- 

jrfa^t: ... v 1 26 158 

gronw qffa^t- 

to: ... iii 2 72 105 

... ii 1 50 37 

g«renro^ 'ttgqes^’Wrni^- 

nq^i: ... ii 2 36 52 

snwtSfiqqmqqfonn: ... v 1 25 157 

snrewn: v 1 16 .153 

stra^i: ... ii 2 29 51 


n*i?Hra: ... iv 1 59 123 


qup wf qq m fa ifi sW^qs^m^at- 
3mqw<fal |q g n: ... v * 1 23 156 

_ f?- . *"v a*. Si - .** - - 

WWPl IgflWraWjT- 

n" q>?q^ iii 1 9 65 



( 

PAOE 

swu ... iv 2 11 129 

vteRSRw’Ciw’^fljjwrenwf wjj- 

q*f»*: iii 1 GO 79 

injn: ... iii 2 71 104 

ffrgqqirwfqi^reiif^: iii 2 59 102 

*». 

*55: 

jjwi: . iii 1 37 72 

«*<kmriH«ilFBsp!: ... iii 2 1 83 

... iii 2 45 98 

«*rfwqqfii) ... ii 2 18 48 

ismmreh^R v 1 28 158 

qmi«mi§m™Tfc ftwj; v 2 20 174 

W»: v 1 38 162 

« «n * w w l3 g: qnanfm: ... i 2 9 17 

*»: v 1 5 145 

... iii 2 39 95 


w: iv 2 7 128 

mfnfroi ^1- 


WW: 

iii 

1 30 

70 


iii 

2 55 

100 

SSEf^l ftfilwtiqwfcMnjV- 




wfN: 

iv 

2 13 

129 

. —./'•* . — . . *\ . . 

... 

iv 

1 18 

110 

JisqqRiMiiqj'iq^ugq^ ... 

iii 

2 6 

84 





... 

V 

1 24 

156 

%rqf^nHTOrmw&: Wvg}- 




iii 

2 18 

88 

•j\6qqT^ qnqqfjqRTa'w^wf- 






iii 

2 14 

87 


iv 

2 40 

137 


*»» \ 

m ) 

•** 

*T- 

PAOE 

!N: iii 1 60 77 

**»W0«pR#«wEPii nww: 

qfiwi: iii 1 64 78 

•wwpww: qfq w nfqy t - 

... • ... i 1 14 5 

ii 2 59 58 

«nfni^rfal|<rn9< i lg : ... v 1 3 141 

«r. 

jrfa^»: v 1 8 148 

yta: i 1 12 5 

Jifivj. ... i 1 11 5 

3T. 

q ii fi fa ifi ’mfapmj ... ii 1 57 39 

iii 2 36 94 

wi^pnH^ 111 17 67 

wm*: ■•• ...iv 2 47 138 

«nifsi{pqi3En*pft ’n»ra^M: ii 1 23 29 

ii Hfa w w i < 5 ? wni#i- 

”• ••• v 1 31 159 

wwfry mg %q q fM«t« i »w : 

*yg?iffm vpqpvfh: iii 2 26 91 

■ mftmq n fo ... iii 2 60 102 

a. 

i rfw i ^ ii: ... iv 1 21 112 

Tifwiftn nrawi qpi w q wqm nc- 

i 2 11 18 

w^pct Tp^ftBjOjf'wwrara iv 1 3 108 

qqRi: ... ... iv 2 37 136 

nw«iwrtwT^ i wli i H wi qHKwn: ; ii 2 16 48 

■ »- * « - *v 

IfflWWWJNN WMW* 

4iw^4wi< ‘ qpsqw- 

wwtmn iv 2 50 139 






PAGE 

wwreireSl m n q&nwfv 






ii 

ii 

1 14 

2 6 

26 

AK 

5r««P c vim qiwfiremfrq its- 

' V» 

40 



qyrere: ••• 

iv 

1 54 

122 


ii 

2 10 

46 

wqrmmiaiqwg^oiti^mMn : 

ii 

l 5 

23 

iwt ^rei: 

w qwijffliRji qtreSrirerW 

iv 

1 2 

108 



v 

1 13 

151 

?rei 

i 

1 35 

11 

;reissqiTnt 

iii 

2 68 

104 

^ „ . » r~~ *v tr n 

ii 

1 48 

36 

.HfRRtfi^'alreqq: 

i 

1 22 

7 


sv&i 

ftmspm iv 

agyrawk^g: ... ...iii 

5?wt vrfijws- 

ii 

i^^rraismn ... ... iv 

flirwa^sR ?rfw- 
rei?qra ... ... iii 

wpn% rewqwrn 
^iW: ii 

5*$i«i<wn%«(» ’i *t*re: ... ii 
8g$' qqf’foreTMmnprerqir^r ^reigi- 
THiwfq's^Mnl: ... iv 

wmn^fTPJitiTrafinT^qvT- 
, wmw: ••• ... ii 

i^nw: .. iv 

tffiFiwr^sfq 3^L ^,. iii 

: ... iii 


iii 2 73 105 


1 27 113 


1 29 

2 20 

1 33 

2 27 

1 58 

2 45 


2 33 
1 24 


iv 


fljqwfSqfriiiflTSsijjq^qwtfn iii 
Nfywnqr jqtwireqfiftqira ii 


61 

5 

21 

14 

28 

75 

20 

49 


159 

49 
71 

50 

39 

137 

64 

52 

29 


2 46 138 


59 

128 

89 

66 

133 

81 

21 

56 


nfg ft remf n « ireftil%qw ) n - 

m: ii 1 18 

mfvfatgr Graftal ... i 1 37 

^awmrii g wiwb ... iii 1 71 


frftvi; ... „. iii 1 3 

w«-3 wwfwld : 

Kgs-ti: ... ... i 

flfifiri fTOstfei: ... iv 

w tKre qr fr qfomroft 

... ... 11 

fly <S*3T a 4 f<md IV 

qiVrefiftq: iii 

r< 

RvwTftT^it^n ... iv 

^ mwspnf ... iii 

^ twstw: ... ii 

wur #imi#iii- 
?ren: ... ... iv 

'TOnriwHMra: ... iv 

rkTre^iH ... ii 

nqsr?!traf?ft'«q a^^RFife- 
ijmfFcg' : .. ... ii 

aWnRg*: nfiftwrefn: ii 
n'sswfSg' ifrerfoysre: ... v 

5isnwrf^- 
... iii 
^rewfrwi- 

grof®*?: iii 

. . _ , iii 



1 26 
2 3 

1 40 

1 31 

2 37 

2 48 

1 73 

2 60 

1 6 
2 8 
1 27 


15 

12 

18 


2 56 


1 54 
1 52 


in 

nwj: ii 

Trent ?icprwninn^sre: i 

wwR 4 ii < i( 5 j ... iv 

^grjferHi (•ntregfitW- 

yrefri: ... iii 

iii 


2 

58 


1 50 
1 11 


PAGE 

27 

12 

81 

63 

8 

127 

34 

114 

94 

138 

81 

59 

109 

128 
30 

27' 

26 

153 

101 

. 76 
75 


63 

29 

2 

122 

75 

65 



( V ) 


w<w i «w S »rm ctiwih 

.... v 1 9 


PAGE 


148 


n WMWwntn vi^r $*- 
MHTWI ^l»M<BW*niI- 


R5l<?: 

V 

1 34 

161 

^reRRifi ^ti^it Rwr *tj- 
WWT’. 

iv 

2 2 

127 

PreRt: 

iv 

2 1 

127 


iii 

1 35 

71 

jjaifiraft mifoRH:- 

fiwsf: 

ii 

2 45 

55 

otw: 

iii 

2 50 

99 


«T. 

•«tw?rfn|5 ! 5^’iprstra^M 3 toc- 


stBtt^ 

i 

2 14 

19 

•stTsrewStwo'sre 

ii 

1 35 

33 

ST. 




=t TOnffsfr^rest^jhnt 

iii 

2 74 

105 

*t flfej'sttStst^wHTct 

ii 

1 59 

39 

st ^tfnrstrare. . , 

ii 

2 24 

50 

*[ 

iv 

1 42 

118 

st SBtstlwMi^'qsitre 

iii 

1 6 

1 ATZ 

04 

rj A 

st J^^tVTtftftreqsi^Kttffl^ss: 

iii 

1 45 

74 

»ffli ■VfSWSfCRst^IJ <fq . . , 

iii 

1 43 

73 

t jfi'spjsst^: s^treifw-'TO 

iv 

1 05 

125 

«t sisswrat^ 

iii 

2 8 

85 

st tj5T?! trerPNr? : 

iv 

1 12 

110 


«gsrera$ ... ... ii 2 15 47 

st ^yg ^f^w i ^ iqir w wrvmpiT- 

srere ii 2 1 43 

ii www: ...- ... iv 2 10 129 

«t ii 1 32 32 

st a yra wrc m ii 2 63 GO 

st «% fr f r « nw iii 1 59 77 

n tn^ w wn n i hH ... i 2 16 19 

si tmytfflw t w p w : ... iii 2 30 92 

st fr n CT w wfrq i wto g tjt ••• iv 1 8 109 


»t fwnirart Hiftrwi 
»t sure: vfi’P’isismvwi- 
y**"! 

si TOJtwn^rerfi: 
st sjrfi'qtoiilt: Ttresjnwm... 
st ti« t fnw( n: 

*t WrSltft? SntWfll^tjlWFWinj 

*t 

st jt^frt; tr Ew s -MP tra 
tfr^STO 

T^re: 

St ff l M^ a twm . . 

st 3 »TC^Sl?»TO!*r: 

*i <r<ittasjiyf9fE : 

»t stsprrefwat^iitfig'.' . . . 
st&ws^stTyrqn: 

»t flsps&siftsfwiH: 
st fwre^antft; 
st aptwstsptn: 

>4 

«t siijsi^mMs r ; 

st viwrsft?Tq' H t mH) i t t 

st tresi*T W j 5t ^' : 

SJ ■>» 

st sjj^ifilw?m3tsiT?ri5jrn 
st flrswstrsta ... 

»t restfiwra^re fiswtrere 
st «<|t<(i'nslwR»'tts: ... 

st wwdrfs t s rera 
st *spt: ytflatEiWM t a 
st ^wsRrfss^fw'stnt . . . 
st ^rerafig'stlqtsti^ 
st $n?t: ^tvF« 5 ' wM5«nfi?§: 
st^nstrare 
«wgrt t ssttsreirejfre 





PAGE 

iv 

2 44 

137 

iii 

2 16 

88 

iii 

2 52 

100 

iii 

1 69 

80 

iv 

1 20 

112 

ii 

1 31 

32 

ii 

1 19 

28 

iv 

2 16 

130 

iv 

1 64 

125 

iiinnS' 

iii 

1- 

1 62 

78 

iii 

2 4 

84 

iii 

2 61 

102 

iii 

1 53 

76 

iii 

1 40 

72 

iii 

2 58 

101 

ii 

2 11 

46 

ii 

2 46 

55 

iv 

l 17 

111 

iii 

1 2 

63 

iv 

1 33 

115 

iii 

1 74 

81 

iv 

1 45 

119 

iii 

1 05 

79 

iv 

1 68 

126 

iii 

1 27 

69 

iii 

2 66 

103 

ii 

1 56 

39 

iv 

1 56 

122 

iii 

2 31 

92 

iii 

1 13 

66 

iv 

1 39 

117 

iv 

I 38 

117 

v 

1 19 

154 

iii 

2 10 

85 

iii 

2 78 

106 

ii 

2 67 

61 

ii 

2 25 

50 

ii 

1 41 

34 



( vi ) 


PAGE 
iv 1 10 111 

wyvjfaftai rawtcfes-roj ii 2 44 55 

iruiolflufo^flirr ’rtl ss^ram iii 1 16 07 

*wSi: wwl- 

*rfn: ... ii 1 21 29 

^ foqwfiw^qw ... iv 1 26 113 


iii 1 34 


nrjiu^nirtncWiv: sp^r^n- 


ii 1 67 


... iii 2 27 01 

<n^?« ^ppjwraiq ... iii 1 24 69 

sapwH^mTORJ . . . ii 2 31 51 

, . , ■* <K . , . < ,_ . | n . - 

•ffoifs^ »nw toito 

ii 1 47 36 

whwjto 01 * .. ii 2 7 45 

•«-ftS#w^srra ... ii 1 29 31 

•wWhwwim ... iv 2 39 136 

*tok vi iv 1 48 120 

".. v 2 22 174 

wnrynun: iii 2 76 106 

wrum ... ii 2 52 56 

... ... iv 1 9 109 

6wvil*iNWMnf*W 

... ... v 1 35 161 

f^WBITVprMR qiftwfiwq- 
wrom ... iv 1 28 114 

wft- 

... ii 2 53 57 

tihmfiifr*: ... iv 1 9 109 

•wfifr*: ... iv 1 24 113 

3 af|pw%r ... iii 2 40 95 

%wt* fntjnm: ... iii 1 18 67 

iii 2 12 86 

Pw^jrvfn- 

... ii 2 58 58 


1 35 116 

2 27 01 

l 24 69 


PAdfe-'” 

Rwwram fr j : ... iv 1 43 118 

ffcwpi: ... v 1 27 158 

... iii 1 48 74 


... iii 2 19 89 


wfaw mq m 

ItTfafiT a? : 


%B>f?iiq’tT5ntnSnRi3a'; 


... ii 1 38 33 
.. iv 1 4 108 


... iii 18 65 

... iii 2 23 90 

... iv 1 32 114 

- iii 2 67 103 

••• iii 2 13 87 

- iv 1 30 114 


••• iii 1 21 68 

V^R^wRwflTpW fs'ww- 

^3: ... ii 2 43 54 

q 

vfirsr'Nra: ... v 2 5 169 

ttfgwr: ... iii 1 20 6S 

••• iii 2 38 94 

tc'ww*: • • iv 2 17 131 

... iii 2 42 96 

fandi^n . ... v 2 9 171 

wnfFfH * n»n%wi: sft- 

4R&: ii 1 10 25 

«nftRftrm?NTO*?roft 
’nyrafa: ... . ii 2 37 53 

vrfift ysrwfim»i: ... iii 1 28 70 

r\ p r .. f» - -- - 

■jwjw qtt^f^qnmqqw- 

ftfa* iv 1 53 121 

ywprfh: Smra: ... i 1 19 7 


««wmi ii 1 54 38 

... iii 2 64 103 



( viz ) 


IV 


q pt’s ... iii 

-S'C, r»_ *> ar ...t.,,, 

3 ? Tf snrwrap nt* 3 FJW~ 

firawfa h wwVmI t i : ... ii 1 


2 41 
1 70 


9 


... m 
stn: ... iv 

^Rtsini't&Slr i 

TgsfwfH# ... ii 


it 




1 ]U 

2 9 

1 13 

2 10 
2 7 
2 42 
2 56 


n«t: iii 2 44 



in 


2 34 


wn: i 1 32 

ntwjrarfaft^ vfflftsRsqm^flt- 
ifa: irf it gi^t ^ ... v 2 3 

Hfwsnpfn: nfaw^t^ sffrer- 

fa^re: nfawNnSr^H^av 
fSx^ « n^m?ir9»rn- 
wnupHirei 3^ 

HlCTHyiTH>JHt!r*WlfTOT 

fawfr nainw 

sm^lmnJTRtT 

MW^f"a«wnPi ... v 5 1 

afnwfirtu: v 2 4 

afn g gT wmfay ji ^tstgr^ 
sfnwftpi: ••• v 2 2 

mngn*<wj?*^ 3 W^tggt*ilJtft- 
»fH gg ra frg y% h ht^- 

5tgr»n: ... ••• v 1 11 

■'tftgfS-gfts : fTWtPsre- 

sRfar: * iii 2 53 

nfns^f in ^ f M m ifllwiHti- 

»i«rt iv 2 49 


PAGE 

137 

80 

25 

G 8 

128 

5 

171 

170 

54 

58 


96 

93 

10 

168 


167 

169 

167 


150 


100 

138 


page 

Hfitarpin twrwHfi®' ; Jtfift- 

Mijpnrir't: v 1 17 153 

alwfafcmfWft v 1 41 163 

wjw v 1 42 J 64 

v Rfo r y w w : nra%smnf?i^i,‘ v 1 20 154 

sfii^wpii Hi%r!^!ss?Hra ii 2 5 44 

nfnWS %h: ••• v 1 39 163 

... v .1 36 162 






11 


iiWt’ fpftHi^ani r>| ir^'i¥f*^: ii 
msraTO'tnytfrTOPtSHHHUj n 
nm^ t fumump^ iftfitwiis': ii 


n^nfv : : 


1 25 30 

1 30 31 

1 20 28 

1 8. 24 

13 2 

1 46 36 


... ... iii 2 49 99 

ftsfri: ...-, ... v 1 10 149 


sram*gTyti!n 3 'Hsi*^«ngHi% 

... iv 1 60 123 

*mF^Bt^w^nxw*»t: n<g r n tTfag: 

<ranffl<wtR' 



spiral: ins': intwRi bhtopth:- 


ftqpreg: ii 

nrewiits»i<?i^ ... ... ii 

*• s> 

H H WH^ iwtt^npiggraftst^tT- 



2 1 14 

2 29 134 

1 17 27 

1 53 28 




nytrewtfii : : . . . 

i 

1 

1 

1 


iv 

2 

30 

134 

infemr h hwihihiwihh 

ii 

1 

16 

27 

i , . 

v 

1 

37 

162 

stHJwretw ^ro: 

i 

1 

18 

7 

mlrt^rafltPiiiT i4: <wi^ .. 

i 

1 

20 

7 

mtlrw^rwir 

iv 

1 

1 

108 

n<lrml<Hla«iC)<n*H 

i 

1 

17 

0 



( Vlll ) 




sTjjrsinwrarf^iWiw^ j- 

dlftr»Irq^ iv 

urnjrOT^ws^rawrpyr- 

... ... ii 

» ijraoTHt^rrenra ... ii 
rnnrqr?: •HH-imwi^yaftwqi v 
SI^a^OTaWlcWTa ... iv 
wfesn 

fr n q^ W ff : iii 

*a>wfe ... iv 

anH arfeani iii 

maj wwmqrai ar $ar:an*aT 
sfqf^gTqT^qmr wnnaq- 
mifwfp’j^i ... v 

atTOranpiFar^qra^vi: ... iv 

awnfa^na^ra: wro^r- 

«n^rf«^: iv 

awarawir ... i 

w ^Brarggy^ Rwftrqa^;- 
afeifw at 5’iqwf^: ... iv 

■4 

jisaravrf^fafiraaaiaiTa i 

;%%<2 fP,W iv 

jjjjVte Pnfeisg^Tqsiwira iv 

tfwiRia asreifo^wara: iii 

jgqt ra^aatn arami aniTFwnj- 
iiBfssnarwwqt 'rcagrara- 
*5^ar^awOw: ... iv 


PAGE 

1 6 3 

1 45 35 

1 60 126 

2 10 49 

2 12 46 

1 11 150 

1 47 119 

2 35 93 

1 7 109 

2 69 104 


1 7 147 

1 52 121 
1 22 68 


1 57 122 
1 21 7 


1 50 .121 

2 36 130 


2 26 133 


inppf a ^ nivw^u^rr^ rn. iii 1 63 78 

W , # 

iii 2 65 103 

IT. 

ntalv^aiiqaiTisjwfwg- 

iii 1 39 72 

*n:atffafiin?gT* aSimron^: iii 2 75 106 




^;fnpirn in 


i%afawf^aniwqTrm?wi 


afn*rm a awfeqqnaaaa- 


m aircata' agvfin-OTa^: ii 


fi^iwi; 


1 69 42 

1 31 70 

2 32 135 

2 35 135 
2 23 132 
1 7 24 

1 30 9 

2 63 103 


aari a aaa: ... iii 2 41 95 


rwft arWr ar<- a nwfl r ar ii 1 6 23 


*^raRq; i 2 2 15 

aaSawsva aaaa nnijlvsH^ i 1 24 8 

war?' awfanrr a fa^araaqRg: 

aarcaag: ... i 2 7 16 

gra^WHifaFgr^nf.ar^ ... iji 2 51 99 

safe ... ii 2 62 59 

i 1 16 6 

gqqsihnaqsiwi* a aro: iii 2 20 89 

3*rc<Rigt afaafaaaraiasfi’Pji^faiMr^r 
s|Nt, ... ii 111 25 

T. .' ' • 

^iw?wig^*at aafnaroq^jataar 
aa*n ... ii 1 37 33 

5T. 

w^Niwg': ... ii 2 8 45 

ivigftr nsprumwfaa; ... iii <2 15 87 

trfgwrcnjgnaT qfiawai algare q g 

S8™: ... i 1 25 8 



( K ) 




... ii 

>Kr>TPimra: vttiti: sKmufimm <ii%>- 

»nn: ... ii 


’irfjjpjrn 


PAGE 

i 2 10 17 

v 2 8 170 

ii 2 5>* 56 


lwm« <tR^t fsuffify ftq i myq^n.- 


Nsrf^i^warm 

wqfqiCT*: 


2 17 173 
2 4 127 


fi»mpisresTy[w*JjCTOwni 

Rwtfwi^ ... 

5wfn<ji$ * 
fl^fwrespiwr'SSTOranf 

®i w*l»t ... i 

***riitKi3§pl ra^fwin.' 
tfw: 

*Hsvfiwv»»iinfaw» 
Prw: ■ ••• 

Mwwrwnpn^ 

so 

wwtonrfifii: ... i 


%U^«sq%Rm* 

ft«j rot tfa ■ . 


. ii 1 64 

ii 1 60 

ii 1 63 

ii 2 38 

HfWr3J- 

iii 2 24 
ii 2 34 


PAGE 

iwpnrkfinfi? »i ... iv 2 6 128 

flwaefWrojWs^: ... iv 1 13 110 

«M»g 3 tM n i iv 1 11 110 

jtfk fcjf i ufl ra fr ... ii 2 69 61 

... ii 2 68 61 

aRTHRsffiJW* 


... ii 1 39 

34 

wfd; 

... ii 2 66 

61 

- ■ 



... iv 1 5 

108 

... ii 1 42 

35 

enrararg^ro: 

... iv 1 15 

110 

*m i 2 15 

19 

aiRffPWj: 



... ii 1 62 

40 


... iii 2 33 

. 93 




... iv 1 40 

117 

... ii 2 55 

57 

sngawit^g: 

... ii 1 28 

31 

... ii 2 47 

55 

t9 

... iii 1 55 

76 

... ii 2 41 

54 

«nnpi7^g: 

... iv 2 27 

133 


WfTWip!an5fl%nffti#i vSjaifn- 

... iii 2 

51. 

•^¥wu^.flHrw^3^s»ifaft i w T ’WT- 
H innnl^K^wqi;!^ : ii 2 
v’litai j’rosflsflw- 
j*n< rq: .... v 2 

(/c»rj ai W 7RT^fy.%*? ... ii 1 

si*5j3*(h*(4w3'»w*^3^i- 

7®[TW ... ii l 

srcfapfNwfcT ... iii 2 

qNWMRTH ... iii 1 

nfkanRfwn ... iii 2 

wfoq f fffffi r wftffltl l K w l n ftfor 
qri ... iii 2 


17 88 


2 43 

14 172 
55 38 

49 36 

57 101 
4 63 

54 100 

70 104 


2 13 46 


1 41 13 


fife ... ii 1 68 42 

... iii 1 29 70 

5f. 

q w n gMilwIriv i y qfff: ... iii 1 26 69 

q^P i iFiPgw wm ... iii 1 72 81 

*ra^ n ffawf: 

wi: ... iv 1 44 119 

s fgWr ... i 1 8 4 

q . . i 2 3 15 

... iv 2 38 136 



( * ) 


PAGE 

gfmw 

fiipw: ... i 1 29 9 

sofa: ... ii 2 71 62 

jpiw: ... ii 1 1 22 

w am w w in u w fwrr: 

«m: ••• i 1 23 7 


... iv 1 62 124 

(s4n^w«(frarawfs'iWTWj k , h>s* 


fwwrthWHWFT 

i 

i 

27 

9 





%r*i: 

i 

i 

28 

9 

. . . 

V 

i 

40 

163 

fiffl MMgflPiUlfXTg • • • 

iv 

i 

29 

114 

tfV W«ti«WWWXig ••• 

iv 

i 

34 

115 






yrofn: 

ii 

i 

13 

26 


iv 

i 

25 

113 






fiif: 

iv 

i 

37 

117 

... 

iv 

2 21 

131 


ii 

1 

34 

32 

ij«(gyif?T^l? gHtRtllllfl . . 

. . . c*.. _c 

iii 

1 

7 

64 





trwHrer: 

i 

2 

4 

15 




«vfr^ sfq ng- 


'T'lT’C: 

ii 2 64 

00 

<H$*wnfgfg: w’wnjroj'i' 



wfiwirg 

iv 1 41 

118 

vwntyimfiSfemrn 

ii 2 17 

48 

%«i^pnn 

ii 2 26 

50 

s***wj 

ii 1 51 

37 



xi wnxww'i, 

i 2 13 

18 

A&. *V- 

wWTWW* 

iv 2 24 

132 

• '*•' • • ■ ■•• 

iii 1 07 

79 

g^T^tip^wnyw^T^ ng$ fimftr. 


' . virT: othSwwSst .. 

v 1 2 

140 


I Page 

wwflMfat grow* 

*tfn: ... i 2 18 19 

x wnwyfo g ^ ^i^gw IrB^ 

^wxxh^wwfwr ; irfiRwwi 
•ntfSim*: ... v 1^32 160 

gwq fanft n jmftr SWg’mr m 
*npl tw^ w yiyl i Www in ^w- 

»nj w^wwniffl^ : ... v 1 15 152 

gfiiftvnfiifg: gfnW 



... V 

1 33 

160 


... ii 

1 33 

32 


... iii 

2 3 

83 

•B’swr^g: 

... iii 

2 28 

91 


ir^ggr'wIrWfaxCTtgw 


apjwBwwww: 

V 

1 

4 

142 

rsv - 

swxgsi: nrnwr 

i 

1 

33 

10 

wmsfe: 

iii 

»> 

3 

83 

sr^wwifris^iwi ?5^?i 





y^nvig 

i 

1 

36 

11 

SNXtfn^m gspntv'm: . . . 

V 

1 

6 

146 

wmrfafjjg: ^rawrwi'iWi : 

i 

2 

8 

10 

«WJfgi s n^rt%«n^ 





fwnfiwmwxfaisFHPi:. 

V 

1 

14 

151 

flPIFw'Jj V^Pl? «t 

ii 

2 

51 

50 

RBPwgte 





fag: 

i 

2 

6 

16 

«TOim^T s®fijgrs?!: 

V 

2 24 

175 

jprojwmw 





’ifawtfliforBsnj 

ii 

1 20 

30 

yiOT^g 

ii 

2 48 

56 

ggp^r jpjimraj- 





! F | w: 

iv 

1 

63 

124 

iww^Oi fanhfaxw- 

* 





ii 

1 

36 

33 

^gfnPfap joxct 





<-s twg: •• ... 

ii 

1 65 

41 



( xi ) 


w 



PAGE 





'Aremiwy 

ifi 

1 51 

75 

nlvw 


# 


&nn: 

iii 

2 9 

85 

Wwl sarroq^nqt}: qft- 




qmif bjuSRpRh: 

iii 

2 10 

86 

<w’ wwff mwwrn 

iii 

2 43 

96 

t’toi: yCknt<3tqn3<- 





iii 

2 29 

92 

wilwiiR- 




*r»j: 

iv 

2 34 

135 

W^qiMl^VrWMV'l^ 




ircRi qmjw 

V 

2 21 

174 

wnmwR^l'iqTg'taqT^ 




wwfrqf*^- 




wnwqRr ^pt qfit ... 

V 

1 43 

164 


page 


wfiqqifiwnnmq" 

i 

2 3 

15 

jjqwiRqiRqm: 

iv 

2 31 

134 

wRwnfifciW*q*i qj- 




qwjqwllf t <qqqq , M 
nqwt^f wRpt uqfn: 

iv 

2 14 

130 

f. 




fRwnWqwRq wrq^ . . . 

V 

2 12 

172 


V 

2 13 

172 

... 

iii 

2 48 

98 

twn^snwfiwrai: 3»rtqq 




R*pppI 

i 

1 39 

12 

ihqqw^fiila: 

iv 

2 33 

135 

^nrorenq q^ran: 

V 

2 25 

175 


qfii i 




Index of Words in English. 


A 

Pago. 

Abh&va ... ...2, 117 

Abode ... .. 9 

Abode of particular qualities 01 
Absence ... 112, 1. *17 

Absence of link ... 87 

Absence of perception ... 49 

Abstinence ... ... 138 

Absurd ... ...76,86 

Absurdities ... ... 89 

Absurdity ... ... 13 

Acceptance ... ... 9 

Act ... ... 8,39 

Act force ... ... 81 

Action 5, 6, 32, 11, 50, 83, 96 

Activities ... ... 123 

Activity 2, 5, 6, 7, 94, 108, 123, 125 
Act of knowledge ... 1.18 

Acts ... ... ... 112 

Acuteness ... ... 130 

Acuteness or dullness of ap- 
prehension ... ... 130 

Admissionof an opinion 164, 167, 174 
Adoption ... ... 13 

Adultery ... ... 6 

Advantage ... ... 40 

Affection 2, 3, 7, 96, 108, 126 

Affirmative ... 11, 12 

Affirmative application ... 12 

Affirmative example ... 11 

Affix ... ... ... 59 

Agama ... ... 2 

Agent of knowledge ... 1.18 

Aggregates ... ... 115 

Air ... ... ... 9, 79 

Airy ... ... ... 70 

Aitihya ... ... 2 

0 


I 


i 

! 


j 

| 


Page. 

... 110 
20, 70, 132 
... 40 

... 40 

... 142 
... 17 

.. 17, 113, 119, 121 » 
...2, 130 


Akritabhy agama ... 

All-pervading 
Alteration 
Alteration of time 
Alternating character 
Alternative 
Analogy 
Annihilation 
Ant hill 
Antecedent 
AniimAna 
Apa varga 
A posteriori 
Apparently 
Apparent modification 
Appearance 
‘Appearances 
Appearance of difference 
Application 
Apprehension 6, 71, 79, 98, 127, 130 
A priori ... ••• 3 

A priori inference 34 


... 87 

46, 126 
... ’2,3 
...7, 125 
...3, 34, 
... 79 

. 59 

. 136 
. 116 
. 85 

10, 12 


ippropriate 

Lpproach 

Lprapta kala 

irbitrariness 

irbuda 

Argument 

Argumentation 

Arguments 

Arrogance 

ArthA-patti 

Artificial 

Lrya ... 

Lrya desSa 
Iryas . . . 
Ascertainment 


... 124 
... 69 

... 17 

... 92 

... 104 
47, 50, 52, 147, 150 
1 

... 20,67,96,128 

... 125 
2, 43, 44 
• ••47,48 
2 

115, 120 
... 39 

... 1, 13 



Adhaka 

Page. . 

... 43 

Asleep 

... 124 

Asolute rule 

... 86 

Assumption 

... 17 

Assent 

... 86 

Assertion 

... 3,4 

Association 

60, 123 

Association of troubles 

... 124 

Assumption 

... 88 

Atom 50, 103, 106, 126, 131 

Atomic dimension 

... 95 

Atomic mind 

... 89 

Atomic substance 

... 6, 29 

Atoms 

8, 15, 130 

Attach 

... 15 

Attainment of supreme felicity 1 

Attendants 

... 121 

Attention 

93, 96 

Audience 

... 24 

Auditory 

20, 78 

Auditory perception 

20, 30, 31 

Augmentation 

... 59 

Authority 

9, 15, 70 

Authors 

... 42 

Avayava 

1, 10, 129 

Aversion ...2, 3, 5, 

7, 94, 108 

Awaking 

... 135 

Awanting 

... 121 

B 

Balancing the addition 

...140, 142 

Balancing the alternative . 

..140, 144 

Balancing in co-presence 

...140, 147 

Balancing the conn ter- exam- 

pie 

...140, 149 

Balancing the controversy 

140, 153 

Balancing the demonstration 140, 157 

Balancing the doubt 

...140,152 

Balancing the effect 

...140, 162 

Balancing the eternal 

161 

Balancing the etemality 

140 


Balancing the heterogeneity 140, 141 


Page. 

Balancing the homogeneity 140, 141 
Balancing the infinite re- 
gression ... ...140,149 

Balancing the mutual 
absence ... ...140,148 

Balancing the non-difference 140, 156 
Balancing the non-eternality 140, 160 
Balancing the non-perception 140, 159 
Balancing the non -produced 150, 170 
Balancing the nou-reason ...140, 153 
Balancing the perception ...140, 158 
Balancing the presumption 140„155 
Balancing the questionable 140, 143 
Balancing the reciprocity ...140, 145 
Balancing the subtraction ...140, 143 
Balancing the unquestionable 140, 144 
Beginning ... ... 47 

Beginningless ... ... 126 

Bhasya-conimentary ... 31 

Bhattas ... ... 2 

Birth ... 27, 122 

Blackness ... ... 126 

Blamo ... ... 41,123 

Blanket ... ... 18 

Block-hoad ... ... 20 

Bodily actions ... ... 6 

Body 5,03,64.70,100,101,137 
Bone ... 65 

Bosgavaens ... ... 4,36 

Bragging ... ... 15 

Brtlhmapa ... -••3,18,60 


Breast 

Buddhas 

Buddhi 

Buddhist 

Buddhist Sanskrit 
Literatuvo 
Bulk 
Burning 


69 

2 

6 

15, 22,86 
and Pali 

125 

54 

38 


Capacity 


10,83 



Carelessness 

Page, 

.112 

Carping 

15 

CArv&kas 

2 

Categories 

1,24 

Cattle 

121 

Cause 3, 23, 104, 112, 1 14, 127 

Cause and effect 

109 

Cause of destruction 

90 

Cause of growth and decay.., 

87 

Cause of in -audition 

52 

Cause of production 

.103,113 

Causes of faults 

.127 

Cave 

157 

Cavil ... 1, 14 

i, 15, 139 

Caviller 

15 

Censuring the non-censur- 

• - 

able 

107, 175 

Cessation 

106, 127 

Cessation of egotism 

127 

Cessation of recognition 

84 

Cessation of tho intellect ... 

84 

Chala 

1,17 

Channels 

• 9 

Character 7, 11, 12, 13, 23, 54, 71, 75, 

78, 96, 101, 

113, 130 

Characterised ... 

80 

Character of an object 

' 77 

Character of a modification 

55 

Character of perception 

114 

Character of transparency . . . 

75 

Charaka 

41 

Change 

88 

Circle of fire brand 

102 

City of the celestial quiris- 
ters- 

135 

Classification of Vedic speech 

40 

Clay 

148 

Clay statue 

104 

Co-abide 

54 

Cognisable 

76,87 

Cognised 

47 

Cognitions ••• 25,26,90,93,102 


Page. 

Collocation of parts 132 

Colour 5, 9, J 7, 30, 59, 71, 78, 98, 101 

102, 127 

Combustibles ••• ••• 113 

Command ••• 42 

Commixture ••• •• 79 

Common ... ••• 22 

“ Commonly seen " ••• 3,34 

Comparison 2, 3, 4, 25, 35, 36 

Common properties ... 22 

Compendious expression ... 36 

Complete destruction ... 2 

Compound ... ... 59 

Compassion ... ... 6 

Conceit ... 65,85,122 

Conceit of difference ... 85 

Conceit of duality ... 65 

Conceit of pleasure ... 122 

Concept ... ... 135 

Concept of means ... 134 

Conception ... 62,127 

Conciousness ... ... 6 

Concentration ... ... 112 

Conclusion 10, 12, 13, 15, 20, 67, 88, 

145 

Concofnitant 
Conditions 


Conduct 
Confirmation 
Conflicting 
Conflicting judgment 
Conflicting testimony 
Conflicting opinions 
Conflicting reasons 
Confutation 
Conjointly 
Conjunction 6, 29 

Connection 
Connoted 
Consciousness 
Consequence 


... 10 
... 10 
... 18 
... 13 

... 22 
7 

... 22 
... 46 

... 46 

1,13,35 
... 22 
31, 60, 90, 92, 93, 
104, 106, 122, 131 
3, 20, 37, 38, 39 
... 150 
... 14 

78,73 



( iv 

Page. i 


Constant audition 

.. 82 

Constituents 

... 131 

Contact 3, 25, 30, 71, 73, 81, 89 

Contentious 

... 23 

Context 

... 96 

Continuity 

.. 23 

Contingency 

84,90 

Contradiction 

39, 40, 76 

Contradictory 

15, 16, 58 

Contradictory reason 

... 16 

Contrary 

13, 22 

Controversy 

... 153 

Convention 

... 39 

Conviction 

... 22 

Oopresence 

... H7 

Corresponding element 

- 80 

Corresponding substrata 

... SI 

Corruption 

... 125 

Countenance 

... 68 

Counter argument, 

... 53 

Counter example ... 

149, 150 

Course 

2 

Covetousness 

6 

Cow ... 

4 

Cowhood 

... 141 

Critical examination 

1 

Crystal ... 73, 

74, 85, 86 

Curd 

... 87 

Cuticle 

... 101 

D 


Dadhi 

... 54 

Deaths 

7 

Debt to Cods 

... 123 

Debt to progenitors 

... 123 

Debt to sages 

... 123 

Debts .?. 

... 123 

Decay 

83, 87 

Declaration 

4 

Deeds 

95, 103 

Defect i ... 

39, 40 

Defence 

... 15 


) 



Page. 

Defilement 

2,125 

Definite form 

... 61 

Definition 

...1,24 

Deliverance 

7 

Demarcate 

... 95 

Demerits 

72,125 

Demonstration 

... 157 

Denial 

114, 136 

Depravity 

... 125 

Desert 

104,105,106 

Design 

... 60 

Desire 

5,68,69,94 

Desire and aversion ... 96 

Destruction 2, 

9, 19, 48, 57, 65, 88, 

89, 90, 106,110,111,114, 120 

Determinate 

3 

Determination 

10,13 

Deva-ripa 

... 123 

Devotion 

6 

Dharma Sastra 

... 124 

Dialogue 

... 14 

Diminution 

... 69 

Dimness 

... 129 

Direct 

... 19 

Direction 

... 29 

Disappearance 

... 106 

Disconnection 

... 20 

Disciples 

... 138 

Discussion 

... 1, 10, 14, 138 

Disjoined 

... 88 

Disputant 

20,22,24 

Disputation 

... 14 

Dissimilarity 

... 20 

Dissolution 

... 70 

Distinct 

...-110 

Distress 

122, 124 

Distribution 

... 116 

Divisible 

... 108 

Doctrine 

14,132 

Dogma 

' ... 9, 10 

Doubt 1, 7, 22, 23, 32, 54, 59, 119, 


125, 127, 151, 152 



( V ) 


Dream 

Drst^ma 

Drum 

Duality 

Dullness 

Durable 

Duration 

Dust ... 

Duties 

Dvyapuka 


Page. 

124, 134, 135 
1 

...17, 27 
... 65 

... 130 

... 17 

... 92 

3 

... 138 

... 131 


E 

Ear ... 

Earth ' 

Earthenware 
Earthy 
Effect 

Efforts of attention 
Egotism 

Element 5, 9, 78, 79, 80, 103 

Emancipation ... 105, 106 

Endless doubt ... ... 23 

Enjoyable ... ••• H7 

Entity 28,60, 110, 111, 112, 116, 117 


Entreaty ... ••• 

Enunciation ... ... 1 , 24 

Epithet ... ... 3, 12 

Equal to the question ... 16 

Erratic ... 15, 108 

Essence and appearance ... 136 

Established tenet ... 1,9 

Establishment ... ... 118 


... 5,81 
... 5,9 
... 61 
...70, 80 
3, 109, 162 
... 93 

... 127 


Eternal 8, 10, 13, 15, 47, 50, 51, 53, 
57, 64, 69, 90, 106, 109, 113, 114, 
131, 157, 161 
Etemalness ... ... 57 

Eternality ... 12, 16, 152 

Eternity ... ... 9 

Ether 83, 5, 9, 20, 29, 53, 79, 129, 
* 132 

Ethereal ... ... 70 

Evasion ... 167,174 


Evidence 

Page. 
110, 134 

Examination 

1, 10,24 

Example 10, 

12, 13, 142, 145 

Excess 

... 96 

Excitement 

... 66 

Exclusion 

... 96 

Exercise 

... 96 

Existence 

49, 63, 109, 127 

Existent. 

... 120 

Extension 

... 48 

Expanding 

... 68 

Experience 

4 

Expert 

... 4,8 

Expression 

... 110 

Expressive of action 

... Ill 

External light 

... 73 

External objects . . . 

... 136 

Eye 

... 5,8 

Eye ball 

... 70 

Eye knowledge ... 

... SO 

F 

Factitious 

... 131 

Fallacies 

... 15 

Fallacies of a reason 

15, 175 

Fallacious argument 

... 147 

Fallacy 

1 

False apprehension 

... 135 

False knowledge ... 

... 136 

Familiar instance 

1 

Fault 

5 

Faults 

2, 7, 108, 127 

Faults of untruth . . . 

... 39 

Fear 

...68,96 

Felicity 

... 1,2 

Fences 

... 139 

Fiery 

...10, 70 

Figuratively 

... 60 

Filling 

... 38 

Five 

8, 38, 79, 113 

Fire brand 

... 102 

Fineness ... 

~ 81 



( Ti ) 


Page. 


Fire sacrifice 

... 41 

Five elements 

... 114 

Five objects 

77 

Five senses 

... 77 

Fixation 

... 60 

Fixed character . . . 

... 75 

Fixed connection . . . 

... 38 

Fixed relation 

63 

Fixity 

... 58 

Fixity of number . . . 

... 118 

Food 

38, 121 

Forbearance 

... 94 

Forbearanco from activity ... 94 

Forest 

...4,137 

Forester 

4 

Form 

59, 61,62, 78 

FQrmation 

... 137 

Fortuitous effects... 

... 112 

Fruit ... 5, 7, 13, 9/5, 

103, 112, 119, 
137 

Fruit of previous deeds ... 103 

Fulfilment 

... 105 

Function 

60, 76, 91 

Futile 

... 20 

Futilities 

15, 21, 140 

Futility 

1. 20, 146 

Future 

34. Ill 

G 

Ganges 

... 60 

General nation . . . 

... 152 

Generality 

... 5, 32 

Genus 

18, 47, 59, 61, 


62, 170 

Gesture 

5 

Glass 

... 73 

God ... % 

... 112 

Gold 

56, 121 

Good 

... 127 

Greed 

... 125 

Grief ... 

68 

Ground.. 

... 9Q 



Page. 

Growth 

... 87 

Gustatory 

... 78 

Gustatory perception 

... 30 

H 


Habitual 

... 136 

Hatchet 

... 38 

Haii- 

... 100 

Happiness 

... 121 

Horse sacrifices ... 

4 

Hatred 

... 125 

Heat 

... 68 

Heretical view 

... 125 

Heterogeneous 

11, 12 

Heterogeneous example 

12, 140 

Heterogeneity 

152, 153 

Hetvnbhasa 

... 1, 15 

Ulna klesa 

... 125 

Hunger 

... 137 

Homogeneity ...151, 

152, 153, 160 

Homogeneous 

... 11 

Homogeueous example 

... 140 

Homogeneous things 

... 109 

Hurting the proposition 

... 167 

Hypothesis 

9 

Hypothetical 

9 

Hypothetical dogma 

9 

Hypothetical reasoning 

1 

I 

Ideas 

... 69 

Identical . . 

78, 84 

Ignorance 

20, 167, 173 

Illumination 

28, 149 

Illusion 

... 28 

Imagination 

... 135 

Immediate 

... 119 

Immediate subsequency 

... 96 

Immolation 

... 61 

Impelling 

*... 92 

Impermanent 

... 56 

Implioation 

... 9 



( vii ) 



Page. 

Implied dogma ... 

... 9, 10 

Impossibility 

18, 128, 131 

Impressions 

... 93 

Impropriety 

... 129 

Inactive 

... 20 

Inadmissible 

... 123 

Inanimate 

19, 68 

Inandition 

... 52 

Incapacity 

. . 95 

Inconsistency 

... Ill 

Incoherent 

167, 17 

Incompatible 

... 50 

Incongruous 

... 120 

Inconsistent 

... 110 

Indifference 

... 10 

Indirect 

... 19 

Indeterminate 

3 

Individual 

59, 60, 61, 86 

Individuality 

... 61 

Indivisibility 

... 132 

Indivisibility of atoms ... 132 

Inequality 

... 104 

Inexperience 

... 105 

Inference 

2, 3, 25, 28, 31, 
33, 67, 71 

Infinite regression 

140, 149 

Injunction 

40, 41, 75, 124 

Innumerable 

... 67 

Inopportune ... 17, 130, 157 171 

Inquiry 

... 10 

Instance 

1, 8, 12 

Instructive assertion 

4 

Instrument 

67 

Instrument of knowledge ... 67 

Intangible 

15, 16, 50, 53 

Intellect 

5, 6, 7, 16, 83, 
84, 85 

Intelligence 

5 

Internal-perception 

... 159 

Interpenetrated ... 

... 80 

Interrelation 

... 109 

Interrelation of cause 

and effect 109 


Interval 

Page. 
50, 122 

Intervention 

... 96 

Intimate relation ... ... 5, 32 

Intimately 

... 71 

Invalid 

... 45 

Invariable 

... 10 

Investigator 

... 8 

Investigation 

... 13 

Invisibility 

... 73 

Iron 

... 69 

Iron ball 

... 10 

Irregularities 

... 22 

Irregularity 

23,24,95 

Irregularity of perception ... 7 

Itihasa 

... 124 

Jalpa 

J 

1 

Jar 

17,47,110 

J&ti 

1,62,140 

Jijfiasa 

... 10 

Jnana 

6 

J udgment 

7 

Jugglery 

... 135 

Jyotistoma 

... 41 

Kalala 

K 

... 104 

Kandara 

... 104 

Karma 

81, 124 

Katha 

... 14 

Kileso 

... 125 

Killing 

6 

Kitchen 

8, 10 

Klesa 

... 125 

Knave 

... 20 

Knower 

67,96 

Knowledge 1, 2 

3, 6, 9, 24, 29, 35, 

67, 78, 84, 89, 

90, 91, 96, 97, 101, 

127, 136, 137 

Knowledge of truth ... 135 

Kritah&ni 

... 110 



( 


V1U 


L 

Page. 

Lalitavistara Sfitra 

... 134 

Lamp 

17, 28, 99, 149 

Latik&vat&ra Sfttra 

... 133 

Light 

5, 9, 72, 73 

Likeness 

... 96 

Link 

... 87 

Letter 

55, 56 

Loadstone 

... 69 

Locomotion 

... 22 

Lotus 

... 68 

M 


Madhyamika Buddhist philo- 

sophy 

... 120 

Madyamika Sutra 

... 134 

Magnitude 

... 71 

Mah&y&na works . . . 

... 134 

M&msa pesi 

... 104 

Malice 

6 

Manifestation 17, 

61,73, 110, 111 

Mark 6, 45, 

87, 96, 115, 116 

Mat 

... 60 

Material 

39, 54, 70, 78 

Material substance 

...70,72 

Matter 

4, 6, 95 

Maturation 

... 100 

M&y& 

... 136 

Meaningless 

167, 170 

Means of knowledge 

... 118 

Means of right knowledge 1, 2, 20 

Measure 

... 60 

Medical Science . . . 

... 42 

Meditation 

136, 137 

Members 

... 1, 10 

Membrane . • .' v 

... 73 

Memory 

68, 96 

Merit 

74, 112, 125 

Merit and demerit 

... 96 

Metaphor 

17, 19 

Metaphorically ... 

... 19 

Meteor 

... 72 


Mica 

Page. 
’... 73 

Milk 

... 87 

/ 

Mim&m Sakas 

9 

Mind 5, 6, 10, 

29, 67, 90, 92 

Mirage 

8, 135 

Mirfor 

... 75 

Misapprehension ... 

2, 112, 126 

Mistimed 

15,17 

Mistimed reason ... 

... 17 

Mlcccha 

... 4, 39 

Modification '... 

54, 55, 57, 58 

Modification and substitute ... 54 

Momentary 

86, 99 

Mother 

... 163 

Motion 

17, 85 

Magical power 

... 89 

Multiplicity 

... 21 

Mutual absence ... 

140, 147 

Mutual difference... 

... 101 

N 

N&garjuna 

115, 120 

Nails 

... 100 

Naiyayika 

2, 22, 80, 83, 94 

Natural 

... 125 

Natural connection 

... 38 

Natural quality ... 

... 99 

Nature 

1, 6, 77 

Nature of sound ... 

... 46 

Navakambala 

... 18 

Necessity 

... 138 

Negative 

... 4, 12 

Negative application 

... 12 

Newborn 

... 69 

Night 

... 73 

Nigraha stli&na ... 

...1,17 

Nir^aya 

r 

Nirvikalpaka 

3 

No-cause 

. ... 113 

Non-difference 

36, 157 

Non-distinction ... 

... 161 

Non-distinguished 

... 147 




Page. 


Page, 

lion erratic 

... 3 

Occurrence 

... 86 

Nonentity 

110,111,117 

Odour 

...77, 78 

Non eternal 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 10, 48, 

Olfactory 

... 78 

50, 90, 113, 126, 151, 162 

Olfactory perception 

... SO 

Non eternalness ... 

... 113 

Omnipresence 

... 131 

Non eternality 

11, 158 

One 

... 129 

Non-existence 2,43, 45, 47, 48, 7 1 , 

Operation 

64,66,93 


126, 128, 159 

Operations of stimuli 

... 93 

Nonexistent 

117, 120 

Operations of the Soul 

... 64 

Nonfulfilment 

... .105 

Operator 

... 39 

Non ingenuity ... 

167, 174 

Opponent ... 

14, 20, 22 

Non-material 

... 72 

Oppression of persons by spells 48 

Non perception 22, 28, 29, 32, 49, 

Opportunity 

... 124 

52,87,159, 162 

Opposing the proposition 

167, 169 

Nonperception of knowledge in 

Opposition 17, 20, 48, 51, 63, 96, 114, 

pots 

... 95 


145 

Non-produced 

... 150 

Organ of vision ... 

... 65 

Non production ... 

... 89 

Origination 

... 83 

Non reality 

... 134 

“Other” 

,... 51 

Non simultaneous 

... 84 

Otherness 

... 51 

Non simultaneousness 

93, 102 

Overlooking the censurable 

167, 174 

Non simultaneousness 

of cog- 



nitions 

... 102 

P 


Non simultaneity... 

... 29 

PAda ... - ... 

... 104 

Non transparent ... 

75 

Pain ... ... 2 

5, 7, 122 

Nose 

... 5,65 

Paradise 

... 41 

“ Not commonly seen ’ 

3 

Part ... ... 32,127,128 

Nyftya Sfttra 

2, 10, 17, 138 

Partially 

... 128 

Partially eternal ... 

... 48 

O 


Partial similarity 

... 35 

Object 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 30, 60, 76, 

Particularity 

... 5,32 

81, 

83, 85, 89, 130 

Parts ... 127, 

128,129 

Objection 

...23, 35 

Parts in an atom ... 

... 132 

Object of knowledge 

118, 134 

Past ... 

34, 111 

Object of right knowledge ... 1 

PaurApikas 

... 2 

Objects of sense ... 

5, 76, 77, 

Perception 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 22, 24, 25, 

Obscurity ... 

... 73 

28,30,32,38,57,70,71,74, 70, 

Observance 

... 138 

81, 110, 114, 133, 158, 159 

Observation,, 

... 112 

Perception of sound 

... 8t 

Obstruction 

72, 125 

Perfect tranquillity 

2 

Obviousness 

71, 72, 73 

Perishable 

... SO 

Occasion for rebuke 

1, 20, 167 

Permanency 

... 89 



( St .) 


' 

Page. 

Persistent 

53, 83, 98 

Permanent intellect 

... 84 

Person 

... 122 

Persuasion 

40,41 

Pervades 

... 100 

Philosophy 

8 

Physician 

4 

Pitri fifla 

... 123 

Pleasure 

5, 7, 122 

Pleasure and pain... 

... 96 

Ploughing 

... 119 

Possession 75, 

78,95, 96,137 

Pot ... 

16, 95, 198 

Pr&bhfikaras 

2 

Practice 

... 68 

Practicable 

... 136 

Praise. 

41, 123 

Prakriti 

6 

Pram&pa 

1 

Prameya 

1 

Pratyaksa 

2, 6, 74 

Prayojana 

... 1, 10 

Preceptors 

... 138 

Predicable 

... 151 

Predicate 

147, 154 

Predominance 

80, 136 

Predominant quality 

... 81 

Pre-eminence 

... 31 

Prescription 

... 41 

Present timo 

... 34 

Presumption 

2, 43, 44, 155 

Previous life 

68, 69 

Pride... ■ ... 

... 125 

Primordial matter 

... 6, 70 

Principle 

... 96 

Principle of injection 

... 40 

Probability 

... 2,43 

Processes 

... 78 

Produced 

113, 119 

Product 

... 20 

Production 48, 90, 103, 

104, 110, 111, 

J12, 113, 114, 120, 128, 148 



Pag*. 

Prohibition 

75, iib 

Promiscuously . 

... iSo 

Pronunciation 

; . 49 

Proof ... 

16, 83, 85 

Propagation . 

... 59 

Proper 

... 132 

Properties 

7, 8, 22, 23 

Property 

8, 11, 150 

Proposition 8, 10, 11, 

12, 13, 15, 16, 
167 

Purapa 

... 124 

Purifying 

... 138 

Purpose 

1, 8, 10, 72 

Puruga 

... 8, 94 

Q 

Qualities 5, 9, 54; 69, 70, 71, 79, 99, 

102, 112 

Qualities of earth ... 

... 70 

Quality 5, 32, 59, 66, 79, 99, 145 

Quality of soul 

... 89 

Quality of sound ... 

... 81 

Question 

8 

Questioning ... 

... ‘10 

Quibble 

1, 15, 17, 18 

R 

‘ *. i 

Radish 

... 8 

Rain ... 

... 68 

Rapt in mind 

... 93 

Ray ... ... . 

70, 71, 72 

Reality 

... 133 

Really eternal 

••• 48 

Reason 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 83, 91, 118, 


135, 147,154 

Reason 

46, 118 

Reasoning 

... 1 

Rebirth 

... 125 

Rebuke ... 1, 

15, 17,20,21 

Receipt 

... 96 

Receptacle 

121 




Page. 


Page. 

Receptacle of happiness 

... m 

S&Akhya Philosophy 

6 

Reception 

... 84 

S&Akhyas 

2, 9, 83, 94 

, Recognition 7, 8, 22, 23, 83, 84, 85 

Samfoya 

... i,io 

Recognition of objects 

... 83 

Ssraiaya vyud&sa 

... 10 

Recollection ...30, 91, 92, 93, 98 

Samsk&ra 

... 81 

Recklessness ' 

... 125 

Sarvajit sacrifice 

41 

Reductio ad absurdum 

.«. 1, 35 

Satisfaction 

8 

Reflection ... 

6 

Satpakgl kath& ... 

... 164 

Refuge 

129, 133 

Savikalpaka 

... 3 

Refuge ad refugee 

... 97 

Savour 

... 78 

Refutation 

... 114 

Saying too little ... 

167, 172 

Ragressus ad infinitum 

... 132 

Sayiug too much ... 

187, 172 

Regularity 

23, 95 

Scaffolds 

18, 60 

Regulation 

114, 115 

Scepticism 

6 

Reinculcation ... 40, 41, 42, 172 

School 

9 

Relation 

... 109 

Screened 

... 73 

Relation of refuge ad refugee ... 98 

Scriptures 

13, 14, 15, 70 

Release 2, 5, 7, 63, 123, 124, 137 

Search of truth ... 

... 138 

Reliable 

... 42 

Season 

... 88 

Reliable person ... 

4 

Seat of knowledge 

... 95 

Reliability 

... 42 

Secondary meaning 

... 123 

Reliance 

... 37 

Sacred fire 

..: 121 

Remembrance 

66, 135 

Seeds 

... 139 

Renouncing the proposition 

167, 169 

Self existent 

... 117 

Repelled 

... 132 

Sense 3, 5, 9, 30, 47, 

51, 63, 65, 66 , 

Repetition 41, 51, 167, 172, 173 

70, 72, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80, 85, 89, 

Residence 

128, 129 


130 

Right knowledge 1, 2, 13, 26, 27, 43 

Sense organ 

6, 7, 10, 89 

Risi ... 

4,39 

Sense perception ... 

... 35 

Rigi rip a 

... 123 

Sensuous bodies ... 

... 89 

River ... 

... 33 

Sentiments 

... 5,7 

Rumour 

... 2, 43 

Separately 

... 22 



Separation 

7, 97, 105 

S 


Sivab 

... 104 

0 

Sabda ... ... 

2 

Series 

7 

Sacred books 

6 

Series of reasons ... 

... 149 

Sacrifice 

39, 124 

Several marks 

... 115 

S&dhya 

... 118 

Shadow 

... 17 

Stikya prApti 

... 10 

Shamelessness 

... 125 

Saro&dhir&ja Sfltra 

,.. 134 

Shifting the proposition 167, 168 

Sambhava 

... 2 

Shifting the reason 

187, 169 

Sameness ... 

... 52 

Shifting the topio 

167,170 




Page. 



Page. 

Siddhftnta 

... 1 

Statue of stone ... 


... 103 

Signifieate 

... 154 

Stealing ' ... 


... 6 

Sight... 

... 63 

Stop ••• ••• 


... Ill 

Sign ... 

96,154 

Study ... 


••• 8 

Silence 

167,173 

Stupidity 2, 

7, 

108, 109, 125 

Similarity ... 3,19,20,33,35 

Subject 

2, 

142, 145, 146 

Simultaneous 

24,93 

Snhject in dispute 


... 83 

Simultaneous cognitions 

... # 89 

Subservient 


72,112 

Simultaneously ... 

... *84 

Substance 3, 5, 9, 10, 32, 55, 59, 71 

Simultaneous productions 

... 91 

Substitute 


... 54 

Sin ... 

63, 64 

Substrata 


... 81 

Single entity 

... 116 

Substratum 


... 53 

Single thing 

... 108 

Succession 


... 84 

Site of operations of the Bonl 

64 

Successive annihilation 

2 

Sites ... 

... 78 

Summer 


3 

Sixteen categories 

1 

Summum bonum ... 


... 138 

Six-winged disputation 

164, 166 

Sun ... 


3 

Skin ... 

5 

Supersensuous 


... 71 

Sloth ... 

... 125 

Supreme felicity ... 


... 1,2 

Smell 

5. 9, 70 

Supremacy 


... 80 

Smoke 

3, 8, 76 

Sustaining 


... 92 

Smoky 

... 10 

Sustenance 


... 60 

Solution 

... 16 

Syllogism 


... 10 

Son ... 

... 121 

System 


8 

Soul... 3,5.8,11,20.22,29,63, 




66 , 67, 69, 91, 92, 95, 

96, 104, 

T 



109, 121, 124, 138, 

Tactual 


... 78 

Soul is receptacle of hsppi- 

Tactual perception 


... 30 

ness ... 

... 121 

Taking 


... 59 

Sound 5,8,9,10,11,12,17,27,46, 

Tallness 


8 

50, 51, 53, 78, 81 

90, 131 

Tangibility 


,.. 28 

Soundness 

... 8, 53 

Tank ... ..; 


.;. 8 

Space ... 

... 29 

Tarka... 


1 

Speech 

... 40 

Taste... 


' ... 5, 9 

Special qualities 

... 78 

Tautology 


39, 40, 42 

Special part of toq$h 

... 76 

Teaching 


...50, 51 

Special practice of meditation, 136 

Technicalities 


... 5 

Spell ... 

42, 148 

Tenet... 


1, 9, 10 

Spiritual injunction 

... 138 

Term ... 


. 17, 10 

Splitting 

><• 38 

Termination 


... 105 

Statements 

... 22 

Termination of deserts 

... 105 

State of formation 

... 137 

Testimony 


2, 4,8,22 



( *iii ) 




Page. 


Page. 

“ That ” 

• • • 

... .59 

’ Uninterrupted course 

... 2 

Thing 

• • • 

...75,88 

Union 

...17, 20 

Thing denoted 


... 150 

Universal 

... 20 

Thom 

• • • 

... 112 

Universality 

... 181 

Thoughts 

• • • 

... 133 

Universal uniformity 

...' 39 

Time ... 

• • • 

... 29 

Unlimited .dimensions 

... 132 

Tongue 


.... 5 

Unmarked 

... 45 

Touch 

5, 26, 63, 75, 76, 101 

Unnameable 

... 8 

Touching 


9 

Unobviousness ... 

... 78 

Total absence 


... 73 

Un perceived ... 

... 36 

Totally 


... 128 

Unproved 

... 16 

Tranquillity 


2 

Unreasonable ...117,121,129,150 

Transcend 


... 130 

Unsaid 

.... 155 

Transitory 


83, 98, 99 

Unsaid conclusion 

... 155 

Transmigration 

... 2,5, 

7, 13, 109 

Untenable 

... 90 

Transparency 


... 75 

Untruth 

... 39 

Transparent consciousness 

... 6 

Upaklefo 

... 125 

Treatise 

• •• 

... 124 

Upalabdhi 

6 

Treatise on knowledge 

... 138 

Upam&na 

2 

Tree ... 

■ • • 

... 119 

Uttara Kurus 

... 37 

Trick... 

• • • 

... 67 



Troubles 

... 123, 124, 125 

V 


True knowledge 

• • e 

2 

VacaBpati 

... 30 

True nature 

* • • 

...1,127 

Vacuum 

... 53 

Trusted to the soul # 

... 124 

Vfida ... 

... 1 

Tryasarenn 

• • • 

... 131 

Vai&sikas 

... 2 

Twilight 

• • • 

... 8, 22 

Vaitasika Philosophy 

5 

Type ... 

... 

... 170 

Valid ... 

43, 83, 118 




Validity 

... 26 


u 


Vanquisher 

... 22 

Udyotakara 

* * . 

... 30 

Vapour 

... 10 

Umpire 

til 

... 24 

Varieties 

... 54 

Unassailable 

..I 

... 57 

Variety 

... 129 

Unattended 

• •• 

... 112 

Vfitsayana 1, 3, 17 

, 27, 30, 31 

Uncertainty 

• •• 

...44, 88 

Veda... 

...39, 42 

Uncommon properties 

... 22 

Ved&ntin 

2 

Undemonstrable 

... 

... 106 

Verbal 

... 2 

Understanding 

• •• 

... 121 

Verbal testimony ... 

2, 4, 25, 38 

Uneasiness 

••• 

7 

Verbal trick 

... 67 

Unenvioua persons 

... 138 

Vicinity 

... 60 

Uniformity 

#11 

... 39 

Veil ... ... 

... 49 

Unintelligible 


167, 171 

ViBion... ... 

... 65 




Page. 

Visual 

... 78 

Visual perception 

...31, 80 

Viivanatha 

... 30 

Vi tap da 

1 

Vividness 

... 93 

Vocal actions 

6 

Voice... 

6 

Volition 

5 

W 

Warning 

... 41 

Water... 

3, 5, 8, 9, 75, 79 

Watery 

...70,80 

Waxing 

... 59 

Web ... 

... 133 

Whole 

32, 127, 128, 129 


Page. 


“Within " 


... 131 

Wife ... 


... 121 

“Without” 


... 131 

Word ... 


4, 38, 59 

World 


... 2 

Wrangler 


... 15 

Wrangling 

Y 

1, 14, 15, 139 

Yoga institute 

, , , 

:.. i38 

Yogacara Buddhist philosophy 133 

Yogi ... 

... 

- 89 

“Yava” 

... 

... 39 


Z 


Zeal for truth 

• • • 

... 139 



1 


Word index to the nyaya sETra. 


%r 


Page. 

iii. 2. 74. ... ... ... ...105 

*S»#arcrr ii. 1. 43. ... ... ... ... ... 35 

«nni? iv. 2. 20. ... ... ... ... ... 131 

m&T iii. 2. 78. ... ... ... ... ... 106 

«^ffi« n * Wl ^ iii. 2. 41. ... ... ... ... 94 

W&Riv. 1. 27. ... ... ... ••• — H3 

ungtf ii. 1. 12., iii. 2. 6. ... ... ... 35, 84 

mnpin^iii. 1. 73., iii. 2.4. ... 81,84 

HlPTTftr: iii. 2. 32. ... ... ... ••• ••• 92 

Uglft v. 2. 1., v. 2. 18. ... ... ... 167 » 173 


*RS ii. 2. 25., iii. 1. 31., iii. 2. 63., iii. 2. 77., iv. 1. 67., iv. 2. 16. 

50, 70, 103, 106, 126, 130 


I- 36. ... 

*R!W% ii- 2- 64. ... 

STCP ii. 1. 15., ii. 1. 17. 

*T5RT i. 1. 22., ii. 1. 5., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1. 44., v. 1. 15., 

ii. 1 . 5. 

UWWi. 2. 9. 

i. 6. ... 

ufcRPJ iii. 2. 44. ... 

llfiraww i. 2. 13. 

2 * 13< 

tltitaii. 1.41.,iv. 1. 16. 

«§reWR5T i. 2. 4. ... 

I- 36., ii- 2.53. ... 
ii. 2. 44. 

WH i. 1. 5. 

1. 25. ... 
iv.*l. 63. 

llgrei^v. 2. 2. ... 

i. I- 8 - ••• 


... 33 

... 60 
...27, 27 
... 7,23,23,35,152 
... 23 

... 17 

... 146 
... 96 

... 18 

... ... 18 

34, 111 
... ... 15 


...33, 57 


M' 




• • • 


• • • 


55 

3 
69 

124 

167 

4 



( a ) 


Page. 

U. 1. 15- 27 

vrffeUffoitliq.ii. 1. 50. ... ... 37 

wrtiii. 2. 44. ... ... ... ... ... gg 

V. 2. 1., V. 2. 13. ... ... ... 167, 172 

i. 1. 26., i. 1. 27., i. 1. 30. ... ... 8,' 9, 9 

gfi HK Km iv. 1. 61. ... ... ... ... 124 

i. 1. 24. ... ... ... ... ... 8 

KffcfRK i. 1. 28. ... ... ... ... 9 

1. 1. ... ... ... ... i 

iii. 1. 62. ... ... ... ... 78 

*fcl«rc!roiv. 2.50. ... ... ... ... ... 139 

*re re ar*n^ii, 1. 1., «. 1. 2 ., ii. 1. 6. ... ... 22 , 22, 23 . 

_!W«n?*T iv. 2. 46. ... ... ... ... ... 138 * 

frauswiv. 1. 31. ... ... ... ... ... 159 

ii. 2. 28., ii. 2. 29. ••• ••• ••• ...50,51 

frapiftNr^iii. 2. 14. ... ... ... ... 87 

iv. 2. u.... ... ... ... ... 130 

*W*Krr ii. 2. 33. ... ... ... ... ... 52 

«Rf*RSIT^ii. 2. 32. ... ... ... ... ... 51 

3PI3WTOV. 2. 1. ... ... ... ... ... 167 

ii. 2. 36. ... ... ... ... ... 52 

SFWtSH^iii. 2. 23., v. 1. 9. ... ... ... 90,148 

iii. 2. 35. ... ... ... ... ... 93 

BRSiraW v. 2. 22. ... ... ... ... ... 174 

irefaarite iii. 1. 41. ... ... 73 

fR*g<inWR^v. 1. 15. ... ... ... 152 

*rc$i.l.l5. ... ... ... ... ... 6 

nwtercui. 1. 15. ... ... ... ... ... 6 

irasfrreft ii. 2. 4. ... ... ... ... 44 

IRqftnfP ii. 1. 23. ... ... ... ... 29 

iv. 2. 25. ... ... ... ... ... 132 

*WWWS.ii. 2?52., ii. 2. 63. ... !.. ... ...56,60 

fRSFQITfc iii. 2. 45. ... ... ... ... ... g 8 

iraqwiPiraT3.iii. 2. 47. ... ... ... ... gg 

ii. 2. 54. ... ... 57 

ii. 1. 41., iv. 1. 16. ... ... ... 34, m 

v. 2. 22. ... ... ... ... ... 474 



( HI ) 



Page. 

v. 2 . 23 . ... 

... 175 

vritan v. 1. 1., v. 1. 14. 

140, 151 

iv. 1. 25. 

... 113 

IffoST* iii. 2. 25., v. 1 32. 

90, 160 • 

iv. 1. 27 , iv. 1. 66. 

113, 126 

Vfaim iv. 1. 26. ... 

... 113 

2. 24., iv. 1. 26. ... 

50, 113 

^ftgwrar^v. 1. 35., V. 1. 36. ... 

161,162 

v. 1. 35., v. 1. 36. 

161,162 

ii. 2. 52. ... 

... 56 

ii- 2. 15., ill. 2. 77., iv. 1. 66. 

47, 106, 126 

nftSTOH* v. 1. 32. ... 

... 160 

Vft&HI iv. 1. 23. ... 

... 113 

yftfiwgr: iv. 1. 22., iv. 1. 23. ... 

112, 113 

nftftalSR: iv. 1. 24. 

... 113 

nfrtra ii. 2. 58. 

... . 58 

ii. 2. 57., iii. 2. 77 

58, 194 

nfripiT^ii. 1. 57., ii. 2. 56., iii. 2. 31., iii. 2. 69., v. 2. 24., 

...39,58, 


92, 104, 175 

nftqit ii. 2. 57. 

... 58 

lrfr[3$T iii. 2. 40. ... 

... 95 

irirT^n iv. 1. 57. ... 

... 1 22 

iv. 1. 46. ... • •• 

... 119 

flftvTtfr iv. 1. 17. ... 

... Ill 

HgSEW iii. 1. 22. ... 

... 155 

Kg^B^nq.v. i. 22 . ... 

... 155 

ugH5T^iii. 1. 41. ... 

... 73 

W^flFOTv. 2 17. ... 

... 173 

iii. 2. 75. ... 

... 106 

ngw% v. 1. 1. 

... 140 

i. 1. 16., ii. 1. 20., iii. 2. 22. 

6, 28, 89 

ii. 2. 21., iv. 1. 41., iv. 2. 30. 

49, 118, 134 

Hgqqfti: ii. 1. 45., iii. 1. 50., iv. 2. 18., v. 1. 17. 

35, 75, 131, 153 

aaramjtl ii. 1. 42t, ii. 2. 46., iii. 2. 76., iv. 1. 33., iv. 1. 

60., iv. 2. 

6., iv. 2. 11., iv. 2. 25., v. 1. 20., v. 1. 24. ... 35, 55, 106, 115, 123, 128, 

129, 132, 154, 156 

v. 1. 12. ... 

... 150 



v. 1. 3 0 , . . . . . . iii . . . « . . l^J^J 

wgqsftn^ii. 2. 20., ii. 2. 21., V. 1. 29. ... ... 49, 49, 159 

1. 23., ii. 2. 21., V. 1. 38. ... ... 7, 49, 102 

ii. 2. 37., iii. 1. 34., iii. 1. 41., iii. 1. 66., iii. 2. 15;, iv. 

2.26. ... ... ... 53,71,73,79,87,133 

iii. 1. 39., iv. 2. 26. ... ... 72, 133 

v. 1. 29. ... ... ... 159 

ii. 1. 49., ii. 1. 53., ii. 1. 54., ii. 2. 19., ii. 2. 20., ii. 2. 22., 
ii. 2. 27., ii. 2. 34., ii. 2. 35., ii. 2. 36., ii. 2. 38., iii. 1. 40., iii. 1. 

45., iii. 1. 65., iii. 2. 18., iii. 2. 20., iii. 2. 24., iii. 2. 39., iii. 2. 

55.. v. 1. 29., v. 1. 30. ... 36, 38, 38, 49, 49, 49, 50, 52, 52, 52, 53, 

72, 74, 79, 88, 89, 90, 95, 100, 159, 159 

iv. l. 4. ... ... ... ... ... HO 


ii. 1. 66. 

iii. 1. 19., iii. 2. 64., iv 
ii. 2. 62. 
v. 2. 17. ... 

ggqp T i. 1. 3 


1. 59., iv. 2. 41. 


... 41 

68, 103, 123, 137 
... 59 

... 173 
... 2 


i. 1. 5., ii. 1. 30., ii. 1. 37., ii. 1. 49., ii. 2. 17., iii. 2. 17. ... 3, 

31, 33, 36, 48, 88 

ii. 2. 2. 

iii. 1. 50. 

*5pftal!TTOT iii. 1. 34. 

Hjftqcqn^ii. 1. 49. 

V. 2. 1., V. 2. 23. 
ii. 2. 13. 

ugfrilTOq^iv. 1. 27. 

«fjjqr? ii. 1. 61., ii. 1. 63., ii. 1. 67. 
iffgqnp ii. 1. 66., iv. 1. 60. 

2. 14. ... 

«gqitv. 2. 15. 

iv. £ 48. 

V$tf; i. 1. 23., ii. 1. 1., iii. 1. 36., iii. 1. 67., iv. 1. 35. 

WtaWT^v. 1. 37. ... 
ii. 1. 1. 

SlWuHR iii. 2. 18. ... 

P i. 2. 5#" ... ... ... 


... 43 

... 75 

... .71 

... 36 

167, 175 
... 49 

... 113 
40, 40, 42 
41, 123 
... 172 
... 175 
... 138 
7, 22, 71, 79, 116 
167 

" ... 22 
... 88 
... 15 


• • * 



< 'T ) 


* p age. 

^«Ti^WIT^ii. 2. ii. 2. 5., v. 1. 22. ... ... 44,44,155 

wg?T ii. 1. 58. ... ... ... ... ... 39 

WSP iii. 2. 27. ... ... ... ... ... 91 

<RTC i. 1. 2., i. 2. 16., ii. 2. 40., iii. 1. 12., 3. 2. 52., iv. 2. 12., iv. 

2. 20. ... .. ... 2, 19, 54, 66, 100, 129, 131 

1. 15., v. 2. 1., v. 2. 3., v. 2. 6. ... ... 6,167,168,169 

WTOMI^ ii. 2. 2. ... ... ... ... 43 

<WKH ^iv. 1. 16. ... ... ... ... ... 124 

wwfiwiroq, iii. 1. 12. ... ... ... ... 66 

«Rra^v. 1. 28. ... ... ... ... ... 158 

inawis ii. 2. 27., iv. 1. 56. ... ... ... 50,122 

iii. 1. 44., iii. 1. 45. ... ... ... 73, 74 

iv. 1. 44. ... ... ... ... 119 

- qareri ta V. 2. 12. ... ... ... ... ... 172 

TO?!?: ii. 1. 1. ... ... ... ... 22 

ii. 1. 1 ... ... ... 22 

VHRR33 ii. 2. 29. ... ... ... ... ... 51 

VrtRiT ii. 2. 32. ... ... ... ... ... 51 

fpqsr iii. 2. 9. ... ... ... ... ... 85 

VW& ii. 2. 31., v. 1. 38. ... ... ... 51,162 

WWJW iii. 1. 24., v. 2. 14. ... ... ... 69, 172 

WqHW g i. 1.30.... ... ... ... ... 9 

unrem^ii. 2. 32. ... ... ... ... 51 

ii. 2. 9. ... ... ... ... ... 45 

WWJr^ii. 2. 32. ... ... ••• ... •• 51 

WJ iii. 1.64. ... ... ... ... ... 78 

1. 1., v.1.4. ... ... ... 140,142 

iv. ',2. 26. ... ... ... ••• ... 133 

iii. 1.64. ... ... ... ... 78 

ircrtaP i. 2. 7o i. 2. 9. ... ... ... 16,17 

ii. 1. 27. ... ... ... ... 30 

1. 39. ... ... ... ... ... 12 

V. 2. 5. ... ... ... ... ... 169 

WfCWPfoBiii. 1. 68. ... ... ... ...' 80 

fprcrTCin. 2. 11. ... ... ... ... ... 86 

vqft&qqpnq, iii. 1. 15. ... ... 66 

i. 1. 31. ... ... *'••• - 4® 



( *1 ) 


Page. 

wftnrwt v. 2. 1. ... ... ... ... ... 167 

Wlfe^RPv. 2. 24. ... ... ... ... 175 

wraif iv. 1. 59. ... ... ... ... ... 123 

wrant i. 1. 2., i. 1. 22., iv. 1. 63. ... ... 2 , 7 , 124 

WfSRTJi. 1. 9. ... ... ... 4 

=SWT iii. 2. 13., iv. 2. 43., iv. 2. 45. ... 105, 137, 137 

inrot^i. i. 2. ... ... ... ... 2 4 

IWf^i. 1. 2. ... ... ... ... ... 2 

ircrS’v. 2. l. ... ... ... ... ... 167 

innfoi! v. 2. io. ... ... ... ... ... 171 

lift ii. 1. 22., ii. 1. 31., ii. 1. 40 , ii. 2. 15., ii. 2. 18., ii. 2. 21., ii. 2. 

31., ii. 2. 64., ii. 2. 66., iii. 1. 5., iii. 1. 10., ii. 1. 40., iii. 7. 47., 

iii. 2. 11., iii. 3. 19., iii. 2. 21., iv. 1. 66., iv. 2. 6., iv. 2. 12., iv. 


2. 43., iv. 2. 49 
v. 2. 17. 




? , v. 1. 27., v. 1. 28., v. 1. 39., v. 2. 9., v. 2. 12., 

29, 32, 34, 47, 48, 49, 51, 60, 61, 64, 65, 72, 74, 86, 
89, 89, 126, 128, 129, 137, 138, 158, 158, 

163, 171 , 172, 173 
... 55 

... 173 
... 164 
... 7 , 12 
34, 61 
... 52 

34, 16 
... 23 

... 133 
... 78 


«5*TCii. 2. 47. 
v. 2. 15. 
v. 1. 43. 

i. 1. 23:, i. 1. 38. 

!■ 40., ii- 2 - 67 - 
2. 33. ... 

V^irii. 1. 41., ii. 2. 11. 

irftjrc^ii. l. 6. 

trpaqg iv 2. 28. 

9&TC51 iii 1. 64. ... 

ii. 1. 15., ii. 1. 55., ii. 2. 2., ii. 2. 28., ii. 2. 29., ii. 2. 39., ii, 

2. 50., ii. 2. 53., ii. 2. 55., ii. 2. 58., iii. 1. 3., iii. 1. 11., iii. 1. 14., 

iii. 1. 45., iii. 1. 60., iii. 2. 29., iii. 2. 37., iii. 2. 53., iii. 2. 59., iv. 

1. 13., iv. 118. iv. 1. 24., iv. 1. 31., iv. 1. 36., iv. 1. 52., iv. 1. 57., 

iv. 1. 62., v?l. 28., iv. 2. 25., v. 1. 5., v. 1. 8., v. 1, 15., v. 1. 20., 

v. 1. 26., ... ... ... ... ... 27, 

38, 43, 50, 51, 53, 56, 57, 57, 58, 63, 65, 66, 74, 77, 92, 94, 100, 102, 
110, 111, 113, 114, 116, 121, 122, 124, 128, 132, 145, 148,’ 

152, 154, 158 

yafegM i q ui. 1.46. .... ... ... ... 74 



wsrfercrftn i. 2. 19., ▼. 2. 19. ... 

mjfcnrr v. 2. 1., v. 2, 19. 
mri&ftracrf' v. 2. 7., v. 2 . io, 
mmrii. 1. 46. ... 

W KW%j c? li. 1. 46. 

«ra*R$ii. 1. 47. 

WmiftWT* iii. 2. 7. ... 
mRSlf$WT*l iii. 2. 5. 

. IWWWK l ft .iv. 1. 28. 

^TS WWWL ii. 1. 37., ii. 2. 3. 

nAmtiv. l. is 

wren iv. 2. li. 

m&lt iii. 2. 56. ... 

2 . 66 . ... 
wnftiv. i. l. 
mnfcrcftr v l. 7. 

W IK W S re V. 2. 1., V. 2. 11. 

WIT*! iii. 1. 44., v. 1. 7. 
mmmwr ii. 1. 8., ii. 1. 58., ii. 2. 5. 

ItfTTO ii. 2. 1., ii 2. 9., iv. 1. 37., iv. 1. 66., v. 1. 29., 



v. 1. 31. 


Page. 
20,174 
167, 173 
170, 171 
... 36 

... 36 

... 36 

... 85 

... 84 

... 114 
33, 44 
... 110 
... 129 
... 101 
... 61 
... 140 
... 147 
167, 177 
73, 147 
24, 39, 44 
43, 45, 


117, 126, 159, 159 


UHq f g f ; ii. 1. 11., ii. 1. 39., ii. 1. 40., ii. 1. 54., ii. 2. 32., iii. 2. 46., iv. 

1. 59.. iv. 2. 7., iv. 2. 8. iv. 2. 14., iv. 2. 20., iv. 2. 45., v. 1. 24., 
v. 1. 36. ... ••• ••• ••• 25,34, 

34, 38, 51, 98, 123, 128, 128, 130, 131, 137, 156, 162 

witwrmrwf ii. 2. 7., ... ••• — ••• 45 

mn*fcg:iii. 1 34., ... ... ••• ••• ••• 71 

mnw^ii. 2. 55., iii. 1. 4., iii. 1. 24., iii- 2. 8 , iii. 2. 10., iii. 2. 12., 
iv. 1. 14., iv. 1. 63., iv. 2. 11., iv. 2. 33., v. 1. 12., v. 1. 13., 

* v. 1. 34. 57, 63, 69, 85, 85, 86, 110, 124, 129, 155, 150, 151, 161 

miwnrtii. 2.2. ... ... ••• ••• 43 

ii. 1. 40., ii. 1. 42., ii. 2, 33., iv. 1. 20., iv. 2. 12., v. 1. 27. ... 34 

35, 52, 112, 129, 158 


ii. 2. 12. 
Wfairmw^iii. 1 23. 

i. 8. 

2. 18.... 


46 

69 



• • f 



( viii ) 


2. 12. ... 


Page. 

.... 18 

iii. 1. 42. 


... 73 

^arf^nrnr: iii. 2. 9., iv. 2. 3., iv. 2. 31., iv. 

2. 36., iv. 2. 

34. ... 85 

2. 9., iv. 2. 31. ... 


127, 134, 135, 135 
85, 134 

iv. 1. 68. 


... 122 

V. 2. 23. ... 

, , , 

... 175 

3Rfas?Rj iii. 2. 49. ... 

• • • 

... 99 

ii. 2. 67. ... 


... 61 

iSfaajrRt iii. 1. 42. ... 


... 73 

iii. 1 . 22. 

« . . 

... 68 

v. 2. 9. 

« « . 

... 171 

itirilerer v. ?. 17. 

■ • « 

... 173 

i. 2. 12. ... 

. . . 

... 18 

Wrg*T iii. 2. 12., iii. 2. 48. ... 

... 

86, 98 

mgiPmiv. i. 2G. 


... 158 

v. 2. 2. ... 

... 

... 167 

waipm, iii. 2. 78. ... 

... 

... 106 

ii. 1. 07., iii. 2. 44., iv. 2. 46., iv. 

2. 47., 

... 42,96,138,138 

WgrerggT^iii. 1 22. 

... 

... 68 

WtWW ii. 2. 31. ... 

. . . 

... 51 

own^m^iii. 1. 68., ii. 2. 30., iv. 2. 38., v. 2. 16. 

... 42,51,136,173 

TORg'T’ffT i. 1. 26., i. 1. 27. 


... 8,9 

*F*3WI&lWn i. 1. 31. 

... 

... 10 

i. 1. 31., V. 1. 43., V. 2. 21. 

•V 

10, 164, 174 

i. 2. 6., ii. 1. 60., v. 1. 42., v. 2. 

24. 

... 16, 40, 164, 175 

HWjfclT^iv. 2. 48. ... 

. . . 

... 138 

3HJJPW iv. 1.6. ... 


... 109 

OT iv. 2. 31. 

... 

... 138 

WTO* iii. 1. 23. 

... 

... 69 

lUTOiRP iii. 1. 23. 

... 

... 69 

1. 4$ 

• * ’ 

... 117 

^Rtpraqhi- 2. 6., in. 2. 34. 

... 

84, 93 

^frmi^v. 2. 10. ... 

... 

... 171 

nUmro li. 1. 24. ... 

■ . • 

' ... 29 

^lHWmiii. 2. 60. 

... 

... 102 

iii. 2. 49. ... 

• > r 

... 99 



( ix ) 


i. 1. 4., i. 1. 28., i 2. 10., i 1. 41., i. 2. 14., i. 2. 10., iv. 2. 29., iv. 2' 

39., v. 2. 5., v. 2. 3., v. 2. 15. ... ... ... 2,9, 

13, 17, 19, 19, 134, 136, 169, 168, 173 
i. 1. 24., i. 1. 40., i. 2. 7., ii 1. 47., iv. 2. 46., iv, 2. 49., v. 2. 9., 8, 13, 

16, 36, 138, 138, 171 

W&:i. 1. 20. ... ... ... ... 7 

1. 2. 13. ... ... ... ... ... 18 

sHmi^ii. 1. 62. ... ... ... ... ... 40 

*&rfcTv. 1. 1. ... ... ... ... ... 140 

2. 14. ... ... ... ... ... 172 

«&rri?*ii. 1. 65. ... ... ... ... ... 41 

ii. 1. 29. ... ... ... ... ... 31 

iii. 1. 32. ... ... ... 71 

wfor i. 2. 13., ii. 1. 49. ••• ... ... 18,36 

114. ... ... ... ... 5 

Wlfc* v. 2. 7., v. 2. 16. ... ... ... 170,173 

Wltarci. 1. 27., i. 2. 12., i. 2. 16., ii. 1. 38., iv. 1. 3., iv. 1. 7., iv. 

1. 24. ... ... ... 9, 18, 19, 33, 108, 109, 113 


v. 2. I.,v. 2. 7. 
irokKs;;mr i. 2. 12. 

i. 2. 16., ii. 1. 38. 
iii. 1. 53., iii. 1. 56. 

wVrsilHHIwj ii. 2. 6. 

ii. 2. 4. 

ii. 2. 2. 
ii. 2. 3. ... 

v. l. 21. ... 
v. i. 21. 

STjqfa#: v. 1. 22. ... 

sri^STiii. 2. 44. 
sriNl&iv. 2. 49 

iv. 2. 48. ... 

*3 i. 1. 25., i. 1. 40., i 2. 12., ii. 1. 52. 
iRTO.iv. 2 42. 
ii. 2. 8. 
ii. 2. 8. ... 
ussfijlils ii. 2. 10. ... 


167, 170 
... 18 
19, 33 
76, 76 
... 45 

... 44 

... 43 

... 44 

... .155 
... 155 
... 165 
... 96 

... 138 
... 138 
8, 13, 18, 37 
... 137 
... 45 

... 45 

... 46 



( X ) 

- 

■ ■ ’ 

Page. 

i. i. 4] 

... 13 

i- 1. 1., i. 3. 1., iii. 1. 10., iii. 1 54., iv. 1. 42., iv. 2. 

12., iv. 2. 

15., iv. 2. 23., v. 2. 11. ... 1,14,65,76,118,129.130,132.171 

Hi. i. io. 

... 65 

TORIPlfiv. 2. 7. ... 

... 128 

<WWi 1. 32., iv. 2. 10. 

10, 129 

wnftriv. 2 . is 

... 130 

1. 33 ... 

... 32 

ii, 1. 32. .. 

... 32 

ii. 1. 34., iii. 1. 10., iv. 2. 3., iv. 2. 7., iv. 2. 8., iv. 2. 

10. ... 32 

64,127,128,128, 

... 129 

v. 2. 12. ... 

... 172 

mrita: iv. 2 9. ... 

... 128 

^HR^II^iv. 2. 50. ... 

... 139 

wAm^iv. 1. 8., iv. 1.31. 

109, 114 

WI«Sv. 1. 1. 

... 140 

v. 1. 4. 

... 142 

SWpi iv. 2. 44. 

... 137 

qqpwraiq, iii. 2. 19., ii. 3. 46. ... 

89, 98 

WWlft ii. 2. 38., iii. 2. 24. 

53, 90 

vcri^nr ii, 2. ii. ... 

... 46 

Xt&Mfrq v. 2. 20. ... 

... 174 

*fo*Tcl i. 1. 40., v. 2. 9. 

13, 171 

ufinruf V. 2. 9., v. ii. 18. 

171, 173 

i. 1. 40, ... 

... 13 

<fefRrra V. 2. 1. ... 

... 167 

^pRTST^iii. 1. 47. 

... 77 

IlfcrciT iv. 2. 4. 

... 127 

i. 1 28. 

9 

< uftftrs i. 2. 8. 

... 16 

^7- 

... 147 

<iNl« i. 2. 12., v. 1. 7., v. 1. 23., v. 2. 6. ... 18, 

140, 156, 169 

ii. 1. 45., ii. 1. 68., v. 1. 34. 

36, 42, 161 

v. 1 23. ... 

... 153 

Ilfirsfom i. 2. 15. ... 

. * ... ; 19 

i. 2. 17., v„ 1. 23. 

19 156 

tlfaft iv. 2 14- * :.'j* 

... 30 



wforcw iv. 2. 22. ... 

... 132 

irff^rn^iv. 2. 7. ... 

... 128 

iv. 2. 8., iv. 2. 0., iv. 2. 12. 

... 128, 128, 129 

HSR? iii. 2. 47. 

... 98 

2. 40, ii 2. 50., in. 1. 60., in. 1. 61. 

... 56,56,77,77 

wnWi.i. 4. ... 

2 

iwftrarc: ii. 2. 16, ii. 2. 18. ... * ... 

48,48 

TOBwroqHi. 1. 38. 

... 72 

i. 1. 4. ... 

2 

«ar$Wii. i. 2. 

... 22 

«aiWTii. 14. 

... 23 

HdWWWTt ii. 1. 4. ... 

... 23 

vctwaraift ii. l. 4. 

... 23 

iv. 2. 22. 

... 132 

swn ii. 2. 35. 

... 52 

fraq;iv. 1. so. 

... 121 

ms&in. 2. 9. 

... 45 

ireniv. 148. 

... 120 

irenwrii. l. 20. 

... 28 

i. 2. 13. 

... 18 

inSnpn ii. i. 6., iv. 2. 5. 

23,128 

srffel ii. 2. 33. 

... 52 

<*1^ ii. 2. 23., ii. 2. 39. . . . 

50, 53 

UCTii. 2. 16. 

... 48 

iimvavRl v. l. 7. 

... 147 

ii. 1* 10., ii. 1. 12., ii. 1. 41., ii. 1. 44., iv. 

1. 41., iv. 2. 33, 


V. 1. 10., V. 1. 33. ... 25, 26, 34, 35, 118, 135, 154, 160 

ii. 1. 8., ii 1. 12., ii. 1. 34., ii. 2. 7., ii. 2. 11., v. 1. 18., 

• v. 1. 33. ... ••• 24,26,32,45,46,153,160 

irfcgj ii. 1. 28., ii. 2. 10., ii. 2. 22., ii. 2. 27., ii. 2. 43., ii. 2. 48., iii. 1. 

10., iii. 1. 33., iii. 1. 55., iii. 2. 3., iii. 2. 11., iii. 2. 28., iii. 2. 39., 

'iv. 1. 5., iv. 1. 21., iv. 1. 43., iv. 1. 51., iv. 2. 12., iv. 2 27., v. 1. • 

11., v. 1. 30. ... 31, 46, 49, 50, 54, 56, 65, 71, 76, 83, 86, 91, 

95, 108, 112, 118, 121. 129, 133, 150, 159 
v. 1 18. ... ... -. - 153 

mpcrc iv. 2. u ••• — ••• ••• 127 



ii. 1. 35. ... 

iv. 1. 1*9. 

’WWTRCT iii. 1. 64. ... 

iii. 2. 1., iv. 2. 18., iv. 2. 19., iv. 2. 22. 

ureron. i. 1. 13. ... 

UTCT515 ii. 1. 22 . ... 

*T$frT ii. 2. 61., ii. 2. 66., ii- 2. 67., ii. 2. 68., iii. 2. 62. 

ii. 2. 65, ii. 2. 70. 

WW i. 1. 9., iii. 2. 32., iv. 1. 10. 

WTcIWk^v. 1 30. 

W!cR*i. 1. 4. 

WRWJpir iii. 1. 14. ... 

WTWgpnc^ iii. 2. 21. 

WWRft ii. 1. 4., iv. 1. 62. 
tllllAr iii. 2. 43. ... 

TOSPB i. 1. 10., ii. 1. 23. 

UPWRnftlt iii. 1. 16. 

vranmn ii. 1 . 21 . ... 

vmra^raR^iii. i. 3. 

W t ^ r ^ F K iv. 2. 46. 

WRHT iv. 1. 52. 

VTOf iii. 1. 49. ... 

i. 1. 14., ii. 2. 19., iii. 1. 60., iv. 1. 22., iv. 1. 53. 
iii. 1. 47. 
snftpraTR^ ii. 2. 74. ... 

Wlri[§ iii. 2. 55., iii. 2. 56., iv. 2. 42. 

Wnftaf ii. 1. 8., iii. 2. 51., iii. 2. 58., iii. 2. 59. 
writel ii. 2. 41. 

WTW*| iii. 2. 37. 

WlHwritWlMi. 2. 64. 
wnreri&T iii. 2. 44^ ... 

WT*rit ii. 2. 27. 

WlfrKrat iv. 1. 12., iv. 1. 20. ... 

wroi. 1. 13. 

WTSftr ii. 2. 1. 

WW%* ii. 2, 48. 


... 33 

... 112 
... 78 

. 83, 131, 131, 132 
5 

... 29 

. 59, 61, 61.61, 78 
... 60, 61 
4, 92, 109 
... 159 
2 

... 66 
... 81 
23, 124 
... 96 

... 5, 29 
... 67 

... 29 

... 63 

... 138 
... 121 
... 74 

5,49,77,112, 121 
... 74 

... 47 

100, 101, 137 
. 24, 99, 101, 102 
... 54. 

... 94 

... 60 
... 96 

... 43 

110, 112 
*.. 5 

... 43 

... 56 



( * •* 
xiu ; 


WPWrer V. 2. 16. ... 


Page. 
... 173 

rngfe* iv. 2 . 42. ... 


... 137 

tfftflwsrrat iv- 1- 39. 

• • • . * • • 

... 117 

WIST i. 1. 7., ii. 1. 52., ii. 1 

08. ... 

4,37,42 

gprewmiv. 2. 15. ... 

• • • • • • 

. ... 130 

hhphwwh^ ii. 1 . 69. 

... 

... 42 

WIST iii. 1. 44. 

• . * ... 

... 73 

WTJP* ii. 1. 69. 

... ... 

... 42 

i. 1. 17., iii. 2. 3(5., iii, 2. 38., iii. 2. 74. 

... 6, 94, 94, 105 

ii. 2. 19., ii. 2. 20., 

ii. 2. 21. 

7 

ii. 2. 47. 

... ... 

55 

mg iii. 2. 30., iii. 2. 62. 

... 

92, 102 

msSRI iii. 2. 44., iv. 1. 51. 

... ... 

96, 121 

mnsm: i. 1 . 11 . 

• • • ... 

5 

wmw^iv. 1. 52., iv. 2. 

28. ... 

121,133 

mfsw iii. 2. 44. ... 

... 

... 96 

wrcnriv. i. 48. 

... ... 

... 120 

iii. 2. 68. ... 

... 

... 104 

miRT: iii. 1. 22. ... 

... ... 

... 68 




v. 2. 6. ... ... ... ... ••• 169 

%J5&( i. 1. 10., iii. 2. 32 , iii. 2. 36., iii. 2. 37., iii. 2. 44.... 5, 92, 94, 94, 96 
iv. 1. 6. ... ... ... ••• ... 109 

ftftaiii. 1. 7. ••• ••• ••• 64 

W&K ii. 1. 41., ii. 2. 33., iii. 1. 48., iii. 1. 75., iii. 2. 58., iv. 1. 37. 

34, 52, 74, 81, 101, 117 

tfo i. 1. 10., i. 1. 13., i. 1. 15., i. 1. 17., i. 1. 21. i. 1. 38., i. 2. 11., 

ii. 1. 36., ii. 1. 47., ii. 1. 48., ii. 1. 65., ii. 2. 9., ii. 2. 18., ii. 2. 32. 

iii. 2. 73., iv. 1. 51., v. 1. 43. 5, 5, 6, 6, 7, 12, 18, 33, 36, 36, 

41, 45, 48, 51, 105, 121, 164 


(fapr i. 1. 4., iii. 1. 12. ... ... ... ...2,66 

<fi**raT«n^iii. 1. 72. ... ... ... ... 81 

(fSgror iv. 2. 14. ... ... ... ... ... 130 

Iii. 1. 37. ... ... ... ... 72 

i. 1. 12. ... ... •• ••• 5 

iftpHW iii. 1. 53. ... ... ... ... 76 



( xfo ) 

- 

tftpnfr i. 1. 4., i. 1. 9., i. 1. 11., ii. 1. 9., ii 

Page. 

1.1.58. ... 2,4,5,25,77 

tftpnfc ii. 1. 26. ... 

... 30 

CfafUltifr ii. I. 25., iii. 2. 10. ... 

...30,89 

iii. 2. 22 . ... 

... 89 

t 

twTC iv. 1. 19. 

... 112 

sr 

i. 2. 2., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1. 45., ii. 1. 58., iii. i 

!. 41., iii. 2. 42., iii. 2. 63. 

lWR^v.2. 1., v. 2. 14., v. 2. 16. 

15, 23, 35, 39, 95, 96, 103 
167,172,173 

¥*&T: ii. 1. 67. 

... 42 

3RBT iv. 1. 1. 

... 108 

fWv. 2. 25. 

... 175 

«£v. 2.6. 

... 169 

2. 19. ... 

... 49 

v. 1. 1., v. 1.4. 

... 140, 142 

3PCT^iii. 1. 70. ... 

... 80 

®fPCi. 1. 2., ii. 1. 6. 

... 2, 24 

wet iii. 1. 64-. 

... 78 

wrortblt ii. 1. 7. ... 

... 24 

WTOCTV. 2. 19. 

... 174 

wenA i. l- 2. 

2 

ii. 1. 7., iii. 1. 66. 

24, 79 

tfftFSftPrt’ iii- 1. 66. 

... 79 

iii. 2. 13., iii. 2. 17., iii. 2. 23., iii. 2. 

67., iii. 2. 70., iv. 1. 25., 

iv. 1. 30., iv. 1. 32., v, 1. 1. ... 87, 88, 90, 103, 104, 113, 114, 114, 140 

•fifth i. 1. 19., ii. 1. 9., ii. 1. 21., iii. 1. 26 

, iii. 2. 26., iii. 2. 64., 

iv. 1. 14., iv. 1. 22., iv. 1. 55., iv. 2. 41. 

... 7, 25, 29, 69, 91, 103, 110, 

‘ 

112. 122. 137 


^flftl^iii. 1. 26., iv. 1. 51. ... 

69, 121 

ii. 2. 12., iii. 2. 11., iii. 2. 26., iii. 

2. 52., iv. 1. 6., iv. 1. 66., 

v. 1. 12. 

.. 46, 86, 91, 10, 109, 126, 150 

WfP*li. 1.4. 

' .;. 2 

fffWgf v. 1. 13. ... 

... ,151 

ffflf iv, l, 40. 

... 120 



(xv) 


iii. 1. 49. . 
i. 1. 32., i. 1 
1. 36. 
3TOT?r ii. 1. 37. 

ii. 2. 02. 
■mu: i. 2. ii. 
ware* iv. l. 54. 

3<rsrora[i. 2. 14,, ii. 


34., i. 1. 38., V. 2. 13. 


2. 14., ii. 2. 15., ii. 2. 


ii. 1. 52. 

3q^5TS i. 1. 7., iv. 2. 42. 
gq foraq; ii. u. 68. ... 

2 . 21 . ... 

sqsro i. 1. 32. 

3?rsW i. 1. 38. 
sqtrcqf i. 2. 10. 

€qqf% v. 1. 26., v. 1. 43. 

ii. 2. 5., iv. 2. 37., v. 1. 22. 
a qq fa a i i. i. 40. ... 

qqqf%^JT: v. 1. 25. 

3qq% i. 1 23., ii. 1. 5., ii. 1. 35., ii. 1 39., ii 
ii. 2. 9., ii. 2. 40., iii. 1. 17., iii. 2. 21)., iii 

iv. 1. 60., v. 1. 28., iii. 2. 23.,- iv. 2. 24., 

v. 1. 17., v. 1. 23., v. 1. 24., v. 1. 25., v. 
v. 1. 35, v. 1. 36., v. 1. 38., v. 2. 15. ... 7, 
54, 67, 92, 96, 105, 109, 123, 128, 132, 

156, 156, 157, 158, 


Page. 
... 74 

... 10, 11, 12, 172 

... 11 
... .33 
... 59 

... 18 

... 122 

31., ii. 2. 61., ii. 2. 62. 

19, 47, 47, 51, 59, 59 
... 37 

...4, 137 
... 42 

... 54 

... .10 
... 12 
... 17 

158,104. 

57, 136, 155 
... 13 

... 157 

. 1. 43., ii. 1. 61., ii. 1.67., 

. 2. 42., iii. 2. 72., iv. 1. 9., 
v. 1. 3., v. 1. 6 , v. 1 13., 

1. 23., v. 1. 29., v. 1. 32., 

23, 33, 34, 35, 40, 42, 45, 

132, 140, 146, 151, 153, 

159, 160, 161, 162, 162, 173 


•TOP i. 2. 1., i. 2. 2., iii. 2. 12. ... 

qqqftrwrt iv. l. 4., 1. 2. 30. 

r fft t wre rr ^ iv. 1. 45. 
sq«#ii. 2 59 

tronpr i. 1. 3., ii. 1. 44., ii. 1. 45., ii. 1. 48. 
gqHT^i. 1.6. 
fquRsasapi i. l. 3. ... 

VTOTTO fi. I- 47. 
iwnlls ii. 1. 44 ... 


14, 15, 105 
118, 134 
119 
58 

2, 35, 35, 36 
3 
2 

36 

35 



( svi ) 


i. 1. 23., iv. 1. 28., iv. 2, 35., v. 1. 1. ... 7, 114, 135, 140 

vraftai i. 1. 5., ii. 1. 32., ii. 2. 20-, iii. 1. 75., iii. 2. 62., iv. 2. ... 73, 6, 

32, 49, 70, 73, 78, 81, 102, 129 

iii. 1. 35. ... ... ... ,71 


Sq^faW^ii. 2. 54., iii. 1. 54., iii. 2. 14., v. 2 13 
gqgforem * v. i. 27. 

ii. l. 10, ii. 1. 50., ii. 2. 43., iii. 1. 10., iii. 1. 28., iii. 1 


44., iii. 1. 63., iii. 1. 74., iii. 2. 13., iii. 2. 50., 

iv. 1. 32. 

ii. 2. 36. 


WSSTR^ii. 1. 31., iii. 1. 30., iv. 2. 36., v. 1. 27. 
gTO& n q . iii. 1. 23. 

W&ZKv. 1. 5. 

«mwgrc i q .ii. i. 48. 

v. l’ 2., V. 1. 43. 

StTOSRi i. 1. 38. 

SWfRH. iii- 2. 65. 
sfqrrcfRS^iii. 2. 65. 

JTIT^IT^iii. 2. 48- 
PJ& iv* 2. 46. 

«qnfa:i.2. l.,i.2. 2. . 

V. 2. 1., V. 2. 22. 
jpflTlT v. 1.4., v. 1. 16., v. 1. 25. 

9«T9«II ii. 1. 43., v. 1. 15., v. 1. 34. 

SWrt: ii. 2. 29. 

5HRisr«rar iii. l. 39. 

3*9 iii. 1. 21. 


iii. 2. 61., iv. 1. 30., 
..31,37, 54, 65,81,87,99, 162, 114, 114 

... ' 52 


57, 54, 76, 87, 129 
158 


32, 70, 136, 158 
69 
145 
'36 
140, 164 
12 
103 
103 
98 
138 
14,15 
167,174 
. 142, 153, 157 
. 35, 152, 161 

51 
72 
. 68 


sap i. 1. 40. 


13 


SDS iv. 1. 59. 


123 


3*i, 2. 17., iii. 2. 44., iii. 2. 61. iv. 1. 4., v. 1. 23. 19, 96, 102, 108, 156 

iii. 1. 9., iii. L 61. ... ... ... 65,77 



( acvii ) 


Page. 

ii. I. 32., ii. 1. 38., ii. 1. 44., iv. 2. 7. ... 32, 33, 35, 128 


ii. 1.30. „... ... 31 

«CTW*iv. 1.35. ... ... ... ... ... H6 

wfcrcrcinii. 1 . n. ... ... ... ... ... 65 

1.8., iv. 2. 11. ... ... ... 65,129 

«wr iii. 1. 57. ... ... ... ... ... 76 

•wwriv. 1.41. ... ... ... ... ... 118 

iii. 1. 1. ... ... ... ... 63 

•tftwriii. 1. 06. ... ... ... ... ... 79 

iii. 2. 60. ... ... ... ... ... 102 

2. 77. ... ... ... ... 106 

^rii. 2. 7. ... ... ... ... ... 43 

•JC^T iii. 2. 71. ... ... ... ... ... 104 

ii. 1. 0., iii. 1. 3., iii. 1. 60., iii. 1 73., iv. 1. 30., iv. 1. 55. ... 23 

* 


63, 79, 81, 116, 122 

ii. 1. 7., ii. 1. 22., iv. 2. 15., iv. 2. 36., iv. 2. 43., v. 1. 40. 

24, 29, 130, 136, 137, 163 


* 

Sfcrii. 2.2. 

nst, ii. 2. 14., iii. 2. 59. 
v. 1. 14. ... 


.. 43 

47, 102 
.. 151 


ART ii. 2. 64. ... ... ... ... ... 60 

tfcOTiv. 1. 22., iv. 2. 50. ... ... ... 112,139 

*Wv. 2. 20., v. 2. 24. ... ... ... 174,175 

iii. 2. 74., v. 1. 9. ... ... ... 105, 148 

«§ ii. 1. 59. ... ... ... ... ... 39 

iii. 1. 6. ... ... - ... ... ... 04 

ii. 1. 59., ii 2. 24., iii. 2. iii. 2. 45., iii. 2. 70., iii. 2. 72., iii. 

2. 75., iv. 1. 19., iv. 1. 20. ... 39, 50, 83, 98, 104, 105, 106, 112, 112 
,, iii. 1. 37. ... ... ... ... 72 

fRW**Ti.2.*12. ... ... ... ... ... 18 

WTO iii. 1. 44. ... ... ... ... ... 73 

«FTOTiv. 1. 16. ... ... ... ... ... HI 



( xviii ) 


Page. 


VtUB i. I, 40., ii. 2. 18., ii. 2. 35., iii. 2. 14., iii. 2. 18., iii. 2. 23., 

iii. 2. 24., iv. 1. 1!)., iv. 1. 30., iv. 1. 3?., iv. 1. 41., iv. 1. 42., 

iv. 2. 20., v. 1. 12., v. 1. 13., v. 1. 25., v. 1. 26., v. 1. 27., v. 1. 28., 

v. 1. 38. ... 13, 48, 52, 87, 88, 90, 90, 112, 114, 114, 118, 118, 


«Tfalf9T^iv. 1. 21. 

tljffoi iii. 2. 73. 


131, 150, 151, 157, 158, 158, 158, 162 

... 112 
... 105 


iv. 2. 25. ... 

TOT iii. 2. 44., iv. 2. 20., v. 1. 38., v. 1. 37., v. 2. 20. 


v. 1. 37. 
JiFshlW v. 1. 1. 

spq’hsm iii. 1. 6. 


... 132 
96, 131, 162, 
167, 174 
... 167 
... 140 
... 64 


TO i. 2. 9., ii. 1. 22., ii. 1. 39., iii. 2. 31., iv. 1. 44. 


ii. 1. 60. ... 

1. 2. 9. ... 

qraSRTC iv. 1. 45. ... 

yraraft ii. 2 . 55 . ... 

iv. 1. 46.... 

2. 17., v. 1. 5. 

$37 iii. 1. 45. 
f^Rrfcr iii. 1. 45. 
f iii. 2. 39. ... 

®?W*^ii. 2. 14. ... 

|S?raT ii. 1. 43. 

iv. 2. 17. 

fraraft iii. l. 30. ... 

iii. 2. 55., iii. 2. 56., iv. 2. 13. 
HHT iv. 1. 18., v. 2. 8. 

IRJIffo?* ii. 1- H. ... 
«Uff%WTRl.iii. 2. 6. 
ftptn iii. 2. 44., iii. 2. 61. 
ifST iv. 1. 59., iv. 1. 63., iv. 1. 65. 

iv. 1. 64. 

iii. 2. 18., v. 1. 24. 


17, 29, 34, 92, 
119 
... 40 

... 17 

... 119 
... 57 

... 119 
19, 145 
... 74 

... 74 

... 95 

... 47 

... 35 

... ’ 28 
... 70 

100, 101, 129 
111, 170 
... 25 

... ' 84 
96, 102 
12.3, 124, 125 
... 125 
88, 156 



( «X ) 

Page. 

SEWiii. 2, 72. ... ... ... ... ... 105 

iii. 2. 14. ... ... ... ... ... 87 

iv. 2. 40. ... ... ... ... ... 137 

ifrfr ii. 2. G4. ... ... ... ... ... 00 

TOUiv. 2. 21. ... ... ... ... ... 131 

iii. 1. 02., iii 2.8. ... ... ... ...78,85 

*1%?^ iii. 2. 30. ... ... ... ... ... 92 

•WM. 1. 14., iii. 1. 04. ... ... .. ...5,78 

q?9csriii. 1. 60. ... ... ... ... 77 

HWI# iv. 2. 32. ... ... ... ... ... 135 

W ff ffr l iii. 1. 60. ... ... ... ... 77 

»T*R ii. 1. 68. ... ... ... ... ... 42 

nqft ii. 1. 47. ... ... ... ... ... 36 

<p0 ii. 2. 69., iii. 1. 06., iii. 1. 67., iii. 1. 74., iii. 1. 75-, iii. 2 50., iii. 2. 

52., iii. 2. 57., iv. 1. 60. ... 61, 79, 79, 81, 81, 99, 100, 101, 123 

JpDTJi. 1. 14. ... ... ... ... ... o 

fpBiWCiii. 1. 28., iii.2. 1G. ... ... ... ...70,88 

g*nrercnfa ii. 2, 59. ... ... ... ... 58 

35 iv. 2. 42. ... ... ... ... ... 137 

v. 1. 3. ... ... ••• ••• ••• 141 

foftlfcraiv. 1. 3. ... ... ••• ••• 141 

iii. 2. 49., iv. 2. 47. ... ... ... 99, 138 

tfgHF ii. 1. 43., iii. 1. 44., iii. 1. 67., iii. 2. 47., iv. 2. 28.... 35, 73, 79, 98, 133 

iii. 2. 47., iii. 2. 49. ... ... ... ...98,99 

WpirPT iv. 2. 14. ... ... ... ••• 130 

W ^mWl iii. 1. 31., iii. 2. 15., iii. 2. 45. ... ... 70, 87, 98 

fhfl^iii. 2. 25. ... ... ... ••• ••• 90 

sr 

*€ iv. 1. 12., iv. 1. 13. ... ... ••• 110,110 

SlfcR^iv. 1. 12. ... ... ... .• ••• HO 

SRTtftv. i. 18. ... ... ... ••• 148 

■aZIWW ii. 2. 15. ... ... ... ... 47 

srrcr i. 1, 12. ... ... ... ... ■••• ^ 



(. XX ) 


Page. 

* i. 1. 5., i. 1. 23., i. 2. 1U i 2. 19., ii. 1. 2., ii. 1. 3., ii. 1. 4., ii. 1. 

15., ii. 1. 16., ii. 1. 25., ii. 1. 26., ii. 1. 27., ii. 1. 32., ii. 1. 35., ii. 

1. 51., ii. 1. 54., ii. 1. 51., ii. 1. 61., ii. 1. 62., ii. 1. 69., ii. 2. 2., 

ii. 2. 5., ii. 2. 12., ii. 2. 13., ii. 2. 14., ii. 2. 15., ii. 2. 36., ii. 2. 38., 

ii. 2. 40., ii. 2. 52., ii. 2. 53., ii. 2. 54., ii. 2. 55., ii- 2. 58., ii. 2. 

64., iii. 1. 15., iii. 1. 18., iii. 1. 29., iii. 1. 30., iii. 1. 35., iii. 1. 37., 

iii. 1. 38., iii. 1. 42., iii. 1. 43., iii. 1. 51., iii. 1. 57., iii. 1. 67., iii. 

1. 73., iii. 2. 5., iii. 2. 7., iii. 2. 14., iii. 2. 20., iii. 2. 24., iii. 2. 

32., iii. 2. 42., iii. 2. 63., iii. 2. 69., iii. 2. 72., iii. 2. 75., iii. 2. 

76., iv. 1. 9., iv. 1. 44., iv. 1. 58., i v. 1. 61., iv. 1. 68., iv. 2. 8., iv\ 

2. 9., iv. 2. 10., iv. 2. 15., iv. 2. 20., iv. 2. 21., iv. 2. 22., iv. 2. 

23., iv. 2. 24., iv. 2. 24., iv. 2. 29., iv. 2. 34., iv. 2. 36., iv. 2. 37., 

iv. 2. 40., iv. 2. 45., iv. 2. 46., iv. 2. 47., v. 1. 4., v. l.'O., v. 1., 7., 

v. 1. 8., v. 1. 9., v. 1. 11., v. 1. 15., v. 1. 22., v. 1. 34., v. 1. 31., 

v. 1. 3 3., v. I. 34., v. 2. 1., v. 2. 18., v. 2. 25 3,7, 18, 20, 23, 

23, 27, 27, 30, 30., 30, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 40, 40, 42, 43, 44, 46, 46, 
47, 47, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 57, 57, 58, 60, 66, 67, 70, 70, 71, 72, 72, 73, 
73, 75, 76, 79, 81, 84, 85, 87, 89, 90, 92, 96, 103, 104, 105, 100, 106, 
109, 119, 122, 124, 126, 128, 128, 129, 130, 131, 131, 132, 132, 132, 

132, 134, 135, 1.36, 136, 137, 137, 138, 138, 142, 146, 147, 148, 1.48, 

150, 1.52, 155, 1.50, 159, 160, 161, 107, 173, 175 

... 102 
5 

... 43 

... 43 

... 60 
... 60 
... 16 
33, 105 
... 45" 


^WR iii. 2. 62. 

i. i. .12. 
«8J*ii.'2. 1. 

<fgfi!rr ii. 2. 1. ... 

ii. 2. 64. 
ii. 2. 64. 

^RTTi. 2. 7. 

^ii. 1. 36., iii. 2. 73. 
#ERii. 2. 9. 

%!Ti. 1. 4. 


5 


QRff i. 1. 1., i. 2. 2., i. 2. 17 

Bi. 2. 10., i. 2. 11., i. 2. 12., i. 2. 15. 


1,15,19 
... 17, 18, 18,49 


atm i. 1. 2., iii. 1. 25., iv. 1. 55. 


2,69,12 2 



■ ( xxi J 


Wmrffr iii. 1. 25. 

i. 1. 20. 

i. 1. 1., iv. 2. 50. 

W3V i. 2. 2. 

«RW: ii. 2. 08. 

*RWI iii. 1. 19. 

sr% i. 1. 1., i. 2. 2., i. 2, 20., ii. 2. 01., ii. 2. 07., iii. 1. 02. 

WfcT* i. 2. 18., ii. 2. 06., ii. 2. 71. 
snfoftrcfr ii. 1. 57. ... 

Hf&rRNvir ii. 2. 70. 

SWiii. 2. 30. 

W& iii. 1. 17. 

*T*f i. 1. 10., ii. 1. 23., 2. 1. 27., iii. 1. 17., iii. 2. 19., iii. 2. 20., iii. 2. 


00., iv. 2. 47., v. 1. 31. 
SOT* i. 1. 4., i. 1. 15. 
SrWHt i. 1. 2., iii. 2. 34. 

ffsrrfr i. i. io. 

iii. 2. 20. 


Page. 
... 69 

7 

1, 139 
... 15 

61 

... 68 
... 1, Id, 
21, 59, 01, 78 
19, 61, 62 
... 39 

... 61 
... 94 

... 67 


0, 29, 30, 07, 89, 91, 102, 138, 159 

... 2,6 
... 2,93 
5 

... 89 


i. 1. 2., i. 1. 5., i. 1. 14., i. 1. 22., i. 1. 24., i. 1. 31., i. 1. 36., i. 1. 

37., i. 2. 0., i. 2. 11., i. 2. 15., i. 2. 10., i. 2. 20., ii. 1. 0., ii. 1. 14-, 

ii. 1. 15., ii. 1. 18., ii. 1. 19., i. 1. 24., ii. 1. 40., ii. 1. 58., ii. 1. 

09., ii. 2. 6., ii. 2. 10., ii. 2. 20., ii. 2. 27., ii. 2. 33., ii. 2. 38., ii. 2. 

49., ii. 2. 53., ii. 2. 63., iii. 1. 3., iii. 1. 5., iii. 1. 23., iii. 1. 60., iii. 

1. 70., iii. 1. 71., iii. 1. 75., iii. 2. 9., iii. 2. 19., iii. 2. 21., iii. 2. 

22., iii. 2. 24., iii. 2. 30., iii. 2. 37., iii. 2. 40., iii. 2. 49., iii. 2. 62., 

iii. 2. 64., iii. 2. 65., iii. 2. 72., iii. 2. 73., iv. 1. 3., iv. 1. 21., iv. 1. 

. 27., iv. 1. 31., iv. 1. 32., iv. 1. 47., iv. 1. 50., iv. 1. 54., iv. 2. 3., 

iv. 2. 5., v. 1. 28., iv. 2. 13., iv. 2. 18., iv. 2. 20., iv. 2. 26., iv. 2. 

41., iv. 2. 45., iv. 2. 46., v. 1. 2., v. 1. 3., v. 1. 10.; v. 1. 29., v. 

2. 3. ... 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, Hi, 18, 19, 19, 11, 23, 26, 

27, 27, 28, 29, 34, 39, 42, 45, 46, 49, 50, 52, 53, 56, 57, 60, 03, 64, 69, 
79, 80, 81, 81, 85, 89, 89, 89, 90, 92, 94, 95, 99, 102, 103, 103, 105, 
105,108, 112,113, 114,114,119, 121, 122,127,128, 128,129,131, 

131, 133, 137, 137, 138, 140, 141, 149, 159, 168 

1# 1* • •• ••• ••• O 



\ 

/ 


i “ 

( xxu 


ii. 2. 8.... 

wrii. 1. 7. 

ITW iv. 2, 37., iv. 2. 50. 
?WVRi. 1. 40. 

’TfSWRT^ i. 1. 1., iv. 2. 1., 

mwnrRih: ii. 2. 16. 
m$i. 1.40. 
dcSfe: ii. 1. 18. ... 

TOT i. 1. 35., i. 1. 38., ii. 1. 
v. 1. 13. 


iv. 2 


u., u 


35. 


1. 48., iii. 2 
11 


Page. 
45 
24 

136, 139 

13 

1, 127, 135 
48 
13 
27 

68., iv. 1. 2., iv. 2 14., 

12, 23, 36, 104, 108, 130, 151 


ertf3*I3ffcr iii. 1. 39. 
ef?^T555^: iii. l. 33. 
ff^RST^ii. 2. 64. 
aqpPIW iii- 1-5. 

^stales!?*, iii. 1. 59. 
i. 1. 14. 

sr^if ii. 2. 61. 

^I^Wt^ iii. 1. 32. ... 

3rfg[*>rc: iii. 1. 20. ... 
affc&t iv, 2. 47. 
if^T iii. 1. 14., iv. 2. 22. 
fttprorc: ii. 2. 64. ... 
srjtnftn iii. 2. 14. ... 
ergprafssp iii. 1* 49., iii. 1. 54. 
?fiv. 2.48. 


iv. ii. 26. 

*|9f i. 1. 26., i. 1. 27., i. 1. 28., i 
?T*i. 1. 28. 


1. 29., iii. 1 


37. 


ii. 1. 40., ii. 2. 33. 
i. 1. 1., i. 2. 1. ... 
?nfr i. 1. 40. 
fffit iv. 1, 7., in* 2. 6. 
am iii. 1. 73., V. 1. 34. 
an$«f ii. 2. 64. 

iii. 1. 63. ... 
1. 13. 

*T**ii. I- 31- , • 


.. 72 

.. 71 

.. 60 
64 

.. 77 

5 

.. 59 

.. 71 

.. 68 
.. 138 
66, 130 
.. 60 
.. 87 

74, 16 
.. 138 

.. 133 


8,9, 


9, 9, 72 
..' 9 

34, 52 
.. 1,44 
.. 13 

109, 128 
81, 161 
... 60 
... 78 




( xxiii ) 



Page. 

3 i< 1. 9., ii. 2. 16., ii. 2. 59., ii. 2. 68., iii. 1. 71., iii. 2. 35 

, iii. 2. 40., 

iii. 2. 43., iv. 1. 50., iv. 2. 3., iv. 2. 26., v. ii. 15. 

4, 48, 56, 61, 

81, 93, 95, 96, 121, 127, 133, 173 

IJ5ST ii. 1. 16. 

... 27 

ii. 1. 16 

... 27 

fgtWHfoqHl iv. 1. 9. ... 

... 109 

gsrod v. l 32. 

... 160 

jpsf iii. 2. 21, 

... 89 

ii. 2. 60. 

... 59 

for iii. 1. 64. 

... 78 

fop i. 1. 13. 

5 

for iii. 1. 73. 

... 81 

fot iv. 1. 6. 

... 169 

iv. 1 54., iv. 2. 8. 

122, 128 

fo ii. 1. 27. 

... 50 

focmriv. 1. 22. 

... 112 

iv. 2. 13. 

... 129 

i, 1. 12., iii. 1. 54., iii. 1. 57., iii. 2. 50. 

5, 76, 76, 101 

6S*ranm*»T5^ in. 1. 52. 

... 75 

wm ii. 2 62. 

... 59 

srrcr ii. l. 38. 

... 33 

f*v. 2. 9.,v. 2. 17. ... 

171,173 

ftlffop* i. 1. 5., i. 2. 11. 

. ...3,18, 

s&iv. 7. 19. 

... 131 

ii. 1. 8., ii. 1. 12., ii. 1. 15., v. 1. 18., v. 1. 19. 24, 

26, 27, 153, 154 

sftTOT iv. 1. 3. 

... 108 


iii. 2. 12., iii. 2. 17. ... ... ... 86,88 

. iii. 2. 66. ... ... ... ... ... 102 

iii. 1. 1. ... ... ... ... 63 

iii. 2. 38., iii. 2. 74., iv. 1. 22., iv. 1. 49., v. 1. 8. ... 94, 

105, 112, 120, 148 

qt$iii. L 4. ... ... ... ... ... 63 

iv. 1. 27. ... ... ... ... ... 113 

TOlliii. h 47. ... ... ... 74 

6 


iii. 1. 1. 


• • * 


• • • 



.. . ( xriv ) 

' v«. 

Page. 

ip* j. 1. 2., i. 1. 9., i. 1. 10., iii. 2. 44., iv. 1. 58. 

... 2, 4, 5, 96, 122 

pif i. 1. 21., iv. 1. 55. 

, 7,122 

i. 1. 8., iii. 1. 50., iii. 2. 73. 

4,75,105 

TO i. 1.5. 

3 

i. 1. 1., 1. 1. 36., iii. 1. 11., v. 1. 6. ... 

1,11,65,146 

f'fflFcT: i. ]. 25., v. 1. 11. 

8,150 

SSRPh: v. 1. 4., v. 1. 14. 

142, 151 

fSFaftftrsro* iii. 1 . 11 . 

... 65 

SSPtTOT V. 1. 9. ... 

... 148 

v. 1. 34. 

... 161 

fa ii. 1. 22. 

... 29 

i. 1. 2., i. 1. 9., i. 1. 20., ii. 1. 45., ii. 1. 60., 

iv. 1. 8., iv. 2. 1., 

iv. 2. 2., v. 1 42., v. 1. 43., v. 2. 21. 

2, 4, 7, 35, 40, 109, 127, 
127, 164, 174, 174 

v. 1. 39., v. 1. 41. 

163,163 

ii. 1. 60. 

... 40 

i. 41. 

... 163 

iv. l. 57. 

... 122 

^TOi: i. 1. 18., iv 1. 2. 

7, 108 

iv. 7. 7., ii. 1. 58. 

109, 39 

£37 iii. 1.26., iii. 1. 75., iii. 2. 17. 

69, 81, 88 

ii. 2. 45. ... 

... 55 

gSTO ii. 2. 18., iv. 2. 20. 

48, 131 

iii- 1. 36. 

... 71 

iii. 2. 17. ... 

... 88 

^Tiii. 2. 50. 

... 99 

f|[WTfiTHRT^iii. 1. 8 

... 65 

H^n^ncn^iii. i. 9. 

65 

t&fcra: i. 1.8. 

4 

aft i. 1. 10., iii. 2. 36., iii. 2. 44., iv. 1. 3. ... 

... 5, 94, 96, 108 

iii. 2. 34. 

... 94 


% 


i. 1. 23., i. 1. 36., i. 2. 14., ii. 1. 1., ii. 2. 46., ii. 2. 53., iii. 2. 44., 
v. 1. 28., v 1. 4., v. 1. 23., v. 1. 24., v. 2. 2., v. 2. 3. ... '7, 11, 19, 

22, 55, 57, 96, 128, 142, 156, 167, 168 

... 132 


iv. 2. 22. 



XXV / 


Si^n^iv. 1.25. ... 

1. 48.... 

i. 1. 36- 

ii. 2. 51. ... 

1. 34. 

ii. 2. 55. 

*mfqW- 1. 23. ... 

ii. 1 35., ii. 2. 04. 
t|jl iii. 1. 5— 4. 


Page. 
... 113 
... ,74 
... 11 
... 50 

... 161 
... 57 

7 

...33, 00 
... 70 


51 i. 1. 38., i. 2. 10., ii. 1. 1., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1.0., ii.l. 10., ii. 1. 14., ii. 1. 19., 



1. 

21., 

ii. 

1. 23., 

ii. 1. 

24., 

ii. 1. 

29., 

ii. 1 

. 31, 

ii. 

1. 

32, 


1. 

30., 

ii. 

1. 38., 

ii. 1. 

41., 

ii. 

1 

47, 

ii. 

1. 48, 

ii 

1, 

50, 


1. 

59., 

ii. 1 

. 07., ii 

1. 08 

., ii. 

2. 15 

■, 

ii. 2 

10. 

ii. 2. 

0, 

i. 2. 7, 


2 

9., ii 

2. 

11., ii. 2. 24., 

ii. 2 

25. 

ii. 2. 31., ii. 2. 33 

, ii 

2. 

37, 


2. 

44., 

ii. 

2. 46., 

ii. 2 

. 51., 

ii. 

o 

57. 

ii. 

2. 03, 

ii. 

2. 

04, 

i. 

2. 

67., 

iii. 

1. 2, 

iii. 1 

6., 

iii. 

1. 

8, 

iii. 1 

. 13, 

ii. 

1. 

16, 

ii. 

1. 

21., 

iii. 

l. 24., 

iii. 1 

27., 

iii. 

1 

34, 

iii. 

1. 40, 

iii. 

1. 

45, 

ii. 

1. 

48., 

iii. 

1. 53., 

iii. 1 

50., 

iii. 

1. 

57, 

iii. 

1. 59, 

iii. 

1. 

02, 

ii. 

1. 

65., 

iii. 

1. 09., 

iii. 

1. 74. 

. >ii 

. 

2. 4, 

iii. 

2. 8, 

iii. 

2. 

10, 

ii. 

2. 

13., 

iii- 

2. 15., 

iii. 2 

10, 

iii. 

2. 

19, 

iii. 

l 20, 

iii. 

2. 

23, 

ii. 

2. 

2o:, 

iii. 

2. 27., 

iii. 2 

30, 

iii. 

2. 

31, 

iii. 

2. 32., 

iii. 

2. 

41., 

ii. 

2. 

52., 

iii. 

2. 58., 

iii. 2 

01., 

iii. 

o 

05, 

iii. 

2. 67, 

iii. 

0 

74, 

ii. 

2. 

78., 

iv. 

1. 3., iv. 

1. 0., 

iv. 1 

.8., 

iv 

. 1. 12, u 

. 1. 10. 

, iv 

1. 

17, 

V. 

1. 

20., 

iv. 

1. 23., 

iv. 1. 

20., 

iv. 

l. 

29, 

iv. 1 

. 32, 

iv. 

1. 

33, 

V. 

1. 

35., iv. 1 

38., iv. 

1. 39. 

iv. 1 

.42. 

iv. 1, 45, iv. 1. 48 

iv 

. 1. 

53, 

V. 

1 

. 56 

, iv. 

1. 04., 

iv. 1 

05., 

iv. 

1 

. 08. 

iv. 

2. 0, 

iv. 

2. 

10, 

V. 

2 

14. 

, iv 

2. 10. 

, iv. 

2. 39 

. iv - 

9. 44 

, v. 

1. 1.1, 

V. 

1 . 

15, 


v. 1. 19., v. 1. 13., v. 1. 34. ... 12, 19, 22, 23, 25, 25, 20, 28, 29, 29, 

29, 31, 32, 32, 33, 33, 34, 30, 36, 39, 39, 42, 42, 42, 43, 45, 45, 

45, 46, 50, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 55, 56, 58, Oft, 6ft, Oft, 63, 04, 65, 

00, 67, 68, 69, 69, 71, 72, 74, 74, 76, 70, 70, 77, 78, 79, 80, SI, 

84„ 85, 85, 87, 87, 88, 89, 89, 90, 91, 91, 92, 92, 92, 95, 100, 


101, 102, 103, 103, 105, 106, 108, 109, HO, 111, 111,112, 113, 

113, 114, 114, 116, HO, 117, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 125, 

125, 120, 128, lSfl, 130, 130, 130, 137, 150, 152, 154, J57, 101 



' (, xxvi ) 

Page. 

HHferciii. 1.43. ... 

... 73 

iii. 2. 55., iii. 2. 50. 

100,101 

H*TC iv. 2. 32. 

... 135 

HHHiii. 1. 43. 

... 73 

HTHTii. 2. 16. 

... 48 

5TTCT5*T^iii. 1. 5. 1. 

... 75 

Hid iii. 1. 10. 

... 65 

Bmnfti. l. 39. 

... 12 

folfflft i. 1. 32. 

... 10 

i. 1. 1., i. 2. 2., i. 2. 19., i. 9. 20., v. 2. 1. 

... 1.15, 20, 21, 167 

PW5WIH v. 2. 23. ... 

... 175 

ftwggrraqii. 2. 19. ... 

... 20 

PWlSHv. 2. 2. 

... 174 

#191 v. 1. 1., v. 1. 14. 

140, 151 

ftwf-iv. 1. 29., v. 1. 35., v. 1. 30. 

114,161,162 

ii. 2. 38., ii. 2. 55., iii. 2. 24., iii. 2. 76., v. 1. 

15., v. 1. 35., 

v. 1. 36. .. ... ...53,57,90,106,152,161,162 

ftWcHIHii. 2. 15., ii. 2. 25., iii. 1. 5., iv. 1. 29. 

... 47, 50,64,114 

ii. 2. 52, iv. 1. 10. 

56, 109 

ftSTCHiv. 1. 28. 

... 114 

farom V. 1. 35. ... 

... 161 

dWTHt ii. 2. 53. 

... 57 

ii. 2. 15., ii. 2. 18. 

... * ...47,48 

ii. 1. 65., iv. 1. 60. 

41, 123 

iii. 2. 44. ... 

... 96 

ii. 2. 37., iv. 1. 7., iv. 1. 9., iv. 1. 24., iv. 2. 36. 

53,109,109, 
113, 136 

iii. 2. 70., iv. 2. 2., iv. 2. 3. 

104,127,127 

ftftwra^iii. 2. 70. ... 

... 104 

ftfaTOK^ii. 1. 25., ii. 1. 26., iii. 1. 21., iii. L 

27., iii. 2. 36., 

iii. 2. 67., iii. 2. 75., iv. 1. 23./,iv. 1. 68.... 

30, 30, 68, 94, 103, 


106, 113, 126 

MlwJTHI iv. 2. 1. ... 

... 127 

ftBraW iii. 2. 44. ... 

, ... 96 

1. 11. ... 

... 25 

ftWW ii. 2. 58., iii. 2. 40., iv. 2. 46. 

58,95,138 

frOTt iii. 1,18. 

... 67 



( «vii ) 


2. 57., ii. 2. 58. 
ftqftii. 2. 58. 
famfcfj iii. 2. 12. ... 
f*&nT iii. 1. 50. 

v. 2. 1., v. 2. 8. 
iii. 7. 18.... 
v. 2. 23. ... 
iv. 1. 43. 
i. 1. 1., 1. 2. 7. 
fcrofcii. 1. 41. 
ftrffsv. 1. 27. 

^5T*‘ v. 2. 3. 

fcrafe tq ^ v. 2. 8. ... 

iv. 1. 18., iv. 1. 53. 
i. 2. 14., v. 1. 43. 
£tf% iii. 2. 38. 


Page. 
...58,58 
... 58 

... 80 
... 75 

167, 170 
... 67 

... 175 
... 118 
... 1,16 
... 13 

... 158 
... 168 
... 170 
111 , 121 
10, 164 
... 94 


Ifmt iv. 2. 1., V. 1. 10. 

127,149 

%t^ra^v. l. io. ... 

... 149 

iii. 2. 17. ... 

. ... 88 

ftfWb iii. 2. 36. ... 

... '94 

frfrreri. 1 . 1 . 

1 

ftwrffcv. 1. 8. 

... 148 

&5TW iv. 1. 13., iv. 1. 35., 

iv. 1. 44., iv. 1. 47., iv. 1. 54., iv. 1. 56. 

110, 116, 119, 119, 122, 122 

ft«TOiv2. 44. 

... 137 

iv. 1. 7., iv. 1. !). 

109,109 

s^qii. 2. 43. 

... 54 

vqjt v. 2. 1., v. 2. 12. 

167,172 

"WJ i. 1. 41., i. 2 1., v. 2. 5. 

13,14,169 

qqqfrqqmit i. 1 . 41. 

<* 

... 13 

q^nii. 2. 29. 

... 51 

•wrt’. V. 1. 22. 7.. 

. ... 155 

<Hi. 2. 1. 

... 14 

q^gqt^iii. 1. 58. • ... 

... 77 

<f^$«qt iii. 1. 62. ... 

... 78 



( xxviii ) 


^iqjriv. 1.29. 
fern* iii. 1. 21. ... 
qffiv. 2. 26. 
q?R5 iii. 1. 44. 

<15 iv. 2. 14. 
iRfSTt ii. 1. 39. 
qfiRTar ii. 1. 39. ... 

q?fpt» ii. 2. 68. 
q<? ii. 2. 60. 

iii. 1. 20. ... 

qnW iii. 2. 10. 
qci. 1. 29. 

ii. 1. (if). ... 

q*J£ir iii. 2. 50. 

TONri. 1. 29. 

i. 1. 29. ... 

<rcw V. i. 43., V. 2. 21. 
<*W$§iii. 2. 38. ... 
«Riv. 2. 17. 

q qgfrttq V. 2. 1., V. 2. 22. 
q^cRqT^iii. 2. 50.... 
qijqqi iv. l. 57. 
qftg g ii. 2. 62., iii. 2. 44. 

iNi 2. 1. 
qfrspfiv. 1. 53. ... 

qftqjW iii.,2. 10. ... 

q ft fl q W liii. 2. 42. ... 
qftq^v. 2. 9. 
qftq^Tv. 2. 17. 
qOqWW f i. 1. 25. ... 
q€te*BHi. l. 31.* ... 
qWT^ii- 1. 10. ’*... 
qtgqmii- l. 47. 
qgiv. l. 53. 
i|(qV iii* 2. 52. 
qjNHnqi iii* 2. 53. ... 
qpWfiii.1.4. 


Page. 

114 

68 

1.33 

73 

130 

34 

34 

61 

59 

68 

88 

9 

41 

99 

9 


9 

164 , 174 
... 94 

... 131 
167 , 174 
... 101 
... 122 
59 , 96 
... 14 

... 121 
... 88 
... 96 

... 171 
... 173 . 
8 

... 10 
... 25 

... 36 

... 121 
... 100 
... 100 
:.. 63 



( xxix ) 
♦ 


*IRremWT^iii. 1. 4. 

2. 33. 

t«WT ii. 1. 54. 
<nftrii. 2. 37. 
<n$tarra:iv. l. o. 
<?TOfwn^iii. 2. 41. ... 
•ITfgsr iii. 2. 37. 

iii. 1 . 28. - 

qifiraicqSrtt iii. l. 69. 

$te%.v. 1. 8. 


Page. 

63 

93 
38 
53 

109 

95 

94 
70 
80 

148 


iv. 1. 53. 
3*: i. 1. 19, 


ii. 1. 58, ii. 1. 67, iii. 2. 73, v 


2. 1, v. 2, 

7, 39, 42 


14, v. 2. 16. 

105, 167, 172, 173 


gpir i. 1. 39, ii. 2. 48. 

ii. 1. 67. ... 

ii. 1. 65. 

gw iv. 1. 19., iv. 1. 20. 
giiwMsn iii. 1. 37. 

ii. 2. 64. 
gCWii. 1. 54. 

gST ii. 1. 9, iii. 1. 64, iii. 1. 70, iii. 2. 17. 

i. 1. 5. 

if^Scr iii. 1. 64, iv. 2. 41. 

iii. 1. 70. 
ff^i. 1. 5. 

iv. 2. 5. 

■JsftwR?! iii. 1. 19. ... 

ii. 1. 25, iv. 1. 34, iv. 2. 9. 
gsHRSI^iv. 1. 34. ... 

1. 13, i. 1.14. 
ig^iarn iii. 1. 64 
tfafcw v. 2. 10. 

ITOTO i. 1. 30, i. 2. 4, i. 2. 7, v. 1. 1. 
STWWW i. 2. 4. 
snrcvrcra: i. 2. 7, V. 1. 16. 

iwrertira h v. 1 . 17. 
nf> rara ^ ii- i. 19. ... 


12, 56 
... 42 

... 41 

112, 112 
... 72 

... 60 
... 38 

25, 78, 80, 88 
3 

103, 137 
-... 80 


... 128 
... 68 
30, 115, 128 
... 115 
. . . 5, o 
... 78 

i7i 

9, 15, 16, 140 
... 15 

16, 153 
... 153 

... 28 



( XXX ) 


ucm^v. 2.7. 

ii. 2. 42., ii. 2. 56. 
srffcOT V. 1. 16. 
snrrcrer v. 1 . 34. ... 
tmreTR in. 2. 34. 


Page. 
... 170 
...54,58 
... 153 
... 161 
... 93 


qftlWfl ffr iii 2. 35.... 
sms i. 1. 3., ii. 1. 8., ii. 1. 9., ii. 
iv. 1. 11. 

srenp^i. 1. 4., ii. 1. 30. 

SRTOtr: iii. 1. 34. ... 

wwwiq m. 1. 69. ... 
iii. 2. 46. ... 

ii. 1. 31., ii. 1. 46. 


... 93 

1. 20., ii. 1. 21., ii. 1. 25., ii. 1. 42., 

... 2,24,25,28,29,30,35,110 

... 2,31 
... 71 

... 80 
... 98 

...32,36 


JRqtftaRiv. 1. 4. 

awfiU TT H T^iii- 1. 7., iii. 2. 20. ... 
ii. 1. 11. 

2. 18. ... 

KSPWfRT^v. 1. 9. ... 
a^RS iii. 2. 71. 

aftar i. 1-32., i. 1. 33., V. 2. 1., v. 2. 2. 

afNtv. 2. 3. 
sfiHmm v. 2. 5. ... 

a%fTOT! i. 1. 39. ... 

afiRfsr i. l. 27. 
a f fofc r ftra c re r- i. i. 29. 


... 108 
...64,83 
... 25 

... 19 

... 148 

... 104 

v. 2.4., v. 2. 5.... 10, 10, 167, 167, 

169, 169 
... 168 
. . 169 
... 12 
9 
9 


aftrgWW v. 1. 1., v. 1. 11., v. 2.2. 
v. i. o. 
v. l. 9. 
iii. 2. 53. 

flrftagf i. 2. 1., i. 2. 3., iv. 2. 49., v. 1. 17., v. 1. 21. 

l. IV ••• 
afo wg rc g rt i. i. 4i. ... 
iv. 2. 29. ... 


140, 150, 167 
... 148 
... 148 
... 100 


14,15, 138,153, 155 
... 153 
... 13 

... 134 


iv. 2. 35. 

v. 2. 9. ... 

v. 2, 6. ... 


135 

171 

169 



( &xxi ) 

Page. 

gftfrl-T i. 2. 14., ii. 1. 12., ii. 2. 5., iii. 1. 50., v. 1. 17., v. 1. 20., 
v. 1. 24., v. 1. 33., v. 1. 36., v. 1. 41., v. 1. 42. ... ...19,26, 

44, 75, 153, 154, 156, 160, 162, 163, 164 
1. 39,v. 2. 3., v.2.5. ... ... 163,168,169 

Slfil^SIv. 1. 42. ... ... ... ... ... 164 

siftta; ii. 1. 14., iv. 1. 9., v. 1. 13. ... ... 26, 109, 151 

nBrfcacaj iii. 2. 48., v. 1. 20. ... ... ••• 98,154 

v. 1. 33. ... ... ... ... ••• 160 

v. 1. 36. ... ... ... ... ••• 162 

iv. 1. 64. ... ... ... 1^5 

srtfarren iii. 1 38. ... ... ■ ••• ••• 72 

v. 1. 10. ... ... ... ••• ••• I 49 

ii. 1. 54. ... ••• ••• 38 

<wfr|iii. 1 . 5 . ... ... ••• ••• ••• 64 

sriftiT ii. 1. 19., iii. 2. 49. ... ... ... ...28,99 

ii. 2. 18., iii. 2. 26. ... ... ... ...48,91 

STC!T*r iv. 1. 60., iv. 2. 37. ... ... ••• 123,136 

SPSJT* iii. 1. 70. ... ... ... ••• - 80 

sfaet iii. 1. 20. ... ... ••• ••• •• 68 

snrrar i. 1. 1., i. 2. 1., ii. 1. 9., ii. 1. 14., ii. 1. 17., ii. 1. 18., ii. 1 47., 
iv. 2. 30., iv. 2. 31. -. 1, 14. 25, 26, 27, 27, 36, 134, 134 

ggTORn ii. 1. 53., iv. 2. 29. ... ••• 38,134 

mwl&t t ii. 1. 9. ... ••• ••• • • 25 

a. 1. 17- ••• 27 

srapnnrt ii. 1. 17. ... ••• 27 

sunn# i. l. 3. ... •• •• ••• 2 

«nnnro ii. l. 47. ... ... ... ••• ••• 36 

smntw ii. i. io. ... ••• ••• ••• 25 

SgifcT i. 1. 1*, ii. I* 16., ii. 2. 7., iv. 2. 31. ... ... 1,25,45,134 

SfrqUi. 1. 9. ... ••• ••• ••• • • 4 

affcraT ii. 1. 16. ... •• ••• ••• ••• 27 

afcnftRfr ii. 2. 7. ... ... m ••• 45 

*PWr i. 1. 10., V. 1. 37., V. 1. 38. ... ••• 5 . 1° 2 » 462 

iv. 2. 11. ... ... ••• ••• ••• 12& 

U^UIK^iv! 1. 16 ... ••• ••• 1*1 

sfcmn i. 1. 1*. iv. 2. 49. „ ... ••• 1,138 

Ulnilft i. 1. 24. ... ••• ••• ••• - 8 



( xxxil ) 


JfCPElSl i. 1. 24. 

8 

srerfo i.i. 18. 

7 

aafrsmj iv. 2. 40 ... 

... 137 

i. 1. 2., i. 1. 9., i. 1, 20., iii 1. 24., iv. 1. 59. 

... 2,4,7,69,123 

STffff: i. 1. 17., iv. 1. 64., iv. 1. 1., iv. 2. 14. ... 

... 6,25,108,130 

Sltr* iv. 1. 50. 

... 13G 

aSOT iv. 2. 16. 

... 130 

srefOT iv. 1. 60. ... 

... 123 

2. 37. 

... 53 

STOaifcTOT ii. 2. 71. 

... 62 

TOTS iii. 1. 49. 

... 74 

nUnc i- 1. 6., li. 1. 45. 

... 3,35 

aftraCSIT^iv. 2, 5. ... 

... 128 

HSflT v. 1. 1., v. 1. 9. 

140, 148 

JRTm^iii. 1, 48., iii. 2. 78., v. 1. 23., v. 1. 32. 

... 74, 106, 156, 160 

B5nTi i. 2. 77., ii. 1. 7., ii. 1. 17., ii. 1. 22., ii. 2. 35., 

ii. 2. 38., iii. 2. 5., 


iii. 2. 24., iii. 2. 35., iii. 
v. 1. 42., v. 2. 21., v. 2. 24. 


2. 73., iii. 2. 76, iv. 2. 15., iv. 2. 43 , 

... 19, 24, 27, 29, 52, 53, 84, 90, 93, 105, 
106, 136, 137, 164, 174, 175 


UPF ii. 2. 12., ii. 2. 19., iv. 1. 47., iv. 1. 66., v. 1. 12. 

... 46,49,119,126, 


150 

«T%«^iii.2. 35. ... 

... 93 

Mlg^famiii. 2. 16., iv. 1. 14. ... 

88, 110 

SIT®* v. 1. 7. 

... 147 

am: iv. 1. 7. 

... 109 

aramv.l. 7. 

... 147 

snWRt ii. 2. 47. 

... 55 

mftf iii. 2. 44., v. 1. 1., V. 1. 7. 

96, 140, 147 

Jl!&iii. 2. 69. 

... 1Q4 

srmsar^iv. 2 . 39 . ... 

... 136 

armnua^ii. 1 . J6., ii. 1 . 69. ... 

...27,42 

mmagt^ii. 2 . 1 ., m. 2 . 29 ., iv. 1 . 11 . 

43, 70, 116 

amM ii. 1. 14., ii. 2. 6. 

...26,45 

awna ii. 1 . 69. 

42 

apjtii 1.44. 

... 35 

OTQV iii. 2. 76. 

... ... 106 

H 1 T* 29' ••• 

31 



( eujuh ) 


jftfc vi. 1. 52. 

Page. 

... 121 

jfeli. 1. 9., iii. 1. 22., iv. 1. 10. ... 

4, 68, 109 

stamp i. 1. 19. ... 

7 

WOT iii. 2. 32. 

... 92 

rit$P01$Rf ii. 2. 66. ... 

... 61 


i. 1. 9., iii. 2. 64., iv. 1. 20., iv. 1. 

44., iv. 1.51., iv. 1. 53., 

iv. 1. 54., iv. 2. 44. ... 4, 

103, 112, 119, 121, 121, 122, 137 

^ 1.1 1. 20. 

7 

'fi&^iv. 1. 47., iv. 1. 54. 

119,122 


1. 6. ... ... ... 64 

qffc: iv. 2. 20. ... ... ... ... ... 131 

i. 2. 20. ... ... ... ... 21 

TOPHi. 1. 21., iv. 1. 55., iv. 1. 57. ... ... 7,122,122 

unmroiii. i. 4i. ... ... ... ... ... 73 

|^Ci. 1.9., i. 1. 17., i. 1.25., iv. 1.50. ... ... 4,6,8,121 

fp8C:i. 1. 15. ... ... ... ••• ... 6 

Sfaww i i. 1. 25. ... ... ... ... ... 8 

1. 11. ... ••• ••• ••• ••• 25 

JSf: iv. 2. 36. ... ... ••• ••• ... 136 

fCQFBra^iii. 2.25. ... ... ••• - 90 

HTCPir ii. 2. 64. ... ... ••• ••• 60 


¥1 

iii. 1. 19., iii. 2. 44. ... ••• ••• ...68, 96 

*H*i. 1. 9., ii. 2. 49., iv. 1. 10., iv. 1. 14., iv. 1.22., iv. 1. 34., 

* v.1.31. ... 4,56,109,110,112,115,159 


iv. 1. 7. 

Viran^i. 1. 27., i. 2. 16., ii. 1. 32., ii. 1. 38., 
iv. 1. 4., iv. 1. 7., iv. 1. 24., iv. 1. 42. 


7 

iii. 1. 34., iv. 1. 3., 

9, 19, 32, 33, 93, 108, 108, 
109, 113, 118 


*n$nrct iv. 1. 38., iv. 2. 26. 
Kllfe^f^iii. 2. 51., iv. 2. 44. 
;W$Ti. 1. 36. 


117, 133 
99, 137 


• • t 



( xxxiv ) 


1. 34. 

W%5iv. 1. 51. 
iii. 1. 63. 

i. 1. 12., iii. 2. 65. 
qjTOVRliii.l. 71. ... 
ittf fv. 2. 11. 
jtymf iii. 1. 17. ... 

$t5«(iv. 2. 37. 

$h£n»iii 1.38. 
IfrUpiKrfr iii. 1. 38. 


Page- 

161 


... 117 
... 78 

..5, 103 
81 

.. 129 
.. 67 

.. 136 
72 

.. 72 


s rer igy i v. 1. 42., v. 2. 1., v. 2. 21 
snnf^nT3. 1. 39. ... 

JW! i. 1. 9., iii. 2. 60., iii. 2. 75. 
5WSP i. 1. 16., ii. 1. 24., iii. 2 


164, 167, 174 
... 72 

4, 102, 106 
20., iii. 2. 22., iii. 2. 26., iii. 2. 27., 


iii. 2. 30., iii. 2. 33., iii. 2. 41. 6, 29, 89, 89, 91, 91, 

92, 93, 95 

tP^friWT^iv. 2. 14. 

... 130 

JTTOtii. 1.26. 

... 30 

SRftr iii. 1. 16. 

... 67 

iii. 1. 31. 

... 70 

nTOgiii. 1. 31. 

... 70 

WaifNt! iii. 2. 67. 

... 103 

«n7Tiv. 2. 32. 

... 135 

ftpEUT i. 1. 2., iv. 2. 35., iv. 2. 37. 

2. 135, 136 

i. 1. 2. 

2 

Jjfis iii. 2. 65. 

... 103 

IjfW ii. 2. 69. 

... 61 

JjRfoat iv. 2. 23. ... 

... 132 

2. 32. 

. . . 13o 

ii. 2. 66. ... 

... 61 

ilHiv. 1. 3. % — 

... 108 

itnpiv. 1. 6. 

... 109 

iv. 1. 8. 

... 109 

ii- 1. 69. 

... 42 



( ) 

Page. 

ii. 1. 7. ... ... ... ... ... 24 

i. 2. 2., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1. 45., iii. 2. 12., iii. 2. 41., iii. 2. 42., iii. 2. 63., 

iv. 1. 1., iv. 1. 28.. v. 2. 25., 15,23, 35,86, 95, 96, 103, 108, 114, 175 

lWiv.2. 41. ... ... ... ... ... 138 

2. 7. ... ... ... ... ... 16 

qfenti. 1. 25. ... ... ... 8 

*IT ii. 2. 62. ... ... ... ... ... 59 

Mraiaar iv. 2. 26. ... ... ... ... ... 133 

L.31., iii.2. 51. . ... ... ... ...32,99 

f&ii. 2. 66. ... ... ... ... .a 61 

i. 1. 16., ii. 1 LI., iii. 1. 56., iii. 2. 4., iii. 2. 20., iii. 2. 26., 

iii. 2. 61. ... ... ... 6,25,76,84,89,91,102 

tmranw ii. 2. 64. ... ... ... ... 60 

5mm i. 2 - 73., iv - »5., iv. 2. 46. ... ... 18, 122, 138 

5i*TTWTRT iv. 2. 42. ... ... ... ... .. 137 

iii. 2. 35. ... ... ... ... 93 

* 

ifipr iii. 1. 32. ... ... ... ... ... 71 

g f to S &m iii. 1. 43. ... ... ... ... 73 

5ST i. 1. 14., iii. 1. 64* ... ... ... ...5,78 

mm i. 12. ... ... ... ... ... 5 

*JIT iii. 2. 44., iv. 1. 3. ... ... ... 96, 108 

lOTlT^taf iii. 1. 27., iv. 1. 68. ... ... ... 69,126 

mrii. 2. 64. ... ... ... ... ... 60 

iii. 1. 40. ... ... ... ... ... 72 

i. 1. 14., iii. 1. 64., iii. 2. 47., iii. 2. 51., iii. 2. 58., iii. 2. 59. ... 5, 

78, 98, 99, 101, 102 

%HMHWl iii. 1-36. ••• ••• - 71 

’4WT556 iv. 2. 2. ... ... ... ... ... 127 

frfrrcg f fcn iii., 1. 36. ... ... ... ... 71 

t jflu ra fow q.iii. 1- 49. ... ... ... ... 74 

5l«l ii 1. 37. ... ••• ••• ••• 33 

55 

gNgPi ii. 1. 20., iii. 1. 62., iii. 2. 44., iv. 1. 8., iv. 1. 31., iv. 1. 34., 

iv. 1. 36., v. 1. 43. ... ... 28, 78, 96, 109, 114, 115, 

116,164 



( nun ) 

Page. 

«TOfcl, 21, . ... ... ... ... 7 

awn- 2. 11. ... ... ... ... 46 

iv. 1. 35. ... ... ... ... ... 116 

firffctaii. 2. 8. ... ... ... ... 45 

srfireran^ii.2. 8. ... ... ... ... ... 45 

Hf*! iii. 2. 44. ... ... ... ... 96 

i. 1. 10., i. 1. 16. ... ... ... 5,6 

iii. 2. 15. ... ... ... ... ... 87 

^*TcSrq ii. 1. 23., ii. 1. 24., iii. 2. 37. ... ... 29, 29, 94 

iii. 2. 34. ... ... ... ... ... 93 

&5T ii. 2. 59. ... ... ... ... ... 58 

Irftai i. 1. 25. ... ... ... ... ... 8 


12 . 

qreffi ii. 1. 63. 

<f5R i. 2. 10. 

*f*l4 i. 1. 39., ii. 1. 25., v. 2. 1L., v. 2. 16., v. 2. 14., v. 2. 16. 


q^TT^ii. 1. 20., ii. 1. 60., iv. 2. 20. 
tH g qJ i. 1. 36. 

ii. 2. 45., ii. 2. 50., ii. 2. 54., ii. 2. 62., v. 2. 8. 

trfe*ii. 2. 50. 

«!(%«(* ii. 2. 46. ... 

ii- 2. 59. ... 

er&ftrcnrop n t ii. 2. 53., ii. 2. 56. 
infif v. 1. 1., v. 1. 4. 

qjhrre ii. 1. 39., ii. 1. 40., ii. 1. 42. 

W iii. 1. 21 


... 18 
... 40 

... 17 

... 12 , 
30, 171 , 172, 173 
28, 40, 131 
... 33 

55, 56, 57, 59, 
170 
... 56 

... 55 

... 58 

...57, 58 
140, 142 
34, 34, 35 
... 681 


ff i. 1. 37., i. 1. 38., i. 2. 17., ii. 1. 1., ii- l- 6., ii. 1. 14., ii. 1. 18., ii. 
o 6 iv. 1. t>7*Jv. 2. 17., iv. 2. 19., iv. 2. 32., iv 2. 49., v. 1. 7.,. 

* '* ^ _ _ . _ . » nn nn Ckf* Ct H A tZ 1 OC 1 Q 1 I Ol 


v. 1. 15. 


12, 12, 19, 22, 23, 26, 27, 45, 126, 131, 131, 135, 

138,147,152 

TO i- 1 17, i. 2. 12. - •" ...6,18 

i. 2. 11., i. 2. 12. ••• • ’ ”• 18,18 

jmiii.-i. 62 . - ••• - -. 4 f 

*• » « i .•• * ,,, ... * 


• •t 



( jarrrii ) 

-ft*. - 

Page. 

i. 2. 1. ... ... ... 14 

«rrg* i. l. 13. ... ... ... ... ... 5 

«n^»rtiii. 1. 64. ... ... ... ... 78 

faSRi. 2. 10, i. 2. 14., v. I.I., v. 1. 4. ... ... 17, 19, 140, 142 

foKSi: ii. 2. 45. ... ... .. ... ... 55 

i. 2. 20., ii. 2. 44., ii. 2. 53., v. 1. 4 , v. 2. 3. 21, 55, 57, 142, 168 

ftnsstpft v. 1. 31. ... ... ... ... ... 159 

^n»5^iv. 1. 58. ... ... ... ... ... 22 

fttRTC ii. 2. 41., ii. 2. 42., ii. 2. 44., ii. 2. 45., ii. 2. 46, ii. 2. 47., ii. 2. 54., 

54, 54, 55, 55, 55, 55, 57 

fara»H3R^iii. 1. 20. ... ... ... ... ... 68 

ftniTCR(ii. 2. 52., iii. 1. 12. ... ... ... 56,66 

Br^irnntii. 2. 43., ii. 2. 49, ii. 2. 50., iii. 1. 21. ... 54,56,56,68 

fe li ftnUW it ii. 2. 55., ii. 2. 59. ... J ... ...57,58 

ftrito V. 2. 1, V. 2. 20. ... ... ... 167,174 

ftrsrrcn i. 2. 10. ... ... ... ... 17 

2. 17. ... ... ... ... ... 173 

littili. 2. 3. ... ... ... ... ... 15 

foTSTi. 1. 1. ... ... ... ... ••• 1 

iv. 2. 50. ... ... ... ..; 139 

ferciTiv. 1 61., iv.2. 4. ... ... ... 124,127 

Eras; iii. .2. 47. ... ... ... ... ... 98 

fain* iv. 1.61. ... ... ... ... 124 

fosrtro* ii. 1. 64. ... ... ... ... ... 41 

ii. 1. 64., ii. 1. 66., iv. 2. 46. ... ... 41, 41, 138 

fa m fon ? ii. 1. 63. ... ... ... ... ... 40 

iv. 1. 17. ... ... ... ... ... Ill 

$RTQr iii. 2. 5., iii. 2. 18., iii. 2. 24., iv. 1. 25., iv. 1. 30. 84, 88, 

90, 113, 114 

GRIST* iii. 2. 35., iv. 2. 35. ... ... ••• 90, 135 

fircrawsrcn ii. 2. 34., ii. 2. 38., iii. 2. 13. ... ... 52,53,87 

Rrcnpi iv. 1. 27. ... ... ... ... ••• 113 

Breran^iv. i.46. ... ... ... ••• ••• 119 

ErISET iii. 2. 14., iii. 2. 19. ... ... ... ...87,89 

fSrPpmiTS.ii. 1. 63. ... ... ... .*• 40 

a. i. is.. ... ... ••• ••• 27 

ftrrfcl V. 1. 29. ... ... 159 



( xxxviii ) 


1. 37. ... 


Page. 
... 12 

ftrq^v. 1 . 2 . 


... 140 

firrcrami. 1.37. ... 


... 12 

f^iSira v. 2 . li. ... 


... 171 

fesrfaqftr ii. l 2 . ... 


... 22 

fegfaqfa: i. 2. 19. 


... 20 

RnrRnm'* i. 1 23., ii. 2 . 13. ... 


... 7,46 

fimfiro#ii. l. 3. . 


... 22 

fiwfafrwtiii. 1. 57. 

• » • 

... 76 

iforfir^ v. 1. 41., v- 1. 42. 


- 163, 164 

fawfiKii. 2. 40. 

. . , 

... 54 

^flT»n^ii. 2. 16., iv. 2. 21. 

. . 

48, 131 

faWTHSI ii. 1. 62. ... 

. . • 

... 40 

frgfsrrSr iv. 2. 22 . ... 

• . . 

137 

fewS ii. 2. 13. 


... 46 

finish i. 1 . 23 . 


7 

f^^Ti. 1-41. 

... 

... 13 

fililWJi i. 1. 22- 


7 

iii. 2. 44. 

• • . 

... 96 

fifitPTl iii. 2. 72. 


... 105 

fires i. 2 . 4. 


... 15 

i. 2. 1., i. 2. 6. 

... 

...14, 16 

fil^T^I iii 2. 44. 

... 

.. 96 

v. 2. 1., v. 2. 4. 

... 

167,169 

fiftrenjii. 2. 58. ... 

... 

.... 58 

wtnsnuin. 1 . ii* ••• 

... 

- ... ... 65 

fii^rSti. 2 . 6. 


.... 16 

fiifirer iv. 1 . 55- 

... 

... 122 

f^T* ii. 2. 42. 

... 

. ... ... 54 

ii. 2. 42. 

... 

54 

fil^R!S>- 2> 26 - • • 

... 

... 133 

^ftr^iv. 2. 4» 

... 

7 

firtrei. 1 . 23-, i. 1 , 31., ii. 1 , 61 ., iii 

. 1. 63., 

iv. 2. 38., iv. 2. 39., 

v. 2. 15. 


7, 10, 23, 78, 136, 136, 173 

firefa v. 2 . 6. 

. . . 

• ... 169 

ft^iii. 1.67i„ iii. 2.32. 


...42,92 

iii. 2. 40. ... 


... 95 



( jtxxix > 

17 . ... 

1. 1. 31. 

I. 32. ... 

ftretarpot ii. 1.27. ... 

iii. 1. 54., iii. 2. 33. 

|%g* iii. 1. 68. 

f§PPJiii. 1. 2., iii. 2.1., iv. 2. 14., iv. 2. 

flFWWr iii. 1. 61. ... 

frramtliii. 1. 13. ... 

iii 1.15. ... 

fcW?JT: iv. 2. 2. 

fimrarc iii. 2. 7. ... 

H w % qr g g%: iii. 2. 41. 
ii. 1. 66. ... 

€tsr iv. 2. 50. 
rtfePPT iii. 1. 25. 

iii. 1. 62., iii. 2. 46. 
iii- 2. 25., iv. 2. 37. 

J8C5JT iv 2. 26* 
fj9J iv. 1. 47., iv. 1. 51 
s^ar iv. 2. 6. 

ii. 2. 59., ii. 2. 62. 
tffSfWS iv, 1. 57. 

% iv. 2. 4. 

tipen^ii. 1 59. ... 

v. 1. 1- 

tNU*ftH,i- 1- 35-, iii- I - 75., iii 2- 57., iii* 2 
, v. 1 15. 

v. 1 2. ... 

tvpqM v. 1 2. ... 

i- 2. 18. 
iv. 2. 37. 

^fWW^ii. 2- 45 
TO^ivri. ll-, iv. 1. 13. 

•P5JPltivl.il. 

tqfa ii- 2. 61., ii- 2. 66-, ii. 2. 67., ii. 2. 68. 

8 


Page. 
48 
10 
71 
30 

..76, 93 
.. 80 
31., iv. 2. 34., iv. 2. 35., 

63, 83, 130, 134, 135, 135 

77 
66 
66 
127 
85 
73 
41 

139 
69 

78, 98 
90, 136 
... 133 

119, 121 
.. 128 
..58, 59 
.. 122 
.. 127 

39 

140 

58-, iv. 1. 48-, v. 1. 5., 

1, 81, 101 , 101, 120, 145, 152 

140 
140 
19 
136 
55 

110, 110 
... 110 
59, 61, 61, 61 



( *1 ) 


ii. 2. 62., ii. 2. 69. 

* • * • * • • 

fage. 
...59, 61 

UWfatiii. 2. 11. 


ii. 2. 62. 

• • * / • • • 

• • • * • * oo 

... 59 

iv. 2. 18. ' 

... 131 

iii. 1. 30. 

... 70 

iv. 1. 51. 

... 121 

suiter iii. 2. 33. 

... 93 

arfir^TO^ii. !• 37., iv. 1. 5- ... 

33, 108 

WW iv. 1. 49. 

... 120 

SWIR iii. 2. 44- 

... 96 

S^R?!?r. i. 1. 23. 

7 

s^raWRii. 2. 65., iv. 1. 33. 

60,115 

SRWT* iii- I- 71. 

... 81 

1. 55., iii. 1. 2„ iii. 1. 3-, iv- 1 

. 28., iv. 1. 36., ... 38, 


63, 63, 114,116 

j*WfagRl^ii. 1, 4. 

... 23 

i. 1. 4. 

2 

i. 1. 4. 

2 

BWffcfriii. 1.8. 

6 

etirarm ii. 1 . 58. 

... 39 

arrarsn^iv. 1 . is. ... 

... 110 

Wtrf?IRT^ni. 2 . 54. ... 

... 100 

eureRB ii. 1. 26., iii. 2. 33. 

...30,93 

iii. 2. 33. 

• ... 93 

«IT^*n^iii. 2. 7., v. 2. 20. 

85,174 

sunRRl^iii- 1. 55., iv. 1. 40., iv. 2. 27. ... 

76, 117, 133 

«lHdK»q.ii. 1. 28. 

... 31 

iii, 1. 37. 

... 72 

2. 17. 

..r ... 


5T 


ii. 2. 64.* 

ii. 1. 67., ii. 2. 2., iii. 1. 74., 
2. 21., v. 2. 14., v. 2. 15. 
i. 1. 7., ii. 1. 49. 
fW^iii. 2. 25. ... 

ii. 1 . t'2. ... 


... 60 

iv. 1. 16., iv. 1. 60., iv. 2. 11., iv. 

42, 43, 81, 111, 123, 129, 131, 172, 173 

‘ ... 4, 36 
... 90 

... 59 



( xli ) 


i. 1. 3., i. 1. 14. 

1. 15., ii. 1. 52. 

STSfTHt iii. 1. 64. ... 

ii. 2. 37. ... 

ii. 1. 55., ii. 1. 56. 

*n«$?T ii. 2. 18., iv. 1. 60., v. 2. 16. 

i. 1. 9., i. 1. 17., iii 2. 27., iii. 2. 51 

iii. 2. 70. 

5rd*l*i. 1. 11. 

$r€to?rtiii. i. 4. ... 

iii. 2. 29. 

W^fftfcSTT^iii, 2. 27. 

SrfkSiT iii. 2. 56. ... 

SHWIT iv. 2. 50. 

STTTORH.ii. 2. 64. ... 

ftr®qr iv. 2. 48. 

ii. 1. 68. 
dnr iii. 1.21. 

^«^i. 1.5. 

STfai iii. 1. 19. 

jpiTiraT iii. 2. 27., iv. 1. 67. 

WTD ii. 2. 35. 
srfcriii. 1. 29. ... 

sfonftr i. 1. 12. 

ii. 2. 59. ... 


Page- 
... 2,5 
...27,37 
... 78 

... 53 

...38,39 
48, 123, 173 
iii. 2. 54., iii. 2. 57., 

4, 6, 91, 99, 100, 101, 104 

5 

... 63 

... 92 

... 91 

... 101 
... 139 

... 60 
... 13fc 

... 42 

... 68 
3 

... 68 
106,126 
... 52 

... 70 

5 

... 58 


iii. i. 27., iv. 1. 68. ... .. ... 69, 126 

iv. 2. 2. ... ... ... ... ... 127 

^FS'I^iv. 2. 34. ... ... ... ... ... 135 

ii- 2. 62, iv. 1. 41- ... ... ... 59,118 

iii. 1. 26. ... ... ... ... .... 69 

iii. 1. 72 - ... 81 

#STOCR^iii. 2. 62. ... ... ... ... ... 102 

*f*Tiii. 1* 17- ... * ... — ••• ... 67 

17 . ... ... ••• ... 

fRRTii. 2. 35- - ••• ... 52 



( zlii ) 


Gfll iii. 1. 30. 


Page. 

, , , 

... 70 

GW ii- 2. 65. 

• ■ • 

... 60 

GWI^ii. 2. 36. 

■ * * 

... 52 

G$Wv. 142. 


... 164 

G*iv. 1. 48- 

' • « • 

• ... 120 

G3CWi. 2. 14, iv. 2 26, iv. 2 36, v. 1. 

1. 23. 

... 19, 133, 136, 156 

ii. 2. 21. ... 

• • • 

... 49 

M^miffiii 1 14., iii. 1 66 , iv. 2. 16. 

• • • 

66, 79, 130 

G?[W? iv. 2 23. ..i 

* • • 

... 132 

GUI iv. 1. 44., iv. 1. 45. 

« • t 

119,119 

GW iv. 1. 48. 


... 120 

GW%iii 2. 49. 


... 99 

GWfc iv 1. 65. 


... 125 

4RTHii. 2 17. 


... 48 

ii. 1. 33. 

Giqrar: t. 2 1., v. 2. 5. 


... .32 

167, 169 

Gftnrfi- 1-4, ii. 1.26. 


...2,30 

ii- 1. 23- 


... 30 

^flPCT^ii. 1- 9 , iii- 2. 26. 


25, 91 

ii. 1. 21. 

• • • 

• • • »» • 

ii. 2 61. 

... 

... 59 

5IH3W ii. 1. 52 


... 37 

iii. i. 19. 

... 

68 

GHWMlft iv. 2. 48. 

... 

... 138 

ii. 1. 54., iii. 2. 44. 


38, 96 

#SFWR^ii. I- 51., iv. 1. 54 


37, 122 

WWW ii. 2. 1., ii- 2. 2 

... 

43,43 

#ra**n i. 2 . 13. 

. • • 

... 18 

WW^I ii. 2. 26. ... 

... 

... 91 

GWlfa iv. 2. 38. ... ... 

... 

... 136 

GUT* i. 1. 23* i. 1. 29., ii. 1. 1. 

... 

7, 9, 22 

GWT^v.i. 14. 

... 

... 15.1 

Wm*W.in. 2 - 33 

... 

... 93 

WWG v. 1. 39 , v. 1. 42., v. 1. 43. 

< t • • 

163, 164, 164 

Gflftrcwiq. >v. i. 62. 

... 

«■-. ... 124 

WHIG ii; 2. 62. ... 

... 

... 59 

OWld it. 2- 40 - *” 

* * » 

... 54 



C xW ) 


Page. 
98 
39 
22 
50 
. 129 
. 92, 


iti. 2. 47. 

WWHW T ii 1 56. ... 
fa < ?=« •» ii 1. 3. ... 
ii. 2. 26 

iv. 2. 13. ... ••• 

^ *• »■ * **• * 2 70 - "" 2 ' 76 - “• 2,; '^ m,m, m, in 

i. I- 27., i. 1. 28., ii. 1. 14., ii. 1. 42., iv. 1. 34 , iv- 2. 21-, v- 1 23., 

v 1 32 ••• 9, 9, 26, 35, 115, 131, 156, 160 

*r£*FB iii. 1. 65. ... ... ••• - 

iv. 2. 19. ... 

i. 1- 28. ... ... ••• •” J 

v. i.40. ... ••• 

ii. 1. 34. ... ... ••• !** , 

ci , . in” ‘ 1 OO m i $7 ... 113, 114, 117 

?3€r IV. 1. 2d., IV. 1 29., IV. 1. 37. ... * 

iv. 2. 50. ••• ••• ••• 

i 2. 5-, i- 2. 4 ... .•• ’ 

... , - ... ... pi 

*aiES*lin. I- 7. ... ••• • • 

^iv-2.47. ... " 

ar^-’Uiu... ::: : ..™«« 

5reR«a: v. 1. 14. ... ••• **’ jf? 

#0*v.l.l5. ... 23 

ua i il H ri. 1. 6. ••• ... 

CTO*' ii. 1. 1., ii. 1. 5., ii. 1. 6., ii. 1. 7., ii. 2. 23., ii. 2. 41., i>. 2. 61., 
iii 1 30. iii. 2. 1., iii. 2. 50., iv. 1. 44., iv. 2. 4., iv. 2. 6., v. 1.15., 

„ \ 22, 23, 23,24,46, 54, 59, 70, 83, 99, 119, 127, 

128,151,152 

iii. 1. 67. ... 

3PPOT* iv. 2. 23. ... 

gfelRr i. 1.-27., 1. 1. 26. 

^ ii. 2. 64., iv. 2. 47. 

ni. 2. 44 ... 

ii. 1 37., ii. 1,38. 

ir 2. 1 ., i. 2. 2., ii. 1 . 59., iii. 1 . 1 7., v. 1 . 34. 
i. 1.6.,i. ! • 34. 

fipnq i. 2. 18., v. 1. 1., iii. 1. 2. 


... 79 

... 132 

... 9,8 
60, 138 
... 96 

...33,33 
14,15, 39, 67,161 
... 3, 11 
19, 140, 140 



( Xliv ) 


Page. 

i. 1. 6., i. 1. 34., i. 2. 17., ii. 1. 44., ii 1. 45 , iii. 2. 1 , 
v. 1. 5., v. 1. 14., v. 1. 15-, v. 1. 16-, v. 1. 32., v. 1. 33. ... 3, 11, 19, 34, 

35, 83, 145, 151, 152, 153, 160, 160 
i. 1 6., 1. 1. 36., 1. 2,4 , i. 2. 8-, v. 1. 1., v. 1. 4., v. 1. 6-, v. 1. 7-, 
v. 1.19., v. 1 34. 3, 11, 15,. 16, 140, 142, 146, 147, 154, 161 

... 16, 32, 91, 142 

... 12 
15,16 
83, 103 
... 142 

... 3, 11 
... 37 

... 39 

8 

18,47,151 
... 18 
... ‘ 3 

... 56 

56,152 
... 60 
9 

... 121 
... 1,14 
16,175 
8,9,9, 9 
... 27 

... 9, t09, 1 1 7j 141 
... 27 

27, 27 

,. 1. 48., ii- 2. 10 , ii. 2- 65 , 


i 2. 8 , ii 1. 33., iii. 2. 28-, v. 1. 4 
i. 1. 38. - ... 
fmSJSRfU i. 2. 4., i. 2. 8. 

iii. 2. 3., iii. 2. 66- 
SrTWWWi: v. 1. 4. ... 

i: 1. 6, 1. 1 34. 

^nwart^ii 1.52. ... 

ii 1. 56. 

srm? i. l. 25 

cronar i. 2. 11., ii. 2. 15., v. 1. 14. 
i 2. 13. 

snrwprcn i. i- 5. 

«nTI«Wfn ii. 2. 51. 

tgf w q g l ii. 2. 51 , V. 1 15. 
gnfczr ii 2. 64. ... 

i. 2. 29. 
ferae iv. 1. 50- 

ferarra i. 1. 1., i. 2. 1. 
feraers?# i- 2. a, v. 2 24. 

%3TOr; i. 1. 76., i. 1- 28., i- 1. 29-, i- 1- 30- 

fefeCii. I- 17- 

fefer: i. 1. 30., iv. 1. 10., iv. 1 39., V. 1. 3. 
feftpNm* ii, 1. 17 ... 
ferf^^RT ii. 1.15, ii- 1- 18. 
ftrac? if 1. 15., ii- 1. 17., ii- 1- 19., »»■ *’ 45 -> 11 

iii. 2. 53., i^l- 37., iv. 1. 38., v. 1- 5., v. 1 16., v- 1. 19., v. 1. 21. ... 27, 

27,28,35, 36, 46, 60, 100, 117, 117, 145, 153, 154, 155 

i. 1. 30., ii- 1. 9., il 1- 10., ii 1. 11., v. 1. 29. ... 9, 25, 25, 25, 159 

i. 1. 10., iii. 2. 44., iv- 1- 58- ... ... 5, 96, 122 

iv. 1. 56. 

‘§Bii. 1- 26. 

ii. 


122 

30 

56 


♦ ♦ * 



t xlv ) 


ii. 2. 48. ... 

Page. 
... 56 

WTOiv.l 63 ... 

... 124 

ii- 1. 36. 

... 33 

#119*1^ ii. 1. 36. ... 

N 

... 33 

SilWJ iii 1. 22 

... 68 

iv. 1. 53. 

... 121 

^Tiil.65. 

... 41 

i. 2. 20., i. 2. 2 , ii. 2 64. ... 

21, 15, 60 

*qHJ*ii2 19. 

... 20 

urara&iii- 1 . si. ... 

... 75 

firanti. 1 . 1. 

1 

WRTftv2. 1. 

... 167 

OTWT i. 2.3. 

... 15 

<W*f i. 1.-14., iii 1. 64. 

... 5, 78 

iii. J. 64 

... 78 

iii. 1. 44., iii. 2. 9 

73, 85 

iii. 1 47- 

... 74 

iii. 2 11. ... 

... 86 

*TCW iii. 2.31. 

... 92 

SR® iii. 2. 34., iii. 2. 43. 

93, 96 

STCcn iii._2. 29. 

... 92 

Sffraf ii 1. 13- 

... 66 

iii. 2. 35. 

... 93 

iii. 2. 15 , iii. 1. 19., iii- 2 46., iii. 2- 26., iv. 2. 34. ... 

... 66, 


68, 98, 91, 135 

iii- 1- lo- 

... 60 

^Jiii.1.13- 

... 66 

i- 2. 3 , iii. 2. 50., v. 2. 16. ... 

15, 99, 173 

v. 1. 43., v. 2. 21. 

164, 174 

iv. 1. 63, iv. 2. 31.. iv. 2. 34 , iv. 2. 35. 124, 134, 135, 135 

3OTT9 iv. I. 38., iv. 1. 39. 

117,117 

iv. 2. 14 ... 

... 130 

iv. 1. 65. 

... 125 

iv. 1. 60. ... 

... 126 

gHyuanq. iii. 1. 49., m. 2. 43. ... 

74, 96 



( slvi ) 




ft iii. 1. 19. 
fT^t v. 2. 1., v. 2. 2. 

ii. 1. 9., ii. 2. 1., ii. 2 2., iii. 1. 68. 

iv. 1. 53 v . ... 

iv. 1. 64- 

$*! iv. 2. 49., v. 2. 12. 

i. 2. 3. ... ... 

$g i. 1. 32., i. 1. 39., ii. 2. 13., iii. 2. 10., iii. 2. 42., iii 
46., iv. 2. 33., v. 1. 1., v. 2. 1., v- 2. 6., v. 2. 13. 

96, 98, 119, 135 

tg: i. 1. 34., v. 1. 43- 
tgsin, v. 1. 38. 

V. 1. 11. 

tgaiv.i. i9. 

fegamv iii. 2. 41., iii- 2. 63., v. 1. 34. 
iii. 1. 16. 

v. 1.7., v. 1. 18.... 
v. 2 6. 

tarararaiii. 2. io ... 

1 . 1 . ... 

v. 2. i. ... 

larrarcn* i. 2. 4., v. 2 25. 

iii. 2. 4. 
grarii-2,59. 


s M . . 

. 68 
167, 167 
25, 43, 43, ‘80 
... 121 
... 125 
138, 172 
... 15 

48., iv. 1. 

10, 12, 46, 85, 
40, 167, 169, 172 
11, 164 
... 162 
... 150 
... 154 
95, 103,101 
... 67 

147, 153 
... 169 
... 85 

1 

... 167 
15, 175 
... 169 
...■ 58 



