The Project Gutenberg eBook of Timid Lucy
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Timid Lucy

Author: Sarah S. Baker


        
Release date: August 3, 2022 [eBook #68677]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: John Morgan, 1862

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/68677

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIMID LUCY ***

[Frontispiece: LUCY AND BRADGET O'BRADY]




  TIMID LUCY


  by

  Sarah Schoonmaker Baker



  "FEAR NOT, LITTLE FLOCK."



  LONDON:
  JOHN MORGAN, 10, PATERNOSTER ROW.
  1862



  LONDON:
  ROBERT K. BURT, PRINTER,
  HOLBORN HILL.




  CONTENTS.


  CHAP.

  I.--The Little Bed-room
  II.--The Thunder-shower
  III.--The Medicine
  IV.--An Announcement
  V.--The Arrival
  VI.--An Accident
  VII.--Sunday Morning
  VIII.--Staying at Home
  IX.--The King and his Weapons
  X.--The Happy Sunday Evening
  XI.--Judy M'Grath
  XII.--The Visitor
  XIII.--Sickness
  XIV.--Conclusion




TIMID LUCY.



CHAPTER I.

THE LITTLE BED-ROOM.

Dr. Vale had the prettiest house in all Chatford.  It was a tasteful,
white cottage, with a green lawn in front, and tall elm trees about
it.  The side windows looked out upon a pleasant orchard, where the
smooth, ripe apples peeped temptingly from their beds of fresh
leaves.  At one of these windows there was a neat curtain, that was
looped back one summer evening, while through the open casement there
floated the perfume of the rose bush that had climbed the cottage
wall, until its buds could look in at the upper window.  A pretty
sight there was within! the moonlight streamed on the floor, and lit
up as sweet a little bed-room as any fairy could desire.  The small
counterpane and bureau-cover were white as snow, on the tiny
work-table there was a vase of fresh flowers, and the miniature
book-case was filled with an interesting collection of nicely-bound
volumes.  There was nothing wanting to give the apartment an air of
perfect taste and comfort.

Did the young owner enjoy that pleasant room?  Young she must have
been, for everything, even to the low rocking-chair, was evidently
prepared for the use of some favoured child.

Presently the door opened, but no one entered.  Lucy Vale, the
doctor's youngest daughter, stood timidly without.  Surely there was
nothing frightful in that quiet room? yet she did not venture in
until the light was so steady that she could see plainly into its
farthest corners.  As soon, as she had locked the door behind her,
she looked into the closet, behind the curtain, under the bed, and
even under the bureau, where nothing thicker than a turtle could
possibly have hidden itself.

There had not been a robbery in the peaceful village of Chatford in
the memory of the oldest inhabitant, so there was no danger of Lucy's
disturbing any villain in his hiding-place.  If she had chanced to
find the thief she seemed so earnestly seeking, she would have been
in a most unfortunate position, as her bed-room door was locked, and,
without any weapon, her feeble arm would have been but poor
protection.

Children who never go to sleep without hunting for robbers, seldom
think what they would do if they should at last succeed in finding
one, nicely stowed away in a closet.  Few thieves are so hardened as
to injure a sleeping child, while the most cowardly might be led to
strike a blow on being suddenly discovered, and placed in danger of
punishment.  After all, even if there were thieves in a house, the
safest course for a child would be to go quietly to sleep, and leave
the evil men to steal and depart.

Lucy Vale did not seem quite satisfied with her first search; again
she furtively glanced about, before she sat down to read the chapter
in the Bible, which she had been taught never to omit at night.  Lucy
read her Bible as a duty, not because she loved it, or wished to
learn the will of God, and now she could not fix her attention at all
upon its sacred pages.

She was hardly seated when a slight sound in the orchard attracted
her notice; she jumped up and ran to the window.  All was quiet in
that peaceful scene, save the occasional dropping of the ripe fruit.
The shadows of the leaves quivered in the moonlight in what seemed to
her a mysterious manner; a strange feeling of fear stole over her;
she did not return to the Bible, but having hastily undressed, she
fell upon her knees for her evening prayer.  Lucy would have thought
it very wicked to go to sleep without what she called saying her
prayers.  In truth it was only _saying_ them, for while she repeated
the solemn words, her thoughts were far away.  Sometimes she would
get so busily thinking of other things, that her lips would cease to
move, and she would remain on her knees, buried in thought, for many
minutes.  As soon as she remembered why she was kneeling, she would
hurry over the remainder of her prayers and go to bed, quite
satisfied that she had done her duty.

On this particular evening her prayers were soon over, and she was
quickly in bed, leaving the lamp burning; its light however was of
but little use to her, as she thrust her head under the covering,
hardly leaving space enough to breathe through.

If Mrs. Maxwell, the housekeeper, had known that Lucy kept her light
burning at night, she would have scolded her severely, for she often
said, "it was flying in the face of nature to try to make night like
day, and for her part she thought it downright wicked to be wasting
oil when everybody was asleep, to say nothing of the danger of fire."

Dr. Vale had lost his wife when Lucy was just six years old, and
since that time Mrs. Maxwell had been his housekeeper; he trusted
everything to her, and she seemed to take the greatest delight in
being economical, that none of her master's substance might be
wasted.  She was not bad-tempered, but she had a stern, harsh manner,
and was easily worried by children, only thinking them good when they
were silent and stirred neither hand nor foot.  Lucy seldom came near
her without being blamed for something, or told to sit down and be
quiet.

The little girl would have been quite lonely had it not been for her
brother Hartwell, who was just two years older than herself.  Lucy
was now ten, but Hartwell seemed to think her a very little child,
hardly fit to be his companion, yet he would sometimes permit her to
play with him, and a dearly-bought pleasure it was.  Harty, as he was
generally called, was indolent; he could not bear to move about, and
therefore found it very convenient to have Lucy to wait upon him.  He
never seemed to have thought his sister might not like running up and
down stairs any better than he did.  It was so easy when he wanted
anything to tell Lucy to run for it, that sometimes he kept her
little feet in such constant motion that at night she was quite tired
out.  If she ever complained, he told her, girls were made to wait on
boys, and if she could not do such trifles for him she had better go
to her doll-baby and not be about in his way.  Lucy loved her
brother, and liked to be near him, so she seldom refused to do what
he asked her, although he often called her disobliging when she had
been trying her best to please him.

Hartwell was very fond of teasing, and his poor little sister had to
suffer for his amusement.  Sometimes he would make her cry, by
telling her that she was so ugly that it was painful to look at her;
at others he would call her a coward, and run after her to put
insects on her neck, or he would jump out from a dark corner and
shout in her ear when she thought herself quite alone.

As you will conclude, Lucy did not lead a very happy life.  Her
father was so constantly occupied that he seldom took his meals with
the family, and sometimes hardly spoke to his little daughter for
days together.  She had no one to whom she could talk freely; Mrs.
Maxwell never listened to her, and her brother was so apt to laugh at
what she said, that she did not dare to tell him many things that
troubled her.  She was naturally a timid child, but since her
mother's death she had grown so bashful that she could hardly answer
when a stranger spoke to her.  Many of her childish fears, which a
kind friend in the beginning could easily have banished, had become
so strong that she lived in perpetual alarm.




CHAPTER II.

THE THUNDER-SHOWER.

About midnight Lucy was roused by a loud clap of thunder.  The rain
was dashing in through the open window, and the waning lamp seemed
but a spark amid the almost incessant flashes of lightning.  The poor
child trembled with fear, she dared not close the window, and yet the
flying drops almost reached her little bed.  She lay in an agony of
terror, thinking that every moment might be her last.  The idea of
death was horrible to her: in broad daylight, or when pleasantly
occupied, she could forget that she must die; but any sudden fright
would bring the solemn truth to her mind and fill her with distress.
She had never heard Mrs. Maxwell or Harty speak of being afraid of
death, and dared not mention her fear to them, and with her father
she was so shy, that he knew very little of what was passing in her
mind.

The many faults of which she had been guilty rose to her mind in that
awful storm, and she resolved if her life were spared never to do
wrong again.  After making this resolution she felt a little
comforted, and began to think what could be done about the window.
She got up and took the lamp to go and call some one to her
assistance.  But whom should she call?  "I will not disturb father,"
she said to herself, "he was so very tired last night; Harty will
laugh at me for not doing it myself; and Mrs. Maxwell--I cannot wake
her, she will be so very angry."  Thus thinking, she stood
irresolutely in the hall, starting at every flash of lightning, and
afraid either to go forward or return.  Just then Mrs. Maxwell opened
her door: "What are you about there?" said she, with an astonished
look at Lucy.

"Please, ma'am," said the little girl, who was really glad to see a
human face, "will you shut my window?"

"Why in the name of wonder did not you shut it yourself?" was the
response.  Lucy was silent, and they entered the room, together.  "A
pretty piece of work!" said the neat housekeeper, holding tip both
hands, as her eyes fell on the soaking carpet.  She shut the window
hastily, and then said to Lucy, "Come to my room, for it wouldn't be
safe for any one to sleep in that damp place."

Lucy was so much afraid of Mrs. Maxwell, that it was quite a trial to
be in the same bod with her; she crept close to the wall, not daring
to go to sleep, lest she should be restless, and wake the stern woman
at her side.  She had many serious thoughts that night, and again and
again resolved never more to do wrong.

Towards morning she had a pleasant nap, from which she was roused by
the morning bell.  The sun was shining cheerfully into the room, and
the wild storm of the night seemed like a painful dream.  She dressed
herself carefully, and knelt to say her morning prayer, simple words
which she had repeated a thousand times with as little thought as if
they had been without sense or meaning.  Those same words, spoken
with earnest sincerity, would have called down a blessing from Him
who loves to listen when children truly pray.  Lucy had not forgotten
her resolution to do right, but she trusted in her own feeble efforts.

A flush of pleasure lit the usually pale face of the little girl as
she saw her father seated at the breakfast-table.  She glided into
the chair next him, and hardly ate anything, she was so busily
occupied in watching his plate, and placing all he might need beside
him.  Harty, meanwhile, showed his delight in his father's company by
being more talkative than usual.  He had taken a long walk in the
fresh morning air, and had many things to tell about what he had
seen.  What had interested him most was a tall tree, which the recent
lightning had struck and splintered from the topmost bough to the
root.

Lucy shuddered as the conversation brought the painful scene of the
night afresh to her mind.  It revived Mrs. Maxwell's memory also, for
she turned to Lucy with a stern look, and said, "How came you with a
light last night?"

Lucy blushed, and hastily answered, "I forgot to put it out when I
went to bed."

"Careless child!" was Mrs. Maxwell's only reply; but nothing that she
could have said would have made Lucy more unhappy than the fault she
had just committed.  What would she not have given, a few moments
after, to recall those false words; but they had been spoken, and
recorded in the book of God!

During breakfast Dr. Vale looked anxiously many times at the little
girl at his side.  There was nothing of cheerful childhood in her
appearance; her slender figure was slightly bent, and her small face
was pale and thin; her eyes were cast down, and she only occasionally
looked up timidly from under the long lashes.  Her little mouth was
closed too tightly, and her whole expression was so sad and subdued,
that he was truly troubled about it.  It was plain to any one who
looked at her that she was not happy.

The doctor dearly loved his children.  Harty he could understand, but
Lucy was a mystery to him.  He felt certain that she loved him, for
she never disobeyed him, and when he was with her she was sure to
nestle at his side, and take his hand in hers; but she seldom talked
to him, and was growing daily more silent and shy.

"Something must be done for her," he inwardly said.  His thoughts
were interrupted by Harty's calling out, "Why don't you eat
something, Lucy?  There, let me butter the baby some bread."  Rude as
this remark seemed, it was meant in kindness.

"I don't want anything, Harty," answered the sister.  "Nonsense!"
said he; "you are thin enough already: one of the boys asked me the
other day, if my sister fed on broom-splinters, for she looked like
one;" and the thoughtless boy gave a loud laugh.

It would have been much better for Lucy if she could have laughed
too, but the tears filled her eyes, and she pettishly replied, "I
should not care what I was, if it was only something that could not
be laughed at."

At this Harty only shouted the louder.  "Hush, Harty," said Dr. Vale;
"for shame, to tease your sister.  Don't mind him, Lucy," and he drew
his arm tenderly around her.  She laid her head on his lap, and cried
bitterly.  This kindness from her father would usually have made her
quite happy, but now the falsehood she had first uttered made her
feel so guilty that she could not bear his gentle manner.  She longed
to tell him all--her fault of the morning, her terror of the night
before--all she had thought and suffered for so many weary days; but
her lips would not move, and she only continued to sob.  A ring at
the bell called the father away, or she might have gained courage to
open her heart to him.  If Lucy could have been more with him, she
would have found a friend who would have listened to all her little
trials, and given her the truest consolation and advice.  It was a
source of sorrow to Dr. Vale that he could be so little with his
family, and on this particular morning he felt it with unusual force.

"My little daughter is going on badly," he said to himself, as he
entered his chaise, to make his round of visits.  "The child is
losing all her spirits; she needs a different companion from Harty;
he is too boisterous, too much of a tease for my little flower.  Mrs.
Maxwell is not the person to make a child cheerful; I must have Rosa
at home."  The doctor was prompt to act when he had fixed upon a
plan, and that day a letter was written to his eldest daughter,
recalling her home.  For three years before her mother's death, and
since that time, Rosa had been under the care of her uncle, the Rev.
Mr. Gillette.  This gentleman had been obliged by ill-health to give
up the exercise of his holy profession, but he did not cease to
devote himself to his Master's cause.  He received a few young ladies
into his family, whose education he conducted with all the
earnestness of a father.  His chief aim was to lead his pupils in the
pleasant paths of virtue, and make them to know and love the Lord.
Rosa, as the child of his departed sister, had been peculiarly dear
to him; he had spared no pains in moulding her character, and was now
beginning to see the fruits of his labour in the daily improvement of
his attractive niece.  To Rosa, then, whom we shall soon know better,
the doctor's letter was immediately sent.

Lucy, meanwhile, had no idea of the change that was soon to take
place in her home.  She passed a sad day, for the remembrance of the
untruth she had spoken hung about her like a dark cloud.  She had
been taught that a lie was hateful to God, and sure to bring
punishment.  Mrs. Maxwell had made it a part of her duty to hear Lucy
recite the Catechism every Sunday.  These were trying times to the
little girl, for the eye of the questioner was constantly fixed upon
her; and if she failed or faltered in one of the long answers, she
was sent to her room to study there until she could go through the
part without hesitation.  Mrs. Maxwell generally closed the Sunday
evening exercise by telling Lucy how dreadful a thing it was to be a
bad child, and that God saw her every moment, and would punish every
wicked act she committed.  From these conversations Lucy would go
away in tears, resolved never to do wrong again; but these
resolutions soon passed from her mind, until recalled by some fright
or by the lesson of the next Sunday evening.

She only thought of God as an awful Judge, who would take delight in
punishing her, and was far happier when she could forget Him.




CHAPTER III.

THE MEDICINE.

The morning light streamed pleasantly into Lucy's pretty room, and
there was the little girl quite dressed, and moving about as busily
as Mrs. Maxwell herself.  She had been up since the dew-drops began
to sparkle in the sunlight.  She could not make up her mind to
confess her fault to her father or Mrs. Maxwell, but she was
determined to be so very good as to quite make up for it.  In the
first place, she would put her room in order; that would please Mrs.
Maxwell.

With a tremendous effort she turned her little bed, and then spread
up the clothes with the greatest care.  It was her first attempt in
that way, and not very successful, but she was quite satisfied with
it, and walked about surveying it as if it had been a masterpiece of
housewifery.

The doctor was again at the breakfast-table, and he was pleased to
see his little daughter looking so much more cheerful.  Harty, as
usual, was in excellent spirits; but his father's rebuke was still
fresh in his mind, and he refrained from teasing his sister, and
contented himself with telling funny stories about school
occurrences, until even Mrs. Maxwell was forced to laugh.

As they rose from the table, Dr. Vale handed Lucy a small parcel,
saying, "Take good care of this, my dear, and leave it at Mrs.
Tappan's on your way to school; it is some medicine for her, which
she will need at ten o'clock.  I have a long ride to take in another
direction, so good morning, my little mouse."  Having kissed her
affectionately, he jumped into his chaise, and was soon out of sight.

Lucy was unusually happy when she started for school; Harty had not
teased her, Mrs. Maxwell had not found fault with her, and her father
had trusted her with something to do for him.

The summer sky was clear above her, and her feet made not a sound as
she tripped over the soft grass.  The wild rose bushes offered her a
sweet bouquet, and she plucked a cluster of buds as she passed.  In
the pleasure of that bright morning, Lucy forgot her good
resolutions.  She did not think of her kind Heavenly Father while
enjoying His beautiful world.  Fear alone brought Him to her mind:
she remembered Him in the storm, but forgot Him in the sunshine.

Lucy was soon at Mrs. Tappan's gate, and was raising the latch, when
the large house-dog came down the walk and stood directly in the way.
She thought he looked very fierce, and did not dare to pass him.  She
walked on a short distance and then came back, hoping he would be
gone; but no, he had not moved an inch.  While she was doubting what
to do, the school-bell rang; thrusting the parcel into her pocket,
she hurried on, saying to herself, "As it is so late, I am sure
father will not blame me."

She was hardly seated in school, however, before she began to be
troubled about what she had done.  "Perhaps Mrs. Tappan was very
ill," she thought; the shutters were all closed, and her father had
called there twice the day before, and had already seen her that
morning.  With such thoughts in her mind, of course Lucy did not
learn her lesson; although she held the book in her hand, and seemed
to have her eyes fixed upon it.  When she was called up to recite,
she blundered, hesitated, and utterly failed.  The tears now filled
her eyes.  Glancing at the clock, she saw that it yet wanted a
quarter of ten.

"Please, Miss Parker, may I go home?" she asked.

"Are you unwell?" asked the teacher, kindly.

"No," murmured Lucy.

"Then go to your seat," said Miss Parker, a little sternly; "and
never ask me again to let you go home unless you have a good reason."

"I wouldn't mind her, she's as cross as she can be," whispered Julia
Staples, as she took her seat at Lucy's side.

Lucy knew Miss Parker was not cross, yet she felt a little comforted
by Julia's seeming interested in her trouble, and placed her hand in
hers under the desk, as if to thank her new friend; for Julia Staples
had seldom spoken to her before.

Wearily the hours of school passed away.  At last the clock struck
one, and the children were dismissed.  Lucy was hurrying off, when
Julia Staples called after her to wait, for she was going that way.
Lucy did not like to be disobliging, and therefore stood still until
her companion was quite ready.

"I hate school, don't you?" said Julia, as they walked along.

Now Lucy did not hate school, she generally found it very pleasant;
but she thought it would seem childish to say so to a large girl like
Julia Staples; so she answered, rather awkwardly, "Yes, I did not
like it to-day."

"I can't bear Miss Parker," continued Julia, "she's so partial; I
know you don't like her, from the way you looked at her this morning."

Lucy did like Miss Parker, for she had often drawn the little girl to
her side, and spoken very tenderly to her, more tenderly than any one
had done since her own mother's death, and she was therefore glad
that they came that moment to the road which led to Julia's home, for
there they must part.

"Good morning," said Julia, not waiting for an answer; "I shall call
for you to-morrow," and Lucy went on her way alone.  She had been
almost led to speak unkindly of a person she really loved, because
she was afraid to say boldly what was in her mind.

As she came in sight of Mrs. Tappan's quiet house, she saw her father
coming out of the gate, looking thoughtfully on the ground.  He did
not see her, and she had to run very fast to overtake him before he
got into his chaise.

"Father! dear father!" she said, "do stop a minute; is Mrs. Tappan
very ill?  Do not be angry with me, here is the medicine."

The doctor looked quite serious while Lucy told him of her fright in
the morning, and her sorrow after she reached school at not having
delivered the medicine.  The dreaded dog was standing within the gate
while they were talking without; the doctor called him and made Lucy
look into his mild eye and pat him gently.  "You see, my dear," said
the father, as the hand of the little girl rested on the head of the
quiet animal, "that you need not have been afraid of Rover.  You
should have remembered that in not delivering the medicine you might
be doing more harm to another than the dog would have done to you.
Even after you were at school, all might have been well if you had
had the courage to tell the whole truth to your teacher; she would
certainly have excused you.  I cannot say what will be the
consequence of your foolish timidity.  Mrs. Tappan is very ill!"

As her father spoke these words, Lucy's tears fell fast.  Not another
syllable was spoken until they reached home.  Harty came out to meet
them, calling out to his sister, "Are those red eyes the sign of bad
lessons?"  She made him no reply, but hastened to her room to think
on her own folly, and poor Mrs. Tappan.

It was a long afternoon to the little girl; her dinner was sent to
her, and she remained alone until dark.  This was the day which had
commenced so pleasantly, and in which Lucy had intended to please
everybody.  Alas! the poor child had not asked God's help to enable
her to do her duty, nor had she been faithful in her own exertions.

When the tea-bell rang, she hastened down stairs, hoping to hear from
her father good news about Mrs. Tappan, but he did not appear.  Harty
seeing his sister look so unhappy, forbore to tease her, and the meal
passed over in silence.  Eight o'clock came, and Mrs. Maxwell gave
Lucy her light, and told her to go to bed.  She did not dare to ask
to sit up a little longer, for she knew the request would not be
granted.  Feeling like a criminal, the little girl went to her
room--that pretty room, how many unhappy hours she had passed there!
but none more wretched than on that evening.

In vain she tried to sleep.  Whenever she closed her eyes, the form
of the sick woman would rise before her, and she could almost fancy
she heard her groans.  Nine o'clock struck, and ten, yet Lucy was
awake.  About eleven she heard the street-door open; then there was a
careful step upon the stairs, and some one moved towards the doctor's
room.  She was out of bed in an instant, and hastening towards the
door.  It was locked as usual, and before she could open it, her
father had passed.  She almost flew along the passage, and sought his
arm as he was entering his room.  He clasped her to his breast and
kissed her tenderly, saying at the same time, what she so much wished
to hear, "Thank God, Mrs. Tappan is out of danger.  You ought to be
very grateful," he continued, "my dear child, that your fault has led
to no evil; I trust that this will teach you not to let childish
fears lead you to neglect your duty!"  Much relieved she returned to
her own room, but no thanks were uplifted from her young heart to Him
who had been pleased to spare the stroke of death.




CHAPTER IV.

AN ANNOUNCEMENT.

All the family at the cottage were awake at sunrise the next morning,
and there was an unusual bustle throughout the house.  Mrs. Maxwell
was flying about with a duster in her hand, giving her orders to the
servants, and working twice as busily as any of them.  The large room
opposite to Lucy's was open, and being put in thorough order.  This
room had been occupied by Lucy's mother during her illness, and had
been kept closed since her death.  It had always seemed a gloomy
place to the little girl; she had peeped in when the door chanced to
be open to air the apartment.  Now it was undergoing an entire
change; the shutters, so long fastened, were thrown back, and muslin
curtains fluttered in the morning breeze; neat covers had been placed
on the dark bureau and table; and on the latter Mrs. Maxwell was
placing a large India work-box that had belonged to Mrs. Vale, and
which Lucy had not seen since she was a very little child.

Before going down to breakfast, she stepped in to see the pleasant
change more closely; she was startled by meeting a mild glance from a
sweet face on the wall.  It was her mamma's portrait that looked thus
gently upon her, and she almost expected the kind face to bend down
to kiss her, as it had been wont to do when that dear mamma was
alive.  Lucy had never seen this picture before, and she could not
help wondering where it had come from, and why it was placed there,
where none of the family could see it.  Indeed, she was thoroughly
puzzled to understand what could be the cause of all this commotion
in the usually quiet house.

Mrs. Maxwell poured out coffee in silence, and Lucy asked no
questions; but before they rose from the table, Harty came bounding
into the room, crying, "Guess who is coming here, Lucy."

"Isn't it cousin Jack?" asked Lucy, almost sighing to think what a
life she should lead with the two boys to tease her.

"Guess again," said Harty; and she did guess all the aunts, cousins,
and friends that had ever been to make them a visit, but in vain.
When Harty had enjoyed her curiosity long enough, he said, "Well,
Miss Mouse" (a name he often called her), "sister Rosa is coming home
to live, and she is to tell us what to do, and be like a little
mother for us!  That's what father told me."

Lucy did not know whether to be glad or sorry at this news; she had
not seen her sister for many years, and perhaps she might be afraid
of her, and perhaps Rosa might not care for such a little girl as
herself, even younger than Harty.

The excited boy was in a state of great delight, and he talked to
Lucy until she quite entered into his feelings.  "Won't it be nice,"
he said, "to have Rosa at home?  I shall offer her my arm when she
goes to church, and lead you with the other hand.  I shall lend her
my 'Swiss Family Robinson;' I mean to put it in her room, that she
may read it whenever she pleases.  But she need not attempt to make
me mind her, for I sha'n't do it; I am not going to have any girl set
over me!"

"Oh, fie!  Harty!" said Lucy, "to speak so of sister Rosa before you
have seen her."

"Before I have seen her!" repeated Harty; "I remember her perfectly;
I have not forgotten how I used to play--she was my horse--and drive
her round the house; you were only a little baby then."

"Not so very little," answered Lucy, pettishly, for her brother had
made her feel as if it were a disgrace to be young.

While they were talking, Julia Staples called to walk with her to
school.  Lucy soon told her all about her sister's expected return.

"I should not think you would like it!" said Julia; "she'll want the
nicest of everything for herself, and make you wait on her, as if you
were her servant."

Before they reached the school-house, Lucy was quite sure that Rosa's
coming would make her unhappy.  Julia Staples had been talking with
little thought, but she had roused evil feelings in Lucy's mind which
were strangers there.  She was not naturally envious, but now her
heart burned at the idea that her sister would always be praised, and
go out with her father, while she would be left at home with no one
to care for her.  Children do not think enough of the harm they may
do each other by idle conversation.  Julia might have encouraged Lucy
in feeling kindly towards her expected sister, and have made her look
forward to the meeting with pleasure; but she filled her mind with
wicked, envious thoughts.

Do my young friends ever think whether they have roused wrong
feelings in their companions?  Two children can hardly talk together
for half an hour without having some influence over each other, for
good or for evil.  The wrong thought that you have planted in the
heart of a child may strengthen, and lead her to do some very wicked
thing when you have forgotten the conversation.

A traveller once took some seeds of a very valuable plant with him on
a journey.  From time to time he cast them in the fields as he
passed, and when he was far away they sprang up and were a great
blessing to the people who owned the fields.  A wicked traveller
might have scattered the seeds of poisonous plants, which would have
grown up to bring sickness and death to all who partook of them.  Our
life is like a journey, and whenever we talk with the people around
us, we cast some seeds in their hearts, those which may spring up to
bless them, or those which may cause them sin and sorrow.




CHAPTER V.

THE ARRIVAL.

"Your sister is to be here at ten o'clock, and you must be ready to
receive her," said Mrs. Maxwell to Lucy, a few days after the
occurrences related in the last chapter.

"Shall I put on my white frock?" asked Lucy.

"Nonsense! child," was the reply; "isn't your sister to see you every
day, from morning to night, in whatever you happen to have on?  Go,
get a clean apron, and make your hair smooth, that is all the
dressing that little girls need."

This idea did not suit Lucy, for she was very anxious that her sister
should love her, and she thought if she were prettily dressed at
first, she would be more likely to do so.  As she looked in the glass
while arranging her hair, she thought she never had seemed quite so
ugly.  The fact was, she was beginning to have a fretful expression,
which was spoiling her face.  Lucy had never heard that scowls must
in time become wrinkles.  She was not at all pleased with her simple
appearance, but there seemed no way for her to wear any ornament, not
even a hair ribbon, for her soft light curls were cut so closely,
that they could only lie like her waxen doll's, in golden rings about
her head.

Lucy was fond of dress, and she would have liked to wear jewellery to
school, as many of the scholars did, but Mrs. Maxwell never allowed
it.  The little girl had a bracelet of her mother's hair, and this
she, one morning, clasped on her arm under her apron, to be worn on
the outside after she reached school, where Mrs. Maxwell could not
see it.  As she stopped on the road to change it, there came a sudden
pang into her heart--she was deceiving, and with the gift of her dead
mother; perhaps that dear mother could see her now, she thought; and
hastily putting down her sleeve, she hurried to school.

Though the bracelet was not displayed, and no one around her knew
that she wore it, she felt guilty and unhappy until it was restored
to the box in which it was usually kept.  The remembrance of that day
checked her this morning, as she was about to place on her slender
finger a ring which had been her mother's, and in her child-like
dress, she went down to wait for her sister.

She found Harty at the front window, but by no means in a fit
condition to give Rosa a welcome, for his face had not been washed
since breakfast, and his dark curls were, as usual, in wild confusion.

"Here comes Miss Prim!" he shouted, as Lucy entered, "as neat as a
new pin.  For my part, I don't intend to dress up for Rosa; she'll
have to see me this way, and she may as well get used to it at once.
I do wish she'd come, I am tired of waiting; the clock struck ten
five minutes ago.  Hurrah! there's the carriage!" he cried, and was
out of the room in an instant.

Lucy longed to follow, but she seemed fastened to her chair; there
she sat, looking anxiously out of the window, as the carriage entered
the yard and drove up to the door.

Her father got out first, and then gave his hand to a tall, slender
girl, who sprang with one leap to the stops, and was locked in
Harty's rough embrace.

"But where is little Lucy?" she asked, when Harty had ceased to
smother her with kisses.

The voice was kind and cheerful, and Lucy stepped forward, hanging
her head, and timidly putting out her hand.

Rosa overlooked the little hand, and clasped the bashful child
tenderly in her arms.

Tears came in Lucy's eyes, she could not tell why--not because she
was unhappy, for she felt sure she should love her sister.

"God bless you, my children!" said Dr. Vale, "may you be happy
together.  Rosa, you must be a second mother to our little one.
Lucy, show your sister her room; I must leave you now; I must not
neglect my patients, even to enjoy seeing my children once more
together."  So saying, he drove from the door.

Rosa's room had no gloomy associations to her, for she had not been
at home at the time of her mother's death, and she only remembered it
as the spot where she had enjoyed much sweet conversation with that
dear mother, now, she trusted, a saint in heaven.

As her eyes fell on the truthful picture of that lost friend, they
were dimmed by natural tears, which were soon wiped away, for why
should she weep for one whose pure spirit was at rest?

Rosa was a Christian; not that she never did wrong, but it was her
chief wish to do right.  She had just been confirmed, and felt most
anxious to do something to serve the Saviour, whose follower she had
professed herself to be.  When she received her father's letter
recalling her home, she found it hard to obey, for she had been so
long at her uncle's, that it was a severe trial to leave his family
circle, and to lose his advice, which she knew she should so much
need, to keep her true to the promises which she had now taken upon
herself.  Mr. Gillette, with gentle firmness, pointed out to his
niece that it was her plain duty to return unhesitatingly to her
father's house.

"You wish, dear Rosa," he said, "to be a true follower of the
Saviour, and to do something for His cause.  Go home to your brother
and sister, strive by example and kind advice to lead their young
hearts to Him who will repay all their love.  But be careful, my
child, while you are striving for the good of others, not to neglect
your own character.  Be yourself all that you wish to make them!"

Rosa had returned with a true desire to be of service to Lucy and
Harty, and she had many plans for their welfare.  Just now she longed
to be alone for a few moments, that she might thank her Heavenly
Father for His protecting care during the journey, and ask His
blessing on her new home.

Her first impulse was to send the children away, but she checked it,
and made them quite happy by allowing them to assist her in
unpacking.  Lucy handled everything very carefully, but Harty made
Rosa tremble, by his way of tumbling over her collars and ribbons.

At last, all was unpacked but the little box of books, which Harty
insisted on opening himself.  "Run, get my hatchet," he said to Lucy,
who willingly brought it.

"This is too small to work with," said the eager boy, after a few
moments' exertion, "get me the large hatchet, Lucy."

Lucy again obeyed; but her brother spoke not a word of thanks when
she came back, breathless with running.  This rudeness did not escape
Rosa, although she hoped it was only occasioned by her brother's
anxiety to oblige her, and was not his usual manner.

The obstinate nails at last came out, and all the party sat down on
the floor, and began taking out the books.  Harty looked at the
titles one after the other, and threw them aside with disappointment;
at length he said, impatiently, "Are they all as sober as sermons?  I
should think you were going to be a parson, Rosa."

"Not exactly!" said she, with a merry laugh, "but you must not be
surprised if I preach a little sometimes.  Then you don't like my
books; I am sorry for that, but I hope we shall have a great deal of
pleasure in reading them together, by-and-by."

"Not I," answered Harty; "I like stories about shipwrecks and great
soldiers, and strange and wonderful things."

"Then here is a book which ought to please you," said Rosa, laying
her hands on the beautiful Bible which had been Mr. Gillette's
parting gift.  "Do you not love to read it?"

Harty hung his head, and answered, "There are no nice stories in the
Bible."

"No nice stories in the Bible!" said Rosa.  She turned the leaves
rapidly, and began to read the story of Gideon.  At first, Harty
looked very indifferent; but she read in a clear voice, and animated
manner, and by degrees he dropped the books which lay on his lap, and
leaned his head on his hands, in rapt attention.  When she came to
the attack on the camp of the Midianites, he was ready to join the
shout, "The sword of the Lord and of Gideon!"

"Where is it? where is it?" asked Harty, when Rosa had finished, "I
want to look at it myself."

She pointed to the place, and promised to find him many more
interesting stories, that they could read together.

Lucy meanwhile had crept close to Rosa's side, and laid her hand upon
her lap.  "And there is something to interest you, too, Lucy," said
Rosa: "here is the Prodigal Son, let me read it to you."

"Do! do! sister Rosa," said both of the children.  She needed no
urging, and read the short and beautiful parable with real feeling.

Harty felt touched, he knew not why, but with an effort to look
unconcerned, he asked, abruptly, "What does it mean, Rosa?"

"It teaches us many sweet lessons, dear Harty," answered Rosa; "I
cannot well explain them all to you, but I know that it is to make us
understand that God loves us as the father loved his wandering son.
Did you notice that he knew the Prodigal when he was afar off, and
ran to meet him?  So God sees when we wish to do right, though nobody
about us may guess it, and He is ready to welcome us to His love.  Is
it not strange that the Holy God should love us so tenderly?"

Harty looked wearied, and did not reply.  Lucy tried to speak, but
she was almost weeping, and her lips would not move.

"Come, we must not talk any more," said Rosa, cheerfully.  "See how
the things are all lying about.  Harty, can you take the box away for
me?"

He started off, with a sense of relief, and Rosa was left alone with
her little sister.  She kissed the child gently, and said, "You must
tell me, some time, why those tears come so quickly; I want to know
all that troubles you, and be your friend."

Lucy only replied by placing her hand in that of her sister.  Harty
now returned, and they all went to work busily, and soon arranged the
books on the shelves of the bookcase.

"Come, Rosa," said Harty, "I want to show you my room, and to take
you down in the orchard;" and he seized her rather forcibly by the
hand.

The room was still in confusion, and Rosa would have preferred to
stay and see her things nicely put away, but she contented herself
with closing one or two of the drawers, and then followed her eager
brother.  Lucy silently went with them, keeping close to her sister's
side, now and then looking half-lovingly, half-wistfully, into Rosa's
cheerful face.

Harty's room was a curiosity shop, filled with all kinds of odd
things that he had gathered together.  Mrs. Maxwell and he had been
for a long time at war about the birds' nests, nuts, shells, stones,
&c., that he was constantly bringing to the house, and leaving about
to her great annoyance.  On several occasions she threw away his
carefully collected treasures, and at last, the young gentleman, in
great displeasure, went to his father and asked, "if he might not be
allowed, at least in his own room, to keep anything valuable that he
found in his walks."  His father consented, and after that his room
became a perfect museum.  Stuffed birds, squirrel-skins, and crooked
sticks were ranged on his mantel-piece, in a kind of order, and the
chest of drawers was covered with similar specimens.

From time to time, Mrs. Maxwell came herself to dust among them,
though Harty was sure to complain after such visits that his
treasures had been greatly injured.  On this particular morning Mrs.
Maxwell had been thoroughly dusting, on account of the expected
arrival, and as Harty entered the room he darted from Rosa, and
carefully taking from the shelf some twigs, with bits of spiders' web
attached to thorn, he angrily exclaimed, "Old Maxwell has been here,
I know!  I wish she would let my things alone! the hateful thing!
See here, Rosa, this was a beautiful web, as perfect as it could be;
I brought it only yesterday morning, when it was all strung with
dew-drops, and now look at it!  Isn't it enough to make any one
angry?"

Rosa looked sorrowfully at her brother, and made no reply for a
moment; at length she answered: "Dear Harty, you can find another
spider's web; but angry words once spoken can never be taken back.
Won't you show me what you have here, and forget your trouble?"

The hasty boy was soon engaged in explaining what all the
queer-looking things were, and why he valued them.  In some of them
Rosa was much interested: she had never seen a titmouse's nest
before, and as she took the curious home in her hand, she thought of
the kind Heavenly Father who had taught those little creatures to
build it with such skill, and had watched the nestlings from the time
they left the shell, until they flew lightly away on their fluttering
wings.

"What can you be thinking about?" said Harty, as she looked earnestly
at the pretty thing.

"Pleasant thoughts," said Rosa, smiling, as she took from his hand a
huge beetle.

Lucy wondered to see her sister take what seemed to her such a
frightful thing so calmly in her hand.  "There now!  I like that!"
shouted Harty, "she handles it like a boy.  There's Lucy, she screams
if I put such a thing near her, if it has been dead a month.  Isn't
she a goose?"

Lucy looked anxiously at Rosa, fearing she would say something unkind.

"Oh! yes, she is a little goose," was the reply, "but such a dear
little goose, that I am sure I shall love her very much.  We must
teach her not to be afraid of trifles."

The timid child clasped Rosa's hand more closely, and inwardly
resolved to try to please her sister in everything.  She even touched
with the tip of her finger a snake-skin from which she had always
shrunk before, as she heard Harty and Rosa admiring it, while they
handled it freely.

Some of the specimens which Harty seemed to think very precious were
uninteresting to Rosa, and some were even disgusting; but she looked
at all, and tried to discover the beauties which Harty so eagerly
pointed out.

Her uncle had taught her that politeness is a Christian duty, and to
be always shown, even to nearest relatives, and to those younger than
ourselves.

Harty was delighted, and slapped Rosa on the back in token of his
pleasure.  "You are a glorious girl!" said Harty; "why, if that had
been Lucy, she would have cried, and said I always hurt her."

"You forget," said Rosa, "that Lucy is a delicate little girl; you
cannot play with her as you would with a boy.  You must take care of
her, as the knights of old guarded their ladye-love, and handle her
as carefully as you would a bird's nest."

At this Harty laughed, and Lucy smiled.

"Now for the orchard," cried Harty; and away he ran, pulling the
girls so rapidly along that they could hardly keep from falling down
stairs.

A pleasant place was that orchard; the grass was fresh and short, and
some of the branches of the old trees bent almost to the ground.
Under these Harty had placed wooden seats, and there it was his
delight to study.  Very little studying he accomplished, though, for
his eye wandered at one moment to a ripe apple on the topmost bough,
and the next to a curious insect that was creeping on the trunk near
him.

Rosa placed herself on the rustic seat, and looked upward through the
waving branches to the clear blue sky above, and a half smile came
over her face, that Harty did not understand.  He did not guess that
the sweet scene was filling the heart of his sister with love to the
great Creator.  Nor did Lucy understand her any better; but the
expression on her sister's countenance made her warm with love
towards her.

Harty soon grew restless, and engaged his companions for a race.
Away they flew over the soft grass, and Rosa was the first to reach
the fence, which had been agreed upon as the goal; Lucy came next,
while Harty, puffing and panting, brought up the rear.

"I declare that was not fair," he began; "we did not start together."

"Never mind," said Rosa; "we girls ought to be the fastest runners,
for that is all we can do in danger.  Girls run, while boys must
stand and defend themselves and their sisters."

This view of the case suited Harty, and reconciled him to his defeat;
and they continued chatting amicably in the orchard and piazza until
the bell rang for them to prepare for dinner.  As they entered the
house, Mrs. Maxwell met them, and looking sternly at Rosa, she said,
"I hoped you were going to set a good example, Miss Rosa, to these
careless children, but there I found your room all in confusion,
while you were out running races.  Your father has reckoned without
his host, if he looks to you to make them particular."

Rosa knew that it had cost her an effort to leave the room in that
condition, and that she had done so to please her brother.  She did
not defend herself, however, for she now saw that it would have been
better to make him wait a few moments.  Hastening up stairs, she soon
found a place for everything, and put everything in its place, and as
she did so, she resolved not to let her anxiety to win the affection
of her brother and sister lead her astray.

Dr. Vale looked very happy, when he sat down to dinner with his
family about him.  He was pleased with Rosa's easy, cheerful manner,
and delighted to see Lucy's face lighted with smiles, and Harty doing
his best to act the gentleman.  And acting it was, for anything like
politeness was far from being habitual with him.

When they rose from the table, Dr. Vale led his eldest daughter to
her room, and entering it, closed the door.  The doctor walked
towards the portrait, and gazed at it a few moments in silence, then,
turning to Rosa, he said, with some emotion, "You do not, I fear,
remember your mother distinctly, my child.  I have had this life-like
image of your mother placed where it will be ever near you, that it
may remind you of the part that you must act to the dear children.
May God bless and assist you in your task: pray earnestly to Him to
watch over you and guide you, and you cannot fail.  And now, dearest,
never think me cold nor stern, when I am silent.  My professional
cares often weigh so heavily upon me that I notice but little what is
passing around me; but nothing can so absorb my mind as to make me
indifferent to the welfare of my children.  Come to me with all that
troubles you, and you shall find a father's heart, though perhaps a
faltering tongue."

The doctor pressed his daughter to his bosom, kissed her forehead,
and left the room.  As soon as he had gone, Rosa fell on her knees to
implore the God of all good to strengthen her for the great task that
was before her, and to enable her to make herself such an example as
the children might safely follow.




CHAPTER VI.

AN ACCIDENT.

In about half an hour there was a gentle tap at Rosa's door.  It was
Lucy, who entered timidly, and going towards Rosa, said, blushing,
"Don't mind Mrs. Maxwell, dear; she often speaks in that way to me,
when she don't mean anything."

"Mind her!  No and yes: she will not worry me; but I shall be glad to
have some one to make me remember to be neat at all times.  Where's
Harty?" said Rosa.

"He's getting ready to go to the woods: he wants you to go with him."

"With all my heart," answered Rosa.  "Are we to go now?"

"Yes, as soon as we can put on our bonnets," said Lucy, as she went
to her room, to get her things.  She put on a pair of thin slippers,
although she knew they were to cross a damp meadow, for she could not
make up her mind to wear the thick boots that were so much more
suitable.  Lucy had certain articles of dress which it gave her great
pleasure to wear, and these shoes were among the favourites.  Many a
cold and sore-throat they had cost her, but her vanity was not
overcome even by such consequences.

Hand in hand the three children walked merrily along, chatting as
pleasantly as if they had not been parted for years.

Rosa and Harty declared that they liked to step on the soft meadow,
that it was like a rich carpet that yielded to their feet.  Their
shoes were so thick that they did not feel the dampness, and they had
no idea how uncomfortable Lucy was, in her thin slippers, thoroughly
soaked with the moisture.  They soon entered the woods, where the
tall trees grew so close together that they almost shut out the
pleasant sunlight.  Here Rosa found so much to admire that she was
constantly exclaiming with delight.  She had not lived in the country
since her childhood, and there was a charm in everything that met her
eyes.  Sometimes she was struck with new beauties, and sometimes she
was reminded of by-gone days.

"Do you remember, Harty," she said, "how we came here together, when
you were a little bit of a boy, and made a house under that tree for
my doll to lie in?  And have you forgotten, when we where gathering
chestnuts just here, and I found I had lost my shawl, and how we
hunted, and found it at last hanging on the fence by the meadow?"

Harty remembered these and many other occasions when he had enjoyed
rambles with his sister; and they continued calling the past to mind,
until poor Lucy felt quite sad that she knew nothing of what caused
them so much pleasure.  She grew silent, and at last withdrew her
hand from Rosa, as she thought, "Yes, it will be as Julia Staples
said, Harty and Rosa will go together, and not care for me."

The sun was just setting when they drew near home on their return.
They had taken a long walk, but Lucy had not recovered her spirits,
although Rosa, perceiving that she was not happy, had done all in her
power to amuse her.  Lucy felt half inclined to laugh and enjoy
herself occasionally, but then the wicked, jealous thought would come
up in her mind, and she grew sober again, and coldly answered her
sister's cheerful remarks.

They had walked through the woods quite round to the back of the
house, and were almost to the pleasant orchard, when they came to a
wide brook, which they must cross to reach the by-path that led to
the house.  A single plank was placed across the stream.  Harty ran
gaily over, and went up the hill on the other side without looking
behind him.

"Let me lead you over," said Rosa, kindly offering her hand to her
little sister.

"I had rather go by myself," answered Lucy, sullenly, and placed her
foot on the plank.  She walked tremblingly on until she was half
over, then the plank shook a little, and she grew frightened, swayed
from side to side, lost her balance, and fell into the brook.

Lucy's shriek attracted the attention of Harty, who was by this time
some distance up the hill, and he hastened towards her; but she had
scarcely sunk in the water before Rosa had leaped from the bank and
caught her in her arms.

The stream was rapid, and the fearless girl could hardly have kept
her footing had she not caught hold of the plank above with one hand,
while with the other she carried the half-fainting Lucy.

They reached the opposite side in safety, and Harty was there to
assist them in climbing the bank.  Great tears stood in his eyes, not
from fright for Lucy, but from admiration of Rosa's courage.

"You are a sister worth having!" were his first words.  "How I wish
you were a boy!"

Poor Lucy, what pain these words gave her!  Although she had been in
such danger, Harty only thought of Rosa!

The true-hearted sister, meanwhile, was lifting her thoughts in
thankfulness to Him who had enabled her to save the life of the child.

Lucy was too weak to walk home, and Rosa and Harty formed a
lady-chair with their arms, and carried her safely up the hill, Rosa
laughing at their ridiculous appearance in their wet clothing, for
she had plunged into the stream up to her neck.

"Here we are! all safe and sound!" shouted Harty, as Mrs. Maxwell
came out to meet the strange-looking party.

"A pretty-looking set you are!  Do not come into the house in that
condition!" was Mrs. Maxwell's reply.  "Pray where have you been?"
she continued: "I wonder if we are to have such doings all the time."

Rosa gently but firmly replied, that Lucy had been in great danger,
and she thought she ought to be undressed immediately, and placed in
a warm bed.

There was something in Rosa's quiet, dignified manner that awed Mrs.
Maxwell: she came forward and took Lucy from their arms without
another word, while Rosa hastened to her room to put herself in order
to wait upon her sister.  In a few moments she was neatly dressed,
and standing by Lucy's bedside.

Dr. Vale had returned, and having heard from Harty an account of the
matter, was soon with his little daughter.  He ordered a warm draught
to be administered, and said he did not think she needed any other
medicine, as she seemed not to be really injured, only much agitated
by the fright.

He kissed the little girl tenderly as he thought how near he had been
to losing his pet, and greatly praised Rosa's promptness and courage
in saving her from the death with which she was threatened.

Lucy could not thank her sister, for she felt guilty, as she
remembered the unkind, suspicious thoughts that were in her mind when
the accident happened.  She shuddered at the idea that she might have
died while her spirit was so unfit to go into the presence of the
holy God.  She felt that she had been very wicked, and she could not
believe that God would pardon her.

"I know I shall be very ill," she said to herself, "because I was so
naughty, and perhaps I shall die, and then nobody would care, and
Harty and Rosa would be just as happy."

This last thought checked her half-formed resolution to tell her
sister of her wrong feelings; and she turned away from the kind face
that was bending down to her, and said, "I wish you would go away, I
had rather be alone."

Rosa did go, but only to the door of her own room that was opposite:
there she placed her chair, that she might be near, if Lucy should be
lonely or want anything, little thinking what was in her sister's
heart.

Lucy lay very still all the evening.  Rosa thought she was sleeping,
and did not disturb her.  During those long, dark hours, Rosa was not
sad.  She had many pleasant thoughts.  She liked to be alone,
sometimes, for then she could more fully realize that God was with
her.

Nine o'clock came, yet Rosa did not like to leave her sister: often
during the evening she had stolen to her side to see if she were
still sleeping.  Once she stooped and kissed her; then Lucy longed to
throw her arms around the neck of the kind watcher, and say that she
had not been asleep; but something kept her silent.

At ten, the doctor came in.  Rosa stole softly down stairs and told
him how quiet the little girl had been during the evening.  "But,
dear father," she said, "I do not like to leave her alone to-night.
May I not lay her in my bed, where I shall be sure to know if she
wakes, and wants anything?"

"Certainly, dear," was the father's reply, "and I will carry her
myself, carefully, that she may not wake.  She is too heavy for you
to lift, though you did take her so nobly through the water, my
darling."

The doctor took the little girl gently in his arms; she did not seem
to be awake, but oh! how guilty she felt all the time, to think that
she had cherished harsh feelings towards one who wished to be so kind
to her; and ashamed she felt that she was even then deceiving; but
she had not the courage to open her eyes and say that it was all
pretence.  Rosa covered her very carefully, and placed her head
comfortably on the pillow, and then began to move about noiselessly,
preparing for the night.

Lucy was just closing her eyes, thinking her bed-fellow was about to
lie down beside her, when Rosa threw her wrapper round her, and
taking her small Bible, sat down to read.  She did not once raise her
eyes or move, while she was reading, yet Lucy could see that her
expression changed from time to time, as if she was very much
interested.  There was a sweet peacefulness on her countenance as she
closed the book, and Lucy resolved to open at the mark the next
morning, that she might read herself what had had so pleasant an
effect.

She then looked up and saw that Rosa was kneeling, with her eyes
raised, and praying earnestly in a low voice.  Lucy was almost
startled, Rosa seemed so really to be speaking to some one, and she
involuntarily looked about to see if there were any one in the room.

She had been so long accustomed to merely prayers herself, that she
had almost forgotten that prayer is always speaking to God.

By degrees she rose in the bed and leaned eagerly forward to catch
the words, which were scarcely audible as she lay on the pillow.

She heard her sister earnestly ask pardon for the sins she had just
been confessing, while she thanked her Heavenly Father with the
confidence of a child for His free forgiveness; and then she prayed,
oh, how earnestly! that God would enable her to watch over her
brother and sister, and lead them to the dear Saviour, the only
source of real happiness, and for whose sake she knew all her
petitions would be granted.  Before she rose, she begged to be
enabled to remember that the Saviour was beside her, through the dark
night to preserve her from all harm.

As Rosa finished her prayer, Lucy sank down in the bed, overcome with
awe.  God was really in the room; Rosa had spoken to Him, and seemed
to know that He had heard her.  What must His pure eye have seen in
her own heart! how much that was wrong!  Could He forgive?  In a few
moments the light was extinguished, and Rosa was at her sister's
side.  She lay very still at first, that she might not waken the
sleeper, but very soon a little hand was laid in hers, and Lucy
gently whispered, "Dear Rosa, do you really think the Saviour is near
us?"

Rosa was startled to find her companion awake; but she took the
little hand instantly, and said, "Yes, dear Lucy, He is with us
always."

"Doesn't it make you afraid," said Lucy, "to think so?"

"Afraid to think He is near us, dearest!  Why, He is our best friend!
Do not you love Him, Lucy?"

Lucy began to sob, and said, at last, that it always frightened her
to think about such things, and she never did, unless something
reminded her that she must die.

"My dear little sister," said Rosa, "God loves you: you need not be
afraid of Him, if you really wish to please Him."

"But I can't please Him, I can't do right," sobbed Lucy.

"I know you cannot," Rosa replied, "but He will forgive you for
Jesus' sake, and help you, if you ask Him."

"But I forget all about it," said Lucy.

"It is very hard to remember at first, that God is always with you,
and you are trying to be His child.  I know, dear Lucy, that you must
wish to love and serve the kind Heavenly Father who has done so much
for you: begin to-night; ask Him to make you His child, and to take
care of you."

Lucy made no answer, but in silence she did as her sister had
advised, and God who seeth all hearts received and answered her
simple petition.

The few words that Rosa had said, dwelt in her mind.  "God loves
you," she thought, again and again, as she lay in her quiet bed; and
when her eyes closed in sleep, it was with the remembrance that the
God who loved her was near to watch over her.




CHAPTER VII.

SUNDAY MORNING.

Sunday morning came, and the sun was fairly risen before either of
the little girls was awake.  Rosa was the first to open her eyes: she
would willingly have taken another nap, but the first stanza of a
morning hymn occurred to her mind, and she remembered her resolution
to overcome her laziness.

As she repeated--

  "Awake, my soul, and with the sun
  Thy daily course of duty run,
  Shake off dull sloth, and early rise
  To pay thy morning sacrifice,"

she got up very carefully that she might not rouse her sister.  "I
will let the child sleep a little longer," she said to herself, "for
she is so pale, I don't believe she is quite well."

It was a beautiful morning: the fields and orchards were bright with
the sunshine, and the birds seemed singing even more happily than
usual.  As soon as Rosa had dressed herself, and finished her usual
devotions, she went down stairs to enjoy the fresh air.  As she
walked in the garden, the conversation she had had with Lucy the
evening before passed through her mind.  What her uncle had said to
her about being useful to her own family seemed about to be realized.
"Poor little Lucy," she thought: "may God help me to lead the dear
child in the right path."

Harty heard Rosa's footsteps in the garden, and was soon at her side.
"Here, brother, is something for your museum," was her greeting, and
she pointed to a chrysalis which hung on a low rose-twig by the path.
"Is it not beautiful?  Just look at the silver spots!"

"It is a capital specimen," answered Harty, as he carefully broke the
little branch to which it was fastened: "I wonder what kind of a
butterfly it will be.  Rosa!" he added, "I did not think you would
like such things as these."

"Not like the beautiful things God has made!" exclaimed Rosa.  "Why,
I love to look at every little object in nature, and think that our
Heavenly Father planned it and made it so perfect.  It seems easy to
believe that He notices all our little joys and troubles, when wo see
that even the smallest insect is made with such care."

As Rosa spoke, her eyes sparkled and she looked around her, as if
every object which was in sight was a proof to her of the love of the
kind Creator.  Harty made no answer, but looked thoughtfully at the
chrysalis as they entered the house together.

The breakfast-bell was ringing, and they met Lucy in the hall.  She
glanced slyly towards her sister, remembering the conversation of the
evening before.  Rosa kissed her cordially, and, hand in hand, they
went to the table.

"Perhaps Miss Rosa had bettor pour out coffee," said Mrs. Maxwell
stiffly to the doctor, as the children came in.

"Would you like it, Rosa?" asked her father.

Rosa saw that Mrs. Maxwell looked displeased, and, in a moment, it
passed through her mind, that perhaps she would not like to give up
the place she had held so long to one so young as herself, and she
quickly said,--

"May I put that off a little longer, father?  I am afraid I could not
suit you as well as Mrs. Maxwell does; she has made tea for you a
great while."

"A long time, dear child," said the doctor; and his thoughts went
back to the days when his delicate wife sat opposite him, her sweet
face growing paler each morning, until at last her weak hands could
no longer do their office, and Mrs. Maxwell took her place.

Rosa knew of what her father must be thinking, and she did not speak
for several minutes.  At length she said, "Is old Mr. Packard any
better to-day, father?"

"I have not seen him yet," was the reply.  "I shall have to make a
round of visits this morning," continued the doctor, "so I shall not
have the pleasure of taking my tall daughter to church to-day: I
leave that to Harty."

Harty looked very proud at the idea of waiting on his sister.  Little
Lucy listened in vain to hear something said about her forming one of
the party.  She resolved, at least, to get ready, and perhaps no one
would object to her going.

When they rose from the breakfast-table, Rosa went to her room,
thinking she should have a quiet hour to herself before it was time
to prepare for church; but Lucy and Harty followed her.  The rules
had been very strict at Mr. Gillette's: the young ladies seldom,
visited each other in their bed-rooms, and then never entered without
knocking.

The freedom with which her sister went in and out of her apartment
was already an annoyance to Rosa, and her first impulse was to send
them away, that she might read her Bible alone, as she had intended.
Then her confirmation vow came to her remembrance.  She had promised
"to love her neighbour as herself, to do unto others as she would
they should do unto her."  Would she like to be sent away from a
person she loved? and was it not a part of her duty to make those
around her happy?  Her first impulse was conquered, and she turned
cheerfully to the children, who felt uncomfortable for a moment, they
hardly knew why, and said, "Come, let us sit here by the window; I am
going to read, and you shall listen to me, if you please."

They looked delighted.  Lucy dropped upon a low footstool by her
sister's side, and Harty stood watching eagerly to see what was to be
the chosen book.  He seemed disappointed when Rosa took up her little
Bible, and shook his head when she asked him if he would not take the
vacant chair beside her.

She began to read in the fifth chapter of Mark, "And, behold, there
cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when
he saw Him [Jesus], he fell at His feet, and besought Him greatly,
saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee,
come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall
live."

Rosa had taken great pains to learn to read properly and pleasantly,
for her uncle had told her that to be an agreeable reader was one way
of being useful.  Now her voice was sweet and natural, and she seemed
herself so interested, that Lucy caught her spirit even before the
"little daughter" was mentioned; but at these words her attention was
fixed, and she listened eagerly to hear what was to follow.

Harty, meanwhile, stood rolling the corner of the neat white curtain
in his hands, which were not particularly clean, and looking
undecidedly about him.  When Rosa finished the sentence, he hurried
from the room, saying, "I'm going to see my chickens."

She glanced at the soiled curtain and then at Harty as he closed the
door: for a moment she looked fretted, but it was only a moment; a
sweet smile took the place of the half-formed frown, and she went on
with the reading.

Lucy had heard the story before of the raising of the ruler's
daughter, but now it seemed quite new to her, and her eyes were
bright with wonder and pleasure, as her sister closed the book.

"Rosa," she said, "I should like to have been that little girl!"

"Why?" said Rosa,

"Because--because," answered Lucy--"because she must have been so
glad to be alive again.  I wonder what she said when they told her
all that had happened."

"I hope she thanked the land Saviour, and learned to love Him very
dearly."

"How sorry she must have been that the Saviour could not stay and
live at her home, and take care of her always," said Lucy.

"Lucy," said Rosa, "the same thing may happen to you as to that
little girl; but after Christ has said to you, Arise, you may live
with Him always."

Lucy looked half-frightened, and answered, "I don't understand you.
I should have to die first;" and she shuddered at the thought.

"No; you may have Christ with you always, without dying, but you
cannot see Him.  He will take care of you, and you can speak to Him,
and He will do what you ask Him.  If you remember that He loves you
and is ever at your side, when you come to die it will seem like
opening your eyes to see the kind Friend who has been so long with
you."

Lucy's eyes filled with tears, and in her heart she wished that she
loved the Saviour as Rosa did.  "I will try and remember that He is
with me," she said to herself; and for the first time the idea was
pleasant to her.  Before she had only thought of God as seeing her
when she was doing wrong, and it had always been a very painful
thought to her.

Many minutes had passed when Lucy started up, saying, "There goes the
church bell; it is time to get ready."

Rosa and Lucy were quite ready, when Harty came running into the
room, his hair in its usual tumbled state, and his coat dusty and
torn.  "Oh!  I have had such a chase," he said: "one of my 'bantys'
got out, and I had to jump over the fence and chase him all over the
orchard before I could catch him.  And see here, where I tore my coat
putting him back in the coop.  Why! you are all ready: is it
church-time?"

"Yes, indeed," answered Lucy; "and I hate to be late, people all look
at you so."

"I hate to be late, too," said Harty; "I do like to watch the people
come in."

"Harty!  Harty!" interrupted Rosa; "don't talk so.  Make haste and
get ready."

"Never mind me," said Harty; "you walk on, and I can catch up with
you: it won't take me but a minute to change my coat--these trowsers
will do."

"But, Harty, you will have to brush your hair and your shoes, and
wash yourself.  It would not be respectful to the place where you are
going to enter in such a plight."

"Pshaw!" said Harty, angrily; "I will not go at all; you can find
your way, with little Lucy to open the door for you."

Rosa was tempted to leave him, for she, too, disliked to be late at
church, but not for either of the reasons that had been mentioned.
She liked to be in her seat before the service commenced, that she
might have time to collect her thoughts, and be ready to join with
the congregation in the solemn worship of God.

"My brother ought not to stay at home," she thought: "it will be
better to wait for him, even if we are late."  "Come, Harty," said
she, encouragingly, "we will help you, and you will soon be ready."

Lucy was dispatched to the kitchen for the shoes that had been
cleaned, for Harty's cap, pocket-hankerchief, another clean collar,
&c.; in short, she had so many things to run for, that she stopped on
the landing, so weary that she was glad to take breath.  There Mrs.
Maxwell met her, and said, "Take off those things, Lucy Vale; you
ought not to think of going to church after the wetting you got
yesterday.  Your father didn't say you might go; I noticed it this
morning."

"But I am quite well," pleaded Lucy.  "I think he would let me go, if
he were at home."

"But he is not at home.  At noon you can ask him.  Go now and undress
as fast as you can."  Without another word Mrs. Maxwell passed down
stairs.

Lucy dropped down upon the lowest stop, and began to cry bitterly.

"Ready at last!" shouted Harty: "now Lucy, my Prayer Book."

But no Lucy came.  Rosa and Harty came towards her, and wore
astonished to see her face wot with tears.

"What is the matter?" asked Rosa: "have you hurt yourself?"

"No!" sobbed Lucy; "but Mrs. Maxwell says I must not go to church."

"Pooh! is that all?" said Harty; "why, you are not always so fond of
church-going!"

This was true, for Lucy often stayed away from church when Mrs.
Maxwell did not oblige her to go; but on this particular morning she
wanted to go with her sister, whom she was beginning to love very
dearly.

"But why mustn't you go?" asked Rosa.

"Because I got in the water yesterday, and Mrs. Maxwell says I am not
well."

"Never mind, dear," said Rosa, "perhaps father will let you go out
this afternoon.  Don't cry any more; we shall not be gone long.
Good-bye."

Harty was rather glad that Lucy could not go; he never liked to take
Lucy anywhere with him.  Perhaps he thought it made him appear more
like a mere boy to have his little sister by his side, or that she
was not fit to associate with so wise a gentleman as himself.

If his sister Rosa had felt as ungenerously and unkindly to those
younger than herself, she would have at least laughingly refused the
arm which he offered her as they went down the walk.  But she took
the arm, although she had to stoop a little in doing so, and talked
with her brother as if he really were the man he was trying to appear.

As Harty was thus honoured, he looked back triumphantly at poor Lucy,
who was still watching them.  A pang of envy shot through the heart
of the little girl.  Julia Staples's evil words came to her mind; the
bad seed was springing up.  "Rosa and Harty will always be together;
they won't care for me," she thought.  But good seed had been sown by
Rosa, and it, too, now sprang up.  "God loves me," thought the little
girl; "if I try to please Him I shall be happy."

She rose and wont into her own pretty room: there she put everything
carefully in its proper place, and felt a new pleasure in doing so;
for it was her duty.




CHAPTER VIII.

STAYING AT HOME.

The house was very still, and as Lucy moved about she was half
startled at the sound of her own footsteps.  She went into her
sister's room to sit, for she fancied that it was more pleasant than
her own; and then all Rosa's books were there; perhaps she might like
to look at some of them.

The Bible was on the table; she took it up.  "Rosa, from her Uncle
Gillette," was written on the blank leaf; and before it were several
sentences.  They were as follows:--"Remember when you open this book,
that God is with you, that He is speaking to you.  Remember to ask
God to bless to you what you read.  When you close the book, think
over what you have been reading, and take the first opportunity to
practise it."

As Lucy read the first sentence, a fooling of awe stole over her; and
she almost trembled to think how often she had carelessly opened the
word of God, and hurried over its sacred pages.  Now she reverently
turned to the place where her sister had left the mark the evening
before.  The story of the storm on the sea of Galilee caught her eye:
as she read it she felt sure that it must have been that sweet
narrative which had so fixed Rosa's attention when she watched her.

Lucy repeated, again and again, the words of the blessed Saviour,
"Why are ye so fearful, O ye of little faith?"  They seemed addressed
to her by the kind Friend who stilled the tempest, and who, Rosa had
said, would be ever with her to take care of her, if she would love
Him and strive to be truly His child.  "I will, I will love Him, and
try to please Him," she said, half-aloud.  "I should never be afraid,
if I were sure He would watch over me."

She took up the Prayer Book, and read the verses with which the
Morning Service commences.  Some of them she did not quite
understand; but when she came to "I will arise, and go to my father,
and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son," she was
reminded of the day when her sister had read to her the sweet parable
from which those words are taken, and how she had said that one
purpose of the parable was to show how willing God is to receive all
those who really come to Him.  Again her purpose strengthened to be
His child, who could so freely forgive.

Lucy had been over the same Service almost every Sunday since she had
been able to read, and could now find all the places without
assistance, but she had hardly noticed many parts of it, and to some
she had listened, while they were repeated by others, as if she had
no part in the matter.  Now the exhortation, "Dearly beloved
brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places," seemed so direct
and simple, that she wondered she could ever have heard it without
feeling for how important a purpose she had come into the house of
God.

With a strange feeling of solemnity, she knelt down and began to
repeat the Confession aloud.  The words were so simple and natural,
and so true, that she seemed rather to be speaking what had long been
in her heart, than repeating what had been spoken by many voices
around her from Sunday to Sunday, while she thoughtlessly glanced on
the page, or let her mind wander to other things.  As she said, "We
have done those things that we ought not to have done," little faults
she had committed, acts known only to herself, came thronging on her
memory.  Among these painful recollections was the falsehood she had
told about the light the morning after the thunder-storm.  The whole
fearful scene of that night came back to her: again she seemed
standing, trembling and alone, in the passage, while the incessant
lightning appeared to threaten her with instant death.  So long she
dwelt on these circumstances, that she quite forgot she was on her
knees, speaking to the mighty God of heaven.  Suddenly it flashed
upon her, and she started up, as if she feared He would immediately
punish her for seeming to be praying, while her thoughts were far
away.  Lucy had begun to realize that prayer is something more than
merely repeating a form of words.

The little girl had hardly risen from her knees before there was a
ring at the door.  She set off immediately to save Betsy the trouble
of coming up stairs, for the poor old woman suffered much from
rheumatism, and Lucy knew it gave her great pain to move about.  "I
will go, Betsy," she called, as she passed the stairway.

A ragged Irishman was standing at the door.  Lucy was almost afraid
to turn the key, lest he should lay hold of her with his hard, rough
hands: she felt inclined to call out to him to go away, as the doctor
was not at home; but she thought of the misery that giving way to her
fear of Mrs. Tappan's dog had cost her, and her father's reproof, and
she resolved that no poor sufferer should go uncared-for because she
was afraid to speak to a man in ragged clothes.

She threw the door wide open, and was quite relieved when the
Irishman took off his hat, and asked her very respectfully, "Is the
doctor in?"

"He is not," answered Lucy, promptly: "where shall I tell him to
call?"

"Sure and it's jist down the lane, forninst Bridget O'Brady's: he
can't miss it, for isn't it the poorest bit of roof in the place? and
tell him to come quick, if you plase, miss."

The man turned to go away, but Lucy called after him, not at all
satisfied that the direction would be sufficient.  "What is your
name?" she asked; "I want to put it down on the slate for my father."

"It's Owen M'Grath, plase you; and don't be afther stopping me, for
who will be minding the baby, and the mother so sick, while I am jist
talking here?"  So saying, he hurried from the door.

Lucy had very little idea how the name was to be spelt, but she put
it down as well as she could, the direction and all, and looked at it
quite proudly when it was done.  It was neatly written, but oh, the
spelling!

"Who was that, Miss Lucy?" called Betsy.

"An Irishman with a queer name: he says he lives by Bridget
O'Brady's," was the reply.

"Oh! dreadful!" shouted Betsy.  "Why, Miss Lucy, they've got the
small-pox in all them dirty little houses; you've ketched it for
certain.  Go, take off every rag of clothes you've got on, and throw
them into the tub there in the yard: I don't know who'll wash 'em.  I
am sure I should not want to touch 'em with a broomstick."

Poor Lucy, pale and trembling, ran up stairs and did as Betsy had
advised.  Even in the midst of her fright she could not help thinking
that she was glad it was her calico, not the favourite silk, that she
happened to have on, since she must thrust it into the water, to lie
there till some one should dare to remove it.

The happy birds were still singing about the pretty cottage, and the
trees were waving in the sunshine, but Lucy did not see them; her
hands were pressed tightly over her eyes, and she rocked to and fro,
thinking of all the horrible stories she had heard about the disease
which Betsy said she had "ketched for certain."

"I shall be very ill," she thought, "and who will dare to nurse me?
Perhaps I shall die; and if I get well, my face will be all marked,
so that nobody will like to look at me.  I wonder if Rosa would be
afraid to sit by my bed, if nobody else would stay with me.  I should
hate to see her face all pitted.  How badly I should feel if she
should take the small-pox from me.  Perhaps I shall give it to her if
I see her now."  At this last thought, Lucy ran into her own little
room.  There she sat sobbing until church was out.  She forgot that
there was a Friend with her, in that quiet room, who could have given
her comfort, if she had called on Him in her trouble.




CHAPTER IX.

THE KING AND HIS WEAPONS.

Rosa and Harty were scarcely out of the church door before he began,
"Oh!  Rosa, did you see how grand Madam Maxwell looked, when she
moved for you to take the end of the pew?  It was as much as to say,
'I suppose, little miss, you think you ought to sit here, but you are
very presuming.'  I would have taken it if I had been in your place.
It made me mad to see her settle herself so satisfied, when you
refused."

"Fie, Harty!" answered Rosa; "Mrs. Maxwell is a great deal older than
I am, and it is far more suitable that she should have the most
comfortable seat.  I should be sorry if my coming home interfered
with her in any way.  She has been most faithful in taking charge of
the house since--since--" since our dear mother died, Rosa would have
added, but her eyes filled and her voice failed her.  The familiar
scene in the church had brought her lost mother freshly before her,
and she well remembered when they last trod that same path together.

After a few moments she recovered herself, and said, "When I last
passed this spot, Harty, our dear mother was with me.  She had been
talking very sweetly to me, as we walked, of the blessing we had in
being able to go out that pleasant morning, and worship God with His
people, while so many poor invalids must remain at home, and even
dear father could not be with us.  Just here, I asked her a question
which had long been in my mind.  I had always noticed that as soon as
she entered the pew, she knelt down for a few minutes.  I wondered
what that was for, as I could not find anything about it in the
Prayer Book.  'Mother,' said I, 'what do you say when you kneel down
before church begins?'  'I make a short prayer,' she answered, 'that
I may remember that I am in God's house, and that He will teach me to
worship Him aright.  Many people,' she continued, 'who come early to
church, quite forget that they are in the house of God as much before
the service begins as afterwards, and spend the time until the
clergyman comes in, in looking about and observing their neighbours,
until their minds are quite unfit to join in any solemn duty.  I
think the habit of asking the blessing of God on the prayers you are
about to offer, and the truths you are about to hear, is a great help
in reminding you immediately that you are with the Lord in His holy
temple.'  'Won't you teach me a little prayer to say, that I may do
as you do?' I asked.  'Yes, darling,' she answered, with one of her
sweet, loving smiles; and as we walked by this hedge, which was just
planted then, she taught me these words, which I have said, many,
many times since our dear mother was taken by her Heavenly Father to
a better world:--

"'Lord, make me remember that I am in Thy house.  Keep me from
dullness and wandering thoughts.  Hear my prayers to-day, and bless
to my soul the truths I shall hear, for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.'"

Harty listened with interest to every word that Rosa tittered: he
often wanted to hear some one talk of his mother, but it was too sad
a subject for his father to speak freely upon, and Lucy could hardly
remember her.

Rosa gladly perceived that he was interested, and added, "I will
write out the little prayer for you, Harty; I know you will like to
keep it, and use it, for our dear mother's sake."

Harty looked embarrassed, but he did not refuse his sister's offer.
She immediately changed the subject by saying, "Poor little Lucy will
be glad to see us by this time.  I hope she can go out this
afternoon.  I like to have her with us."

Harty wondered that Rosa should wish for the society of such a child
as Lucy; but his respect for her involuntarily rose when he found
that Rosa spoke affectionately of her.

As they drew near the house, they caught a glimpse of Lucy looking
sorrowfully from her window.  She did not run to meet them, as they
expected, but old Betsy came out saying, "Oh! only think of it!  Miss
Lucy has got the small-pox, I know she has.  There's been a man here
that must have it, for he lives down by Bridget O'Brady's, where they
are dirty enough to make them all ill."

Rosa was startled for a moment, but she answered calmly, "But Lucy
has been vaccinated, Betsy; she would not take the small-pox even if
the man really had it."

"I don't believe nothin' at all in _vaxnation_," said Betsy; "it
don't stand to reason.  I telled Miss Lucy she'd ketched the
small-pox, and I believe she has."

"Poor child!" said Rosa; and she ran hastily up stairs.  Harty did
not follow, for although he laughed at Lucy's timidity, he was a bit
of a coward about some things himself; and old Betsy's words had
alarmed him not a little.

"Let me in, Lucy," said Rosa's sweet voice entreatingly; "I could not
take the small-pox if you had it."

Lucy gladly unfastened the door.  Rosa took the trembling girl in her
lap.  For a few moments Lucy sobbed violently, and not a word was
spoken; at length Rosa said, tenderly, "Dear Lucy, there is no danger
of what you dread so much.  Here, let me look at those little arms:
there is the scar where you wore vaccinated when you were a baby,
that you might never take the small-pox.  Your kind father took good
care that his little Lucy should not have her smooth face all pitted."

"Can't I have it?" asked Lucy, the tears still in her eyes.

"No! certainly not!" was the reply.

"But, dearest," continued Rosa, "you may be exposed to other diseases
quite as dangerous.  I wish you could learn to trust the Heavenly
Father, who loves you more dearly even than our own papa; then you
would not be afraid of anything.  Shall I tell you what I heard uncle
Gillette saying to one of the little girls at school, who was afraid
of lightning."

"Oh! do," said Lucy; "I am so frightened when it thunders."

Lucy nestled closer in her sister's lap, and Rosa began.

"There was once a mighty king who was so terrible in war that all his
enemies were afraid of him; the very sound of his name made them
tremble.  His arm was so strong that the horse and its rider would
sink under one blow of his battle-axe; and when he struck with his
sharp sword, his enemies fell dead at his feet.  This mighty king had
a little fair-haired daughter, who watched him as he prepared for the
battle.  She saw him put on his helmet, and laughed as the plumes
nodded above his brow.  She saw the stately battle-axe brought forth;
she saw him take his keen sword in his hand; he tried its edge, then
waved it about his head in the sunlight.  She laughed as it glanced
sparkling through the air; and even while it was upheld she ran
towards her father to take a parting kiss.  Why was not the little
child afraid of the mighty king with the fierce weapons?  Because he
was her father; she knew that he loved her, loved her as his own
life.  She knew that those dangerous weapons would never be used
against her unless to save her from worse peril.  Do you understand
what uncle Gillette meant by this story?"

"Not exactly," said Lucy; "won't you tell me?"

"He meant," said Rosa, "that God is like that mighty king.  Sickness,
lightning, danger, trial, death, are all His weapons; but we need not
fear them if we are truly His children.  When the sharp lightning
flashes in the sky, we can look calmly at its beauty, for it is in
our Father's hand.  Sickness may be around us, but our Father can
keep us safe.  Death may come, but it will only be to send us to our
Father's arms."

"But I am not His child," half sobbed Lucy.

"His child you are, my dear little sister: His loving, obedient
child, I hope you will be."

At this moment the dinner-bell rang.  Rosa waited till Lucy could
wash away the traces of her tears and smooth her hair, and then they
went down stairs together.  Mrs. Maxwell looked up with a smile as
Rosa came in; her thoughtful deference was beginning to have its
effect.

"Hurrah! for the small-pox!" shouted Harty, as Lucy came in.  He had
heard from his father that the danger was imaginary, and, forgetting
his own fears, he quite despised Lucy for her fright.

"Come here, my little patient," said the doctor to the blushing
child.  "I don't wonder my pet was frightened: old Betsy ought to be
ashamed for being so foolish.  Poor Owen M'Grath could injure no one;
his sorrow is his worst disease.  You see I made out the name in your
spelling, and I am obliged to my little girl for trying to write the
message so exactly.  Owen had as neat a little home as you could wish
to see, but it is a sad, sad place now.  His poor wife has long been
ill with consumption; she died this noon, and there is no one to take
charge of his little baby but his daughter, who is only as old as you
are, Lucy."

"Can we not do something for them, father?" asked Rosa.

"How like her mother," thought the doctor.  "Yes, dear child," he
replied; "I will take you to see them to-morrow."

"May I go too?" asked Harty, eagerly.

The father smiled and nodded his head.  "We will not leave little
Lucy behind, either," he added, to her great delight; "that is, if
she is well enough.  My pet looks a little pale yet.  You did well,
Mrs. Maxwell, not to let her go out this morning."

Mrs. Maxwell gave a glance at Lucy, which made her drop her eyes.

"I shall not be at home to hear your catechism this evening, Lucy,"
said Mrs. Maxwell, as she left the dinner-table; "I am going to see a
sick friend after church, as Miss Rosa can take my place at tea-time."

"Willingly," said Rosa, "and hear the catechism too," she added,
internally.




CHAPTER X.

THE HAPPY SUNDAY EVENING.

Sunday afternoon passed away very rapidly to Lucy.  She spent the
time while her brother and sister were at church in reading a little
book which Rosa had lent her.

As the children sat together in the twilight, after tea, Rosa said to
Lucy, "We used to call you baby and pet at first: do you know when we
began to call you Lucy?"

"Not till I was two months old, I've heard father say."

"Yes; I well remember the morning that you took your new name,"
continued Rosa.  "It was a bright day in June.  Dear mamma was so
kind and cheerful then.  I can see her now as she came in to
breakfast, so slender and pale, and yet with such a calm, happy look
on her face.

"'You must call the baby Lucy after to-day,' she said to me, as I
kissed her that morning.

"'And why, dear mother?' I asked.

"'Because she is to be baptized to-day, and take Lucy for her
Christian name,' answered our mother.

"'But why is the baby to be baptized?' I childishly asked.  She took
no notice of my question then; but after breakfast was over, she
called me to her side, and said, 'Shall I tell my little girl a
story?'

"'Oh, do!' I answered, and she began.

"'There was once a little child who lived in a very small cottage,
with a scanty grass plat before it.  This child had a pet lamb, of
which she was very fond.  She loved it so dearly that she often sat
on the door-step and anxiously thought how she should ever be able to
keep it from harm as it grew older, and would be tempted to run away
from the cottage, around which there was not even a light paling.
Then winter must come, and how would the poor little lamb be
protected from the storm?

"'These thoughts were one day in the child's mind, when an old
traveller came to the cottage door, and said to her, "I have a
message to you, dear child, from the shepherd who feeds his flock on
yonder green hill.  He has noticed you and your little lamb, and he
wants to be a friend to you.  He knows that you will never be able to
keep your pet from harm, although you love it so tenderly; and he
bade me say to you, that he is willing to take your lamb to be one of
his flock, to feed in that green pasture and drink from the clear
stream that is ever flowing there.  It shall be safely gathered to
his fold when the storms of winter beat, and shall be guarded from
all cruel beasts.  You can see it every day, and caress it, though
you must never try to lead it away from him.  Shall we go together
and lead the little lamb to the kind shepherd?"

"'"Yes!" shouted the child, joyfully; and she took the old
traveller's hand, and gently led the lamb away by the blue ribbon
that was about its neck.

"'It was but a short distance they had to go, yet the traveller found
time to tell the child, as they walked together, that if her lamb
learned to know the shepherd's voice, and follow him, he would take
it some day to a beautiful land, where it could hunger and thirst no
more; where there would be no more storms, nor cruel beasts, and
where she might meet it and dwell for ever with the kind shepherd and
his blessed flock.

"'The child did not see the kind shepherd; but the peaceful sheep,
feeding on the delicate food, or lying beside the clear water, were
there, and she did not fear to leave her pet among them.  Day by day
she saw her lamb grow stronger and happier, and more pure and gentle,
and she rejoiced that she had placed it among the favoured flock.

"'One day the little child grew dizzy and faint: all things around
her seemed fading from her sight, and her dim eyes could only see a
strange figure which seemed beckoning her away.

"'Then at her side she heard the voice of the old traveller who had
visited her before: "Fear not," said he; "you are going to the
beautiful land where the kind shepherd dwells."  Then a pang shot
through the heart of the child, for she thought of the lamb that she
must leave behind her.  The traveller guessed her thoughts, and
answered, "Your little lamb is in the care of the kind shepherd!"
Then the eyes of the child were bright, and she said, "I don't fear
for my little lamb: I am happy that I placed him where he will be so
tenderly cared for, when I did not know that I so soon must leave
him.  May he learn to know the kind shepherd's voice, and follow him,
that we may meet again in the beautiful land."

"'The cottage was soon all silence: the child no longer went singing
from room to room, but she was happy, far away in the blessed land
which the kind shepherd prepared for his faithful flock.'"

"'Did the little lamb go to meet her there?' I asked, as dear mamma
stopped as if she had finished the story.

"'I cannot tell you, Rosa,' she answered, and fast the tears fell
from her eyes.  'By the lamb I mean your little sister, and the kind
shepherd is the Saviour, to whom I am to give her to-day.  God only
knows whether our little Lucy will reach the blessed land.'

"'But you are not going away, mamma, as the child did,' I said, my
eyes, too, filling with tears, for I too well understood her meaning.

"'Perhaps not very soon,' she answered, and smiled away her tears."

Lucy was still silent, and Rosa went on, for both Harty and Lucy were
earnestly listening.

"When you were carried up the aisle, dear Lucy, all in your white
clothing, you seemed to me like the little lamb of which mother had
spoken, and I felt that you were being received into the flock of the
kind shepherd.  You smiled when the water was sprinkled on your
forehead, and I was so glad, for that made you seem willing to be
placed in His care."

Lucy listened to the story of the child and the lamb; and when she
heard its explanation her heart was full, and she inwardly resolved
that she would try so to follow the Saviour here, that she might join
her mother at last in His blessed land.  As Rosa recalled the
circumstances of her Baptism, she for the first time realized that it
had really happened, that her name had been really given by her
"sponsors in Baptism."

"Was I there too?" asked Harty, beginning to be restless, as there
was a short pause.

"Yes, indeed! and so eager to see the ceremony that you climbed on to
the seat, and leaned forward to look until you fell with a loud
noise, just as the baby was being carried out of church.  You always
were a noisy fellow," said Rosa, as she laid her hand affectionately
on her brother's clustered curls.

"Did I cry?" asked Harty.

"No; you thought yourself too much of a man for that, even then; and
how fondly, proudly, mamma looked at you, as you closed your little
lips and stood up without a sound, though there was a bright red mark
on your forehead where you had struck it."

It seemed strange to Harty that he was willing to sit still and
listen to a girl; yet he found a pleasure in being with Rosa
different from any he had ever felt.  He had always been quite
indifferent as to what Lucy thought of him, but that Rosa should not
be pleased with him was a very unpleasant idea.  As a child he had
tenderly loved his mother; and when she was taken from him, a blank
had been left in his heart which had never been filled.  Now half the
charm of Rosa's society consisted in her being able to speak of that
mother, and revive his now fading remembrance of her.

"Come," said Rosa, "let us say our Catechism together: I will ask the
questions, and we will all repeat the answers."

Lucy was delighted at the idea, and readily joined her voice with
Rosa's.  She found it difficult to keep with her sister in reciting,
as Rosa repeated her answers slowly, as if she really meant what she
was saying.  As she pronounced the words, "a member of Christ, a
child of God," she looked meaningly at Lucy; and then it flashed
through the little girl's mind, that she was indeed the child of God,
as her sister had said; His child, not only because He had made her,
but because she had been made His by Baptism; and again she resolved
to be His "loving, obedient child."

At first Harty did not join in saying the Catechism; he had for some
time given up the practice as a thing only for such children as Lucy;
but when he saw that Rosa did not think it beneath her, as they came
to the Apostles' Creed his voice mingled with the others.  Rosa took
no notice of it save that she placed her hand in his, and they went
on.  In some of the long answers Lucy faltered, and Harty halted
entirely; but Rosa smoothly continued until they could again join
her.  As Harty repeated the once familiar words, he recalled the time
when he had learned them from that mother who was now a saint in
Paradise.  With those familiar words returned the precious lessons of
love and holiness which she had spoken, but which he had forgotten
amid the sport and recklessness of boyhood.

When they had finished, he was quite softened, and his voice was very
gentle as he replied to Rosa's proposal to sing, "Yes, if I know
anything you do."

Lucy was fond of music, but she could not sing: she laid her head on
her sister's lap, and listened to the simple hymns with a feeling of
peace and happiness.  Another and another hymn was sung, until, at
last, the clock struck nine.

"Nine o'clock," said Harty, "and Lucy not in bed! what would Mrs.
Maxwell say to that?"

Lucy had been fast asleep, and was not a little frightened when she
heard it was so late.  She took a candle immediately, kissed her
sister and wished her good night.  Oh! what pleasure it gave her when
Harty said, "Me, too, if you please," and really looked fondly in her
face.

That night she forgot to look for robbers; she was too happy to think
of them; but she did not forget the many blessings of the day when
she repeated her usual thanksgiving.  The same prayers she had often
said she used that evening; but they went up from her heart, and were
received in heaven for the Redeemer's sake.




CHAPTER XI.

JUDY M'GRATH.

Often, during school-hours on Monday, the promised visit to Owen
M'Grath's came into Lucy's mind, and she longed for four o'clock to
come, that she might be at liberty.  School was over at last, and
with the pleasant consciousness of having done well the duties of the
day, Lucy tripped towards home.  Julia Staples had tried several
times to draw her into a whispered conversation, but she had resisted
the temptation; and when Julia offered her an apple, and put her arm
in hers, to draw her aside for a confidential chat, Lucy refused the
gift and got away as soon as she could with politeness.  She had
learned that the first step towards doing right, is to keep as much
as possible out of the way of temptation; and she knew that Julia's
society roused her evil feelings.

"Dear me, how stuck-up somebody is!" said Julia Staples to one of her
companions, as Lucy turned away.

Lucy heard the remark, and her face flushed slightly, but she made no
reply.

Julia did not offer to accompany Lucy home, but with two of the
scholars, who were much like herself, she walked behind the little
girl, "making fun of her."  Of this Lucy knew nothing.  Lightly and
rapidly she walked along, not looking behind her, but welcoming each
turn in the road that brought her nearer home.

Rosa and Harty were standing at the door to meet her.  "I do believe
you were kept in," began Harty; "we have been waiting for you this
half-hour."

"Come, come! young gentleman," interposed Rosa playfully, "you are in
such a hurry to wait on the ladies, that the time seems long to you.
It is but five minutes past four."

The teased, fretted expression that was coming over Lucy's face
passed away in an instant, and Harty's impatience was changed to a
smile.

The children, set off together in high spirits.  Even Rosa, although
she know she was going to the house of mourning, caught something of
their spirit, and chatted cheerfully by the way.

Dr. Vale was just driving up to Owen's door when they arrived.

"That's right! all punctual," said he, as he alighted; and when he
looked upon their bright faces, he felt thankful that his little
group had been so far spared from sickness and death.  The happy
young voices were hushed in an instant, as they entered the dark,
quiet room, into which the street-door opened.  There was but a
little furniture, and that of the plainest sort, yet all was neat and
tidy.  The pale, lifeless form of the mother was stretched upon the
bed, and close at its side there nestled a sleeping infant, rosy with
health.

The little girl, who was sitting beside them, her head on her hands,
jumped up as the strangers came in.  She instantly recognised the
doctor, and said, in a low voice, "Won't the docther plase to be
sated, and the young gintleman and ladies?"

Noiselessly she put forward the chairs, and whispered as she did so,
"Whisht! the poor babby has been grievin' so I could not hush him at
all, and sorra a bit would he sleep till I laid him there by poor
mammy, and then he cuddled up to her cold side and seemed quite
contint."

"Poor baby!" said Rosa, the tears in her eyes.

They all drew near to the bed, and looked into the face of the dead.
Harty gave one glance and then stepped to the door; he could not bear
it; he felt a choking in his throat to which he was quite
unaccustomed.

As Rosa and Lucy looked upon the calm, sweet expression of the face,
they felt no chill of horror.  Death seemed less terrible to Lucy
than it had ever done before.  "She is happy now?" half questioned
she of Rosa.

Rosa looked puzzled, but the doctor replied, "Yes, she is happy.
'I'm going home,' were her last words.  She has only gone to be with
the Friend whom she has served faithfully through life."

"Did you say mammy was happy?" asked Judy, the little girl who had
been acting as nurse.

"Happy with the angels in heaven," was the doctor's reply.

"Then I'd not want her back again, to be sorrying here.  Little peace
she's had, with that misery in her side, for many a day.  Why, the
lifting of Larry there, was enough to make her all put to it for an
hour.  Poor fayther, he can't get along with it all: sorra a bit has
he tasted to-day, and he cried fit to break his heart when he went
away to work this morning; but he said he must go, for he'd niver a
sixpence to pay for the burying."

The poor little girl had been so long alone that it seemed to be
quite a relief to her to talk to some one who felt for her.

"You'll be a comfort to him, I know," said Rosa, gently.

"I'll lave nothing untiched that I can turn my hand to," answered
Judy, earnestly.

The talking, although it was in a low voice, waked Larry, and he
began to moan piteously.  He put out his hand, touched the cold face
near him, and then drew it quickly away.  He half-raised his head,
but seeing that it was his mother's cheek that had so startled him,
he again put forth his hand and patted her gently until he was again
asleep.

"And what will poor Larry do when they lay her in the cold ground?"
said little Judy, half crying.

"He will soon be comforted," whispered Rosa: "God will take care of
you both.  It must have been a long time since your mother has been
able to sew," she continued, to divert Judy's mind from her trouble.

"Ach! yes.  She has not set a stitch for two months gone; and there's
Larry, with sorra a bit of clothes but them he has on, savin' this
thrifle of a frock that I've been trying to wash for the burying."

As she said this she put her hand on a little faded calico frock that
was hanging near the window.

"I think we can get some clothes for Larry," said Rosa: "may I take
this home with me for a pattern?"

Judy looked a little confused, but she answered, "Sartainly, miss."

"Can you sew, Judy?" asked Rosa.

"I never was learnt," was Judy's reply.

"Would you like to have me teach you?  If you would, you may come to
me every Saturday morning, and I will show you how."

Judy's eyes brightened, and she was going to accept the offer very
gladly, when she thought of Larry, and changed her mind.

"I can't lave Larry; there's nobody but me to mind him now."

"You may bring him with you; I know Lucy here will take care of him,"
said Rosa.

"Oh yes, I will, if he won't be afraid to stay with me," said Lucy.

Before they left the house it was agreed that Judy should come the
next Saturday morning for her first lesson in sewing, if her father
did not object.

Dr. Vale, who had been standing without the door with Harty, met the
girls as they came out.  He stepped back when Judy was alone, and
placed some money in her hand, telling her to give it to her father,
and say to him, that his children should not want for a friend while
Dr. Vale was in the neighbourhood.

Judy curtseyed, and spoke her thanks as well as she was able, but
they were not heard, for the doctor hurried away, and in a few
moments had driven from the door.

Very little was said on the way home.  As they passed an old house,
with a rough, high fence about it, Harty told his sisters that this
was where the people had been sick with small-pox.

Lucy clasped Rosa's hand a little closer, and they both stopped more
rapidly.

"Father says nobody need be afraid, for they have all got well, and
nobody took it from them," said Harty.

Notwithstanding this assurance, all the party felt more easy when the
house with the high fence was out of sight.

"Let us stop here and buy the cloth for Larry's frocks," said Rosa,
as they reached the village shop.

While Rosa was looking at some cheap woollen cloth, Harty was
fumbling in his pockets.  He drew out some marbles, an old knife, a
peg-top, and some bits of string, and at last he found what he was
seeking--a half-crown, with which he had intended to buy some new
fishing-tackle.  He gave one longing look at the money, and then
handed it to Rosa, saying, "Take that for the cloth."

"Yes," said she, very quietly; but a bright, loving smile was on her
face, and Harty felt, happy, although he was blushing as if he had
been in mischief.  Like many boys, Harty seemed to feel more ashamed
when he did right than when he did wrong.

When the children were gathered round the table in the evening, Rosa
brought out the old dress, and was just putting the scissors to it
when Mrs. Maxwell exclaimed, "What are you doing, child? are you
going to cut that dress to pieces?"

"I was going to rip it for a pattern," answered Rosa, mildly.

"I suppose you think I could not cut out a frock nice enough for a
little Paddy boy," said Mrs. Maxwell.

"Oh no, I did not think that!" Rosa replied, smiling; "I should be
very glad to have you help us."

Mrs. Maxwell took the scissors, and the frocks were soon cut out,
much to Rosa's relief, for although she had resolved to do it, it was
her first attempt at dressmaking, and she was afraid that she should
only spoil the cloth.

Then the sewing commenced, and the needles flew so fast that there
was little time for talking.  Lucy was allowed to make the skirt, and
she sewed it as carefully as if it had been an apron for her doll,
and that was very nicely.  Mrs. Maxwell put on her spectacles and
began to sew too, much to Rosa's surprise; and once she offered to
turn the hem for Lucy, when she saw that she was troubled.  It seemed
as if the work they were doing put them all in a good humour, for
every face was bright and happy.  Even Harty felt as if he had
something to do in the business, and instead of fidgeting about as
usual, annoying everybody, he sat very still for some time, doing no
harm, but breaking off thread from the ball and tying it into knots.
At last he said, "Shall I read to you?"

"Yes, do," said Rosa and Lucy, both at once.

"Well, I will, if Lucy will get my Natural History off my table."

Lucy jumped up in a moment, and ran for the book: the hall-lamp
showed her the way until she got to the room door, and then, by the
faint starlight, she easily found the volume.  There were other books
which Rosa would have preferred, and Harty was a very dull reader;
but she listened patiently, and got quite interested at last in an
account of an elephant that went mad in London, a favourite story
with Harty.

Lucy was very sorry when bed-time arrived; but there was not a word
to be said, for Mrs. Maxwell put the lamp in her hand, and bade her
"Good night" most decidedly.

As Lucy entered her own pretty room, she thought of little Judy
watching beside her dead mother in that poor cottage, and she
wondered that it had never struck her before that God had surrounded
her with so many blessings.

Judy's washing had not been very well done, and as Rosa thought best
to send back the little frock as soon as possible, she was in haste
to have it made clean.

After Lucy had gone to bed, she went to the kitchen with it in her
hand.  Old Betsy was sitting by the fire, looking very stupid and
cross.  Rosa was almost afraid to ask her to do what she had
intended.  She took courage, however, and said, "Betsy, I want you to
wash this little frock for a poor boy who has no other to wear but
the one he has on.  I know you would be glad to do it, if you had
seen the poor little fellow lying by his dead mother: he has nobody
at home to wash his clothes now."

Betsy had looked very sour when Rosa commenced, but softened as she
continued to speak, and when Rosa finished, she took the little frock
in her hand, saying, "I suppose I shall ketch something, handling
this thing, but I can't say no to you, for you are the image of your
mother."

"Thank you, Betsy," said Rosa; "I hope I may be like my mother.  You
need not do the frock to-night; it will be time enough in the
morning.  The funeral is not till three o'clock to-morrow afternoon,
and I can get Harty to take it down after school."

"I guess Master Harty will not be running for anybody," said Betsy to
herself, as Rosa went up stairs; but she was wrong: Harty did go, and
took with him, besides, a penny cake, that he had bought for Larry.




CHAPTER XII.

THE VISITOR.

Rapidly, happily, the weeks flew by at Dr. Vale's cottage: there
seemed to be a new spirit at work there.  Lucy no longer looked sad
and drooping: there was always a bright face to welcome her return
from school, and some one to listen to her account of the occurrences
of the day.  If her lessons were difficult, Rosa was always ready to
explain them, and to encourage her to more persevering study.  By
degrees, Lucy was learning to share all her feelings with her sister.
Sometimes Rosa found these confidences rather tiresome, but she never
checked them, as she Was anxious that Lucy should speak to her
without restraint, that they might be able to talk freely on the most
important of subjects.

Many of Lucy's fears seemed to have passed away without effort as she
became more cheerful; others she had been enabled to conquer by
Rosa's kind advice; but the great secret of the new courage that she
seemed acquiring, was found in the few words, "God is with me, God
loves me," which were seldom far from Lucy's mind.

At first she could not help feeling that when she had done wrong, God
had ceased to love her.  Then Rosa would read to her passages from
the Bible where the Saviour speaks of having come to save sinners,
and would remind her, again and again, that she was God's own child.

"God made you, my dear Lucy," she would frequently say; "and He loves
everything that He has made, and 'would not that any of His little
ones should perish.'  Christ has died that you may be forgiven; He
has promised to receive all that truly come unto Him; His child you
were made in Baptism, and His child you are glad to be; then why
should you fear?"

"It seems so strange that God is willing to forgive me so often,"
Lucy would reply, "I can hardly believe it."

"It is, indeed, most wonderful; but for Christ's sake His poor erring
followers are received, if they truly repent," would Rosa answer.

"I wish I could be perfect in a minute," said Lucy, one day; "I get
tired of trying."

"When Christ has done so much for us that wo may share His happy home
in heaven, we ought to be willing to stay here as long as He pleases,
and strive to follow His example.  If we prayed more earnestly for
God to assist us, we should find it easier to do right; for God gives
His Holy Spirit freely to them that ask Him.  If you can constantly
remember that God is with you, you will soon learn to turn to Him
when you are tempted," answered Rosa.

Lucy thought that Rosa had no trouble to do right always; but it was
a mistake.  Many times hasty words came to Rosa's lips, and unkind
thoughts were offered to her mind; but they wore followed so quickly
by the effort to subdue them, and the prayer for aid, that they never
were made known to those around her.

Cold winter weather had come: it seemed to make Harty only the more
full of life and spirits.  When he came in from the keen air, there
was always a bustle in the circle round the fire.  Sometimes he would
lay his cold hands suddenly on Lucy's neck, and shout with laughter
as she shivered and drew away; sometimes Rosa's cheeks got rubbed
with a snow-ball until they were redder than usual; and almost always
the noisy fellow was reproved by Mrs. Maxwell for bringing in so much
snow or mud on his boots.

Yet Rosa was learning to love her rough brother very dearly, and she
even fancied she could see some improvement in him.  After a long
talk with his sister, he would be more gentle and quiet for a few
days; but soon some trifle would throw him into a passion, and all
his goodness departed.  He was so accustomed to speaking rudely to
Lucy, that he never thought of it afterwards; yet he was mortified
when in his fits of passion he had been unkind to Rosa.

She never seemed to retain any remembrance of his fault, but was
ready to meet him pleasantly again as soon as his bad humour had
passed away.

He could not help admiring her noble spirit; and every day he felt
more and more sure that there was some strength in the principles
that could keep a high-spirited girl like Rosa uniformly gentle.

By degrees Harty took less pleasure in teasing Lucy, and more
happiness in her society.  She had followed Rosa's hints, and tried
not to be vexed and hurt by trifles, and really was becoming more
interesting as she grew more cheerful and talkative.

Dr. Vale was still obliged to be very much away from home, but the
time that he could spend with his family he greatly enjoyed; and he
often rejoiced that Rosa had been brought home to throw around her
such an atmosphere of sunshine.

Even Mrs. Maxwell had relaxed a little from her stiffness: she
occasionally allowed Rosa to put Harty's room in order at first, and
finally she gave up that charge entirely to her.  This arrangement
prevented much disturbance, for Rosa handled carefully the veriest
trash, which she knew had value in Harty's eyes; and there were no
more broken cobwebs to put him out of temper.

Often, when Mrs. Maxwell was weary, she found a comfortable chair
placed for her by the fire; when her eyes were painful at night,
unasked, Rosa would read the daily paper aloud.  Such trifling
attentions were very grateful to the faithful housekeeper, and it
soon became a favourite joke with Harty to call Rosa "Mrs. Maxwell's
pet."

As regularly as Saturday came, little Judy appeared, leading Larry by
the hand, for he was now nearly two years old, and a fine healthy boy.

Lucy often wished that she could stay in the room with Rosa and Judy,
but the latter could never attend to her sewing while her little
brother was in her presence.  She was constantly stopping to bid him
say, "Thank ye" to the lady, or shame him for running about as if he
were as much at home as the ladies.

Lucy found it very easy to amuse Larry, and before long she grew fond
of him, and looked forward with pleasure to his Saturday visit.

With Harty's consent, and Mrs. Maxwell's valuable assistance, some of
his old clothes were "cut down" for Larry, and he was warmly dressed
in a good great-coat and cap, that delighted him exceedingly, though
Judy could not help laughing when she first saw him in them.

Judy learned much more than the use of the needle from Rosa.  As she
sat sewing, Rosa taught her many sweet hymns and passages from
Scripture, and led her to look to her kind Heavenly Father as a
friend who would "never leave nor forsake her."

The short winter days and the long winter evenings soon passed away.
One bright spring morning Lucy was looking at the hyacinths that were
blooming beside the cottage wall, when she heard a footstep, and,
turning round, she saw a stranger standing beside her.  Once she
would have started away like a frightened bird; but now she did not
think of herself, but waited politely until the stranger should
announce his errand.

"The flowers are peeping forth again; I see you love them," he said,
cheerfully; "and what a place this is for birds; I never heard such a
twittering.  Are there any robins in the old nest at the bottom of
the garden?"

"Oh yes, they have come," answered Lucy, wondering who could know so
well about the robin's nest.

"We ought to be friends, Lucy," continued the stranger's pleasant
voice, "for I could hush you when you were a baby, when nobody else
could make you stop crying.  You were a fat little thing then, and
you are not so very much heavier now."  And he jumped the little girl
high in the air.

Lucy by this time had made up her mind, that whoever the stranger
might be, she liked him.

"Can it be uncle Gillette?" she had once thought to herself; but she
immediately decided that it was not he, as she had always imagined
him very stern, with large black eyes, and the stranger's face was
mild and cheerful, and his eyes were of a soft hazel.

"I have more little friends in the house," said the gentleman, and
with Lucy's hand in his, he entered the door.  Rosa was half-way down
stairs; she caught one glimpse of the stranger, and then gave a
flying leap, which nearly brought her to his side.

"Oh! uncle Gillette, I am so glad to see you," she said, as he bent
to kiss her, apparently as delighted as herself.

Harty came out to see what was the cause of all this commotion, and
was greeted with a cordial shake of the hand, and the address, "I
hope Harty has not forgotten his old playfellow, uncle Gillette."

The children thought their father welcomed their uncle somewhat
coldly; but they changed their minds when they found that he had been
expecting him for several days, and had accompanied him from the
station to the gate.

Lucy had supposed that she should be very much afraid of Mr.
Gillette, as she knew that he was very learned and good; but she
found him as mild and simple as a little child, and she was most
happy to take the low stool he placed for her at his side, and look
into his pleasant face, while she listened to his conversation.

She was heartily sorry when she heard him say that he was to leave on
Monday morning, for as it was Saturday, they would have but a short
visit from him.

There was no settled clergyman at Chatford at this time, the rector
being absent for the benefit of his health.  On this account a long
time had passed since the children of the parish had been catechised
in the church.  There was therefore no small bustle among the little
people when it was announced on the Sunday morning after Mr.
Gillette's arrival, that the children would be called upon to recite
the Catechism that afternoon, immediately after the service.

There was much buzzing and studying at noon; and many a boy was
astonished that he had forgotten what was once so familiar to him, in
the long interval which had passed since the last catechising.

Even Lucy was glad to study over what she called the "long answers,"
although she never failed to repeat them with her brother and sister
every Sunday evening.  She did not dare to lay her Prayer Book aside
until Rosa had patiently heard her say the whole Catechism, and
pronounced it perfectly learned.

Many young hearts that had palpitated with fear at the idea of
reciting to a stranger, were reassured when the Rev. Mr. Gillette
arose after the Evening Service, and said, "The children may now come
up to the chancel."

Without a thought that any one was observing her, Lucy stepped out
and joined the throng of boys and girls that were moving up the
aisle.  Julia Staples was tittering in the pew behind, and Judy
M'Grath was walking at her side; but she did not see either of them;
she felt that she was in God's holy temple, and about to perform a
solemn duty, and she inwardly prayed that she might be able to
understand and improve by Mr. Gillette's explanations.

The children were allowed to recite together, and their voices joined
in a full chorus, as they answered correctly all the questions of the
Catechism.  Glances of triumph and congratulation passed from eye to
eye as they finished, or not once had they faltered, even in the most
difficult parts.

"What is the Catechism?" asked Mr. Gillette.

"It is a preparation for Confirmation," answered one of the boys.

"You have all recited the Catechism perfectly; are you then prepared
to be confirmed?" said Mr. Gillette.

There was no answer for a moment, and all looked confused; at length
there was a faint "No."

"I fear not," continued Mr. Gillette: "how, then, must you say this
Catechism before you are ready to be confirmed?"

"We must speak it from the heart," said Judy M'Grath.

Some of the boys smiled at her Irish accent, but one glance from Mr.
Gillette sobered them.

"Right!  When do you take upon yourselves the promises made for you
by your sponsors in Baptism?" he asked.

"At Confirmation," several replied.

"True," said Mr. Gillette, "at Confirmation you take these promises
publicly upon yourselves.  I see many before me," said he, looking
tenderly about him, "who are too young for Confirmation, but hardly a
child who is not old enough to make those solemn promises to God in
private, and strive earnestly to keep them.  Do not wait, my dear
children, until you are old enough to be confirmed, before you
promise to love and obey the Saviour who has redeemed you.  Your
sponsors laid you as infants on His bosom; turn not from Him with
your first feeble footsteps.  You were made members of Christ at
Baptism; ask God this day to help you to live as the lambs of His
flock.  If you commence now to strive to keep your baptismal
promises, Confirmation will indeed be, as it ought, a strengthening
of you in all that is good, an assistance in leading that holy life
which becomes the children of God, the members of Christ, and the
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven.

"Let me ask you once more, Do you not believe that you are bound to
believe and do as your sponsors promised for you?  Let me hear that
answer again, and may God give you strength to speak it from the
heart."

"Yes, verily, and by God's help so I will; and I heartily thank our
Heavenly Father that He has called me to this state of salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord," was heard from the throng around the
chancel.

Even those who stood nearest to Lucy could hardly hear her voice; no
human friend saw her uplifted eye; but God, who seeth all hearts,
accepted the vow she made in His holy temple, and she felt more fully
than she had ever done before, that she was indeed the child of God.

Lucy was not the only child who had listened earnestly to Mr.
Gillette.  It was the last time that he ever addressed those
children; but there will be those at the resurrection who will thank
him for the words he spoke that day: good resolutions were then
roused in young hearts, which strengthened until they became strong
principles, which supported through life, sustained in death, and
were perfected in heaven.




CHAPTER XIII.

SICKNESS.

All was changed at Dr. Vale's cottage on Monday noon: Mrs. Maxwell,
Harty, and Lucy once more sat down to dinner by themselves.  The
doctor was with a distant patient, and Rosa had gone with Mr.
Gillette, to pass a few days in the city.

Although Mr. Gillette had been with them so short a time, both Harty
and Lucy were sorry to part with him; and they did not wonder at
Rosa's strong attachment to their uncle.

Lucy felt very sad when it was first proposed that Rosa should leave
home, although it was only for a few days; but she knew this was a
selfish feeling, and struggled to overcome it.  Early on Monday
morning the packing of Rosa's trunk commenced.  Lucy ran about to
wait on her sister, and helped her in her preparations as cheerfully
as if she herself were of the party; she even insisted upon lending
her certain belts and ribbons which were the treasures of her
wardrobe.

Harty was not up when the carriage came to the door; he had been
called once, but had fallen asleep again.  He thrust his tumbled head
from the window, and bade his sister a hearty farewell as she drove
from the door.

This little circumstance seemed to have put him in a bad humour for
the day.  He pushed away his plate at breakfast, declaring he would
not eat a mouthful of such trash; although everything was very nice,
and there were hot cakes, of which he was usually very fond.
Notwithstanding Harty's ill-humours, he was a favourite with old
Betsy, and she was always careful to send him up a good breakfast,
even when he had been lazy.

At dinner, his temper did not seem to have improved.  "How you do
eat," he said to Lucy: "it takes away my appetite to see you stuff
so.  I will speak to father about it."

Poor Lucy looked up in surprise, for she was only quietly taking a
moderate meal.  Once she would have answered pettishly or begun to
cry, but Rosa had taught her that a cheerful as well as a soft answer
often turneth away wrath, and she smilingly replied, "Why, Harty, I
shall not be a stout, rosy girl soon, unless I make good dinners.  Do
try some of this horse-radish, it will make you relish your dinner as
well as I do."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed Harty, impatiently, "you need not try so hard to
be like Rosa: you can never hit it; you are as unlike as an acorn to
an apple."

Lucy blushed, and was glad that Mrs. Maxwell spoke to her just then,
for she was hurt by her brother's rudeness, and tempted to make a
hasty reply.

Mrs. Maxwell wanted a certain apron for a pattern, and Lucy ran for
it as soon as dinner was over, little thinking that even Mrs. Maxwell
had learned something from Rosa, and had spoken to her at that moment
to change the conversation.

Lucy really felt sorry to see Harty come into the dining-room after
tea, as if he intended to spend the evening there, for the frown was
on his brow.  She was about to ask him why he did not go to see John
Staples, when she remembered that Rosa had said that John was a bad
companion, and that sisters ought to do everything to make their home
pleasant, even when their brothers were cross and disagreeable; for
boys were often led into temptation when out of the house, from which
they were safe when at home.

With these thoughts in her mind Lucy laid aside a mark which she was
working for Rosa, and which she was anxious to finish before her
return, and went for the chequer-board.

"Don't you want to beat me?" she asked gently of Harty.

"It is so easy to do that, I don't care for it," was his reply.

The little girl was not discouraged; she took out her scrap-book and
pictures, and the bottle of gum-arabic, and placed them on the table.
She knew Harty would be sure to take an interest in some new
engravings which one of the school-girls had that day given her.

A spirited engraving of a wild horse caught his eye, and he soon was
engaged in looking over the addition to the old stock, and in
advising Lucy where to paste them.  One of the engravings he claimed
as his own.  Lucy knew perfectly that he was mistaken, but she gave
it to him without a word; and when he laughed at her awkward way of
using the brush, she joined in the laugh, holding up her sticky
fingers in a comical way.

Presently Harty put his head on the table, and fell fast asleep.

"Harty must be unwell," said Mrs. Maxwell, as she roused him from his
heavy sleep, and told him he had better go up to bed.

Grumbling at being waked, he disappeared, without saying Good night
to anybody.

Rosa's room looked lonely and deserted to Lucy as she passed it that
night; and she wondered, as she put the lamp down on her own little
table, where her sister was, and what she was doing.

That pretty room was a different place to Lucy from what it once was.
She did not think of looking for robbers now; she had given that up
long ago; and when she looked out of the pleasant window, the stars
seemed like spirits, that told her of the power of the great God, who
was her friend.  She had ceased to hear mysterious noises in the
orchard; the stillness of the night was only disturbed by the
twittering of some restless bird, or the waving of the tender leaves
in the soft wind; but Lucy felt no fear as she looked out upon the
quiet scene.  Once she had been afraid of ghosts, and often feared at
night to see some white figure rise before her; but since she had
learned to love the ever-present, invisible God, she felt safe from
all harm, whether from spirits or evil men.  Lucy liked to be alone
now, that she might think about the gentle Saviour who was ever with
her.  To that Saviour she spoke in sincere prayer that night.  Her
brother was not forgotten: she prayed that God might watch over him
and make him truly good, and as she did so there was not a harsh
feeling in her heart towards him, notwithstanding his unkindness
during the day.

In the middle of the night Lucy woke suddenly: she did not long doubt
as to what had roused her, for the rain was falling in torrents, and
soon there was a heavy clap of thunder, at almost the same moment
that the room was lit by the glare of lightning.  Lucy lay very
still: she could not help feeling that there was some danger, but she
was calm and peaceful.  "The lightning is in God's hand, my Father's
hand," she thought.  "He will take care of me;" and she was soon
almost asleep again.  A loud groan made her start up in bed and
listen.  It was repeated, and seemed to come from Harty's room.
Without a thought but of alarm for her brother, she slipped on her
shoes, and throwing her little wrapper about her, she ran to him.

"What is the matter, Harty?" film asked, as she stood by his side.

"Go away! they'll not get me; I know where to hide," he muttered.

"Wake up, Harty," said Lucy, "there's nobody trying to catch you."

The lightning lit the room, and she saw that her brother's eyes were
wide open, and that his cheeks were flushed.  She took his hand; it
was burning hot: he snatched it from her, saying, "Let me go, John,
you don't play fair."

"Don't you know me, brother?" said Lucy, leaning over him.

"Oh yes, Thomas; tell Betsy to bake me some cakes," was his reply.

Poor Lucy! what should she do?  She did not like to leave her brother
to call Mrs. Maxwell; yet something, she knew, ought to be done for
him immediately.  At length she thought to knock on the wall, and
wake Mrs. Maxwell, as her room was next to Harty's.

"What, afraid again?" said Mrs. Maxwell, as she saw Lucy standing by
her brother's bed.

A groan from Harty, and a few muttered words, immediately drew her
attention to him.

"I told you he was ill last night; why, how hot he is!  Harty, what
ails you?" said Mrs. Maxwell in a breath.

Harty could not tell what ailed him, for he was delirious with fever.

"What shall we do?" said Mrs. Maxwell, desperately: "your father
won't be home till near morning, I know, and I am afraid to give any
medicine, for he always scolds about my 'dosing the children.'"

"But Harty ought to have something done for him, I am sure," said
Lucy.

"Well, we'll do what we can to put him in a perspiration," said Mrs.
Maxwell.  "I'll go to the kitchen and make him some hot drink, and
get hot water for his feet, and may be that'll be the best thing till
the doctor comes home."  So saying, she disappeared with the light
she had brought in her hand.

Lucy put on her brother's great coat, that lay on a chair; for the
storm had cooled the air, and she was quite chilly.  Thus equipped,
she began to act the nurse as well as she could.  Her first step was
to light a lamp.  Harty had a nice lucifer-box on his shelf: she felt
carefully for it, and managed to find it without knocking down any of
his treasures.

Not a thought of fear crossed her mind, although Mrs. Maxwell had
gone to the kitchen in the basement, and there was no one near to aid
her, if her brother should attempt in his delirium to injure her.
Love to God made her trust in His protection; love to her brother
made her forgetful of danger to herself while striving to be useful
to him.  She bathed his burning forehead, and moistened his parched
lips, and often spoke to him tenderly, hoping he might answer her
naturally.  Sometimes, for a moment, she fancied he knew her, but as
she bent to catch his words, some unmeaning sentence would convince
her she was mistaken.  How welcome was the sound of her father's
footstep!  Unconscious of any evil, Dr. Vale entered the house, and
was hurried to Harty's bedside.  Lucy watched his face as he felt her
brother's pulse and noticed his other symptoms, and her heart grew
sadder yet as she read his deep anxiety.

Mrs. Maxwell told him how fretful and indifferent to food Harty had
appeared during the day, and of his unusual nap in the evening; and
as she did so, Lucy felt grateful that she had borne pleasantly with
her brother's ill-humour, which had, no doubt, been caused in part by
disease.  How painful her feelings would have been if she had treated
him with unkindness, though with ever so great provocation!  Children
can never know how soon the illness or death of their friends may
make them bitterly lament the slightest harshness towards them.

When Dr. Vale had given Harty such medicines as he thought most sure
to give him relief, he for the first time noticed Lucy, who had kept
by the bedside.  Even in his sadness, he almost smiled at the funny
little figure wrapped in the thick coat, with only the face visible,
looking out from the nightcap.

"Go to bed, child; you can do no good here, and it will make you ill
to lose your sleep," he said to her, gently.

"But, father," she pleaded, "I shall not sleep if I do go to bed; I
can't bear to leave poor Harty."

"Mrs. Maxwell and I can do all that is needed for him to-night, my
dear," said he, kissing her sorrowful face.  "To-morrow we shall want
you to run about and wait on us.  Go, take some rest, like a good
child, that you may be able to be useful in the morning."

With this motive to console her, Lucy went to her room.  When there,
all the fearful reality of Harty's illness came fully upon her.  He
might be taken from her, she thought, and at the very idea her tears
flowed fast, and her heart throbbed with distress.  Lucy did not long
forget the heavenly Friend to whom she had learned to go in all her
trials.  Now she prayed earnestly to Him to spare her brother's life,
or grant him his reason, that he might be able to realize his awful
situation if he indeed must die.  After this prayer she felt more
composed, although very, very sad.  At last she fell asleep, and did
not wake until the sun was several hours high.

Her first thought in waking was of her brother.  She stole gently to
his door.  Mrs. Maxwell was sitting beside him: she motioned to Lucy
to go away, and made a sign that Harty was sleeping.

The sorrow and anxiety of that day would have been harder for Lucy to
bear, if she had not been so busy.  Mrs. Maxwell did not leave the
sick-room, and Dr. Vale was there nearly all the time; but unwilling
as he was to leave his son, he was obliged to visit other patients
several times during the day.

Lucy was kept almost constantly in motion.  She brought for Mrs.
Maxwell what was needed from the surgery or the kitchen, and carried
messages in all directions.  She carefully placed a little chair by
the door, and there she sat silently, to be ready whenever she might
be wanted.

Lucy did not ask her father any questions, but she hoped from hour to
hour to hear him say that her brother was better; but no such
cheering words fell from his lips.

Towards evening he hastily wrote a letter, and said to Lucy, as he
handed it to her to send to the post, "I have written to Rosa to come
home immediately.  Tell Patty to have a room ready for Mr. Gillette;
he will return with her."

These words were full of dreadful meaning to Lucy.  Harty must be
very ill, she knew, or Rosa would not have been sent for.  Throwing
aside her usual quiet manner, she clasped her father round the neck
and sobbed upon his bosom.  "Dear, dear father," she whispered, "do
you think Harty will die?"

"God may spare him," said Dr. Vale, his strong frame shaking with
emotion, and the tears in his eyes.

Lucy had never seen her father so much moved before, and she felt
sure that he had very little hope that her brother would be well
again.

She ceased sobbing, and a strange calmness came over her.  Every
impatient or unkind word that she had ever spoken to Harty came back
to her; and oh how solemnly she resolved, if he should recover, to be
a better sister to him than she had ever been before!  She tried to
remember something that Harty had said which could make her feel sure
that he would be happy in heaven, if he should die.  She thought of
the Sunday evening when he had bid her "Good night" so kindly, and
joined in saying the Catechism; of the first Sunday that he had made
a prayer on entering church; and of the many times that he had
listened with interest while Rosa talked of the Saviour.  But these
recollections did not set her mind at rest.  She knew that God had
said, "My son, give me thine heart;" and she felt sadly sure that
Harty had never, in sincerity, given his heart to God.




CHAPTER XIV.

CONCLUSION.

Rosa reached home on Wednesday morning.  Her bright smile had
vanished, and her sweet eyes looked sad and tearful; yet her step was
firm and her manner calm.  Lucy felt sure when she met her sister,
that she had found support in this great trouble from that God who
bids us "cast all our care on Him, for He careth for us."

When Rosa bent over Harty, and called him by name, he looked
strangely at her, and, muttering, turned away.  At first this was
almost too much for her to bear; but by degrees she became accustomed
to it, and commanded herself sufficiently to relieve Mrs. Maxwell
from her post as nurse.  Poor Mrs. Maxwell was quite worn out, and
was very glad to take a little rest.  Lucy had darkened her room,
that she might sleep the better; and as soon as the tired woman had
lain down, she stationed herself by the door to keep the hall as
quiet as possible.  Lucy found that she had been unjust to Mrs.
Maxwell.  She had always thought her a stern woman with a cold heart;
but when she saw how tenderly she watched by Harty's bedside, she
felt that she should always love her for it, and never call her cross
again, when she found fault about trifles.

Mrs. Maxwell herself was surprised to find how deeply she had become
attached to Dr. Vale's children.  She had met with much misfortune
and unkindness in the world; and when she came to live in Dr. Vale's
family, she resolved to do her duty faithfully, and did not expect to
love those around her or be loved by them.  Although her severe
manner had softened but little, by degrees she had become so fond of
the children that she was only happy when doing something for them;
and now her anxiety for poor sick Harty knew no bounds.

Several sad days of care and nursing passed by.  Dr. Vale, Mrs.
Maxwell, and Rosa, were with Harty by turns, day and night; and Lucy
patiently waited on all until evening came, when she slept soundly
from pure weariness.

Mr. Gillette was a comfort to all: he seemed truly a messenger from
his Master in heaven, for there were ever sweet words of consolation
on his lips.  He daily offered prayers in the room of the sick boy;
and all who knelt with him rose up strengthened by trust in the God
who "doeth all things well."

One day, when Harty had been ill a week, Rosa was sitting by him in
silence, when, in a low, weak voice, he called her by name.

"My dear brother," she answered, very calmly, although she was much
startled.

He took the hand she placed on his, and said, in a searching manner,
"Am I very ill?"

"We hope you may get well, but you are in God's hands," was Rosa's
reply.

To be in God's hands was not an idea of peace to poor Harty.  He
could not turn with loving trust in sickness to the God whom he had
neglected in health.  A pang darted through his heart, a pang of fear
and remorse, more deep and painful than he had ever felt.  He was to
die with all the sins of his youth upon him!  In his weak state this
awful thought was too much for him, and his mind again wandered in
delirium.

Rosa continued by his bedside in silent prayer.  She did not again
hear her name called, as she hoped, and she was forced to resign her
place to Mrs. Maxwell, without having another sign of consciousness
from her brother.

When it was again Rosa's turn to act as nurse, she found that there
had been a decided change in Harty.  He slept more calmly, and
breathed more naturally.  Dr. Vale came in when she had been sitting
by the bed a few moments: a rapid examination served to show him that
there was, indeed, cause for hope.

The joyful news spread through the household, and many thanksgivings
went up to the God who dispenses sickness and health.  Rejoiced as
all were at the idea of seeing Harty once more in health, there was
in every heart a deeper cause of gratitude: they might now hope that
he would not be called to meet his Father in heaven while yet a
disobedient, wandering child.  Time might yet be given him to learn,
to know, and love that Father, and walk in His holy ways.

When Harty was again conscious of what was going on around him, his
father was with him.  "Don't trouble yourself to think now, my dear
boy," said Dr. Vale, soothingly.  "I hope you will soon be much
better; and I pray God that He will enable you to lead a new life.
Lie still now, and you will soon fall asleep again, to wake much
refreshed, I hope."

Harty's recovery was slow and tedious.  He was very weak, and little
inclined to talk.  He seemed most contented when Rosa was singing to
him some pretty hymn, and Lucy was sitting by him on the bed
smoothing his hair, or fanning him gently.

His large eyes looked sunken and thoughtful, and his manner, once
boisterous, was mild and gentle.

"Don't move for me again this morning, dear Lucy," he said one day;
"your little feet must be very tired with running up and down stairs.
When I get well I shall have to wait on you all the rest of my life
to repay you for this kindness."

This was so unlike the old, exacting Harty, that it quite overcame
little Lucy, and the tears were in her eyes as she answered, "I love
to do anything for you, my dear brother.  I want nothing from you but
to get well as soon as you can, and look bright, and merry, and tease
me as you used to do."

A sad smile crossed Harty's face, as he said, "I don't mean to do as
I used to do in anything, Lucy.  You will forget how unkind I was to
you, won't you, pet?  I don't think I shall be so any more."

Lucy's tears fell fast.  Don't talk so, Harty," she said; "You were
never unkind to me.  I was a foolish little thing, and let everything
worry me.  Come, we won't talk any more; you look tired.  Here is
Rosa, she will sing,--

  'Softly now the light of day,'--

while you take a nice little nap."

By degrees the colour came again to Harty's cheeks, and his limbs
renewed their strength.

One calm Sunday evening, towards the end of June, he was sitting
between his sisters, looking out at the evening sky.

"Let us have the Catechism once more," said Lucy; "it will seem like
old times."

Rosa and Lucy began as usual together.  Harty's voice was with them;
and there was a deep solemnity in his manner as he pronounced the
words, "Yes, verily, and by God's help so I will; and I heartily
thank our Heavenly Father that He has called me to this state of
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord; and I pray unto God to give
me His grace that I may continue in the same unto my life's end."

His sisters felt that he spoke from his heart; and there was that joy
in their hearts which the angels know over "one sinner that
repenteth."

As the summer passed away, the cottage looked cheerful once more, as
of old.  The children again rambled in the woods or strolled in the
orchard, and whenever their voices were heard the tones were pleasant
and kindly.

True, they all had faults of character still to overcome, and were
sometimes tempted to go astray; but there was in each heart an
earnest wish to do right, and a spirit of love and forgiveness that
kept them from all variance.

Mrs. Maxwell was still formal and particular; but she now had little
cause for complaint, for Harty was so grateful for her watchful care
during his illness, that he made many efforts to overcome his
careless habits, and in a great measure succeeded.

"The dear boy forgot for once," she would sometimes say, as she hung
his cap on the accustomed peg, or overlooked some act of
heedlessness; for she felt that he was trying to please her, and she
was the more ready to forgive him.

In the trying scenes by Harty's bedside Dr. Vale had been brought
near in heart to his children.  Now there was no subject on which he
could not talk freely to them.  He spoke to them of their mother, and
told them anecdotes of her blameless life that were treasured up in
their young hearts for loving imitation.

The blessed Saviour and the heaven He purchased for His faithful ones
were often subjects for conversation in that happy family circle, and
the doctor felt, as he looked into the faces of his children, that
God had blessed their mother's prayers.

Uncle Gillette's letters were always welcomed with joy, and never
read without cheering the young Christians in the path of duty.

Lucy had now nothing to fear: the sorrows of her timid childhood were
over.  Loving and cheerful, she made all happy around her.  She had
found a comfort for all sorrow, a Friend ever-present, a support for
life and death, in Him who saith to the children of His love, "Fear
not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you
the kingdom."



LONDON: R. K. BURT, PRINTER, HOLBORN HILL.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIMID LUCY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


