. Given that man is the physically stronger sex, it may seem preposterous to claim that many men fear women more than women fear men. Yet across cultures and throughout history, women have often been portrayed as the greatest threat to man. In Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things, the American linguist and philosopher George Lakoff shows how in many languages there is a deep metaphorical connection between the words “woman” and “danger.” In this video, drawing from the anthropologist David Gilmore’s book Misogyny: The Male Malady , we examine the anthropological and cultural evidence showing that man’s fear of woman is a cross-cultural phenomenon and we explore how the early developmental process of boys contributes to this fear. Misogyny is commonly defined as contempt, hatred, or prejudice towards women. But a more complete definition of this phenomenon should include fear as well. For much of the hate of the misogynist is a mask for his fear of the female sex. In Antony and Cleopatra, William Shakespeare famously wrote: “In time we hate that which we often fear.” And as David Gilmore writes: “…by “misogyny” I mean an unreasonable fear or hatred of women that takes on some palpable form in any given society.…Some men are not misogynists. These men have successfully resolved their inner conflicts over women…But most men have not been so successful…misogyny is not a Western invention, nor is it confined to modern capitalist societies, as many feminists and Marxists have argued for many years…misogyny shows no correlation with any particular form of society; it occurs everywhere&#8230; misogyny is indeed close to being universal, as our data will amply demonstrate.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady It is not an exaggeration to state that man’s preoccupation with woman’s body is the greatest obsession in history. Yet this obsession is shadowed by an equally powerful fear. For man not only desires the female body, he also experiences it as something foreign, mysterious, and potentially dangerous. Among hunter-gatherer cultures, this fear of the female body takes the form of a full-blown phobia. The aboriginal tribes of the highlands of Melanesia, or New Guinea, remained undiscovered and untouched by outside influence until the mid-to-late 20th century. When anthropologists first encountered these tribes, they observed that the aboriginal men harbored a deep and intense fear of the female body. In summarizing these anthropological studies, David Gilmore writes: “…literally all publications start off by noting a curious degree of sex antagonism as a salient feature, if not the standout feature, of most highland societies. There is probably no place on earth where men have such a pervasive fear and loathing of women…Nowhere else in the world does fear of the female body reach such a terrible, staggering pitch.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady According to the aboriginal men of New Guinea, prolonged contact with a woman’s body can cause serious illness that causes the skin to wither and the organs to waste away. The anthropologist John Langness observed the male elders of one tribe warn the adolescent boys that if they spend too much time in close physical proximity with women, “their skins will be ‘no good,’ their work will ‘go wrong’ and they will die young”. The aboriginal fear of the female body reaches its most intense expression in anxieties surrounding her reproductive functions and sexual organ. Menstrual blood is regarded as one of the most dangerous substances a man can encounter; contact with a mere drip of it is thought to be able to kill a young and strong man. While the female genitalia are not only considered potentially poisonous but also the conduit through which malevolent forces enter the world. The very biology that gave birth to man, paradoxically, is seen as antithetical to man’s well-being and existence. “So through her sexual organs a woman, even if unintentionally, is believed to act as a constant magnet to the evil powers that populate the world’s subterranean realm…” explains Gilmore. “Women attract these evil powers without even being aware of it, and thus seriously endanger both nature and society…Mother, wife, sister . . . no matter; woman’s body is the harbinger of all human evil.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady Like all men, aboriginal men desire sex, but they also believe that too much of it weakens them and can even kill them. The anthropologist Raymond Kelly noted that among the Etoro tribe, the men ritually abstain from sexual contact with women for around two-thirds of the year. For the New Guinea aboriginal man, sex drains him of his vital essence, while at the same time enhancing the strength and vitality of women. “Throughout the entire highland region, men conclude that women pursue sex precisely in order to capture semen, to enhance well-being, to deplete the male victim, and to strengthen themselves in the process.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady These fears of the female body are not only found in the male-dominated aboriginal tribes of New Guinea. Among the matrilineal Crow, where women control significant property and hold relatively high status, as well as the Semai of the Malay Peninsula, a non-violent people described by David Gilmore as “the least sexist group of people on the face of the earth,” the same fear of the feminine body exists. As Gilmore notes: “These beliefs are not confined to what are referred to as male-dominated cultures, nor to patrilineal societies where women’s position is low” (David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady) . Nor are such beliefs confined to aboriginal societies, as parallel fears of the feminine can be found throughout Western history. But whereas many aboriginal tribes located the danger of woman in her physicality, Western man has more often portrayed her as a moral and spiritual threat. As far back as the 7th century BC, the ancient Greek poet Semonides wrote: “Yes, women are the greatest evil Zeus has made, and men are bound to them hand and foot, with impossible knots by god.” Subsequent Greek and Roman poets echoed this idea by claiming that women are the original source of “kaki”, or evil, in this world, and that they were created by the gods to torment men. “Roman poets like Ovid, Hesiod, and Juvenal wrote long treatises heaping scorn and abuse upon women and everything pertaining to them and urging men to avoid sex and marriage completely (Coole 1988).” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady Western mythology is also rife with fears of the female. In a myth that echoes the aboriginal belief that the female genitalia are a gateway for malevolent forces, it is Pandora who opens a box that releases evil into the world. Ancient Greek mythology is filled with female figures &#8211; sirens, nymphs, lamias, and Furies &#8211; who lure, ensnare, and ultimately destroy men. Many of these mythological females live in water and attract men with their beauty only to drag them underwater. This motif persists throughout Western history. In Icelandic myths, for example, women are portrayed as “rivers of poison,” into which men, like flies drawn to honey, taste sweetness for a brief moment, and then drown. “The philosopher Dorothy Dinnerstein (1976) finds the image of the siren or mermaid, the female sea creature who rises from the dark sea depths to drag men down, to be virtually universal in folklore. In his book on monsters and demons, David Williams (1996:187) calls this siren figure the most widely represented monster throughout history, putting a female face on the horrific and the grotesque for all times.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady The siren is a mythological representation of the femme fatale &#8211; the seductive yet deadly woman &#8211; which is a common symbol across the centuries. In the 18th century, the English poet John Gay wrote: “The fly that sips treacle is lost in the sweets, So he that tastes woman, ruin meets.” In the operas of Richard Wagner, the goddess Venus ensnares men in realms of sensual pleasure, thus diverting them from their higher, heroic pursuits. In capturing the widespread belief that every woman embodies something of the femme fatale, Gilmore writes: “Women are evil because of their sexual allure, which, by disguising all this teeming malevolence with a pretty exterior, puts men in physical and moral danger of immorality. This physical attractiveness is, in fact, the strategy for their treachery and duplicity, for it is their appeal to men’s senses that cheats, betrays, deceives. And so women are among the most dangerous things on earth.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady Western philosophy and literature are likewise filled with men expressing the view that women are inherently dangerous. The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer argued that because women are constitutionally weaker than men, they have become master deceivers in order to survive and achieve their reproductive ends. “ They are driven to rely not on force but on cunning; hence their instinctive subtlety and their tendency to tell lies” (Arthur Schopenhauer, On Women). Friedrich Nietzsche echoed this idea by arguing that women are constitutionally incapable of telling the truth: “What is truth to a woman? From the beginning, nothing has been more alien, repugnant and hostile to women than truth—her great art is her lie” (Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil). While the writer DH Lawrence did not hold back in expressing what he thought to be the “colossal evil of the united spirit of Woman that is sending out waves of destructive malevolence which eat out the inner life of a man, like a cancer” (DH Lawrence, Studies in Classic American Literature) The foundational texts and teachings of all the world’s major religions likewise provide evidence for man’s fear of the feminine. “In most of the world’s messianic religions…sin is brought into the world by women. It is always First Woman, never First Man, who, because of innate character flaws, capitulates to the devil’s blandishments.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady In the Book of Genesis, it is Eve who succumbs to the serpent’s deceptions, eats the forbidden fruit, and convinces Adam to disobey God which results in their expulsion from paradise and the fallen state of humanity. As the 4th century theologian Saint Ambrose of Milan wrote: “The woman was first deceived, and it was she who deceived the man&#8230;Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived and was in sin.” In the biblical apocryphal texts, one finds warnings about “the ruinous power, which women can exercise over men,” as well as the claim that “All wickedness is but little compared to the wickedness of a woman.” While the medieval bishop Marbod of Rennes went as far to link woman with the devil. As he wrote: “Countless are the traps which the scheming enemy [the devil] has set throughout the world’s paths and plains: but among them the greatest—and the one scarcely anybody can evade—is woman. Woman, the unhappy source, evil root, and corrupt offshoot, who brings to birth every sort of outrage throughout the world. . . . Woman subverts the world; woman the sweet evil, compound of honeycomb and poison.” Marbod of Rennes In the religion of Islam, the same fears can be found. Upon his ascension to heaven, the prophet Muhammad is reported to have said that “hell was populated above all by women”. While on his deathbed he is said to have stated: “After my disappearance, there will be no other greater source of chaos and disorder for my nation than women.” In her study of Islam, the Moroccan sociologist Fatima Mernissi goes so far as to argue that “The entire Muslim social structure can be seen as an attack on, and a defense against, the disruptive power of female sexuality.” Even in Buddhism, a spiritual tradition associated with peace and kindliness to all living creatures, women are depicted as morally degraded enchantresses who, through deceptions and lies, lure men away from the righteous spiritual path. As one Buddhist traditional verse puts it: “’Tis nature’s law that rivers wind; Trees grow of wood and kind; And, given opportunity, All women work iniquity. A sex composed of wickedness and guile, Unknowable, uncertain as the path Of fishes in the water—womankind Hold truth for falsehood, falsehood for the truth!” Andabhuta Jātaka Because man’s fear of woman appears in similar forms across cultures and religions throughout history, it cannot be adequately explained by social structures, institutions, or belief systems. Its roots must lie in the psyche of man. “…it is because misogyny is so widespread and so pervasive among men everywhere that it must be psychogenic in origin, a result of identical experiences in the male developmental cycle, rather than caused by the environment.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady The developmental roots of man’s fear of women can be traced back to the earliest stage of life, when the mother stands as the omnipresent figure in the child’s world. As the source of nourishment, comfort, and that indispensable motherly love, she is the central figure of early experience. Embedded in this maternal environment, both boys and girls unconsciously mirror the mother’s gender identity and develop what the psychiatrist Robert Stoller called a “proto-feminine identity”. “…a boy’s earliest experience of gender is really not neuter but female, a mirroring of the gender of his mother.” Eugene Monick, Castration and Male Rage Or as Stoller writes: “If, as is suggested, there is a stage at the beginning of life in both males and females when one feels as if a part of mother, this will establish a feminine quality in one’s identity. While helpful for the girl who is to become feminine, it can threaten the boy’s capacity for masculinity.” Robert Stoller, Symbiosis Anxiety and the Development of Masculinity Because an infant boy initially forms a feminine-oriented identity, in order to later develop a masculine identity he must psychologically distance himself from the mother and reject the proto-feminine identity that was unconsciously formed in the earliest stages of life. As the Indian proverb puts it: “men are born of women, nurtured and loved by women, protected and dominated by women, yet they must become men”. Or as David Gilmore continues: “…all boys feel this irreducible core feminine identity as a threat to their masculine self, an inner softness or weakness, a deficiency lurking within. It must be repudiated so that the boy can later develop a manly identification consonant with cultural expectations; that is, the boy at some point must “dis-identify with the mother” to become a true male as defined by convention (Greenson 1978). The process of disidentifying with mother…includes an often violent rejection of everything feminine, so that masculinity becomes defined as the opposite of, and a distancing from, femininity.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady But this process of disidentifying with the mother and repudiating the feminine within, is no easy task; in fact, it is the one of the most difficult a boy must face. For the mother is the source of comfort, security, and unconditional love. The earliest years of life, before self-consciousness fully emerges, are marked by a state of ease and contentment in which the child is cared for without effort or responsibility. “Mother is warmth, mother is food, mother is the euphoric state of satisfaction and security.” Erich Fromm, The Art of Loving A boy does not relinquish his bond with the mother willingly. Historically, harsh rites of passage, designed to forcibly separate the boy from the maternal world and initiate him into manhood, were practiced by almost all cultures. Underlying these rites of passage was the recognition that within the male psyche there exists a regressive longing to remain in, or return to, that paradisal and infantile state of dependence on the feminine. “Regressive wishes seem to be felt as a return to a primordial premasculine state, to infancy—that is, to a condition associated with femininity.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady Especially as a boy matures into adolescence and then adulthood, these regressive wishes become increasingly unacceptable &#8211; for to give into them means the extinction of masculinity. Within most men, therefore, there exists an innate conflict: on the one hand they are drawn toward what the anthropologist Thomas Gregor called “the path back to fusion with the mother and the pleasures of infancy, ” while at the same time they fear, resist, and despise these regressive impulses that arise from within. “…the boy, more than the girl, has a powerfully ambivalent response to this universal regressive wish. On the one hand he feels it as a pleasurable symbiosis with the mother—a recapturing of the carefree, prelapsarian world of infancy—but on the other hand he senses it as dangerous backsliding that is as terrifying as it is pleasurable, for it means extinction of masculinity.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady In an attempt to deal with the anxiety this inner conflict evokes, many men project it onto women so that what is, in reality, an internal struggle comes to be experienced as an external threat. The result is a paranoid fear or phobia of women, that in many men takes the form of hatred or contempt. And in some cases &#8211; such as the Salem witch hunts &#8211; this fear of woman expands into full-blown psychoses. Or as Gilmore writes: “…phobias are projections, attributions to others of one’s own repressed wishes…phobias are either projections of the repressed wishes or they are displacements by which inner conflicts find objectification in scapegoats. Phobia formation is what psychoanalysts call “the defense mechanism of externalization”…misogyny has all the earmarks of a typical phobia, with fears focusing on woman, who is demonized as the implacable, omnipotent foe.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady The fact that many men project their desire for, and fear of, their own regressive impulses onto women helps explain why their feelings towards women are marked by such intense ambivalence. For on the one hand men fear women, but they also admire, desire, and idolize them. This ambivalence has been expressed throughout history in religion, literature, and myth. Hesiod described woman as a “beautiful evil,” while Catullus, writing of his mistress, confessed: “I love and I hate.” Mythological figures such as the sphinx, half alluring woman, half monstrous beast, embody this union of attraction and dread. “…it seems abundantly clear that many, if not most, of men’s feelings about women are a hodgepodge of strongly contrasting impulses, starkly contradictory affects and fantasies&#8230;It seems that wherever we find misogyny, we also find its diametric opposite in equal measure: and this is the key to misogyny.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady If this explanation is valid, then it follows that the more a man fears or hates women, the more he simultaneously longs for and needs them. In other words, men who appear most overtly misogynistic may, in fact, be the ones most deeply driven by a powerful yet unacknowledged yearning for the very women they denounce. “Ambivalence occurs when one experiences diametrically opposed emotions at the same time: the affected person is drawn in opposite directions, torn by incompatible emotions. He feels anxiety because he cannot reconcile the clashing feelings…this tension-ridden state, not simple hatred or a wish to dominate, accounts for men’s denigration of women…It is not surprising that the men who most deplore and distrust women are the same ones who most admire, want, and need them.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady Although the regressive impulses that underlie man’s fear of women originate in his early dependence on the mother, David Gilmore notes that the father–son relationship plays a crucial role in shaping a boy’s later attitudes toward women. He draws on a comparative synthesis study by the anthropologist James Taggart, who discovered that fathers who are more involved in a boy’s life “help their sons separate from the mother with less anger toward women”. This is a promising finding, but given that absent fathers are now the norm, with about half of all boys growing up without a present father in the household, many are deprived of the masculine guidance needed to develop a healthy relationship to women. Like many deep-rooted social problems, the responsibility ultimately rests with individual men to recognize that conflicting feelings toward women are, in reality, conflicts within themselves. This requires bringing regressive impulses into consciousness, and rather than indulging in them acknowledging, accepting, integrating, and mastering them. It requires the awareness that when one hates or fears woman, one is really hating and fearing parts of oneself. “…men who hate women hate themselves even more. What they really hate (and fear) is the “femaleness” within.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady Only if more men undergo this evolution of consciousness can the deep division that exists at the heart of our species – a millennia old war between men and women &#8211; give way to a more harmonious relationship between the sexes and an elevated form of human life. “A species divided itself cannot stand” , writes Robert Meagher. Or as Gilmore concludes: “Only self-knowledge can free men from fear of women, and self-knowledge in this case means the acceptance of the divided self within…And only through such an acceptance can men appreciate the loveliness, gentleness, and beauty of women…Men and women thus united, misogyny will wither away of its own accord. And on that ambiguous note, we end.” David Gilmore, Misogyny: The Male Malady