
Three Books of Occult Philosophy, or of
Magick; Written by that Famous Man
Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight,
And Doctor of both Laws, Counsellor to
Cæsars Sacred Majesty, and Judge of the
Prerogative Court.
BOOK I.
Chap. i. How Magicians Collect vertues from the three-fold World, is
declared in these three Books.
eeing there is a three-fold World, Elementary, Celestiall, and
Intellectual, and every inferior is governed by its superior, and receiveth the influence of
the vertues thereof, so that the very original, and chief Worker of all doth by Angels, the
Heavens, Stars, Elements, Animals, Plants, Metals, and Stones convey from himself the
vertues of his Omnipotency upon us, for whose service he made, and created all these
things: Wise men conceive it no way irrationall that it should be possible for us to ascend
by the same degrees through each World, to the same very originall World it self, the
Maker of all things, and first Cause, from whence all things are, and proceed; and also to
enjoy not only these vertues, which are already in the more excellent kind of things, but
also besides these, to draw new vertues from above. Hence it is that they seek after the
vertues of the Elementary world, through the help of Physick [=medicine], and Naturall
Philosophy in the various mixtions of Naturall things, then of the Celestiall world in the
Rayes, and influences thereof, according to the rules of Astrologers, and the doctrines of
Mathematicians, joyning the Celestiall vertues to the former: Moreover, they ratifie and
confirm all these with the powers of divers Intelligencies, through the sacred Ceremonies
of Religions. The order and process of all these I shall endeavor to deliver in these three
Books: Whereof the forst contains naturall Magick, the second Celestiall, and the third
Ceremoniall. But I know not whether it be an unpardonable presumption in me, that I, a
man of so little judgement and learning, should in my very youth so confidently set upon
a business so difficult, so hard, and intricate as this is. Wherefore, whatsoever things have
here already, and shall afterward be said by me, I would not have any one assent to them,
nor shall I my self, any further then they shall be approved of by the Universall Church,
and the Congregation of the Faithfull.
Chap. ii. What Magick is, What are the Parts thereof, and how the
Professors thereof must be Qualified.
Magick is a faculty of wonderfull vertue, full of most high mysteries, containing the most
profound Contemplation of most secret things, together with the nature, power, quality,
substance, and vertues thereof, as also the knowledge of whole nature, and it doth instruct
us concerning the differing, and agreement of things amongst themselves, whence it
produceth its wonderfull effects, by uniting the vertues of things through the application
of them one to the other, and to their inferior sutable subjects, joyning and knitting them
together thoroughly by the powers, and vertues of the superior Bodies. This is the most
perfect and chief Science, that sacred and sublimer kind of Phylosophy [philosophy], and
lastly the most absolute perfection of all most excellent Philosophy. For seeing that all
regulative Philosophy is divided into Naturall, Mathematicall, and Theologicall: (Naturall
Philosophy teacheth the nature of those things which are in the world, searching and
enquiring into their Causes, Effects, Times, Places, Fashions, Events, their Whole, and
Parts, also
The Number and the Nature of those things,
Cal'd Elements, what Fire, Earth, Aire forth brings:
From whence the Heavens their beginnings had;
Whence Tide, whence Rainbow, in gay colours clad.
What makes the Clouds that gathered are, and black,
To send forth Lightnings, and a Thundring crack;
What doth the Nightly Flames, and Comets make;
What makes the Earth to swell, and then to quake:
What is the seed of Metals, and of Gold
What Vertues, Wealth, doth Nature's Coffer hold.
All these things doth naturall Philosophy, the viewer of nature contain, teaching us
according to Virgil's Muse.
----------Whence all things flow,
Whence Mankind, Beast; whence Fire, whence Rain, and Snow,
Whence Earth-quakes are; why the whole Ocean beats
Over his Banks, and then again retreats;
Whence strength of Hearbs [herbs], whence Courage, rage of Bruits
[brutes],
All kinds of Stone, of Creeping things, and Fruits.
But Mathematicall Philosophy teacheth us to know the quantity of naturall Bodies, as
extended into three dimensions, as also to conceive of the motion, and course of
Celestiall Bodies.
----- As in great hast [haste],
What makes the golden Stars to march so fast;
What makes the Moon sometimes to mask her face,
The Sun also, as if in some disgrace.
And as Virgil sings,
How th' Sun doth rule with twelve Zodiack Signs,
The Orb thats measur'd round about with Lines,
It doth the Heavens Starry way make known,
And strange Eclipses of the Sun, and Moon.
Arcturus also, and the Stars of Rain,
The Seaven Stars likewise, and Charles his Wain,
Why Winter Suns make tow'rds the West so fast;
What makes the Nights so long ere they be past?
All which is understood by Mathematicall Philosophy.
----- Hence by the Heavens we may foreknow
The seasons all; times for to reap and sow,
And when 'tis fit to launch into the deep,
And when to War, and when in peace to sleep,
And when to dig up Trees, and them again
To set; that so they may bring forth amain.
Now Theologicall Philosophy, or Divinity, teacheth what God is, what the Mind, what an
Intelligence, what an Angel, what a Divell [devil], what the Soul, what Religion, what
sacred Institutions, Rites, Temples, Observations, and sacred Mysteries are: It instructs us
also concerning Faith, Miracles, the vertues of Words and Figures, the secret operations
and mysteries of Seals, and as Apuleius saith, it teacheth us rightly to understand, and to
be skilled in the Ceremoniall Laws, the equity of Holy things and rule of Religions. But
to recollect my self) these three principall faculties Magick comprehends, unites, and
actuates; deservedly therefore was it by the Ancients esteemed as the highest, and most
sacred Philosophy. It was, as we find, brought to light by most sage Authours [authors],
and most famous Writers; amongst which principally Zamolxis and Zoroaster were so
famous, that many believed they were the inventors of this Science. Their track
[footsteps] Abbaris the Hyperborean, Charmondas, Damigeron, Eudoxus, Hermippus
followed: there were also other eminent, choice men, as Mercurius Tresmegistus
[Trismegistus], Porphyrius [Porphyry], Iamblicus [Iamblichus], Plotinus, Proclus,
Dardanus, Orpheus the Thracian, Gog the Grecian, Germa the Babilonian [Babylonian],
Apollonius of Tyana, Osthanes also wrote excellently in this Art; whose Books being as it
were lost, Democritus of Abdera recovered, and set forth with his own Commentaries.
Besides Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, and many other renowned
Philosophers travelled far by Sea to learn this Art: and being returned, published it with
wonderfull devoutness, esteeming of it as a great secret. Also it is well known that
Pythagoras, and Plato went to the Prophets of Memphis to learn it, and travelled through
almost all Syria, Egypt, Judea, and the Schools of the Caldeans [Chaldaeans], that they
might not be ignorant of the most sacred Memorials, and Records of Magick, as also that
they might be furnished with Divine things. Whosoever therefore is desirous to study in
this Faculty, if he be not skilled in naturall Philosophy, wherein are discovered the
qualities of things, and in which are found the occult properties of every Being, and if he
be not skilful in the Mathematicks, and in the Aspects, and Figures of the Stars, upon
which depends the sublime vertue, and property of every thing; and if he be not learned
in Theologie [theology], wherein are manifested those immateriall substances, which
dispence [dispense], and minister all things, he cannot be possibly able to understand the
rationality of Magick. For there is no work that is done by meer Magick, nor any work
that is meerly Magicall, that doth not comprehend these three Faculties.
Chap. iii. Of the four Elements, their qualities, and mutuall mixtions.
There are four Elements, and originall grounds of all corporeall things, Fire, Earth,
Water, Aire, of which all elementated inferiour bodies are compounded; not by way of
heaping them up together, but by transmutation, and union; and when they are destroyed,
they are resolved into Elements. For there is none of the sensible Elements that is pure,
but they are more or less mixed, and apt to be changed one into the other: Even as Earth
becoming dirty, and being dissolved, becomes Water, and the same being made thick and
hard, becometh Earth again; but being evaporated through heat, passeth into Aire, and
that being kindled, passeth into Fire, and this being extinguished, returns back again into
Aire, but being cooled again after its burning, becometh Earth, or Stone, or Sulphur, and
this is manifested by Lightening [lightning]: Plato also was of that opinion, that Earth
was wholly changeable, and that the rest of the Elements are changed, as into this, so into
one another successively. But it is the opinion of the subtiller sort of Philosophers, that
Earth is not changed, but relented and mixed with other Elements, which do dissolve it,
and that it returns back into it self again. Now, every one of the Elements hath two
specificall qualities, the former whereof it retains as proper to it self, in the other, as a
mean, it agrees with that which comes next after it. For Fire is hot and dry, the Earth dry
and cold, the Water cold and moist, the Aire moist and ot. And so after this manner the
Elements, according to two contrary qualities, are contrary one to the other, as Fire to
Water, and Earth to Aire. Moreover, the Elements are upon another account opposite one
to the other: For some are heavy, as Earth and Water, and others are light, as Aire and
Fire. Wherefore the Stoicks called the former passives, but the latter actives. And yet
once again Plato distinguished them after another manner, and assigns to every one of
them three qualities, viz. to the Fire brightness, thinness and motion, but to the Earth
darkness, thickness and quietness. And according to these qualities the Elements of Fire
and Earth are contrary. But the other Elements borrow their qualities from these, so that
the Aire receives two qualities of the Fire, thinness and motion; and one of the Earth, viz.
darkness. In like manner Water receives two qualities of the Earth, darkness and
thickness, and one of Fire, viz. motion. But Fire is twice more thin then Aire, thrice more
movable, and four times more bright: and the Aire is twice more bright, thrice more thin,
and four times more moveable then Water. Wherefore Water is twice more bright then
Earth, thrice more thin, and four times more movable. As therefore the Fire is to the Aire,
so Aire is to the Water, and Water to the Earth; and again, as the Earth is to the Water, so
is the Water to the Aire, and the Aire to the Fire. And this is the root and foundation of all
bodies, natures, vertues, and wonderfull works; and he which shall know these qualities
of the Elements, and their mixtions, shall easily bring to pass such things that are
wonderfull, and astonishing, and shall be perfect in Magick.
Chap. iv. Of a three-fold consideration of the Elements.
There are then, as we have said, four Elements, without the perfect knowledge whereof
we can effect nothing in Magick. Now each of them is three-fold, that so the number of
four may make up the number of twelve; and by passing by the number of seven into the
number of ten, there may be a progress to the supream Unity, upon which all vertue and
wonderfull operation depends. Of the first Order are the pure Elements, which are neither
compounded nor changed, nor admit of mixtion, but are incorruptible, and not of which,
but through which the vertues of all naturall things are brought forth into act. No man is
able to declare their vertues, because they can do all things upon all things. He which is
ignorant of these, shall never be able to bring to pass any wonderfull matter. Of the
second Order are Elements that are compounded, changeable, and impure, yet such as
may by art be reduced to their pure simplicity, whose vertue, when they are thus reduced
to their simplicity, doth above all things perfect all occult, and common operations of
nature: and these are the foundation of the whole naturall Magick. Of the third Order are
those Elements, which originally and of themselves are not Elements, but are twice
compounded, various, and changeable one into the other. They are the infallible Medium,
and therefore are called the middle nature, or Soul of the middle nature: Very few there
are that understand the deep mysteries thereof. In them is, by means of certain numbers,
degrees, and orders, the perfection of every effect in what thing soever, whether Naturall,
Celestiall, or Supercelestiall; they are full of wonders, and mysteries, and are operative,
as in Magick Naturall, so Divine: For from these, through them, proceed the bindings,
loosings, and transmutations of all things, the knowing and foretelling of things to come,
also the driving forth of evill, and the gaining of good spirits. Let no man, therefore,
without these three sorts of Elements, and the knowledge thereof, be confident that he is
able to work any thing in the occult Sciences of Magick, and Nature. But whosoever shall
know how to reduce those of one Order, into those of another, impure into pure,
compounded into simple, and shall know how to understand distinctly the nature, vertue,
and power of them in number, degrees, and order, without dividing the substance, he
shall easily attain to the knowledge, and perfect operation of all Naturall things, and
Celestiall secrets.
Chap. v. Of the wonderfull Natures of Fire, and Earth.
There are two things (saith Hermes) viz. Fire and Earth, which are sufficient for the
operation of all wonderfull things: the former is active, the latter passive. Fire (as saith
Dionysius) in all things, and through all things, comes and goes away bright, it is in all
things bright, and at the same time occult, and unknown; When it is by it self (no other
matter coming to it, in which it should manifest its proper action) it is boundless, and
invisible, of it self sufficient for every action that is proper to it, moveable, yielding it self
after a maner to all things that come next to it, renewing, guarding nature, enlightening,
not comprehended by lights that are vailed [veiled] over, clear, parted, leaping back,
bending upwards, quick in motion, high, alwayes raising motions, comprehending
another, not Comprehended it self, not standing in need of another, secretly increasing of
it self, and manifesting its greatness to things that receive it; Active, Powerfull, Invisibly
present in all things at once; it will not be affronted or opposed, but as it were in a way of
revenge, it will reduce on a sudden things into obedience to it self; incomprehensible,
impalpable, not lessened, most rich in all disensations of it self. Fire (as saith Pliny) is the
boundless, and mischievous part of the nature of things, it being a question whether it
destroys, or produceth most things. Fire it self is one, and penetrates through all things (as
say the Pythagorians) also spread abroad in the Heavens, and shining: but in the infernall
place streightened, dark, and tormenting, in the mid way it partakes of both. Fire
therefore in it self is one, but in that which receives it, manifold, and in differing subjects
it is distributed in a different manner, as Cleanthes witnesseth in Cicero. That fire then,
which we use is fetched out of other things. It is in stones, and is fetched out by the stroke
of the steele; it is in Earth, and makes that, after digging up, to smoake [smoke]: it is in
Water, and heats springs, and wells: it is in the depth of the Sea, and makes that, being
tossed with winds, warm: it is in the Aire, and makes it (as we oftentimes see) to burn.
And all Animals, and living things whatsoever, as also all Vegetables are preserved by
heat: and every thing that lives, lives by reason of the inclosed heat. The properties of the
Fire that is above, are heat, making all things Fruitfull, and light, giving life to all things.
The properties of the infernall Fire are a parching heat, consuming all things, and
darkness, making all things barren. The Celestiall, and bright Fire drives away spirits of
darkness; also this our Fire made with Wood drives away the same, in as much as it hath
an Analogy with, and is the vehiculum of that Superior light; as also of him, who saith, I
am the Light of the World, which is true Fire, the Father of lights, from whom every good
thing that is given, Comes; sending forth the light of his Fire, and communicating it first
to the Sun, and the rest of the Celestiall bodies, and by these, as by mediating
instruments, conveying that light into our Fire. As, therefore the spirits of darkness are
stronger in the dark: so good spirits, which are Angels of Light, are augmented, not only
by that light, which is Divine, of the Sun, and Celestiall, but also by the light of our
common Fire. Hence it was that the first, and most wise institutors of Religions, and
Ceremonies ordained, that Prayers, Singings, and all manner of Divine Worships
whatsoever should not be performed without lighted Candles, or Torches. (Hence also
was that significant saying of Pythagoras, Do not speak of God without a Light) and they
commanded that for the driving away of wicked spirits, Lights and Fires should be
kindled by the Corpses of the dead, and that they should not be removed untill the
expiations were after a Holy manner performed, and they buried. And the great Jehovah
himself in the old Law Commanded that all his Sacrifices should be offered with Fire,
and that Fire should always be burning upon the Altar, which Custome the Priests of the
Altar did always observe, and keep amongst the Romanes. Now the Basis, and foundation
of all the Elements, is the Earth, for that is the object, subject, and receptacle of all
Celestiall rayes, and influencies; in it are contained the seeds, and Seminall vertues of all
things; and therefore it is said to be Animall, Vegetable, and Minerall. It being made
fruitfull by the other Elements, and the Heavens, brings forth all things of it self; It
receives the abundance of all things, and is, as it were the first fountain, from whence all
things spring, it is the Center, foundation, and mother of all things. Take as much of it as
you please, seperated, washed, depurated, subtilized, if you let it lye [lie] in the open Aire
a little while, it will, being full, and abounding with Heavenly vertues, of it self bring
forth Plants, Worms, and other living things, also Stones, and bright sparks of Metals. In
it are great secrets, if at any time it shall be purified by the help of Fire, and reduced unto
its simplicity by a convenient washing. It is the first matter of our Creation, and the truest
Medicine that can restore, and preserve us.
Chap. vi. Of the wonderfull Natures of Water, Aire, and Winds.
The other two Elements, viz. Water, and Aire, are not less efficacious then the former;
neither is nature wanting to work wonderfull things in them. There is so great a necessity
of Water, that without it no living thing can live. No Hearb [herb], nor Plant whatsoever,
without the moistening of Water can branch forth. In it is the Seminary vertue of all
things, especially of Animals, whose seed is manifestly waterish. The seeds also of Trees,
and Plants, although they are earthy, must notwithstanding of necessity be rotted in
Water, before they can be fruitfull; whether they be imbibed with the moisture of the
Earth, or with Dew, or Rain, or any other Water that is on purpose put to them. For Moses
writes, that only Earth, and Water bring forth a living soul. But he ascribes a twofold
production of things to Water, viz. of things swimming in the Waters, and of things flying
in the Aire above the Earth. And that those productions that are made in, and upon the
Earth, are partly attributed to the very Water, the same Scripture testifies, where it saith
that the Plants, and the Hearbs [herbs] did not grow, because God had not caused it to
rain upon the Earth. Such is the efficacy of this Element of Water, that Spirituall
regeneration cannot be done without it, as Christ himself testified to Nicodemus. Very
great also is the vertue of it in the Religious Worship of God, in expiations, and
purifications; yea, the necessity of it is no less then that of Fire. Infinite are the benefits,
and divers are the uses thereof, as being that by vertue of which all things subsist, are
generated, nourished and increased. Thence it was that Thales of Miletus, and Hesiod
concluded that Water was the beginning of all things, and said it was the first of all the
Elements, and the most potent, and that because it hath the mastery over all the rest. For,
as Pliny saith, Waters swallow up the Earth, extinguish flames, ascend on high, and by
the stretching forth of the clouds, challenge the Heaven for their own: the same falling
become the Cause of all things that grow in the Earth. Very many are the wonders that
are done by Waters, according to the Writings of Pliny, Solinus, and many other
Historians, of the wonderfull vertue whereof, Ovid also makes mention in these Verses.
----- Hornd Hammons Waters at high noon
Are cold; hot at Sun-rise and setting Sun.
Wood, put in bub'ling Athemas is Fir'd,
The Moon then farthest from the Sun retir'd;
Circonian streams congeal his guts to Stone
That thereof drinks, and what therein is thrown.
Crathis and Sybaris (from the Mountains rol'd)
Color the hair like Amber or pure Gold.
Some fountains, of a more prodigious kinde,
Not only change the body but the minde.
Who hath not heard of obscene Salmacis?
Of th' Æthiopian lake? for, who of this
But only tast [taste], their wits no longer keep,
Or forthwith fall into a deadly sleep.
Who at Clitorius fountain thirst remove,
Loath Wine, and abstinent, meer Water love.
With streams oppos'd to these Lincestus flowes:
They reel, as drunk, who drink too much of those.
A Lake in fair Arcadia stands, of old
Call'd Pheneus; suspected, as twofold:
Fear, and forbear to drink thereof by night:
By night unwholesome, wholesome by day-light.
Josephus also makes relation of the wonderfull nature of a certain river betwixt Arcea,
and Raphanea, Cities of Syria: which runs with a full Channell all the Sabboth [Sabbath]
Day, and then on a sudden ceaseth, as if the springs were stopped, and all the six dayes
you may pass over it dry-shod: but again, on the seaventh day (no man knowing the
reason of it) the Waters return again in abundance, as before. Wherefore the inhabitants
thereabout called it the Sabboth-day river, because of the Seaventh day, which was holy
to the Jews. The Gospel also testifies to a sheep-pool, into which whosoever stepped first,
after the Water was troubled by the Angel, was made whole of whatsoever disease he
had. The same vertue, and efficacy we read was in a spring of the Ionian Nymphs, which
was in the territories belonging to the Town of Elis, at a Village called Heraclea, neer the
river Citheron: which whosoever stepped into, being diseased, came forth whole, and
cured of all his diseases. Pausanias also reports, that in Lyceus, a mountain of Arcadia,
there was a spring called Agria, to which, as often as the dryness of the Region threatned
[threatened] the destruction of fruits, Jupiters Priest of Lyceus went, and after the offering
of Sacrifices, devoutly praying to the Waters of the Spring, holding a Bough of an Oke
[oak] in his hand, put it down to the bottome of the hallowed Spring; Then the waters
being troubled, a Vapour ascending from thence into the Air was blown into Clouds, with
which being joyned together, the whole Heaven was overspread: which being a little after
dissolved into rain, watered all the Country most wholsomly [wholesomely]. Moreover
Ruffus a Physitian [physician] of Ephesus, besides many other Authours, wrote strange
things concerning the wonders of Waters, which, for ought I know, are found in no other
Authour.
It remains that I speak of the Aire. This is a vitall spirit, passing through all Beings,
giving life, and subsistence to all things, binding, moving, and filling all things. Hence it
is that the Hebrew Doctors reckon it not amongst the Elements, but count it as a Medium
or glew [glue], joyning things together, and as the resounding spirit of the worlds
instrument. It immediately receives into it self the influences of all Celestiall bodies, and
then communicates them to the other Elements, as also to all mixt [mixed] bodies: Also it
receives into it self, as it were a divine Looking-glass, the species of all things, as well
naturall, as artificiall, as also of all manner of speeches, and retains them; And carrying
them with it, and entering into the bodies of Men, and other Animals, through their pores,
makes an Impression upon them, as well when they sleep, as when they be awake, and
affords matter for divers strange Dreams and Divinations. Hence they say it is, that a man
passing by a place where a man was slain, or the Carkase [carcass] newly hid, is moved
with fear and dread; because the Aire in that place being full of the dreadfull species of
Man-slaughter [manslaughter], doth, being breathed in, move and trouble the spirit of the
man with the like species, whence it is that be comes to be afraid. For every thing that
makes a sudden impression, astonisheth nature. Whence it is, that many Philosophers
were of opinion that Aire is the cause of dreams, and of many other impressions of the
mind, through the prolonging of Images, or similitudes, or species (which are fallen from
things and speeches, multiplyed in the very Aire) untill they come to the senses, and then
to the phantasy, and soul of him that receives them, which being freed from cares, and no
way hindred, expecting to meet such kind of species, is informed by them. For the species
of things, although of their own proper nature they are carryed to the senses of men, and
other animals in generall, may notwithstanding get some impression from the Heaven,
whilest they be in the Aire, by reason of which, together with the aptness and disposition
of him that receives them, they may be carryed to the sence [sense] of one rather then of
another. And hence it is possible naturally, and far from all manner of superstition, no
other spirit coming between, that a man should be able in a very time to signifie his mind
unto another man, abiding at a very long and unknown distance from him; although he
cannot precisely give an estimate of the time when it is, yet of necessity it must be within
24 hours; and I my self know how to do it, and have often done it. The same also in time
past did the Abbot Tritemius [Trithemius] both know and do. Also, when certain
appearances, not only spirituall, but also naturall do flow forth from things, that is to say,
by a certain kind of flowings forth of bodies from bodies, and do gather strength in the
Air, they offer, and shew themselves to us as well through light as motion, as well to the
sight as to other senses, and sometimes work wonderfull things upon us, as Plotinus
proves and teacheth. And we see how by the South wind the Air is condensed into thin
clouds, in which, as in a Looking-glass are reflected representations at a great distance of
Castles, Mountains, Horses, and Men, and other things, which when the clouds are gone,
presently vanish. And Aristotle in his Meteors shews, that a Rainbow is conceived in a
cloud of the Aire, as in a Looking-glass. And Albertus saith, that the effigies of bodies
may by the strength of nature, in a moist Aire be easily represented, in the same manner
as the representations of things are in things. And Aristotle tels of a man, to whom it
happened by reason of the weakness of his sight, that the Aire that was near to him,
became as it were a Looking-glass to him, and the optick beam did relect back upon
himself, and could not penetrate the Aire, so that whithersoever he went, he thought he
saw his own image, with his face towards him, go before him. In like manner, by the
artificialnes of some certain Looking-glasses, may be produced at a distance in the Aire,
beside the Looking-glasses, what images we please; which when ignorant men see, they
think they see the appearances of spirits, or souls; when indeed they are nothing else but
semblances kin to themselves, and without life. And it is well known, if in a dark place
where there is no light but by the coming in of a beam of the sun somewhere through a
litle hole, a white paper, or plain Looking-glass be set up against that light, that there may
be seen upon them, whatsoever things are done without, being shined upon by the Sun.
And there is another sleight, or trick yet more wonderfull. If any one shall take images
artificially painted, or written letters, and in a clear night set them against the beams of
the full Moon, whose resemblances being multiplyed in the Aire, and caught upward, and
reflected back together with the beams of the Moon, any other man that is privy to the
thing, at a long distance sees, reads, and knows them in the very compass, and Circle of
the Moon, which Art of declaring secrets is indeed very profitable for Towns, and Cities
that are besieged, being a thing which Pythagoras long since did often do, and which is
not unknown to some in these dayes, I will not except my self. And all these, and many
more, and greater then these, are grounded in the very nature of the Aire, and have their
reasons, and causes declared in Mathematicks, and Opticks. And as these resemblances
are reflected back to the sight, so also sometimes to the hearing, as is manifest in the
Echo. But there are more secret arts then these, and such whereby any one may at a very
remote distance hear, and understand what another speaks, or whispers softly.
There are also from the airy Element Winds. For they are nothing else, but Air moved
and stirred up. Of these there are four that are principall, blowing from the four corners of
the Heaven, viz. Notus from the South, Boreas from the North, Zephyrus from the West,
Eurus from the East, which Pontanus comprehending in these verses, saith,
Cold Boreas from the top of 'lympus [Olympus] blows,
And from the bottom cloudy Notus flows.
From setting Phoebus fruitfull Zeph'rus flies,
And barren Eurus from the Suns up-rise.
Notus is the Southern Wind, cloudy, moist, warm, and sickly, which Hieronimus cals the
butler of the rains. Ovid describes it thus,
Out flies South-wind, with dropping wings, who shrowds
His fearful aspect in the pitchie clouds,
His white Haire stream's, his Beard big-swoln with showres [showers];
Mists binde his Brows, rain from his Bosome powres [pours].
But Boreas is contrary to Notus, and is the Northern Wind, fierce, and roaring, and
discussing clouds, makes the Aire serene, and binds the Water with Frost. Him doth Ovid
thus bring in speaking of himself.
Force me befits: with this thick cloud I drive;
Toss the blew Billows, knotty Okes [oaks] up-rive;
Congeal soft Snow, and beat the Earth with haile;
When I my brethren in the Aire assaile,
(For thats our Field) we meet with such a shock,
That thundring Skies with our encounters rock
And cloud-struck lightning flashes from on high, When through the
Crannies of the Earth I flie,
And force her in her hollow Caves, I make
The Ghosts to tremble, and the ground to quake.
And Zephyrus, which is the Western Wind, is most soft, blowing from the West with a
pleasant gale, it is cold and moist, removing the effects of Winter, bringing forth
Branches, and Flowers. To this Eurus is contrary, which is the Eastern wind, and is called
Apeliotes; it is waterish, cloudy, and ravenous. Of these two Ovid sings thus:
To Persis and Sabea, Eurus flies;
Whose gums perfume the blushing Mornes up-rise:
Next to the Evening, and the Coast that glows
With setting Phoebus, flowry Zeph'rus blows:
In Scythia horrid Boreas holds his rain,
Beneath Boites, and the frozen Wain:
The land to this oppos'd doth Auster steep
With fruitfull showres, and clouds which ever weep.
Chap. vii. Of the kinds of Compounds, what relation they stand in to the
Elements, and what relation there is betwixt the Elements themselves, and
the soul, senses, and dispositions of men.
Next after the four simple Elements follow the four kinds of perfect Bodies compounded
of them, and they are Stones, Metals, Plants, and Animals: and although unto the
generation of each of these all the Elements meet together in the composition, yet every
one of them follows, and resembles one of the Elements, which is most predominant. For
all Stones are earthy, for they are naturally heavy, and descend, and so hardened with
dryness, that they cannot be melted. But Metals are waterish, and may be melted, which
Naturalists confess, and Chymists [chemists] finde to be true, viz. that they are generated
of a viscous Water, or waterish argent vive. Plants have such an affinity with the Aire,
that unless they be abroad in the open Aire, they do neither bud, nor increase. So also all
Animals
Have in their Natures a most fiery force,
And also spring from a Celestiall source.
And Fire is so naturall to them, that that being extinguished they presently dye [die]. And
again every one of those kinds is distinguished within it self by reason of degrees of the
Elements. For amongst the Stones they especially are called earthy that are dark, and
more heavy; and those waterish, which are transparent, and are compacted of water, as
Crystall, Beryll, and Pearls in the shels [shells] of Fishes: and they are called airy, which
swim upon the Water, and are spongious [spongeous], as the Stones of a Sponge, the
pumice Stone, and the Stone Sophus: and they are called fiery, out of which fire is
extracted, or which are resolved into Fire, or which are produced of Fire: as
Thunderbolts, Fire-stones, and the Stone Asbestus [asbestos]. Also amongst Metals,
Lead, and Silver are earthy; Quicksilver is waterish: Copper, and Tin are airy: and Gold,
and Iron are fiery. In Plants also, the roots resemble the Earth, by reason of their
thickness: and the leaves, Water, because of their juice: Flowers, the Aire, because of
their subtility, and the Seeds the Fire, by reason of their multiplying spirit. Besides, they
are called some hot, wine cold, sonic moist, some dry, borrowing their names from the
qualifies of the Elements. Amongst Animals also, some are in comparison of others
earthy, and dwell in the bowels of the Earth, as Worms and Moles, and many other small
creeping Vermine; others are watery, as Fishes; others airy, which cannot live out of the
Aire: others also are fiery, living in the Fire, as Salamanders, and Crickets, such as are of
a fiery heat, as Pigeons, Estriches [ostriches], Lions, and such as the wise man cals beasts
breathing Fire. Besides, in Animals the Bones resemble the Earth, Flesh the Aire, the
vital spirit the Fire, and the humors the Water. And these humors also partake of the
Elements, for yellow choller [choler] is instead of Fire, blood instead of Aire, Flegme
[phlegm] instead of Water, and black choller [choler], or melancholy instead of Earth.
And lastly, in the Soul it self, according to Austin [Augustine], the understanding
resembles Fire, reason the Aire, imagination the Water, and the senses the Earth. And
these senses also are divided amongst themselves by reason of the Elements, for the sight
is fiery, neither can it perceive without Fire, and Light: the hearing is airy, for a sound is
made by the striking of the Aire; The smell, and tast [taste] resemble the Water, without
the moisture of which there is neither smell, nor tast [taste]; and lastly the feeling is
wholly earthy, and taketh gross bodies for its object. The actions also, and the operations
of man are governed by the Elements. The Earth signifies a slow, and firm motion; The
water signifies fearfulness, & sluggishness, and remisseness in working: Aire signifies
chearfulness [cheerfulness], and an amiable disposition: but Fire a fierce, quick and angry
disposition. The Elements therefore are the first of all things, and all things are of, and
according to them, and they are in all things, and diffuse their vertues through all things.
Chap. viii. How the Elements are in the Heavens, in Stars, in Divels
[devils], in Angels, and lastly in God himself.
It is the unanimous consent of all Platonists, that as in the originall, and exemplary
World, all things are in all; so also in this corporeal world, all things are in all; so also the
Elements are not only in these inferior bodies, but also in the Heavens, in Stars, in Divels
[devils], in Angels, and lastly in God, the maker and originall example of all things. Now
in these inferiour bodies the Elements are accompanied with much gross matter; but in
the Heavens the Elements are with their natures, and vertues, viz. after a Celestiall, and
more excellent manner, then in sublunary things. For the firmness of the Celestiall Earth
is there without the grossness of Water: and the agility of the Aire without running over
its bounds; the heat of Fire without burning, only shining, and giving life to all things by
its heat. Amongst the Stars, also, some are fiery, as Mars, and Sol; airy, as Jupiter, and
Venus: watery, as Saturn, and Mercury: and earthy, such as inhabit the eighth Orbe, and
the Moon (which notwithstanding by many is accounted watery) seeing, as if it were
Earth, it attracts to it self the Celestiall waters, with which being imbibed, it doth by
reason of its neerness [nearness] to us power [pour] out, and communicate to us. There
are also amongst the signes, some fiery, some earthy, some airy, some watery: the
Elements rule them also in the Heavens, distributing to them these four threefold
considerations Of every Element, viz. the beginning, middle, and end: so Aries possesseth
the beginning of Fire, Leo the progress, and increase, and Sagittarius the end. Taurus the
beginning of the Earth, Virgo the progress, Capricorn the end. Gemini the beginning of
the Aire, Libra the progress, Aquarius the end. Cancer the beginning of Water, Scorpius
[Scorpio] the middle, and Pisces the end. Of the mixtions therefore of these Planets and
Signes, together with the Elements are all bodies made. Moreover Divels [devils] also are
upon this account distinguished the one from the other, so that some are called fiery,
some earthy, some airy, and some watery. Hence also those four Infernall Rivers, fiery
Phlegethon, airy Cocytus, watery Styx, earthy Acheron. Also in the Gospel we read of
Hell Fire, and eternall Fire, into which the Cursed shall be commanded to go: and in the
Revelation we read of a Lake of Fire, and Isaiah speaks of the damned, that the Lord will
smite them with corrupt Aire. And in Job, They shall skip from the Waters of the Snow
to extremity of heat, and in the same we read, That the Earth is dark, and covered with
the darkness of death, and miserable darkness. Moreover also these Elements are placed
in the Angels in Heaven, and the blessed Intelligencies; there is in them a stability of their
essence, which is an earthly vertue, in which is the stedfast seat of God; also their mercy,
and piety is a watery cleansing vertue. Hence by the Psalmist they are called Waters,
where he speaking of the Heavens, saith, Who rulest the Waters that are higher then the
Heavens [Ps148.4;] also in them their subtill [subtle] breath is Aire, and their love is
shining Fire. Hence they are called in Scripture the Wings of the Wind; and in another
place the Psalmist speaks of them, Who makest Angels thy Spirits, and thy Ministers a
flaming fire. Also according to orders of Angels, some are fiery, as Seraphin [Seraphim],
and authorities, and powers; earthy as Cherubin [Cherubim]; watery as Thrones, and
Archangels: airy as Dominions, and Principalities. Do we not also read of the original
maker of all things, that the earth shall he opened and bring forth a Saviour? Is it not
spoken of the same, that he shall be a fountain of living Water, cleansing and
regenerating? Is not the same Spirit breathing the breath of life; and the same according
to Moses, and Pauls testimony, A consuming Fire? That Elements therefore are to be
found every where, and in all things after their manner, no man can deny: First in these
inferiour bodies feculent and gross, and in Celestials more pure, and clear; but in
supercelestials living, and in all respects blessed. Elements therefore in the exemplary
world are Idea's of things to be produced, in Intelligencies are distributed powers, in
Heavens are vertues, and in inferiour bodies gross forms.
Chap. ix. Of the vertues of things Naturall, depending immediatly upon
Elements.
Of the naturall vertues of things, some are Elementary, as to heat, to cool, to moisten, to
dry; and they are called operations, or first qualities, and the second act: for these
qualities only do wholly change the whole substance, which none of the other qualities
can do. And some are in things compounded of Elements, and these are more then first
qualities, and such are those that are maturating, digesting, resolving, mollifying,
hardening, restringing, absterging, corroding, burning, opening, evaporating,
strengthening, mitigating, conglutinating, obstructing, expelling, retaining, attracting,
repercussing, stupifying [stupefying], bestowing, lubrifying, and many more. Elementary
qualities do many things in a mixt [mixed] body, which they cannot do in the Elements
themselves. And these operations are called secondary qualities, because they follow the
nature, and proportion of the mixtion of the first vertues, as largely it is treated of in
Physick [Medical] Books. As maturation, which is the operation of naturall heat,
according to a certain proportion in the substance of the matter. Induration is the
operation of cold; so also is congelation, and so of the rest. And these operations
sometimes act upon a certain member, as such which provoke Urine, Milk, the Menstrua,
and they are called third qualities, which follow the second, as the second do the first.
According therefore to these first, second, and third qualities many diseases are both
cured, and caused. Many things also there are artificially made, which men much wonder
at; as is Fire, which burns Water, which they call the Greek Fire, of which Aristotle
teacheth many compositions in his particular Treatise of this subject. In like manner there
is made a Fire that is extinguished with Oyl [oil], and is kindled with cold Water, when it
is sprinkled upon it; and a Fire which is kindled either with Rain, Wind, or the Sun; and
there is made a Fire, which is called burning Water, the Confection whereof is well
known, and it consumes nothing but it self: and also there are made Fires that cannot be
quenched, and incombustible Oyles [oils], and perpetuall Lamps, which can be
extinguished neither with Wind, nor Water, nor any other way; which seems utterly
incredible, but that there had been such a most famous Lamp, which once did shine in the
Temple of Venus, in which the stone Asbestos did burn, which being once fired can never
be extinguished. Also on the contrary, Wood, or any other combustible matter may be so
ordered, that it can receive no harm from the Fire; and there are made certain
Confections, with which the hands being anointed, we may carry red hot Iron in them, or
put them into melted Metall, or go with our whole bodies, being first anointed therewith,
into the Fire without any manner of harm, and such like things as these may be done.
There is also a kind of flax, which Pliny calls Asbestum, the Greeks call Ασβεζον, which
is not consumed by Fire, of which Anaxilaus saith, that a Tree compassed about with it,
may be cut down with insensible blows, that cannot be heard.
Chap. x. Of the Occult Vertues of things.
There are also other vertues in things, which are not from any Element, as to expell
poyson [poison], to drive away the noxious vapours of Minerals, to attract Iron, or any
thing else; and these vertues are a sequell of the species, and form of this or that thing;
whence also they being little in quantity, are of great efficacy; which is not granted to any
Elementary quality. For these vertues having much form, and litle matter, can do very
much; but an Elementary vertue, because it hath more materiality, requires much matter
for its acting. And they are called occult qualities, because their Causes lie hid, and mans
intellect cannot in any way reach, and find them out. Wherefore Philosophers have
attained to the greatest part of them by long experience, rather then by the search of
reason: for as in the Stomack [stomach] the meat is digested by heat, which we know; so
it is changed by a certain hidden vertue which we know not: for truly it is not changed by
heat, because then it should rather be changed by the Fire side, then in the Stomack
[stomach]. So there are in things, besides the Elementary qualities which we know, other
certain imbred vertues created by nature, which we admire, and are amazed at, being such
as we know not, and indeed seldom or never have seen. As we read in Ovid of the
Phoenix, one only Bird, which renews her self.
All Birds from others do derive their birth,
But yet one Fowle there is in all the Earth,
Call'd by th' Assyrians Phoenix, who the wain
Of age, repairs, and sows her self again.
And in another place,
Ægyptus came to see this wondrous sight:
And this rare Bird is welcom'd with delight.
Long since Metreas [Matreas] brought a very great wonderment upon the Greeks, and
Romans concerning himself. He said that he nourished, and bred a beast that did devour it
self. Hence many to this day are solicitous, what this beast of Matreas should be. Who
would not wonder that Fishes should be digged out of the Earth, of which Aristotle,
Theophrastus, and Polybius the Historian makes mention? And those things which
Pausanius wrote concerning the singing Stones? All these are effects of occult vertues.
So the Estrich [ostrich] concocts cold, and most hard Iron, and digests it into nourishment
for his body; whose Stomack [stomach] they also report, cannot be hurt with red hot Iron.
So that little Fish called Echeneis doth so curb the violence of the Winds, and appease the
rage of the Sea, that, let the Tempests be never so imperious, and raging, the Sails also
bearing a full Gale, it doth notwithstanding by its meer touch stay the Ships, and makes
them stand still, that by no means they can be moved. So Salamanders, and Crickets live
in the Fire; although they seem sometimes to burn, yet they are not hurt. The like is said
of a kind of Bitumen, with which the weapons of the Amazons were said to be smeared
over, by which means they could be spoiled neither with Sword nor Fire; with which also
the Gates of Caspia, made of Brass, are reported to be smeared over by Alexander the
great. We read also that Noah's Ark was joyned together with this Bitumen, and that it
endured some thousands of years upon the Mountains of Armenia. There are many such
kind of wonderfull things, scarce credible, which notwithstanding are known by
experience. Amongst which Antiquity makes mention of Satyrs, which were Animals, in
shape half men, and half bruits [brutes], yet capable of speech, and reason; one whereof
S. Hierome reporteth, spake once unto holy Antonius the Hermite, and condemned the
errour of the Gentiles, in worshipping such poor creatures as they were, and desired him
that he would pray unto the true God for him; also he affirms that there was one of them
shewed openly alive, and afterwards sent to Constantine the Emperour.
Chap. xi. How Occult Vertues are infused into the severall kinds of things
by Idea's, through the help of the Soul of the World, and rayes of the
Stars: and what things abound most with this Vertue.
Platonists say that all inferiour bodies are exemplified by the superiour Ideas. Now they
define an Idea to be a form, above bodies, souls, minds, and to be one, simple, pure,
immutable, indivisible, incorporeal, and eternall: and that the nature of all Idea's is the
same. Now they place Idea's in the first place in very goodness it self (i.e.) God, by way
of cause; and that they are distinguished amongst themselves by some relative
considerations only, least whatsoever is in the world, should be but one thing without any
variety, and that they agree in essence, least God should be a compound substance. In the
second place, they place them in the very intelligible it self (i.e.) in the Soul of the world,
differing the one from the other by absolute forms, so that all the Idea's in God indeed are
but one form: but in the Soul of the world they are many. They are placed in the minds of
all other things, whether they be joyned to the body, or separated from the body, by a
certain participation, and now by degrees are distinguished more, and more. They place
them in nature, as certain small seed of forms infused by the Idea's, and lastly they place
them in matter, as Shadows. Hereunto may be added, that in the Soul of the world there
be as many Seminal Forms of things, as Idea's in the mind of God, by which forms she
did in the Heavens above the Stars frame to her self shapes also, and stamped upon all
these some properties; on these Stars therefore, shapes, and properties, all vertues of
inferiour species, as also their properties do depend; so that every species hath its
Celestiall shape, or figure that is sutable [suitable] to it from which also proceeds a
wonderfull power of operating, which proper gift it receives from its own Idea, through
the Seminal forms of the Soul of the world. For Idea's are not only essential causes of
every species, but are also the causes of every vertue, which is in the species: and this is
that which many Philosophers say, that the properties which are in the nature of things
(which vertues indeed are the operations of the Idea's) are moved by certain vertues, viz.
such as have a certain, and sure foundation, not fortuitous, nor casuall, but efficacious,
powerfull, and sufficient, doing nothing in vain. Now these Vertues do not err in their
actings, but by accident, viz. by reason of the impurity, or inequality of the matter: For
upon this account there are found things of the same species, more, or less powerful,
according to the purity, or indisposition of the matter; for all Celestial Influences may be
hindred by the indisposition, and insufficiency of the matter. Whence it was a Proverb
amongst the Platonists, That Celestial Vertues were infused according to the desert of the
matter: Which also Virgil makes mention of, when he sings,
Their natures fiery are, and from above,
And from gross bodies freed, divinely move.
Wherefore those things in which there is less of the Idea of the matter (i.e.) such things
which have a greater resemblance of things separated, have more powerfull vertues in
operation, being like to the operation of a separated Idea. We see then that the situation,
and figure of Celestials is the cause of all those excellent Vertues, that are in inferiour
species.
Chap. xii. How it is that particular Vertues are infused into particular
Individuals, even of the same Species.
There are also in many Individuals, or particular things, peculiar gifts, as wonderfull, as
in the species, and these also are from the figure, and situation of Celestiall Stars. For
every Individuall, when it begins to be under a determined Horoscope, and Celestiall
Constellation, Contracts together with its essence a certain wonderfull vertue both of
doing, and suffering something that is remarkable, even besides that which it receives
from its species, and this it doth partly by the influence of the Heaven, and partly through
that obedientialness of the matter of things to be generated, to the Soul of the World,
which obedientialness indeed is such as that of our bodies to our souls. For we perceive
that there is this in us, that according to our conceptions of things, our bodies are moved,
and that cheerfully, as when we are afraid of, or fly from any thing. So many times when
the Celestiall souls conceive several things, then the matter is moved obedientially to it:
Also in Nature there appear divers prodigies, by reason of the imagination of superiour
motions. So also they conceive, & imagine divers vertues, not only things naturall, but
also sometimes things artificial, and this especially if the Soul of the operator be inclined
towards the same. Whence Avicen saith, that whatsoever things are done here, must have
been before in the motions, and conceptions of the Stars, and Orbes. So in things, various
effects, inclinations, and dispositions are occasioned not only from the matter variously
disposed, as many suppose, but from a various influence, and diverse form; not truly with
a specifical difference, but peculiar, and proper. And the degrees of these are variously
distributed by the first Cause of all things, God himself, who being unchangeable,
distributes to every one as he pleaseth, with whom notwithstanding second Causes,
Angelical and Celestial, cooperate, disposing of the Corporeal matter, and other things
that are committed to them. All vertues therefore are infused by God, through the Soul of
the World, yet by a particular power of resemblances, and intelligences over-ruling them,
and concourse of the rayes, and aspects of the Stars in a certain peculiar harmonious
consent.
Chap. xiii. Whence the Occult Vertues of things proceed.
It is well known to all, that there is a Certain vertue in the Loadstone, by which it attracts
Iron, and that the Diamond doth by its presence take away that vertue of the Loadstone:
so also Amber, and jeat [jet] rubbed, and warmed draw a straw to them, and the Stone
Asbestus [asbestos] being once fired is never, or scarce extinguished: a Carbuncle shines
in the dark, the Stone Aetites put above the young fruit of Women, or Plants, strengthens
them, but being put under, causeth abortion; the Jasper stencheth [stauncheth] blood; the
litle fish Echeneis stops the ships: Rhubarb expels choller [choler]; the liver of the
Camelion [Chameleon] burnt, raiseth showers, and thunders. The Stone Heliotrope dazles
[dazzles] the sight, and makes him that wears it to be invisible, the Stone Lyucurius takes
away delusions from before the eyes, the perfume of the Stone Lypparis cals forth all the
beasts, the Stone Synochitis brings up infernal Ghosts, the Stone Anachitis makes the
images of the Gods appear. The Ennecis put under them that dream, causeth Oracles.
There is an Hearb [herb] in Æthiopia [Ethiopia], with which they report ponds, and lakes
are dryed [dried] up, and all things that are shut, to be opened; and we read of an Hearb
[herb] called Latace which the Persian Kings give to their Embassadours, that
whithersoever they shall come, they shall abound with plenty of all things. There is also a
Scythian Hearb [herb], with which being tasted, or at least held in the mouth, they report
the Scythians will endure twelve dayes hunger, and thirst; and Apuleius saith, that he was
taught by an Oracle that there were many kinds of Hearbs [herbs], and Stones, with
which men might prolong their lives for ever, but that it was not lawfull for men to
understand the knowledge of those things, because, whereas they have but a short time to
live, they study mischief with all their might, and attempt all manner of wickedness; if
they should be sure of a very long time, they would not spare the Gods themselves. But
from whence these vertues are, none of all these have shewed, who have set forth huge
Volumes of the properties of things, not Hermes, not Bochus, not Aaron, not Orpheus,
not Theophrastus, not Thebith, not Zenothemis, not Zoroaster, not Evax, not Dioscorides,
not Isaaick the Jew, not Zacharias the Babilonian [Babylonian], not Albertus, not
Arnoldus; and yet all these have confessed the same, that Zacharias writes to Mithridites,
that great power, and humane destinies are couched in the vertues of Stones and Hearbs
[herbs]. But to know from whence these come, a higher speculation is required.
Alexander the peripateticke not going any further then his senses, and qualities, is of the
opinion that these proceed from Elements, and their qualities, which haply might be
supposed to be true, if those were of the same species; but many of the operations of the
Stones agree neither in genere, nor specie. Therefore Plato, and his Schollers [scholars]
attribute these vertues to Idea's, the formers of things. But Avicen reduceth these kinds of
operations to Intelligencies, Hermes to the Stars, Albertus to the specificall forms of
things. And although these Authors seem to thwart one the other, yet none of them, if
they be rightly understood, goes beside the truth: since all their sayings are the same in
effect in most things. For God in the first place is the end, and begining of all Vertues, he
gives the seal of the Idea's to his servants the Intelligencies; who as faithfull officers sign
all things intrusted [entrusted] to them with an Ideall Vertue, the Heavens, and Stars, as
instruments, disposing the matter in the mean while for the receiving of those forms
which reside in Divine Majesty (as saith Plato in Timeus) and to be conveyed by Stars;
and the Giver of forms distributes them by the Ministry of his Intelligencies, which he
hath set as Rulers, and Controllers over his Works, to whom such a power is intrusted in
things committed to them, that so all Vertues of Stones, Hearbs [herbs], Metals, and all
other things may come from the Intelligencies, the Governours. The Form therefore, and
Vertue of things comes first from the Idea's, then from the ruling, and governing
Intelligencies, then from the aspects of the Heavens disposing, and lastly from the
tempers of the Elements disposed, answering the influencies of the Heavens, by which
the Elements themselves are ordered, or disposed. These kinds of operations therefore are
performed in these inferiour things by express forms, and in the Heavens by disposing
vertues, in Intelligencies by mediating rules, in the original Cause by Idea's, and
exemplary forms, all which must of necessity agree in the execution of the effect, and
vertue of every thing.
There is therefore a wonderfull vertue, and operation in every Hearb [herb] and Stone,
but greater in a Star, beyond which, even from the governing Intelligencies every thing
receiveth, and obtains many things for it self, especially from the Supream Cause, with
whom all things do mutually, and exactly correspond, agreeing in an harmonious consent,
as it were in Hymnes, alwaies praising the highest Maker of all things, as by the three
Children in the fiery furnace were all things called upon to praise God with singings.
Bless ye the Lord all things that grow upon the Earth, and all things which move in the
Waters, all fowls of the Heavens, Beasts, and Cattle, together with the sons of men. There
is therefore no other cause of the necessity of effects, then the connexion [connection] of
all things with the first Cause, and their correspondency with those Divine patterns, and
eternall Idea's, whence every thing hath its determinate, and particular place in the
exemplary world, from whence it lives, and receives its originall being; And every vertue
of Hearbs [herbs], Stones, Metals, Animals, Words, and Speeches, and all things that are
of God, is placed there. Now the first Cause, which is God, although he doth by
Intelligencies, and the Heavens work upon these inferiour things, doth sometimes (these
Mediums being laid aside, or their officiating being suspended) works those things
immediatly by himself, which works then are called Miracles: But whereas secondary
causes, which Plato, and others call handmaids, do by the Command, and appointment of
the first Cause, necessarily act, and are necessitated to produce their effects, if God shall
notwithstanding according to his pleasure so discharge, and suspend them, that they shall
wholly desist from the necessity of that Command, and appointment; then they are called
the greatest Miracles of God. So the fire in the Chaldeans furnace did not burn the
Children: So also the Sun at the Command of Joshua went back from its course the space
of one whole day; so also at the prayer of Hezekiah it went back ten degrees, or hours. So
when Christ was Crucified the Sun was darkened, though at full Moon: And the reasons
these operations can by no rationall discourse, no Magick, or occult, or profound Science
whatsoever be found out, or understood, but are to be learned, and inquired into by
Divine Oracles only.
Chap. xiv. Of the Spirit of the World, what it is, and how by way of
medium it unites occult Vertues to their subjects.
Democritus and Orpheus, and many Pythagorians having most diligently searched into
the vertues of Celestiall things, and natures of inferior things, said, That all things are full
of God, and not without cause: For there is nothing of such transcending vertues, which
being destitute of Divine assistance, is content with the nature of it self. Also they called
those Divine Powers which are diffused in things, Gods: which Zoroaster called Divine
allurements, Synesius Symbolicall inticements, others called them Lives, and some also
Souls, saying, that the vertues of things did depend upon these; because it is the property
of the Soul to be from one matter extended into divers things, about which it operates: So
is a man, who extends his intellect unto intelligible things, and his imagination unto
imaginable things; and this is that which they understood, when they said, viz. That the
Soul of one thing went out, and went into another thing, altering it, and hindering the
operations of it: As the Diamond hinders the operation of the Loadstone, that it cannot
attract Iron. Now seeing the Soul is the first thing that is moveable, and as they say, is
moved of it self; but the body, or the matter is of it self unable, and unfit for motion, and
doth much degenerate from the Soul, therefore they say there is need of a more excellent
Medium, viz. Such a one that may be as it were no body, but as it were a Soul, or as it
were no Soul, but as it were a body, viz. by which the soul may be joyned to the body.
Now they conceive such a medium to be the spirit of the World, viz. that which we call
the quintessence: because it is not from the four Elements, but a certain first thing, having
its being above, and besides them. There is therefore such a kind of spirit required to be,
as it were the medium, whereby Celestiall Souls are joyned to gross bodies, and bestow
upon them wonderfull gifts. This spirit is after the same manner in the body of the world,
as ours is in the body of man. For as the powers of our soul are communicated to the
members of the body by the spirit, so also the Vertue of the Soul of the World is diffused
through all things by the quintessence: For there is nothing found in the whole world, that
hath not a spark of the Vertue thereof. Yet it is more, nay most of all infused into those
things which have received, or taken in most of this spirit: Now this spirit is received or
taken in by the rayes of the Stars, so far forth as things render themselves conformable to
them. By this spirit therefore every occult property is conveyed into Hearbs [herbs],
Stones, Metals, and Animals, through the Sun, Moon, Planets, and through Stars higher
then the Planets. Now this spirit may be more advantageous to us, if any one knew how
to separate it from the Elements: or at least to use those things chiefly, which do most
abound with this spirit. For these things, in which this spirit is less drowned in a body,
and less checked by matter, do more powerfully, and perfectly act, and also more readily
generate their like: for in it are all generative, & seminary Vertues. For which cause the
Alchymists [alchemists] endeavour to separate this spirit from Gold, and Silver; which
being rightly separated, and extracted, if thou shalt afterward project upon any matter of
the same kind (i.e.) any Metall, presently will turn it into Gold, or Silver. And we know
how to do that, and have seen it done: but we could make no more Gold, then the weight
of that was, out of which we extracted the spirit. For seeing that is an extense form, and
not intense, it cannot beyond its own bounds change and imperfect body into a perfect:
which I deny not, but may be done by another way.
Chap. xv. How we must find out, and examine the Vertues of things by
way of similitude.
It is now manifest that the occult properties in things are not from the nature of the
Elements, but infused from above, hid from our senses, and scarce at last known by our
reason, which indeed come from the Life, and the Spirit of the World, through the rayes
of the Stars: and can no otherwise but by experience, and conjecture be enquired into by
us. Wherefore, he that desires to enter upon this study must consider, that every thing
moves, and turns it self to its like, and inclines that to it self with all its might, as well in
property, viz. Occult vertue, as in quality, viz. Elementary vertue. Sometimes also in
substance it self, as we see in Salt, for whatsoever hath long stood with Salt, becomes
Salt: for every agent, when it hath begun to act, doth not attempt to make a thing inferiour
to it self, but as much as may be, like, and sutable [suitable] to it self. Which also we
manifestly see in sensible Animals, in which the nutritive Vertue doth not change the
meat into an Hearb [herb], or a Plant, but turns it into sensible flesh. In what things
therefore there is an excess of any quality, or property, as heat, cold, boldness, fear,
sadness, anger, love, hatred, or any other passion, or Vertue; whether it be in them by
nature, or sometimes also by art, or chance, as boldness in a harlot; these things do very
much move, and provoke to such a quality, passion, or Vertue. So Fire moves to Fire, and
Water moves to Water, and be that is bold moves to boldness. And it is well known
amongst Physitians [physicians], that brain helps the brain, and lungs, the lungs. So also
it is said, that the right eye of a Frog helps the soreness of a mans right eye, and the left
eye thereof helps the soreness of his left eye, if they be hanged about his neck in a Cloth
of its naturall Colour: The like is reported of the eyes of a Crab. So the foot of a Tortoise
helps them that have the Gout in their being applyed thus, as foot to foot, hand to hand,
right to right, left to left.
After this manner they say, that any Animall that is barren causeth another to be barren;
and of the Animall, especially the Testicles, Matrix [womb], or Urin [urine]. So they
report that a woman shall not conceive, if she drink every moneth of the Urin [urine] of a
Mule, or any thing steeped in it. If therefore we would obtain any property or Vertue, let
us seek for such Animals, or such other things whatsoever, in which such a property is in
a more eminent manner then in any other thing, and in these let us take that part in which
such a property, or Vertue is most vigorous: as if at any time we would promote love, let
us seek some Animall which is most loving, of which kind are Pigeons, Turtles,
Sparrows, Swallows, Wagtailes: and in these take those members, or parts, in which the
Venerall [venereal, i.e. sexual] appetite is most vigorous, such as the heart, testicles,
matrix [womb], yard [penis], sperme, and menstrues. And it must be done at that time
when these Animals have this affection most intense: for then they do provoke, and draw
love. In like manner to increase boldness, let us look for a Lyon [lion], or a Cock, and of
these let us take the heart, eyes, or forehead. And so we must understand that which
Psellus the Platonist saith, viz. that Dogs, Crows, and Cocks conduce much to
watchfulness: also the Nightingale, and Bat, and horn Owle [horned owl], and in these
the heart, head, and eyes especially. Therefore it is said, if any shall carry the heart of a
Crow, or a Bat about him, he shall not sleep till he cast it away from him. The same doth
the head of a Bat dryed [dried], and bound to the right arme of him that is awake, for if it
be put upon him when he is asleep, it is said, that he shall not be awaked till it be taken
off from him. After the same manner doth a Frog, and an Owle make one talkative and of
these specially the tongue, and heart; So the tongue also of a Water-frog laid under the
head, makes a man speak in his sleep, and the heart of a scrich-Owle [screech-owl] laid
upon the left breast of a woman that is asleep is said to make her utter all her secrets. The
same also the heart of the horn Owle [horned owl] is said to do, also the sewet [suet] of a
Hare laid upon the breast of one that is asleep. Upon the same account do Animals that
are long lived, conduce to long life; and whatsoever things have a power in themselves,
to renew themselves, conduce to the renovation of our body, and restoring of youth,
which Physitians [physicians] have often professed they know to be true; as is manifest of
the Viper, and Snake. And it is known that Harts renew their old age by the eating of
Snakes. After the same manner the Phoenix is renewed by a fire which she makes for her
self; and the like vertue there is in a Pellican [pelican], whose right foot being put under
warm dung, after three moneths [months] there is of that generated a Pellican [pelican].
Therefore some Physitians [physicians] by some certain confections made of Vipers, and
Hellebor [hellebore], and the flesh of some such kind of Animals do restore youth, and
indeed do sometimes restore it so, as Medea restored old Pileas. It is also believed that
the blood of a Bear, if it be sucked out of her wound, doth increase strength of body,
because that Animall is the strongest creature.
Chap. xvi. How the operations of several Vertues pass from one thing into
another, and are communicated one to the other.
Thou must know, that so great is the power of naturall things, that they not only work
upon all things that are neer them, by their Vertue, but also besides this, they infuse into
them a like power, through which by the same Vertue they also work upon other things,
as we see in the Loadstone, which Stone indeed doth not only draw Iron Rings, but also
infuseth a Vertue into the Rings themselves, whereby they can do the same, which Austin
[Augustine] and Albertus [Magnus] say they saw. After this manner it is, as they say, that
a common harlot, grounded in boldness, and impudence doth infect all that are neer her,
by this property, whereby they are made like her self. Therefore they say that if any one
shall put on the inward garment of an Harlot, or shall have about him that looking glass,
which she daily looks into, he shall thereby become bold, confident, impudent, and
wanton. In like manner they say, that a cloth that was about a dead Corpse hath received
from thence the property of sadness, and melancholy; and that the halter wherewith a
man was hanged hath certain wonderfull properties. The like story tels Pliny, if any shall
put a green Lizard made blind, together with Iron, or Gold Rings into a glass-vessel,
putting under them some earth, and then shutting the vessel, and when it appears that the
Lizard hath received his sight, shall put him out of the glass, that those Rings shall help
sore eyes. The same may be done with Rings, and a Weesel [weasel], whose eyes after
they are with any kind of prick put out, it is certain are restored to sight again. Upon the
same account Rings are put for a certain time in the nest of Sparrows, or Swallows, which
afterwards are used to procure love, and favor.
Chap. xvii. How by enmity and friendship the vertues of things are to be
tryed, and found out.
In the next place it is requisite that we consider that all things have a friendliness, and
enmity amongst themselves, and every thing hath something that it fears & dreads, that is
an enemy, and destructive to it; and on the contrary something that it rejoyceth, and
delighteth in, and is strengthened by. So in the Elements, Fire is an enemy to Water, and
Aire to Earth, but yet they agree amongst themselves. And again, in Celestiall bodies,
Mercury, Jupiter, the Sun, and Moon are friends to Saturn; Mars, and Venus enemies to
him, all the Planets besides Mars are friends to Jupiter, also all besides Venus hate Mars;
Jupiter, and Venus love the Sun, Mars, Mercury, and the Moon are enemies to him, all
besides Saturne love Venus; Jupiter, Venus, and Saturne are friends to Mercury, the Sun,
Moon, and Mars his enemies. Jupiter, Venus, Saturne are friends to the Moon, Mars, and
Mercury her enemies. There is another kind of enmity amongst the Stars, viz. when they
have opposite houses; as Saturne to the Sun and Moon, Jupiter to Mercury, Mars to
Venus. And their enmity is stronger, whose exaltations are opposite: as of Saturne, and
the Sun; of Jupiter, and Mars; of Venus, and Mercury. But their friendship is the
strongest, who agree in nature, quality, substance, and power; as Mars with the Sun, as
Venus with the Moon, as Jupiter with Venus, as also their friendship whose exaltation is
in the house of another, as that of Saturne with Venus, of Jupiter with the Moon, of Mars
with Saturn, of the Sun with Mars, of Venus with Jupiter, of the Moon with Venus. And
of what sort the friendships, and enmities of the superiours be, such are the inclinations of
things subjected to them in these inferiour. These dispositions therefore of friendship, and
enmity are nothing else but certain inclinations of things of the one to another, desiring
such, and such a thing if it be absent, and to move towards it, unless it be hindered, and to
acquiess [acquiesce] in it when it is obtained, shunning the contrary, and dreading the
approach of it, and not resting in, or being contented with it. Heraclitus therefore being
guided by this opinion, professed that all things were made by enmity & friendship. Now
the inclinations of Friendship are such in Vegetables and Minerals, as is that attractive
inclination, which the Loadstone hath upon Iron, and the Emrald [emerald] upon riches,
and favour; the Jasper upon the birth of any thing, and the Stone Achates upon
Eloquence; In like manner there is a kind of Bituminous Clay that draws Fire, and leaps
into it, wheresoever it sees it: Even so doth the root of the Hearb [herb] Aproxis draw
Fire from afar off. Also the same inclination there is betwixt the male palme, and female:
whereof when the bough of one shall touch the bough of the other, they fold themselves
into mutual embraces, neither doth the female bring forth fruit without the male. And the
Almond tree, when she is alone is less fruitfull. The Vines love the Elme, and the Olive-
tree, and myrtle love one the other: also the Olive-tree, and Fig tree. Now in Animals
there is amity betwixt the Blackbird, and Thrush, betwixt the Crow, and Heron, betwixt
Peacocks, and Pigeons, Turtles, and Parrats [parrots]. Whence Sappho writes to Phaon.
To Birds unlike oftimes joyned are white Doves;
Also the Bird that's green, black Turtle loves.
Again, the Whale, and the little Fish his guide are friendly. Neither is this amity in
Animals amongst themselves, but also with other things, as with Metals, Stones, and
Vegetables, so the Cat delights in the Hearb [herb] Nip [catnip], by rubbing her self upon
which she is said to conceive without a male; and there be Mares in Cappadocia, that
expose themselves to the blast of the wind, and by the attraction thereof conceive. So
Frogs, Toads, Snakes, and all manner of creeping poisonous things delight in the Plant
called Pas-flower, of whom, as the Physitians [physicians] say, if any one eat, he shall
dye [die] with laughing. The Tortoise also when he is hunted by the Adder, eats
Origanum [origano], and is thereby strengthened: and the Stork, when he hath eat Snakes,
seeks for a remedy in Origanum [origano]: and the Weesell [weasel], when he goes to
fight with the Basilisk, eats Rue, whence we come to know that Origanum [origano], and
Rue are effectuall against poison. So in some Animals there is an imbred skil, and
medicinall art; for when the Toad is wounded with a bite or poison of another Animall,
he is wont to go to Rue, or Sage, and Rub the place wounded, and so escapes the danger
of the poison. So men have learned many excellent remedies of diseases, & vertues of
things from bruits [brutes]; So Swallows have shewed us that Sallendine is very
medicinable for the sight, with which they cure the eyes of their young, and the pye when
she is sick, puts a Bay-leafe into her nest, and is recovered. In like maner, Cranes, Dawes
[jackdaws], Partriges [partridges], Blackbirds purge their nauseous stomacks [stomachs]
with the same, with which also Crows allay the poison of the Chameleon; and the Lyon
[lion], if he be feavorish [feverish], is recovered by eating of an Ape. The Lapwing being
surfetted [surfeited] with eating of Grapes, cures himself with Southernwood; so the
Harts have taught us that the Hearb [herb] Ditany is very good to draw out Darts; for they
being wounded with an Arrow, cast it out by eating of this Hearb [herb]: the same do
Goats in Candy. So Hinds, a little before they bring forth, purge themselves with a certain
Hearb [herb] called Mountain Osier. Also they that are hurt with Spiders, seek a remedy
by eating of Crabs: Swine also being hurt by Snakes cure themselves by eating of them;
and Crows when they perceive they are poisoned with a kinde of French poison, seek for
cure in the Oake; Elephants, when they have swallowed a Chameleon help themselves
with the wild olive. Bears being hurt with Mandrakes, escape the danger by eating of
Pismires [ants]. Geese, Ducks, and such like watery fowle, cure themselves with the
Hearb [herb] called will-sage. Pigeons, Turtles, Hens, with the Hearb [herb] called
Pellitory of the wall. Cranes with Bull-rushes [bulrushes]. Leopards cure themselves,
being hurt, with the HEarb [herb] called Wolfes-bane, by mans dung: Boars with Ivy,
Hinds with the Hearb [herb] called Cinnara.
Chapter xviii. Of the Inclinations of Enmities.
On the contrary there are inclinations of Emnities, and they are as it were the odium, and
anger, indignation, and a certain kind of obstinate contrariety of nature, so that any thing
shuns its contrary, and drives it away out of its presence. Such kinds of inclinations hath
Rhubarb against Choller [choler], Treacle against poison, the Saphir [sapphire] Stone
against hot biles [boils], and feavorish [feverish] heats, and diseases of the eyes; the
Amethyst against drunkenness, the Jasper against Flux of blood, and offensive
imaginations, the Emrald [emerald], and Agnus Castus against Lust, Achates against
poison, Piony [peony] against the Falling sickness, Corall against the ebullition of black
Choller [choler], and pains of the stomack [stomach]. The Topaze against spirituall heats,
such as are covetousness, lust, and all manner of excesses of love. The like inclination is
there also of Pismire [ants] against the Hearb [herb] Origanum [origano], and the wing of
a Bat, and the heart of a Lapwing, from the presence of which they flie [fly]. Also
Origanum [origano] is contrary to a certain poisonous fly, which cannot endure the Sun,
and resists Salamanders, and loathes Cabbage with such a deadly hatred, that they destroy
one the other; so Cucumbers hate oile, and will run themselves into a ring least they
should touch it. And it is said that the Gall of a Crow makes men afraid, and drives them
sway from where it is, as also certain other things; so a Diamond doth disagree with the
Loadstone, that being set by it, it will not suffer Iron to be drawn to it; and sheep fly from
Frog-parsley as from some deadly thing: and that which is more wonderfull, nature hath
pictured the sign of this death in the livers of sheep, in which the very figure of Frog-
parsley being described, doth naturally appear; So Goats do so hate garden basil, as if
there were nothing more pernicious. And again, amongst Animals, Mice, and Weesels
[weasels] do disagree; whence it is said that Mice will not touch Cheese, if the brains of a
Weesel [weasel] be put in the rennet, and besides that the Cheese will not be corrupt with
age. So a Lizard is so contrary to Scorpions, that it makes them afraid with its very sight,
as also it puts them into a cold sweat; therefore they are killed with the oile of them,
which oile also cures the wounds made by Scorpions. There is also an enmity betwixt
Scorpions, and Mice: wherefore if a Mouse be applyed to a prick or wound made by a
Scorpion, it cures it, as it is reported. There is also an enmity betwixt Scorpions, and
Stalabors, Aspes, and Waspes. It is reported also that nothing is so much an enemy to
Snakes as Crabs, and that if Swine be hurt therewith they eat them, and are cured. The
Sun also being in Cancer, Serpents are tormented. Also the Scorpion, and Crocodile kil
[kill] one the other; and if the Bird Ibis doth but touch a crocodile with one of his
feathers, he makes him immovable; the Bird called Bustard flies away at the sight of a
horse; and a Hart runs away at the sight of a Ram, as also of a Viper. An Elephant
trembles at the hearing of the grunting of a Hog, so doth a Lyon [lion] at the sight of a
Cock: And Panthers will not touch them that are annointed [anointed] all over with the
broth of a Hen, especially if Garlick hath been boiled in it. There is also enmity betwixt
Foxes, and Swans, Buls [bulls], and Daws [jackdaws]. Amongst Birds also some are at a
perpetuall strife one with another, as also with other Animals, as Daws [jackdaws], and
Owles, the Kite, and Crows, the Turtle, and Ring-taile, Egepis, and Eagles, Harts, and
Dragons. Also amongst Water Animals there is enmity, as betwixt Dolphins, and
Whirpools, Mullets, and Pikes, Lampreys, and Congers: Also the fish called Pourcontrel
makes the Lobster so much afraid, that the Lobster seeing the other but neer him, is
struck dead. The Lobster, and Conger tear one the other. The Civet Cat is said to stand so
in awe of the Panther, that he hath no power to resist him, or touch his skin: and they say
that if the skins of both of them be hanged up one against the other, the haires of the
Panthers skin fall off. And Orus Apollo saith in his Hieroglyphicks, if any one be girt
about with the skin of the Civet Cat, that he may pass safely through the middle of his
enemies, and not at all be afraid. Also the Lamb is very much afraid of the Wolf, and flies
from him. And they say that if the taile, or skin, or head of a Wolf be hanged upon the
sheep-coate, the sheep are much troubled, and cannot eat their meat for fear. And Pliny
makes mention of a Bird, called Marlin, that breaks Crows Eggs; whose young are so
annoyed by the Fox that she also will pinch, and pull the Foxes whelps, and the Fox her
self also: which when the Crows see, they help the Fox against her, as against a common
enemy. The litle Bird called a Linnet living in Thistles, hates Asses, because they eat the
Flowers of Thistles. Also there is such a bitter enmity betwixt the litle bird called Esalon,
and the Asse, that their blood will not mix together, and that at the braying of the Asse
both the eggs and young of the Esalon perish. There is also such a disagreement betwixt
the Olive-tree and a Harlot, that if she Plant it, it will either be alwayes unfruitfull, or
altogether wither. A Lyon [lion] fears nothing so much as fired Torches, and will be
tamed by nothing so much as by these: and the Wolf fears neither sword, nor spear, but a
stone, by the throwing of which a wound being made, worms breed in the Wolf. A Horse
fears a Camell, so that he cannot endure to see so much as his picture. An Elephant when
he rageth, is quieted by seeing of a Cock. A Snake is afraid of a man that is naked, but
pursues a man that is clothed. A mad Bull is tamed by being tyed to a Fig-tree. Amber
draws all things to it besides Garden Basill, and those things, which are smeared with
oile, betwixt which there is a kinde of a naturall Antipathy.
Chapter xix. How the Vertues of things are to be tryed and found out,
which are in them specifically, or in any one Individuall by way of speciall
gift.
Moreover thou must consider that the Vertues of things are in some things according to
the species, as boldness, and courage in a Lyon [lion], & Cock: fearfulness in a Hare, or
Lamb, ravenousness in a Wolf, treachery, and deceitfulness in a Fox, flattery in a Dog,
covetousness in a Crow, and Daw [jackdaw], pride in a Horse, anger in a Tygre [tiger],
and Boar, sadness, and melancholy in a Cat, lust in a sparrow, and so of the rest. For the
greatest part of naturall Vertues doth follow the species. Yet some are in things
individually; as there be some men which do so wonderfully abhor the sight of a Cat, that
they cannot look upon her without quaking; which fear it is manifest is not in them as
they are men. And Avicen tels of a man that lived in his time, whom all poisonous things
did shun, all of them dying, which did by chance bite him, he himself not being hurt, and
Albertus reports that in a City of the Ubians he saw a wench who would catch Spiders to
eat them, and being much pleased with such a kind of meat, was wonderfully nourished
therewith. So is boldness in a Harlot, fearfulness in a Thief. And upon this account it is
that Philosophers say, that any particular thing that never was sick, is good against any
manner of sickness: therefore they say that a bone of a dead man, who never had a feavor
[fever], being laid upon the patient, frees him of his quartane. There are also many
singular vertues infused into particular things by Celestiall bodies, as we have shewed
before.
Chapter xx. That naturall Vertues are in some things throughout their
whole substance, and in other things in certain parts, and members.
Again thou must consider, that the vertues of things are in some things in the whole (i.e.)
the whole substance of them, or in all their parts, as that little fish Echeneis, which is said
to stop a ship by its meer touch, this it doth not do according to any particular part, but
according to the whole substance. So the Civet Cat hath this in its whole substance, that
Dogs by the very touch of his shadow hold their peace. So Salendine is good for the
sight, not according to any one but all its parts, not more in the root then in the leaves,
and seeds; and so of the rest. But some vertues are in things according to some parts of it,
viz. only in the tongue, or eyes, or some other members, and parts; so in the eyes of a
Basilisk, is a most violent power to kill men, assoon as they see them: the like power is
there in the eyes of the Civet Cat, which makes any Animall that it hath looked upon, to
stand still, to be amazed, and not able to move it self. The like vertue is there in the eyes
of some Wolfes [wolves], which if they see a man first, make him amazed, and so hoarse,
that if he would cry out, he hath not the use of his voice: Of this Virgil makes mention,
when he sings,
Moeris is dumb, hath lost his voice, and why?
The Wolf on Moeris first hath cast his eye.
So also there were some certain women in Scythia, and amongst the Illyrians, and
Triballians, who as often as they looked angrily upon any man, were said to slay him.
Also we read of a certain people of Rhodes, called Telchines, who corrupted all things
with their sight, wherefore Jupiter drowned them. Therefore Witches, when they would
after this manner work by witchcraft, use the eyes of such kind of Animals in their waters
for the eyes, for the like effects. In like manner do Pismires [ants] fly from the heart of a
Lapwing, not from the head, foot, or eyes. So the gall of Lizards being bruised in Water
is said to gather Weesels [weasels] together, not the taile or the head of it; and the gall of
Goats put into the Earth in a brazen Vesel [vessel], gathers Frogs together; and a Goats
liver is an enemy to Butterflies and all Maggots, and dogs shun them that have the heart
of a Dog about them, and Foxes will not touch those poultry that have eaten the liver of a
Fox. So divers things have divers vertues dispersed variously through several parts, as
they are from above infused into them according to the diversity of things to be received;
as in a mans body the bones receive nothing but life, the eyes sight, the ears hearing. And
there is in mans body a certain little bone, which the Hebrews call LVZ, of the bigness of
a pulse that is husked, which is subject to no corruption, neither is it overcome with Fire,
but is alwaies preserved unhurt, out of which, as they say, as a Plant out of the seed, our
Animall bodies shall in the Resurrection of the dead spring up. And these vertues are not
cleared by reason, but by experience.
Chapter xxi. Of the Vertues of things which are in them only in their life
time, and such as remain in them even after their death.
Moreover we must know that there are some properties in things only whilest they live,
and some that remain after their death. So the litle fish Echeneis stops the ships, and the
Basilisk, and Catablepa kill with their sight, when they are alive; but when they are dead
do no such thing. So they say that in the Colick, if a live Duck be applyed to the belly, it
takes away the pain, and her self dies: like to this is that which Archytas sayes. If you
take a heart newly taken out of an Animall, and whilest it is yet warm, and hang it upon
one that hath a quartane feavor [fever], it drives it away. So if any one swallow the heart
of a Lapwing, or a Swallow, or a Weesel [weasel], or a Mole whilest it is yet warm with
naturall heat, it shall be helpfull to him for remembring [remembering], understanding,
and foretelling: Hence is this generall rule, viz. That whatsoever things are taken out of
Animals, whether they be Stones, any Member, Excrements, as Haire, Dung, Nailes, they
must be taken from those Animals, whilest they be yet living; and if it be possible, that so
they may be alive afterwards. Whence they say, when you take the tongue of a Frog, you
must put the Frog into the water again; and if you take the tooth of a Wolf, you must not
kill the Wolf; and so of the rest. So writes Democritus, if any one take out the tongue of a
water-Frog, yet living, no other part of the body sticking to it, and she be let go into the
Water again, & lay it upon the place where the heart beats, of a woman, she shall answer
truly whatsoever you ask her. Also they say, that if the eyes of a Frog be before Sun
rising bound to the sick party, and the Frog be let go again blind into the Water, they will
drive away tertian ague; as also that they will, being bound with the flesh of a
Nightingale in the skin of a Hart, keep one alwaies watchfull without sleep. Also the ray
of the fork fish being bound to the Navil [navel], is said to make a woman have an easie
travel, if it be taken from it alive, and it put into the Sea again. So they say the right eye
of a Serpent being applyed, doth help the watering of the eyes, if the Serpent be let go
alive. And there is a certain fish, or great Serpent called Myrus, whose eye, if it be pulled
out, and bound to the forehead of the patient, is said to cure the inflamation
[inflammation] of the eyes, and that the eye of the fish grows again, and that he is taken
blind that did not let the fish go. Also the teeth of all Serpents, being taken out whilest
they are alive, and hanged about the patient, are said to cure the quartane. So doth the
tooth of a Mole taken out whilest she is alive, being afterwards let go, cure the tooth-ach
[toothache]; and Dogs will not bark at those that have the taile of a Weesel [weasel] that
is escaped. And Democritus relates that the tongue of a Chameleon, if it be taken from
her alive, doth conduce to a good success in trials, and is profitable for women that are in
travel, if it be about the outside of the house, for you must take heed that it be not brought
into the house, because that would be most dangerous; Moreover there be some
properties that remain after death: and of these the Platonists say, that they are things in
which the Idea of the matter is less swallowed up, in these, even after death that which is
immortall in them, doth not cease to work wonderfull things. So in the Hearbs [herbs],
and Plants pulled asunder, and dryed, that vertue is quick, and operative which was
infused at first into them by the Idea. Thence it is, that as the Eagle all her life time doth
overcome all other birds: so also her feathers after her death destroy, and consume the
feathers of all other birds. Upon the same account doth a Lyons [lion's] skin destroy all
other skins: and the skin of the Civet Cat destroyes the skin of the Panther: and the skin
of a Wolf corrodes the skin of a Lamb: And some of these do not do it by way of a
corporeall contact, but also sometimes by their very sound. So a drum made of the skin of
a Wolf, makes a drum made of a Lamb skin not to sound. Also a drum made of the skin
of the fish called Rotchet, drives away all creeping things, at what distance soever the
sound of it is heard: and the strings of an instrument made of the guts [intestines] of a
Wolf, and being strained [strung] upon a Harp, or Lute with strings made of sheeps guts,
will make no harmony.
Chapter xxii. How inferior things are subjected to superior bodies, and
how the bodies, the actions, and dispositions of men are ascribed to Stars,
and Signes.
It is manifest that all things inferiour are subject to the superiour, and after a manner (as
saith Proclus) they are one in the other, viz. in inferiour are superiour, and in superiour
are inferiour: so in the Heaven are things Terrestriall, but as in their cause, and in a
Celestiall manner; and in the Earth are things Celestiall, but after a Terrestriall manner, as
in an effect. So we say that there be here certain things which are Solary, and certain
which are Lunary, in which the Sun, and Moon make a strong impression of their vertue.
Whence it is that these kind of things receive more operations, and properties, like to
those of the Stars, & Signes which they are under: So we know that Solary things respect
the heart, & head, by reason that Leo is the house of the Sun, and Aries the exaltation of
the Sun: so things under Mars are good for the head, and testicles, by reason of Aries, and
Scorpio. Hence they whose senses faile, and heads ake [ache] by reason of drunkenness,
if they put their testicles into cold Water, or wash them with Vinegar, find present help.
But in reference to these it is necessary to know how mans body is distributed to Planets,
& Signes. Know therefore that according to the doctrine of the Arabians, the Sun rules
over the brain, heart, the thigh, the marrow, the right eye, and the spirit; also the tongue,
the mouth, and the rest of the Organs of the senses, as well internall as externall; also the
hands, feet, legs, nerves, and the power of imagination. That Mercury rules over the
spleen, stomack [stomach], bladder, womb, and right ear, as also the faculty of the
common sense. That Saturn rules over the liver and fleshy part of the stomack [stomach].
That Jupiter over the belly, and navill [navel], whence it is written by the Ancients, that
the effigies of a navil [navel] was laid up in the temple of Jupiter Hammon. Also some
attribute to him the ribs, breast, bowels, blood, arms, and the right hand, and left ear, and
the powers natural. And some set Mars over the blood, and veins, the kidnies [kidneys],
the bag of the gall [gall bladder], the buttocks, the back, motion of the sperm, and the
irascible power. Again they set Venus over the kidnies [kidneys], the testicles, the
privities, the womb, the seed, and concupiscible power; as also the flesh, fat, belly,
breast, navill [navel], and all such parts as server to venerall [venereal] acts, also the Os
sacrum, the back bone [backbone], and loins; as also the head, mouth, with which they
give a kiss, as a token of love. Now the Moon, although she may challenge the whole
body, and every member thereof according to the variety of the Signes: yet more
particularly they ascribe to her the brain, lungs, marrow of the back bone [backbone], the
stomack [stomach], the menstrues, and all other excrements, and the left eye, as also the
power of increasing. But Hermes saith, That there are seven holes in the head of an
Animall, distributed to the seven Planets, viz. the right ear to Saturne, the left to Jupiter,
the right nostrell [nostril] to Mars, the left to Venus, the right eye to the Sun, the left to
the Moon, and the mouth to Mercury. The severall Signes also of the Zodiack take care of
their members. So Aries governs the head, and face, Taurus the neck, Gemini the armes,
and shoulders, Cancer the breast, lungs, stomack [stomach], and armes, Leo heart,
stomack [stomach], liver, and back, Virgo the bowels, and bottome of the stomack
[stomach], Libra the kidnies [kidneys], thighs, and buttocks, Scorpius [Scorpio] the
genitals, the privities, and womb, Sagittarius the thigh, and groins, Capricornus the
knees, Aquarius the legs and shins, Pisces the feet. And as the triplicities of these Signes
answer one the other, and agree in Celestials, so also they agree in the members, which is
sufficiently manifest by experience, because with the coldness of the feet, the belly, and
breast are affected, which members answer the same triplicity; whence it is, if a medicine
be applyed to the one, it helps the other, as by the warming of the feet, the pain of the
belly ceaseth. Remember therefore this order, and know, that things which are under any
one of the Planets, have a certain particular aspect, or inclination to those members that
are attributed to that Planet, and especially to the houses, and exaltations thereof. For the
rest of the dignities, as those triplicities, and markes, and face, are of litle account in this;
upon this account therefore Piony [peony], Balme, Clove-gilliflowers, Citron-pils, sweet
Marjoram, Cynnamon [cinnamon], Saffron, Lignum Aloes, Frankincense, Amber, Musk,
and Myrrh help the head, and heart; by reason of sol [the Sun], Aries, and Leo: so doth
Rib-wort, the Hearb [herb] of Mars, help the head, and testicles by reason of Aries, and
Scorpio: and so of the rest. Also all things under Saturne conduce to sadness, and
melancholly [melancholy]; those under Jupiter to mirth, and honour; those under Mars to
boldness, contention, and anger; those under the Sun to glory, victory and courage; those
under Venus to love, lust, and concupiscence; those under Mercury to Eloquence; those
under the Moon to a common life. Also all the actions, and dispositions of men are
distributed according to the Planets. For Saturne governes old men, Monkes, melancholly
[melancholy] men, and hid treasures; and those things which are obtained with long
journies [journeys], and difficulty; but Jupiter, those that are Religious, Prelates, Kings,
and Dukes, and such kind of gains that are got lawfully: Mars rules over Barbers,
Chirurgeons, Physitians [physicians], Sergeants, Executioners, Butchers, all that make
fires, Bakers, Souldiers [soldiers], who are every where called Martial men. Also do the
other Stars signifie their office, as they are described in the books of Astrologers.
Chapter xxiii. How we shall know what Stars naturall things are under,
and what things are under the Sun, which are called Solary.
Now it is very hard to know, what Star, or Signe every thing is under: yet it is known
through the imitation of their rayes, or motion, or figure of the superiours. Also some of
them are known by their colours and odours, also some by the effects of their operations,
answering to some Stars. So then Solary things, or things under the power of the Sun are,
amongst Elements, the lucid flame; in the humours, the purer blood, and spirlt of life;
amongst tasts [tastes], that which is quick, mixed with sweetness. Amongst Metals, Gold
by reason of its splendor, and its receiving that from the Sun which makes it cordiall. And
amongst stones, they which resemble the rayes of the Sun by their golden sparklings, as
doth the glittering stone Aetites which hath power against the Falling-sickness, and
poisons: so also the stone, which is called the eye of the Sun, being of a figure like to the
Apple of the eye, from the middle whereof shines forth a ray, it comforts the brain, and
strengthens the sight; So the Carbuncle which shines by night, hath a vertue against all
aiery, and vaporous poison: so the Chrysolite stone is of a light green colour, in which,
when it is held against the Sun, there shines forth a golden Star; and this comforts those
parts that serve for breathing, & helps those that be Asthmaticall, and if it be bored
through, and the hole filled with the Mane of an Asse, and bound to the left arme, it
drives away idle imaginations, and melancholy fears, and puts away foolishness: So the
stone called Iris, which is like Crystall in colour, being often found with six corners,
when under some roof part of it is held against the rayes of the Sun, and the other part is
held in the shadow, it gathers the rayes of the Sun into it self, which, whilest it sends
them forth, by way of reflection, makes a Rain-bow [rainbow] appear on the opposite
wall. Also the Stone Heliotropion [heliotrope] green like the Jasper, or Emrald [emerald],
beset with red specks [i.e. bloodstone], makes a man constant, renowned, and famous,
also it conduceth to long life: And the vertue of it indeed is most wonderfull upon the
beams of the Sun, which it is said to turn into blood (i.e.) to appear of the colour of blood,
as if the Sun were eclypsed [eclipsed], viz. When it is joyned to the juice of a Hearb
[herb] of the same name, and be put into a vessell of Water: There is also another vertue
of it more wonderfull, and that is upon the eyes of men, whose sight it doth so dim, and
dazel [dazzle], that it doth not suffer him that carries it to see it, & this it doth not do
without the help of the Hearb [herb] of the same name, which also is called Heliotropium
[heliotrope], (i.e.) following the Sun. These vertues doth Albertus Magnus, and William
of Paris confirm in their writings. The Hyacinth also hath a vertue from the Sun against
poisons, and pestiferous vapours; it makes him that carries it to be safe, and acceptable; it
conduceth also to riches, and wit, it strengthens the heart; being held in the mouth, it doth
wonderfully cheer up the mind. Also there is the stone Pyrophylus, of a red mixture,
which Albertus Magnus saith Æsculapius, makes mention of in one of his Epistles unto
Octavius Augustus, saying, that there is a certain poison so wonderfull cold, which
preserves the heart of man being taken out from burning, so that if for any time it be put
into the Fire, it is turned into a stone, and this is that stone which is called Pyrophylus,
from the fire. It hath a wonderfull vertue against poison, and it makes him that carries it,
to be renowned and dreadfull to his enemies. But above all, that stone is most Solary,
which Apollonius is reported to have found, and which is called Pantaura, which draws
other stones to it, as the Loadstone doth Iron, most powerfull against all poisons; it is
called by some Pantherus, because it is spotted like the beast called the Panther. It is
therefore also called Pantochras, because it contains all colours. Aaron cals it Evanthum.
There are also other Solary stones, as the Topazius, Chrysopassus, the Rubine, and
Balagius. So also is Auripigmentum, and things of a golden colour, and very lucid.
Amongst plants also and trees, those are Solary, which turn towards the Sun, as the
Marygold [marigold], and those which fold in their leaves when the Sun is neer upon
setting, but when it riseth unfold their leaves by little and little. The Lote-tree also is
Solary, as is manifest by the figure of the fruit & leaves. So also Piony [peony],
Sallendine, Balme, Ginger, Gentian, Dittany, & Vervin [vervain], which is of use in
prophecying [prophesying], and expiations, as also driving away evill spirits. The Bay-
tree also is consecrated to Phoebus, so is the Cedar, the Palm tree, the ash, the Ivie [ivy],
and Vine, and whatsoever repell poisons, and lightnings, and those things which never
fear the extremities of the Winter. Solary also are Mint, Mastick, Zedoary, Saffron,
Balsome [balsam], Amber, Musk, Yellow honey, Lignum aloes, Cloves, Cinnamon,
Calamus, Aromaticus, Pepper, Frankincense, sweet Marjoram, also Libanotis, which
Orpheus cals the sweet perfume of the Sun. Amongst Animals those are Solary which are
magnanimous, couragious [courageous], ambitious of victory, and renown: as the Lyon
[lion], King of beasts, the Crocodile, the spotted Wolf, the Ram, the Boar, the Bull, King
of the herd, which was by the Egyptians at Heliopolis dedicated to the Sun, which they
called Verites; and an Ox was consecrated to Apis in Memphi [Memphis], and in
Herminthus a Bull by the name of Pathis. The Wolf also was consecrated to Apollo, and
Latona. Also the beast called Baboon is Solary, which twelve times in a day, viz. every
hour barks, and in time of Equinoctium [equinox] pisseth [urinates] twelve times every
hour: the same also it doth in the night, whence the Egyptians did Engrave him upon their
Fountains. Also amongst birds these are Solary, The Phoenix, being but one of that kind,
and the Eagle, the Queen of birds, also the Vulture, the Swan, and those which sing at the
rising Sun, and as it were call upon it to rise, as the Cock, Crow, also the Hawk, which
because it in the Divinity of the Egyptians is an emblem of the spirit, and light, is by
Porphyrius [Porphyry] reckoned amongst the Solary birds. Moreover, all such things as
have some resemblance of the works of the Sun, as Worms shining in the night, and the
Betle [beetle], which is a creature that lies under Cow-dung, also according to Appious
interpretation, such whose eyes are changed according to the course of the Sun, are
accounted Solary, and those things which come of them. And amongst fish, the Sea Calf
is chiefly Solary, who doth resist lightning, also shell fish, and the fish called Pulmo, both
which shine in the night, and the fish called Stella [i.e. starfish] for his parching heat, and
the fish called Strombi [i.e. strombite or sea-snail], that follow their King, and Margari
[i.e. oyster], which also have a King, and being dryed, are hardened into a stone of a
golden colour.
Chapter xxiv. What things are Lunary, or under the power of the Moon.
These things are Lunary, amongst the Elements, viz. the Earth, then the Water, as well
that of the Sea, as of the Rivers, and all moist things, as the moisture of Trees, and
Animals, especially they which are White, as the Whites of Eggs, fat, sweat, flegme
[phlegm], and the superfluities of bodies. Amongst tasts [tastes], salt, and insipid;
amongst Metals, Silver; amongst stones, Crystall, the Silver Marcasite, and all those
stones that are White, and Green. Also the stone Selenites (i.e.) Lunary, shining from a
white body, with a yellow brightness, imitating the motion of the Moon, having in it the
figure of the Moon which daily increaseth, or decreaseth as doth the Moon. Also Pearls,
which are generated in shels [shells] of fishes from the droppings of Water, also the Berill
[beryl]. Amongst Plants and Trees, these are Lunary, as the Selenotropion, which turns
towards the Moon, as doth the Heliotropion towards the Sun, and the Palme tree sends
forth a bough at every rising of the Moon; Hyssope also, and Rosemary, Agnus Castu,
and the Olive-tree, are Lunary. Also the Hearb [herb] Chinosta, which increaseth, and
decreaseth with the Moon, viz. in substance, and number of leaves, not only in Sap, and
vertue, which indeed is in some sort common to all Plants, except Onions, which are
under the influence of Mars, which have contrary properties; As amongst flying things
the Saturnine bird, called a Quaile is a great enemy to the Moon and Sun. Lunary
Animals are such as delight to be in mans company, and such as do naturally excell in
love, or hatred, as all kinds of Dogs: The Chameleon also is Lunary, which alwaies
assumes a colour according to the variety of the colour of the object: as the Moon
changeth her nature according to the variety of the Signe which it is found in. Lunary also
are Swine, Hinds, Goats, and all Animals whatsoever, that observe, and imitate the
motion of the Moon: As the Baboon, and Panther, which is said to have a spot upon her
shoulder like the Moon, increasing into a roundness, and having horns that bend inwards.
Cats also are Lunary, whose eyes become greater or less, according to the course of the
Moon: and those things which are of like nature, as Menstruous blood, of which are made
wonderfull and strange things by Magicians; The Civet-Cat also changing her sex, being
obnoxious to divers Sorceries, and all Animals that live in water as well as on land: as
Otters, and such as prey upon fish. Also all Monstrous beasts, such as without any
manifest seed are equivocally generated, as Mice, which sometimes are generated by
Coition, sometimes of the putrefaction of the Earth. Amongst fowle, Geese, Ducks,
Didoppers, and all kind of watery fowl as prey upon fish, as the Heron, and those that are
equivocally produced, as Wasps of the Carkases [carcasses] of horses: Bees of the
putrefaction of Cows, small Flies of putrefied wine, and Betles [beetles] of the flesh of
Asses; but most Lunary of all is the two-horned Betle [beetle], horned after the manner of
a Bull: which digs under Cow-dung, and there remaines for the space of twenty eight
daies, in which time the Moon measures the whole Zodiack, and in the twenty ninth day,
when it thinks there will be a conjunction of their brightness, it opens the dung and casts
it into Water, from whence then come Betles [beetles]. Amongst fish these are Lunary,
Ælurus, whose eyes are changed according to the course of the Moon, and whatsoever
observes the motion of the Moon, as the Tortoise, the Echeneis, Crabs, Oisters [oysters],
Cockles, and Frogs.
Chapter xxv. What things are Saturnine, or under the power of Saturne.
Saturnine things, amongst Elements, are Earth, and also Water: amongst humors, black
Choller [choler] that is moist, as well natural, as adventitious, adust Choller [choler]
excepted. Amongst tasts [tastes], soure, tart, and dead. Amongst Metals, Lead, and Gold,
by reason of its weight, and the golden Marcasite. Amongst stones, the Onix [onyx], the
Ziazaa, the Camonius, the Saphir [sapphire], the brown Jasper, the Chalcedon, the
Loadstone, and all dark, weighty, earthy things. Amongst Plants, and Trees the Daffodill,
Dragon-wort [drsgon's wort], Rue, Cummin [cumin], Hellebor [Hellebore], the tree from
whence Benzoine comes, Mandrake, Opium, and those things which stupifie, and those
things which are never sown, and never bear fruit, and those which bring forth berries of
a dark colour, and black fruit, as the black Fig-tree, the Pine-tree, the Cypress-tree, and a
certain tree used at burials, which never springs afresh with berries, rough, of a bitter tast
[taste], of a strong smell, of a black shadow, yielding a most sharp pitch, bearing a most
unprofitable fruit, never dies with age, deadly, dedicated to Pluto, as is the Hearb [herb]
pas-flower, with which they were wont Anciently to strow the graves before they put the
dead bodies into them, wherefore it was lawfull to make their Garlands at feasts with all
Hearbs [herbs], and Flowers besides pas-flowers, because it was mournfull, and not
conducing to mirth. Also all creeping Animals, living apart, and solitary, nightly, sad,
contemplative, dull, covetous, fearfull, melancholly [melancholy], that take much pains,
slow, that feed grosly, and such as eat their young. Of these kinds therefore are the Ape,
the Cat, the Hog, the Mule, the Camel, the Bear, the Mole, the Asses, the Wolf, the Hare,
the Dragon, the Basilisk, the Toad, all Serpents, and creeping things, Scorpions, Pismires
[ants], and such things as proceed from putrefaction in the Earth, in Water, or in the
ruines of houses, as Mice, and many sorts of Vermin. Amongst birds those are Saturnine,
which have long necks, and harsh voices, as Cranes, Estriches [ostriches], and Peacocks,
which are dedicated to Saturn, and Juno. Also the scrich-Owle [screech-owl], the horn-
Owle [horned-owl], the Bat, the Lapwing, the Crow, the Quaile, which is the most
envious bird of all. Amongst fishes, the Eel, living apart from all other fish; the Lamprey,
the Dog-fish, which devours her young, also the Tortoise, Oisters [oysters], Cockles, to
which may be added Sea-spunges [sea-sponges], and all such things as come of them.
Chapter xxvi. What things are under the power of Jupiter, and are called
Jovial.
Things under Jupiter, amongst Elements, are the Aire: amongst humors, blood, and the
spirit of life, also all things which respect the encrease [increase], nourishment, and
vegetation of the life. Amongst tasts [tastes] such as are sweet, and pleasant. Amongst
Metals, Tin, Silver, and Gold, by reason of their temperateness: Amongst stones, the
Hyacinth, Beril [beryl], Saphir [sapphire], the Emrald [emerald], green Jasper, and aiery
colours: Amongst Plants and Trees, Sea-green, Garden Basil, Bugloss, Mace, Spike,
Mints, Mastick, Elicampane, the Violet, Darnell, Henbane, the Poplar tree, and those
which are called lucky trees, as the Oke [oak], the tree æsculus [horse-chestnut] which is
like an Oke [oak] but much bigger, the Holm tree, the Beech tree, the Hasle [hazel] tree,
the Service tree, the white Fig tree, the Pear tree, the Apple tree, the Vine, the Plum tree,
the Ash, the Dog-tree, and the Olive tree, and also Oile. Also all manner of Corn, as
Barley, Wheat, also Raisins, Licorish [licorice], Sugar, and all such things whose
sweetness is manifest, and subtile, partaking somewhat of an astringent, and sharp tast
[taste], as are Nuts, Almonds, Pine-apples [pineapples], Filberds [filberts], Pistake Nuts
[pistachios], roots of Peony, Mirabolaus, Rhubarb, and Manna, Orpheus adds Storax.
Amongst Animals such as have some stateliness, and wisdom in them, and those which
are mild, well trained up, and of good dispositions, as the Hart and Elephant, and those
which are gentle, as Sheep and Lambs: Amongst birds, those that are of a temperate
complexion, as Hens, together with the Yolk of their Eggs. Also the Partridge, the
Pheasant, the Swallow, the Pellican [pelican], the Cuckow [cuckoo], the Stork, birds
given to a kind of devotion which are Emblemes of gratitude. The Eagle is dedicated to
Jupiter, she is the Ensigne of Emperours, and an Embleme of Justice, and Clemency.
Amongst fish, the Dolphin, the fish called Anchia [anchovy], the Sheath fish, by reason
of his devoutness.
Chapter xxvii. What things are under the power of Mars, and are called
Martial.
These things are Martiall, amongst Elements, Fire, together with all adust, and sharp
things: Amongst humours, Choller [choler]; also bitter tasts [tastes], tart, and burning the
tongue, and causing tears: Amongst Metals, Iron, and red Brass; and all fiery, red, and
sulphureous things: Amongst Stones the Diamond, Loadstone, the Blood-stone
[bloodstone], the Jasper, the stone that consists of divers kinds, and the Amethist
[amethyst]. Amongst Plants, and Trees, Hellebor, Garlick, Euphorbium, Cartabana,
Armoniack, Radish, the Laurell, Wolfs-bane [wolfsbane], Scammony, and all such as are
poysonous [poisonous], by reason of too much heat, and those which are beset round
about with prickles, or by touching the skin, burn it, prick it, or make it swell, as Cardis,
the Nettle, Crow-foot, and such as being eaten cause tears, as Onyons [onions],
Ascolonia, Leeks, Mustardseed, and all thorny Trees, and the Dog-tree, which is
dedicated to Mars. And all such Animals as are warlike, ravenous, bold, and of clear
fancy, as the Horse, Mule, Goat, Kid, Wolf, Libard [leopard], the wild Ass; Serpents also,
and Dragons full of displeasure and poyson [poison]; also all such as are offensive to
men, as Gnats, Flies, Baboon, by reason of his anger. All birds that are ravenous, devour
flesh, break bones, as the Eagle, the Faulcon [falcon], the Hawk, the Vultur [vulture]; and
those which are called the fatall Birds, as the Horn-Owl, the Scrich-Owl [screech-owl],
Castrels, Kites, and such as are hungry, and ravenous, and such as make a noise in their
swallowing, as Crows, Daws, the Pie, which above all the rest is dedicated to Mars. And
amongst Fishes, the Pike, the Barbell, the Fork-fish, the Fish that hath horns like a Ram,
the Sturgeon, the Glacus, all which are great devourers, and ravenous.
Chapter xxviii. What things are under the power of Venus, and are called
Venereall.
These things are under Venus, amongst Elements, Aire, and Water; amongst humours,
Flegm [phlegm], with Blood, Spirit, and Seed; amongst tasts [tastes], those which are
sweet, unctuous, and delectable; amongst Metals, Silver, and Brass, both yellow, and red;
amongst Stones, the Berill [beryl], Chrysolite, Emrald [emerald], Saphir [sapphire], green
Jasper, Corneola [carnelian], the stone Aetites, the Lazull [lazuli] stone, Corall, and all of
a fair, various, white, and green Colour; amongst Plants and Trees the Vervin [vervain],
Violet, Maidenhaire, Valerian, which by the Arabian is called Phu; also Thyme, the gum
Ladanum, Amber-grise [ambergris], Musk, Sanders [sandalwood], Coriander, and all
sweet perfumes, and delightfull, and sweet fruits, as sweet Pears, Figs, Pomegranats
[pomegranates], which the Poets say was, in Cyprus, first sown by Venus. Also the Rose
of Lucifer was dedicated to her, also the Myrtle tree of Hesperus. Moreover all luxurious,
delicious Animals, and of a strong love, as Dogs, Conies, stinking Sheep, and Goats, both
female, and male, which generates sooner then any other Animall, for they say that he
couples after the seventh day of his being brought forth; also the Bull for his disdain, and
the Calf for his wantonness. Amongst birds the Swan, the Wagtail, the Swallow, the
Pellican [pelican], the Burgander, which are very loving to their yong [young]. Also the
Crow, and Pigeon, which is dedicated to Venus, and the Turtle [turtledove], one whereof
was Commanded to be offered at the purification, after bringing forth. The Sparrow also
was dedicated to Venus, which was Commanded in the Law to be used in the purification,
after the Leprosie [leprosy], a martiall disease, then which nothing was of more force to
resist it. Also the Egyptians called the Eagle Venus, because she is prone to Venery, for
after she hath been trod thirteen times a day, if the Male call her, she runs to him again.
Amongst fishes, these are Venereall, the lustfull Pilchards, the letcherous [lecherous]
Gilthead, the Whiting for her love to her yong [young], Crab fighting for his Mate, and
Tithymallus for its fragrance, and sweet smell.
Chapter xxix. What things are under the power of Mercury, and are called
Mercuriall.
Things under Mercury are these; amongst Elements, Water, although it moves all things
indistinctly; amongst humors, those especially which are mixed, as also the Animall
spirit; amongst tasts [tastes] those that are various, strange, and mixed: amongst Metals,
Quick-silver, Tin, the Slver Marcasite; amongst stones, the Emrald [emerald], Achates
[agates], red Marble, Topaze, and those which are of divers colours, and various figures
naturally, & those that are artificiall, as glass, & those which have a colour mixed with
yellow, and green. Amongst Plants, and Trees, the Hazle [hazel], Five-leaved-grass, the
Hearb [herb] Mercury, Fumitary, Pimpernell, Marjoram, Parsly [parsley], and such as
have shorter and less leaves, being compounded of mixed natures, and divers colours.
Animals also, that are of quick sence, ingenious, strong, inconstant, swift, and such as
become easily acquainted with men, as Dogs, Apes, Foxes, Weesels [weasels], the Hart,
and Mule; and all Animals that are of both sexes, and those which can change their Sex,
as the Hare, Civet-Cat, and such like. Amongst birds, those which are naturally witty,
melodious, and inconstant, as the Linet, Nightingale, Blackbird, Thrush, Lark, the Gnat-
sapper, the bird Calandra, the Parret [parrot], the Pie, the Bird Ibis, the bird Porphyrio,
the black Betle [beetle] with one horn. And amongst fish, the fish called Trochius, which
goes into himself, also Pourcontrell for deceitfulness, and changeableness, and the Fork
fish for its industry; the Mullet also that shakes off the bait on the hook with his taile.
Chapter xxx. That the whole sublunary World, and those things which are
in it, are distributed to Planets.
Moreover whatsoever is found in the whole world is made according to the governments
of the Planets, and accordingly receives its vertue. So in Fire the enlivening light thereof
is under the government of the Sun, the heat of it under Mars, in the Earth, the various
superficies thereof under the Moon, and Mercury; and the starry Heaven, the whole mass
of it under Saturne, but in the middle Elements, Aire is under Jupiter, and Water the
Moon, but being mixed are under Mercury, and Venus. In like manner naturall active
causes observe the Sun, the matter the Moon, the fruitfulness of active causes Jupiter, the
fruitfullness of the matter, Venus, the sudden effecting of any thing, Mars, and Mercury,
that for his vehemency, this for his dexterity, and manifold vertue: But the permanent
continuation of all things is ascribed to Saturne. Also amongst Vegetables, every thing
that bears fruit is from Jupiter, and every thing that bears Flowers is from Venus, all
Seed, and Bark is from Mercury, and all roots from Saturne, and all Wood from Mars,
and leaves from the Moon. Wherefore, all that bring forth fruit, and not Flowers, are of
Saturne and Jupiter, but they that bring forth Flowers, and Seed, and not fruit, are of
Venus, and Mercury; These which are brought forth of their own accord without Seed,
are of the Moon, and Saturn; All beauty is from Venus, all strength from Mars, and every
Planet rules, and disposeth that which is like to it. Also in stones, their weight,
Clamminess, and Sliptickness is of Saturne, their use, and temperament of Jupiter, their
hardness from Mars, their life from the Sun, their beauty and fairness from Venus, their
occult vertue from Mercury, and their common use from the Moon.
Chapter xxxi. How Provinces, and Kingdomes are distributed to Planets.
Moreover the whole Orb of the Earth is distributed by Kingdoms, and Provinces to the
Planets, and Signes: For Macedonia, Thracia, Illyria, Arriana, Gordiana, (many of which
countries are in the lesser Asia) are under Saturne with Capricorn; but with Aquarius,
under him are the Sauromatian Country, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia, Phazania, Media and
Æthiopia [Ethiopia], which Countries for the most part belong to the more inward Asia.
Under Jupiter with Sagittarius are Tuscana, Celtica, Spaine, and happy Arabia: under
him with Pisces, are Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia, Nasamonia, and
Lybia. Mars with Aries governs Britany, France, Germany, Bastarnia, the lower parts of
Syria, Idumea, and Judea: with Scorpio, he rules Syria, Comagena, Cappadocia,
Metagonium, Mauritania, and Getulia. The Sun with Leo governs Italy, Apulia, Sicilia,
Phenicia, Chaldea, & the Orchenians. Venus with Taurus governs the Isles Cyclades, the
Seas of litle Asia, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, Persia: but with Libra she commands the
people of the Island Bractia, of Caspia, of Seres, of Thebais, of Oasis, and of Troglodys.
Mercury with Gemini, rules Hircania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the
lower Egypt: but with Virgo, Greece, Achaia, Creta, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and
Ela, whence they of that place are in Scripture called Elamites. The Moon with Cancer
governs Bithivia, Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, and all Carchedonia.
These we have in this manner gathered from Ptolemies [Ptolemy's] opinion, to which
according to the writings of other Astrologers many more may be added. But he which
knows how to compare these divisions of Provinces according to the divisions of the
Stars, with the Ministery [Ministry] of the ruling Intelligencies, and blessings of the
Tribes of Israel, the lots of the Apostles, and typicall seales of the sacred Scripture, shall
be able to obtain great and propheticall oracles concerning every Region, of things to
come.
Chapter xxxii. What things are under the Signes, the fixed Stars, and their
Images.
The like consideration is to be had in all things concerning the figures of the fixed Stars:
so they will have the Terrestiall [terrestrial] Ram to be under the rule of the Celestiall
Aries: and the Terrestiall Bull, and Ox to be under the Celestiall Taurus. So also that
Cancer should rule over Crabs, and Leo over Lyons [lions]: Virgo over Virgins, and
Scorpio over Scorpions. Capricorn over Goats. Sagittarius over Horses, and Pisces over
Fishes. Also the Celestiall Ursa over Bears, Hydra over Serpents, and the Dog-star over
Dogs, and so of the rest. Now Apuleius distributes certain and peculiar Hearbs [herbs] to
the Signes, and Planets, viz. To Aries the Hearb [herb] Sange [sage], to Taurus Vervine
[vervain] that growes straight, to Gemini Vervine [vervain] that growes bending, to
Cancer Comfrey, to Leo Sowbread, to Virgo Calamint, to Libra Mug-wort, to Scorpio
Scorpion-grass, to Sagittarius Pimpernell, to Capricorn the Dock, to Aquarius Dragon-
wort [dragon's-wort], to Pisces Hart-wort. And to the Planets these, viz. to Saturne Sen-
green, to Jupiter Agrimony, to Mars Sulphur-wort, to the Sun Marygold [marigold], to
Venus Wound-wort, to Mercury Mulleine, to the Moon, Peony. But Hermes, whom
Albertus follows, distributes to the Planets these, viz. to Saturne the Daffodill, to Jupiter
Henbane, to Mars Rib-wort, to the Sun Knotgrass, to Venus Vervine [vervain], to
Mercury Cinquefoile, to the Moon, Goos-foot. We also know by experience that
Asparagus is under Aries, and Garden-basill under Scorpio; For of the shavings of Rams-
horn sowed, comes forth Asparagus, and Garden Basill rubbed betwixt two stones,
produceth Scorpions. Moreover I will according to the doctrine of Hermes, and Thebit
reckon up some of the more eminent Stars, whereof the first is called the head of Algol,
and amongst stones, rules over the Diamond, amongst Plants, black Hellebor, and
Mugwort. The second are the Pleiades, or seven Stars, which amongst stones, rule over
Crystall, and the stone Diodocus; amongst Plants, the Hearb [herb] Diacedon, and
Frankincense, and Fennill [fennel]: and amongst Metals, Quick-silver [quicksilver]. The
third is the Star Aldeboran, which hath under it, amongst stones, the Carbuncle, and
Ruby: amongst Plants, the Milky Thistle, and Matry-silva. The fourth is called the Goat-
Star, which rules, amongst stones, the Saphir [sapphire], amongst Plants, Horehound,
Mint, Mugwort, and Mandrake. The fifth is called the great Dog-star, which amongst
stones, rules over the Berill [beryl]: amongst Plants, Savin, Mugwort and Dragonwort:
and amongst Animals the tongue of a Snake. The sixth is called the lesser Dog-star, and,
amongst stones, rules over Achates [agates]: amongst Plants the Flowers of Marigold,
and Penyroial [pennyroyal]. The seventh is called the Heart of the Lyon, which amongst
stones, rules over the Granate; amongst Plants, Sallendine, Mugwort, and Mastick. The
eighth is the Taile of the lesser Bear, which amongst stones, rules over the Loadstone,
amongst Hearbs [herbs], Succory, whose leaves, and Flowers turn towards the North, also
Mugwort, and the flowers of Perwinckle [periwinkle]; and amongst Animals the tooth of
a Wolf. The ninth is called the Wing of the Crow, under which, amongst stones, are such
stones as are of the Colour of the black Onyx stone: amongst Plants the Bur,
Quadraginus, Henbane, and Comfrey; and amongst Animals the tongue of a Frog. The
tenth is called Spica, which hath under it, amongst stones, the Emrald [emerald]: amongst
Plants, Sage, Trifoile, Perwinkle [periwinkle], Mugwort, and Mandrake. The eleventh is
called Alchamech, which amongst stones, rules over the Jasper: amongst Plants the
Plantain. The twelfth is called Elpheia, under this, amongst stones, is the Topaze;
amongst Plants, Rosemary, Trifoile, and Ivy. The thirteenth is called the Heart of the
Scorpion, under which, amongst stones, is the Sardonius, and Amethist [amethyst];
amongst Plants long Aristolochy, and Saffron. The fourteenth is the Falling Vultur, under
which, amongst stones, is the Chrysolite: amongst Plants Succory, and Fumitary. The
fifteenth is the Taile of Capricorn under which, amongst stones, is the Chalcedone
[chalcedony]: amongst Plants, Majoram [marjoram], Mugwort, and Nip [catnip], and the
root of Mandrake.
Moreover this we must know, that every stone, or Plant, or Animall, or any other thing, is
not governed by one Star alone, but many of them receive influence, not separated, but
conjoyned, from many Stars. So amongst stones, the Chalcedony is under Saturne, and
Mercury, together with the Taile of Scorpion, and Capricorn. The Saphir [sapphire]
under Jupiter, Saturne, and the Star Alhajoth; Tutia is under Jupiter, and the Sun and
Moon, the Emrald [emerald] under Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury, and the Star Spica. The
Amethyst, as saith Hermes, is under Mars, Jupiter, and the Heart of the Scorpion. The
Jasper, which is of divers kinds is under Mars, Jupiter, and the Star Alchamech, the
Chrysolite is under the Sun, Venus, and Mercury, as also under the Star which is called
the falling Vultur; the Topaze under the Sun, and the Star Elpheia: the Diamond under
Mars, and the Head of Algol. In like manner amongst Vegetables, the Hearb [herb]
Dragon is under Saturne, and the Celestiall Dragon, Mastick, and Mints, are under
Jupiter, and the Sun; but Mastick is also under the Heart of the Lyon, and Mint under the
Goat star: Hellebor is dedicated to Mars, and the Head of Algol, Mosse, and Sanders, to
the Sun, and Venus: Coriander to Venus, and Saturne. Amongst Animals, the Sea Calf is
under the Sun, and Jupiter; The Fox, and Ape under Saturne, and Mercury: and
Domesticall Dogs under Mercury, and the Moon. And thus we have shewed more things
in these inferiours by their superiours.
Chapter xxxiii. Of the Seals, and Characters of Naturall things.
All Stars have their peculiar Natures, properties, and conditions, the Seals and Characters
whereof they produce through their rayes, even in these inferiour things, viz. in Elements,
in Stones, in Plants, in Animals, and their members, whence every thing receives from an
harmonious disposition, and from its Star shining upon it, some particular Seal, or
Character stampt upon it, which is the significator of that Star, or harmony, conteining in
it a peculiar vertue, differing from other vertues of the same matter, both generically,
specifically, and numerically. Every thing therefore hath its Character pressed upon it by
its Star for some particular effect, especially by that Star which doth principally govern it:
And these Characters contain, and retain in them the peculiar natures, vertues, and roots
of their Stars, and produce the like operations upon other things, on which they are
reflected, and stir up, and help the influencies of their Stars, whether they be Planets, or
fixed Stars, and figures, and Celestiall signs, viz. as oft as they shall be made in a fit
matter, and in their due, and accustomed times. Which ancient wise men considering,
such as laboured much in the finding out of the occult properties of things, did set down
in writing the images of the Stars, their figures, Seals, Marks, Characters, such as nature
her self did describe by the rayes of the Stars, in these inferiour bodies, some in stones,
some in Plants, and joynts, and knots of boughs, and some in divers members of Animals.
For the Bay-tree, the Lote-tree, and the Marygold [marigold] are Solary Plants, and in
their roots, and knots being cut off, shew the Characters of the Sun, so also in the bone,
and shoulderblades in Animals: whence there arose a spatulary kind of divining (i.e.) by
the shoulder-blades, and in stones, and stony things the Characters, and images of
Celestiall things are often found. But seeing that in so great a diversity of things there is
not a traditionall knowledge, only in a few things, which humane understanding is able to
reach: Therefore leaving those things which are to be found out in Plants, and Stones, and
other things, as also, in the members of divers Animals, we shall limit our selves to mans
nature only, which seeing it is the compleatest image of the whole universe, containing in
it self the whole heavenly harmony, will without all doubt abundantly afford us the Seals,
and Characters of all the Stars, and Celestiall Influencies, and those as the more
efficacious, which are less differing from the Celestiall nature. But as the number of the
Stars is known to God alone, so also their effects, and Seals upon these inferiour things:
wherefore no humane intellect is able to attain to the knowledge of them. Whence very
few of those things became known to us, which the ancient Philosophers, &
Chyromancers [chiromancers] attained to, partly by reason, and partly by experience, and
there be many things yet ly hid in the treasury of nture. We shall here in this place note
some few Seals,and Characters of the Planets, such as the ancient Chyromancers
[chiromancers] knew in the hands of men. These doth Julian call sacred, and divine
letters, seeing that by them, according to the holy Scripture is the life of men writ in their
hands. And there are in all Nations, and Languages alwaies the same, and like to them,
and permanent; to which were added, and found out afterwards many more, as by the
ancient, so by latter Chyromancers [chiromancers]. And they that would know them must
have recourse to their Volumes. It is sufficient here to shew from whence the Characters
of Nature have their originall, and in what things they are to be enquired after.
There follow the Figures of Divine Letters.
The Letters, or Characters of Saturne.
The Letters, or Characters of Jupiter.
The Letters, or Characters of Mars.
The Letters, or Characters of the Sun.
The Letters, or Characters of Venus.
The Letters, or Characters of Mercury.
The Letters, or Characters of the Moon.
Chapter xxxiv. How by Naturall things, and their vertues we may draw
forth, and attract the influencies, and vertues of Celestiall bodies.
Now if thou desirest to receive vertue from any part of the World, or from any Star, thou
shalt (those things being used which belong to this Star) come under its peculiar
influence, as Wood is fit to receive Flame, by reason of Sulphur, Pitch, and Oile.
Nevertheless when thou dost to any one species of things, or individual, rightly apply
many things, which are things of the same subject scattered amongst themselves,
conformable to the same Idea, and Star, presently by this matter so opportunely fitted, a
singular gift is infused by the Idea, by means of the soul of the world. I say opportunely
fitted, viz. under a harmony like to the harmony, which did infuse a certain vertue into the
matter. For although things have some vertues, such as we speak of, yet those vertues do
so ly [lie] hid that there is seldom any effect produced by them: but as in a grain of
Mustardseed, bruised, the sharpness which lay hid is stirred up: and as the heat of the fire
doth make letters apparently seen, which before could not be read, that were writ with the
juice of an Onion or milk: and letters wrote upon a stone with the fat of a Goat, and
altogether unperceived, when the stone is put into Vinegar, appear and shew themselves.
And as a blow with a stick stirs up the madness of a Dog, which before lay asleep, so
doth the Celestiall harmony disclose vertues lying in the water, stirs them up,
strengtheneth them, and makes them manifest, and as I may so say, produceth that into
Act, which before was only in power, when things are rightly exposed to it in a Celestiall
season. As for example; If thou dost desire to attract vertue from the Sun, and to seek
those things that are Solary, amongst Vegetables, Plants, Metals, Stones, and Animals,
these things are to be used, and taken chiefly, which in a Solary order are higher. For
these are more available: So thou shalt draw a singular gift from the Sun through the
beams thereof, being seasonably received together, and through the spirit of the world.
Chapter xxxv. Of the Mixtions of naturall things, one with another, and
their benefits.
It is most evident, that in the inferiour nature all the powers of superior bodies are not
found comprehended in any one thing, but are dispersed through many kinds of things
amongst us: as there are many Solary things, whereof every one doth not contain all the
vertues of the Sun: but some have some properties from the Sun, and others othersome.
Wherefore it is sometimes necessary that there be mixtions in operations, that if a
hundred or a thousand vertues of the Sun were dispersed through so many Plants,
Animals, & the like, we may gather all these together, and bring them into one form, in
which we shall see all the said vertues, being united, contained. Now there is a twofold
vertue in commixtion, one, viz. which was first planted in its parts, and is Celestiall, the
other is obtained by a certain, and artificiall mixtion of things mixt amongst themselves,
and of the mixtions of them according to certain proportions, such as agree with the
heaven under a certain Constellation; And this vertue descends by a certain likeness, and
aptness that is in things amongst themselves towards their superiours, and just as much as
the following do by degrees correspond with them that go before, where the patient is
fitly applyed to its agent. So from a certain composition of Hearbs [herbs], vapours, and
such like, made according to naturall Philosophy, and Astronomy, there results a certain
common form, endowed with many gifts of the Stars: as in the honey of Bees, that which
is gathered out of the juice of innumerable Flowers, and brought into one form, contains
the vertue of all, by a kind of divine, and admirable art of the Bees. Yet this is not to be
less wondred at which Eudoxus Giudius reports of an artificiall kind of honey, which a
certain Nation of Gyants [giants] in Lybia knew how to make out of Flowers, and that
very good, and not far inferiour to that of the Bees. For every mixtion, which consists of
many severall things, is then most perfect, when it is so firmly compacted in all parts, that
it becomes one, is every where firm to it self, and can hardly be dissipated: as we
sometimes see stones, and divers bodies to be by a certain naturall power conglutinated,
and united, that they seem to be wholly one thing: as we see two trees by grafting to
become one, also Oisters [oysters] with stones by a certain occult vertue of nature, and
there have been seen some Animals which have been turned into stones, and so united
with the substance of the stone, that they seem to make one body, and that also
homogeneous. So the tree Ebeny [ebony] is one while wood, and another while stone.
When therefore any one makes a mixtion of many matters under the Celestiall
influencies, then the variety of Celestiall actions on the one hand, and of naturall powers
on the other hand, being joyned together doth indeed cause wonderfull thing, by
ointments, by collyries, by fumes, and such like, which viz. are read in the book of
Chiramis, Archyta, Democritus, and Hermes, who is named Alchorat, and of many
others.
Chapter xxxvi. Of the Union of mixt things, and the introduction of a more
noble form, and the Senses of life.
Moreover we must know, that by how much the more noble the form of any thing is, by
so much the more prone, and apt it is to receive, and powerfull to act. Then the vertues of
things do then become wonderfull, viz. when they are put to matters that are mixed, and
prepared in fit seasons, to make them alive, by procuring life for them from the Stars, as
also a sensible soul, as a more noble form. For there is so great a power in prepared
matters which we see do then receive life, when a perfect mixtion of qualities seems to
break the former contrariety. For so much the more perfect life things receive, by how
much their temper is more remote from contrariety. Now the Heaven, as a prevalent
cause doth from the beginning of every thing to be generated by the concoction, and
perfect digestion of the matter, together with life, bestows Celestiall influences, and
wonderfull gifts, according to the Capacity that is in that life, and sensible soul to receive
more noble, and sublime vertues. For the Celestiall vertue doth otherwise lye asleep, as
Sulphur kept from Flame, but in living bodies it doth alwaies burn, as kindled Sulphur,
then by its vapour it fils all the places that are next to it; so certain wonderfull works are
wrought, such as are read of in the book of Nemith, which is tituled a Book of the Laws
of Pluto, because such kind of monstrous generations are not produced according to the
Laws of Nature. For we know that of Worms are generated Gnats, of a Horse Waspes, of
a Calf, and Ox Bees, of a Crab, his legs being taken of [off], and he buried in the ground,
a Scorpion; of a Duck dryed into powder, and put into Water, are generated Frogs; but if
it be baked in a Pie, and cut into pieces, and put into a moist place under the ground,
Toads are generated of it: of the Hearb [herb] Garden Basill bruised betwixt two stones,
are generated Scorpions, and of the hairs of a menstrous Woman put under dung, are bred
Serpents; and the hair of a Horse taile put into Water, receiveth life, and is turned into a
pernicious Worm. And there is an art wherewith by a Hen sitting upon Eggs may be
generated a form like to a man, which I have seen, & knww how to make, which
Magicians say hath in it wonderfull vertues, and this they call the true Mandrake. You
must therefore know which, and what kind of matters are either of nature, or art, begun,
or perfected, or compounded of more things, and what Celestiall influencies they are able
to receive. For a Congruity of naturall things is sufficient for the receiving of influence
from Celestiall; because when nothing doth hinder the Celestials to send forth their lights
upon inferiours, they suffer no matter to be destitute of their vertue. Wherefore as much
matter as is perfect, and pure, is not unfit to receive the Celestiall influence. For that is
the binding and continuity of the matter to the soul of the world, which doth so daily flow
in upon things naturall, and all things which nature hath prepared, that it is impossible
that a prepared matter should not receive life, or a more noble form.
Chapter xxxvii. How by some certain naturall, and artificiall preparations
we may attract certain Celestiall, and vitall Gifts.
Platonists, together with Hermes, say, and Jarchus Brachmanus, and the Mecubals of the
Hebrews confess, that all sublunary things are subject to generation, and corruption, and
that also there are the same things in the Celestiall world, but after a Celestiall manner, as
also in the intellectuall world, but in a far more perfect, and better fashion, and manner,
but in the most perfect manner of all in the exemplary. And after this course, that every
inferiour thing should in its kind answer its superiour, and through this the supream
[Supreme] it self, and receive from heaven that Celestiall power they call the
quintessence, or the spirit of the world, or the middle nature, and from the intellectuall
world a spirituall and enlivening vertue transcending all qualities whatsoever, and lastly
from the exemplary or originall world, through the mediation of the other, according to
their degree receive the originall power of the whole perfection. Hence every thing may
be aptly reduced from these inferiours to the Stars, from the Stars to their Intelligencies,
and from thence to the first cause it self; from the series, and order whereof whole
Magick, and all occult Philosophy flowes: For every day some naturall thing is drawn by
art, and some divine thing is drawn by nature, which the Egyptians seeing, called Nature
a Magicianess, (i.e.) the very Magicall power it self, in the attracting of like by like, and
of sutable things by sutable. Now such kind of attractions by the mutuall correspondency
of things amongst themselves, of superiours with inferiours, the Grecians called
συμπαθιαν [sympathies]. So the earth agrees with cold water, the water with moist Aire,
the Aire with Fire, the Fire with the Heaven in water; neither is Fire mixed with water,
but by Aire, nor the Aire with the Earth, but by water. So neither is the soul united to the
body, but by the spirit, nor the understanding to the spirit but by the soul. So we see that
when nature hath framed the body of an infant, by this very preparative she presently
fetcheth the spirit from the Universe. This spirit is the instrument to obtain of God the
understanding, and mind in the soul, and body, as in wood the dryness is fitted to receive
oile, and the oile being imbibed is food for the Fire, the Fire is the vehiculum of light. By
these examples you see how by some certain naturall, and artificiall preparations, we are
in a capacity to receive certain Celestiall gifts from above. For stones, and Metals have a
correspondency with Hearbs [herbs], Hearbs [herbs] with Animals, Animals with the
Heavens, the Heavens with Intelligencies, and those with divine properties, and
attributes, and with God himself, after whose image, and likness all things are created.
Now the first Image of God is the world, of the world, man, of man, beasts, of beasts, the
Zeophyton (i.e.) half Animall, and half Plant; of Zeophyton, plants, of plants, metals, of
metals, stones. And again in things spirituall, the Plant agrees with a bruit [brute] in
Vegetation, a bruit [brute] with a man in sense, man with an Angel in understanding, an
Angell with God in immortality. Divinity is annexed to the mind, the mind to the
intellect, the intellect to the intention, the intention to the imagination, the imagination to
the senses, the senses at last to things. For this is the band, and continuity of nature, that
all superior vertue doth flow through every inferiour with a long, and continued series,
dispersing its rayes even to the very last things; and inferiours through their superiours,
come to the very supream [Supreme] of all. For so inferiours are successively joyned to
their superiours, that there proceeds an influence from their head, the first cause, as a
certain string stretched out, to the lowermost things of all, of which string if one end be
touched, the whole doth presently shake, and such a touch doth sound to the other end,
and at the motion of the inferiour, the superiour also is moved, to which the other doth
answer, as strings in a Lute well tuned.
Chapter xxxviii. How we may draw not only Celestiall, and vitall, but also
certain Intellectuall, and divine gifts from above.
Magicians teach that Celestial gifts may through inferiors being conformable to superiors
be drawn down by opportune influencies of the Heaven; and so also by these Celestial
[gifts], the Celestial Angels, as they are servants of the Stars, may be procured, and
conveyed to us. Iamblichus, Proclus, and Synesius, with the whole School of Platonists
confirm, that not only Celestiall, and vitall, but also certain Intellectuall, Angelicall, and
divine gifts may be received from above by some certain matters, having a naturall power
of divinity (i.e.) which have a naturall correspondency with the superiors, being rightly
received, and opportunely gathered together according to the rules of Naturall
Philosophy, and Astronomy: And Mercurius Trismegistus writes, that an Image rightly
made of certain proper things, appropriated to any one certain Angel, will presently be
animated by that Angel. Of the same also Austin [St. Augustine] makes mention in his
eighth book De Civitate Dei [the City of God]. For this is the harmony of the world, that
things supercelestiall be drawn down by the Celestiall, and the super-naturall
[supernatural] by naturall, because there is one operative vertue that is diffused through
all kinds of things, by which vertue indeed, as manifest things are produced out of occult
causes; so a Magician doth make use of things manifest, to draw forth things that are
occult, viz. through the rays of the Stars, through fumes, lights, sounds, and naturall
things, which are agreeable to Celestiall: in which, besides corporeall qualities, there is a
kind of reason, sense, and harmony, and incorporeall, and divine measures, and orders.
So we read that the Ancients were wont often to receive some divine, and wonderfull
thing by certain naturall things: so the stone that is bred in the Apple of the eye of a Civet
Cat, held under the tongue of a man, is said to make him to divine, or prophesie
[prophesy]: The same is Selenite, the Moon stone [moonstone], reported to do, so they
say that the Images of Gods may be called up by the stone called Anchitis, and that the
Ghosts of the dead may be, being called up, kept up by the stone Synochitis. The like
doth the Hearb [herb] Aglauphotis do, which is called Marmorites, growing upon the
Marbles of Arabia, as saith Pliny, and the which Magicians use. Also there is an Hearb
[herb] called Rheangelida, which Magicians drinking of, can prophesie [prophesy].
Moreover there are some Hearbs [herbs] by which the dead are raised to life; whence
Xanthus the Historian tels, that with a certain Hearb [herb] called Balus, a young Dragon
being killed, was made alive again, also that by the same a certain man of Tillum, whom a
Dragon killed, was restored to life: and Juba reports, that in Arabia a certain man was by
a certain Hearb [herb] restored to life. But whether or no any such things can be done
indeed upon man by the vertue of Hearbs [herbs], or any other naturall thing, we shall
discourse in the following Chapter. Now it is certain, and manifest that such things can be
done upon other animals. So if flies, that are drowned, be put into warm ashes, they
revive. And Bees being drowned, do in like manner recover life in the juice of the hearb
Nip [herb catnip]; and Eels being dead for want of water, if with their whole bodies they
be put under mud in vineger [vinegar], and the blood of a Vultur [vulture] being put to
them, will all of them in a few dayes recover life. They say that if the fish Echeneis be cut
into peices [pieces], and cast into the sea, the parts will within a little time come together,
and live. Also we know that the Pellican [pelican] doth restore her yong [young] to life,
being killed, with her own blood.
Chap. xxxix. That we may by some certain matters of the world stir up the
Gods of the world, and their ministring spirits.
No man is ignorant that evill spirits, by evill, and prophane [profane] Arts may be raised
up as Psellus saith Sorcerers are wont to do, whom most detestable and abominable
filthiness did follow, and accompany, such as were in times past in the sacrifices of
Priapus, and in the worship of the Idoll which was called Panor, to whom they did
sacrifice with their privy members [genitals] uncovered. Neither to these is that unlike (if
it be true, and not a fable) which is read concerning the detestable heresy of old Church-
men, and like to these are manifest in Witches and mischeivous [mischievous] women,
which wickednesses the foolish dotage of women is subject to fall into. By these, and
such as these evill spirits are raised. As a wicked spirit spake once to Iohn [John] of one
Cynops a Sorcerer; all the power, saith he, of Satan dwells there, and he is entred into a
confederacy with all the principalities together, and likewise we, with him, and Cynops
obeys us, and we again obey him. Again, on the contrary side, no man is ignorant that
supercelestiall Angels or spirits may be gained by us through good works, a pure mind,
secret prayers, devout humiliation, and the like. Let no man therefore doubt that in like
manner by some certain matters of the world, the Gods of the world may be raised by us,
or at least the ministring spirits, or servants of these Gods, and as Mercurius [Hermes
Trismegistus] saith, the airy spirits, not supercelestiall, much less higher. So we read that
the antient [ancient] Priests made statues, and images, foretelling things to come, and
infused into them the spirits of the stars, which were not kept there by constraint in some
certain matters, but rejoycing [rejoiced] in them, viz. as acknowledging such kinds of
matter to be sutable [suitable] to them, they do alwaies and willingly abide in them, and
speak, and do wonderfull things by them: no otherwise then evill spirits are wont to do,
when they possess mens bodies.
Chap. xl. Of bindings, what sort they are of, and in what wayes they are
wont to be done.
WEE have spoken concerning the vertues, and wonderfull efficacy of naturall things.
It remains now that we understand a thing of great wonderment: and it is a binding of
men into love, or hatred, sickness or health, and such like. Also the binding of thieves,
and robbers, that they cannot steale in any place; the binding of Merchants, that they
cannot buy, or sell in any place; the binding of an army, that they cannot pass over any
bound; the binding of ships, that no winds, though never so strong, shall be able to carry
them out of the Haven. Also the binding of a mill, that it can by no force whatsoever be
turned round: the binding of a Cisterne, or fountain, that the water cannot be drawn up
out of them: The binding of the ground, that it cannot bring forth fruit: the binding of any
place, that nothing can be built upon it: The binding of fire, that though it be never so
strong, can burn no combustible thing that is put to it. Also the bindings of lightnings,
and tempests, that they shall do no hurt. The binding of dogs, that they cannot bark. Also
the binding of birds, and wild beasts, that they shall not be able to fly, or run away. And
such like as these, which are scarce credible, yet often known by experience. Now there
are such kind of bindings as these made by Sorceries, Collyries, Unguents, love potions,
by binding to, and hanging up of things, by rings, by charmes, by strong imaginations,
and passions, by images, and characters, by inchantments [enchantments], and
imprecations, by lights, by sound, by numbers, by words, and names, invocations,
sacrifices, by swearing, conjuring, consecrations, devotions, and by divers superstitions,
and observations, and such like.
Chap. xli. Of Sorceries, and their power.
The force of Sorceries is reported to be so great, that they are believed to be able to
subvert, consume, and change all inferiour things, according Virgils Muse.
Moeris for me these hearbs [herbs] in Pontus chose,
And curious drugs, for there great plenty grows;
I many times, with these, have Moeris spide [spied]
Chang'd to a wolfe, and in the woods to hide:
From Sepulchres would souls departed charm,
And Corn bear standing from anothers Farm.
Also in an other place, concerning the companions of Ulysses, whom
The cruell Goddess Circe there invests
With fierce aspects, and chang'd to savage beasts.
And a litle after,
When love from Picus Circe could not gaine
Him with her charming wand, and hellish bane
Chang'd to a bird, and spots his speckled wings
With sundry colours ----------
Now, there are some kinds of these sorceries mentioned by Lucan concerning that
Sorceress Thessala, calling up ghosts, where he saith,
Here all natures products unfortunate;
Fomr [foam] of mad Dogs, which waters fear and hate;
Guts of the Lynx; Hyena's knot imbred;
The marrow of a Hart with Serpents fed
Were not wanting; no nor the sea Lamprey
Which stops the ships; nor yet the Dragons eye.
And such as Apuleius tells of concerning Pamphila, that Sorceress, endeavouring to
procure love; to whom Fotis a certain maid brought the haires of a goat (cut off from a
bag or botle [bottle] made with the skin thereof) instead of Bæotius a young mans haires:
Now she (saith he) being out of her wits for the young man, goeth up to the tyled rough
[tiled roof], and in the upper part thereof makes a great hole open to all the orientall, and
other aspects, and most fit for these her arts, and there privately worships, having before
furnished her mournfull house with sutable furniture, with all kinds of spices, with plates
of Iron with strange words engraven upon them, with sterns of ships that were cast away,
and much lamented, and with divers members of buryed carkasses [buried carcasses] cast
abroad: here noses, and fingers, there the fleshy nailes of those that were hanged, and in
another place the blood of them that were murdered, and their skulls mangled with the
teeth of wild beasts; then she offers sacrifices (their inchanted entralls [enchanted
entrails] lying panting), and sprinkles them with divers kinds of liquors; sometimes with
fountain water, sometimes with cowes milk, sometimes with mountain honey, and mead:
Then she ties those haires into knots, and layes them on the fire, with divers odours to be
burnt. Then presently with an irresistible power of Magick, and blind force of the Gods,
the bodies of those whose haires did smoke, and crash, assume the spirit of a man, and
feel, and hear, and walk, and come whither the stink of their haire led them, and insteed
of Bæotius the young man, come skipping, and leaping with joy, and love into the house.
Austin [Augustine] also reports, that he heard of some women Sorceresses, that were so
versed in these kind of arts, that by giving cheese to men, they could presently turn them
into working cattell [cattle], and the work being done, restored them into men again.
Chap. xlii. Of the wonderful vertues of some kinds of Sorceries.
Now I will shew you what some of the Sorceries are, that by the example of these there
may be a way opened for the consideration of the whole subject of them. Of these
therefore the first is menstruous bloud [blood], which, how much power it hath in
Sorcery, we will now consider; for, as they say, if it comes over new wine, it makes it
soure, and if it doth but touch the Vine it spoyles [spoils] it for ever, and by its very touch
it makes all Plants, and Trees barren, and they that be newly set, to die; it burns up all the
hearbs [herbs] in the garden, and makes fruit fall off from the Trees, it darkens the
brightness of a looking glass, dulls the edges of knives, and razors, dims the beauty of
Ivory, and makes Iron presently rusty, it makes brass rust, and smell very strong: it makes
dogs mad, if they do but tast [taste] of it, and if they being thus mad shall bite any one,
that wound is incurable: it kils [kills] whole hives of Bees, and drives them from the
hives that are but touched with it, it makes linnen [linen] black that are boyled [boiled], it
makes Mares cast their foal if they do but touch it, and makes women miscarry if they be
but smeared with it: it makes Asses barren as long as they eat of the corn that hath been
touched with it. The ashes of menstruous clothes, if they be cast upon purple garments
that are to be washed, change the colour of them, and takes away colours from flowers.
They say that it drives away tertian, and quartane Agues, if it be put into the wooll of a
black Ram, and tyed [tied] up in a silver bracelet, as also if the soles of the patients feet
be noynted [anointed] therewith, and especially if it be done by the woman her self, the
patients not knowing of it; moreover it cures the fits of the falling sickness. But most
especially it cures them that are affraid [afraid] of water, or drink after they are bitten
with a mad dog, if onely a menstruous cloth be put under the cup. Besides, they report,
that if menstruous women shall walk naked about the standing corn, they make all
cankars [cankers], worms, beetles, flyes [flies], and all hurtfull things fall off from the
corn: but they must take heed that they do it before Sun rising [sunrise], or else they will
make the corn to wither. Also they say that they are able to expell hail, tempests, and
lightnings, more of which Pliny makes mention of. Know this, that they are a greater
poyson [poison] if they happen in the decrease of the Moon, and yet much greater, if they
happen betwixt the decrease, and change of the Moon: But if they happen in the Eclypse
[eclipse] of the Moon or Sun, they are an incurable poyson [poison]. But they are of
greatest force of all, when they happen in the first years, even in the years of virginity, for
if they do but touch the posts of the house there can no mischeif [mischief] take effect in
it. Also they say that the threads of any garment touched therewith, cannot be burnt, and
if they be cast into the fire, it will spread no further. Also it is said that the root of Peony
being given with Castor [oil], and smeared over with a menstruous cloth, cureth the
falling sickness. Moreover if the stomack [stomach] of a Hart be burnt or rosted [roasted],
and to it be put a perfuming made with a menstruous cloth, it will make crass-bows
[cross-bows] useless for the killing of any game: The haires of a menstruous woman put
under dung, breed Serpents: and if they be burnt, will drive away Serpents with their
smell. So great a poysonous [poisonous] force is in them, that they are poyson [poison] to
poysonous [poisonous] creatures. There is also Hippomanes, which amongst Sorceries is
not the least taken notice of, and it is a little venemous [venomous] piece of flesh as big
as a fig, and black, which is in the forehead of a Colt newly foaled, which unless the
Mare her self doth presently eat, she will never after love her foals, or let it suck. And for
this cause they say there is a most wonderful power in it to procure love, if it be
powdered, and drank in a cup with the blood of him that is in love. There is also another
Sorcery, which is called by the same name, viz. Hippomanes, viz. a venemous
[venomous] humour, issuing out of the share of a Mare what time she desires a horse, of
which Virgill makes mention, when he sings
Hence comes that poison which the Shepherds call
Hippomanes, and from Mares groines doth fall,
The wofull [woeful] bane of cruell stepdames use,
And with a charme 'mongst powerfull drugs infuse.
Of this doth Juvenall the Satyrist [Satirist] make mention.
Hippomanes, poysons [poisons] that boyled [boiled] are, and charmes
Are given to Sons in law, with such like harmes.
Apollonius also in his Argonauticks makes mention of the hearb [herb] of Prometheus,
which he saith groweth from corrupt blood dropping upon the earth, whilest the Vultur
[vulture] was gnawing upon the liver of Prometheus upon the hill Caucasus. The flowre
[flower] of this hearb [herb], he saith, is like Saffron, having a double stalk hanging out,
one farther then the other the length of a cubit, the root under the earth, as flesh newly
cut, sends forth a blackish juice as it were of a beech; with which, saith he, if any one
shall after he hath performed his devotion to Proserpina, smear over his body, he cannot
be hurt either with sword, or fire. Also Saxo Gramaticus [Grammaticus] writes, that there
was a certain man called Froton, who had a garment, which when he had put on he could
not be hurt with the point or edge of any weapon. The civet Cat also abounds with
Sorceries: for, as Pliny reports, the posts of a dore [door] being touched with her blood,
the Arts of Juglers [jugglers] and Sorcerers are so invallid, that the Gods cannot be called
up, and will by no means be perswaded to talk with them. Also that they that are
anoynted [anointed] with the ashes of the ankle bone of her left foot, being decocted with
the blood of a Weesell [weasel] shall become odious to all. The same also is done with
the eye, being decocted. Also it is said that the straight gut is administered against the
injustice, and corruption of Princes, and great men in power, and for success of Petitions,
and to conduce to ending of suits, and controversies, if any one hath never so little of it
about him, and that if it be bound unto the left arm, it is such a present [?] charm, that if
any man do but look upon a woman, it will make her follow him presently; and that the
skin of her [i.e. the civet cat's] forehead doth withstand bewitchings. They say also that
the blood of a Basilisk, which they call the blood of Saturn, hath such great force in
Sorcery, that it procures for him that carryes it about him, good success of his Petitions,
from great men in power, and of his prayers from God, and also remedies of diseases, and
grant of any priveledge [privilege]. They say also that a tyck [tick], if it be pulled out of
the left eare of a dog, and if be it altogether black, hath great vertue in the prognostick of
life, for if the sick party shall answer him that brought it in, who standing at his feet, &
shall ask of him concerning his disease, there is certain hope of life, and that he shall dye
[die], if he make no answer. They say also, that a stone that is bit with a mad dog hath
power to cause discord, if it be put in drink, and that he shall not be barked at by dogs,
that puts the tongue of a dog in his shooe [shoe] under his great toe, especially if the
hearb [herb] of the same name, viz. houndstongue be joyned with it. And that a
membrane of the secondines of a dog doth the same; and that dogs will shun him that
hath a dogs heart. And Pliny reports that there is a red toad that lives in bryers [briars],
and brambles, and is full of Sorceries and doth wonderfull things: for the little bone
which is in his left side, being cast into cold water, makes it presently very hot, by which
also the rage of dogs is restrained, and their love is procured, if it be put in drink; and if it
be bound to any one, it stirreth up lust. On the contrary, the litle bone which is on the
right side, makes hot water cold, and that it can never be hot again, unless that be taken
out, also it is said to cure quartanes if it be bound to the sick in a snakes skin, as also all
other feavors [fevers], and restrain love, and lust. And that the spleen, and heart is an
effectual remedy against the poisons of the said Toad. Thus much Pliny writes. Also it is
said that the sword, with which a man is slain, hath wonderfull power in Sorceries: For if
the snaffle of the bridle, or spurs be made of it, they say that with these any horse, though
never so wild, may be tamed, and gentled: and that if a Horse should be shod with shooes
[shoes] made with it, he would be most swift and fleet, and never, though never so hard
rod [rode], tire. But yet they will that some Characters, and names should be written upon
it. They say also, if any man shall dip a sword, wherewith men were beheaded, in wine;
and the sick drink thereof, he shall be cured of his quartane. They say also that a cup of
liquor being made with the brains of a Bear, and drank out of the skull, shall make him
that drinks it, to be as fierce, and as raging as a Bear, and think himself to be changed into
a Bear, and judge all things he sees to be Bears, and so to continue in that madness, untill
the force of that draught shall be dissolved, no other distemper being all the while
perceived in him.
Chap. xliii. Of Perfumes, or Suffumigations, their manner, and power.
Some Suffumigations also, or perfumings, that are proper to the Stars, are of great force
for the opportune receiving of Celestiall gifts under the rayes of the Stars, in as much as
they do strongly work upon the Aire, and breath. For our breath is very much changed by
such kind of vapours, if both vapours be of another like: The Aire also being through the
said vapours easily moved, or affected with the qualities of inferiours, or those Celestiall,
daily, and quickly penetrating our breast, and vitals, doth wonderfully reduce us to the
like qualities; Wherefore Suffumigations are wont to be used to [by] them that are about
to Sooth-say [soothsay], for to affect their fancy, which indeed being duly appropriated to
any certain Deities, do fit us to receive divine inspiration: So they say that fumes made
with Lin-seed [linseed], and Flea-bane seed, and roots of Violets, and Parsly [parsley],
doth make one to fore-see [foresee] things to come, and doth conduce to prophecying. Let
no man wonder how great things suffumigations can do in the Aire, especially when he
shall with Porphyrius [Porphyry] consider, that by certain vapours exhaling from proper
suffumigations, airy spirits are presently raised, as also Thundrings, and Lightnings, and
such like things. As the Liver of a Chamelion [chameleon] being burnt on the top of the
house, doth, as it is manifest, raise showers, and Lightnings. In like manner the head, and
throat, if they be burnt with Oken [oaken] wood, cause Storms, and Lightnings. There are
also suffumigations under opportune influencies of Stars, that make the images of spirits
forthwith appear in the Aire, or elswhere. So they say, that if of Coriander, Smallage,
Henbane, and hemlock be made a fume, that spirits will presently come together; hence
they are called spirits Hearbs [herbs]. Also it is said that a fume made of the root of the
reedy Hearb [herb] Sagapen, with the juice of Hemlock, and Henbane, and the Hearb
[herb] Tapsus Barbatus, red Sanders, and black Poppy, makes spirits and strange shapes
appear: and if Smallage be added to them, chaseth away spirits from any place, and
destroyes their visions. In like manner a fume made of Calamint, Peony, Mints, and
Palma Christi, drives away all evil spirits, and vain imaginations. Moreover it is said that
by certain fumes certain Animals are gathered together, and put to flight, as Pliny
mentions concerning the stone Liparis, that with the fume thereof all beasts are called
out; so the bones in the upper part of the throat of a Hart, being burnt, gather all the
Serpents together, but the horn of the Hart being burnt doth with its fume chase them all
away. The same doth a fume of the feathers of Peacocks. Also the lungs of an Asse being
burnt, puts all poisonous things to flight; the fume of the burnt hoof of a Horse drives
away Mice, the same doth the hoof of a Mule, with which also if it be the hoof of the left
foot, Flies are driven away; And they say, if a house or any place be smoaked [smoked]
with the gall of a Cutle fish [cuttle-fish], made into a confection with red Storax, Roses,
and Lignum-aloes, and if then there be some Sea Water, or blood cast into that place, the
whole house will seem to be full of Water, or blood; and if some Earth of plowed ground
be cast there, the Earth will seem to quake. Now such kinds of vapours we must conceive
do infect any body, and infuse a vertue into it, which doth continue long, even as any
contagious, or poisonous vapour of the Pestilence, being kept for two yeers [years] in the
Wall of a house, infect the inhabitants, and as the contagion of Pestilence, or Leprosie
[leprosy] lying hid in a garment, doth long after infect him that wears it. Therefore were
certain suffumigations used to images, rings, and such like instruments of Magick, and
hid treasures, and as Porphyrius [Porphyry] saith, very effectually. So they say, if any
one shall hide Gold, or Silver, or any other pretious [precious] thing, the Moon being in
conjunction with the Sun, and shall fume the place with Coriander, Saffron, Henbane,
Smallage, and black Poppy, of each a like quantity, bruised together, and tempered with
the juice of Hemlock, that which is so hid shall never be found, or taken away, and that
spirits shall continually keep it: and if any one shall endeavour to take it away, he shall be
hurt by them, and shall fall into a frensie [frenzy]. And Hermes saith, that there is nothing
like the fume of Sperma Ceti [spermaceti] for the raising of spirits: wherefore if a fume
be made of that, and Lignum-aloes, Pepperwort, Musk, Saffron, red Storax tempered
together, with the blood of a Lapwing, it will quickly gather airy spirits together, and if it
be used about the graves of the dead, it gathers together spirits, and the Ghosts of the
dead. So, as often as we direct any work to the Sun, we must make suffumigations with
Solary things, if to the Moon, with Lunary things, and so of the rest. And we must know,
that as there is a contrariety and enmity in Stars, and spirits, so also in suffumigations
unto the same. So there is also a contrariety betwixt Lignum-aloes, and Sulphur,
Frankincense, and Quick-silver [quicksilver], and spirits that are raised by the fume of
Lignum-aloes, are allayed by the burning of Sulphur. As Proclus gives an example of a
spirit, which was wont to appear in the form of a Lion, but by the setting of a Cock before
it, vanished away, because there is a contrariety betwixt a Cock, and a Lyon [lion], and so
the like consideration, and practise is to be observed concerning such like things.
Chap. xliv. The Composition of some fumes appropriated to the Planets.
We make a suffumigation for the Sun in this manner, viz. of Saffron, Amber-gryse
[ambergris], Musk, Lignum-aloes, Lignum-balsaim [lignum balsam], the fruit of the
Laurell, Cloves, Myrrh, and Frankincense, all which being bruised, and mixt in such a
proportion as may make a sweet odour, must be incorporated with the brain of an Eagle,
or the blood of a white Cock, after the manner of Pils [pills], or Trochiscks [troches].
For the Moon we make a suffumigation of the head of a Frog dryed [dried], the eyes of a
Bull, the seed of white Poppy, Frankincense, and Camphir [camphor], which must be
incorporated with Menstruous blood, or the blood of a Goose.
For Saturne take the seed of black Poppy, of Henbane, root of Mandrake, the Load-stone
[loadstone], and Myrrh, and make them up with the brain of a Cat, or the blood of a Bat.
For Jupiter take the seed of Ash, Lignum-aloes, Storax, the gum Benjamin [benzoin], the
Lazule [lazuli] stone, the tops of the feathers of a Peacock, and incorporate them with the
blood of a Stork, or a Swallow, or the brain of a Hart.
For Mars take Euphorbium, Bdellium, gum Armoniack, the roots of both Hellebors
[hellebores], the Load stone [loadstone], and a little Sulphur, and incorporate them all
with the brain of a Hart, the blood of a Man, and the blood of a black Cat.
For Venus take Musk, Amber-gryse [ambergris], Lignum-aloes, red Roses, and red
Corall, and make them up with the brain of Sparrows, and the blood of Pigeons.
For Mercury take Mastick, Frankincense, Cloves, and the Hearb [herb] Cinquefoile, and
the stone Achates, and incorporate them all with the brain of a Fox, or Weesel [weasel],
and the blood of a Pie [magpie].
Besides, to Saturne are appropriated for fumes all odoriferous roots, as Pepper-wort root,
&c. and the Frankincense tree: to Jupiter odoriferous fruits, as Nutmegs, Cloves: to Mars
all odoriferous wood, as Sanders [sandalwood], Cypress, Lignum-balsaim [lignum
balsam], and Lignum-aloes: to the Sun, all Gums, Frankincense, Mastick, Benjamin,
Storax, Laudanum [labdanum, i.e. Cistus], Amber-gryse [ambergris], and Musk; to Venus
Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Saffron, and such like: to Mercury all Pils [peels] of Wood
and fruit, as Cinnamon, Lignum Cassia, Mace, Citron pill [lemon peel], and Bayberries,
and whatsoever seeds are odoriferous; to the Moon the leaves of all Vegetables, as the
leaf Indum, the leaves of the Myrtle, and Bay-tree. Know also, that according to the
opinion of the Magicians, in every good matter, as love, good will, and the like, there
must be a good fume, odoriferous, and pretious [precious]; and in every evill matter, as
hatred, anger, misery, and the like, there must be a stinking fume, that is of no worth. The
twelve Signes also of the Zodiack have their proper fumes, as Aries hath Myrrh, Taurus,
Pepper-wort [pepperwort], Gemini, Mastick; Cancer, Camphir [camphor], Leo,
Frankincense, Virgo Sanders [sandalwood], Libra, Galbanum, Scorpio, Opoponax,
Sagittarius, Lignum-aloes, Capricornus, Benjamin [benzoin], Aquarius, Euphorbium,
Pisces, red Storax. But Hermes describes the most powerfull fume to be, viz. that which
is compounded of the seven Aromaticks, according to the powers of the seven Planets,
for it receives from Saturne, Pepper-wort [pepperwort], from Jupiter, Nutmeg, from
Mars, Lignum-aloes, from the Sun, Mastick, from Venus Saffron, from Mercury,
Cinnamon, and from the Moon, the Myrtle.
Chap. xlv. Of Collyries, Unctions, Love-Medicines, and their vertues.
Moreover Collyries, and Unguents, conveying the vertues of things Naturall, and
Celestiall to our spirit, can multiply, transmute, transfigure, and transform it accordingly,
as also transpose those vertues which are in them into it, that so it cannot act only upon
its own body, but also upon that which is neer [near] it, and affect that by visible rayes,
charmes, and by touching it, with some like quality. For because our spirit is the subtile,
pure lucid, airy, and unctuous vapour of the blood; it is therefore fit to make Collyries of
the like vapours, which are more sutable [suitable] to our spirit in subtance, for then by
reason of their likeness, they do the more stir up, attract, and transform the spirit. The like
vertues have certain ointments, and other confections. Hence by the touch sometimes
sickness, poisonings, and love is induced; some things, as the hands, or garments being
anointed: Also by kisses, some things being held in the mouth, love is induced, as in
Virgil we read that Venus prayes Cupid
That when glad Dido hugs him in her lap
At royall feasts, crown'd with the cheering Grape,
When she imbracing [embracing], shall sweet kisses give,
Inspire hid Flame, with deadly bane deceive,
He would ----- -----
Now the sight, because it perceives more purely, and cleerly [clearly] then
the other senses, and fastening in us the marks of things more acutely, and
deeply, doth most of all, and before others agree with the Phantastick
spirit, as is apparent in dreams, when things seen do more often present
themselves to us then things heard, or any thing coming under the other
senses. Therefore when Collyries transform visuall spirits, that spirit doth
easily affect the imagination, which indeed being affected with divers
species, and forms, transmits the same by the same spirit unto the outward
sense of sight, by which occasion there is caused in it a perception of such
species, and forms in that manner, as if it were moved by externall objects,
that there seem to be seen terrible images, and spirits, and such like: so
there are made Collyries, making us forthwith to see the images of spirits
in the Aire, or elsewhere, as I know how to make of the gall of a man, and
the eyes of a black Cat, and of some other things. The like is made also of
the blood of a Lapwing, of a Bat, and of a Goat, and they say, if a smooth
shining piece of Steel be smeered [smeared] over with the juice of
Mugwort, and made to fume, it will make invocated spirits to be seen in it.
So also there are some suffumigations, or unctions, which make men speak
in their sleep, to walk, and to do those things which are done by men that
are awake, and sometimes to do those things, which men that are awake
cannot, or dare not do. Some there are that make us to hear horrid, or
delectable sounds, and such like. And this is the cause why Maniacall, and
Melancholy men believe they see, and hear those things without, which
their imagination doth only fancy within, hence they fear things not to be
feared, and fall into wonderfull, and most false suspicions, and fly when
none pursueth them, are angry, and contend, no body being present, and
fear where no fear is. Such like passions also can magicall confections
induce, by Suffumigations, by Collyries, by Unguents, by potions, by
poisons, by lamps, and lights, by looking glasses, by images, enchantments,
charms, sounds, and Musick. Also by divers rites, observations,
ceremonies, religions, and superstitions; all which shall be handled in their
places. And not only by these kind of arts, passions, apparitions, and
images induced, but also things themselves, which are really changed, and
transfigured into divers forms, as the Poet relates of Proteus, Periclimenus,
Acheloas, and Merra, the daughter of Erisichthon: So also Circe changed
the companions of Ulysses, & of old in the sacrifices of Jupiter Lycæus, the
men that tasted of the inwards of the sacrifices, were turned into Wolves,
which Pliny saith, befell a certain man called Demarchus, the same opinion
was Austin [Augustine] of: for he saith, whilest he was in Italy, he heard of
some women that by giving Sorceries in cheese to travellors [travelers],
turned them into working Catle [cattle], and when they had done such
work as they would have them, turned them into men again, and that this
befell a certain Father called Prestantius. The Scriptures themselves testify
that Pharao's [pharaoh's] Sorcerers turned their rods into Serpents, and
water into blood, and did such like things.
Chapter xlvi. Of naturall alligations, and suspensions.
When the soul of the world, by its vertue doth make all things that are naturally
generated, or artificially made, fruitfull, by infusing into them Celestiall properties for the
working of some wonderfull effects, then things themselves not only when applyed by
suffumigations, or Collyries, or oyntments [ointments], or potions, or any other such like
way, but also when they being conveniently wrapt [wrapped] up, are bound to, or hanged
about the neck, or in any other way applyed, although by never so easy a contact, do
impress their vertue upon us. By these alligations therefore, suspensions, wrappings up,
applications, and contacts the Accidents of the body, and mind are changed into sickness,
health, boldness, fear, sadness, and joy, and the like: They render them that carry them,
gratious [gracious], or terrible, acceptable, or rejected, honoured, and beloved, or hatefull,
and abominable. Now these kind of passions are conceived to be by the abovesaid,
infused no otherwise, then is manifest in the graffing [grafting] of trees, where the vitall
vertue is sent, and Communicated from the trunk to the twig graffed [grafted] into it, by
way of contact and alligation; so in the female Palme tree, when she comes neer to the
male, her boughs bend to the male, and are bowed: which the gardeners seeing, bind
ropes from the male to the female, which becomes straight again, as if it had by this
continuation of the rope received the vertue of the male. In like manner we see, that the
cramp-fish being touched afar off with a long pole, doth presently stupify [stupefy] the
hand of him that toucheth it. And if any shall touch the sea Hare with his hand or stick,
doth presently run out of his wits. Also if the fish called Stella [starfish], as they say,
being fastned [fastened] with the blood of a Fox and a brass nail to a gate, evill medicines
can do no hurt. Also it is said, that if a woman take a needle, and beray it with dung, and
then wrap it up in earth, in which the carkass carcass of a man was buryed [buried], and
shall carry it about her in a cloth which was used at the funerall, that no man shall be able
to ly [have sex] with her as long as she hath it about her. Now by these examples we see,
how by certain alligations of certain things, as also suspensions, or by a simple contact, or
the continuation of any thread, we may be able to receive some vertues thereby. It is
necessary that we know the certain rule of alligation, and suspension, and the manner
which the Art requires, viz. that they be done under a certain, and sutable [suitable]
constellation, and that they be done with wyer [wire], or silken threads, with hair, or
sinews of certain animals. And things that are to be wrapped up must be done in the
leaves of hearbs [herbs], or the skins of animals, or fine cloths, and the like, according to
the sutableness [suitability] of things: as if you would procure the solary vertue of any
thing, this being wrapped up in bay leaves, or the skin of a Lion, hang it about thy neck
with a golden thread, or a silken thread of a yallow [yellow] colour, whilest the Sun rules
in the heaven: so thou shalt be endued with the Solary vertue of that thing. But if thou
dost desire the vertue of any Saturnine thing, thou shalt in like maner take that thing
whilest Saturn raignes, and wrap it up in the skin of an Ass, or in a cloth used at a
funerall, especially if thou desirest it for sadness, and with a black thread hang it about
thy neck. In like manner we must conceive of the rest.
Chapter xlvii. Of Rings, and their compositions.
Rings also, which were alwaies much esteemed of by the Ancients, when they are
opportunely made, do in like manner impress their vertue upon us, in as much as they do
affect the spirit of him that carries them with gladness or sadness, and render him
courteous, or terrible, bold, or fearfull, amiable, or hatefull; in as much as they do fortifie
us against sickness, poisons, enemies, evill spirits, and all manner of hurtfull things, or, at
least will not suffer us to be kept under them. Now the manner of making these kinds of
Rings, is this, viz. when any Star ascends fortunately, with the fortunate aspect, or
conjunction of the Moon, we must take a stone, and Hearb [herb] that is under that Star,
and make a Ring of the Metall that is sutable [suitable] to this Star, and in it fasten the
stone, putting the Hearb [herb], or root under it; not omitting the inscriptions of images,
names, and Characters, as also the proper suffumigations, but we shall speak more of
these in another place, where we shall treat of Images, and Characters. So we read in
Philostratus Jarchus, that a wise Prince of the Indians bestowed seven Rings made after
this manner, marked with the vertues, and names of the seven Planets, to Apollonius, of
which he wore every day one, distinguishing them according to the names of the dayes,
by the benefit of which he lived above one hundred and thirty years, as also alwaies
retained the beauty of his youth. In like manner Moses the Law-giver, and ruler of the
Hebrews, being skilled in the Egyptian Magick, is said by Josephus to have made Rings
of love, and oblivion. There was also, as saith Aristotle, amongst the Cireneans a Ring of
Battus, which could procure love and honour. We read also that Eudamus a cerain
Philosopher made Rings against the bites of Serpents, bewitchings, and evil spirits. The
same doth Josephus relate of Solomon. Also we read in Plato that Gygus, King of Lydia
had a Ring of wonderfull, and strange vertues, the seal of which, when he turned it
toward the palm of his hand, no body could see him, but he could see all things: by the
opportunity of which Ring he ravished the Queen, and slew the King his Master, and
killed whomsoever he thought stood in his way, and in these villanies no body could see
him, and at length by the benefit of this Ring be became King of Lydia.
Chapter xlviii. Of the vertue of places, and what places are sutable to every
Star.
There be wonderfull vertues of places accompanying them, either from things there
placed, or by the influences of the Stars, or in any other way. For as Pliny relates of a
Cuckow [cuckoo], in what place any one doth first hear him, if his right foot be marked
about and, and that foot-step [footprint] digged up, there will no Fleas be bred in that
place where it is scattered. So they say that the dust of the track of a Snake being
gathered up, and scattered amongst Bees, makes them return to their hives. So also that
the dust, in which a Mule hath rolled himself, being cast upon the Body, doth mitigate the
heat of love, and that the dust wherein a Hawk hath rolled her self, if it be bound to the
body in a bright red cloth, cures the quartane. So doth the stone taken out of the nest of a
Swallow, as they say, presently relieve those that have the falling sickness [epilepsy], and
being bound to the party, continually preserve them, especially if it be rolled in the blood,
or heart of a Swallow. And it is reported That if any one shall cut a veine, and being
fasting, shall go over a place where any one lately fell with the fit of a Falling sickness
[epilepsy], that he shall fall into the same disease. And Pliny reports, that to fasten an
Iron naile in that place where he that fell with a fit of the Falling sickness first pitched his
head, will free him from his disease. So they say that an Hearb [herb] growing upon the
head of any image, being gathered, and bound up in some part of ones garment with a red
thread, shall presently allay the headach [headache]; and that any Hearb [herb] gathered
out of the brooks or rivers before Sun rising, and no body see him that gathers it, shall
cure the Tertian, if it be bound to the left arm, the sick party not knowing what is done.
But amongst places that are appropriated to the Stars, all stinking places, dark,
underground, religious, and monrnfull places, as Church-yards, tombes, and houses not
inhabited by men, and old, tottering, obscure, dreadfull houses, and solitary dens, caves,
and pits, also fish-ponds, standing pools, fennes, and such like are appropriated to
Saturne. Unto Jupiter are ascribed all privileged places, Consistories of noble men,
Tribunals, Chaires, places for Exercises, Schools, and all beautifull, and clean places,
scattered, or sprinkled with divers odours. To Mars, fiery, and bloody places, furnaces,
bake-houses, shambles, places of execution, and places where there have been great
battailes [battles] fought, and slaughters made, and the like. To the Sun, light places, the
Serene Aire, Kings Pallaces [palaces], and Princes Courts, Pulpits, Theators [theaters],
Thrones, and all kingly, and Magnificent places. To Venus, pleasant fountains, green
Meadows, flowrishing [flourishing] Gardens, garnished beds, stews (and according to
Orpheus) the sea, the sea shore, baths, dancing-places, and all places belonging to
women. To Mercury, shops, schools, ware-houses [warehouses], Exchange for
Merchants, and the like. To the Moon, wildernesses, woods, rocks, hils [hills], mountains,
forrests [forests], fountains, waters, rivers, seas, sea-shores, ships, groves, high-waies
[highways], and granaries for Corn, and such like. Upon this account they that endeavor
to procure love, are wont to bury for a certain time the instruments of their art, whether
they be rings, images, looking-glasses, or any other, or hide them in a stew house,
because in that place they will contract some venerall faculty, no otherwise then things
that stand in stinking places, become stinking, and those in an Aromaticall place, become
Aromaticall, and of a sweet savour. The four corners of the Earth also pertain to this
matter. Hence they that are to gather a Saturnall, Martiall, or Joviall Hearb [herb], must
look towards the East, or South, partly because they desire to be orientall from the Sun,
and partly, because of their principall houses, viz.> Aquarius, Scorpius
[Scorpio],Sagittarius are Southern signes, so also are Capricornus, and Pisces. But they
that will gather a Venerall, Mercuriall. or Lunary Hearb [herb], must look towards the
West, because they delight to be western, or else they must look Northward, because their
principall houses, viz. Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo are Northern signes, so in any
Solary work we must look towards the Eas, or South, but rather towards the Solary body,
and light.
Chapter xlix. Of Light, Colours, Candles, and Lamps, and to what Stars,
Houses, and Elements severall colours are ascribed.
Light also is a quality that partakes much of form, and is a simple act, and a
representation of the understanding: it is first diffused from the Mind of God into all
things, but in God the Father, the Father of Light, it is the first true light; then in the Son a
beautifull overflowing brightness, and in the Holy Ghost a burning brightness, exceeding
all Intelligencies; yea, as Dyonisius saith, of Seraphins, In Angels therefore it is a shining
intelligence diffused, an abundant joy beyond all bounds of reason yet received in divers
degrees, according to the Nature of the intelligence that receives it; Then it descends into
the Celestiall bodies, where it becomes a store of life, and an effectuall propagation, even
a visible splendor. In the fire a certain naturall liveliness infused into it by the heavens.
And lastly in men, it is a clear discourse of reason, an knowledge of divine things, and the
whole rationall: but this is manifold, either by reason of the disposition of the body, as the
Peripateticks will have it, or which is more true, by reason of the good pleasure of him
that bestows it, who gives it to every one as he pleaseth. From thence it passeth to the
fancy, yet above the sense, but only imaginable, and thence to the sence [senses], but
especially to that of the eyes; In them it becomes a visible clearness, and is extended to
other perspicuous bodies, in which it becomes a colour, and a shining beauty, but in dark
bodies it is a certain beneficiall and generative vertue, and penetrates, to the very center,
where the beames of it being collected into a narrow place, it becomes a dark heat,
tormenting, and scorching, so that all things perceive the vigour of the light according to
their capacity, all which joyning to it self with an enlivening heat, and passing through all
things, doth convey its qualities, and vertues through all things. Therefore Magicians
forbid the Urin [urine] of a sick man to be sprinkled in the shadow a sick man, or to be
uncovered against the Sun or the Moon, because the rayes of the light penetrating,
bringing suddenly with it the noxious qualities of the sick bodies, convey them into the
opposite body, and affect that with a quality of the same kind. This is the reason why
Enchanters have a care to cover their Enchantments with their shadow. So the Civet cat
make all Dogs dumb with the very touch of her shadow. Also there are made artificially
some Lights, by Lamps, Torches, Candles, and such like, of some certain thing, and
liquors opportunely chosen, according to the rule of the Stars, and composed amongst
themselves according to their congruity, which when they be lighted, and shine alone, are
wont to produce some wonderfull, and Celestiall effects, which men many times wonder
at, as Pliny reports out of Anaxilaus, of a poison of Mares after copulation, which being
lighted in Torches, doth monstrously represent a sight of horse heads: the like may be
done of Asses, and flies, which being tempered with wax, & lighted, make a strange sight
of flies: and the skin of a Serpent lighted in a Lamp, maketh Serpents appear. And they
say when Grapes are in their flower, if any one shall bind a Viall to them full of Oile, and
shall let it alone till they be ripe, and then the Oile be lighted in a Lamp, it makes Grapes
to be seen. And so in other fruits. If Centory be mixed with Honey, and the blood of a
Lapwing, and be put in a Lamp, they that stand about will seem a great deal bigger then
they are wont: and if it be lighted in a clear night, the Stars will seem to be scattered the
one from the other. Such force also is in the inke of the Cuttle fish, that it being put into a
Lamp, makes Black-mores [blackamoors] appear. It is also reported, that a Candle made
of some certain Saturnine things, if being lighted, it be extinguished in the mouth of a
man newly dead, will afterwards, as oft as it shines alone, bring great sadness, and fear
upon them that stand about it. Of such like Torches, Lamps, doth Hermes speak more of,
also Plato, and Chyrannides, and of the latter writers Albertus in a certain Treatise of this
particular thing. Colours also are a kind of lights, which being mixed with things, are
wont to expose them to those Stars, to which they are agreeable. And we shall afterwards
speak of some colours, which are the lights of the Planets, by which even the natures of
fixed Stars themselves are understood, which also may be applyed to the flames of
Lamps, and Candles. But in this place we shall relate how the colours of inferiour mixt
things are distributed to divers Planets. For all colours, black, lucid, earthy, leaden,
brown, have relation to Saturne. Saphire [Sapphire], and airy colours, and those which
are alwaies green, clear, purple, darkish, golden, mixed with Silver, belong to Jupiter.
Red colours, and burning, fiery, flaming, violet, purple, bloody, and iron colours,
resemble Mars. Golden, Saffron, purple, and bright colours, resemble the Sun. But all
white, fair, curious, green, ruddy, betwixt saffron, and purple, resemble Venus, Mercury,
and the Moon. Moreover amongst the houses of the heaven [signes of the zodiac], the
first and seventh hath white colour: the second, and twelfth green: the third, and eleventh
saffron: the fourth, and the tenth red: the fift, and ninth honey colour: the sixt, and eighth,
black. The Elements also have their colours, by which Naturall Philosophers judge of the
complexion and property of their nature; For an earthy colour, caused of coldness, and
dryness is brown, and black, and manifests black Choller [choler], and a Saturnine nature;
the blew [blue] tending towards whiteness, doth denote flegme [phlegm]: for cold makes
white, moisture and dryness makes black: reddish colour shews blood, but fiery, flaming,
burning hot, shew choller [choler], which by reason of its subtilty, and aptness to mix
with others, doth cause divers colours more: for if it be mixed with blood, and blood be
most predominant, it makes a florid red; if choller [choler] predominate, it makes a redish
[reddish] colour; if there be an equall mixtion, it makes a sad red. But if adust choller
[choler] be mixed with blood, it makes a Hempen colour, and red, if blood predominate,
and somewhat red if choller [choler] prevaile; but if it be mixed with a melancholy
humour, it makes a black colour, but with malancholy [melancholy], and flegme
[phlegm] together, in an equall proportion, it makes a Hempen colour: If flegme [phlegm]
abound, a mud colour, if melancholy, a blewish [bluish]; but if it be mixed with flegme
[phlegm] alone, in an equall proportion, it makes a citrine [citron] colour; if unequally, a
pale, or palish. Now all colours are more prevalent, when they be in silk, or in metals, or
in perspicuous substances, or pretious [precious] stones; and in those things which
resemble Celestiall bodies in colour, especially in living things.
Chapter l. Of Fascination, and the Art thereof.
Fascination is a binding, which comes from the spirit of the Witch, through the eyes of
him that is bewitched, entering to his heart. Now the instrument of Fascination is the
spirit, viz. a certain pure, lucid, subtile vapour, generated of the purer blood, by the heat
of the heart. This doth alwaies send forth, through the eyes, rayes like to it self; Those
rayes being sent forth, do carry with them a spirituall vapour, and that vapour a blood, as
it appears in bleer [bleary], and red eyes, whose raies [rays] being sent forth to the eyes of
him that is opposite, and looks upon them, carries the vapour of the corrupt blood,
together with it self, by the contagion of which, it doth infect the eyes of the beholder
with the like disease. So the eye being opened, and intent upon any one with a strong
imagination, doth dart its beams, which are the Vehiculum of the spirit into the eyes of
him that is opposite to him, which tender spirit strikes the eyes of him that is bewitched,
being stirred up from the heart of him that strikes, and possesseth the breast of him that is
stricken, wounds his heart, and infects his spirit. Whence Apuleius saith, Thy eyes sliding
down through my eyes, into mine inward breast, stir up a most vehement burning in my
Marrow. Know therefore that men are most bewitched, when with often beholding they
direct the edge of their sight to the edg [edge] of their sight that bewitch them, and when
their eyes are reciprocally intent one upon the other, and when raies [rays] are joyned to
raies, and lights to lights, for then the spirit of the one is joyned to the spirit of the other,
and fixeth its sparks: So are strong ligations made, and so most vehement loves are
inflamed with the only raies of the eyes, even with a certain sudden looking on, as if it
were with a dart, or stroke penetrating the whole body, whence then the spirit, and
amorous blood being thus wounded, are carried forth upon the lover, and enchanter, no
otherwise then the blood, and spirit of the vengeance of him that is slain, are upon him
that slayes him. Whence Lucretius sang concerning those amorous bewitchings.
The body smitten is, but yet the mind
Is wounded with the darts of Cupid blind.
All parts do Simpathize [sympathize] i' th' wound, but know
The blood appears in that which had the blow.
So great is the power of Fascination, especially when the vapours of the eyes are
subservient to the affection. Therefore Witches use Collyries, ointments, alligations, and
such like, to affect, and corroborate the spirit this or that manner. To procure love, they
use venereall collyries, as Hippomanes, the blood of Doves, or Sparrows, and such like.
To induce fear, they use Martiall Collyries, as of the eyes of Wolves, the Civet Cat, and
the like. To procure misery or sickness, they use Saturnine, and so of the rest.
Chapter li. Of certain observations, producing wonderfull Vertues.
They say that certain acts, and observations have a certain power of naturall things, that
they believe diseases may be expelled, or brought thus, and thus. So they say that
quartanes may be driven away if the parings of the nails of the sick be bound to the neck
of a live Eel in a linnen clout [linen cloth], and she be let go into the water. And Pliny
saith, that the paring of a sick mans nailes of his feet, and hands being mixed with wax,
cure the quartan, tertian, and quotidian Ague, and if they be before Sun rising fastened to
another mans gate, will cure such like diseases. In like manner let all the parings of the
nailes be put into Pismires caves [anthills], and they say that that which begun to draw
the nailes first must be taken, and bound to the neck, and by this means will the disease
be removed. They say that by Wood stricken with lightning, and cast behind the back
with ones hands, any disease may be cured, and in quartanes a piece of a naile from a
Gibbet, wrapt up in Wooll, and hanged about the neck, cures them; also a Rope doth the
like, that is taken from a Gallows, and hid under ground, that the Sun cannot reach it.
Also the throat of him that hath a hard swelling, or imposthume [aposteme, abscess],
being touched with the hand of him that dyed [died] by an immature death, is cured
thereby. Also they say, that a woman is presently eased of her hard travel [labor], if any
one shall put into the bed, where the woman in travel [labor] is, a stone, or dart, with
which either of these Animals, viz. a Man, a Boar, or a Bear were at one blow killed. The
same also, as they say, doth a spear that is pulled out of the body of a man, if it shall not
first touch the ground; also they say that Arrows pulled out of the body of a man, if they
have not touched the Earth, and be put under any one lying down, will procure love; Also
they say that the falling sickness is cured by meat made of the flesh of a wild beast, slain
in the same manner as a man is slain. Also they say that a mans eyes that are washed
three times with the water wherein he hath washed his feet, shall never be sore or bleer
[bleary]. It is said that some do cure diseases of the groin with threed [thread] taken out
of the Weavers Loom, being tyed [tied] in nine, or seven knots, the name of some Widow
being named at every knot. Also the Spleen of Catle [cattle] extended upon pained
Spleens, cures them, if he that applies it, saith that he is applying a medicine to the Spleen
to cure, and ease it: After this, they say, the patient must be shut into a sleeping room, the
dore [door] being sealed up with a Ring, and some verse be repeated over nineteen times.
The Urine of a green Lizard cures the same disease, if it be hanged up in a pot before the
patients bed-chamber, so that he may, as he comes in and out, touch it with his hand.
Also a Lizard killed in the Urine of a Calf, as they say, retains his lust that put it in: but
he that shall put his own Urine into a Dogs Urine, is said to be made thereby dull to
venerous acts, and to feel a benummedness in his loins. They say, that if ones own Urine
be dropped upon the foot in the morning, it is a remedy against all evil medicines. And a
little Frog climbing up a tree, if any one shall spit in his mouth, and then let him escape,
is said to cure the Cough. It is a wonderfull thing, but easy to experience, what Pliny
speaks of, If any one shall be sorry for any blow that he hath given another afar off, or
nigh at hand, if he shall presently spit into the middle of that hand with which he gave the
blow, the party that was smitten shall presently be freed from pain. This hath been
approved of in a four-footed beast that hath been sorely hurt. Some there are that
aggravate the blow before they give it. In like maner spitle [spittle] carried in the hand, or
to spit in the shooe [shoe] of the right foot before it be put on, is good when any one
passeth through a dangerous place. They say that Wolves will not come to a field, if one
of them be taken, and the blood let by little and little out of his legs, being unbroken, with
a knife, and sprinkled about the outsides of the field, and he himself be buried in that
place, from which he was first drawn. The Methanenses, Citizens of Trezenium,
accounted it as a present remedy for preserving of Vines from the wrong of the Southern
wind, having alwaies found it by most certain experience; if whilest the wind blows, a
white Cock should be pulled to pieces in the middle by two men, both which keeping
their part, must walk round the Vineyard, and both meeting in the place from whence
they began their Circuit, must that place bury the pieces of the Cock. They say also that if
any one shall hold a Viper over a vapour with a staffe, he shall prophecy, and that the
staffe wherewith a Snake was beaten is good against diseases of breeding women. These
things Pliny recites. It is said also in gathering roots and hearbs [herbs], we must draw
three circles round about them, first with a sword, then dig them up, taking heed in the
mean time of a contrary wind. Also they say, that if any one shall measure a dead man
with a rope, first from the Elbow to the biggest finger, then from the shoulder to the same
finger, and afterwards from the head to the feet, making thrice those mensurations, if any
one afterward shall be measured with the same rope in the same maner, he shall not
prosper, but be unfortunate, and fall into misery, and sadness. And Albertus out of
Chyrannis saith, that if any woman hath enchanted thee to love her, take the sheet [gown]
she lies in, and piss through her hood, and her right sleeve, out of doors, and the
enchantment will be quitted. And Pliny saith, that to sit by women great with child
[pregnant], or when a medicine is given to any one of them, the fingers being joyned
[joined] together like the teeth of a Kemb [comb], is a charm. This was known by
experience in Alcumena breeding Hercules: and so much the worse, if that be done about
one, or both knees. Also to sit cross legged, is Sorcery, therefore it was forbiden
[forbidden] to be done in the Counsels of Princes, and Rulers, as a thing which hindred
all acts. And it is said, if any one standing before the door call the man by his name, that
is lying with a woman, and he answer, if then he fasten a knife, or needle on the door, and
break it, the edge being downward, he that is in the bed with the woman cannot couple
with her as long as those things shall be there.
Chapter lii. Of the Countenance, and Gesture, the Habit, and Figure of the
Body, and to what Stars any of these do answer; whence Physiognomy,
and Metoposcopy, and Chyromancy [Chiromancy], Arts of divination,
have their grounds.
The countenance, gesture, the motion, setting, and figure of the body, being accidentall to
us, conduce to the receiving of Celestiall gifts, and expose us to the superiour bodies, and
produce certain effects in us, no otherwise then in Hellebor, which when thou gatherest,
if thou pullest the leaf upward, it draws the humors upward, and causeth vomiting; if
downward, it causeth purging, by drawing the humor downward. How much also the
countenauce, gesture, do affect the sight, imagination, and Animall spirit, no man is
ignorant. So they that couple for generation, for the most part are wont to make an
impression on the children that are then begotten, of that countenance which they
themselves then form, or imagine: So a mild, and cheerfull countenance of a Prince in the
City, makes the people joyfull: but fierce, and sad, terrifies them: so the gesture, and
countenance of any one lamenting, doth easily move to pitty [pity]: So the shape of an
amiable person, doth easily excite to love. Thou must know that such like gestures, and
figures, as harmonies of the body do expose it no otherwise to the Celestials, then odours,
and the spirit of a Medicine, and internall passions do the soul. For as Medicines, and
passions of the mind are by certain dispositions of the Heaven increased so also the
gesture, and motion of the body do get an efficacy by certain influences of the heavens.
For there are gestures resembling Saturne, which are melancholy, and sad, as are beating
of the breast, striking of the head: also such as are Religious, as the bowing of the knee,
and a fixt look downwards, as of one praying, also weeping, and such like, as are used by
an Austere, and Saturnine man, such an one as the Satyrist describes, saying,
With hang'd down head, with eyes fixed to the ground,
His raging words bites in, and muttering sound
He doth express with powting [pouting] lips -----
A cheerfull, and honest countenance, a worshipfull gesture, clapping of the hands, as of
one rejoycing [rejoicing], and praising; also the bending of the knee, with the head lifted
up, as of one that is worshiping, are ascribed to Jupiter. A sowre [sour], fierce, cruell,
angry, rough countenance, and gesture, are ascribed to Mars. Solary are honourable, and
couragious [courageous] gestures, and countenances: also walkings abroad, bending of
the knee, as of one honoring a King with one knee. Venereal, are dances, embraces,
laughters, amiable, and cheerfull countenances. Mercuriall are inconstant, quick,
variable, and such like gestures, and countenances. Lunary are such as are moveable,
poisonfull, and childish, and the like. And as we have spoke of gestures, so also are the
shapes of men distinct. For Saturne bespeaks a man to be of a black, and yellowish
colour, lean, crooked, of a rough skin, great veines, hairy all over his body, little eyes, of
a frowning forehead, of a thin beard, great lips, eyes intent upon the ground, of a heavy
gate [gait], striking his feet together as he walks, crafty, witty, a seducer, and murderous.
Jupiter signifies a man to be of a pale colour, darkish red, a handsome body, good stature,
bold, of great eyes, not black altogether, large pupill, short nostrils, not equall, great teeth
before, curld hair, of good disposition, and manners. Mars makes a man red, of a red hair,
round face, yellowish eyes, of a terrible, and sharp looks, bold, jocund, proud, crafty. The
Sun makes a man of a tauny [tawny] colour, betwixt yellow and black, dasht [dashed]
with red, of a short stature, yet of a handsome body, without much hair, and curld, of
yellow eyes, wise, faithfull, desirous of praise. Venus signifies a man to be tending
towards blackness, but more white, with mixture of red, of a handsome body, a fair, and
round face, fair hair, fair eyes, the blackness whereof is more intense, of good manners,
and honest love, also kind, patient, and jocund; Mercury signifies a man not much white,
or black, of a long face, high forehead, fair eyes, not black, to have a streight [straight],
and long nose, thin beard, long fingers, to he ingenious, a subtile inquisitor, turn-coat, and
subject to many fortunes. The Moon signifies a man to be in colour white, mixed with a
little red, of a fair stature, round face, with some marks in it, eyes not fully black,
frowning forehead, also kind, gentle, sociable.
The Signes also, and faces of Signes have their figures, and shapes, which he that would
know, must seek them out in books of Astrology. Lastly, upon these figures, and
gestures, Physiognomy, and Metoposcopy, arts of divination do depend: Also
Chyromancy [chiromancy], foretelling future events, not as causes, but as signes through
like effects, caused by the same cause. And although these divers kinds of divinations
may seem to be done by inferiour, and weak signes, yet the judgements of them are not to
be slighted, or condemned, when prognostication is made by them, not out of
superstition, but by reason of the harmoniacall correspondency of all the parts of the
body. Whosoever therefore doth the more exactly imitate the Celestiall bodies, either in
nature, study, action, motion, gesture, countenance, passions of the mind, and opportunity
of the season, is so much the more like to the heavenly bodies, and can receive larger
gifts from them.
Chapter liii. Of Divination, and its kinds.
There are some other kinds of divinations, depending upon naturall causes, which are
known to every one in his art, and experience, to be in divers things; by which Physitians
[physicians], husbandmen, shepheards [shepherds], Mariners, and every one of these out
of probable signes do Prognosticate. Many of these kinds Aristotle made mention of in
his Book of Times. Amongst which Auguria, and Auspicia are the chiefest, which were in
former time in such esteem amongst the Romanes, that they would do nothing that did
belong to private or publique [public] business without the counsell of the Augures:
Cicero also in his Book of Divinations largely declares, that the people of Tuscia would
do nothing without this art. Now there are divers kinds of Auspicia's: for some are called
Pedestria (i.e.) which are taken from four-footed beasts: Some are called Auguria, which
are taken from birds: Some are Celestiall, which are taken from thundrings, and
lightnings; some are called Caduca (i.e.) when any fell in the temple, or elsewhere; Some
were sacred, which were taken from sacrifices. Some of these were called Piacula, and
sad Auspicia, as when a sacrifice escaped from the Altar, or being smitten made a
bellowing, or fell upon another part of his body then he should. To these is added
Exauguration, viz., when the rod fell out of the hand of the Augure, with which it was the
custome to view, and take notice of the Aupicium. Michael Scotus makes mention of
twelve kinds of Auguria's, viz. Six on the right hand, the names of which he saith are
Fernova, Fervetus, Confert, Emponenthem, Sonnasarnova, Sonnasarvetus: and the other
six on the left hand, the names of which are, Confernova, Confervetus, Viaram,
Herrenam, Scassarnova, and Scassarvetus. Then expounding their names, he saith,
Fernova is an Augurium; when thou goest out of thy house to do any business, and in
going thou seest a man, or a bird going, or flying, so that either of them set himself before
thee upon thy left hand, that is a good signification, in reference to thy business. Fervetus
is an Augurium; when thou shalt go out of thy house for to do any business, and in going
thou findest or seest a bird, or a man resting himself before thee on the left side of thee,
that is an ill sign in reference to thy business: Viaram is an Augurium; when a man or a
bird in his journey, or flying passeth before thee, coming from the right side of thee, and
bending toward the left, goeth out of thy sight, that is a good sign concerning thy
business. Confernova is an Augurium; when thou dost first find a man, or a bird going, or
flying, and then he rest himself before thee on thy right side, thou seeing of it, that is a
good sign concerning thy business; Confervetus is an Augurium; when first thou findest,
or seest a man, or a bird bending from thy right side, it is an ill sign concerning thy
business. Scimasarnova is an Augurium; when a man, or a bird comes behind thee, and
outgoeth thee, but before he comes at thee, he rests, thou seeing of him on thy right side,
it is to thee a good sign. Scimasarvetus is an Augurium; when thou seest a man, or bird
behind thee, but before he comes to thee he rests in that place, thou seeing of it, is a good
sign.
[Confert is an Augurium; when a man or bird in journeying, or flying shall pass behind
thee, coming from the left side of thee, and bending toward thy right, pass out of thy
sight, and is an evill sign concerning thy business.]
Scassarvetus is when thou seest a man, or a bird passing by thee, and resting in a place on
thy left side, it is an evill sign to thee.
[Scassarnova is when thou seest a man, or a bird passing by thee, and resting in a place
on thy right side, is an Augurium of good to thee.]
Emponenthem is when a man, or a bird, coming from thy left side, and passing to thy
right, goeth out of thy sight without resting, it is a good sign. Hartena is an Augurium; if
a man or a bird coming from thy right hand, passing behind thy back to thy left, and thou
shall see him resting any where, this is an evill sign. Thus much Scotus. The Ancients did
also prognosticate from sneesings [sneezings], of which Homer in the seventeenth book
of his Odyssey makes mention, because they thought they proceeded from a sacred place,
viz. the head, in which the intellect is vigourous, and operative. Whence also whatsoever
speech came into the breast, or mind of a man rising in the morning unawares, is said to
be some presage, and an Augurium.
Chapter liiii. Of divers certain Animals, and other things which have a
signification in Auguria's [auguries].
All the Auspicia [auspices] which first happen in the beginning of any enterprise are to be
taken notice of: as, if in the beginning of thy work thou shalt perceive that Rats have
gnawn thy garments, desist from thy undertakings; If going forth thou shalt stumble at the
threshold, or if in the way thou shalt dash thy foot against any thing, forbear thy journey;
If any ill omen happen in the beginning of thy business, put off thy undertakings, least
thy intentions be wholly frustrated, or accomplished to no purpose; but expect and wait
for a fortunate hour for the dispatching of thy affairs with a better omen. We see that
many Animals are, by a naturall power imbred in them, propheticall. Doth not the Cock
by his crowing diligently tell you the hours of the night, and morning, and with his wings
spread forth chase away the Lion; and many birds with their singing, and chattering, and
flies by their sharp pricking foretell rain, and Dolphins by their often leaping above the
water, fore-run [forwarn of] tempests. It would be too long to relate all the passages,
which the Phrygians, Cilicians, Arabians, Umbrians, Tuscians, and other peoples, which
follow the Auguria's, learned by birds. These they have proved by many experiments, and
examples. For in all things the Oracles of things to come are hid: but those are the
chiefest which Ominall [omenal] birds shall foretell. These are those which the Poets
relate were turned from men into birds. Therefore what the Daw declares, hearken, and
mark, observing her setting as she sits, and her manner of flying, whether on the right
hand, or left, whether clamorous, or silent, whether she goes before, or follows after,
whether she waits for the approach of him that passeth by, or flies from him, and which
way she goes; all these things must be diligently observed. Orus Apollo saith in his
Hyeroglyphicks [Hieroglyphics], Daws that are twins signifie marriage, because this
Animall brings forth two eggs, out of which male, and female must be brought forth: But
if (which seldom happens) two males be generated, or two females, the males will not
couple with any other females, nor females with any other males, but will alwaies live
without a mate; and solitary. Therefore they that meet a single Daw, divine thereby that
they shall live a single life. The same also doth a black Hen Pigeon betoken; for after the
death of her mate, she alwaies lives single. Thou shalt as carefully observe Crows, which
are as significant as Daws, yea, and in greater matters. It was Epictetus the Stoicks
Philosophers judgment, who was a Sage Author, that if a Crow did croke [croak] over
against any one, it did betoken some evill, either to his body, fortune, honour, wife, or
children. Then thou shall take heed to Swans, who foreknow the secrets of the waters, for
their cheerfulness doth presage happy events not only to Marriners [mariners], but all
other travellers, unless they be overcome by the coming over of a stronger [bird], as of an
Eagle, who by the most potent Majesty of her soveraignty [sovereignty] makes null the
predictions of all other birds, if she speaks to the contrary; for she flies higher then all
other birds, and is of more acute sight, and is never excluded from the secrets of Jupiter:
She portends advancement, and victory, but by blood; because she drinks no water but
blood. An Eagle flying over the Locrensians, fighting against the Crotoniensians gave
them victory. An Eagle setting her self unawares upon the Target of Hiero, going forth to
the first War, betokened that he should be King. Two Eagles sitting all day upon the
house at the birth of Alexander of Macedonia, did portend to him an omen of two
Kingdomes, viz. Asia, and Europe. An Eagle also taking off the hat of Lucias Tarquinius
Priscus, Son to Demarathus the Corinthian (flying from home by reason of some
discord, and being come into Hetraria, and going to Rome) and then flying high with it,
and afterwards putting it upon his head again, did portend to him the Kingdome of the
Romans. Vulturs [Vultures] signifie difficulty, hardness, ravenousness, which was
verified in the beginning of building of Cities. Also they foretell the places of slaughter,
coming seven dayes before hand; and because they have most respect to that place where
the greatest slaughter shall be, as if they gaped after the greatest number of the slain;
therefore the ancient Kings were wont to send out spies to take notice what place the
Vulturs [vultures] had most respect to. The Phoenix promiseth singular good success,
which being seen anew, Rome was built very auspiciously. The Pellican [pelican],
because she hazards her self for her young, signifies that a man should out of the zeal of
his love undergo much hardship. The painted bird gave the name to the City of Pictavia,
and foreshewed the lenity of that people by its colour, and voice. The Heron is an
Augurium of hard things. The Stork is a bird of concord, and makes concord. Cranes
gives us notice of the trechery [treachery] of enemies. The bird Cacupha betokens
gratitude, for she alone doth express love to her Dam [mother], being spent with old age.
On the contrary, Hippopotamus that kils [kills] his Dam [mother], doth betoken
ingratitude for good turn, also injustice. The bird Origis is most envious, and betokens
envy.
Amongst the smaller birds, the Pie is talkative, and foretels [foretells] guests. The bird
Albanellus flying by any one, if from the left to the right, betokens cheerfulness of
entertainment, if contrarywise, betokens the contrary. The scritch [screech] Owl is
alwaies unlucky, so also is the horn Owl, who because she goes to her young by night
unawares, as death comes unawares, is therefore said to foretell death: yet sometimes,
because she is not blind in the dark of the night, doth betoken diligence, and
watchfulness, which she made good, when she sate upon the spear of Hiero. Dido, when
she sees the unlucky Owl, pittied [pitied] Æneas, whence the Poet sang,
The Owl sitting on top of th' house alone,
Sends forth her sad complaints with mournfull tone.
And in another place,
The slothfull Owl by mortals is esteem'd
A fatall omen -----
The same same bird sang in the Capitoll when the Romane affaires were low at
Numantia, and when Fregelia was pulled down for a conspiracy made against the
Romans. Almadel saith, that Owls, and night-ravens, when they turn aside to strange
countries, or houses, betoken the death of the men of that country, and those houses; for
those birds are delighted with dead Carkases [carcasses], and perceive them before hand.
For men that are dying have a neer affinity with dead Carkases [carcasses]. The Hawk
also is a foreteller of contention, as Naso sings.
We hate the Hawk, because that arms amongst
She alwaies lives -----
Lelius the Embassadour of Pompey was slain in Spain amongst the Purveyours, which
misfortune, a Hawk flying over the head, is said to foretell. And Almadel saith, that these
kind of birds fighting amongst themselves, signifie the change of a Kingdome; but if
birds of another kind shall fight with them, and are never seen to come together again, it
portends a new condition, and state of that Country. Also little birds by their coming to,
or departing from, foreshew that a family shall be inlarged [enlarged], or lessened, and
their flight, by how much the more serene it is, by so much the more laudable. Whence
Melampus the Augure conjectured at the slaughter of the Greeks by the flight of little
birds, when he saith, Thou seest that no bird taketh his flight in fair weather. Swallows,
because when they are dying they provide a place of safety for their young, do portend a
great patrimony, or Legacy after the death of friends. A Bat meeting any one running
away, signifies an evasion: for although she have no wings, yet she flies. A Sparrow is a
bad omen to one that runs away, for she flies from the Hawk, and makes hast [haste] to
the Owl, where she is in as great danger: yet in love she is fortunate, for being stirred up
with lust, couples seven times in an hour. Bees are a good omen to Kings, for they
signifie an obsequious people. Flies signifie importunity, and impudency, because being
oftentimes driven away, they do yet continually return. Also domestick birds are not
without some Auguria's, for Cocks by their crowing promote hope, and the journey of
him that is undertaking it. Moreover Livia the mother of Tiberius, when she was great
with him, took a Hen-Egg and hatched it in her bosome, and at length came forth a Cock
chick with a great comb, which the Augures interpreted that the child that should be born
of her should be King. And Cicero writes that at Thebais Cocks, by their crowing all
night, did presage that the Bætians would obtain victory against the Lacedæmonians: and
the reason is according to the Augures interpretations, because that bird when he is beaten
is silent, but when he himself hath overcome, crows. In like manner also omens of events
are taken from beasts. For the meeting of a Weesel [weasel] is ominous, also meeting of a
Hare is an ill omen to a traveller, unless she be taken. A Mule also is bad, because barren.
A Hog is pernicious, for such is his nature, and therefore signifies pernicious men. A
Horse betokens quarrellings, and fightings: whence Anchises seeing of white Horses,
cries out in Virgil,
With War are Horses arm'd, yea threaten War.
But when they are joyned together in a Chariot, because they draw with an equall yoke,
they signifie that peace is to be hoped for. An Asse is an unprofitable creature, yet did
Marius good, who when he was pronounced an enemy to his country, saw an Asse
disdaining provender that was offered to him, and running to the water, by which Augury,
he supposing he saw a way of safety shewed to him, intreated the aid of his friends, that
they would convey him to the Sea; which being granted, he was set into a little ship, and
so escaped the threats of Silla the Conqueror. If the Foal of an Asse meet any one going
to an Augury, he signifies labor, patience, and hinderances. A Wolf meeting any one is a
good sign, the effect whereof was seen in Hiero of Sicilia, from whom a Wolf snatching
away a book whilest he was at school, confirmed to him the success of the Kingdom: but
yet the Wolf makes him speechless whom he sees first. A Wolf rent in pieces a
Watchman of P. Africanus, and C. Fulvius at Minturn, when the Romane Army was
overcome by the fugitives in Sicilia. Also he signifies perfidious men, such as you can
give no credit to: which was known in the progeny of Romanes. For the faith which they
long since sucked from their mother the Wolf, and kept to themselves from the
beginning, as by a certain law of nature, passed over to their posterity. To meet a Lion,
seeing she is amongst Animals the strongest, and striking terrour into all the rest, is good.
But for a woman to meet a Lionesse, is bad, because she hinders conception, for a
Lionesse brings forth but once. To meet Sheep, and Goats is good. It is read also in the
Ostentarian of the Tuscians, if this Animall shall wear any unusuall colour, it portends to
the Emperour plenty of all things, together with much happiness. Whence Virgil to Pollio
sings thus,
But in the Meadows Rams shall Skarlet [scarlet] bear,
And changing, sometimes golden Fleeces wear.
It is good also to meet Oxen treading out Corn, but better to meet them plowing, which
although breaking the way hinder thy journey, yet by the favour of their Auspicium will
recompence thee again. A Dog in a journey is fortunate, because Cyrus being cast into
the woods was nourished by a Dog till he came to the Kingdom, which also the Angel,
companion of Tobit did not scorn as a companion. The Castor, because he bites off his
Testicles, and leaves them to the Hunters, is an ill omen, and portends that a man will
injure himself. Also amongst small Animals, Mice signifie danger. For the same day that
they did gnaw Gold in the Capitoll, both the Consuls were intercepted by Hannibal by
way of ambush neer Tarentum. The Locust making a stand in any place, or burning the
place, hinders one from their wishes, and is an ill omen; on the contrary the Grass-
hoppers [grasshoppers] promote a journey, and foretell a good event of things. The
Spider weaving a line downwards, is said to signifie hope of money to come. Also the
Pismires [ants], because they know how to provide for themselves, and to prepare safe
nests for themselves, portend security, and riches, a great Army. Hence, when the
Pismires [ants] had devoured a tame Dragon of Tiberius Caesar, it was advised, that he
should take heed of the tumult of a multitude. If a Snake meet thee, take heed of an ill
tongued enemy; For this Animall hath no power but in his mouth. A Snake creeping into
Tiberius his pallace [palace], portended his fall. Two Snakes were found in the bed of
Sempronius Gracchus, wherefore a Soothsayer told him, if he would let the male, or the
female escape, either he or his wife would shortly dye [die]; he preferring the life of his
wife, killed the male, and let the female escape, and within a few dayes he dyed [died].
So a Viper signifies lewd women, and wicked children; and an Eel signifies a man
displeased with every body: For she lives apart from all other fishes, nor is ever found in
the company of any. But amongst all Auspicia's [auguries] and omens, there is none more
effectuall, and potent then man, none that doth signifie the truth more cleerly. Thou shalt
therefore diligently note, and observe the condition of the man that meeteth thee, his age,
profession, station, gesture, motion, exercise, complexion, habit, name, words, speech,
and all such like things. For seeing there are in all other Animals so many discoveries of
presages, without all question these are more efficacious, and cleer, which are infused
into mans soul; which Tully [Cicero] himself testifies, saying, that there is a certain
Auspicium naturally in mens souls of their eternity, for the knowing of all the courses,
and causes of things. In the foundation of the City of Rome the head of a man was found
with his whole face, which did presage the greatness of the Empire, and gave the name to
the Mountain of the Capitoll. The Brutian souldiers [soldiers] fighting against Octavius,
and M. Antonius, found an Aethiopian [Ethiopian] in the gate of their Castle; whom
though they did slay as a presage of ill success, yet they were unfortunate in the batle
[battle], and Brutus, and Cassius both Generals, were slain. Meeting of Monks is
commonly accounted an ill omen, and so much the rather, if it be early in the morning,
because these kind of men live for the most by the sudden death of men, as Vulturs
[vultures] do by slaughters.
Chapter lv. How Auspica's are verified by the light of Naturall instinct,
and of some rules of finding of it out.
Auspicia, and Auguria, which foretell things to come by Animals, & birds, Orpheus the
divine himself (as we read) did teach and shew first of all, which afterwards were had in
great esteem with all Nations. Now they are verified by the light of naturall instinct, as if
from this, some lights of divination may descend upon four-footed beasts, winged, and
other Animals, by which they are able to presage to us of the events of things: which
Virgil seems to be sensible of, when he sings,
Nor think I Heaven on them such knowledge states,
Nor that their prudence is above the fates.
Now this Instinct of nature, as saith William of Paris, is more sublime then all humane
apprehension, and very neer, and most like to prophecy. By this instinct there is a certain
wonderfull light of divination in some Animals naturally, as it manifestly appears in some
Dogs, who know by this instinct theeves [thieves], and men, and finde them out, and
apprehend them, falling upon them with a full mouth. By the like instinct Vulturs
[vultures] foresee future slaughters in batles [battles], and gather together into places
where they shall be, as if they fore-saw the flesh of dead Carkases [carcasses]. By the
same instinct Partridges [partridges] know their Dam, whichm they never saw and leave
the Partridge which stole away her Dams Eggs, & sate upon them. By the same instinct
also certain hurtful and terrible things are perceived (the soul of the men being altogether
ignorant of them) whence terror, and horror ceaseth much upon men when they think
nothing of these things. So a thief lying hid in any house, although no body knows, or
thinks of his being there, strikes fear, and terror, and a troublesomeness of mind into the
inhabitants of that house, although haply not of all, because the brightness of this instinct
is not in all men; yet of some of them. So a harlot being hid in some very large house, is
sometimes perceived to be there by some one that is altogether ignorant of her being
there. It is mentioned in Histories that Heraiscus a certain Egyptian, a man of a divine
nature, could discern unclean women, not only by his eyes, but by their voice, being
heard afar off, and thereupon did fall into a most grievous headach [headache]. William
of Paris also makes mention of a certain woman in his time, that by the same instinct
perceived a man whom she loved, coming two miles off. Also he relates that in his time
was a certain Stork convicted of unchastity by the smell of the male, who being judged
guilty by a multitude of Storks whom the male gathered together, discovering to them the
fault of his mate, was, her feathers being pulled off, torn in pieces by them. He also
makes mention of a certain horse, who not knowing his dam [mother], and leaping of
[copulating with] her, when afterwards he understood what he had done, bit off his own
Stones [testicles] by way of revenge upon himself for his incest. The same doth Varro,
Aristotle, and Pliny relate concerning horses. And Pliny makes mention of a certain
Serpent, called the Asp, that did such a like thing, for she coming to a certain mans table
in Egypt, was there daily fed, and she having brought forth some young, by one of which
a son of her hosts was killed, after she knew of it, killed that young one, and would never
return to that house any more. Now by these examples you see, how the lights of presage
may descend upon some Animals, as signs, or marks of things, & are set in their gesture,
motion, voice, flying, going, meat, colour, and such like. For according to the doctrine of
the Platonists, there is a certain power put into inferiour things, by which for the most
part they agree with the superiours; whence also the tacid consents of Animals seem to
agree with divine bodies, and their bodies and affections to be affected with their powers,
by the name of which they are ascribed to the Dieties [Deities]. We must consider
therefore what Animals are Saturnall, what are Joviall, and what Martiall, and so of the
rest, and according to their properties to draw forth their presages: so those birds which
resemble Saturn, and Mars, are all of them called terrible, and deadly, as the Scritch
[screech] Owl, the Hawlet, and others which we have mentioned before, also the horn
Owl, because she is a Saturnall Solitary bird, also nightly, and is reputed to be most
unfortunately ominous, of which the Poet saith,
The ugly Owl, which no bird well resents,
Fortels [foretells] misfortunes, and most sad events.
But the Swan is a delicious bird, Venereall, and Dedicated to Phoebus, and is said to be
most happy in her presages, especially in the Auspicia's of Mariners, because she is never
drowned in water, whence Ovid sings,
Most happy is the cheerfull, singing Swan
In her presages ----- ----- -----
There are also some birds that presage with their mouth, and singing, as the Crow, Pie,
Daw, whence Virgil,
----- ----- This did fore-show
Oft from the hollow holm that ominous Crow.
Now the birds that portend future things by their flying are, viz. Buzzards, the bone-
Breakers, Eagles, Vulturs [vultures], Cranes, Swans, and the like: for they are to be
considered in their flying, whether they fly slowly, or swiftly, whether to the right hand,
or to the left, how many fly together: upon this account if Cranes fly apace, they signifie
a tempest: when slowly, fair weather. Also when two Eagles fly together, they are said to
portend evill, because that is a number of confusion. In like manner thou shalt enquire
into the reason of the rest, as this is shewed of number. Moreover it belongs to an artist to
observe a similitude in these conjectures, as in Virgil, Venus dissembling, teacheth her
son Aeneas in these verses.
---------- All this is not for naught,
Else we in vain my parents Augury taught,
Lo! twice six Swans in a glad company
Joves bird pursued through the etheriall Skie [sky]
In Heavens broad tracks: now earth in a long train
They seem to take, or taken to disdain;
As they return with sounding wings, they sport,
And Heaven surrounding in a long consort.
Just so, I say, thy friends and fleet have gain'd
The port, or with full sailes the Bay obtain'd.
Most wonderful is that kind of Auguring of theirs, who hear, & understand the speeches
of Animals, in which as amongst the Ancients, Melampus, and Tiresias, and Thales, and
Apollonius the Tyanean [Apollonius of Tyana], who as we read, excelled, and whom they
report had excellent skill in the language of birds: of whom Philostratus, and Porphyrius
[Porphyry] speak, saying, that of old when Apollonius sate in company amongst his
friends, seeing Sparrows sitting upon a tree, and one Sparrow coming from elsewhere
unto them, making a great chattering and noise, and then flying away, all the rest
following him, he said to his companions, that that Sparrow told the rest that an Asse
being burdened with wheat fell down in a hole neer the City, and that the wheat was
scattered upon the ground: many being much moved with these words, went to see, and
so it was, as Apollonius said, at which they much wondered. Also Porphyrius [Porphyry]
the Platonist in his third book of Sacrifices, saith, that there was a Swallow: for it was
certain, because every voice of any Animall is significative of some passion of its soul, as
joy, sadness, or anger, or the like, which voices it is not so wonderfull a thing should be
understood by men conversant about them. But Democritus himself declared this art, as
saith Pliny, by naming the birds, of whose blood mixed together was produced a Serpent,
of which whosoever did eat, should understand the voices of birds. And Hermes saith, if
any one shall go forth to catch birds on a certain day of the Kalends of November, and
shall boil the first bird which he catcheth, with the heart of a Fox, that all that shall eat of
this bird, shall understand the voices of birds, and all other Animals. Also the Arabians
say, that they can understand the meaning of bruits [brutes], who shall eat the heart, and
liver of Dragons. Proclus also the Platonist believed, and wrote, that the heart of a Mole
conduceth to presages. There were also divinations, and Auspicia's which were taken
from the inwards of sacrifices, the inventor whereof was Tages, of whom Lucan sang,
And if the Inwards have no credit gained,
And if this Art by Tages was but feigned.
The Romane Religion thought that the liver was the head of the inwards. Hence the
Sooth-sayers [soothsayers] enquiring after future things in the inwards, did first look into
the liver, in which were two heads, whereof the one was called the head for the City, the
other for the enemy; and the heads of this, or another part being compared together, they
pronounced Victory, as we read in Lucan, that the inwards did signifie the slaughter of
Pompeys men, and the Victory of Caesars, according to these verses,
I' th' inwards all defects are ominous
On part, and branch of th' entrals [entrails] doth increase,
Another part is weak, and flagging lies,
Beats, and moves with quick pulse the arteries.
Then the bowels being finished, they search the heart. Now if there were a sacrifice found
without an heart, or a head was wanting in the Liver, these were deadly presages, and
were called piacularia. Also if a sacrifice fled from the Altar, or being smitten, made a
lowing, or fell upon any part of his body then he ought to do, it was the like ominous. We
read that when Julius Caesar on a day went forth to procession with his purple Robe, and
sitting in a golden chair, and sacrificing, there was twice a Heart wanting; And when C.
Marius Utica was sacrificing, there was wanting a Liver. Also when Caius the prince,
and M. Marcellus, C. Claudius, and L. Petellius Coss: were offering sacrifices, that the
Liver was consumed away suddenly: and not long after, one of them dyed [died] of a
disease, another was slain by men of Lyguria, the entrals [entrails] foretelling so much:
which was thought to be done by the power of the Gods, or help of the divell [devil]:
Hence it was accounted a thing of great concernment amongst the Ancients as oft as any
thing unusuall was found in the inwards: as when Sylla was sacrificing at Laurentum, the
figure of a Crown appeared in the head of the Liver: which Posthumius the Soothsayer
interpreted to portend a Victory with a Kingdome, and therefore advised that Sylla should
eat those entrals [entrails] himself. The colour also of the inwards is to be considered. Of
these Lucan made mention.
Struck at the colour Prophets were with fear,
For with foul spots pale entrals [entrails] tinged were.
Both black, and blew [blue], with specks of sprinkled blood
They were ---------------
There was in times past such a venerable esteem of these arts, that the most potent, and
wise men sought after them, yea the Senate, and Kings did nothing without the Counsell
of the Augures. But all these in these dayes, partly by the negligence of men, and partly
by the authority of the Fathers, are abolished.
Chapter lvi. Of the Sooth sayings of Flashes, and Lightenings, and how
Monstrous, and prodigious things are to be interpreted.
Now the Sooth-sayings of Flashes, and Lightenings, and of wonders, and how monstrous,
and prodigious things are to be interpreted, the Prophets, and Priests of Hetruscus have
taught the Art. For they have ordained sixteen Regions of the Heavens, and have ascribed
Gods to every one of them; and besides eleven kinds of Lightenings, and nine Gods,
which should dart them forth, by shewing rules for understanding the signification of
them. But as often as Monstrous, prodigious, and wondrous things happen, they do
presage, as is most certain, some great matter. Now their interpreter must be some
excellent conjecturer of similitudes, as also some curious searcher, and of them who at
that time are employed about the affairs of Princes, and Provinces. For the Celestials take
such care only for Princes, peoples, and provinces, that before the rest they might be
prefigured, and admonished, by Stars, by Constellations, by wonders, and by prodigies.
Now if the same thing, or the like hath been seen in former Ages, we must consider that
very thing, and what happened after that, and according to these, to fortell the same, or
the like, because the same signs are for the same things, and the like for like. So prodigies
have come before the birth, and death of many eminent men and Kings; as Cicero makes
mention of Midas a boy, into whose mouth, whilest he was sleeping, the Pismire [ant] put
corns of Wheat, which was an omen of great riches. So Bees sate upon the mouth of
Plato when he was sleeping in the Cradle, by which was foretold the sweetness of his
speech. Hecuba, when she was bringing forth Paris, saw a burning Torch, which should
set on fire Troy, and all Asia. There appeared unto the mother of Phalaris the image of
Mercury pouring forth blood upon the earth, with which the whole house was over-
flowed. The mother of Dionysius dreamed she brought forth a Satyr, which prodigious
dreams the event that followed made good. The wife of Tarquinius Priscus seeing a
flame lick the head of Servius Tullius, foretold that he should have the Kingdom. In like
manner after Troy was taken, Aeneas disputing with Anchises his father concerning a
flight [?], there appeared a flame licking the Crown of Ascanius his head, and doing of
him no hurt: which thing, seeing it did portend the Kingdom to Ascanius, perswaded him
to depart, for monstrous prodigies did fore-run great and eminent destruction. So we read
in Pliny, that M. Attilius, and C. Portius being Consuls, it rained Milk, and Blood, which
did presage that a very great Pestilence should the next yeer [year] over-spread Rome.
Also in Lucania it rained spongious [spongeous] Iron, & in the yeer before Marcus
Crassus was slain in Parthia; with which also all the souldiers [soldiers] of Lucania,
being a very numerous Army, were slain. Also L. Paulus, and C. Marcellus being
Consuls, it rained Wool about the Castle of Corisanum, neer which place a yeer [year]
after T. Annius was slain by Milus. And in the wars of Denmark, the noise of Arms, and
sound of a Trumpet was heard in the Aire. And Livie [Livy] concerning the Macedonian
wars, saith, in the yeer when Annibil [Annibal] dyed [died] it rained blood for two dayes.
Also concerning the second punick war, he saith, that water mixed with blood came down
from Heaven like rain, at that time when Annibal did spoil Italy. A little before the
destruction of Leuctra the Lacedemonians heard a noise of Arms in the temple of
Hercules, and at the same time in the temple of Hercules the doors that were shut with
bars, opened themselves, and the arms that were hanged on the wall, were found on the
ground. The like events may be prognosticated of other like things, as oftentimes in times
past something hath been foretold of them. But concerning these also, the judgements of
the Celestial influencies must not be neglected, of which we shall more largely treat in
the following Chapters.
Chapter lvii. Of Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, Pyromancy, four
Divinations of Elements.
Moreover the Elements themselves teach us fatall events; whence those four famous
kinds of Divinations, Geomancy, Hydromancy, Aeromancy, and Pyromancy, have got
their names, of which the Sorceress in Lucan seems to boast her self, when she saith,
The Earth, the Aire, the Chaos, and the Skie,
The Seas, the Fields, the Rocks, and Mountains high
Foretell the truth -----
The first therefore is Geomancy, whicb foresheweth future things by the motions of the
earth, as also the noise, the swelling, the trembling, the chops, the pits, and exhalation,
and other impressions, the art of which Almadel the Arabian sets forth. But there is
another kind of Geomancy, which Divines by points written upon the earth, by a certain
power in the fall of it, which is not of present speculation; but of that we shall speak
hereafter.
Now Hydromancy doth perform its presages by the impressions of water, their ebbing
and flowing, their increases, and depressions, their tempests, and colours, and the like; to
which also are added visions, which are made in the waters. A kind of Divination found
by the Persians, as Varro reports, a boy saw in the water the effigies of Mercury, which
foretold in an hundred and fifty verses all the events of Mithridates his War. We read also
that Numa Pompilius practiced Hydromancy; for in the water he called up the gods, and
learned of them things to come. Which art also Pythagoras, a long time after Numa
practised. There was of old a kind of Hydromancy, had in great esteem amongst the
Assyrians, and it was called Lecanomancy, from a skin full of water, upon which they put
plates of Gold, and Silver, and pretious [precious] Stones, written upon with certain
images, names, and characters. To this may be referred that art, by which Lead, and Wax
being melted, and cast into the water, do express manifest marks of images, what we
desire to know. There were also in former years Fountains that did foretell things to
come, as the Fathers-Fountain at Achaia, and that which was called the water of Juno in
Epidaurus; but of these more in the following Chapters, where we shall speak of Oracles.
Hither also may be referred the divination of Fishes, of which kind there was use made
by the Lycians in a certain place, which was called Dina, neer the Sea, in a Wood
dedicated to Apollo, made hollow in the dry sand, into which, he that went to consult of
future things, let down roasted meat, and presently that place was filled with waters, and
a great multitude of Fish, and of strange shapes, unknown to men, did appear, by the
forms of which the Prophet foretold what should come to pass. These things doth
Atheneus more at large relate out of Polycharmus, in the History of the Lycians.
After the same maner doth Aeromancy divine by airy impressions, by the blowing of the
Winds, by Rainbows, by Circles about the Moon and Stars, by Mists, and Clouds, and by
imaginations in Clouds, and visions in the Aire.
So also Pyromancy divines by fiery impressions, and by Stars with long Tailes, by fiery
Colours, by visions, and imaginations in the fire. So the wife of Cicero foretold that he
would be Consul the next year, because when a certain man after the Sacrifice was ended,
would look in the ashes, there suddenly broke forth a flame. Of this kind are those that
Pliny speaks of, that terrene, pale, and buzzing fires presage tempests, Circles about the
snuffs of Candles betoken rain; if the flame fly turning, and winding, it portends wind.
Also Torches when they strike the fire before them, and are not kindled. Also when a
Coal sticks to Pots taken off from the fire, and when the fire casts off the ashes, and
sparkles, or when ashes are hard grown together on the hearth, and when a Coal is very
bright.
To these is added Capnomancy, so called from smoak [smoke], because it searcheth into
the flame, and smoak [smoke], and thin colours, sounds, and motions, when they are
carryed upright, or on one side, or round, which we read in these Verses in Statius.
Let Piety be bound, and on th' Altar laid,
Let us implore the Gods for divine aid.
She makes acute, red, towring flames, and bright,
Increas'd by th' aire, the middle being white;
And then she makes the flames without all bound,
For to wind in and out, and to run round
Like to a Serpent -----
Also in the Aethnean Caves, and Fields of the Nymphs in Apollonia, Auguries were taken
from fires, and flames; joyful, if they did receive what was cast into them, and sad, if they
did reject them. But of these things we shall speak in the following Chapters, amongst the
answers of the Oracles.
Chapter lviii. Of the reviving of the dead, and of sleeping, and wanting
victuals many years together.
The Arabian Philosophers agree, that some men may elevate themselves above the
powers of their body, and above their sensitive powers; and those being surmounted,
receive into themselves by the perfection of the Heavens, and Intelligencies, a divine
vigour. Seeing therefore all the souls of men are perpetuall, and also all the spirits obey
the perfect souls; Magicians think that perfect men may by the powers of their soul repair
their dying bodies with other inferiour souls newly separated, and inspire them again; As
a Weesell [weasel] that is killed, is made alive again by the breath, and cry of his Dam
[mother]; And Lions make alive their dead Whelps by breathing upon them. And
because, as they say, all like things being applyed to their like, are made of the same
natures; and every patient, and thing that receives into it self the act of any agent, is
endowed with the nature of that agent, and made con-naturall. Hence they think, that to
this vivification, or making alive, some Hearbs [herbs], and Magicall confections, such as
they say are made of the ashes of the Phoenix, and the cast skin of a Snake do much
conduce, which indeed to many seems fabulous, and to some impossible, unless it could
be accounted approved by an Historicall faith. For we read of some that have been
drowned in water, others cast into the fire, and put upon the fire, others slain in war,
others otherwise tryed, and after a few dayes were alive again, as Pliny testifies of Aviola,
a man pertaining to the Consull, of L. Lamia, Cæius, Tubero, Corfidius, Gabienus, and
many others. Also we read that Aesop the Tale-maker, Tindoreus, Hercules, and Palicy,
the sons of Jupiter, and Thalia being dead, were raised to life again; also that many were
by Physitians [physicians], and Magicians raised from death again, as the Historians
relate of Aesculapius; and we have above mentioned out of Juba, and Xanthus, and
Philostratus concerning Tillo, and a certain Arabian, and Apollonius the Tyanean. Also
we read that Glaucus, a certain man that was dead, whom they say, beyond all
expectation, the Physitians [physicians] coming to see it, the hearb [herb] Dragon-wort
restored to life. Some say that he revived by the puting into his body a medicine made of
Honey, whence the proverb, Glaucus was raised from death by taking in Honey into his
body. Apuleius also relating the manner of these kinds of restorings to life, saith of
Zachla the Egyptian prophet: The prophet being thus favourable, layes a certain Hearb
[herb] upon the mouth of the body of a young man being dead, and another upon his brest
[breast], then turning towards the East, or rising of the propitious Sun, praying silently (a
great assembly of people striving to see it) in the first place heaved up his brest [breast],
then makes a beating in his veines [CPR!?], then his body to be filled with breath [mouth-
to-mouth?], after which the Carkase ariseth, and the young man speaks. If these things
are true, the dying souls must, sometimes lying hid in their bodies, be oppressed with
vehement extasies [ecstasies], and be freed from all bodily action: So that the life, sense,
motion, forsake the body, and so, that the man is not yet truly dead, but lies astonied
[dazed], and as it were dead for a certain time. And this is often found, that in times of
Pestilence many that are carried for dead to the graves to be buryed [buried], revive
again. The same also hath often befeln women, by reason of fits of the Mother. And
Rabbi Moises out of the book of Galen, which Patriarcha translated, makes mention of a
man, who was suffocated for six dayes, and did neither eat nor drink, and his arteries
became hard. And it is said in the same book, that a certain man by being filled with
Water, lost the pulse of his whole body, so that the heart was not perceived to move, and
he lay like a dead man. Also it is said that a man by reason of a fal [fall] from a high
place, or great noise, or long staying under the Water, may fall into a swoun [swoon],
which may continue fourty eight [forty-eight] hours, and so lye as if he were dead, his
face being very green. And in the same place there is mention made of a man that buried
a man that seemed to be dead seventy two hours after his seeming decease, and so killed
him, because he buried him alive, and there are given signs whereby it may be known
who are alive; although they seem to be dead, and indeed will dye [die], unless there be
some means used to recover them, as Phlebotomy, or some other cure. And these are such
as very seldom happen. This is the manner, by which we understand Magicians, and
Physitians [physicians] do raise dead men to life, as they that were tryed by the stinging
of Serpents, were by the Nation of the Marsi, and the Psilli restored to life. Now we may
conceive that such kind of extasies [ecstasies] may continue a long time, although a man
be not truly dead, as it is in Dor-mice [dormice], and Crocodiles, and many other
Serpents, which sleep all Winter, and are in such a dead sleep, that they can scarce be
awakened with fire. And I have often seen a Dormouse dissected, and continue
immovable, as if she were dead, untill she was boyled [boiled], and when presently in
boyling [boiling] the water the dissected members did shew life. Also, although it be hard
to be believed, we read in some approved Historians, that some men have slept for many
yeers together, and in the time of sleep, untill they awaked, there was no alteration in
them, as to make them seem older: The same doth Pliny testifie of a certain boy, whom
he saith, being wearied with heat, and his journey, slept fifty seven yeers in a Cave. We
read also that Epimenides Gnosius slept fifty seven yeers in a Cave. Hence the proverb
arose, To outsleep Epimenides. M. Damascenus tels, that in his time a certain country
man being wearied in Germany, slept for the space of a whole Autumn, and the Winter
following, under a heap of hay, untill the Summer, when the hay began to be eaten up,
then he was found awakened as a man halfe dead, and out of his wits. Eclesiasticall
[Ecclesiastical] Histories confirm this opinion concerning the seven sleepers, whom they
say slept 196 yeers. There was in Norvegia a Cave in a high Sea shore, where, as Paulus
Diaconus, and Methodius the Martyr write, seven men lay sleeping a long time without
corruption, and the people that went in to disturb them were contracted, or drawn
together, so that after a while, being forewarned by that punishment, they durst not hurt
them. Now Xenocrates, a man of no mean repute amongst Philosophers was of opinion,
that this long sleeping was appointed by God as a punishment for some certain sins. But
Marcus Damascenus proves it by many reasons to be possible, and naturall, neither doth
he think it irrationall, that some should without meat, and drink, and avoyding
excrements, without consuming, or corruption, sleep many moneths. And this may befall
a man by reason of some poisonous potion, or sleepy disease, or such like causes, for
certain dayes, moneths, or years, according to the intention, or remission of the power of
the medicine, or of the passions of their mind. And Physitians [physicians] say that there
are some Antidotes, of which they that take too great a potion, shall be able to endure
hunger a long time, as Elias in former time being fed with a certain food by an Angell,
walked, and fasted in the strength of that meat, fourty [forty] dayes. And John Bocatius
makes mention of a man in his time, in Venice, who would every yeer fast four dayes
without any meat. But that was a greater wonder, that there was a woman in lower
Germany at the same time, who took no food till the thirteenth yeer of her age, which to
us may seem incredible, but that he lately confirmed it; as also he tels of a Miracle of our
Age, that his brother Nicolaus Stone, an Helvetian by Nation, who lived twenty yeers in
the wilderness without meat, till he dyed [died]. That also is wonderfull which
Theophrastus mentions concerning a certain man, called Philinus, who used no meat, or
drink, besides Milk. And there are grave Authors who describe a certain hearb [herb] of
Sparta, with which they say the Scythians can endure twelve dayes hunger, without meat
or drink, if they do but tast [taste] it, or hold it in their mouth.
Chapter lix. Of Divination by Dreams.
There is also a certain kind of Divination by Dreams, confirmed by the traditions of
Philosophers, the authorities of Divines, the examples of Histories, and daily experience.
A Dreams I call here, not vain Dreams, or idle imaginations: for those are vain, and have
no Divination in them, but arise from the remains of watchings, and disturbance of the
body. For as the mind is taken up about, and wearied with cares, it suggests it self to him
that is asleep. I call that a Dream here, which is caused by the Celestiall influences in the
phantastick spirit, mind, or body, being all well disposed. The rule of interpreting this is
found amongst Astrologers, in that part which is wrote concerning questions; but yet that
is not sufficient, because these kind of Dreams come by use to divers men after a divers
manner, and according to the divers quality, and dispositions of the phantastick spirit:
wherefore there cannot be given one common rule to all for the interpretation of Dreams.
But according to the opinion of Synesius, seeing there are the same accidents to things,
and like befall like; so be which hath often fallen upon the same visible thing, hath
assigned to himself the same opinion, passion, fortune, action, event, and as Aristotle
saith, the memory is confirmed by sence [sense], and by keeping in memory the same
thing knowledge is obtained, as also by the knowledge of many experiences, by little, &
little, arts, and sciences are obtained. After the same account you must conceive of
Dreams. Whence Synesius commands that every one should observe his Dreams, and
their events, and such like rules, viz. to commit to memory all things that are seen, and
accidents that befall, as well in sleep, as in watching, and with a diligent observation
consider with himself the rules by which these are to be examined, for by this means shall
a Diviner be able by little, and little to interpret his Dreams, if so be nothing slip out of
his memory. Now Dreams are more efficacious, when the Moon over-runs that Sign,
which was in the ninth number of tbe Nativity, or revolution of that yeer, or in the ninth
Sign from the Sign of perfection. For it is a most true, and certain divination, neither doth
it proceed from nature or humane Arts, but from purified minds, by divine inspiration.
We shall now discuss, and examine that which belongs to prophecyings, and oracles.
Chapter lx. Of Madness, and Divinations which are made when men are
awake, and of the power of a Melancholy humor, by which Spirits are
sometimes induced into mens bodies.
It happens also sometimes, that not only they that are asleep, but also they that are
watchfull do with a kind of instigation of minde, Divine, which Divination Aristotle cals
ravishment, or a kind of madness, and teacheth that it proceeds from a melancholy
humor, saying in his Treatise of divination: Melancholy men, by reason of their
earnestness, do far better conjecture, and quickly conceive a habit, and most easily
receive an impression of the Celestials. And in his Problemes saith, that the Sibyls, and
the Bacchides, and Niceratus the Syracusan, and Amon, were by their naturall
Melancholy complexion Prophets, and Poets. The cause therefore of this madness, if it be
any thing within the body, is a melancholy humor, not that which they call black choller
[choler], which is so obstinate, and terrible a thing, that the violence of it is said by
Physitians [physicians], and Naturall Phylosophers [philosophers], besides madness,
which it doth induce, also to entice evill spirits to seize upon mens bodies. Therefore we
understand a melancholy humor here, to be a naturall, and white choller [choler]. For this,
when it is stirred up, burns, and stirs up a madness conducing to knowledge, and
divination, especially if it be helped by any Celestiall influx, especially of Saturn, who
seeing he is cold, and dry, as is a melancholy humor, hath his influence upon it,
increaseth, and preserveth it. Besides, seeing he is the Author of secret contemplation,
and estranged from all publike [public] affairs, and the highest of all the planets, doth
alwaies as with call his mind from outward businesses, so also makes it ascend higher,
and bestows upon him the knowledge, and passages of future things. And this is
Aristotles meaning in his book of Problemes. By Melancholy, saith he, some men are
made as it were divine, foretelling things to come, and some men are made Poets. He
saith also, that all men that were excellent in any Science, were for the most part
melancholy. Democritus, and Plato attest the same, saying, that there were some
melancholy men, that had such excellent wits, that they were thought, and seemed to be
more divine then humane. So also there have been many melancholy men at first rude,
ignorant, and untractable, as they say Hesiod, Ion, Tynnichus, Calcinenses, Homer, and
Lucretius were, who on a suddain were taken with a madness, and became Poets, and
prophecied wonderfull, and divine things, which they themselves scarce understood.
Whence divine Plato in Ion saith, many Prophets, after the violence of their madness was
abated, do not well understand what they wrote, yet treated acurately [accurately] of each
Art in their madness, as all Artists by reading of them judge. So great also they say the
power of melancholy is of, that by its force, Celestiall spirits also are sometimes drawn
into mens bodies, by whose presence, and instinct, antiquity testifies men have been
made drunk, and spake most wonderful things. And that they think happens under a
threefold [three-fold] difference, according to a threefold apprehension of the soul, viz.
imaginative, rationall, and mentall. They say therefore, when the mind is forced with a
melancholy humor, nothing moderating the power of the body, and passing beyond the
bonds of the members, is wholly carried into imagination, and doth suddenly become a
seat for inferior spirits, by whom it oftentimes receives wonderfull wayes, and forms of
manuall Arts. So we see that any most ignorant man doth presently become an excellent
painter, or contrivers of building, and to become a master in any such Art. But when
these kinds of spirits portend to us future things, they shew those things which belong to
the disturbing of the Elements, and changes of times, as rain, tempests, innundations,
earthquakes, great mortality, famine, slaughter, and the like. As we read in Aulus Gelius,
that Cornelius Patarus his Priest did at the time, when Cesar, and Pompey were to fight
in Thessalia, being taken with a madness, foretell the time, order, and issue of the battell
[battle]. But when the mind is turned wholly into reason, it becomes a receptacle for
midle [middle] spirits. Hence it obtains the knowledge, and understanding of natural, and
humane things. So we see that a man sometimes doth on a suddain become a Philosopher,
Physitian [physician], or an excellent Orator, and foretels [foretells] mutations of
Kingdomes, and restitutions of Ages, and such things as belong to them, as the Sybill
[Sibyl] did to the Romanes; but when the mind is wholly elevated into the understanding,
then it becomes a receptacle of sublime spirits, and learns of them the secrets of divine
things, such as the Law of God, the orders of Angels, and such things as belong to the
knowledge of things eternall, and salvation of souls. It foresees things which are
appointed by Gods speciall predestination, as future prodigies, or miracles, the prophet to
come, and the changing of the law. So the Sybills [Sibyls] Prophecyed of Christ a long
time before his coming. So Virgil understanding that Christ was at hand, and remembring
what the Sybill [Sibyl] Cumaea had said, sang thus to Pollio.
Last times are come, Cumæa's prophesie
Now from high heaven springs a new progenie,
And times great order now again is born,
The Maid returns, Saturnian Realms return.
And a little after intimating that originall sin shall be of no effect, saith,
If any prints of our old vice remain'd
By thee they'r voyd, and fear shall leave the Land;
He a Gods life shall take, with Gods shall see
Mixt Heroes, and himself their object be,
Rule with paternall power th' appeased earth
He shall ----------
Then he adds, that thence the fall of the Serpent, and the poison of the tree of death, or of
the knowledge of good, and evill shall be nulled, saying,
---------- The Serpent shall
And the deceitfull hearb [herb] of venome fall.
Yet he intimates that some sparks of originall sin shall remain, when he saith,
Some steps of ancient fraud shall yet be found.
And at last with a most great hyperbole cryes out to his child, as the off-spring [offspring]
of God, adoring him in these words,
Dear race of Gods, great stock of Jupiter,
Behold! the world shakes on its ponderous axe,
See earth, and heavens immense, and th' Ocean tracts,
How all things at th' approaching Age rejoyce!
Oh! that my life would last so long, and voyce,
As would suffice thy actions to rehearse.
There are also some prognosticks, which are in the midle [middle], betwixt naturall, and
supernaturall divination, as in those who are neer to death, and being weakened with old
Age, do sometimes foresee things to come, because as saith Plato, by how much the more
men are less hindred by their sence, so much the more acurately they understand, and
because they are neerer to the place whither they must go, and their bonds being as it
were a little loosed, seeing they are no more subject to the body, easily perceive the light
of divine revelation.
Chapter lxi. Of the forming of Man, of the external Senses, and also the
Inward, and the Mind: of the threefold appetite of the Soul, and passions
of the Will.
It is the opinion of some Divines, That God did not immediately creat [create] the body
of man, but by the assistance of the heavenly Spirits compound, and frame him; which
opinion Alchinous, and Plato favor; thinking that God is the chief Creator of the whole
world, of spirits both good and bad, and therefore immortalized them: but that all kinds of
mortall animals were made at the command of God; for if he should have created them,
they must have been immortall. The spirits therefore mixing Earth, Fire, Aire, and Water
together, made of them all, put together, one body, which they subjected to the service of
the soul, assigning in it severall Provinces to each power thereof, to the meaner of them,
mean and low places: as to Anger the Midriff, to Lust the Womb, but to the more noble
senses the Head, as the Tower of the whole body, and then the manifold Organs of
Speech. They divide the Sense into External, and Internall. The externall are divided into
five, known to every one, to which there are allotted five Organs, or subjects, as it were
Foundations; being so ordered, that they which are placed in the more eminent part of the
body, have a greater degree of purity. For the Eyes placed in the uppermost place, are the
most pure, and have an affinity with the Nature of Fire, and Light: then the Ears have the
second order of place, and purity, and are compared to the Aire: the Nostrils have the
third order, and have a middle nature betwixt the Aire, and the Water; then the Organ of
tasting, which is grosser and most like to the nature of Water: Last of all, the touching is
diffused through the whole body, and is compared to the grossness of Earth. The more
pure senses are those which perceive their Objects farthest off, as Seeing, and Hearing,
then the Smelling, then the Tast [taste], which doth not perceive but those that are nigh.
But the touch perceives both wayes, for it perceives bodies nigh; and as Sight discerns by
the medium of the Aire, so the touch perceives by the medium of a stick or pole, bodies
Hard, Soft, and Moist. Now the touch only is common to all animals. For it is most
certain that man hath this sense, and in this, and tast [taste] he excels all other animals,
but in the other three he is excelled by some animals, as by a Dog, who Hears, Sees, and
Smels [smells] more acutely then Man, and the Linx [lynx], and Eagles see more acutely
then all other Animals, & Man. Now the interior senses are, according to Averrois,
divided into four, whereof the first is called Common sence [sense], because it doth first
collect, and perfect all the representations which are drawn in by the outward senses. The
second is the imaginative power, whose office is, seeing it represents nothing, to retain
those representations which are received by the former senses, and to present them to the
third faculty of inward sense, which is the phantasie, or power of judging, whose work is
also to perceive, and judge by the representations received, what or what kind of thing
that is of which the representations are, and to commit those things which are thus
discerned, and adjudged, to the memory to be kept. For the vertues thereof in generall,
are discourse, dispositions, persecutions, and flights, and stirrings up to action: but in
particular, the understanding of intellectuals, vertues, the manner of Discipline, Counsel,
Election. And this is that which shews us future things by dreams: whence the Fancy is
sometimes named the Phantasticall Intellect. For it is the last impression of the
understanding; which, as saith Iamblicus, is belonging to all the powers of the mind, and
forms all figures, resemblances of species, and operations, and things seen, and sends
forth the impressions of other powers unto others: And those things which appear by
sence [sense], it stirs up into an opinion, but those things which appear by the Intellect, in
the second place it offers to opinion, but of it self it receives images from all, and by its
property, doth properly assign them, according to their assimilation, forms all the actions
of the soul, and accommodates the externall to the internall, and impresses the body with
its impression. Now these senses have their Organs in the head, for the Common sence
[sense], and imagination take up the two former Cels [cells] of the brain, although
Aristotle placeth the Organ of the Common sence [sense] in the heart, but the cogitative
power possesseth the highest, and middle part of the head; and lastly, the memory the
hinmost part thereof. Moreover, the Organs of Voice, and Speech are many, as the inward
muscles of the breast betwixt the ribs, the breasts, the lungs, the arteries, the windpipe,
the bowing of the Tongue, and all those parts and muscles that serve for breathing. But
the proper Organ of Speech is the Mouth, in which are framed words, and speeches, the
Tongue, the Teeth, the Lips, the Palate, &c. Above the sensible soul, which expresseth its
powers by the Organs of the body, the incorporeall mind possesseth the highest place,
and it hath a double nature, the one, which inquireth into the causes, properties, and
progress of those things which are contained in the order of nature, and is content in the
contemplation of the truth, which is therefore called the contemplative intellect. The other
is a power of the mind, which discerning by consulting what things are to be done, and
what things to be shunned, is wholly taken up in consultation, and action, and is therefore
ealled the Active Intellect. This Order of powers therefore nature ordained in man, that by
the externall sences [senses] we might know corporeall things, by the internall the
representations of bodies, as also things abstracted by the mind and intellect, which are
neither bodies, nor any thing like them. And according to this threefold order of the
powers of the soul, there are three appetites in the soul: The first is naturall, which is an
inclination of nature into its end, as of a stone downward, which is in all stones: another
is animal, which the sense follows, and it is divided into irascible, and concupiscible: the
third is intellective, which is called the will, differing from the sensitive, in this, the
sensitive is of it self, of those things, which may be presented to the senses, desiring,
nothing unless in some manner comprehended. But the will, although it be of it self, of all
things that are possible, yet because it is free by its essence, it may be also of things that
are impossible, as it was in the Devil, desiring himself to be equall with God, and
therefore is altered and depraved with pleasure and continuall anguish, whilest it assents
to the inferiour powers. Whence from its depraved appetite there arise four passions in it,
with which in like manner the body is affected sometimes. Whereof the first is called
Oblectation, which is a certain quietness or assentation of the mind or will, because it
obeys, and not willingly consents to that pleasantness which the senses hold forth; which
is therefore defined to be an inclination of the mind to an effeminate pleasure. The second
is called effusion, which is a remission of, or dissolution of the power, viz. when beyond
the oblectation the whole power of the mind, and intention of the present good is melted,
and diffuseth it self to enjoy it. The third is vaunting, and loftiness, thinking it self to have
attained to some great good, in the enjoyment of which it prides it self and glorieth. The
fourth and the last is Envy, or a certain kind of pleasure or delight at another mans harm,
without any advantage to it self. It is said to be without any advantage to it self, because
if any one should for his own profit rejoyce at an other mans harm, this would be rather
out of love to himself, then out of ill wil [will] to another. And these four passions arising
from a depraved appetite for pleasure, the grief or perplexity it self doth also beget so
many contrary passions, as Horror, Sadness, Fear, and Sorrow at anothers good, without
his own hurt, which we call Envy, i.e. Sadness at anothers prosperity, as pity is a certain
kind of sadness at anothers misery.
Chapter lxii. Of the Passions of the Mind, their Original [origin],
difference, and kinds.
The passions of the mind are nothing else but certain motions or inclinations proceeding
from the apprehension of any thing, as of good or evill, convenient or inconvenient. Now
these kind of apprehensions are of three sorts, viz., Sensual, Rationall, and Intellectuall.
And according to these three, are three sorts of passions in the Soul; For when they
follow the sensitive apprehension, then they respect a temporall good or evill, under the
notion of profitable, or unprofitable, delightfull and offensive, and are called naturall, or
animall passions. When they follow the rational apprehension, and so respect good or
bad, under the notions of Vertue or Vice, praise or disgrace, profitable or unprofitable,
honest or dishonest, they are called rationall, or voluntary passions. When they follow the
Intellectuall apprehension, and respect good or bad, under the notion of just or unjust,
true or false, they are called intellectuall passions, or synderesis. Now the subject of the
passions of the soul, is the concupitive power of the soul, and is divided into
concupiscible, and irascible, and both respect good and bad, but under a different notion.
For when the concupiscible power respects good, and evil absolutely; Love or Lust, or on
the contrary, hatred is caused: When it respects good, as absent, so desire is caused; or
evill, as absent, or at hand, and so is caused horror, flying from, or loathing: or if it
respect good, as present, then there is caused delight, mirth, or pleasure; but if evill, as
present, then sadness, anxiety, grief. But the irascible power respects good or bad, under
the notion of some difficulty; to obtain the one, or avoid the other, and this sometimes
with confidence: and so there is caused Hope or Boldness; but when with diffidency, then
Despair, and Fear. But when that irascible power riseth into revenge, and this be onely
about some evill past, as it were of injury or hurt offered, there is caused Anger. And so
we find eleven passions in the mind, which are, Love, Hatred, Desire, Horror, Joy, Grief,
Hope, Despair, Boldness, Fear, and Anger.
Chapter lxiii. How the passions of the mind change the proper body, by
changing the Accidents, and moving the spirit.
The Phantasie, or imaginative power hath a ruling power over the passions of the soul,
when they follow the sensuall apprehension. For this doth of its own power, according to
the diversity of the Passions, First of all change the proper body with a sensible
transmutation, by changing the Accidents in the body, and by moving the spirit upward or
downward, inward, or outward, and by producing divers qualities in the members. So in
joy, the spirits are driven outward, in fear, drawn back, in bashfulness, are moved to the
brain. So in joy, the heart is dilated outward, by little and little, in sadness, is constringed
by little, and little inward. After the same manner in anger or fear, but suddenly. Again
anger, or desire of revenge produceth heat, redness, a bitter tast [taste], and a looseness.
Fear induceth cold, trembling of the heart, speechlessness, and paleness. Sadness causeth
sweat, and a blewish [bluish] whiteness. Pitty [pity], which is a kind of sadness, doth
often ill affect the body of him that takes pitty [pity], that it seems to be the body of
another man affected. Also it is manifest, that amongst some lovers there is such a strong
tye [tie] of love, that what the one suffers, the other suffers. Anxiety induceth dryness,
and blackness. And how great heats love stirs up in the Liver, and pulse, Physitians
[physicians] know, discerning by that kind of judgement the name of her that is beloved,
in an Heroick Passion. So Naustratus knew that Antiochus was taken with the love of
Stratonica. It is also manifest that such like Passions, when they are most vehement, may
cause death. And this is manifest to all men, that with too much joy, sadness, love, hatred,
men many times dye [die], and are sometimes freed from a disease. So we read, that
Sophocles, and Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, did both suddenly dye [die] at the news of a
Tragicall victory. So a certain woman seeing her son returning from the Canensian battle,
dyed [died] suddenly. Now what sadness can do, is known to all. We know that Dogs
oftentimes dye [die] with sadness for the death of their masters. Sometimes also by
reason of these like Passions, long diseases follow, and are sometimes cured. So also
some men looking from an high place, by reason of great fear, tremble, are dim-sighted,
and weakened, and sometimes loose their senses. So fears, and falling-sickness,
sometimes follow sobbing. Sometimes wonderfull effects are produced, as in the son of
Cræsus, whom his mother brought forth dumb, yet a vehement fear, and ardent affection
made him speak, which naturally he could never do. So with a suddain fall oftentimes
life, sense, or motion on a suddain leave the members, and presently again are sometimes
returned. And how much vehement anger, joyned with great audacity, can do, Alexander
the great shews, who being circumvented with a battle in India, was seen to send forth
from himself lightening [lightning] and fire. The Father of Theodoricus is said to have
sent forth out of his body, sparks of fire; so that sparkling flames did leap out with a
noyse [noise]. And such like things sometimes appear in beasts, as in Tiberius his horse,
which is said to send forth a flame out of his mouth.
Chapter lxiv. How the Passions of the mind change the body by way of
imitation from some resemblance; Also of the transforming, and
translating of men, and what force the imaginative power hath not only
over the body, but the soul.
The foresaid Passions sometimes alter the body by way of imitation, the reason of the
vertue which the likeness of the thing hath to change it, which power the vehement
imagination moves, as in setting the teeth on edge at the sight or hearing of something, or
because we see or imagine another to eat sharp or soure things; So he which sees another
gape [yawn], gapes also; and some when they hear any one name soure things, their
tongues waxeth tart. Also the seeing of any filthy thing causeth nauseousness. Many at
the sight of mans blood fall into a swoun [swoon]. Some when they see bitter meat given
to any, perceive a bitter spitle [spittle] in their mouth. And William of Paris saith, that he
saw a man, that at the sight of a medicine, went to stool as oft as he pleased; when as
neither the substance of the medicine, nor the odour, nor the tast [taste] of it came to him:
but only a kind of resemblance was apprehended by him. Upon this account some that are
in a dream think they burn, and are in a fire, and are fearfully tormented, as if they did
truly burn, when as the substance of the fire is not neer them, but only a resemblance
apprehended by their imagination. And sometimes mens bodies are transformed, and
transfigured, and also transported, and this oft-times when they are in a dream, and
sometimes when they are awake. So Cyprus after he was chosen King of Italy, did very
much wonder at, and meditate upon the sight [fight?], and victory of Buls [bulls], and in
the thought thereof did sleep a whole night, but in the morning was found horned, no
otherwise then by the vegetative power being stirred up by a vehement imagination,
elevating corniferous humors into his head, and producing horns. For a vehement
cogitation, whilest it vehemently moves the species, pictures out the figure of the thing
thought on, which they represent in their blood, and the blood impresseth from it self, on
the members that are nourished by it, as upon those of the same body, so upon those of
anothers. As the imagination of a woman with child impresseth the mark of the thing
longed for upon her infant, and the imagination of a man bit with a mad Dog, impresseth
upon his Urine the image of Dogs. So men may grow grey on a suddain. And some by the
dream of one night, have grown up from boies [boys] into perfect men. Hitherto may be
referred those many scarrs of King Dagobertus, and Marks of Franciscus, which they
received, the one whilest he was afraid of correction, the other whilest he did wonderfully
meditate upon the wounds of Christ. So, many are transported from place to place,
passing over rivers, fires and unpassable places, viz. when the species of any vehement
desire, or fear, or boldness are impressed upon their spirits, and, being mixed with
vapors, do move the Organ of the touch in their original, together with phantasie, which
is the original of locall motion. Whence they stir up the members, and Organs of motion
to motion, and are moved without any mistake unto the imagined place, not out of sight,
but from the interiour fantasy [phantasy]. So great a power is there of the soul upon the
body, that which way soever that imagines, and dreams that it goes, thither doth it lead
the body. We read many other examples by which the power of the soul upon the body is
wonderfully explained, as is that which Avicen describes of a certain man, who when he
pleased could affect his body with the palsie [palsy]. They report of Gallus Vibius, that he
did fall into madness, not casually, but on purpose: for whilest he did imitate mad men,
he assimilated their madness to himself, and became mad indeed. And Austin [Augustine]
makes mention of some men who would move their ears at their pleasure, and some that
would move the crown of their head to their forehead, and could draw it back again when
they pleased: and of another that could sweat at his pleasure. And it is well known, that
some can weep at their pleasure, and pour forth abundance of tears: and that there are
some that can bring up what they have swallowed, when they please, as out of a bag, by
degrees. And we see that in these dayes there are many who can so imitate, and express
the voices of Birds, Cattle, Dogs, and some men, that they can scarce at all be discerned.
Also Pliny relates by divers examples, that women have been turned into men. Pontanus
testifieth, that in his time, a certain woman called Caietava, and another called Aemilia,
who after many years, after they were married, were changed into men. Now how much
imagination can do upon the soul, no man is ignorant: for it is neerer to the substance of
the soul then the sense is; wherefore it acts more upon the soul then the sense doth. So
women by certain strong imaginations, dreams, and suggestions brought in by certain
Magicall Arts do oftentimes bind them into a strong loving of any one. So they say that
Medea only by a dream, burnt in love towards Jason. So the soul sometimes is by a
vehement imagination, or speculation altogether abstracted from the body, as Celsus
relates of a certain Presbyter, who as oft as he pleased, could make himself senseless, and
lie like a dead man, that when any one pricked, or burnt him, he felt no pain, but lay
without any motion or breathing, yet he could, as he said, hear mens voices as it were afar
off, if they cryed out aloud. But of these abstractions we shall discourse more fully in the
following Chapters.
Chapter lxv. How the Passions of the Mind can work out of themselves
upon anothers Body.
The Passions of the Soul which follow the phantasie, when they are most vehement,
cannot only change their own body, but also can transcend so, as to work upon another
body, so that some wonderfull impressions are thence produced in Elements, and
extrinsecall things, and also can so take away, or bring some disease of the mind or body.
For the Passions of the Soul are the chiefest cause of the temperament of its proper body.
So the Soul being strongly elevated, and inflamed with a strong imagination, sends forth
health or sickness, not only in its proper body, but also in other bodies. So Avicen is of
the opinion, that a Camell may fall by the imagination of any one. So he which is bitten
with a mad Dog presently fals into a madness, and there appear in his Urine the shapes of
Dogs. So the longing of a woman with Child, doth act upon anothers body, when it Signs
the infant in the womb with the mark of the thing longed for. So, many monstrous
generations proceed from monstrous imaginations of women with Child, as Marcus
Damascenus reports that at Petra Sancta, a Town scituated [situated] upon the territories
of Pisa, viz. a wench that was presented to Charls [Charles] King of Bohemia, who was
rough and hairy all over her body, like a wild beast, whom her mother affected with a
religious kind of horrour [horror] upon the picture of John Baptist, which was by her bed,
in time of conception, afterwards brought forth after this fashion. And this we see is not
only in men, but also is done amongst bruit [brute] Creatures. So we read that Jacob the
Patriarch, with his speckled Rods set in the watering places, did discolour the Sheep of
Laban. So the imaginative powers of Pea-Cocks, and other Birds, whilest they be
coupling, impress a colour upon their wings. Whence we produce white Pea-Cocks
[peacocks], by hanging round the places where they couple, with white Clothes. Now by
these examples it appears how the affection of the phantasie, when it vehemently intends
it self, doth not only affect its own proper body, but also anothers. So also the desire of
Witches to hurt, doth bewitch men most perniciously with stedfast [steadfast] lookes. To
these things Avicen, Aristotle, Algazel, and Gallen assent. For it is manifest that a body
may most easily be affected with the vapour of anothers diseased body, which we plainly
see in the Plague, and Leprosie [leprosy]. Again, in the vapours of the eyes there is so
great a power, that they can bewitch and infect any that are near them, as the Cockatrice,
or Basilisk, killing men with their looks. And certain women in Scythia, amongst the
Illyrians, and Triballi, killed whomsoever they looked angry upon. Therefore let no man
wonder that the body, and soul of one may in like manner be affected with the mind of
another, seeing the mind is far more powerfull, strong, fervent, and more prevalent in its
motion then vapours exhaling out of bodies; neither are there wanting Mediums, by
which it should work, neither is anothers body less subjected to anothers mind, then to
anothers body. Upon this account they say, that a man by him affection, and habit only,
may act upon another. Therefore Philosophers advise, that the society of evill, and
mischievous men must be shunned, for their soul being full of noxious rayes, infects them
that are near with a hurtfull Contagion. On the contrary, they advise that the society of
good, and fortunate men be endeavored after, because by their nearness they do us much
good. For as the smell of Assa-fetida [asafetida], or Musk, so of bad something of bad, of
good something of good, is derived upon them that are nigh, and sometimes continues a
long time. Now then if the foresaid Passions have so great a power in the Phantasie, they
have certainly a greater power in the reason, in as much as the reason is more excellent
then the Phantasie; and lastly, they have much greater power in the mind; for this, when it
is fixt upon God for any good with its whole intention, doth oftentimes affect anothers
body as well as its own with some divine gift. By this means we read that many miracles
were done by Apollonius, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Philolaus, and many Prophets, and
holy men of our Religion.
But of these more fully in the following Chapters, where we shall discourse of Religion.
Chapter lxvi. That the Passions of the mind are helped by a Celestiall
season, and how necessary the Constancy of the mind is in every work.
The Passions of the mind are much helped, and are helpfull, and become most powerfull
by vertue of the Heaven, as they agree with the heaven, either by any naturall agreement,
or by voluntary Election. For, as saith Ptolomeus [Ptolemy], he which chooseth that
which is the better, seems to differ nothing from him who hath this of nature. It
conduceth therefore very much for the receiving of the benefit of the Heavens, in any
work, if we shall by the Heaven make our selves sutable [suitable] to it in our thoughts,
affections, imaginations, elections, deliberations, contemplations, and the like. For such
like passions do vehemently stir up our spirit to their likeness, and suddenly expose us,
and ours to the superior significators of such like passions; and also by reason of their
dignity, and neerness to the superiors, do much more partake of the Celestials, then any
materiall things. For our mind can through imaginations, or reason by a kind of imitation,
be so conformed to any Star, as suddenly to be filled with the vertues of that Star, as if it
were a proper receptacle of the influence thereof. Now the contemplating mind, as it
withdraws it self from all sense, imagination, nature, and deliberation, and cals [calls] it
self back to things separated, unless it exposeth it self to Saturn, is not of present
consideration, or enquiry. For our mind doth effect divers things by faith, which is a firm
adhesion, a fixt intention, and a vehement application of the worker, or receiver, to him
that co-operates in any thing, and gives power to the work which we intend to do. So that
there is made as it were in us the image of the vertue to be received, and the thing to be
done in us, or by us. We must therefore in every work, and application of things, affect
vehemently, imagine, hope, and believe strongly, for that will be a great help. And it is
verified amongst Physitians [physicians], that a strong belief, and an undoubted hope, and
love towards the Physitian [physician], and medicine, conduce much to health, yea more
sometimes than the medicine it self. For the same that the efficacy, and vertue of the
medicine works, the same doth the strong imagination of the Physitian [physician] work,
being able to change the qualities in the body of the sick, especially when the patient
placeth much confidence in the Physitian [physician], by that means disposing himself
for the receiving of the vertue of the Physitian [physician], and Physick [=medicine].
Therefore he that works in Magick, must be of a constant belief, be credulous, and not at
all doubt of obtaining the effect. For as a firm, and strong belief doth work wonderfull
things, although it be in false works, so distrust and doubting doth dissipate, and break
the vertu [vertue] of the mind of the worker, which is the medium betwixt both extreams,
whence it happens, that he is frustrated of the desired influence of the superiors, which
could not be joyned, and united to our labours without a firm, and solid vertue of our
mind.
Chapter lxvii. How mans mind may be joyned with the mind, and
Intelligencies of the Celestials, and together with them impress certain
wonderfull vertues upon inferiour things.
The Philosophers, especially the Arabians, say, that mans mind, when it is most intent
upon any work, through its passion, and effects, is joyned with the mind of the Stars, and
Intelligencies, and being so joyned is the cause of some wonderfull vertue be infused into
our works, and things; and this, as because there is in it an apprehension, and power of all
things, so because all things have a naturall obedience to it, and of necessity an efficacy,
and more to that which desires them with a strong desire. And according to this is
verified the Art of Characters, images, inchantments [enchantments], and some speeches,
and many other wonderfull experiments to every thing which the mind affects. By this
means whatsoever the mind of him that is in vehement love affects, hath an efficacy to
cause love, & whatsoever the mind of him that strongly hates, dictates, hath an efficacy to
hurt, and destroy. The like is in other things, which the mind affects with a strong desire.
For all those things which the mind acts, and dictates by Characters, Figures, Words,
Speeches, Gestures, and the like, help the appetite of the soul, and acquire certain
wonderfull vertues, as from the soul of the operator, in that hour when such a like
appetite doth invade it, so from the opportunity, and Celestiall influence, moving the
mind in that manner. For our mind, when it is carried upon the great excess of any
Passion, or vertue, oftentimes presently takes of it self a strong, better, and more
convenient hour, or opportunity. Which Thomas Aquinas in his third book against the
Gentiles, confesseth. So many wonderfull vertues both cause, and follow certain
admirable operations by great affections, in those things which the soul doth dictate in
that hour to them. But know, that such kind of things confer nothing, or very little but to
the Author of them, and to him which is inclined to them, as if he were the Author of
them. And this is the manner by which their efficacy is found out. And it is a generall rule
in them, that every mind that is more excellent in its desire, and affection, makes such
like things more fit for it self, as also efficatious to that which it desires. Every one
therefore that is willing to work in Magick, must know the vertue, measure, order, and
degree of his own soul, in the power of the universe.
Chapter lxviii. How our mind can change, and bind inferiour things to that
which it desires.
There is also a certain vertue in the minds of men, of changing, attracting, hindring, and
binding to that which they desire, and all things obey them, when they are carried into a
great excess of any Passion or vertu [vertue], so as to exceed those things which they
bind. For the superior binds that which is inferior, and converts it to it self, and the
inferior is by the same reason converted to the superior, or is otherwise affected, and
wrought upon. By this reason things that receive a superior degree of any Star, bind, or
attract, or hinder things which have an inferior, according as they agree, or disagree
amongst themselves. Whence a Lion is afraid of a Cock, because the presence of the
Solary vertue is more agreeable to a Cock then to a Lion: So a Loadstone draws Iron,
because in order it hath a superior degree of the Celestiall Bear.
So the Diamond hinders the Loadstone, because in the order of Mars it is superior to it. In
like manner any man when he is opportunely exposed to the Celestiall influencies, as by
the affections of his mind, so by the due applications of naturall things, if he become
stronger in a Solary vertue, binds and draws the inferior into admiration, and obedience,
in order of the Moon to servitude or infirmities, in a Saturnall order to quietness or
sadness; in order of Jupiter to worship, in order of Mars to fear, and discord, in order of
Venus to love, and joy, in a Mercuriall order to perswasion [persuasion], and
obsequiousness, and the like. Now the ground of such a kind of binding is the very
vehement, and boundless affection of the souls, with the concourse of the Celestiall order.
But the dissolutions, or hinderances of such a like binding, are made by a contrary effect,
and that more excellent or strong, for as the greater excess of the mind binds, so also it
looseth, and hindreth. And lastly, when the [thou] fearest Venus, oppose Saturn. When
Saturn or Mars, oppose Venus or Jupiter: for Astrologers say, that these are most at
enmity, and contrary the one to the other (i.e.) causing contrary effects in these inferior
bodies; For in the heaven, where there is nothing wanting, and where all things are
governed with love, there can in no wise be hatred, or enmity.
Chapter lxix. Of Speech, and the vertue of Words.
It being shewed that there is a great power in the affections of the soul, you must know
moreover, that there is no less Vertue in words, and the names of things, but greatest of
all in speeches, and motions, by which we chiefly differ from bruits [brutes], and are
called rationall; not from reason, which is taken for that part of the soul, which contains
the affections, which Galen saith, is also common to bruits [brutes], although in a less
degree; but we are called rationall, from that reason which is according to the voice
understood in words, and speech, which is called declarative reason, by which part we do
chiefly excell all other Animals. For λογος [logos] in Greek signifies, reason, speech, and
a word. Now a word is twofold, viz. internall, and uttered; An internall word is a
conception of the mind, and motion of the soul, which is made without a voice. As in
dreams we seem to speak, and dispute with our selves, and whilest we are awake we run
over a whole speech silently. But an uttered word hath a certain act in the voice, and
properties of locution, and is brought forth with the breath of a man, with opening of his
mouth, and with the speech of his tongue, in which nature hath coupled the corporeall
voice, and speech to the mind, and understanding, making that a declarer, and interpreter
of the conception of our intellect to the hearers, And of this we now speak. Words
therefore are the fittest medium betwixt the speaker and the hearer, carrying with them
not only the conception of the mind, but also the vertue of the speaker with a certain
efficacy unto the hearers, and this oftentimes with so great a power, that oftentimes they
change not only the hearers, but also other bodies, and things that have no life. Now those
words are of greater efficacy then others, which represent greater things, as intellectuall,
Celestiall, and supernaturall, as more expressly, so more misteriously [mysteriously].
Also those that come from a more worthy tongue, or from any of a more holy order; for
these, as it were certain Signs, and representations, receive a power of Celestiall, and
supercelestiall things, as from the vertue of things explained, of which they are the
vehicula, so from a power put into them by the vertue of the speaker.
Chapter lxx. Of the vertue of proper names.
That proper names of things are very necessary in Magicall operations, almost all men
testifie: For the naturall power of things proceeds first from the objects to the senses, and
then from these to the imagination, and from this to the mind, in which it is first
conceived, and then is expressed by voices, and words. The Platonists therefore say, that
in this very voice, or word, or name framed, with its Articles, that the power of the thing
as it were some kind of life, lies under the form of the signification. First conceived in the
mind as it were through certain seeds of things, then by voices or words, as a birth
brought forth, and lastly kept in writings. Hence Magicians say, that proper names of
things are certain rayes of things, every where present at all times, keeping the power of
things, as the essence of the thing signified, rules, and is discerned in them, and know the
things by them, as by proper, and living Images. For as the great operator doth produce
divers species, and particular things by the influencies of the Heavens, and by the
Elements, together with the vertues of Planets; so according to the properties of the
influencies proper names result to things, and are put upon them by him who numbers the
multitude of the Stars, calling them all by their names, of which names Christ in another
place speaks, saying, Your names are written in Heaven. Adam therefore that gave the
first names to things, knowing the influencies of the Heavens, and properties of all things,
gave them all names according to their natures, as it is written in Genesis, where God
brought all things that he had created before Adam, that he should name them, and as he
named any thing, so the name of it was, which names indeed contain in them wonderfull
powers of the things signified. Every voice therefore that is significative, first of all
signifies by the influence of the Celestiall harmony: Secondly, by the imposition of man,
although oftentimes otherwise by this, then by that. But when both significations meet in
any voice or name, which are put upon them by the said harmony or men, then that name
is with a double vertue, viz. naturall, and arbitrary, made most efficatious to act, as oft as
it shall be uttered in due place, and time, and seriously with an intention exercised upon
the matter rightly disposed, and that can naturally be acted upon by it. So we read in
Philostratus, that when a maid at Rome dyed [died] the same day she was married, and
was presented to Apollonius, he accurately inquired into her name, which being known,
he pronounced some occult thing, by which she revived. It was an observation amongst
the Romanes in their holy rites, that when they did besiege any City, they did diligently
enquire into the proper, and true name of it, and the name of that God, under whose
protection it was, which being known, they did then with some verse call forth the Gods
that were the protectors of that City, and did curse the inhabitants of that City, so at
length their Gods being absent, did overcome them, as Virgil sings,
----- That kept this Realm, our Gods
Their Altars have forsook, and blest abodes.
Now the verse with which the Gods were called out, and the enemies were curst [cursed],
when the City was assaulted round about, let him that would know, finde it out in Livy,
and Macrobius; but also many of these Serenus Samonicus in his book of secret things
makes mention of.
Chapter lxxi. Of many words joyned together, as in sentences, and verses,
and of the vertues, and astrictions of charms.
Besides the vertues of words and names, there is also a greater vertue found in sentences,
from the truth contained in them, which hath a very great power of impressing, changing,
binding, and establishing, so that being used it doth shine the more, and being resisted is
more confirmed, and consolidated; which vertue is not in simple words, but in sentences,
by which any thing is affirmed, or denyed; of which sort are verses, enchantments,
imprecations, deprecations, orations, invocations, obtestations, adjurations, conjurations,
and such like. Therefore in composing verses, and orations, for attracting the vertue of
any Star, or Deity, you must diligently consider what vertues any Star contains, as also
what effects, and operations, and to infer them in verses, by praising, extolling,
amplifying, and setting forth those things which such a kind of Star is wont to cause by
way of its influence, and by vilifying, and dispraising those things which it is wont to
destroy, and hinder, and by supplicating, and begging for that which we desire to get, and
by condemning, and detesting that which we would have destroyed, & hindered: and after
the same manner to make an elegant oration, and duly distinct by Articles, with
competent numbers, and proportions. Moreover Magicians command that we call upon,
and pray by the names of the same Star, or name, to them to whom such a verse belongs,
by their wonderfull things, or miracles, by their courses, and waies in their sphear
[sphere], by their light, by the dignity of their Kingdome, by the beauty, and brightness
that is in it, by their strong, and powerfull vertues, and by such like as these. As Psyche in
Apuleius prayes to Ceres; saying, I beseech thee by thy fruitfull right hand, I intreat thee
by the joyfull Ceremonies of harvests, by the quiet silence of thy chests, by the winged
Chariots of Dragons thy servants, by the furrows of the Sicilian earth, the devouring
Wagon, the clammy earth, by the place of going down into cellars at the light Nuptials of
Proserpina, and returns at the light inventions of her daughter, and other things which are
concealed in her temple in the City Eleusis in Attica. Besides, with the divers sorts of the
names of the Stars, they command us to call upon them by the names of the
Intelligencies, ruling over the Stars themselves, of which we shall speak more at large in
their proper place. They that desire further examples of these, let them search into the
hymns of Orpheus, then which nothing is more efficatious in naturall Magick, if they
together with their circumstances, which wise men know, be used according to a due
harmony, with all attention. But to return to our purpose. Such like verses being aptly,
and duly made according to the rule of the Stars, and being full of signification, &
meaning, and opportunely pronounced with vehement affection, as according to the
number, proportion of their Articles, so according to the form resulting from the Articles,
and by the violence of imagination, do confer a very great power in the inchanter
[enchanter], and sometimes transfers it upon the thing inchanted [enchanted], to bind, and
direct it to the same purpose for which the affections, and speeches of the inchanter
[enchanter] are intended. Now the instrument of inchanters [enchanters] is a most pure
harmoniacall spirit, warm, breathing, living, bringing with it motion, affection, and
signification, composed of its parts, endued with sence, and conceived by reason. By the
quality therefore of this spirit, and by the Celestiall similitude thereof, besides those
things which have already been spoken of, verses also from the opportunity of time,
receive from above most excellent vertues, and indeed more sublime, and efficatious then
spirits, & vapors exhaling out of the Vegetable life, out of hearbs, roots, gums,
aromaticall things, and fumes, and such like. And therefore Magicians inchanting
[enchanting] things, are wont to blow, and breath [breathe] upon them the words of the
verse, or to breath [breathe] in the vertue with the spirit, that so the whole vertue of the
soul be directed to the thing inchanted [enchanted], being disposed for the receiving the
said vertue. And here it is to he noted, that every oration, writting [writing], and words, as
they induce accustomed motions by their accustomed numbers, and proportions, and
form, so also besides their usuall order, being pronounced, or wrote backwards, more
unto unusuall effects.
Chapter lxxii. Of the wonderful power of Inchantments [Enchantments].
They say that the power of inchantments [enchantments], and verses is so great, that it is
believed they are able to subvert almost all nature, as saith Apuleius, that with a Magicall
whispering, swift Rivers are turned back, the slow sea is bound, the Winds are breathed
out with one accord, the Sun is stopt, the Moon is clarified, the Stars are pulled out, the
day is kept back, the night is prolonged, and of these things sings Lucan,
The courses of all things did cease, the night
Prolonged was, 'twas long before 'twas light;
Astonied was the headlong world, all this
Was by the hearing of a verse ----------
And a little before.
Thessalian verse did into 's heart so flow,
That it did make a greater heat of love.
And elsewhere.
No dregs of poison being by him drunk,
His wits decay'd inchanted [enchanted] -----
Also Virgil in Damon.
Charms can command the Moon down from the Skie,
Circes Charms chang'd Ulisses [Ulysses'] company.
A cold Snake being charm'd, burst in the Meads.
And in another place.
charms bear Corn standing from anothers Farm.
And Ovid in his book, sine Titulo, saith.
With charms doth with'ring Ceres dye,
Dried are the fountains all,
Acorns from Okes [oaks], inchanted [enchanted] Grapes
And Apples from trees fall.
If these things were not true, there would not be such strict penall Statutes made against
them, that should inchant [enchant] fruit. And Tibullus saith of a certain Imchantress
[enchantress],
Her with Charms drawing Stars from Heaven, I
And turning th' Course of rivers, did espy,
She parts the earth, and Ghosts from Sepulchers
Draws up, and fetcheth bones away from th' fires,
And at her pleasure scatters Clouds i'th' Air,
And makes it Snow in Summer hot, and fair.
Of all which that Inchantress [enchantress] seems to boast her self in Ovid, when she
saith,
----- At will, I make swift streams retire
To their fountains, whilest their banks admire;
Sea toss, and smooth; clear Clouds, with Clouds deform.
With Spells, and Charms I break the Vipers jaw,
Cleave Solid Rocks, Oakes from their seasures [seizures] draw,
Whole Woods remove, the airy Mountains shake,
Earth for to groan, and Ghosts from graves awake,
And thee O Moon I draw -----
Moreover all Poets sing, and Philosophers do not deny, that by verses many wonderfull
things may be done, as Corn to be removed, Lightenings to be commanded, diseases to be
cured, and such like. For Cato himself in Country affairs used some inchantments
[enchantments] against the diseases of beasts, which as yet are extant in his writings.
Also Josephus testifies that Solomon was skilled in those kinds of inchantments
[enchantments]. Also Celsus Africanus reports, according to the Egyptian doctrine, that
mans body, according to the number of the faces of the Zodiack Signs, was taken care of
by so many, viz. thirty six spirits, whereof each undertake, and defend their proper part,
whose names they call with a peculiar voice, which being called upon, restore to health
with their inchantments [enchantments] the diseased parts of the body.
Chapter lxxiii. Of the vertue of writting [writing], and of making
imprecations, and inscriptions.
The use of words, and speech, is to express the inwards of the mind, and from thence to
draw forth the secrets of the thoughts, and to declare the will of the speaker. Now writing
is the last expression of the mind, and is the number of speech and voice, as also the
collection, state, end, continuing, and iteration, making a habit, which is not perfected
with the act of ones voice. And whatsoever is in the mind, in voice, in word, in oration,
and in speech, the whole, and all of this is in writing also. And as nothing which is
conceived in the mind is not expressed by voice, so nothing which is expressed is not also
written. And therefore Magicians command, that in every work, there be imprecations,
and inscriptions made, by which the operator may express his affection: that if he gather
an Hearb [herb], or a Stone, he declare for what use he doth it; if he make a picture, he
say, and write to what end he maketh it; with imprecations, and inscriptions. Albertus
also in his book called Speculum, doth not disallow, without which all our works would
never be brought into effect; Seeing a disposition doth not cause an effect, but the act of
the disposition. We find also that the same kind of precepts was in use amongst the
Ancients, as Virgil testifies, when he sings,
----- I walk a round
First with these threads, in number which three are,
'Bout th' Altars thrice I shall thy Image bear.
And a little after.
Knots, Amaryllis tye [tie]! of Colours three,
Then say, these bonds I knit, for Venus be.
And in the same place.
As with one fire this clay doth harder prove,
The wax more soft; so Daphnis with our love.
Chapter lxxiv. Of the proportion, correspondency, reduction of Letters to
the Celestiall Signs, and Planets, according to various tongues, and a Table
shewing this.
God gave to man a mind, and speech, which (as saith Mercurius Trismegistus) are
thought to be a gift of the same vertue, power, and immortality. The omnipotent God hath
by his providence divided the speech of men into divers languages; which languages have
according to their diversity received divers, and proper Characters of writing, consisting
in their certain order, number, and figure, not so disposed, and formed by hap, or chance,
nor by the weak judgement of man, but from above, whereby they agree with the
Celestiall, and divine bodies, and vertues. But before all notes of languages, the writing
of the Hebrews is of all the most sacred in the figures of Characters, points of vowels,
and tops of accents, as consisting in matter, form, and spirit.
The position of the Stars being first made in the seat of God, which is heaven, after the
figure of them (as the masters of the Hebrews testifie) are most fully formed the letters of
the Celestiall mysteries, as by their figure, form, and signification, so by the numbers
signified by them, and also by their various harmony of their conjunction. Whence the
more curious Mecubals of the Hebrews do undertake by the figure of their letters, the
forms of Characters, and their signature, simpleness, composition, separation,
crookedness, directness, defect, abounding, greatness, litleness, crowning, opening,
shutting, order, transmutation, joyning together, revolution of letters, and of points, and
tops, by the supputation of numbers by the letters of things signified to explain all things,
how they proceed from the first cause, and are again to be reduced into the same.
Moreover they divide the letters of their Hebrew Alphabet, viz. into twelve simple, seven
double, and three mothers, which they say signifie as Characters of things, the twelve
Signs, seven Planets, and three Elements, viz. Fire, Water, and Earth, for they account
Aire no Element, but as the glew [glue], and spirit of the Elements. To these also they
appoint points, and tops: As therefore by the aspects of Planets, and Signs, together with
the Elements, the working spirit, and truth all things have been, and are brought forth, so
by these Characters of letters, and points, signifying those things that are brought forth,
the names of all things are appointed, as certain Signs, and vehicula's of things explained,
carrying with them every where their essence, and vertues. The profound meanings, and
Signs are inherent in those Characters, and figures of them, as also numbers, place, order,
and revolution; so that Origenes therefore thought that those names being translated into
another Idiome, do not retain their proper vertue. For only originall names, which are
rightly imposed, because they signify naturally, have a naturall activity: It is not so with
them which signifie at pleasure, which have no activity, as they are signifying, but as they
are certain naturall things in themselves. Now if there be any originall [language], whose
words have a naturall signification, it is manifest that this is the Hebrew, the order of
which he that shall profoundly, and radically observe, and shall know to resolve
proportionably the letters thereof, shall have a rule exactly to find out any Idiome. There
are therefore two and twenty Letters, which are the foundation of the world, and of
creatures that are, and are named in it, and every saying, and every creature are of them,
and by their revolutions receive their Name, Being, and Vertue.
He therefore that will find them out, must by each joyning together of the Letters so long
examine them, untill the voice of God is manifest, and the framing of the most sacred
letters be opened, and discovered. For hence voices, and words have efficacy in Magicall
works: because that in which nature first exerciseth Magicall efficacy, is the voice of
God. But these are of more deep speculation, then to be handled in this book. But to
return to the division of the Letters. Of these, amongst the Hebrews, are three mothers,
viz., é, å, à; seven double, viz. ú, ø, ô, ë, ã, ð, á. The other 12, viz. ù, ÷,ö,ò,
ñ, â, î, ì, è,ç, æ, ä are simple. The same rule is amongst the Chaldeans; And by
the imitation of these the letters of other tongues are distributed to Signs, Planets, and
Elements, after their order. For the Vowels in the Greek tongue, viz. Α Ε Η Ι Ο Υ Ω
answer to the seven Planets. Β Γ ∆ Ζ Κ Λ Μ Ν Π Ρ Σ Τ are attributed to the twelve Signs
of the Zodiack, the other five Θ Ξ Φ Χ Ψ represent the four Elements, and the spirit of
the world. Amongst the Latine there is the same signification of them. For the five
Vowels A E I 0 U, and J and V Consonants are ascribed to the seven Planets; and the
Consonants B C D F G L M N P R S T are answerable to the twelve Signs. The rest, viz.
K Q X Z make four Elements. H the aspiration represents the Spirit of the World. Y
because it is a Greek, and not a Latine Character, and serving only to Greek words,
follows the nature of its Idiome.
But this you must not be ignorant of, that it is observed by all wise men, that the Hebrew
letters are the most efficacious of all, because they have the greatest similitude with
Celestials, and the world, and that the letters of the other tongues have not so great an
efficacy, because they are more distant from them. Now the disposition of these, the
following Table will explain. Also all the Letters have double numbers of their order, viz.
Extended, which simply express of what number the letters are, according to their order:
and collected, which recollect with themselves the numbers of all the preceding letters.
Also they have integrall numbers, which result from the names of Letters, according to
their various manners of numbring [numbering]. The vertues of which numbers, he that
shall know, shall be able in every tongue to draw forth wonderfull mysteries by their
letters, as also to tell what things have been past, and foretell things to come. There are
also other mysterious joynings of letters with numbers: but we shall abundantly discourse
of all these in the following Books: Wherefore we will now put an end to this first Book.

The Second Book of Occult
Philosophy, or Magick; written by
Henry Cornelius Agrippa.
BOOK II.
Chapter i. Of the necessity of Mathematicall learning, and of the many wonderfull
works which are done by Mathematicall Arts only.
The Doctrines of Mathematicks are so necessary to, and have such an affinity with Magick, that they that do profess it
without them, are quite out of the way, and labour in vain, and shall in no wise obtain their desired effect. For whatsoever
things are, and are done in these inferior naturall vertues, are all done, and governed by number, weight, measure, harmony,
motion, and light. And all things which we see in these inferiours, have root, and foundation in them: yet nevertheless
without naturall vertues, of Mathematicall Doctrines only works like to naturals can be produced, as Plato saith, a thing not
paataking of truth or divinity, but certain Images kin to them, as bodies going, or speaking, which yet want the Animall
faculty, such as were those which amongst the Ancients were called Dedalus his Images, and αυτοματα, of which Aristotle
makes mention, viz. the threefooted Images of Vulcan, and Dedalus, moving themselves, which Homer saith came out of
their own accord to exercise, and which we read, moved themselves at the feast of Hiarba the Philosophicall Exerciser: As
also that golden Statues performed the offices of Cup bearers, and Carvers to the guests. Also we read of the Statues of
Mercury, which did speak, and the wooden Dove of Arthita, which did fly, and the miracles of Boethius, which Cassiodorus
made mention of, viz. Diomedes in Brass, sounding a Trumpet, and a brazen Snake hissing, and pictures of birds singing most
sweetly. Of this kind are those miracles of Images which proceed from Geometry, and Opticks, of which we made some
mention in the first book, where we spoke of the Element of Aire, So there are made glasses, some Concave, others of the
form of a Columne, making the representations of things in the Aire seem like shadows at a distance: of which sort
Apoilonius, and Vitellius in their Books De Perspectiva, and Speculis, taught the making, and the use. And we read that
Magnus Pompeius brought a certain glass amongst the spoils from the East, to Rome, in which were seen Armies of Armed
men. And there are made certain transparent glasses, which being dipped in some certain juices of Hearbs [herbs], and
irradiated with an artificiall light, fill the whole Aire round about with visions. And I know how to make reciprocall glasses,
in which the Sun shining, all things which were illustrated by the raies [rays] thereof are apparently seen many miles off.
Hence a Magician, expert in naturall Philosophy, and Mathematicks, and knowing the middle sciences consisting of both
these, Arithmatick, Musick, Geometry, Opticks, Astronomie [astronomy], and such sciences that are of weights, measures,
propertions, articles, and joynts, knowing also Mechanicall Arts resulting from these, may without any wonder, if he excell
other men in Art, and wit, do many wonderfull things, which the most prudent, and wise men may much admire. Are there
not some reliques extant of the Ancients works, viz. Hercules, and Alexanders pillars, the gate of Caspia made of brass, and
shut with Iron beams, that it could by no Wit or Art, be broken? And the Pyramis of Julius Caesar erected at Rome neer the
hill Vaticanus, and Mountains built by Art in the middle of the Sea, and Towers, and heaps of Stones, such as I saw in
England put together by an incredible Art. And we read in faithfull Historians, that in former times Rocks have been cut off,
and Vallies [valleys] made, and Mountains made into a Plain, Rocks have been digged through, Promontories have been
opened in the Sea, the bowels of the Earth made hollow, Rivers divided, Seas joyned to Seas, the Seas restrained, the bottome
of the Sea been searched, Pools exhausted, Fens dryed up, new Islands made, and again restored to the continent, all which,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (4 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
although they my seem to be against nature, yet we read have been done, and we see some reliques of them remaining till this
day, which the vulgar say were the works of the divell [Devil], seeing the Arts, and Artificers thereof have been dead out of
all memory, neither are there any that care to understand, or search into them. Therefore they seeing any wonderfull sight, do
impute it to the divell, as his work, or think it is a miracle, which indeed is a work of naturall, or Mathematicall Philosophy.
As if anyone should be ignorant of the vertue of the Loadstone, and should see heavy Iron drawn upwards, or hanged in the
Aire (as we read the Iron Image of Mercury did long since at Treveris hang up in the middle of the Temple by Loadstones,
this verse attesting the same.
The Iron white rod-bearer flies i'th' Aire.
The like to which we read was done concerning the image of the Sun at Rome, in the Temple of Serapis) would not such an
ignorant man, I say, presently say it is the work of the divell? But if he shall know the vertue of the Loadstone to the Iron, and
shall make triall of it, he presently ceaseth to wonder, and doth no more scruple it to be the work of nature. But here it is
convenient that you know, that as by naturall vertues we collect naturall vertues, so by abstracted, mathematicall, and
celestiall, we receive celestiall vertues, as motion, life, sense, speech, southsaying [soothsaying], and divination, even in
matter less disposed, as that which is not made by nature, but only by art. And so images that speak, and foretell things to
come, are said to be made, as William of Paris relates of a brazen head made under the rising of Saturn, which they say spake
with a mans voice. But he that will choose a disposed matter, and most fit to receive, and a most powerfull agent, shall
undoubtedly produce more powerfull effects. For it is a generall opinion of the Pythagoreans, that as Mathematicall things are
more formall then Naturall, so also they are more efficacious: as they have less dependence in their being, so also in their
operation. But amongst all Mathematicall things, numbers, as they have more of form in them, so also are more efficacious,
to which not only Heathen Philosophers, but also Hebrew, and Christian Divines do attribute vertue, and efficacy, as well to
effect what is good, as what is bad.
Chapter ii. Of Numbers, and of their power, and vertue.
Severinus Boethius saith, that all things which were first made by the nature of things in its first Age, seem to be formed by
the proportion of numbers, for this was the principall pattern in the mind of the Creator. Hence is borrowed the number of the
Elements, hence the courses of times, hence the motion of the Stars, and the revolution of the heaven, and the state of all
things subsist by the uniting together of numbers. Numbers therefore are endowed with great and sublime vertues. For it is no
wonder, seeing there are so many, and so great occult vertues in naturall things, although of manifest openations, that there
should be in numbers much greater, and more occult, and also more wonderfull, and efficacious, for as much as they are more
formall, more perfect, and naturally in the celestialls, not mixt with separated substances; and lastly, having the greatest, and
most simple commixtion with the Idea's in the mind of God, from which they receive their proper, and most efficacious
vertues: wherefore also they are of more force, and conduce most to the obtaining of spirituall, and divine gifts, as in naturall
things, elementary qualities are powerfull in the transmuting of any elementary thing. Again, all things that are, and are made,
subsist by, and receive their vertue from numbers. For time consists of number, and all motion, and action, and all things
which are subject to time, and motion.
Harmony also, and voices have their power by, and consist of numbers, and their proportions, and the proportions arising
from numbers, do by lines, and points make Characters, and figures: And these are proper to Magicall operations, the middle
which is betwixt both being appropriated by declining to the extreams, as in the use of letters. And lastly, all species of
naturall things, and of those things which are above nature, are joyned together by certain numbers: which Pythagoras seeing,
saith, that number is that by which all things consist, and distributes each vertue to each number. And Proclus saith, Number
hath alwaies a being: Yet there is one in voyce, another in the proportion of them, another in the soul, and reason, and another
in divine things. But Themistius, and Boethius, and Averrois the Babilonian [Babylonian], together with Plato, do so extoll
numbers, that they think no man can be a true Philosopher without them. Now they speak of a rationall, and formall number,
not of a materiall, sensible, or vocall, the number of Merchants buying, and selling, of which the Pythagoreans, and
Platonists, and our Austin [Augustine] make no reckoning, but apply it to the proportion resulting from it, which number they
call naturall, rationall, and formall, from which great mysteries flow, as well in naturall, as divine, and heavenly things. By it
is there a way made for the searching out, and understanding of all things knowable. By it the next access to naturall
prophesying is had: and the Abbot Joachim proceeded no other way in his Prophecies, but by formall numbers.
Chapter iii. How great vertues Numbers have, as well in Naturall things, as in
Supernaturall.
That there lyes [lies] wonderfull efficacy, and vertue in numbers, as well to good as to bad, not only most eminent
Philosophers do unanimously teach, but also Catholike [Catholic] Doctors, and especially Hierom, Austin [Augustine],
Origen, Ambrose, Gregory of Nazianzen, Athanasius, Basilius, Hilarius, Rubanus, Bede, and many more confirm. Hence
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (5 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
Hilarius in his Commentaries upon the Psalms, testifies that the seventy Elders, according to the efficacy of numbers, brought
the Psalms into order. Rabanus also, a famous Doctor, composed an excellent book of the vertues of numbers: But now how
great vertues numbers have in nature, is manifest in the hearb [herb] which is called Cinquefoil, i.e. five leaved Grass; for this
resists poysons [poisons] by vertue of the number of five; also drives away divells [devils], conduceth to expiation; and one
leafe of it taken twice in a day in wine, cures the Feaver [fever] of one day: three the tertian Feaver: foure the quartane. In
like manner four grains of the seed of Turnisole being drunk, cures the quartane, but three the tertian. In like manner Vervin is
said to cure Feavers, being drunk in wine, if in tertians it be cut from the third joynt [joint], in quartans from the fourth. A
Serpent, if he be once struck with a Spear, dieth, if twice, recovers strength. These and many such as these are read, and
testified in divers Authors. We must know now whence these are done, which certainly have a cause, which is a various
proportion of various numbers amongst themselves. There is also a wonderfull experiment of the number of seven, that every
seventh male, born without a female coming betwixt, hath power to cure the Kings evill by his touch alone, or word. Also
every seventh daughter that is born, is said wonderfully to help forward the birth of children: neither is the naturall number
here considered, but the formall consideration that is in the number. And let that which we spake before, be alwaies kept in
mind, viz. that these powers are not in vocall, or numbers of merchants buying, and selling, but in rationall, formall, and
naturall; These are distinct mysteries of God, and nature. But he that knows how to joyn [join] together the vocall numbers,
and naturall with divine, and order them into the same harmony, shall be able to work and know wonderfull things by
numbers; the Pythagorians profess that they can prognosticate many things by the numbers of names, in which truly, unless
there did ly [lie] a great mysterie [mystery], John had not said in the Revelation, He which hath understanding, let him
compute the number of the name of the beast, which is the number of a man, and this is the most famous manner of
computing amongst the Hebrews, and Cabalists, as we shall shew afterwards. But this you must know, that simple numbers
signifie Divine things: numbers of ten; Celestiall numbers of an hundred; terrestriall numbers of a thousand; those things that
shall be in a future age. Besides, seeing the parts of the mind are according to an Arithmeticall Mediocrity, by reason of the
identity, or equality of excess, coupled together. But the body, whose parts differ in their greatness, is according to a
Geometricall mediocrity, compounded: But an animall consists of both, viz. soul and body, according to that mediocrity,
which is sutable [suitable] to harmony: Hence it is that numbers do work very much upon the soul, figures upon the body,
and harmony upon the whole animall.
Chapter iv. Of unity, and the Scale thereof.
Now let us treat particularly of numbers themselves: and because number is nothing els [else] but a repetition of Unity, let us
first consider Unity it self. For Unity doth most simply go through every number, and is the common measure, fountain, and
originall of all numbers, contains every number joyned [joined] together in it self intirely, the beginner of every multitude,
alwayes the same, and unchangable: whence also being multiplyed into it self, produceth nothing but it self: it is indivisible,
void of all parts: But if it seem at any time to be divided, it is not cut, but indeed Multiplied into Unities: yet none of these
Unities is greater or lesser then the whole Unity, as a part is less than the whole: It is not therefore Multiplyed into parts, but
into it self: Therefore some called it concord, some piety, and some friendship, which is so knit, that it cannot be cut into
parts. But Martianus, according to the opinion of Aristotle saith, it is named Cupid, because it is made one alone, and will
alwaies bewail it self, and beyond it self it hath nothing, but being void of all haughtiness, or coupling, turns its proper heats
into it self. It is therefore the one beginning, and end of all things, neither hath it any beginning, or end it self: Nothing is
before one, nothing is after one, and beyond it is nothing, and all things which are, desire that one, because all things
proceeded from one, and that all things may be the same, it is necessary that they partake of that one: And as all things
proceeded of one into many things, so all things endeavour to return to that one, from which they proceeded; it is necessary
that they should put off multitude. One therefore is referred to the high God, who seeing he is one, and innumerable, yet
creates innumerable things of himself, and contains them within himself. There is therefore one God, one world of the one
God, one Sun of the one world, also one Phoenix in the World, one King [queen] amongst Bees, one Leader amongst Flocks
of Catel [cattle], one Ruler amongst heards [herds] of Beasts, & Cranes follow one, and many other Animalls honour Unity;
Amongst the Members of the body there is one Principal by which all the rest are guided, whether it be the head, or (as some
will) the heart. There is one Element overcoming, and penetrating all things, viz. Fire. There is one thing created of God, the
subject of all wondring [wondering], which is on Earth, or in Heaven, it is actually Animal, Vegetable, and Minerall, every
where found, known by few, called by none by its proper name, but covered with figures, and Riddles, without which neither
Alchymie [alchemy], nor Naturall Magick, can attain to their compleat end, or perfection. From one man, Adam, all men
proceed, from that one all become mortall, from that one Jesus Christ they are regenerated: and as saith Paul, one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, one mediator betwixt God and man, one most high Creator, who is over all,
by all, and in us all. For there is one Father, God, from whence all, and we in him: one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all, and
we by him: one God Holy Ghost, into whom all, and we into him.
The Scale of Unity
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (6 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
In the exemplary world. é Iod
One Divine essence, the fountain of all
vertues, and power, whose name is
expressed with one most simple Letter.
In the intellectuall world. The soul of the world. One supreme Intelligence, the first
Creature, The fountain of lives.
In the Celestial world. The Sun. One King of Stars, fountain of life.
In the Elemental world. The Philosophers Stone. One subject, and instrument of all
vertues, naturall, and supernaturall.
In the lesser world. The Heart. One first living, and last dying.
In the infernall world. Lucifer. One Prince of Rebellion, of Angels, and
darkness.
Chapter v. Of the Number of Two, and the Scale thereof.
The first Number is of two, because it is the first Multitude, it can be measured by no number besides unity alone, the
common measure of all Numbers: It is not compounded of Numbers, but of one unity only; neither is it called a number
uncompounded, but more properly not compounded: The Number of three is called the first Number uncompounded: But the
Number of two is the first branch of unity, and the first procreation: Hence it is called generation, and Juno, and an
imaginable Corporation, the proof of the first motion, the first form of parity: the number of the first equality, extremity, and
distance betwixt, and therefore of peculiar equity, and the proper act thereof, because it consists of two equally poysed: and it
is called the Number of Science, and Memory, and of light, and the number of man, who is called another, and the lesser
World: it is also called the number of charity, and mutuall love, of marriage, and society, as it is said by the Lord, Two shall
be one flesh. And Solomon saith: It is better that two be together then one, for they have a benefit by their mutuall society: If
one shall fall, he shall be supported by the other. Wo [woe] to him that is alone, because when he falls he hath not another to
help him: and if two sleep together, they shall warm one the other; how shall one be hot alone? And if any prevaile against
him, two resist him. And it is called the number of Wedlock and Sex; for there are two sexes, Masculine, and Feminine: and
two Dovess bring forth two Eggs, out of the first of which is hatched the Male, out of the second the Female. It is also called
the midle [middle], that is capable, that is good, and bad, partaking, and the beginning of division, of Multitude, and
distinction, and signifies matter. This is also sometimes the number of discord, and confusion, of misfortune, and
uncleanness, whence Saint Hierom against Jovianus saith, that therefore it was not spoken in the second day of the creation
of the world, and God said, That it was good, because the number of two is evill. Hence also it was, that God commanded
that all unclean Animals should go into the Ark by couples: because as I said, the number of two, is a number of uncleanness,
and it is most unhappy in their Soothsayings, especially if those things, from whence the Soothsaying is taken, be Saturnall,
or Martiall, for these two are accounted by the Astrologers unfortunate. It is also reported, that the number of two doth cause
apparitions of Ghosts, and fearfull Goblins, and bring mischiefs of evill spirits to them that travell by night. Pythagoras (as
Eusebius reports) said, that Unity was God, and a good intellect; and that Duality was a Divell [devil], and an evill intellect,
in which is a materiall multitude: wherefore the Pythagoreans say, that two is not a number, but a certain confusion of
unities. And Plutarke [Plutarch] writes, that the Pythagorians [Pythagoreans] called unity Apollo, and two, strife, and
boldness; and three, Justice, which is the highest perfection, and is not without many mysteries. Hence there were two Tables
of the Law in Sina, two Cherubins looking to the Propitiatory in Moses, two Olives dropping oyle [oil], in Zachariah, two
natures in Christ, Divine, and Humane; Hence Moses saw two appearances of God, viz. his face, and back-parts, also two
Testaments, two commands of Love, two first dignities, two first people, two kinds of Spirits, good and bad, two intellectuall
creatures, an Angell, and soul, two great lights, two Solstitia [solstices], two equinoctials [equinoxes], two poles, two
Elements, producing a living soul, viz. Earth, and Water.
The Scale of the Number of two.
In the exemplary world. Iah
ìà El
The names of God expressed with two
letters.
In the Intellectuall world. An Angell. The Soul. Two intelligible substances.
In the Celestiall world. The Sun. The Moon Two great lights.
In the Elementary world. The Earth. The Water. Two Elements producing a living soul.
In the lesser world. The Heart. The Brain. Two principall seats of the soul.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (7 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
In the Infernall soul. Beemeth
Weeping.
Leviathan
gnashing of teeth.
Two chief of the divels.
Two things which Christ threatens to the
damned.
Chapter vi. Of the Number of three, and the Scale thereof.
The number of three is an incompounded number, a holy number, a number of perfection, a most powerfull number. For
there are three persons in God, there are three Theologicall vertues in Religion. Hence it is that this number conduceth to the
Ceremonies of God, and Religion, that by the solemnity of which, prayers, and sacrifices are thrice repeated. Whence Virgil
sings,
Odd numbers to the God delightfull are.
And the Pythagorians use it in their sanctifications, and purifications, whence in Virgil,
The same did cleanse, and wash with Water pure
Thrice his companions -----
And it is most fit in bindings, or ligations, hence that of Virgil,
----- I walk around
First with these threads, which three, and severall are,
'Bout th' Altar thrice I shall thy image bear.
And a little after;
Knots, Amaryllis, tye, of colours three,
Then say, these bonds I knit, for Venus be.
And we read of Medea.
She spake three words, which caus'd sweet sleep at will,
The troubled Sea, the raging Waves stand still.
And in Pliny it was the cusome in every medicine to spit with three deprecations, and hence to be cured. The number of thee
is perfected with three Augmentations, long, broad, and deep, beyond which there is no progression of dimension, whence the
first number is called square. Hence it is said that to a body that hath three measures, and to a square number, nothing can be
added. Wherefore Aristotle in the beginning of his speeches concerning Heaven, cals it as it were a Law, according to which
all things are disposed. For Corporeall, and spirituall things consist of three things, viz. beginning, middle, and end. By three
(as Tresmegistus [Trismegistus] saith) the world is perfected: Hemarmene {so the L}, necessity, and order (i.e.) concurrence
of causes, which many call fate, and the execution of them to the fruit, or increase, and a due distribution of the increase. The
whole measure of time is concluded in three, viz. Past, present, to come; All magnitude is contained in three; line, superficies,
and body, every body consists of three Intervals, length, bredth [breadth], thickness. Harmony contains three consents in
time, Diapason, Hemiolion, Diatessaron. There are three kinds of souls, Vegetative, sensitive, and intellectuall. And as saith
the Prophet, God orders the world by number, weight, and measure, and the number of three is deputed to the Ideall forms
thereof, as the number two is to the procreating matter, and unity to God the maker of it. Magicians do constitute three
Princes of the world, Oromasis, Mitris, Araminis [i.e. Ohrmazd (Av. Ahura Mazda), Mithra, and Ahriman (Av. Anghra
Mainyu). In Zoroastrian theology, these are the names for God, the highest angel, and the Devil respectively.] (i.e.) God, the
Mind, and the Spirit. By the three square or solid, the three numbers of nine of things produced are distributed, viz. of the
supercelestiall into nine orders of Intelligencies: of Celestiall into nine Orbs: of inferiours into nine kinds of generable, and
corruptible things. Lastly in this ternall Orb, viz. twenty seven, all Musical proportions are included, as Plato, and Proclus, do
at large discourse. And the number of three hath in a harmony of five, the grace of the first voyce. Also in Intelligencies there
are three Hierarchies of Angelicall spirits. There are three powers of Intellectuall creatures, memory, mind, and will. There
are three orders of the blessed, viz. of Martyrs, Confessors, and Innocents. There are three quaternions of Celestiall Signs, viz.
Of fixt [fixed], moveable, and common, as also of houses, viz. centers, succeeding, and falling. There are also three faces, and
heads in every Sign, and three Lords of each triplicity. There are three fortunes amongst the Planets. Three graces amongst
the Goddesses. Three Ladies of destiny amongst the infernall crew. Three Judges. Three furies. Three-headed Cerberus. We
read also of a thrice double Hecate. Three moneths [L: ora = mouths] of the virgin Diana. Three persons in the
supersubstantiall Divinity. Three times, of Nature, Law, and Grace. Three Theologicall vertues, Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Jonas was three days in the Whales belly; and so many was Christ in the grave.
The Scale of the Number of three.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (8 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
In the Original world. The Father éãù
Sadai
The Son.
The Holy Ghost The name of God
with three letters.
In the Intellectuall
world.
Supreme.
Innocents.
Midle
Martyrs.
Lowest of all
Confessors.
Three Hierarchies of
Angels.
Three degrees of the
blessed.
In the Celestiall
world.
Moveable.
Corners.
Of the day.
Fixt
Succeeding.
Nocturnall.
Common.
Falling.
Partaking.
Three quaternions of
Signs.
Three quaternions of
houses.
Three Lords of the
Triplicities.
In the Elementary
world. Simple. Compounded. Thrice compounded. Three degrees of
Elements.
In the lesser world.
The head, in which
the Intellect grows,
answering to the
intellectuall world.
The breast, where is the
heart, the seat of life,
answering to the Celestiall
world.
The belly, where the
faculty of generation is,
and the genitall members,
answering the Elemental
world.
Three parts,
answering the
three-fold world.
In the infernal world.
Alecto.
Minos.
Wicked.
Megera.
Acacus.
Apostates.
Ctesiphone.
Rhadamantus.
Infidels.
Three infernall furies.
Three infernall
Judges.
Three degrees of the
damned.
Chapter vii. Of the Number of Four, and the Scale thereof.
The Pythagorians call the Number of four Tetractis, and prefer it before all the vertues of Numbers, because it is the
foundation, and root of all other numbers; whence also all foundations, as well in artificiall things, as naturall, and divine, are
four square, as we shall shew afterwards: and it signifies solidity, which also is demonstrated by a four square figure. For the
number four is the first four square plain, which consists of two proportions, whereof the first is of one to two, the latter of
two to four, and it proceeds by a double procession and proportion, viz. of one to one, and of two to two, beginning at a unity,
and ending at a quaternity: which proportions differ in this, that according to Arithmatick [arithematic], they are unequall to
one the other: but according to Geometry are equall. Therefore a four square is ascribed to God the Father, and also contains
the mysterie [mystery] of the whole Trinity: for by its single proportion, viz. by the first of one to one, the unity of the
paternall substance is signified, from which proceeds one Son, equall to him; by the next procession, also simple, viz. of two
to two, is signified by the second procession the Holy Ghost from both, that the Son be equall to the Father by the first
procession; and the Holy Ghost be equall to both by the second procession. Hence that superexcellent, and great name of the
divine Trinity of God is written with four letters, viz. Yod, He, and Vau; He, where it is the aspiration He, signifies the
proceeding of the spirit from both: for He being duplicated, terminates both syllables, and the whole name, but is pronounced
Jova, as some will, whence that Jovis of the heathen, which the Ancients did picture with four ears, whence the number four
is the fountain, and head of the whole divinity. And the Pythagorians [Pythagoreans] call it the perpetuall fountain of nature:
for there are four degrees in the Scale of nature, viz. to be, to live, to be sensible, to understand. There are four motions in
nature, viz. ascendent, descendent, going forward, circular. There are four Corners in the heaven, viz. rising, falling, the midle
[middle] of the heaven, and the bottome of it. There are four Elements under Heaven, viz. Fire, Aire, Water, and Earth;
according to these there are four triplicities in Heaven: There are four first qualities under the Heaven, viz. Cold, Heat,
Driness [dryness], and Moystness [moistness], from these are the four Humours, Blood, Flegm [phlegm], Choller [choler],
Melancholy. Also the year is divided into four parts, which are Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter; also the wind is
divided into Eastern, Western, Northern, and Southern. There are also four rivers of Paradise, and so many infernall. Also the
number four makes up all knowledge: first it fills up every simple progress of numbers with four termes, viz. with one, two,
three, and four, constituting the number ten. It fills up every difference of numbers, the first even, and conteining the first odd
in it. It hath in Musick Diatessaron, the grace of the fourth voice. Also it conteins the instrument of four strings, and a
Pythagorean Diagram, whereby are found out first of all musicall tunes, and all harmony of Musick. For Double, Treble,
fourtimes double, one and halfe, one and a third part, a concord of all, a double concord of all, of five, of four, and all
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (9 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
consonancy is limited within the bounds of the number four. It doth also contein the whole of Mathematicks in four terms,
viz. point, line, superficies, and profundity. It comprehends all natute in four terms, viz. substance, quality, quantity, and
motion. Also all naturall Phylosophy [philosophy], in which are the seminary vertues of nature, the naturall springing, the
growing form, and the compositum. Also Metaphysick is comprehended in four bounds, viz. being, essence, vertue, and
action. Morall Phylosophy is comprehended with four vertues, viz. prudence, justice, fortitude, temperence. It hath also the
power of justice: hence a fourfold law: of providence from God; fatall, from the soul of the world: of nature from Heaven: of
prudence, from man. There are also four judiciary powers in all things being, viz. the intellect, discipline, opinion, and sense.
It hath also great power in all mysteries. Hence the Pythagoreans did ratifie [ratify] the number four with an oath, as if it were
the cheifest [chiefest] ground whereon their faith was grounded, and their belief might be confirmed. Hence it was called the
Pythagorians oath, which is expressed in these verses.
I with pure minde by th' number four do swear
That's holy, and the fountain of nature
Eternall, parent of the mind -----
Also there are four rivers of Paradise; four Gospels received from four Evangalists throughout the whole Church. The
Hebrews received the cheifest [chiefest] name of God written with four letters. Also the Egyptians, Arabians, Persians,
Magicians, Mahumitans, Grecians, Tuscans, Latines, write the name of God with only four letters, viz. thus, Theut, Alla, Sire,
Orsi, Abdi, θεοζ [theos], Esar, Deus. Hence the Lacedemonians were wont to paint Jupiter with four wings. Hence also in
Orpheus his divinity, it is said that Neptunes Chariots are drawn with four horses. There are also four kinds of divine furies,
proceeding from severall deities, viz. from the Muses, Dionysius, Apollo, and Venus. Also the Prophet Ezekiel saw four beasts
by the river Chobar, and four Cherubims in four wheels. Also in Daniel, four great beasts did ascend from the Sea, and four
winds did fight. And in the Revelations four beasts were full of eyes, before, and behind: standing round about the Throne of
God, and four Angels, to whom was given power to hurt the Earth, and the Sea, did stand upon the four corners of the Earth,
holding the four winds, that they should not blow upon the Earth, nor upon the Sea, nor upon any Tree.
The Scale of the Number four, answering the four Elements.
The name of God
with four letters. äåäé In the Originall
world, whence the
Law of
providence.
Four Triplicities or
intelligible
Hierarchies.
Seraphim.
Cherubin.
Thrones.
Dominations.
Powers.
Vertues.
Principalities.
Archangels.
Angels.
Innicents.
Martyrs.
Confessors.
In the Intellectual
world, whence the
fatall Law.
Four Angels ruling
over the corners of
the world.
ìàëéî
Michael.
ìàôø
Raphael.
ìàéøáâ
Gabriel.
ìàéøåà
Uriel.
Four rulers of the
Elements. ôøù
Seraph.
áåøë
Cherub.
ùéùøú
Tharsis.
ìàéøà
Ariel.
Four consecrated
Animals. The Lion. The Eagle. Man. A Calf.
Four Triplicities of
the tribes of Israel.
Dan.
Asser.
Nephtalim.
Jehuda.
Isachar.
Zabulum [Zabulon].
Manasse.
Benjamin.
Ephraim.
Reubin [Ruben].
Simeon [Simehon].
Gad.
Four Triplicities of
Apostles.
Mathias.
Peter.
Jacob the elder.
Simon.
Bartholemew.
Mathew.
John.
Phillip.
James the younger.
Thaddeus.
Andrew.
Thomas.
Four Evangelists. Mark. John. Mathew. Luke.
Four Triplicities of
Signs.
Aries.
Leo.
Sagittarius.
Gemini.
Libra.
Aquarius.
Cancer.
Scorpius.
Pisces.
Taurus.
Virgo.
Capricornus.
In the Celestiall
world, where is the
law of nature.
The Stars, and
Planets, related to
the Elements.
Mars, and the
Sun. Jupiter, and Venus. Saturn, and Mercury. The fixt Stars, and
the Moon.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (10 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:47]
Four qualities of
the Celestiall
Elements.
Light. Diaphanousness. Agility. Solidity.
Four Elements. ùà
Fire.
çåø
Ayre [air].
íéî
Water.
øôò
Earth.
In the Elementary,
where the Law of
generation, and
corruption is.
Four qualities. Heat. Moysture [moisture]. Cold. Dryness.
Four seasons. Summer. Spring. Winter. Autumne.
Four corners of the
World. The East. The West. The North. The South.
Four perfect kinds
of mixt bodies. Animals. Plants. Metals. Stones.
Four kinds of
Animals. Walking. Flying. Swimming. Creeping.
What answer the
Elements, in Plants. Seeds. Flowers. Leaves. Roots.
In the lesser world,
viz. man, from
whom is the Law of
prudence.
What in Metals. Gold, and Iron. Copper, and Tin. Quicksilver. Lead, & Silver.
What in stones. Bright, and
burning.
Light, and
transparent.
Clear, and
congealed. Heavy, & dark.
Four Elements of
man. The Mind. The spirit. The Soul. The body.
Four powers of the
Soul. The Intellect. Reason. Phantasy. Sense.
Four Judiciary
powers. Faith. Science. Opinion. Experience.
Four morall vertues. Justice. Temperance. Prudence. Fortitude.
The senses
answering to the
Elements.
Sight. Hearing. Tast, and smel [taste
and smell]. Touch.
Four Elements of
mans body. Spirit. Flesh. Humours. Bones.
A four-fold spirit. Animall. Vitall. Generative. Naturall.
Four humours. Choller. Blood. Flegme. Melancholly.
Four Manners of
complexion. Violence. Nimbleness. Dulness. Slowness.
Four Princes of
divels, offensive in
the Elements.
ìàîñ
Samael.
ìæàæò
Azazel.
ìàæò
Azael.
ìàæäî
Mahazael. In the infernall
world, where is the
Law of wrath, and
punishment.
Four infernal Rivers. Phlegeton. Cocytus. Styx. Acheron.
Four Princes of
spirits, upon the four
angels [angles] of the
world.
Oriens. Paymon. Egyn. Amaymon.
Chapter viii. Of the Number Five, and the Scale thereof.
The number five is of no small force, for it consists of the first even, and the first odd, as of a Female, and Male; For an odd
number is the Male, and the even the Female. Whence Arithmeticians call that the Father, and this the Mother. Therefore the
number five is of no small perfection, or vertue, which proceeds from the mixtion of these numbers: It is also the just midle
[middle] of the universal number, viz. ten. For if you divide the number ten, there will be nine and one, or eight and two, or
seven and three, or six and four, and every collection makes the number ten, and the exact midle [middle] alwaies is the
number five, and its equidistant; and therefore it is called by the Pythagoreans the number of Wedlock, as also of justice,
because it divides the number ten in an even Scale. There be five senses in man, sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling:
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (11 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
five powers in the soul, Vegetative, Sensitive, Concupiscible, Irascible, Rationall: five fingers on the hand: five wandering
Planets in the heavens, according to which there are five-fold terms in every sign. In Elements there are five kinds of mixt
[mixed] bodies, viz. Stones, Metals, Plants, Plant-Animals, Animals, and so many kinds of Animals, as men, four-footed
beasts, creeping, swimming, flying. And there are five kinds by which all things are rnade of God, viz. Essence, the same,
another, sense, motion. The Swallow brings forth but five young, which she feeds with equity, beginning with the eldest, and
so the rest, according to their age. Also this number hath great power in expiations: For in holy things it drives away Divels
[devils]. In naturall things, it expels poysons [poisons]. It is also called the number of fortunateness, and favour, and it is the
Seale of the Holy Ghost, and a bond that binds all things, and the number of the cross, yea eminent with the principall
wounds of Christ, whereof he vouchsafed to keep the scars in his glorifyed body. The heathen Philosophers did dedicate it as
sacred to Mercury, esteeming the vertue of it to be so much more excellent then the number four, by how much a living thing
is more excellent then a thing without life. For in this number the Father Noah found favour with God, and was preserved in
the floud [flood] of waters. In the vertue of this number Abraham, being an hundred years old, begat a Son of Sarah, being
ninety years old, and a barren Woman, and past child bearing, and grew up to be a great people. Hence in time of grace the
name of divine omnipotency is called upon with five letters. For in time of nature the name of God was called upon with
three letters. éãù Sadai: in time of the Law, the ineffable name of God was expressed with four letters äåäé insteed of
which the Hebrews express éðãà Adonai: in time of grace the ineffable name of God was with five letters äåùäé Ihesu,
which is called upon with no less mysterie then that of three letters åùé.
The Scale of the Number of five.
Five senses.
The names of
God with five
Letters.
The names of
Christ with
five Letters.
ïåéìà
íéäìà
äåùäé
Eloim [Elion].
Elohim.
Jhesu.
In the
examplary
world.
Five
Intelligible
substances.
Spirits of the
first Hierarchy
called Gods,
or the Sons of
God.
Spirits of the
second Hierarchy
called
Intelligencies.
Spirits of the
third
Hierarchy,
called Angels
which are
sent.
Souls of Celestiall
bodies.
Heroes or blessed
souls.
In the
Intellectual
world.
Five wandring
Stars, Lords of
the Tearms.
Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Venus. Mercury. In the Celestiall
world.
Five kinds of
corruptible
things.
Water. Aire. Fire. Earth. A mixed body.
In the
Elementary
world.
Five kinds of
mixt bodies. Animall. Plant. Metall. Stone. Plant-animal.
Tast [taste]. Hearing. Seeing. Touching. Smelling. In the lesser
world.
Five
Corporeall
torments.
Deadly
Bitterness. Horrible howling. Terrible
darkness.
Unquenchable
Heat. A piercing stink. In the infernall
world.
Chapter ix. Of the Number six, and the Scale thereof.
Six is the number of perfection, because it is the most perfect in nature, in the whole course of numbers, from one to ten, and
it alone is so perfect, that in the collection of its parts it results the same, neither wanting, nor abounding. For if the parts
thereof, viz. the midle [middle], the third, and sixt [sixth] part, which are three, two, one, be gathered together, they perfectly
fill up the whole body of six, which perfection all the other numbers want: Hence by the Pythagorians it is said to be
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (12 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
altogether applyed to generation, and Marriage, and is called the Scale of the world. For the world is made of the number six,
neither doth it abound, or is defective. Hence that is, because the world was finished by God the sixt day. For the sixt day
God saw all the things which he had made, and they were very good. Therefore the heaven, and the earth, and all the Host
thereof were finished. It is also called the number of man, because the sixt day man was created: and it is also the number of
our redemption, for the sixt day Christ suffered for our redemption: whence there is a great affinity betwixt the number six
and the Cross, labour, and servitude: hence it is commanded in the Law, that in six days the work is to be done, six days
Manna is to be gathered, six years the ground was to be sown, and that the Hebrew servant should serve his Master six years;
six days the glory of the Lord appeared upon Mount Sina [Sinai], covering it with a cloud: the Cherubins had six wings, 6
circles in the Firmament, Artick, Antartick, two Tropicks, Equinoctiall, & Eclipticall, six wandring [wandering] Planets,
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, running through the latitude of the Zodiack, on both sides the Eclyptick
[ecliptic]. There are six substantificall qualities in the Elements, viz. Sharpness, Thinness, Motion, and the contrary to these,
Dulness, Thickness, Rest. There are six differences of position, Upwards, Downwards, Before, Behind, on the right side, one
the left side. There are six naturall offices, without which nothing can be, viz. Magnitude, Colour, Figure, Intervall, Standing,
Motion. Also a solid Figure of any four square thing hath six superficies. There are six Tones of all harmony, viz. 5. Tones, &
2. half tones, which make one tone, which is the sixt.
The Scale of the Number six.
In the examplary
world. íéäåìà øåáâ ìà Names of the six
Letters.
In the intelligible
World. Cherubin. Thrones. Dominations. Powers. Vertues.
Six orders of
Angels, which
are not sent to
inferiours.
In the Celestiall
World. Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Venus. Mercury. The Moon
Six planets wandring
through the latitude of
the Zodiack from the
Eclyptick.
In the Elemental
world. Rest. Thinness. Sharpness. Dulness. Thickness. Motion. Six substantificall
qualities of Elements.
In the lesser
world. The Intellect. Memory. Sense. Motion. Life. Essence. Six degrees of men.
In the infernall
World. Acteus. Megalesius. Ormenus. Lycus. Nicon. Mimon.
Six divels [devils], the
authors of all
calamities.
Chapter x. Of the Number Seaven, and the Scale thereof.
The number seaven [seven] is of various, and manifold power, for it consists of one, and six, or of two, and five, or of three
and four, and it hath a Unity, as it were the coupling together of two threes: whence if we consider the severall parts thereof,
and the joyning together of them, without doubt we shall confess that it is as well by the joyning together of the parts thereof,
as by its fullness apart, most full of all Majesty. And the Pythagorians call it the Vehiculum of mans life, which it doth not
receive from its parts so, as it perfects by its proper right of its whole, for it contains body, and soul, for the body consists of
four Elements, and is endowed with four qualities: Also the number three respects the soul, by reason of its threefold power,
viz. rationall, irascible, and concupiscible. The number seaven therefore, because it consists of three, and four, joyns the soul
to the body, and the vertue of this number relates to the generation of men, and it causeth man to be received, formed,
brought forth, nourished, live, and indeed altogether to subsist. For when the genitall seed is received in the womb of the
woman, if it remain there seaven hours after the effusion of it, it is certain that it will abide there for good: Then the first
seaven daye it is coagulated, and is fit to receive the shape of a man: then it produceth mature infants, which are called infants
of the seaventh moneth [month], i.e. because they are born the seaventh moneth. After the birth, the seaventh hour tryes
whether it will live or no: for that which shall bear the breath of the aire after that hour is conceived will live. After seaven
dayes it casts off the reliques of the Navell.
After twice seaven dayes its sight begins to move after the light: in the third seaventh it turns its eyes, and whole face freely.
After seaven moneths it breeds teeth: After the second seaventh moneth it sits without fear of falling: After the third seaventh
moneth it begins to speak: After the fourth seaventh moneth it stands strongly, and walks: after the fifth seaventh moneth it
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (13 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
begins to refrain sucking its Nurse: After seaven years its first teeth fall, and new are bred, fitter for harder meat, and its
speech is perfected: After the second seaventh year boys wax ripe, and then is a beginning of generation: At the third
seaventh year they grow to be men in stature, and begin to be hairy, and become able, and strong for generation: At the fourth
seaventh year they begin to barnish, and cease to grow taller: In the fifth seaventh year they attain to the perfection of their
strength: The sixt seaven year they keep their strength; The seaventh seaventh year they attain to their utmost discretion, and
wisdome, and the perfect age of men. But when they come to the tenth seaventh year, where the number seaven is taken for a
compleat number, then they come to the common tearm of life, the Prophet saying, Our age is seaventy years. The utmost
hight [height] of mans body is seaven feet. There are also seaven degrees in the body, which compleat the dimension of its
altitude from the bottome to the top, viz. marrow, bone, nerve, vein, artery, flesh, skin. There are seaven, which by the Greeks
are called black members, the Tongue, the Heart, the Lunges, the Liver, the Spleen, and two Kidnies [kidneys]. There are also
seaven principal parts of the body, the head, the breast, the hands, the feet, and the privy members. It is manifest concerning
breath, and meat, that without drawing of the breath the life doth not endure above seaven hours: and they that are starved
with famine, live not above seaven dayes. The Veins also, and arteries (as Physicians say) are moved by the seaventh
number. Also judgements in diseases are made with greater manifestation upon the seaventh dayes, which Physitians
[physicians] call criticall, i.e. judiciall. Also of seaven portions God Creates the soul, as divine Plato witnesseth in Timeus
[Timaeus]. The soul also receives the body by seaven degrees. All difference of voices proceeds to the seaventh degree, after
which there is the same revolution. Again, there are seaven modulations of the voyces, Ditonus, Semiditonus, Diutessaron,
Diapente with a tone [lat: semitone], Diapente with a half time [lat: semitone], and diapason. There is also in Celestials a
most potent power of the number seven. For seeing there are four corners of the Heaven Diametrically looking one towards
the other, which indeed is accounted a most full, and powerfull aspect, and consists of the number seven. For it is made from
the seventh Sign, and makes a Cross, the most powerfull figure of all, of which we shall speak in its due place. But this you
must not be ignorant of, that the number seven hath a great Communion with the Cross. By the same radiation, and number
the solstice is distant from Winter, and the Winter equinoctium from the Summer, all which are done by seven Signs. There
are also seven Circles in the Heaven, according to the longitudes of the Axel-tree. There are seven Stars about the Articke
[Arctic] Pole, greater, and lesser, called Charls-Wain, also seven Stars called the Pleiades, and seven Planets, according to
those seven dayes, constituting a week. The Moon is the seventh of the Planets & next to us observing this number more then
the rest, this number dispensing the mofion, and light thereof. For in twenty eight dayes it runs round the Compass of the
whole Zodiack, which number of dayes, the number seven, with its seven tearms, viz. from one to seven, doth make, and fill
up, as much as the several numbers, by adding to the Antecedents, and makes four times seven dayes, in which the Moon
runs through, and about all the longitude, and latitude of the Zodiack by measuring, and measuring again: with the like seven
of dayes it dispenseth its light, by changing it; For the first seven dayes unto the middle as it were of the divided world, it
increaseth; the second seven dayes it fils [fills] its whole Orb with light; the third by decreasing is again contracted into a
divided Orb; but after the fourth seven dayes, it is renewed with the last diminuafion of its light, and by the same seven of
dayes it disposeth the increase, and decrease of the Sea, for in the first seven of the increase of the Moon, it is by little
lessened; in the second by degrees increased: but the third is like the first, and the fourth doth the sure as the second. It is also
applyed to Saturn, which ascending from the lower, is the seventh Planet, which betokens rest, to which the seventh day is
ascribed, which signifies the seven thousandth, wherein (as John witnesseth) the Dragon, which is the Divell [Devil], and
Satan, being bound, men shall be quiet, and lead a peaceable life. Moreover the Phythagorians [Pythagoreans] call seven the
number of Virginity, because the first is that which is neither generated, or generates, neither can it be divided into two equall
parts, so as to be generated of another number repeated, or being doubled to bring forth any other number of it self, which is
contained within the bounds of the number ten, which is manifestly the first bound of numbers, and therefore they dedicate
the number seven to Pallas. It hath also in Religion most potent signs of its esteem, and it is called the number of an oath.
Hence amongst the Hebrews to swear is called Septenare (i.e.) to protest by seven. So Abraham, when he made a covenant
with Abimelech, appointed seven Ewe Lambs for a testimony. It is also called the number of blessedness, or of rest, whence
that,
O thrice, and four times blessed!
viz. in soul, and body. The seventh day the Creator rested from his work, wherefore this day was by Moses called the Sabbath
(i.e.) the day of rest; hence it was that Christ rested the seventh day in the grave. Also this number hath a great communion
with the Cross, as is above shewed, as also with Christ. For in Christ is all our blessedness, rest, and felicity; besides, it is
most convenient in purifications. whence Apuleius saith, and I put myself forthwith into the bath of the Sea, to be purified,
and put my head seven times under the Waves. And the Leprous person that was to be cleansed, was sprinkled seven times
with the blood of a Sparrow; and Elisha the Prophet, as it is written in the Second Book of the Kings, saith unto the Leprous
person; Go, and wash thy self seven times in Jordan, and thy flesh shall be made whole, and thou shalt be cleansed, and it
follows a little after, And he washed himself seven times in Jordan, according to the Prophets saying, and he was cleansed.
Also it is a number of repentance, and remission: Hence was ordeined the seaventh years repentance for every sin, according
to the opinion of the wise man, saying, And upon every sinner seaven fold: Also the seaventh year there were granted
remissions, and after full seaven years there was giving a full remission, as is read in Leviticus. And Christ with seaven
petitions finished his speech of our satisfaction: hence also it is called the number of liberty, because the seaventh year the
Hebrew servant did challenge liberty for himself. It is also most sutable to divine praises. Whence the Prophet saith, Seaven
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (14 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgements. It is moreover called the number of revenge, as saith the
Scripture, and Cain shall be revenged seaven fold. And the Psalmist saith, Render unto our Neighbours seaven fold into their
bosome, their reproach. Hence there are seaven wickednesses, as saith Solomon, and seaven wickeder spirits taken, are read
of in the Gospel. It signifies also the time of the present circle, because it is finished in the space of seaven days. Also it is
consecrated to the Holy Ghost, which the Prophet Isaiah describes to be seaven fold, according to his gifts, viz. the spirit of
wisdom, and understanding, the spirit of counsell, and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and holiness, and the spirit of the
fear of the Lord, which we read in Zachariah to be the seaven eyes of God. There are also seaven Angells, spirits standing in
the presence of God, as is read in Tobias, and in the Revelation; seaven Kamps did burn before the Throne of God, and
seaven golden Candlesticks, and in the midle thereof was one like to the son of man, and he had in his right hand seaven
Stars. Also there were seaven spirits before the Throne of God, and seaven Angells stood before the Throne, and there were
given to them seaven Trumpets. And he saw a Lamb having seaven horns, and seaven eyes, and he saw the book sealed with
seaven Seales, and when the seaventh seal was opened, there was made silence in heaven. Now by all what hath been said, it
is apparent that the number seaven, amongst the other numbers, may deservedly be said to be most full of all efficacy.
Moreover, the number seaven hath great conformity with the number twelve; For as three, and four make seaven, so thrice
four make twelve, which are the numbers of the celestiall Planets, and signs, resulting from the same root, and by the number
four of the nature of inferiour things. There is in sacred writ a very great observance of this number, before all others, and
many, and very great are the mysteries thereof; many we have decreed to reckon up here, repeating them out of holy writ, by
which it will easily appear, that the number seaven doth signifie a certain fulness of sacred mysteries. For we read in Genesis,
that the seaventh was the day of the rest of the Lord; & Enoch, a pious, holy man, was the seaventh from Adam, and that there
was another seaventh man from Adam, a wicked man, by name Lamech, that had two wives; and that the sin of Cain should
be abolished the seaventh generation: As it is written, Cain shall be punished seaven fold: and he that shall slay Cain, shall be
revenged seaven fold, to which the Master of the History collects, that there were seaven sins of Cain. Also of all clean beasts
seaven, and seaven were brought into the Ark, as also of Fowles: And after seaven days the Lord rained upon the Earth, and
upon the seaventh day the fountains of the deep were broken up, and the waters covered the Earth. Also Abraham gave to
Abimelech seaven Ewe Lambs: and Jacob served seaven years for Leah, and seaven more for Rachael: and seaven dayes the
people of Israel bewailed the death of Jacob. Moreover, we read in the same place, of seaven Kine, and seaven Ears of Corn,
seaven years of plenty, and seaven years of scarcity. And in Exodus, the Sabboth of Sabboths, the holy rest to the Lord, is
commanded to be on the seaventh day. Also on the seaventh day Moses ceased to pray. On the seaventh day there shall be a
solemnity of the Lord, the seaventh year the servant shall go out free: seaven dayes let the Calf, and the Lamb be with its
damm; the seaventh year let the ground that hath been sown six years, be at rest: the seaventh day shall be a holy Sabboth,
and a rest: the seaventh day, because it is the Sabboth, shall be called holy. In Leviticus the seaventh day also shall be more
observed, and be more holy: and the first day of the seaventh moneth shall be a Sabboth of memoriall. Seaven dayes shall the
sacrifices be offered to the Lord, seaven dayes shall the holy dayes of the Lord be celebrated, seaven dayes in a year
everlastingly in the generations. In the seaventh moneth you shall celebrate feasts, and shall dwell in Tabernacles seaven
dayes: seaven times he shall sprinkle himself before the Lord, that hath dipped his finger in blood: he that is cleansed from
the Leprosy, shall dip seaven times in the blood of a sparrow: seaven days shall she be washed with running water, that is
menstruous: seaven times he shall dip his finger in the blood of a bullock: seaven times I will smite you for your sins: In
Deuteronomy seaven people possessed the Land of promise. There is also read of a seaventh year of remission, and seaven
Candles set up on the South side of the Candlesticks. And in Numbers it is read, that the sons of Israel offered up seaven Ewe
Lambs without spot, and that seaven dayes they did eat unleavened bread, and that sin was expiated with seaven Lambs, & a
Goat, and that the seaventh day was celebrated, and holy, and the first day of the seaventh moneth was observed, and kept
holy, and the seaventh moneth of the feast of Tabernacles, & sseven Calves were offered on the seaventh day, and Baalam
erected seaven Altars; seaven dayes Mary the sister of Aaron went forth leprous out of the Camp, seaven dayes he that
touched a dead carkass [carcass] was unclean. And in Joshua seaven priests carried the Ark of the Covenant before the Host,
and seaven dayes they went round the Cities, and seaven trumpets were carried by the seaven Priests, and on the seaventh day
the seaven Priests sounded the Trumpets. And in the book of Judges, Abessa raigned [reigned] in Israel seaven years,
Sampson kept his nuptialls seaven dayes, and the seaventh day he put forth a Riddle to his wife, he was bound with seaven
green [i.e. fresh] withs [nerviceis = sinews i.e. bowstrings, cf. Judges 16:8], seaven locks of his head were shaved off, seaven
years were the children of Israel oppressed by the King of Maden [Madian] And in the books of the Kings, Elias prayed
seaven times, and at the seaventh time, behold a little cloud! seaven dayes the children of Israel pitched over against the
Syrians, and in the seaventh day the battell [battle] was joyned: seaven years famine was threatened to David for the peoples
murmuring; and seaven times the child sneesed [sneezed], that was raised [resuscitated] by Elisha, [cf. II Kings 4:35] and
seaven men were crucified together in the dayes of the first harvest. Naaman was made clean with seaven washings by
Elisha, the seaventh moneth Golias was slain. And in Hester we read, that the King of Persia had three Eunuchs: and in
Tobias seaven men were coupled [copulati] with Sara the daughter of Raguel: And in Daniel Nebucadnezzars Furnace was
heated seaven times hotter then it was used to be, and seaven Lions were in the den, and the seaventh day came
Nebucadnezzar. In the book of Job there is made mention of seaven sons of Job, and seaven dayes and nights Jobs friends
sate with him on the Earth; and in the same place, In seaven troubles no evill shall touch thee. In Ezra we read of Artaxerxes
his seaven counsellers: and in the same place the trumpet sounded: the seaventh moneth of the feast of tabernacles were in
Ezraes time, whilest the children of Israel were in the Cities: and on the first day of the seaventh moneth Esdras read the Law
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (15 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
to the people. And in the Psalmes David praised the Lord seaven times in a day: silver is tryed seaven times; and he renders
to our neighbours seaven fold into their bosomes. And Solomon saith, that wisdom hath hewen her self seaven Pillars; seaven
men that can render a reason, seaven abominations which the Lord abhors, seaven abominations in the heart of an enemy,
seaven overseers, seaven eyes beholding. Isaiah numbers up seaven gifts of the Holy Ghost, and seaven women shall take
hold on a man. And in Jeremiah, she that hath born seaven, languisheth, she hath given up the ghost. In Ezekiel, the Prophet
continued sad for seaven dayes. In Zechariah seaven lamps, and seaven pipes to those seaven lamps, and seaven eyes running
to and fro throughout the whole Earth, and seaven eyes upon one stone, and the fast of the seaventh day is turned into joy.
And in Micah, seaven shepherds are raised against the Assyrians. Also in the Gospel we read of seaven blessednesses, and
seaven vertues, to which seaven vices are opposed; seaven petitions of the Lords prayer, seaven words of Christ upon the
cross, seaven words of the blessed Virgin Mary, seaven loaves distributed by the Lord, seaven baskets of fragments, seaven
brothers having one wife, seaven disciples of the Lord that were fishers, seaven water pots in Cana of Galile [Galilee],
seaven woes which the Lord threatens to the Hypocrites, seaven divels [devils] cast out of the unclean woman, and seaven
wickeder divells [devils] taken in after that which was cast out. Also seaven years Christ was fled into Egypt; and the
seaventh hour the Fevour [fever] left the Governors son. And in the Canonicall Epistles, James describes seaven degrees of
wisdom, and Peter seaven degrees of Vertues. And in the Acts are reckoned seaven Deacons, and seaven disciples chosen by
the Apostles. Also in the Revelations there are many mysteries of this number: for there we read of seaven Candlesticks,
seaven Stars, seaven Crowns, seaven Churches, seaven Spirits before the Throne, seaven Rivers of Egypt, seaven Seales,
seaven Markes, seaven Horns, seaven Eyes, seaven Spirits of God, seaven Angels with seaven Trumpets, seaven horns of the
Dragon, seaven heads of the Dragon, who had seaven Diadems: also seaven plagues, and seaven Vials, which were given to
one of the seaven Angells, seaven heads of the scarlet Beast, seaven Mountains, and seaven Kings sitting upon them, and
seaven thunders uttered their voyces. Moreover this number hath much power, as in natural, so in sacred, Ceremoniall, and
also in other things: therefore the seaven days are related hither, also the seaven Planets, the seaven, Stars called Pleiades, the
seaven Ages of the World, the seaven changes of man, the seaven liberall Arts, and so many mechanick, and so many
forbidden, seaven Colours, seaven Metalls, seaven holes in the head of a man, seaven pair of nerves, seaven Mountains in the
City of Rome, seaven Romane Kings, seaven Civill Wars, seaven wise men in the time of Jeremiah the Prophet, and seaven
wise men of Greece. Also Rome did burn seaven days by Nero. By seaven Kings were slain ten thousand Martyrs. There
were seaven sleepers, seaven principall Churches of Rome, and so many Monasteries did Gregory build: So many sons Saint
Felicity brought forth: there were seaven Electors of the Empire appointed, and seaven solemn Acts in crowning the
Emperour; the Laws in the Testament require seaven witnesses, there are seaven civill punishments, and seaven canonicall,
and seaven canonicall hours, the priest makes seaven obeysances in the Mass; seaven Sacraments, and seaven orders of the
Clergy, and a boy of seaven years may be ordained by the lesser, and may obtein a benefice sine Cura. There are seaven
penitentiall Psalmes, and seaven commands of the second table, and seaven hours were Adam,and Eve in Paradise, and there
were seaven men foretold by an Angell before they were born, viz. Ismael, Isaack, Sampson, Jeremiah, John Baptist, James
the brother of the Lord, and Christ Jesus. Lastly, this number is most potent of all, as in good, so evill; of this Livy, the most
ancient Poet sang,
The seaventh light is come, and then all things
T'absolve the father of all light begins,
The seaventh's of all things originall,
The first seaventh, seaventh seaven we call
Perfect, with wandering Stars the heaven's volv'd,
And with as many circles is round roll'd.
The Scale of the Number seven.
In the
originall
world. Ararita. àúéøàøà Asser Eheie äéäà øùà The name of God with seven letters.
In the
Intelligible
world.
ìàé÷ôö
Zaphiel
[Zaphkiel].
ìàé÷ãö
Zadkiel.
ìàîë
Camael.
ìàôø
Raphael.
ìàéðàä
Haniel.
ìàëéî
Michael.
ìàéøáâ
Gabriel.
Seven
Angels
which
stand in the
presence of
God.
In the
Celestiall
world.
éàúáù
Saturn.
÷ãö
Jupiter.
íéãàî
Mars.
ùîù
The Sun.
äâåð
Venus.
áëåë
Mercury.
äðáì
The Moon.
Seven
Planets.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (16 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
In the
Elementary
world.
The
Lapwing.
The
Cutlefish.
The Mole.
Lead.
The Onyx.
The Eagle.
The
Dolphin.
The Hart.
Tin.
The Saphir
[Saphire].
The Vultur
[vulture]
The Pike.
The Wolf.
Iron.
The Diamond.
The Swan.
The Sea-calf.
The Lion.
Gold.
The
Carbuncle.
The Dove.
Thimallus.
The Goat.
Copper.
The Emrald
[emerald].
The Stork.
The Mullet.
The Ape.
Quick-silver
[mercury].
The Achates.
The Owle.
The
Sea-Cat.
Cat.
Silver.
Crystall.
Seven
Birds of
the Planets.
Seven Fish
of the
Planets.
Seven
Animals of
the Planets.
Seven
Metals of
the Planets.
Seven
Stones of
the Planets.
In the lesser
world.
The right
foot.
The right
ear.
The Head.
The left ear.
The right hand.
The right
Nostrell.
The heart.
The right eye.
The privy
members.
The left
nostrill.
The left
hand.
The mouth.
The left
foot.
The left
eye.
Seven
integrall
members
distributed
to the
Planets.
Seven
holes of
the head
distributed
to the
Planets.
In the
infernall
world.
Hell.
íðäéâ
The gates
of death.
úåî ìöå
The shadow of
death.
úéî éøöù
The pit of
destruction.
úçù øàá
The clay of
death.
ïåéä èéè
Perdition.
ïåãáà
The depth
of the
Earth.
ìåàù
Seven
habitations
of
infernals,
which
Rabbi
Joseph of
Castilia the
Cabalist
describes
in the
Garden of
Nuts.
Chapter xi. Of the number Eight, and the Scale thereof.
The Pythagoreans call eight the number of justice, and fulness: first, because it is first of all divided into numbers equally
even, viz. into four, and that division is by the same reason made into twice two, viz. by twice two twice; and by reason of this
equality of division, it took to it self the name of justice, but the other received the name, viz. of fulness, by reason of the
contexture of the corporeall solidity, since the first makes a solid body. Hence that custome of Orpheus, swearing by eight
dieties [deities], if at any time he would beseech divine justice, whose names are these. Fire, Water, Earth, the Heaven,
Moon, Sun, Phanes, the Night. There are also only eight visible Spheres of the heavens: also by it the property of corporeall
nature is signified, which Orpheus comprehends in eight of his Sea songs. This is also called the covenant of circumcision,
which was commanded to be done by the Jewes the eight day.
There were also in the old Law eight ornaments of the Priest, viz. a breast-plate, a coat, a girdle, a myter [miter], a robe, an
Ephod, a girdle of the Ephod, a golden plate; hither\ belongs the number to eternity, and the end of the world, because it
follows the number seven, which is the mysterie [mystery] of time: hence also the number of blessedness; for Christ teacheth
so many degrees of blessednesses, as you may see in Matthew: It is also called the number of safety, and conservation, for
there were so many souls of the sons of Jesse, from which David was the eighth. Also Zacharias, the father of John, received
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (17 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
his speech the eighth day. They say this number was dedicated to Dionysius, because he was born the eighth moneth, in
everlasting memory whereof, Naxos the Iland [island] was dedicated to him, which obtained this prerogative, that only the
women of Naxos should safely bring forth in the eighth moneth, and their children should live, whereas the children of the
eighth moneth in other Nations dy [die], and their mothers then bringing forth are in manifest danger.
The Scale of the Number eight.
The
name of
God with
eight
letters.
Eloha Vadaath úòãå äåìà Jehovah Vedaath, úòãå äåäé In the
Originall.
Eight
rewards
of the
blessed.
Inheritance. Incorruption. Power. Victory.
The
vision of
God.
Grace. A
Kingdom. Joy.
In the
Intelligible
world.
Eight
visible
Heavens.
The Starry
Heaven.
The Heaven
if Saturn.
The
Heaven of
Jupiter.
The Heaven
of Mars.
The
Heaven
of the
Sun.
The Heaven
of Venus.
The
Heaven of
Mercury.
The
Heaven of
the Moon.
In the
Celestiall
world.
Eight
particular
qualities.
The
dryness of
the earth.
The coldness
of the water.
The
moisture of
the aire.
The heat of
the fire.
The heat
of the
aire.
The
moisture of
the water.
The
dryness of
the fire.
The
coldness
of the
earth.
In the
Elementary
world.
Eight
kinds of
blessed
men.
The peace
makers.
That hunger
and thirst
after
righteousness.
The meek.
They which
are
persecuted
for
righteousness
sake.
Pure in
heart. Mercifull. Poor in
spirit. Mourners.
In the
lesser
world.
Eight
rewards
of the
damned.
Prison. Death. Judgement. The wrath of
God. Darkness. Indignation. Tribulation. Anguish.
In the
infernall
world.
Twilit Grotto -- Esoteric Archives Contents Prev agrippa2 Next timeline
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 1)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agrippa2.htm (18 von 18) [20.02.2001 16:11:48]
Twilit Grotto -- Esoteric Archives Contents Prev agrippa2-2 Next timeline
This HTML edition by Joseph H. Peterson, Copyright © 2000. All rights reserved.
The copyright to the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives is owned by Joseph H. Peterson and is protected by the copyright laws of the United States and the Universal Copyright Convention.
The materials on the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives (including all texts, translations, images, descriptions, drawings etc.) are provided for the personal use of students, scholars, and the public. Any commercial use or publication of them without
authorization is strictly prohibited. All materials are copyrighted and are not in the public domain. Copying of materials on the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives Web pages is not permitted.
Individuals distributing illegal copies will be pursued legally along with their Internet Service Providers.
You will need a Hebrew font installed to read some of this book.
Chapter xii. Of the Number Nine, and the Scale thereof.
The number nine is dedicated to the Muses, by the help of the order of the Celestiall Spheres, and divine spirits: Hence there are nine movable Spheres, and according to those there are nine Muses, viz. Calliope, Urania, Polymnia, Terpsichore, Clio,
Melpomene, Erato, Euterpe, Thalia, which nine Muses indeed are appropriated to the nine Spheres, so that the first resembles the supreme Sphere, which they call Primum mobile, and so descending by degrees, according to the written order, unto the
last, which resembles the Sphere of the Moon, so, viz. Calliope is appropriated to the Primum mobile; Urania to the Starry Heaven, Polymnia to Saturn, Terpsichore, to Jupiter, Cleo to Mars, Melpomene to the Sun, Erato to Venus, Euterpe to Mercury,
Thalia to the Moon.
There are also nine orders of blessed Angels, viz. Seraphim, Cherubim, Thrones, Dominations, Powers, Vertues, Principallities, Archangels, Angels, which Ezekiel figures out of nine Stones, which are the Saphir, Emrald [sapphire, emerald],
Carbuncle, Berill [beryl], Onyx, Chrysolite, Jasper, Topaze, Sardis: This number hath also a great, and Occult mysterie of the Cross: For the ninth hour our Lord Jesus Christ breathed out his Spirit. And in nine dayes the Ancients buryed [buried] their
dead, and in so many yeers [years] they say Minea received Laws from Jupiter in a Cave; whence this number was most especially taken notice of by Homer, when Laws were to be given, or answers were to be given, or the sword was like to rage.
The Astrologers also take notice of the number nine in the Ages of men, no otherwise then they do of seven, which they call Climactericall years, which are eminent for some remarkable change. Yet sometimes it signifies imperfectness, and
incompleatness, because it doth not attain to the perfection of the number ten, but is less by one, without which it is deficient, as Austin [Augustine] interprets it out of the ten Leapers [leper]: Neither is the longitude of nine Cubits of Og King of Basan,
who is a type of the divel [Devil], without a mysterie [mystery].
The Scale of the Number nine.
The names of God with
nine letters. Jehovah Sabaoth. úåàáö äåäé Jehovah Zidkenu. åð÷ãö äåäé Elohim Gibor. øáéâ íéäìà In the originall world.
Nine Quires of Angels.
Nine Angels ruling the
Heavens.
Seraphim.
Metattron [Metatron].
Cherubin.
Ophaniel.
Thrones.
Zaphkiel.
Dominations.
Zadkiel.
Powers.
Camael.
Vertue.
Raphael.
Principalities.
Haniel.
Archangels.
Michael.
Angels.
Gabriel.
In the intelligible
world.
Nine moveable spheres. The primum mobile. The Starry Heaven. The sphere of Saturn. The sphere of Jupiter. The sphere of
Mars.
The sphere of the
Sun. The sphere of Venus. The sphere of
Mercury.
The sphere of the
Moon. In the Celestial world.
Nine stones
representing the nine
Quires of Angels.
Saphir [saphire] Emrald [emerald]. Carbuncle. Beril [beryl] Onyx. Chrysolite. Jasper. Topaze. Sardis. In the Elementary
world.
Nine senses inward,
and outward together. Memory. Cogitative. Imaginative. Common sense. Hearing. Seeing. Smelling. Tasting. Touching. In the lesser world.
Nine orders of divels
[devils]. False spirits. Spirits of lying. Vessels of iniquity. Avengers of wickedness. Juglers. Aiery powers. Furies, sowing mischief. Sisters or tryers. Tempters or
insnarers. In the infernal world.
Chapter xiii. Of the Number Ten, and the Scale thereof.
The number ten is called every number, or an universall number, compleat, signifying the full course of life: for beyond that we cannot number, but by replication; and it either implies all numbers within it self, or explains them by it self, and its own,
by multiplying them: wherefore it is accounted to be of a manifold Religion, and power, and is applyed to the purging of souls. Hence the Ancients called Ceremonies Denary, because they that were to be expiated, and to offer sacrifices, were to
abstain from some certain things for ten dayes. Whence amongst the Egyptians it was the custome for him that would sacrifice to Io, to fast ten dayes before, which Apuleius testifies of himself, saying, It was commanded that I should for the space of
ten dayes refrain all meat, and be fasting. There are ten sanguine parts of man, the Menstrues, the Sperm, the Plasmatick spirit, the Mass, the Humours, the Organicall body, the vegetative part the sensitive part, reason, and the mind. There are also ten
simple integrall parts constituting man, the bone, cartilage, nerve, fibre, ligament, artery, vein, membrane, flesh, skin. There are also ten parts of which a man consists intrinsecally; The spirit, the brain, the lungs, the heart, the liver, the gall, the spleen,
the kidnies [kidneys], the testicles, the Matrix. There were ten Curtains in the Temple, ten strings in the Psaltery; ten musicall instruments with which Psalms were sang, the names whereof were, Neza, on which their Odes were sang, Nablum, the
same as Organs, Mizmor, on which the Psalms, Sir, on which the Canticles; Tehila, on which Orations, Beracha, on which Benedictions, Halel, on which Praises: Hodaia, on which Thanks, Asre, on which the Felicity of any one, Hallelujah, on which
the praises of God only, and Contemplations. There were also ten singers of Psalms, viz. Adam, Abraham, Melchisedech, Moses, Asaph, David, Solomon, and three sons of Chora, there are also ten commandments; And the tenth day after the ascension
of Christ the Holy Ghost came down. This lastly is the number, in which Jacob wrestling with the Angel all night overcame, and at the rising of the Sun was blessed, and called by the name of Israel. In this number Joshua overcame thirty one Kings,
and David overcame Goliath, and the Philistines, and Daniel escaped the danger of the Lions. This number also is as circular as unity, because being heaped together, returns into a unity, from whence it had its beginning, and it is the end, and
perfection of all numbers, and the beginning of tens. As the number ten flows back into a unity, from whence it proceeded, so every thing that is flowing is returned back to that from which it had the beginning of its Flux. So water returns to the Sea,
from whence it had its beginning, the body returns to the Earth, from whence it was taken; time returns into Eternity, from whence it flowed, the spirit shall return to God that gave it; and lastly, every creature returns to nothing, from whence it was
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (1 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
created, neither is it supported but by the word of God, in whom all things are hid; and all things with the number ten, and by the number ten, make a round, as saith Proclus, taking their beginning from God, and ending in him. God therefore that first
unity, or one thing, before he communicated himself to inferiours, diffused himself into the first of numbers, viz. The number three, then into the number ten, as into ten Ideas, and measures of making all numbers, and all things, which the Hebrews
call ten Attributes, and account ten divine names; For which cause there cannot be a further number. Hence all tens have some divine thing in them, and in the Law are required of God as his own, together with the first fruits, as the originall of things,
and beginning of numbers, and every tenth is as the end given to him, who is the beginning, and end of all things.
The Scale of the Number ten.
The Scale of the Number ten.
In the
originall
åäéåçéäåäé
The name Jehova of ten letters
collected.
àä åàå àä ãåé
The Name Jehovah of ten letters Extended.
úåàáö íéäìà
The name Elohim Sabaoth. The name of God with ten letters.
äéäà
Eheie.
øúë
Kether.
äåäé é
Iod
Jehovah.
äîëç
Hochmah.
íéäìà äåäé
Jehova
Elohim.
äðéá
Binah.
ìà
El.
ãñä
Hesed.
øáéâ íéäìà
Elohim
gibor.
äøåáâ
Geburah.
äåìà
Eloha.
úøàôú
Tiphereth.
úåàáö äåäé
Jehovah
Sabaoth
äöð
Nezah.
úåàáö íéäìà
Elohim
Sabaoth.
ãåä
Hod.
éãù
Sadai.
ãåñé
Iesod.
éðãà
Adonai
melech.
úåëìî
Malchuth.
Ten names of God.
Ten Sephiroth.
In the
intelligible
world.
Seraphim.
Haioth
ha-kados.
Metattron.
Cherubim.
Ophanim.
Jophiel.
Thrones.
Aralim.
Zaphkiel.
Dominations.
Hasmallim.
Zadkiel.
Powers.
Seraphim.
Camael.
Vertues.
Malachim.
Raphel
[Raphael].
Principalities.
Elohim.
Haniel.
Archangels.
Ben Elohim.
Michael.
Angels.
Cherubim.
Gabriel.
Blessed
souls.
Issim.
The soul
of
Messiah.
Ten orders of the blessed according to Dionysius.
Ten orders of the blessed according to the traditions of men.
Ten Angels ruling.
In the
Celestiall
world.
Reschith
ha-gallalim.
The
Primum
Mobile.
Masloth.
The
sphere of
the
Zodiake
[zodiac].
Sabbathi.
The Sphere
of Saturn.
Zedeck.
The sphere
of Jupiter.
Madim.
The Sphere
of Mars.
Schemes.
The
sphere of
the Sun.
Noga.
The sphere of
Venus.
Cochab.
The sphere of
Mercury.
Levanah.
The
sphere of
the Moon.
Holom.
Jesodoth.
The
sphere of
the
Elements.
Ten spheres of the world.
In the
Elementary
world.
A Dove. A Lizard. A Dragon. An Eagle. A Horse. Lion. Man. Genitals [sic.
Serpent] Bull. Lamb. Ten Animals consecrated to the Gods.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (2 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
In the
lesser
world.
Spirit. Brain. Spleen. Liver. Gall. Heart. Kidneys. Lungs. Genitals. Matrix. Ten parts intrinsecall of man.
In the
infernall
world.
False Gods. Lying
spirits.
Vessels of
iniquity.
Revengers of
wickedness. Juglers. Aery
powers.
Furies the
seminaries of
evil.
Sifters or
tryers.
Tempters
or
ensnarers.
Wicked
souls bear
rule.
Ten orders of the damned.
Chapter xiiii. Of the Number eleven, and the number twelve; with a double Scale of the Number twelve Cabalisticall, and Orphicall.
The number eleven as it exceeds the number ten, which is the number of the commandements [commandments], so it fals short of the number twelve, which is of grace and perfection, therefore it is called the number of sins, and the penitent. Hence in
the tabernacle there were commanded to be made eleven Coats of hair which is the habit of those that are penitent, and lament for their sins, whence this number hath no Communion with Divine or Celestiall things, nor any attraction, or scale tending
to things above: neither hath it any reward; but yet sometimes it receives a gratuitous favor from God, as he which was called the eleventh hour to the vineyard of the Lord, received the sanne reward as those who had born the burden, and heat of the
day. Now the number twelve is divine, and that whereby the Celestials are measured; it is also the number of the Signs in the Zodiack over which there are twelve angeis as chief, supported by the irrigation of the great name of God. In twelve yeers
[years] also Jupiter perfects his course, and the Moon daily runs through twelve degrees. There are also twelve chief joynts [joints] in the body of man, viz. in hands, elbones [elbows], shoulders, thighs, knees, and vertebrae of the feet. There is also a
great power of the number twelve in divine mysteries. God chose twelve families of Israel, and set over them twelve Princes; so many stones were placed in the midst of Jordan, and God commanded that so many should be set on the breast of the
Priest; twelve Lyons [lions] did bear the brazen Sea that was made by Solomon: there were so many fountains in Helim, and so many spies sent to the land of promise, and so many Apostles of Christ set over the twelve tribes, and twelve thousand
people were set apart and chosen; the queen of Heaven crowned with twelve Stars, and in the Gospel twelve baskets of the fragments were taken up, and twelve Angels are set over the twelve gates of the City, and twelve stones of the heavenly
Jerusalem. In inferior things many breeding things proceed after this number; so the Hare and Coney being most fruitfull, bring forth twelve times in the yeer [year], and the Cammel [camel] is so many moneths in breeding, and the Pea-cock [peacock]
brings forth twelve Eggs.
The Scale of the Number twelve.
The names
of God with
twelve
letters
àåä
Holy
(ê)åøá
Blessed
ùã÷ä
He [Ipse]
ùã÷ä çåøå ïá áà
Father, Son, Holy Ghost.
In the originall
world.
The great
name
returned
back into
twelve
banners.
äåäé åääé ääåé éäåä äéåä åéää äéäå ääåé éääå åäéä äåéä éåää
Twelve
orders of the
blessed
Spirits.
Seraphim. Cherubim. Thrones. Dominations. Powers. Vertues. Principalities. Archangels. Angels. Innocents. Martyrs. Confessors.
In the
Intelligible
world.
Twelve
Angels
ruling over
the signs.
Malchidiel. Asmodel. Ambriel. Muriel. Verchiel. Hamaliel. Zuriel. Barbiel. Adnachiel. Hanael. Gabiel. Barchiel.
Twelve
Tribes: Dan. Ruben. Judah. Manasseh. Asher. Simeon. Issachar. Benjamin. Napthalin. Gad. Zabulon. Ephraim.
Twelve
Prophets. Malachi. Haggai. Zachary. Amos. Hosea. Micha. Jonah. Obadiah. Zephaniah Nahum. Habakuk Joel.
Twelve
Apostles. Mathias. Thadeus. Simon. John. Peters. Andrew. Bartholemew. Philip. James the
elder Thomas. Matthew. James the
yonger.
Twelve
signs of the
Zodiack.
Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittarius. Capricorn. Aquarius. Pisces.
In the
Celestiall
world.
Twelve
Moneths
[months].
March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. Novemb. December. January. February.
In the
Elementall
world.
Twelve
Plants. SSang. Upright
Vervain.
Bending
Vervain. Comfrey. Lady's
Seal. Calamint. Scorpion-grass. Mugwort. Pimpernel. Dock. Dragon-wort. Aristolochy.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (3 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
Twelve
stones. Sardonius. A Carneol. Topaze Calcedony. Jasper. Emrald
[emerald]. Berill. Amethyst. Hyacinth. Chrysoprasus. Crystall. Saphir.
Twelve
principall
members.
The head. The neck. The arms. The brest
[breast]. The heart. The belly. The kidnies
[kidneys]. Genitals. The hams. Knees. Legs. Feet.
In the
Elementary
world.
Twelve
degrees of
the damned,
and of
Divels
[devils].
False gods Lying spirits. Vessels of
iniquity.
Revengers of
wickedness. Juglers. Aery
powers.
Furies the sowers
of evils.
Sifters or
Tryers.
Tempters or
ensnarers. Witches. Apostates. Infidels. In the infernall
world.
The Orphical Scale of the Number twelve.
Twelve Deities. Pallas. Venus. Phoebus. Mercury. Jupiter. Ceres. Vulcan. Mars. Diana. Vesta. Juno. Neptune. In the intelligible
world.
Twelve signs of the
Zodiake. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Cancer. Leo. Virgo. Libra. Scorpio. Sagittarius. Capricorn. Aquarius. Pisces. In the Celestiall world.
Twelve Moneths
[months]. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. Novemb. December. January. February. In the Elementall
world.
Twelve consecrated
birds. The Owle. Dove. Cock. Ibis. Eagle. Sparrow. Goose. Pie. Daw. Heron. Peacock. Swan.
Twelve consecrated
beasts. Shee Goat. He Goat. Bull. Dog. Hart. Sow. Asse. Wolf. Hind. Lyon [lion]. Sheep. Horse.
Twelve consecrated trees. Olive-tree. Myrtil-tree. Laurell. Hasle [hazel tree]. Aesculus. Apple-tree. Box-tree. Dog tree. Palm-tree. Pine-tree. Ram-thorn. Elm-tree.
Twelve members of man
distributed to the signs. The head. The Neck. The Armes. The Brest [breast]. The Heart. The Belly. The kidnies [kidneys]. Genitals. Hamnes. Knees. Leggs. Feet. In the lesser world.
Chapter xv. Of the Numbers which are above twelve, and of their powers and vertues.
The other numbers also which are above twelve, are endowed with many, and various effects, the vertues whereof you must understand by their originall, and parts, as they are made of a various gathering together of simple numbers, or maner of
multiplication. Sometimes as their significations arise from the lessening, or exceeding going before, especially more perfect, so they contain of themselves the signs of certain divine mysteries. So you see the third number above ten, shews the
mysteries of Christs appearing to the Gentiles, for the thirteenth day after his birth a Star was a guide to the wise men. The fourteenth day doth typifie Christ, who the fourteenth day of the first moneth [month] was sacrificed for us; upon which day the
children of Israel were commanded by the Lord to celebrate the Passeover [Passover]. This number Mathew [Matthew] doth so carefully observe, that he passed over some generations, that he might every where observe this number in the generations
of Christ. The fifteenth number is a token of spirituall ascensions, therefore the song of degrees is applyed to that in fifteen Psalms. Also fifteen yeers [years] were added to the life of King Hezekiah: and the fifteenth day of the seventh moneth [month]
was observed, and kept holy. The number sixteen, the Pythagorians call the number of felicity. It also comprehends all the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the Apostles, and Evangelists of the new. The number eighteen, and twenty, Divines
interpret to be unhappy, for in the former, Israel served Eglon King of Moab; and in the other Jacob served, and Joseph was sold. And lastly, amongst creatures that have many feet, there is none that hath above twenty feet. The twenty two signifies
the fullness of wisdom, and so many are the Characters of the Hebrew letters, and so many Books doth the old Testament contain. To the number twenty eight, the favour of the Moon is designed, for the motion thereof is distant from the course of
other Stars, & as it were alone is compleated the twenty eighth day, when it returns to the same point of the Zodiake [zodiac] from whence it came. Hence twenty eight Mansions of the Moon, having singular vertue, and influence, are numbered in the
heavens. The number thirty is memorable for many mysteries, Our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized the thirtieth yeer [year] of his Age, and began to do miracles, and to teach the Kingdom of God. Also John Baptist was thirty yeers old when be began
to preach in the wilderness, and to prepare the wayes of the Lord. Also Ezekiel at the same age began to prophecy; and Joseph was brought out of Prison on the thirtieth yeer of his Age, and received the government of Egypt from Pharaoh. The
number thirty two, the Hebrew Doctors ascribe to wisdom, and so many paths of wisdom are described by Abraham. But the Pythagorians call this the number of Justice, because it is alwaies divisible into two parts, even unto a unity. The number
fourty [forty], the Ancients did honour with great observation, concerning which they did celebrate the feast Tessarosten: It is said that it doth conduce to the account of birth, for in so many daies the seed is fitted, and transformed in the womb, untill it
be by its due, and harmoniacall proportions brought unto a perfect organicall body, being disposed to receive a rationall soul. And so many dayes they say women be, after they have brought forth, before all things are setled [settled] within them, and
they purifled, and so many dayes infants refrain from smiling, are infirme, and live with a great deal of hazard. This also is in Religion a number of expiation, and penitency, and signifying great mysteries. For in the time of the deluge the Lord rained
fourty daye, and nights upon the earth: The children of Israel lived fourty yeers in the wilderness; fourty dayes the destruction of Nineveh was put off. The same number was accounted as holy in the fasts of the Saints: For Moses, Elias, and Christ
fasted fourty dayes. Christ was carried fourty weeks in the womb of a Virgin, Christ tarryed fourty dayes after his birth at Bethelem [Bethlehem] before he was presented in the Temple: He preached fourty months publickly: He lay fourty [forty] hours
dead in the Sepulchre, the fourtieth day after his resurrection he ascended into heaven, all which Divines say, were not done without some occult property, and mysterie of this number. The number fifty signifies remission of sins, of servitudes, and
also liberty. According in the Law, on the fiftieth year they did remit debts, and every one did return to his own possessions. Hence by the yeer of Jubilee, and by the Psalm of repentance it shews a sign of indulgency, and repentance. The law also, and
the holy Ghost are declared in the same: For the fiftieth day after Israels going forth out of Egypt, the Law was given to Moses in mount Sinai: The fiftieth day after the resurrection, the holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles in mount Sion;
Whence also it is called the number of grace, and attributed to the Holy Ghost. The number sixty, was holy to the Egyptians, for it is proper to the Crocodile, that as she in sixty dayes brings forth sixty eggs, and so many dayes sits on them, so she is
said also to live so many yeers, and to have so many teeth: and so many dayes every yeer to rest solitary without any meat. The number seventy hath also its mysteries, for so many yeers the fire of the sacrifice in the Babylonian Captivity lay under the
water, and was alive: so many yeers Jeremiah foretold the destruction of the Temple, and so many yeers the Babylonian Captivity endured, and in so many yeers the desolation of Jerusalem was finished. Also there were seventy Palms in the place
where the children of Israel pitched their Tents. The Fathers went down to Egypt with seventy souls. Also seventy Kings with their fingers, and toes cut off did gather meat under the table of Adonibezeck seventy sons came forth of the loins of Joas,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (4 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
seventy men, all sons of Jero, seventy weights of silver were given to Abimelech, and so many men Abimelech slew upon one stone: Abdon had seventy sons, and Nephews, who rod upon seventy Foals of Asses; Solomon had seventy thousand men
which carried burdens. Seventy sons of King Ahab were beheaded in Samaria; seventy yeers, according to the Psalmist, are the Age of man. Lamech shall be avenged seventy seven fold; Thou shalt forgive thy brother if he offend against thee, seventy
seven times. Also the number <seventy seven times. Also the number> seventy two was famous for so many languages, for so many Elders of the Synagogue, for so many interpreters of the old Testament, for so many Disciples of Christ: It hath also a
great Communion with the number twelve; hence in the heavens, every sign being divided into six parts, there result seventy two fives, over which so many angels bear rule; and so many are the names of God; and every five is set over one Idiom with
such efficacy, that the Astrologers, and Physiognomists can know from thence from what Idiom everyone ariseth. Answerable to these are so many manifest joynts in mans body, whereof in every finger and toe there are three, which together with the
twelve Principal reckoned before in the number twelve make up seventy two. The number a hundred in which the sheep that was found, was placed, which also passeth from the left hand to the right, is found holy: and because it consists of tens it
shews a complete perfection. But the Complement of all numbers is a thousand which is the four square measure of number ten, signifying a complete, and absolute perfection. There are also two numbers especially celebrated by Plato in his Repub.
[Republic] and not disallowed by Aristotle in his Politicks, by which great mutations in Cities are foretold: These are the square of ten [*twelve], and the four square measure thereof, viz. the fourty four above a hundred, and seven hundred twenty
eight above a thousand, which number is fatall: to which when any City, or Common Wealth hath attained, it shall afterward with a compleat four square measure decline: but in squares it undergoeth a change, but for the better, if it be governed with
prudent discipline, and then it shall not with fate, but imprudency fall. And let thus much suffice for numbers in particular.
Chapter xvi. Of the notes of numbers, placed in certain gesturings.
I have often read in the books of Magicians, and their works, and experiments certain, wonderful, & as they seemed to me ridiculous gesturings, and I did think they were certain occult agreements of the divels, by reason of which I did reject them: but
after I did more seriously examine the matter, then I did presently understand that they were not the compacts of divels [devils]; but that there lay in them the reason of numbers, by which the ancients did by the various bending forward, and backward,
their hands, and fingers represent numbers, by whose gesturings the Magiciand did silently signifie words unknown by sound, various with numbers, yet of great vertue, by their fingers joyned together, and sometimes changed, and did with sacred
silence worship the Gods that rule over the world. The rites whereof Martianus also makes mention of in his Arithmetick, saying, The fingers of the Virgin were moved all manner of wayes, who after she went in, did by expressing seven hundred and
seventeen numbers with her bended fingers call upon Jupiter. But, that these things may be the better understood, I shall bring something out of the sayings of Beda who saith, When thou sayest one, bend in the litle [little] finger on thy left hand, and
set it in the middle of the Palme; when thou sayest two, place the next finger to the litle finger in the same place; when three, the middle finger after the same manner; when four, thou shalt lift up thy little finger; when five, the next to it after the same
manner; when six, the middle, that finger alone which is called the ring finger, being fixt on the middle of the Palme: when thou sayest seve, thou shaly put only thy little finger above the root of thy Palm, tthe rest in the mean time being lifted up; and
by it when thou sayest eight, thy ring finger; when thou sayest nine, thou shalt set thy middle finger contrary to them; when thou sayest ten, thou shall set the naile of thy fore-finger, or the middle joynt [joint] of thy thumb. When thou sayest twenty,
thou shalt put the top of thy middle finger close betwixt the joynts of thy thumb, and forefinger. When thou sayest thirty, thou shalt joyn the naile of thy thumb, and fore-finger lightly together. When thou sayest fourty [forty], thou shalt bring the
inside of thy thumb to the outside of thy fore-finger, both being lifted up. When thou sayest fiftym thou shalt bend thy thumb with the outward joynt like to the Greek Gamma to the Palme. When thou sayest sixty, compass about thy thumb being
bended as before, with thy fore-finger bowed over it. When thou sayest seventy, thou shalt supply thy fore-finger being bowed about as before, with thy thumb stretched at length, the naile thereof being lifted up before the middle joynt of thy
fore-finger. When thou sayest eighty, thou shalt supply thy fore-finger bowed about as before, with thy thumb stretched forth at length, the naile thereof being set upon the middle joynt of the fore-finger. When thou sayest ninty, thou shall set the naile
of thy fore-finger bent into the root of thy thumb stretched out. Thus much for the left hand. Now thou shalt make 100. on thy right hand, as thou sisdt ten of thy left; and 200. on thy right, as thou didst twenty on thy left; 2000. on thy right, as thou
didst two on thy left, and so to 9000. Moreover when thou sayest 10000. thou shalt put thy left hand upward on thy brest, thy fingers only being lifted towards Heaven. When thou sayest 20000. thou shalt put the same spread forth upon thy breast.
When thou sayest 30000. thou shalt put thy thumb on the same hand downwards, on the cartilage of the middle of thy brest. When thou sayest 40000. thou shalt lay the same upright, and stretched forth on thy navell. When thou sayest 50000. thou shalt
lay thy thumb of the same hand downard [downward] on thy navell. When thou sayest 60000. thou shalt hold thy left thigh with the same, being downards [downwards]. When thou sayest 70000. the same shalt put upon thy thumb upright. When thou
sayest 80000. thou shalt put the same downward on thy thigh. When thou sayest 90000. thou shalt hold thy loyns [loins] with the same, thy thumb being turned downwards. But when thou sayest 100000. or 200000 . and so unto to 900000. thou shalt in
the same order as we have spoken, fill them up on the right part of thy body. But when thou sayest 1000000. thou shall joyn thy hands together, and clasp thy fingers one within the other. Let these suffice which have been observed out of Beda; Thou
shalt finde more of these in Brother Luke of Saint Sepulchers, in his great Arithmetick.
Chap. xvii. Of the various notes of numbers observed amongst the Romans.
The notes of numbers are made diverse wayes in divers nations, The Romans did figure them by these following notes, which Valerius Probus ascribes concerning the ancient letters, and which are still in use, viz.
One.
I. Five.
V. Ten.
X. Fifty.
L. A hundred.
C. Two hundred.
CC. Five hundred.
D.
A thousand. Five thousand.
Ten thousand. Fifty thousand.
A hundred thousand. Two hundred thousand.
Five hundred thousand. A thousand thousand.
There are also other notes of numbers now a dayes used amongst Arithmeticians, and Calculators, which according to the order of numbers are made after this manner. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. to which is added a note of privation signed with the mark 0
which although it signifie no number, yet makes others to signifie, either tens, or hundreds, or thousands, as is well known to Arithmeticians. Also there are some that mark the number ten with a line downward, and another made cross it; and five by
that line which toucheth the other, but doth not go cross it, and a unity by that which is put by it self, as you may see in this example, signifies ten, signifies ten and five, signifies sixteen, ten and seven; and the round o being put by it
self signifies a hundred; but being joyned to others, signifies so many hundreds as the numbers are to which it is put, as thus, oo or thus IIo signifies two hundred, thus ooo or thus IIIo three hundred five hundred, ten hundred or a thousand.
And these notes are commonly seen added in Magicall Characters.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (5 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
Chap. xviii. Of the notes or figures of the Græcians.
The Græcians [Greeks] use the Alphabeticall letters for their notes ofnumbers, and that three wayes; first by every Element according to the series of the Alphabet signifying the number of its place. For in the order of which any number doth possesse
the place of the Alphabet, it represents the number thereof, as here you may see.
1.
α
2.
β
3.
γ
4.
δ
5.
ε
6.
ζ
7.
η
8.
θ
9.
ι
10.
κ
11.
λ
12.
μ
13.
ν
14.
ξ
15.
ο
16.
π
17.
ρ
18.
σ
19.
τ
20.
υ
21.
φ
22.
χ
23.
ψ
24.
ω
And this is the first order of numbeers amongst the Greeks. Secondly, the Greeks divide the whole Alphabet into three Classes, whereof the first beginning from Alpha, is of unites. The second beginning from Iota is of tens. The third begining from
Rho is of hundreds; and this order by the latter of the Greeks is instituted after the imitation of the Hebrews. Now because threir Alphabet wants by that rule, three letters, it is necessary to add to them three figures and to interlace them with the letters,
by which, viz. they explain the sixt, the ninetieth, and the nine hundreth, as is manifest in the following Classes.
1.
Α
2.
Β
3.
Γ
4.
∆
5.
Ε
6.
ζ
7.
Ζ
8.
Η
9.
Θ
10.
Ι
20.
Κ
30.
Λ
40.
Μ
50.
Ν
60.
Ξ
70.
Ο
80.
Π
90.
100.
Ρ
200.
Σ
300.
Τ
400.
Υ
500.
Φ
600.
Χ
700.
Ψ
800.
Ω
900.
Now if to any of these letters there be subscribed the stroke of an acute tone, then it signifies so many thousands, as in these examples.
1000.
/ A 10000.
/ I 100000.
/ P
After the third manner, the Greeks use only six letters in signifying their numbers, viz. I, for an Unite, Π for the number five, because it is the head of the word πεντε (i.e.) five. ∆ for the number ten, from δεκα. H for a hundred from εκατον. X for a
thousand from the word χιλια, M for ten thousand from μυρια. From which six letters joyned in number after their manner unto four, or to other numbers, they make other numbers, besides Π which is not multiplyed, nor joyned to it self, but alwayes
aignifies the fives of others, as appears in the following examples.
1
I
2
II
3
III
4
IIII
5
Π
6
ΠΙ
7
ΠΙΙ
8
ΠΙΙΙ
9
ΠΙΙΙΙ
10
∆
11
∆Ι
12
∆ΙΙ
13
∆ΙΙΙ
14
∆ΙΙΙΙ
15
∆Π
16
∆ΠΙ
20
∆∆
21
∆∆Ι
50 60
∆
100
Η
200
ΗΗ
500 1000
Χ
5000 10000
Μ
50000
Chap. xix. Of the notes of the Hebrews, and Caldeans [Chaldaeans], and certain other notes of Magicians.
The Hebrew letters also have marks of numbers, but far more excellently then in any other languages, since the greatest mysteries lie in Hebrew letters, as is handled concerning these in that part of Cbaly which they call Notariacon. Now the principall
Hebrew letters are in number twenty two, whereof five have divers other figures in the end of a word, which therefore they call the five ending letters, which being added to them aforesaid make twenty seven, which being then divided into three
degrees, signifie the unites, which are in the first degree; tens which are in the second, and hundreds which are in the third degree. Now every one of them if they be marked with a great Character signifies so many thousands, as here
3000.
â 2000.
á 1000.
à
Now the Classes of the Hebrew numbers are these,
9.
è 8.
ç 7.
æ 6.
å 5.
ä 4.
ã 3.
â 2.
á 1.
à
90.
ö 80.
ô 70.
ò 60.
ñ 50.
ð 40.
î 30.
ì 20.
ë 10.
é
900.
õ 800.
ó 700.
ï 600.
í 500.
ê 400.
ú 300.
ù 200.
ø 100.
÷
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (6 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
Now there are some which do not use those finall letters, but instead of them write thus.
1000.
à 900.
úú÷ 800.
úú 700.
úù 600.
úø 500.
ú÷
And by those simple figures by the joyning them together they desfribe all other compound numbers, as eleven, twelve, a hundred and ten, a hundred and eleven, by adding to the number ten, those which are of unites; and in like manner to the rest
after their manner; yet they describe the fifteenth number not by ten, and five, but by nine, and six, viz. thus åè and that out of honor to the divine name äé which imports fifteen, lest it should happen that the sacred name should be abused to
prophane things. Also the Egyptians, Æthiopians [Ethiopians], Caldeans [Chaldaeans], and Arabians, have their marks of numbers, which also often times happen amongst Magicall Characters. He therefore that would know them, must seek them, of
them that are skilful of these letters. For the Caldeans [Chaldaeans] mark the numbers with the letters of their Alphabet after the manner of the Hebrews. We have set down their Alphabet in the end of the first book. Moreover I found in two most
ancient books of Astrologers, and Magicians, certain most elegant marks of numbers, which I thought good to set down in this place; Now they were in both Volums [volumes] such.
Now by these mark turned to the left hand are made tens, after this manner.
And by those markes which are turned downwards on the right hand, are made hundreds; on the left thousands, viz. thus.
And by the composition, and mixture of these markes other mixt and compounded numbers also are most elegantly made, as you may perceive by these few.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (7 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:00]
According to the example of which we must proceed in other compound numbers; And so much suffice for the marks of numbers.
Chap. xx. What numbers are attributed to letters; and of divining by the same.
The Pythagorians [Pythagorians] say (Aristotle, and Ptolemy are of the same opinion) that the very Elements of letters have some certain divine numbers, by which collected from proper names of things, we may draw conjectures concerning occult
things to come. Whence they call this kind of divination Arithmancy, because, viz. it is done by numbers, as Terentianus hath made mention of it in these verses.
Names are, they say, made of but letters few
Unfortunate, of many, do foreshew
Success; so Hector did Patroclus slay,
So Hector to Achilles was a prey.
Also Pliny saith, That there was added to what Pythagoras invented, an uneven number of vowels of imposed names, which did betoken lameness, or want of eyes, and such like misfortunes, if they be assigned to the right side parts; but an even
number to them of the left. And Alexandrinus the Philosopher taught, How that by the number of letters we may find out the ruling Stars of any one that is born, and whether the husband or wife shall dye [die] first, and know the prosperous, or
unhappy events of the rest of our works. His traditions which were not disallowed by Ptolemy the Astrologer we shall here add, and put under. But those numbers, which are deputed to each letter, we have above shewed in the Greek, and Hebrew
letters, the Alphabet being divided into three Classes, whereof the first is of unites, the second of tens, the third of hundreds. And seeing in the Roman Alphabet there are wanting four to make up the number of twenty seven Characters, their places are
supplyed with I, and V sinple consonants, as in the names of John, and Valentine, and hi, and hu aspirate consonants as in Hierom, and Huilhelme, although the Germans for hu the asperate use a double vv; the true Italians, and French in their vulgar
speech put G joymed with U instead thereof, writing thus, Vuilhelmus, and Guilhelmus.
1.
A.
2.
B.
3.
C.
4.
D.
5.
E.
6.
F.
7.
G.
8.
H.
9.
I.
10.
K.
20.
L.
30.
M.
40.
N.
50.
O.
60.
P.
70.
Q.
80.
R.
90.
S.
100.
T.
200.
V.
300.
X.
400.
Y.
500.
Z.
600.
I.
700.
V.
800.
HI.
900.
HV.
But if thou desirest to know the ruling Star of any one that is born, compute his name, and of both his parents, through each letter according to the number above written, and divide the sum of the whole being gathered together by nine, substracting it
as often as thou canst; and if there remaine a unity, or four, both signifie the Sun; if two or seven, both signifie the Moon; but three, Jupiter; five, Mercury; six, Venus; eight, Saturne; nine, Mars; and the reasons thereof are shewed else where. In like
manner if thou desirest to know the horoscope of any one that is born, compute his name, and of his Mother, and Father, and divide the whole collected together by twelve, if there remain a unity, it signifies the Lyon; if Junos dewce, Aquarius; if the
Vestall three, Capricorn; if four, Sagittarius; if five, Cancer; if Venus six, Taurus; if Palladian seven, Aries; if Vulcans eight, Libra; if Mars his nine, Scorpio; if ten, Virgo; if eleven, Pisces; if Phoebus twelve, they represent Geminos; and the reasons
of them are given elswhere. And let no mam wonder that by the numbers of names many things may be Prognosticated, seeing (thr Pythagorian Philosophers, and Hebrew Cabalists testifying the same) in those numbers lye [lie] certain occult mysteries
understood by few: for the most High created all things by number, measure, and weight, from whence the truth of letters, and names had its originall, which were not instituted casually, but by a certain rule (although unknown to us.) Hence John in
the Revelation saith, Let him which hath understanding compute the number of the name of the beast, which is the number of a man. Yet these are not to be understood of those names, which a disagreeing difference of Nations, and divers rites of
Nations according to the causes of places, or education have put upon men; but those which were inspired into every one at his birth, by the very Heaven with the conjunction of Stars, and those which the Hebrew Mecubals, and wise men of Egypt
long since taught to draw from the generation of every one.
Chap. xxi. What numbers are consecrated to the Gods, and which are ascribed, and to what Elements.
Moreover the Pythagorians have dedicated to the Element, and dieties [deities] of Heaven sacred numbers; for to the Aire they have assigned the number eight, and to fire five, to the earth six, to the water twelve. Besides, unity is ascribed to the Sun,
which is the only King of the Stars, in which God put his Tabernacle; and that this also is of Jupiter, doth the Causative power of his ideal and intellectuall species testifie, who is the head, and the father of the Gods, as unity is the beginning, and
parent of numbers: The number two is ascribed to the Moon, which is the second great light, and figures out the soul of the world, and is called Juno, because betwixt that and unity there is the first conjunction, and neer fellowship; it is also ascribed to
Saturn, and Mars, two unfortunate Planets with the Astrologers; so the number three is ascribed to Jupiter, the Sun, and Venus, viz. three fortunate planets, and is deputed to Vesta, Hecata, and Diana; hence they say,
Threefold is Hecate, three mouths Diana
The Virgin hath -----
The number three therefore is dedicated to this Virgin whom they say to be powerfull in Heaven, and in Hell. The number four is of the Sun, which by that number constitutes the corners of the heavens, and distinguisheth seasons: it is also ascribed to
Cyllenius, because he alone is called the four square God. The number five consisting of the first even, and the first odd, as of female, and male, both sexes, is assigned to Mercury; it is also attributed to the Celestiall world, which beyond the four
Elements is it self under another form, the fist. The number six, which consists of two threes, as a Commixtion of both sexes, is by the Pythagorians ascribed to generation, and marriage, and belongs to Venus, and Juno. The number seven is of rest,
and belongs to Saturn; the same also doth dispence the motion, and light of the Moon, and therefore is called by the name of Tritonia the Virgin, because it begets nothing. It is assigned to Minerva, because it proceeds of nothing; also to Pallas the
Virago, because it consists of nuumbers, as of males, and females. This also Plutarck ascribes to Apollo. The number eight, by reason it containes the mysterie of justice, is ascribed to Jupiter; it is also dedicated to Vulcan, for of the first motion, and
the number two, which is Juno drawn twice into it self, it consists; It is also attributed to Cybele the mother of the Gods, to whom every four square is attributed. Plutarck assigns it to Bacchus, or Dionysius, who is said to be born the eighth moneth
[month]: others, because Infants of the wight moneth do not live, have attributed it to Saturn, and the three Ladies of destiny. The number nine belongs to the Moon, the utmost receptacle of all Celestiall influences, and vertues, as also it is dedicated to
the nine Muses, as also to Mars, from whom is the end of all things. The number ten is Circular, and belongs to the Sun, after the same manner as unity; also it is attributed to Janus, because it is the end of the first order, and from whence begins the
second unity; it is also ascribed to the world. In like manner the number twelve, because the Sun going round twelve signes, distributes the yeer [year] into twelve moneths, is attributed to the world, the Heaven, and the Sun. The number eleven,
because it is semicircular, is attributed to the Moon, and also deputed to Neptune.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (8 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
Chap. xxii. Of the tables of the Planets, their vertues, forms, and what Divine names, Intelligencies, and Spirits are set over them.
It is affirmed by Magicians, that there are certain tables of numbers distributed to the seven planets, which they call the sacred tables of the planets, endowed with many, and very great vertues of the Heavens, in as much as they represent that divine
order of Celestiall numbers, impressed upon Celestials by the Idea's of the divine mind, by means of the soul of the world, and the sweet harmony of those Celestiall rayes, signifying according to the proportion of effigies, supercelestiall Intelligencies,
which can no other way be expressed, then by the marks of numbers, and Characters. For materiall numbers, and figures can do nothing in the mysteries of hid things, but representatively by formall numbers, and figures, as they are governed, and
informed by intelligencies, and divine numerations, which unite the extreams of the matter, and spirit to the will of the elevated soul, receiving through great affection, by the Celestiall power of the operator, a power from God, applyed through the
soul of the universe, and observations of Celestiall constellations, to a matter fit for a form, the mediums being disposed by the skill, and industry of Magicians; But let us hasten to explain the tables severally. The first of them is assigned to Saturn,
and consists of a square of three, containing the particular numbers of nine, and in every line three every way, and through each Diameter making fifteen. Now the whole sum of numbers is fourty five/ Over this are of Divine names set such names as
fill up the numbers with an Intelligency to what is good, with a spirit to what is bad, and out of the same numbers is drawn the seal, or Character of Saturn, and of the spirits thereof, such as we shall beneath ascribe to its table. They say that this table
being with a fortunate Saturn engraved on a plate of lead, doth help to bring forth, or birth, and to make a man safe, and powerfull, and to cause success of petitions with princes, and powers: but if it be done with an unfortunate Saturn, that it hinders
buildings, plantings, and the like, and casts a man from honours, and dignities, and causes discords, and quarrellings, and disperses an Army. The second is called the table of Jupiter, which consists of a Quaternian drawn into it self [i.e. 4 times 4],
containing sixteen particular numbers, and in every line, and Diameter four, making thirty four. Now the Sum of all is 136. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligence to good, with a spirit to bad, and out of it is drawn the Character of
Jupiter, and the spirits thereof. They say that if it be impressed upon a Silver plate with Jupiter being powerfull, and ruling, it conduceth to gain, and riches, favor, and love, peace, and concord, and to appease enemies, to confirm honors, dignities, and
counsels, and dissolve enchantments if it be engraven on a corall. The third table belongs to Mars, which is made of a square of four containing twenty five numbers, and of these in every side and Diameter five, which make sixty five, and the sum of
all is 325. And there are over it Divine names with an Intelligence to good, with a spirit to bad, and out of it is drawn the Character of Mars, and of his spirits. These with Mars being fortunate, being engraven on an Iron plate, or sword, makes a man
potent in war, and judgments, and petitions, and terrible to his enemies, and victorious against them; and if engraven upon the Stone Correola, it stops blood, and the mestrues [menses]; but if it be engraven with Mars being unfortunate, on a plate of
red Brass, it hinders buildings, casts down the powerfull from dignities, honors, and riches, and causeth discord, strife, and hatred of men, and beasts, chaseth away Bees, Pigeons, and Fish, and hinders Mils, and renders them unfortunate that go forth
to hunting, or fighting, and causeth barreness in men and women, and other Animals, and strikes a terror in all enemies, and compels them to submit. The fourth table is of the Sun, and is made of a square of six, and contains thirty six numbers,
whereof six in every side, and Diameter, produce 111, and the sum of all is 666. There are over it divine names with an Intelligency to what is good, with spirit to what is evil, and out of it is drawn Characters of the Sun, and the spirits thereof. This
being engraven on a Golden plate with the Sun being fortunate, renders him that wears it to be renowned, amiable, acceptable, potent in allhis works, and equals a man to Kings, and Princes, elevating him to high fortunes, inabling to do whatsoever he
pleaseth: but with an unfortunate Sun, it makes a tyrant, and a man to be proud, ambitious, unsatisfiable, and to have an ill ending. The fifth table is of Venus, consisting of a square of seven drawn into it self, viz. of fourty nine numbers, whereof seven
on each side and Diameter make 175. and the sum of all is 1225. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligency to good, and spirit to evil; And there is drawn out of it the Character of Venus, and the spirits thereof. This being engraven on a
Silver plate, Venus being fortunate, procureth concord, endeth strife, procureth the love of women, conduceth to conception, is good against barreness, causeth ability for generation, dissolves enchantments, and causeth peace between man, and
woman, and maketh all kind of Animals and Cattle fruitful; and being put into a Dove-house, causeth an increase of Pigeons. It conduceth to the cure of all melancholy distempers, and causeth joyfulness; and being carryed about travellers make them
fortunate. But if it be formed upon Brass with an unfortunate Venus, it causeth contrary things to all that hath bin above said. The sixt table is of Mercury resulting from the square of eight drawn into it self, containing sixty four numbers, whereof eight
on every side and by both Diameters make 260. and the sum of all 2080. and over it are set divine names with an Intelligency to what is good, with a spirit to what is evil, and from it is drawn a Character of Mercury, and the spirits thereof; and if it be
with Mercury being fortunate engraven upon Silver, or Tin, or yellow Brass, or be writ upon Virgin Parchment, it renders the bearer thereof gratefull, and fortunate to do what he pleaseth: it bringeth gain, and prevents poverty, conduceth to memory,
understanding, and divination, and to the understanding of occult things by dreams: and if it be an unfortunate Mercury, doth all things contrary to these. The seventh table is of the Moon, of a square of nine multiplied into it self, having eighty one
numbers, in every side and Diameter nine, producing 369. and the sum of all 3321. And there are over it divine names with an Intelligency to what is good, and a spirit to what is bad. And of it are drawn the Characters of the Moon, and of the spirits
thereof. This fortunate Moon being engraven on Silver, renders the bearer thereof grateful, aimiable [amiable], pleasant, cheerfull, honored, removing all malice, and ill will. It causeth security in a ourney, increase of riches, and health of body, drives
away enemies and other evil things from what place thou pleaseth; and if it be an unfortunate Moon engraven in a plate of Lead, where ever it shall be buried, it makes that place unfortunate, and the inhabitants thereabouts, as also Ships, Rivers,
Fountains, Mills, and it makes every man unfortunate, against which it shall be directly done, making him fly from his Country, and that place of his abode where it shall be buried, and it hinders Physitians [physicians], and Orators, and all men
whatsoever in their office, against whom it shall be made. Now how the seals, and Characters of the Stars, and spirits are drawn from these tables, the wise searcher, and he which shall understand the verifying of these tables, shall easily find out.
Divine names answering to the numbers of Saturn.
3. Ab. áà
9. Hod. ãä
15 Iah. äé
15. Hod. ãåä
45 Jehovah extended. àä åàå àä ãåé
45 Agiel The Intelligence of Saturn ìàéâà
45 Zazel The spirit of Saturn ìæàæ
Divine names answering to the numbers of Jupiter.
4 Abab àáà
16 äåä
16 éäà
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (9 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
34 El Ab áàìà
136 Johphiel The Intelligence of Jupiter ìàéôäé
136 Hismael The spirit of Jupiter ìàîñä
Names answering to the numbers of Mars.
5 He the letter of the Holy Name ä
25 éäé
65 Adonay éðãà
325 Graphiel The Intelligence of Mars. ìàéôàøâ
325 Barzabel The spirit of Mars. ìàáàöøá
Names answering to the numbers of the Sun.
6 Vau the letter of the Holy Name. å
6 He extended, the letter of the Holy Name. àä
56 Eloh äìà
111 Nachiel The Intelligence of the Sun. ìàéëð
666 Sorath The spirit of the Sun úøåñ
Names answering to the numbers of Venus.
7 àäà
49 Hagiel The Intelligence of Venus. ìàéâä
157 Kedemel The spirit of Venus. ìàîã÷
1252 Bne Seraphim The Intelligencies of Venus. íéôøù éðá
Names answering to the numbers of Mercury.
8 Asboga, eight extended. äâáæà
64 Din. ïéã
64 Doni éðã
260 Tiriel. ìàéøéè
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (10 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
2080 Taphthartharath úøúøúôú
Names answering to the numbers of the Moon.
9 Hod ãä
81 Elim íéìà
369 Hasmodai the spirit of the Moon. éàãåîùä
3321 Schedbarschemoth Scharthathan, the spirit of the spirits of the Moon.
ïúúøù úòîäùøáãù
3321 Malcha betharsism hed beruah schehalim The Intelligency of the Intelligence of the Moon.
íé÷äù ãåøá ãò íéñéùøáá àëìî
The Table of Saturn in his compass. In Hebrew notes.
The Seales or Characters.
Of Saturn. Of the Intelligence of Saturn. Of the Spirit of Saturn.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (11 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
The Table of Jupiter in his compass. In Hebrew notes.
The Seales or Characters.
Of Jupiter. Of the Intelligence of Jupiter. Of the Spirit of Jupiter.
The Table of Mars in his compass. In Hebrew notes.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (12 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
The Seales or Characters.
Of Mars.
Of the Intelligence of Mars.
Of the Spirit of Mars.
The Table of the Sun in his compass. In Hebrew notes.
The Seales or Characters.
Of the Sun.
Of the intelligence of the Sun. Of the Spirit of the Sun.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (13 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
The Table of Venus in her Compass.
The Table of Venus in Hebrew notes.
The Seals, or Characters.
Of Venus.
Of the Intelligence of Venus.
[figure 2-50]
Of the Spirit of Venus.
[figure 2-51]
Of the Intelligences of Venus.
[figure 2-52]
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (14 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
The Table of Mercury in his compass.
[figure 2-53]
The Table of Mercury in Hebrew notes.
[figure 2-54]
The Seals or Characters of Mercury.
[figure 2-55]
Of the Intelligency Of Mercury.
[figure 2-56]
Of the Spirit of Mercury.
[figure 2-57]
The Table of the Moon in her Compass.
[figure 2-58]
The Table of the Moon in Hebrew notes.
[figure 2-59]
The Seals or Characters
Of the Moon.
[figure 2-60]
Of the Spirit of the Moon.
[figure 2-61]
Of the Spirits of the spirits of the Moon.
[figure 2-62]
Of the Intelligence of the Intelligences of the Moon.
[figure 2-63]
Twilit Grotto -- Esoteric Archives Contents Prev agrippa2-2 Next timeline
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (part 2)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2b.htm (15 von 15) [20.02.2001 16:12:01]
Twilit Grotto -- Esoteric Archives Contents Prev agrippa2-3 Next timeline
This HTML edition by Joseph H. Peterson, Copyright © 2000. All rights reserved.
The copyright to the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives is owned by Joseph H. Peterson and is protected by the
copyright laws of the United States and the Universal Copyright Convention.
The materials on the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives (including all texts, translations, images, descriptions,
drawings etc.) are provided for the personal use of students, scholars, and the public. Any commercial use or
publication of them without authorization is strictly prohibited. All materials are copyrighted and are not in
the public domain. Copying of materials on the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives Web pages is not permitted.
Individuals distributing illegal copies will be pursued legally along with their Internet Service Providers.
You will need a Hebrew font installed to read some of this book.
Chap. xxiii. Of Geometrical Figures and Bodies, by what vertue they
are powerful in Magick, and which are agreeable to each Element, and
the Heaven.
Geometricall Figures also arising from numbers, are conceived to be of no less power. Of these first of all, a
Circle doth answer to Unity, and the number ten; for Unity is the Center, and circumference of all things;
and the number ten being heaped together retuens into a Unity from whence it had its beginning, being the
end, and complements of all numbers. A circle is called an infinite line in which there is no Terminus a quo,
nor Terminus ad quem, whose beginning and end is in every point, whence also a circular motion is called
infinite, not according to time, but according to place; hence a circular being the largest and perfectest of all
is judged to be the most fit for bindings and conjurations; Whence they who adjure evil spirits, are wont to
environ themselves about with a circle. A Pentangle also, as with the vertue of the number five hath a very
great command over evil spirits, so by its lineature, by which it hath within five obtuse angles, and without
five acutes, five double triangles by which it is surrounded. The interior pentangle containes in it great
mysteries, which also is so to be enquired after, and understood; of the other figures, viz. triangle,
quadrangle, sexangle, septangle, octangle, and the rest, of which many, as they are made of many and divers
insections [intersections], obtain divres significations and vertues according to the divers manner of draeing,
and proportions of lines, and numbers. The Egyptians, and Arabians confirmed that the figure of the Cross
hath very great power, and that is the most firm receptacle of all Celestial powers, and intelligencies,
because it is the rightest figure of all, containing foure right angles, and it is the first description of the
superficies, having longitude and latitude: And they said it is inspired with the fortitude of the Celestials,
because their fortitude results by the straitness of angles and rayes: And stars are then most potent when
they possess four corners in the figure of the heaven, and make a cross, by the projection of their rayes
mutually. It hath moreover (as we shewed before) a very great correspondency with the numbers 5. 7. 9.
most potent numbers. It was also reckoned by the Egyptian Priests, from the beginning of Religion amongst
sacred letters, signifying amongst them allegorically the life of future salvation. It was also impressed on the
Picture of Serapis, and was had in great veneration amongst the Greeks. But what here belongs to Religion
we shall discuss elsewhere. This is to be observed, whatsoever wonderfull thing figures work when we write
tham in Papers, Plates, or Images, they do not do it but by the vertue acquired from sublimer figures, by a
certain affection which a natural apitude [aptitude] or resemblance procures, in as much as they are exactly
configured to them; as from an opposite wall the Eccho is caused, and in a hollow glass the collection of the
solarie rayes, which afterward reflecting upon an opposite body, either wood, or any combustible thing doth
forthwith burne it: or as an Harpe causeth a resounding in an other Harpe, which is no otherwise but because
a sutable and a like figure is set before it, or as two strings on a Harpe being touched with an equall distance
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (1 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
of time, and modulated to the same intention, when one is touched the other shakes also: Also the figures, of
which we have spoken, & what characters soever concern the vertues of the Celestial figures as they shall be
opportunely impressed upon things, those ruling, or be rightly framed, as one figure is of affinity with, and
doth express an other. And as these are spoken of figures, so also they are to be understood of Geometrical
bodies, which are a Sphear [sphere], a Tetracedron, Hexacedron, Octocedron, Icocedron, Dodecacedron
[tetrahedron, hexahedron, octohedron, icohedron, dodecahedron], and such like. Neither must we pass over
what figures Phythagoras [Pythagoras] and his followers, Timeus, Locrus, and Plato assigned to the
Elements and Heavens: for first of all they assigned to the earth a four square, and a square of eight solid
angles, and of twenty four plains [planes], and six bases in form of a Dice to the fire, a Pryamis [pyramid] of
a four triangular basis, and of so many solid angles, and of twelve plaines; to the aire Octocedron
[octohedron], of eight triangular bases, and six solid angles, and ternty four plains: and lastly, to Water they
have assigned Icocedron [icohedron] twenty basesm twelve solid angles: To the Heaven they have assigned
Dodecacedron [dodecahedron] of twelve five cornered bases, and twenty solid angles, and sixty plaines.
Now he which knows the powers, relations, and proprieties of these figures, and bodies, shall be able to
work many wonderful things in Natural and Mathematical Magick, especially in Glasses. And I knew how
to make by them wonderful things, in which any one mught see whatsoever he pleased at a long distance.
Chap. xxiv. Of Musicall Harmony, of the force and power thereof.
Musical Harmony also is not destitute of the gifts of the Stars; for it is a most powerful imaginer of all
things, which whilst it follows opportunely the Celestial bodies, doth wonderfully allure the Celestial
influence, and doth change the affections, intentions, gestures, motions, actions and dispositions of all the
hearers, and doth quietly allure them to its own properties, as to gladness, lamentation, to boldness, or rest,
and the like; also it allures Beasts, Serpents, Birds, Dolphins to the hearing of its pleasant tunes. So Birds
are allured with Pipes, and Harts are caught by the same. Fish in the lake of Alexandria are delighted with a
noise. Musick hath caused friendship betwixt Men and Dolphins. The sound of the Harp doth lead up and
down the Hyperborean Swans. Melodious voyces [voices] tame the Indian Elephants: and the very Elements
delight in Musick. The Hulesian fountain otherwise calm, and quiet, if the Trumpet sound riseth up
rejoycing [rejoicing], and swells over its banks. There are in Lydia those which they call the Nymphs Ilands
[Islands], which at the sound of a Trumpet forthwith come into the middle of the sea, and turning round lead
a dance, and then are returned to the shores; M. Varro testifies that he saw them. And there are more
wonderful things then these. For in the shore of Attica the sea sounds like a Harpe. A certain stone of
Megaris makes a sound like a Harpe every time the string of a Harpe is struck; so great is the power of
Musick, that it appeaseth the minde, raiseth the spirit, stirreth up souldiers [soldiers] to fight, and refresheth
the weary, calls back them that are desperate, refresheth travellers. And the Arabians say, that Camels
carrying burdens are refreshed by the singing of their leaders. In like manner, they that carry great burdens,
sing, and are thereby strengthened and refreshed: for asinging causeth delight and strength, pacifieth the
angry, cheareth [cheers] up those that are sad and heavy, pacifieth enemies, moderates the rage of mad men,
chaseth away vain imaginations: Hence it is that Democritus and Theophrastus affirm that some diseases of
the body, and minde may thus be cured, or caused. So we read that Therpander, and Arion of Lesbos cured
the Les*ians [inhabitants of Lesbos], and Ionians by Musick; and Ismenia of Thebes cured divers of very
great diseases by Musick; Moreover, Orpheus, Amphion, David, Phythagoras [Pythagoras], Empedocles,
Asclepiades, Timotheus, were wont to do many wonderful things by sounds: Sometimes they did stir up dull
spirits by familiar sounds; sometimess they did restrain wanton, furious, angry spirits by more grave tones.
So David with a Harp moderated Saul in a rage. So Phythagoras [Pythagoras] recalled a luxurious yong
[young] man from immoderate lust. So Timotheus stirred up King Alexander to a rage, amd again repressed
him. Saxo the Grammarian, in his History of the Danes, tells of a certain Musician, who boasted that he
could by his Musick make every one that heard it to be mad; and when he was constrained by the Kings
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (2 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
command to perform the same, he endeavoured to work severall wayes upon the affections; and first, by a
tone of Musicall gravity filled the hearers with a kinde of sadness and unsensibleness; then by a more lively
sound he made them rejoyce [rejoice], and dance; and lastly, he by a more earnest Musick, reduced them to
fury and madness. We read also, that they in Apulia that were touched with a kinde of dangerous Spider,
were astonished untill they heard a certain sound, at the hearing of which every one riseth up and danceth.
And it is believed (Gellius being witness) that they that are pained with the Sciatica, are eased at the sound
of a Pipe. Also Theophrastus reports, that the sound of a Flute cures the biting of Spiders. And Democritus
himself confesseth that the Consort of Pipers, hath been a cure for very many diseases.
Chap. xxv. Of Sound, and Harmony, and whence their wonderfulness
in operation.
Moreover we shall not dent, that there is in Sounds a vertue to receive the heavenly gifts; if with Pythagoras
and Plato we thought the heavens to consist by an Harmonial composition, and to rule and cause all things
by Harmonial tones and motions: Singing can do more then the sound of an Instrument, in as much as it
arising by an Harmonial consent, from the conceit of the minde, and imperious affection of the phantasie
[phantasy] and heart, easily penetrateth by motion, with the refracted and well tempered Air, the aerious
spirit of the hearer, which is the bond of soul and body; and transferring the affection and minde of the
Singer with it, It moveth the affection of the hearer by his affection, and the hearers phantasie by his
phantasie, and minde by his minde, and striketh the minde, and striketh the heart, and pierceth even to the
inwards of the soul, and by little and little, infuseth even dispositions: moreover it moveth and stoppeth the
members and the humors of the body. From hence in moving the affections harmony conferreth so much,
that not onely natural, but also artificial and vocal Harmony doth yield a certain power both to the souls and
bodies: but it is necessary that all Consorts proceed from fit foundations, both in stringed instruments, in
pipes, and vocall singings, if you would have them agree well together: for no man can make the roaring of
Lions, the lowing of Oxen, the neighing of Horses, the braying of Asses, the grunting of Hogs to be
harmonious: neither can the strings made of Sheeps and Wolves gut, be brought to any agreement, because
their foundations are dissonant; but the many and divers voyces [voices] of men agree together, because
they have one foundation in the species or kinde: so many birds agree, because they have one nigh genus or
kinde, and a resemblance from above; also artificiall instruments agree with natural voyces, because the
similitude that is betwixt them, is either true and manifest, or hath a certain analogy. But every harmony is
either of sounds or voyces. Sound is a breath, voyce is a sound and animate breath; Speech is a breath
pronounced with sound, and a voyce signifying something: the spirit of which proceedeth out of the mouth
with sound and voyce; Chaludius [Chalcidius] saith that a voyce is sent forth out of the inward cavity of the
breast and heart, by the assistance of the spirit. By which, together with the tongue, forming, and striking the
narrow passages of the mouth, and by the other vocall organs, are delivered forth articulate sounds; the
elements of speech, by which Interpreter the secret motions of the minde are laid open: but Lactantius saith,
that the nature of the voyce is very obscure, and cannot be comprehended how it is made, or what it is. To
conclude, All Musick consisteth in voice, in sound, and hearing: sound without Air cannot be Audible,
which though it be necessary for hearing, yet, as Aire, it is not of it self audible, nor to be perceived by any
sense, unless by accident; for the Sight seeth it not, unless it be coloured, nor the Ears unless sounding, nor
the Smell unless odoriferous, nor the Taste unless it be sapid [savory], nor the Touch unless it be cold or
hot, and so forth: Therefore though sound cannot be made without Air, yet is not sound of the nature of Air,
not air of the nature of sound, but air is the body of the life of our sensitive spirit, and is not of the nature of
any sensible object, but of a more simple and higher vertue, but it is meet that the sensitive soul should
vivifie the air joyned to it; and in the vivificated air, which is joyned to the spirit, perceive the species of
objects put forth into act, and this is done in the living air, but in a subtile and Diaphanous the visible
species, in an ordinary air the audible, in a more gross air the species of other senses are perceived.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (3 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
Chap. xxvi. Concerning the agreement of them with the Celestial
bodies, and what harmony and sound is correspondent of every Star.
But understanding now, that of the seven Planets, Saturn, Mars, and the Moon have more of the voice then
of the Harmony. Saturn hath sad, hoarse, heavy, and slow words, and sounds, as it were pressed to the
Center; but Mars, rough, sharp, threatning [threatening] great and wrathful words: the Moon observeth a
mean betwixt these two; but Jupiter, Sol, Venus and Mercury, do possess Harmonies; yet Jupiter hath grave,
constant, fixed, sweet, merry, and pleasant Consorts; Sol venerable, settled, pure and sweet, with a certain
grace; but Venus lascivious, luxurious, delicate, voluptuous, dissolute and fluent: Mercury hath Harmonies
more remiss, and various, merry and pleasant, with a certain boldness: but the Tone of particulars, and
proportionated Consorts obeyeth the nine Muses. Jupiter hath the grace of the octave, and also the quinte,
viz. the Diapason with the Diapente: Sol obtains the melody of the octave voice, viz. Diapason; in like
manner by fifteen Tones, a Disdiapason; Venus keepeth the grace of the quinte or Diapente. Mercury hath
diatessaron; viz. the grace of the quarte: Moreover the ancients being content with four strings, as with the
number of Elements, accounted Mercury the Author of them, as Nicomachus reports, and by their Base
strings would resemble the earth, by their Parhypas or middle the water; by their note Diezeugmenon, or
Hyperboleon the fire; by the Paranete or Synemmenon, or treble, the Air; but afterwards Terpander the
Lesb*an [inhabitant of Lesbos] finding out the seventh string, equalled them to the number of the Planets.
Moreover, they that followed the number of the Elements, did affirm, that four humors, and did thin the
Dorian musick to be consonant to the water and phlegm, the Phrygian to choler and fire, the Lydian to
blood and air; the mixt Lydian [mixolydian] to melancholy and earth: Others respecting the number and
vertue of the Heavens, have attributed the Dorian to the Sun, the Phrygian to Mars, the Lydian to Jupiter,
the mixt Lydian [mixolydian] to Saturn, the Hypophrygian to Mercury, the Hypolydian to Venus, the
Hypodorian to the Moon, the Hypo mixed Lydian [Hypomixolydian] to the mixed Stars: Moreover they
refer these modes of Musick to the Muses, and the strings to the Heavens, but not in that order as we have
declared concerning the nine Muses, amongst our numbers and celestial souls; for they say Thalia hath no
Harmony, therefore ascribe her to Silence, and the Earth; but Clio with the Moon move after the
Hypodorian manner; the string Proslambanomenos or Air. Calliope and Mercury possess the Hypophrygian
maner, and the Chord, Hypate-Hypaton, or B. Mi. Terpsichore with Venus the Hypolydian manner, and
Parahypote, Hypaton; and for Melpomene and the Dorian manner with Licanos, Hypaton, or D. Sol. Re. are
applied to the Sun. Erato with Mars keep the Phrygian fashion, and the Hypatemise, or E.la.mi. Euterpe,
and the Lydian Musick, and Pachyparemeson agree with Jupiter; Polymnia and Saturn keep the mixt
Lydian [mixolydian] manner, and Lichanos Meson D.Sol.Re. To Urania and the fixt Stars the Jypo mixt
Lydian [hypomixolydian] Musick, and the string Mese, or A.le.mi.re are ascribed, as we reade them
expressed in these Verses.
Silent Thalia we to th' Earth compare,
For she by Musick never doth ensnare,
After the Hypodorian Clio sings,
Persephone likewise doth strike the Base strings;
Calliope also doth Chord sedond touch,
Using the Phrygian; Mercury as much:
Terpsichore strikes the third, and that rare,
The Lydian Musick makes so Venus fair. Melpomene, and Titan do with a grace
The Dorian Musick use in the fourth place.
The fift ascribed is to Mars the god
Of War, and Erato after the rare mode
Of th' Phrygians, Euterpe doth also love
The Lydian, and sixt string; and so doth Jove.
Saturn the seventh doth use with Polymny,
And causeth the mixt Lydian [mixolydian] melody.
Urania also doth the eight create,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (4 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
And musick Hypo-Lydian [hypolydian] elevate.
Moreover there are some who find out the harmony of the Heavens by their distance one from another. For
the space which is betwixt the Earth and the Moon, viz. an hundred and twenty six thousand Italian Miles,
maketh the Intervall of a Tone; But from the Moon to Mercury being half that space, maketh half a Tone;
And so much from Mercury to Venus maketh another half Tone; But from thence to the Sun, as it were a
threefold Tone and a half; and makes Diapente; But from the Moon to the Sun, maketh a twofold
Diatessaron with a half; Again from the Sun to Mars is the same space as from the Earth to the Moon,
making a Tone; from thence to Jupiter half of the same making half a Tone; So much likewise from Jupiter
to Saturn, constituting an half Tone, from whence to the starry firmament is also the space of an half Tone.
Therefore there is from the Sun to the fixed Stars a Diatessaron distance of two tones and an half, but from
the Earth a perfect Diapason of six perfect tones; moreover also from the proportion of the motions of the
planets amongst themselves, and with the eight Sphere, resulteth the sweetest Harmony of all; for the
proportion of the motions of Saturn to Jupiters motion, is two fold and an half; of Jupiter to Mars, a six fold
proportion; of Mars to the Sun, Venus and Mercury, which in a manner finish their course in the same time,
is a double proportion; but Saturns proportion to the starry Sphere is a thousand and two hundred, if it be
true which Ptolomy saith, viz. that, that Heaven is moved contrary to the primum mobile in an hundred
yeers, one degree. Therefore the proper motion of the Moon being more swift, maketh a more acute sound
then the starry firmament, which is the slowest of all, and therefore causeth the most base sound; But by the
violent motion of the primum mobile, is the most swift, and acute sound of all; but the violent motion of the
Moon is most slow and heavy, which proportion and reciprocation of motions yeelds a most pleasant
Harmony; from hence there are not any songs, sounds, or musicall instruments more powerfull in moving
mans affections, or introducing magicall impressions, then those which are composed of numbers,
measures, and proportions, after the example of the Heavens. Also the Harmony of the Elements is drawn
forth from their BAses, and Angles, of which we have spoken before; for between Fire and Aire, there is a
double proportion in the Bases, and one and an half in solid Angles; again in Planes, a double; there ariseth
hence an Harmony of a double Diapason, and a Diapente. Betwixt the Aire and Water, the proportion in
their Bases is double, and one and an half; hence Dipason, and Diapente; but in their Angles double; Hence
again Diapason; but between Water and Earth the proportion in the Bases, is threefold and a third part more;
from hence ariseth Diapason, Diapente, Diatessaron; but in the Angles one and an half, again constituting
Diapente. To conclude, betwixt Earth and Fire, in the Bases the proportion is one and an half, making
Diapente; but in the Angles, double, causing Diapason; but between Fire, and Water, Aire and Earth, there is
scarce any consonancy, because they have a perfect contrariety in their qualities, but they are united by the
imtermediate Element.
Chap. xxvii. Of the proportion, measure, and Harmony of mans body.
Seeing man is the most beautifull and perfectest work of God, and his Image, and also the lesser world;
therefore he by a more perfect composition, and sweet Harmony, and more sublime dignity doth contain and
maintain in himself all numbers, measures, weights, motions, Elements, and all other things which are of his
composition; and in him as it were in the supreme workmanship, all things obtain a certain high condition,
beyond the ordinary consonancy which they have in other compounds. From hence all the Ancients in time
past did number by their fingers, and shewed all numbers by them; and they seem to prove that from the
very joynts of mans body all numbers measures, proportions, and Harmonies were invented; Hence
according to this measure of the body, they framed, and contrived their temples, pallaces [palaces], houses,
Theaters; also their ships, engins [engines], and every kind of Artifice, and every part and member of their
edifices, and buildings, as columnes, chapiters of pillars, bases, buttresses, feet of pillars, and all of this
kind. Moreover God himself taught Noah to build the Arke according to the measure of mans body, and he
made the whole fabrick of the world proportionable to mans body; from whence it is called the great world
[macrocosm], mans body the less [microcosm]; Therefore some who have written of the Microcosme or of
man, measure the body by six feet, a foot by ten degrees, every degree by five minutes; from hence are
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (5 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
numbred sixty degrees, which make three hundred minutes, to the which are compared so many
Geometrical cubits, by which Moses describes the Arke; for as the body of man is in length three hundred
minutes, in breath fifty, in hight thirty; so the length of the Arke was three hundred cubits, the breadth fifty,
and the height thirty; that the proportion of the length to the breadth be six fold, to the heighth ten fold, and
the proportion of the breadth to the height about two thirds. In like manner the measures of all the members
are proportionate, and consonant both to the parts of the world, and measures of the Archetype, and so
agreeing, that there is no member in man which hath not correspondence with some sign, Star, intelligence,
divine name, sometimes in God himself the Archetype. But the whole measure of the body may be turned,
and proceeding from roundness, is knowen to tend to it again.
[figure 2-64]
Also the four square measure is the most proportionated body; for, if a man be placed upright with his feet
together, and his arms stretched forth, he will make a quadrature equilateral, whose center s in the botom
[bottom] of his belly.
[figure 2-65]
But if on the same center a circle be made by the crown of the head, the arms being let fall so far till the end
of the fingers tough the circumference of that circle, and the feet spread abroad in the same circumference,
as much as the fingers ends are distant from the top of the head; Then they divide that circle, which was
drawn from the center of the lower belly, into five equale parts, and do constiturte a perfect Pentagon; and
the Heels of the feet, having reference to the navile [navel], make a triangle of equal sides.
[figure 2-66]
But if the Heels being unmoved, the feet be stretched forth on both sides to the right and left, and the hands
lifted up to the line of the head, them the ends of the fingers and Toes do make a square of equall sides,
whose center is on the navile [navel], in the girdling of the body.
[figure 2-67]
But if the hands be thus elevat4ed, and the feet and Thighes extended in this manner, by the which a man is
made shorter by the fourteenth part of his upright stature, then the distance of his feet heving reference to
the lower bellu, they will make an equilaterall Triangle; and the center being placed in his navile [navel], a
circle being brought about, will touch the ends of the fingers and toes.
[figure 2-68]
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (6 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
But if the hands be lifted up as high as can be, above the head, then the elbow will be equal to the crown of
the head, and if then the feet being put together, a man stand thus, he may be put into an equilaterall square
brought by the extremities of the hands and feet; the center of this square is the navel, which is the middle
betwixt the top of the head and the knees.
[figure 2-69]
Now let us proceed to particular measures. The compass of a man under the armpits contains the middle of
his length, whose middle is the bottom of his breast: and from thence upward to the middle of his breast
betwixt both dugges, and from the middle of his breast unto the crown of his head, on every side the fourth
part; also from the bottom of his breast to the bottom of the knees, and from thence to the bottom of the
ankles the fourth part of man. The same is the latitude of his shoulder-blades, from one extream [extreme] to
the other: The same is the length from the elbow to the end of the longest finger, and therfore this is called a
cubit. Hence four cubits make the length of man, and one cubit the bredth which is in the shoulder-blades,
but that which is in the compass, one foot; now six hand-bredths make a cubit, four a foot, and four fingers
bredths make a hand-bredth, and the whole length of man is twenty four hand bredths, of six foot, of ninty
six fingers bredths. From the bottom of his breast to the top of his breast, is the sixth part of his length, from
the top of his breast to the top of his forehead, and lowermost root of his hairs, the seventh part of his length;
of a strong, and well set body, a foot is the sixth part of the length, but of a tall the seventh. Neither can (as
Varro, and Gellius testifie) the tallness of mans body exceed seven feet. Lastly, the Diameter of his compass
is the same measure as is from the hand, being shut unto the inward bending of the elbow, and as that which
is from the breast to both dugs, upward to the upward lip, or downward to the navel; and as that which is
from the ends of the bones of the uppermost part of the breast compassing the gullet; and as that which is
from the sole of the foot to the end of the calf of the legg, and from thence to the middle whirle bone of the
knee. All these measures are co-equall, and make the seventh part of the whole height. The head of a man
from the bottom of the chin to the crown of his head is the eighth part of his length, as also from the elbow
to the end of the shoulder-blade; So great is the Diameter of the compass of a tall man. The compass of the
head drawn by the top of the forehead, and the bottom of the hinder part of the head, make the fift part of his
whole length; So much also doth the bredth of the breast. Nine face-bredths make a square well set man, and
ten a tall man. The length of man therefore being divided into nine parts, the face from the top of the
forehead to the bottome of the chin is one; then from the bottom of the throat, or the top of the breast unto
the top of the stomack [stomach] is another; from thence to the navell is a third; from thence to the bottom
of the thigh, a fourth; from thence the hipp, to the top of the calf of the leg, makes two; from thence to the
joynt of the foot the leggs make two more; all which are eight parts. Moreover the space from the top pf the
forehead to the crown of the head & that which is from the chin to the top of the breast, and that which is
from the joynt of the foot to the sole of the foot, I say these three spaces joyned together make the ninth part.
In bredth the breast hath two parts, and both Arms seven. But that body which ten face bredths make, is the
most exactly proportioned. Therefore the first part of this is from the crown of the head to the bottome of the
nose; from thence to the top of the breast, the second; and then to the top of the stomack [stomach] the third;
and from thence to the navel, the fourth; from thence to the privy members [genitals], the fifth; where is the
middle of the length of man, from whence to the soles of his feet are five other parts, which being joyned to
the former, make ten whole, by which every body is measured by a most proportioned measure. For the face
of a man from the bottom of his chin, to the top of his foreheadm and bottom of the hair is the tenth part.
The hand of a man from the shutting, to the end of the longest finger is also one part; also betwixt the
middle of both dugs is one part and from both to the top of the gullet is an equilaterall triangle. The latitude
of the lower part of the forehead from one eare to the other is another part; the latitude of the whole breast,
viz. from the top of the breast to the joynts of the shoulder-blades, is on both sides one part, which make
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (7 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
two. The compass of the head cross-wise from the distance of the eye-brows by the top of the forehead unto
the bottom of the hinder part of the head, where the hair ends, hath also two parts; from the shoulders on the
outside unto the coupling together of the joynts of the hand, and on the inside from the arm-pits unto the
beginning of the palm of the hand, and of the fingers, are three parts. The compass of the head by the middle
of the forehead hath three parts; the compass of the girdling place hath four parts in a well set man, but in a
thin body three parts and a half, or as much as is from the top of the breast to the bottom of the belly. The
compass of the breast by the arm-pit to the back hath five parts, viz. as much as half the whole length. From
the crown of the head, to the knurles of the gullet is the thirteenth part of the whole altitude. The arms being
stretched upward, the elbow is even to the crown of the head. But now, let us see how equal the other
commensurations are to one the other. As much as the distance is from the chin to the top of the breast, so
great is the latitude of the mouth; as much as is the distance betwixt the top of the breast, to the navell, so
great is the compass of the mouth; as much as the distance is from the chin to the crown of the head, so great
is the latitude of the girdling place; as is the distance from the top of the nose to the bottom, such is the
distance betwixt the chin, and the throat. Also the cavity of the eyes from the place betwixt the eye-brows
unto the inward corners, and the extension of the bottom of the nose, and the distance from the bottom of the
nose to the end of the upper lip; I say these three are equals amongst themselves; and as much as from the
top of the nail of the forefinger to the lowermost joynt thereof.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (8 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
And from thence where the hand is joyned to the arm on the outside, and in the inside from the top of the
naile of the middle finger unto the lowermost joynt, and from thence to the shutting of the hand; I say all
these parts are equall amongst themselves. The greater joynt [joint] of the forefinger equals the height of the
forehead; the other two to the top of the naile equall the nose, from the top to the bottom; the first and the
greater joynt [joint] of the middle finger equals that space which is betwixt the end of the nose to the end of
the chin; and the second joynt of the middle finger is as much as the distance from the bottom of the chin to
the top of the lower lip; but the third as from the mouth to the end of the nose, but the whole hand as much
as the whole face. The greater joynt of the thumb is as much as the widness [width] of the mouth, and as the
distance betwixt the bottom of the chin, and the top of the lower lip; but the lesser joynt is as much as the
distance betwixt the top of the lower and the end of the nose; the nailes are half as much as those joynts
which they call the naile joynts. The distance betwixt the middle of the eye brows to the outward corners of
the eyes is as much as betwixt those corners and the ears. The hight of the forehead, the length of the nose,
and the widness of the mouth are equall. Also the bredth of the hand, and foot are the same. The distance
betwixt the lower part of the ankle to the top of the foot is the same as that betwixt the top of of the foot and
the end of the nailes. The distance from the top of the forehead to the place betwixt the eyes, and from that
to the end of the nose, and from thence to the end of the chin is the same. The eye-brows joyned together are
as much as the circle of the eyes, and the half circle of the ears equals the widness of the mouth: Whence the
circles of the eyes, ears, and mouth opened are equall. The bredth of the nose is as much as the length of the
eye; Hence the eyes have two parts of that space which is betwixt both extremities of the eyes; a third part
the nose that is betwixt takes up. From the crown of the head to the knees the navel is the middle; from the
top of the breast to the end of the nose the knurle of the throat makes the middle; from the crown of the head
to the bottom of the chin, the eyes are the middle; from the space betwixt the eyes to the bottom of the chin,
the end of the nose is the middle: from the end of the nose to the bottom of the chin, the end of the lower lip
is the middle; a third part of the same distance is the upper lip. Moreover all these measures are through
manifold proportions, and harmoniacall contents consonant one to the other; for the thumb is to the wrest in
a circular Measure in a double proportion and half; For it contains it twice and a half as five is to two; But
the proportion of the same to the brawn of the Arm neer the shoulder is triple; The greatnesse of the leg is to
that of the Arm, a proportion half so much again as of three to two; And the same proportion is of the neck
to the leg, as of that to the Arm. The proportion of the thigh is triple to the Arm; The proportion of the
whole Body to the Trunk, is eigth and a half; From the Trunk or Brest to the legs, and from thence to the
soles of the Feet, a Third and a half; From the neck to the navell, and to the end of the trunk a Double. The
latitude of them to the latitude of the thigh, is half so much again; of the head to the neck triple, of the head
to the knee triple, the same to the leg. The length of the forehead betwixt the temples is fourfold to the
height thereof; These are those measures which are everywhere found; by which the members of mans body
according to the length, bredth, height, and circumference thereof agree amongst themselves, and also with
the Celestials themselves: all which measures are divided by manifold proportions either upon them that
divide, or are mixed, from whence there results a manifold Harmony. For a double proportion makes thrice
a Diapason; four times double, twice a Diapason, and Diapente. After the same manner are Elements,
qualities, complexions, and humors proportioned. For these weights of humors and complexions are
assigned to a sound and well composed man, viz. the eight weights of blood, of flegm [phlegm] four, of
choler two, of melancholy one, that on both sides there be by order a double proportion; but of the first to
the third, and of the second to the fourth, a four times double proportion; but of the first to the last an
eightfold. Dioscorides saith, that the heart or a man in the first yeer hath the weight of two Dram, in the
second four, and so proportionably in the fiftyeth yeer to have the weight of a hundred Drams, from which
time the decreases are again reckoned to an equilibrium, which, the course being ended, may return to the
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (9 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
same limit, and not exceed the space of life by the decay of that member: by which account of a hundred
years, he circumscribed the life of man. And this saith Pliny was the heresie of the Egyptians. The motions
also of the members of mens bodies answer to the Celestial motions, and every man hath in himself the
motion of his heart, which answers to the motion of the Sun, and being diffused through the Arteries into the
whole body, signifies to us by a most sure rule, years, moneths, dayes, hours, and minutes. Moreover, there
is a certain Nerve found by the Anatomists about the nod of the neck, which being touched doth so move all
the members of the body, that every one of them move according to its proper motion; by which like touch
Aristotle thinks the members of the world are moved by God. And there are two veines in the neck, which
being held hard presently the mans strength failes, and his senses are taken away untill they be loosened.
Therefore the eternal Maker of the world when he was to put the soul into the body, as into its habitation,
first made a fit lodging worthy to receive it, and endows the most excellent soul with a most beautiful body,
which then the soul knowing its own divinity, frames and adorns for its own habitation. Hence the people of
Æthiopia [Ethiopia], which were governed by the wisdom of Gymnosophists, as Aristotle witnesseth, did
make them Kings, not of those which were most strong, and wealthy, but those onely which were most
proper and beautiful; for they conceived that the gallantry of the minde did depend upon the excellencie of
the body. Which many Philosophers, as well ancient as modern, considering, such as searched into the
secrets of causes hid in the very Majesty of Nature, were bold to assert, that there was no fault of, and no
disproportion of the body, which the vice and intemperance of the minde did not follow, because it is certain
that they do increase, thrive, and operate by the help one of the other.
Chap. xxviii. Of the Composition and Harmony of the humane soul.
As the Consonancy of the body consists of a due measure and proportion of the members: so the
consonancy of the minde of a due temperament, and proportion of its vertues and operations which are
concupiscible, irascible, and reason, which are so proportioned together. For Reason to Concupiscence hath
the proportion Diapason; but to Anger Diatessaron: and Irascible to Concupiscible hath the proportion
Diapente. When therefore the best proportionated soul is joyned to the best proportionated body, it is
manifest that such a man also hath received a most happy lot in the distribution of gifts, for as much as the
soul agrees with the body in the disposition of Naturals, which agreement indeed is most hid, yet after some
maner shadowed to us by the wise. But to hasten to the Harmony of the soul, we must inquire into it by
those Mediums by which it passeth to us, (i.e.) by Celestial Bodies, and Sphears [spheres]; Knowing
therefore what are the powers of the soul to which the Planets answer, we shal by those things which have
been spoken of before, the more easily know their agreements amongst themselves. For the Moone governs
the powers of increasing and decreasing; the Phantasie and Wits depends on Mercury; the Concupiscible
vertue on Venus; the Vitall on the Sun; the Irascible on Mars; the Natural on Jupiter: the Receptive on
Saturn: but the Will as the Primum Mobile, and the guide of all these Powers at pleasure, being joyned with
the superior intellect, is always tending to good; which intellect indeed doth alwayes shew a pathway to the
Will, as a Candle to the eye; but it moves not it self, but is the Mistriss [mistress] of her own operation,
whence it is called Free Will; and although it alwayes tends to good, as an object sutable to it self: yet
sometimes being blinded with error, the animal power forcing it, it chooseth evil, believing it to be good.
Therefore Will is defined to be a faculty of the intellect, & Will wherby good is chosen by the help of
Grace; and Evil, that not assisting, Grace therefore, which Divines call Charity, or infused Love is in the
Will, as a first mover; which being absent, the whole consent falls into Dissonancy. Moreover, the soul
answers to the Earth by Sense, to the Water by Imagination, to the Air by Reason, to the Heaven by the
Intellect, and the soul goes out into an HArmony of them, according as these are tempered in a mortall body.
The wise Ancients therefore knowing that the Harmonious dispositions of bodies and souls are divers,
according to the diversity of the complexions of men, did not in vain use Musical sounds and singingsm as
to confirm the health of the body, and restore it being lost so to bring the minde to wholsome [wholesome]
manners, untill they make a man sutable to the Celestial Harmony, and make him wholly Celestial.
Moreover, there is nothing more efficacious to drive away evil spirits then Musicall Harmony (for they
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (10 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
being faln [fallen] from the Celestiall Harmony, cannot endure any true consent, as being an enemy to them,
but fly from it) as David by his Harp appeased Saul, being troubled with an evil spirit. Hence by the ancient
Prophets and Fathers, who knew these Harmonicall mysteries, singing and Musical sounds were brought
into sacred services.
Chap. xxix. Of the Observation of Celestials, necessary in every
Magical Work.
Every natural vertue doth work things far more wonderful when it is not onely compounded of a natural
proportion, but also is informed by a choice observation of the Celestials opportune to this (viz. when the
Celestial power is most strong to that effect which we desire, and also helpt by many Celestials) by
subjecting inferiors to the Celestials, as proper females to be made fruitful by their males. Also in every
work there are to be observed, the situation, motion, and aspect of the Stars, and Planets, in Signs and
Degrees, and how all these stand in reference to the length and latitude of the Climate; for by this are varyed
the qualities of the angles, which the rays of Celestial bodies upon the figure of the thing describe, according
to which Celestial vertues are infused. So when thou art working any thing which belongs to any Planet,
thou must place it in its dignities, fortunate, and powerful, and ruling in the day, hour, and in the Figure of
the Heaven. Neither shalt thou expect the signification of the work to be powerful, but also thoo must
observe the Moon opportunely directed to this; for thou shalt do nothing without the assistance of the Moon:
And if thou hast more patterns of thy work, observe them all being most powerful, and looking upon one the
other with a friendly aspect: and if thou canst not have such aspects, it will be convenient at least that thou
take them angular. But thou shalt take the Moon, either when she looks upon both, or is joyned to one, and
looks upon the other; or when she passeth from the conjunction, or aspect of one to the conjunction or
aspect of the other: for that I conceive must in no wise be omitted; also thou shalt in every work observe
Mercury; for he is a messenger betwixt the higher gods, and infernal gods; when he goeth to the good he
increaseth their goodness; when to the bad, hath influence upon their wickedness. We call it an unfortunate
Sign, or Planet, when it is by the aspect of Saturn or Mars, especially opposite, or quadrant; for these are
aspects of enmity; but a conjunction, or a trine, or sextile aspect are of friendship; betwixt these there is a
greater conjunction: but yet if thou dost already behold it through a trine, and the Planet be received, it is
accounted as already conjoyned. Now all Planets are afraid of the conjunction of the Sun, rejoycing in the
trine, and sextile aspect thereof.
Chap. xxx. When Planets are of most powerful influence.
Now we shall have the Planets powerfull when they are ruling in a House, or in Exaltation or Triplicity, or
term, or face without combustion of what is direct in the figure of the heavens, viz. when they are in Angles,
especially of the rising, or Tenth, or in houses presently succeeding, or in their delights. But we must take
heed that they be not in the bounds or under the dominion of Saturn or Mars, least they be in dark Degrees,
in pits or vacuityes. Thou shalt observe that the Angles of the Ascendent, and Tenth and Seventh be
fortunate, as also the Lord of the Ascendent and place of the Sun and Moon, and the place of part of the
fortune, and the Lord thereof, the Lord of ihe foregoing Conjunction & prevention: But that they of the
malignant Planet fall unfortunate, unless haply they be significators of thy work, or can be any way
advantagious to thee; or if in thy revolution or birth, they had the predominancy; for then they are not at all
to be depressed. Now we shall have the Moone powerfurful if she be in her house, or exaltation, or triplicity,
or face, and in degree convenient for the desired work, and if it hath a mansion of these twenty and eight
sutable to it self and the work; Let her not be in the way burnt up, nor flow in course; let her not be in the
Ecclipse [eclipse], or burnt by the Sun, unless she be be in unity with the Sun; let her nor descend in the
Southern latitude, when she goeth out of the burning, neither let her be opposite to the Sun, nor deprived of
light, let her not be hindred by Mars, or Saturn. I will not here discourse any longer of these, seeing these,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (11 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
and many more necessary things are sufficiently handled in the Volums of Astrologers.
Chap. xxxi. Of the Observation of the fixt Stars, and of their Natures.
There is the like consideration to be had in all things concerning the fixt stars. Know this that all the fixt
stars are of the signification and nature of the seven Planets; but some are of the nature of one Planet, and
some of two. Hence as often as any Planet is joyned with any of the fixt stars of its own nature, the
signification of that star is5 made more powerful, and the nature of the Planet augmented: but if it be a star
of two natures, the nature of that which shall be the stronger with it shall overcome in signification; as for
example, if it be of the nature of Mars, and Venus; if Mars shall be the stronger with it, the nature of Mars
shall overcome; but if Venus, the nature of Venus shall overcome. Now the natures of fixt stars are
discovered by their colours, as they agree with certain Planets, and are ascribed to them. Now the colours of
the Planets are these: of Saturn, blew [blue], and leaden, and shining with this: of Jupiter citrine neer to a
paleness, and clear with this; of Mars, red, and fiery; of the Sun, yellow, and when it riseth red, afterward
glittering: of Venus, white and shining; white with the morning, and reddish in the evening: of Mercury,
glittering; of the Moon, fair. Know also that of the fixed stars by how much the greater, and the brighter and
apparent they are, so much the greater and stronger is the signification; such are these stars which are called
by the Astrologers of the first, and second Magnitude. I will tell thee some of these which are more potent to
this faculty, as are viz. the Navel of Andromeda in two and twentieth degree of Aries, of the nature of Venus,
& Mercury; some call it Jovial, & Saturnine. The head of Algol in the eighteenth degree of Taurus, of the
nature of Saturn and Jupiter. The Pleiades are also in the two and twentieth degree, a Lunary star by Nature
and by complexion Martial. Also in the third degree of Gemini is Aldeboram [Aldeboran], of the nature of
Mars, and complexion of Venus: but Hermes placeth this in the twenty fifth degree of Aries. The Goat star
is in the thirteenth degree of the said Gemini, of the nature of Jupiter, and Saturn; the greater Dog star is in
the seventh degree of Cancer, and Venereal: the lesser Dog-star is in the seventeenth degree of the same,
and is of the nature of Mercury, and complexion of Mars. The Kings star, which is called the Heart of the
Lion, is in the one and twentieth degree of Leo, and of the nature of Jupiter and Mars; the tail of the greater
Bear is in the nineteenth degree of Virgo, and is Venereal, and Lunary. The Star which is called the right
wing of the Crow is in the seventh degree of Libra, and in the thirteenth degree of the same is the left wing
of the same, and both of the nature of Saturn and Mars. The Star called Spica is in the sixteenth degree of
the same, and is Venereal and Mercurial. In the seventeenth degree of the same is Alcameth, of the nature of
Mars, and Jupiter; but of this when the Suns aspect is full towards it; of that when on the contrary. Elepheia
in the fourth degree of Scorpio, of the nature of Venus, and Mars: The Heart of the Scorpion is in the third
degree of Sagittarius, of the nature of Mars, and Jupiter: the falling Vulture is in the seventh degree of
Capricorn, Temperate, Mercurial, and Venereal: The taile of Capricorn is in the sixteenth degree of
Aquarius, of the nature of Saturn, and Mercury: The Star called the Shoulder of the Horse, is in the third
degree of Piscis, of the nature of Jupiter and Mzrs. And it shall be a general rule for thee to expect the
proper gifts of the Stars whilest they rule, to be prevented of them, they being unfortunate, and opposite, as
is above shewed. For Celestial bodies, in as much as they are affected fortunately, or unfortunately, so much
do they affect us, our works, and those things which we use, fortunately, or unhappily. And although many
effects proceed from the fixt Stars, yet they are attributed to the Planets, as because being more neer to us,
and more distinct and known, so because they execute whatsoever the superior Stars communicate to them.
Chap. xxxii. Of the Sun, and Moon, and their Magicall considerations.
The Sun, and Moon have obtained the administration or ruling of the Heavens, and all bodies under the
heavens. The Sun is the Lord of all Elementary vertues, and the Moon by vertue of the Sun is the mistress of
generation, increase, or decrease. Hence Albumasar saith, that by the Sun and Moon life is infused into all
things, which therefore Orpheus cals the enlivening eyes of the heaven. The Sun giveth light to all things of
it self, and gives it plentifully to all things not only in the Heaven, Aire, but Earth and Deep: whatsoever
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (12 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
good we have, as Iamblichus saith, we have it from the Sun alone, or from it through other things.
Heraclitus cals the Sun the fountain of Celestiall light; and many of the Platonists placed the soul of the
world chiefly in the Sun, as that which filling the whole Globe of the Sun doth send forth its rayes on all
sides as it were a spirit through all things, distributing life, sense and motion to the very Universe. Hence the
ancient Naturalists called the Sun the very heart of heaven; and the Caldeans [Chaldaeans] put it as the
middle of the Planets. The Egyptians also placed it in the middle of the world, viz. betwixt the two fives of
the world, i.e. above the Sun they place five Planets, and under the Sun, the Moon and four Elements. For it
is amongst the other Stars the image and statue of the great Prince of both worlds, viz. Terrestiall, and
Celestiall; the true light, and the most exact image of God himself; whose Essence resembles the Father,
Light the Son, Heat the Holy Ghost. So that the Platonists have nothing to hold forth the Divine Essence
more manifestly by, then this. So great is the consonancy of it to God, that Plato cals it the conspicuous Son
of God, and Iamblicus [Iamblichus] cals it the divine image of divine intelligence. And our Dionysius cals it
the perspicuous statue of God. It fits as King in the middle of other Planets, excelling all in light, greatness,
fairness, enlightning [enlightening] all, distributing vertue to them to dispose inferior bodies, and regulating
and disposing of their motions, so that from thence their motions are called daily, or nightly, Southern, or
Northern, Orientall, or Occidentiall, direct, or retrograde; and as it doth by its light drive away all the
darkness of the night, so also all powers of darkness, which we read of in Job; Assoon as morning appears,
they think of the shadow of death: And the Psalmist speaking of the Lyons [lion's] whelps seeking leave of
God to devour, saith, The Sun is risen, and they are gathered together, and shall be placed in their dens;
which being put to flight, it followes, Man shall go forth to his labor. The Sun therefore as it possesseth the
middle Region of the world, and as the heart is in Animals to the whole body, So the Sun is over the heaven,
and the world, ruling over the whole Universe, and those things which are in it, the very author of seasons,
from whence day and year, cold and heat, and all other qualities of seasons; and as saith Ptolomy, when it
comes unto the place of any Star, it stirs up the power thereof which it hath in the Aire. So as with Mars,
heat; with Saturn, cold; and it disposeth even the very spirit and mind of man, from hence it is said by
Homer, and approved by Aristotle, that there are in the mind such like motions, as the Sun the Prince and
moderator of the Planets every day bringeth to us; but the Moon, the nighest to the Earth, the receptacle of
all the heavenly Influences, by the swiftness of her course is joyned to the Sun, and the other Planets and
Stars, every month, and being made as it were the wife of all the Stars, is the most fruitful of the Stars, and
receiving the beams and influences of all the other planets and Stars as a conception, bringing them forth to
the inferior world as being next to it self; for all the Stars have influence on it being the last receiver, which
afterwards communicateth the influences ot all the superiors to these inferiors, and pours them forth on the
Earth; and it more manifestly disposeth these inferiors then the others, and its motion is more sensible by the
familiarity and propinquity which it hath with us; and as a medium betwixt both, superiors and inferiors,
communicateth them to them all; Therefore her motion is to be observed before the others, as the parent of
all conceptions, which it diversely issueth forth in these Inferiors, according to the diverse complexion,
motion, situation, and different aspects to the planets and others Stars; and though it receiveth powers from
all the Stars, yet especially from the Sun; as oft as it is in conjunction with the same, it is replenished with
vivifying vertue, and according to the aspect thereof it borroweth its complexion; for in the first quarter, as
the Peripatetickes deliver, it is hot and moist; in the second hot and dry; in the third, cold and dry; in the
fourth cold and moist; and although it is the lowest of the stars, yet it bringeth forth all the conceptions of
the superiors; for from it in the heavenly bodies beginneth that series of things which Plato calleth the
Golden Chain, by the which every thing and cause being linked one to an other, do depend on the superior,
even untill it may be brought to the supreme cause of all, from which all things depend; from hence is it,
that without the Moon intermediating, we cannot at any time attract the power of the superiors. Therefore
Thebit adviseth vs, for the taking of the vertue of any Star, to take the stone and herb of that plant, when the
Moon doth either fortunately get under or hath a good aspect on that Star.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (13 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
Chap. xxxiii. Of the twenty eight Mansions of the Moon, and their
vertues.
And seeing the Moon measureth the whole Zodiack in the space of twenty eight dayes; hence is it, that
the wise-men of the Indians and ancientest Astrologians have granted twenty eight Mansions to the Moon,
which being fixed in the eight sphere, do enjoy (as Alpharus saith) diverse names and proprieties from the
diverse Signs and Stars which are contained in them, through which while the Moon wandreth, it obtaineth
other and other powers and vertues; but every one of these Mansions, according to the opinion of Abraham,
containth [sic] twelve degrees, and one and fifty minutes, and almost twenty six seconds, whose names and
also their beginnings in the Zodiack of the eight sphere, are these. The first is called Alnath, that is the
horns of Aries; his beginning is from the head of Aries of the eighth sphere; it causeth discords, and
journies; the second is called Allothaim or Albochan, that is the belly of Aries, and his beginning is from
the twelfth degree of the same sign, fifty one minutes, twenty two seconds compleat; it conduceth to the
finding of treasures, and to the retaining of captives; The third is called Achaomazon or Athoray, that is,
showring or Pleiades; his beginning is from the twenty five degrees of Aries compleat fourty two minutes,
and fifty one seconds; it is profitable to Saylors [sailors], Huntsmen, and Alchymists; The fourth Mansion is
called Aldebaram or Aldelamen that is the eye or head of Taurus; his beginning is from the eight degree of
Taurus, thirty four minutes, and seventeen seconds of the same Taurus being excluded; it causeth the
destruction and hindrances of buildings, fountains, wels, of gold-mines, the flight of creeping things, and
begetteth discord. The fift is called Alchatay or Albachay; the beginning of it is after the twenty one degree
of Taurus, twenty five minutes, fourty seconds; it helpeth to the return from a journey, to the instruction of
scholars, it confirmeth edifices, it giveth health and good will, the sixth is called Alhanna or Alchaya, that
is the little Star of great light; his beginning is after the fourth degree of Gemini, seventeen minutes, and
nine seconds; it conduceth to Hunting, and besieging of Towns, and revenge of princes, it destroyeth
Harvests and fruits and hindreth the operation of the Physitian [physician]. The seventh is called Aldimiach
or Alarzach, that is the Arm of Gemini and beginneth from the seventeenth degree of Gemini, eight minutes
and thirty four seconds, and lasteth even to the end of the sign; it conferreth gain and friendship, its
profitable to Lovers, it scareth flyes, destroyeth Magisteries. And so is one quarter of the heaven compleated
in these seven Mansions; and in the like order and number of degrees, minutes and seconds, the remaining
Mansions in evert quarter have their severall beginnings; namely so, that in the first signe of this quarter
three Mansions take their beginnings, in the other two signs two Mansions in each; Therefore the seven
following Mansions begin from Cancer, whose names are Alnaza or Anatrachya that is misty or cloudy,
viz. the eighth Mansion; it causeth love, friendship, and society of fellow travellers, it driveth away mice
ands afflicteth Captives, confirming their imprisonment. After this is the ninth called Archaam or Arcaph,
that is the eye of the Lyon; it hindreth Harvests and travellers, and putteth discord between men. The tenth is
called Algelioche or Albgebh, that is the neck or forehead of Leo; it strengtheneth buildings, yeeldeth love,
benevolence and help against enemies; the eleventh is called Azobra or Ardaf, that is, the hair of the Lyons
[lion's] head; it is good for voyages, and gain by merchandize, and for redemption of Captives; the twelfth is
called Alzarpha or Azarpha, that is the tayle of Leo; it giveth prosperity to Harvests, and Plantations, but
hindreth Seamen, but it is good for the bettering of servants, Captives and companions. The thirteenth is
named Alhaire, that is Dogstars, or the wings of Virgo; it is pravalent for Benevolence, gain, voyages,
Harvests, and freedom of captives; the fourteenth is called Achureth or Arimet, by others Azimeth or
Alhumech or Alcheymech, that is the spike of Virgo, or flying spike; it causeth the love of martyred folk, it
cureth the sick, its profitable to Saylors, but it hindreth journies by land; and in these the second quarter of
Heaven is compleated. The other seven follow, the first of which beginneth in the head of Libra, viz. the
fifteenth Mansion, and his name is Agrapha or Algarpha, that is, covered, or covered flying; its profitable
for the extracting of treasures, for digging of pits, it helpeth forward divorce, discord, and the destruction of
houses and enemies, and hindreth travellers. The sixteenth is called Azubene or Ahubene, that is, the horns
of Scorpio, it hindereth journyes and Wedlock, Harvests and Merchandize, it pervaileth for redemption of
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (14 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
captives. The seventeenth is called Alchil, that is the Crown of Scorpio, it bettereth a bad fortune, maketh
love durable, strengtheneth buildings, & helpeth Seamen; The eighteenth is called Alchas or Altob, that is
the Heart of Scorpio; it causeth discord, sedition, conspiracy against princes and mighty ones, and revenge
from enemies, but it freeth captives and helpeth edifices; the ninteenth is called Allatha or Achala, by others
Hycula or Axala, that is the tayle of Scorpio; it helpeth in the besieging of Cities and taking of Towns, and
in the driving of men from their places, and for the dcstruction of Sea-men, and perdition of captives. The
twentieth is called Abnahaya, that is a beam; it helpeth for the taming of wild beasts, for the strengthening
of prisons, it destroyeth the wealth of societies, it compelleth a man to come to a certain place. The one &
twentieeth is called Abeda or Albeldach which is a desert; it is good for Harvests, gain buildings and
travellers, and causeth divorce; & in this is the third quarter of Heaven is compleated. There remaineth the
seven last Mansions compleating the last quarter of heaven; the first of which being in order to the two and
twentyeth, beginneth from the head of Capricorn, called Sadahacha or Zodeboluch, or Zandeldena, that is a
pastour; it promoteth the flight of servants and captives, that they may escape, and helpeth the curing of
diseases; the three and twentieth is called Zabadola or Zobrach that is swallowing; it maketh for divorce,
liberty of captives and the health of the sick; the twenty fourth is called Sadabath or Chadezoad, that is the
Star of fortune; it is prevalent for the Benevolence of marryed folk, for the victory of souldiers, it hurteth the
execution of Government, and hindreth that it may not be exercised; The twenty fifth is called Sadalabra or
Sadalachia, that is a Butterfly or a spreading forth; it helpeth besieging and revenge, it destroyeth enemies,
maketh divorse [divorce], confirmeth prisons and buildings, hasteneth messengers, it conduceth to spels
[spells] against copulation, and so bindeth every member of man, that it cannot perform his duty; the twenty
sixth is called Alpharg or Phragal Mocaden, that is the first drawing; it maketh for the Union and love of
men, for the health of captives, it destroyeth prisons and buildings; The twenty seventh is called Alcharya or
Alhalgalmoad that is the second drawing; it encreaseth Harvests, Revenues, Gain, it healeth infirmities, but
hindreth buildings, prolongeth prisons, causeth danger to Seamen, and helpeth to infer mischiefs on whom
you shall please; the twenty eight and last is called Albotham or Alchalcy, that is Pisces: it encreaseth
Harvests and Merchandize, it secureth travellers through dangerous places; it maketh for the joy of marryed
couples, but it strengthenth prisons, and causeth loss of treasures; and in these twenty eight Mansions do lye
hid many secrets of the wisdom of the Ancients, by the which they wrought wonders on all things which are
under the circle of the Moon; and they attributed to every Mansion his resemblances, Images, and seals, and
his president intelligences, and they did work by the vertue of them after diverse manners.
Chap. xxxiv. Of the true motion of the heavenly bodies to be observed
in the eight sphere, and of the ground of Planetary hours.
Whosoever will work according to the Celestiall opportunity, ought to observe both or one of them, namely
the motion of the Stars, or their times; I say their motions, when they are in their dignities or dejections,
either essential or accidentall; but I call their times, dayes and hours distributed to their Dominions.
Concerning all these, it is abundantly taught in the books of Astrologers; but in this place two things
especially are to be considered and observed by us. One that we observe the motions and ascensions and
windings of Stars, even as they are in truth in the eight sphere, through the neglect of which it happeneth
that many err in fabricating the Celestiall Images, and are defrauded of their desired effect; the other thing
we ought to observe, is about the times of choosing the planetary hours; for almost all Astrologers divide all
that space of time from the Sun rising to setting into twelve equall parts, and call them the twelve hours of
the day; then the time which followeth from the setting to the rising, in like manner being divided into
twelve equall parts, they call the twelve hours of the night, and then distribute each of those hours to every
one of the Planets according to the order of their successions, giving alwayes the first hour of the day to the
Lord of that day, then to every one by order, even to the end of twenty four hours; and in this distribution
the Magicians agree with them; but in the partition of the hours some do different, saying, that the space of
the rising and setting is not to be divided into equall parts, and that those hours are not therefore called
unequal because the diurnal are unequal to the nocturnall, but because both the diurnal and nocturnal are
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (15 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
even unequall amongst themselves; therefore the partition of unequall or Planetaty hours hath a different
reason of their measure observed by Magicians, which is of this sort; for as in artificiall hours, which are
alwayes equall to themselves, the ascensions of fifteen degrees in the equinoctiall, constituteth an artificial
hour: so also in planetary hours the ascensions of fifteen degrees in the Eclipicke constituteth an unequall or
plametary hour, whose measure we ought to enquire and find out by the tables of the oblique ascensions of
every region.
Chap. xxxv. How some artificiall things as Images, Seals, and such
like, may obtain some vertue from the Celestial bodies.
So great is the extent, power and efficacy of the Celestiall bodies, that not only naturall things, but also
artificiall when they are rightly esposed to those above, do presently suffer by that most potent agent, and
obtain a wondefull life, which oftentimes gives them an admirable Celestiall vertue; which thing Saint
Thomas Aquinas that holy Doctor, thus confirmeth in his book de fæto, when he saith, that even garments,
buildings and other artificiall works whatsoever, do receive a certain qualification from the Stars; so the
Magicians affirm, that not only by the mixture and application of naturall things, but also in Images, Seals,
Rings, Glasses, and some other Instruments, being opportunely framed under a certain constellation, some
Celestiall Illustration may be taken, and some wonderfull thing may be received; for the beams of the
Celestiall bodies betng animated, living, sensuall, and bringing along with them admirable gifts, and a most
violent power, do, even in a moment, and at the first touch, imprint wonderfull powers in the Images,
though their matter be less capable. Yet they bestow more powerfull vertues on the Images, if they be
framed not of any, but of a certain matter, namely whose naturall, and also specificall vertue is agreeable
with the work, and the figure of the image is like to the Celestial; for such an Image, both in regard of the
matter naturally congruous to the operation and Celestiall influence, and also for its figure being like to the
Heavenly one, is best prepared to receive the operations and powers of the Celestiall bodies and figures, and
instantly receiveth the Heavenly gift into it self; then it constantly worketh on another thing, and other
things do yeeld obedience to it. Hence saith Ptolemy in centiloquio, that inferior things do obey the
Celestiall, and not only them, but also even their Images; Even as earthly Scorpions obey not only the
Celestiall Scorpion, but also his Image, if it shall be opportunely figured under his ascent and Dominion.
Chap. xxxvi. Of the Images of the Zodiack, what vertues they being
ingraven, receive from the stars.
But the Celestial Images, according to whose likeness Images of this kinde are framed, are very many in the
heavens: Some visible and conspicuous, others onely imaginable, conceived and set down by Egyptians,
Indians and Chaldeans [Chaldaeans]; and their parts are so ordered, that even the figures of some of them
are distinguished from others: for this reason they place in the Zodiack circle twelve general images,
according to the number of the signs: of these they constituting Aries, Leo, and Sagittary for the fiery and
oriental triplicity, do report that its profitable against Feavors [fevers], Palsie [palsy], Drosie, Gout, and all
cold and phlegmatick infirmities, and that it makes him who carrieth it to be acceptable, eloquent, ingenious
and honorable, because they are the Houses of Mars, Sol, and Jupiter. They made also the image of a Lion
against melancholy phantasies, the Dropsie, Plague, Feavors [fevers], and to expel diseases, at the hour of
the Sun, the first degree of the sign of Leo ascending, which is the face and Decanate of Jupiter; but against
the Stone, and diseases of the Reins, and against the hurts of beasts, they made the same image when Sol in
the heart of the Lion obtained the midst of heaven: and again, because Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius do
constitute the Aerial and Occidental Triplicity, and are the houses of Mercury, Venus, and Saturn, they are
said to put to flight diseases, to conduce to friendship and concord, to prevail against melancholy, and to
cause health; & they report that Aquarius especially freeth from the Quartane [quartan]. Also, that Cancer,
Scorpio, and Pisces, because they constitute the watry & Northern Triplicity, do prevail against hot and dry
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (16 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
Fevors [fevers]; also against the Hectick, and all cholerick passions; but Scorpio, because amongst the
members it respecteth the privy parts [genitals], doth provoke to lust: but these did frame it for this purpose,
his third face ascending, which belongeth to Venus; and they made the same against Serpents and Scorpions,
poysons [poisons], and evil spirits; his second face ascending, which is the face of the Sun, and Decanate of
Jupiter; and they report that it maketh him who carrieth it, wise, of a good colour; and they report that the
image of Cancer is most efficacious against Serpents, and poysons [poisons], when Sol and Luna are in
conjunction in it, and ascend in the first and third face; for this is the face of Venus, and the Decanate of
Luna; but the second face of Luna, the Decanate of Jupiter: They report also that Serpents are tormented
when the Sun is in Cancer: Also that Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, because they constitute the earthly and
Southern triplicity, do cure hot infirmitiss, and prevail against the Synocall Feaver; it maketh those that
carry it grateful, acceptable, eloquent, devout and religious, because they are the Houses of Venus, Mars,
and Saturn: Capricorn also is reported to keep men in safety, and also places in security, because it is the
exaltation of Mars.
Chap. xxxvii. Of the Images of the Faces, and of those Images which
are without the Zodiack.
There are besides in the Zodiack thirty six images, according to the number of the faces of the which, (as
Porphyry saith) Teucer the Babylonian long since wrote, who was a most ancient Mathematician, after
whom the Arabians also wrote of these things. Therefore it is said, that in the first face of Aries, ascendeth
the image of a black man, standing and cloathed in a white garment, girdled about, of a great body, with
reddish eyes, and great strength, and like one that is angry; and this image signifieth and causeth boldness,
fortitude, loftiness and shamelesness; in the second face ascendeth a form of a woman, outwardly cloathed
with a red garment, and under it a white, spreading abroad over her feet, and this image causeth nobleness,
height of a Kingdom, and greatness of dominion: in the third face ariseth the figure of a white man, pale,
with reddish hair, and cloathed with a red garment, who carrying on the one hand a golden Bracelet, and
holding forth a wooden staff, is restless, and like one in wrath, because he cannot perform that good he
would. This image bestoweth wit, meekness, joy and beauty: in the first face of Taurus ascendeth a naked
man, an Archer, Harvester or Husbandman, and goeth forth to sow, plough, build, people, and divide the
earth, according to the rules of Geometry; in the second face ascendeth a naked man, holding in his hand a
key; it giveth power, nobility, and dominion over people: in the third face, ascendeth a man in whose hand is
a Serpent, and a dart, and is the image of necessity and profit, and also of misery & slavery. In the first face
of Gemini ascendeth a man in whose hand is a rod, and he is, as it were, serving another; it granteth wisdom,
and the knowledge of numbers and arts in which there is no profit: in the second face ascendeth a man in
whose hand is a Pipe, and another being bowed down, digging the earth: and they signifie infamous and
dishonest agility, as that of Jesters and Juglers [jugglers]; it also signifies labours and painful searchings: In
the third, ascendeth a man seeking for Arms, and a fool holding in the right hand a Bird, and in his left a
pipe, and they are the significations of forgetfulness, wrath, boldness, jeasts [jests], scurrilities, and
unprofitable words: In the first face of Cancer ascendeth the form of a young Virgin, adorned with fine
cloathes [clothes], and having a Crown on her head; it giveth acuteness of senses, subtilty of wit, and the
love of men: in the second face ascendeth a man cloathed in comely apparrel, or a man and woman sitting at
the table and playing; it bestoweth riches, mirth, gladness, and the love of women: in the third face
ascendeth a man a Hunter with his lance and horne, bringing out dogs for to hunt; the signification of this is
the contention of men, the pursuing of those who fly, the hunting and possessing of things by arms and
brawlings. In the first face of Leo ascendeth a man riding on a Lion; it signifieth boldness, violence, cruelty,
wickedness, lust and labours to be sustained. In the second ascendeth an image with hands lifted up, and a
man on whose head is a Crown; he hath the appearance of an angry man, and one that threatneth, having in
his right hand a Sword drawn out of the scabbard, & in his left a buckler; it hath signification upon hidden
contentions, and unknown victories, & upon base men, and upon the occasions of quarrels and battels
[battles]: in the third face ascendeth a young man in whose hand is a Whip, and a man very sad, and of an ill
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (17 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
aspect; they signifie love and society, and the loss of ones right for avoiding strife. In the first face of Virgo
ascendeth the figure of a good maide, and a man casting seeds; it signifieth getting of wealth, ordering of
diet, plowing, sowing, and peopling; in the second face ascendeth a black man cloathed with a skin, and a
man having a bush of hair, holding a bag; they signifie gain, scraping~ together of wealth and covetousness.
In the third face ascendeth a white woman and deaf, or an old man leaning on a staff; the signification of
this is to shew weakness, infirmity, loss of members, destruction of trees, and depopulation of lands. In the
first face of Libra ascendeth 4the form of an angry man, in whose hand is a Pipe, and the form of a man
reading in a book; the operation of this is in justifying and helping the miserable and weak against the
powerful and wicked: in the second face ascend two men furious and wrathful and a man in a comely
garment, sitting in a chair; and the signification of these is to shew indignation against the evil, and
quietness and security of life with plenty of good things. In the third face ascendeth a violent man holding a
bow, and before him a naked man, and also another man holding bread in one hand, and a cup of wine in the
other; the signification of these is to shew wicked lusts, singings, sports and gluttony. In the first face of
Scorpio ascendeth a woman of good face and habit, and two men striking her; the operations of these are for
comliness, beauty, and for strifes, treacheries, deceits, detractations, and perditions; in the second face
ascendeth a man naked, and a woman naked, and a man sitting on the earth, and before him two dogs biting
one another; and their operation is for impudence, deceit, and false dealing, and for to lend mischief and
strife amongst men; in the third face ascendeth a man bowed downward upon his knees, and a woman
striking him with a staff, and it is the signification of drunkenness, fornication, wrath, violence, and strife. In
the first face of Sagittariys ascendeth the form of a man armed with a coat of male [mail], and holding a
naked sword in his hand; the operation of this is for boldness, malice, and liberty: In the second face
ascendeth a woman weeping, and covered with cloathes; the operation of this is for sadness and fear of his
own body. In the third face ascendeth a man like in colour to gold, or an idle man playing with a staff; and
the signification of this is in following our own wills,and obstinacy in them, and in activeness for evil
things, contentions, and horrible matters. In the first face of Capricorn ascendeth the form of a woman, and
a man carrying full bags; and the signification of these is for to go forth and to rejoyce [rejoice], to gain and
to lose with weakness and baseness: in the second face ascendeth two women, and a man looking towards a
Bird flying in the Air; and the signification of these is for the requiring those things which cannot be done,
and for the searching after those things which cannot be known: In the third face ascendeth a woman chast
[chaste] in body, and wise in her work, and a banker gathering his mony [money] together on the table; the
signification of this is to govern in prudence, in covetousness of money, and in avarice. In the first face of
Aquarius ascendeth the form of a prudent man, and of a woman spinning; and the signification of these is in
the thought and labour for gain, in poverty and baseness: in the second face ascendeth the form of a man
with a long beard; and the signification of this belongeth to the understanding, meeknes, modesty, liberty
and good maners: in the third face ascendeth a black and angry man; and the signification of this is in
expressing insolence; and impudence. In the first face of Pisces ascendeth a man carrying burthens
[burdens] on his shoulder, and well cloathed; it hath his significion in journeys, change of place, and in
carefulness of getting wealth and cloaths: in the second face ascendeth a woman of a good countenance, and
well adorned; and the signification is to desire and put ones self on about high and great matters: in the third
face ascendeth a man naked, or a youth, and nigh him a beautiful maide, whose head is adorned with
flowers, and it hath his signification for rest, idleness, delight, fornication, and for imbracings of women.
And thus far concerning the Images of Faces. Besides these, there are as yet three hundred and sixty Images
in the Zodiack, according to the number of the degrees, whose forms Petrus de Abano hath described:
without the Zodiack there are also general Figures, which Hyginius and Aratus describe for us, and very
many particular ones, according to the number of faces and degrees, existing therein, of all which to speak it
would be too long; but of these the more principal are accounted, Pegasus which prevaileth against the
diseases of horses, and preserveth horsemen in battle; Then is Andromache, which begetteth love betwixt
husband and wife, so that it is said even to reconcile adulterers: Cassiopeia restoreth weak bodies and
strengtheneth the members; Serpentarius chaseth away poysons [poisons], and cureth the bitings of
venemous beasts: Hercules giveth victory in war; the Dragon with both the Bears maketh a man crafty,
ingenious, valiant, acceptable to the gods and men: Hydra conferreth wisdom and riches, and resisteth
poysons [poisons]. Centaurus bestoweth health and long old age: Ara conserveth charity, and maketh one
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (18 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
acceptable to the gods; Cetus maketh one amiable, prudent, happy both by sea and land, and helps him to
recover his lost goods: the Ship affordeth security in the waters; the Hare prevaileth against deceits and
madness; the Dog cureth the Dropsie, resisteth the plague, and also preserveth from beasts, and fierce
creatures. Orion granteth victory: The Eagle giveth new honors, and preserveth the old. The Swan freeth
from the Palsie and the Quartain [quartan]: Perseus freeth from Envy and Witchcrafts, and preserveth from
Lightnings and Tempests: The Hart preserveth Phrenetical and mad people. And thus much may suffice to
have been spoken.
Chap. xxxviii. Of the Images of Saturn.
But now, what Images they did attribute to the Planets, although of these things very large volumes have
been written by the ancient wise men, so that there is no need to declare them here, notwithstanding I will
recite a few of them; for they made, from the operations of Saturn, Saturn ascending in a stone, which is
called the Loadstone, the Image of a man, having the countenance of an Hart, and Camels seet and sitting
upon a Chayr or Dragon, holding in his right hand, a sithe [scythe], in his left hand a dart; which image they
did hope would be profitable for prolongation of life; for Albumasar in his book Sadar, proveth that Saturn
conduceth to the prolongation of life; where also he telleth that certain regions of India being subject to
Saturn, there men are of a very long life and dye [die] not unless by extream old Age: They made also an
other Image of Saturn for length of dayes, in a saphire, at the hour of Saturn, Saturn ascending or
fortunately constituted, whose figure was an old man setting upon an high chayre [chair], having his hands
lifted up above his head, and in them holding a fish or Sickle, and under his feet a bunch of Grapes, his head
covered with a black or dusky coloured cloth, and all his garments black or dark coloured: They also make
this same Image against the Stone and diseases of the kidnyes [kidneys], viz. in the hour of Saturn, Saturn
ascending with the third face of Aquarius: they made also from the operations of Saturn, an Image for the
encreasing in power, Saturn ascending in Capricorn; The form of which was an old man leaning on a staff
having in his hand a crooked sickle, and cloathed in black. They also made an Image of melted Copper,
Saturn ascending in his rising, viz. in the first degree of Aries, or which is more true in the first degree of
Capricorn, which Image they affirm to speak with a mans voyce; They made also out of the operations of
Saturn, and also Mercury, an Image of cast metall, like a beautifull man, which they promised would
foretell things to come, and made it on the day of Mercuy, on the third hour of Saturn, the sign of Gemini
ascending, being the house of Mercury, signifying prophet, Saturn and Mercury being in conjunction in
Aquarius in the ninth place of Heaven, which is also called God; Moreover let Saturn have a trine aspect on
the ascendent, and the Moon in like manner, and the Sun have an aspect on the place of conjunction. Venus
obtaining some Angle may be powerfull and occidentall; let Mars be combust by the Sun, but let it not have
an aspect on Saturn and Mercury; for they said, that the splendor of the powers of these Stars was diffused
upon this Image, and it did speak with men, and declare those things which are profitable for them.
Chap. xxxix. Of the Images of Jupiter.
From the operations of Jupiter, they made for prolongation of life, an Image, in the hour of Jupiter, Jupiter
being in his exaltation fortunately ascending, in a clear and white stone, whose figure was a man crowned,
cloathed with garments of a Saffron Colour, riding upon an Eagle or Dragon, having in his right hand a dart,
about as it were to strike it into the head of the same Eagle or Dragon. They made also another Image of
Jupiter at the same convenient season, in a white and clear stone, especially in Crystall, and it was a naked
man crowned, having both his hands joyned together and lifted up, as it were deprecating something, sitting
in a four-footed chair, which is carried by four winged boys, and they affirm that this Image encreaseth
felicity, riches, honor, and conferreth Benevolence and prosperity, and freeth from enemies; They made also
another Image of Jupiter for a religious and glorious life, and advancement of fortune; whose figure was a
man having the head of a Lyon [lion], or a Ram, and Eagles feet, cloathed in Saffron coloured cloathes, and
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (19 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
he was called the son of Jupiter.
Chap. xl. Of the Images of Mars.
From the operations of Mars they made an Image in the hour of Mars, Mars being in the second face of
Aries, in a Martiall stone, especially in a Diamond; The form of which was a man armed, riding upon a
Lyon [lion], having in his right hand a naked sword erected, carrying in his left hand the head of a man; they
report, that an Image of this kind rendreth a man powerfull in good and evill, so that he shall be feared of
all; and whosoever carryeth it they give him the power of enchantment, so that he shall terrifie men by his
looks when he is angry, and stupifie them; they made another Image of Mars for the obtaining of boldness,
courage, and good fortune in wars, and contentions, the form of which was a souldier armed and crowned,
girt with a sword, carrying in his right hand a long Lance; and they made this at the hour of Mars, the first
face of Scorpio ascending with it.
Chap. xli. Of the Images of the Sun.
From the operations of the Sun, they made an Image at the hour of the Sun, the first face of Leo ascending
with the Sun, the forme of which was a king crowned, sitting in a chair, having a Raven in his bosom, and
under his feet a Globe; he is cloathed in Saffron coloured cloathes [clothes]; They report that this Image
rendreth men invincible, and honorable, and helps to bring their businesses to a good end, and to drive away
vain dreams; also to be prevalent against feavers [fevers], and the plague; and they made it in a Balanite
stone or a Rubin, at the hour of the Sun, when it in his exaltation fortunately ascendeth; They made another
Image of the Sun in a Diamond, at the hour of the Sun, it ascending in his exaltation; the figure of which was
a woman crowned with the gesture of one dancing and laughing, standing in a Chariot drawn with four
horses, having in her right hand a looking glass, or buckler [clypeum], in the left a staffe, leaning on her
breast, carrying a flame of fire on her head; They report that this Image rendreth a man fortunate and rich,
and beloved of all; and they made this Image, on a Corneoll stone at the hour of the Sun ascending in the
first face of Leo, against Lunatick passions which proceed from the combustion of the Moon.
Chap. xlii. Of the Images of Venus.
From the operations of Venus they made an Image, which was available for favor, and benevolence, at the
very hour it ascending into Pisces, the form of which was the Image of a woman having the head of a bird,
and feet of an Eagle, holding a dart in her hand. They made another Image of Venus for to get the love of
women, in the Lapis Lazulus [lapis lazuli], at the hour of Venus, Venus ascending in Taurus, the figure of
which was a naked maide with her haire spread abroad, having a looking glass in her hand, and a chain tyed
about her neck, and nigh her a handsome young man holding her with his left hand by the chain, but with
his right hand making up her hair, and they both look lovingly on one another, and about them is a little
winged boy holding a sword or a dart. They made another Imageof Venus, the first face of Taurus or Libra
or Pisces ascending with Venus, the figure of which was a little maide with her hair spread abroad, cloathed
in long and white garments, holding a Laurell Apple, or flowes in her right hand, in her left a Combe. Its
reported to make men pleasant, jocand, strong, chearfull [cheerful] and to give beauty.
Chap. xliii. Of the Images of Mercury.
From the operations of Mercury, they made an Image at the hour of Mercury, Mercury ascending in Gemini,
the form of which was an handsome young man, bearded, having in his left hand a rod in which a serpent is
twyned about, in his right carrying a dart, having his feet winged; They report that this Image conferreth
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (20 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
knowledge, eloquence, diligence in merchandizing and gain; moreover to beget peace and concord, and to
cure feavers; They made another Image of Mercury, Mercury ascending in Virgo, for good will, wit and
memory; The form of which was a man sitting upon a chaire, or riding on a Peacock, having Eagles feet,
and on his head a crest, and in his left hand holding a cock or fire.
Chap. xliv. Of the Images of the Moon.
From the operations of the Moon, they made an Image for travellers against weariness, at the hour of the
Moon, the Moon ascending in its exaltation; the figure of which was a man leaning on a staffe, having a bird
on his head, and a flourishing tree before him; They made another Image of the Moon for the increase of the
fruits of the earth, and against poysons [poisons], and infirmities of children, at the hour of the Moon, it
ascending in the first face of Cancer, the figure of which was a woman cornuted, riding on a Bull, or a
Dragon with seven heads, or a Crab; and she hath in her right hand a dart, in her left a looking glass, clothed
in white or green, and having on her head two Serpents with horns twined together, and to each arm a
Serpent twined about, and to each foot one in like manner. And thus much spoken concerning the figures of
the Planets, may suffice.
Chap. xlv. Of the Images of the head and Tayle of the Dragon of the
Moon.
They made also the Image of the head and taile of the Dragon of the Moon, namely betwixt an Aeriall and
fiery circle, the likeness of a Serpent, with the head of an Hawke tyed about them, after the manner of the
great letter Theta, & they made it when Jupiter with the head obtain'd the midst of Heaven:
which Image they affirm to availe much for the success of Petitions, and would signifie by this Image a
good and fortunate Genius, which they would represent by this Image of the Serpent; for the Egyptians and
Phenicians [Phoenicians] do extoll this creature above all others, and say it is a divine creature and hath a
divine nature; for in this is a more acute spirit, and a greater fire than in any other, which thing is manifested
both by his swift motion without feet, hands or any other instruments; and also that it often reneweth his age
with his skin, and becometh young again: but they made the Image of the taile like as when the Moon
Ecclipsed [eclipsed], in the Taile, or ill affected by Saturn or Mars, and they made it to introduce, anguish,
infirmity and misfortune; and they called it the evill Genius; such an Image a certain Hebrew had included
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (21 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
in a golden Belt full of Jewels, which Blanch the daughter of the Duke of Borbon (either willingly or
ignorantly) bestowed on her husband Peter King of Spain, the first of that name, with which when he was
girt, he seemed to himself to be compassed about with a Serpent; and afterwards finding the Magicall virtue
fixed in the girdle, for this cause he forsook his wife.
Twilit Grotto -- Esoteric Archives Contents Prev agrippa2-3 Next timeline
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 3)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2c.htm (22 von 22) [20.02.2001 16:12:14]
Twilit Grotto -- Esoteric Archives Contents Prev agrippa2-4 Next timeline
This HTML edition by Joseph H. Peterson, Copyright © 2000. All rights reserved.
The copyright to the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives is owned by Joseph H. Peterson and is protected by the
copyright laws of the United States and the Universal Copyright Convention.
The materials on the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives (including all texts, translations, images, descriptions,
drawings etc.) are provided for the personal use of students, scholars, and the public. Any commercial use or
publication of them without authorization is strictly prohibited. All materials are copyrighted and are not in
the public domain. Copying of materials on the Twilit Grotto Esoteric Archives Web pages is not permitted.
Individuals distributing illegal copies will be pursued legally along with their Internet Service Providers.
You will need a Hebrew font installed to read some of this book.
Chap. xlvi. Of the Images of the Mansions of the Moon.
They made also Images for evert Mansion of the Moon; in the first for the destruction of some one, they
made in an Iron ring, the Image of a black man in a garment made of haire, and girdled round, casting a
small lance with his right hand; they sealed this in black wax, and perfumed it with liquid Storax, and wished
some evil to come. In the second, against the wrath of the Prince, and for reconciliation with him, they sealed
in white wac and mastick, the Image of a king crowned, and perfumed it with Lignum Aloes; In the third,
they made an Image in a silver ring, whose table was square, the figure of which was a woman well clothed,
sitting in a chair, her right hand being lifted up on her head; they sealed it and perfumed it with muske,
Camphire and Calamus Aromaticus. They affirmed that this giveth happy fortune and every good thing. In
the fourth, for revenge, separation, enmity and ill will, they sealed in red wax the Image of a soldier sitting
on an horse, holding a Serpent in his right hand; they perfumed it with red myrrhe, and Storax; in the fifth,
for the favor of Kings and officers, and good entertainment, they sealed in Silver the head of a man, and
perfumed it with Sanders; in the sixth, for to procure love betwixt two, they sealed in white wax two Images
imbracing [embracing] one another, and perfumed them with Lignum Aloes and Amber; in the seventh, for
to obtain every good thing, they sealed in Silom the Image of a man well clothed, holding up his hands to
heaven as it were praying and supplicating, and perfumed it with good odors; In the eight, for victory in war,
they made a seal of Tin, being an Image of an Eagle, having the face of a man, and perfumed it with
Brimstone. In the ninth, to cause infirmities, they made a seal of Lead, being the image of a man wanting his
privy parts, shutting his eyes with his hands; and they perfumed it with Rosin of the Pine. In the tenth, to
facilitate child-bearing, and to cure the sick, they made a seal of gold, being the head of a Lyon [lion], and
perfumed it with Amber: In the eleventh, for fear, reverence and worship, they made a seal of a plate of gold,
being the image of a man riding on a Lion, holding the ear thereof in his left hand, and in his right, holding
forth a bracelet of gold, and they perfumed it with good odours and Saffron. In the twelth, for the separation
of Lovers, they made a seal of black lead, being the image of a Dragon fighting with a man, and they
perfumed it with the hairs of a Lion, and Assa fetida [asafoetida]. In the thirteenth, for the agreement of
married couples, and for the dissolving of charms against copulation, they made a feal of the images of both,
of the man in red Wax, of the woman in white, and caused them to imbrace one another, perfuming it with
Lignum Aloes and Amber. In the fourteenth, for divorce and separation of the man from the woman, they
made a seal of red Coppcr, being the image of a Dog biting his tail, and they perfumed it with the hair of a
black Dog, and black Cat. In the fifteenth, for to obtain friendship and good will, they made the image of a
man sitting, and inditing of letterss, and perfumed it with Frankincense and Nutmegs. In the sixteenth, for to
gain much Merchandizing they made a seal of Silver, being the image of a man sitting upon a Chair, holding
a ballance [balance] in his hand, and they perfumed it with well smelling spices. In the seventeenth, against
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (1 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:23]
Theeves [thieves] and Robbers, they sealed with an Iron seal the Image of an Ape: and perfumed it with the
hair of an Ape. In the eighteenth, against Feavors [fevers] and pains of the belly, they made a seal of Copper,
being the image of a Snake, holding his tail above his bead, and they perfumed it with Harts-horn, and
reported the same seal to put to flight Serpents, and all venemous creatures from the place where it is buried.
In the nineteenth for facilitating birth, & provoking the menstrues [menstruation], they made a seal of
copper, being the image of a woman, holding her hands upon her face; and they perfumed it with Liquid
Storax. In the twentieth, for hunting, they made a seal of Tin, being the image of Sagittary [Sagittarius], half
a Man, and half an Horse, and they perfumed it with the head of a Wolf. In the twentie one for the
destruction of some body, they made the image of a man with a double countenance, before and behinde, and
they perfumed it with Brimstone and Jet, and did put it in a box of brass, and with it Brimstone and Jet, and
the hair of him whom they would hurt. In the two and twentieth, for the security of Runaways, they made a
seal of Iron, being the image of a man with wings on his feet, bearing an helmet on his head, and they
perfumed it with Argent vive. In the three and twentieth, for destruction and wasting, they made a seal of
Iron, being the image of a Cat, having a Dogs head, and they perfumed it with the hairs of a Dogs head, and
buried it in the place where they did pretend to hurt. In the four and twentieth, for the multiplying of Heards
of Cattle, they took the horn of a Ram, Bull, or Goat, or of that sort of cattle which they would increase, and
sealed in it burning with an Iron seal, the image of a woman giving suck [breast feeding] her son, and they
hanged it on the neck of that cattle who was the leader of the flock, or they sealed it in his horn. In the five
and twentieth, for the preservation of Trees and Harvests, they sealed in the wood of a Fig-tree, the image of
a man planting, and they perfumed it with the flowers of the Fig-tree, and did hang it on the tree. In the six
and twentieth for love and favor, they sealed in white Wax and Mastick the image of a woman washing and
combing her haires, and they perfumed it with things smelling very well. In the seven and twentieth for to
destroy Fountains, Pits, Medicinal Waters and Baths, they made of red Earth the image of a man winged,
holding in his hand an empty vessel, and perforated, and the image being burnt, they did put in the vessel
Assafetida, and liquid Storax, and they did overwhelm and bury it in the Pond or Fountain which they would
destroy. In the eight and twentieth, for to gather Fishes together, they made a seal of Copper, being the image
of a Fish, and they perfumed it with the skin of a sea fish, and did cast it into the water, wheresoever they
would have the fish to gather together. Moreover together with the foresaid Images, they did write down also
the names of the Spirits and their Characters, and did invocate and pray for those things which they
pretended to obtain.
Chap. xlvii. Of the Images of the fixed Behenian Stars.
But now for the operations of the fixed stars, according to Hermes opinion, under the head of Algol, they
made an image whose Figure was the head of a man with a bloody neck; they report that it bestoweth good
success to Petitions, and maketh him who carrieth it bold and magnanimous, and preserveth the members of
the body sound: also it helpeth against Witchcraft, and reflecteth evil indeavors [endeavors] and wicked
incantations upon our adversaries. Under the constellation of Pleiades, they made the image of a little Virgin,
or the Figure of a Lamp; its reported to increase the light of the eyes, to assemble Spirits, to raise Winds, to
reveal secret and hidden things: Under Adlebora [sic. Aldeboran], they made an image after the likeness of
God, or of a flying man; it giveth riches and honor: Under the Goat they made an image, the Figure of which
was, as it were, a man willing to make himself merry with musical instruments; it maketh him who carrieth it
acceptable, honored and exalted before Kings and Princes; and helpeth the pain of the teeth: Under the
greater Dog-star, they made the image of an Hound and a little Virgin; it bestoweth honor and good will, and
the favor of men, and Aerial spirits, and giveth power to pacifie and reconcile Kings, Princes, and other men:
Under the lesser Dog-star they made the image of a Cock, or of three little maides; it conferreth the favor of
the gods, of spirits, and men; it giveth power against Witchcrafts, and preserveth health: Under the Heart of
Leo, they made the image of a Lion or Cat, or the Figure of an honorable Person sitting in a Chair; it rendretb
a man temperate, appeaseth wrath, and giveth favour: Under the tail of Vrsa Major [Ursa Major] they made
the image of a pensive Man, or of a Bull, or the Figure of a Calf; it availeth against incantations, and maketh
him who carrieth it secure in his travels: Under the wing of Corvus, they made the image of a Raven, or
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (2 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:23]
Snake, or of a black Man cloathed in black; this maketh a man cholerick, bold, couragious, full of thoughts, a
backbiter, and causeth naughty dreams; also it giveth the power of driving away evil spirits, and of gathering
them together; it is profitable against the malice of Men, Devils and Winds: Under the Spike they made the
image of a Bird, or of a man laden with Merchandize; it conferreth riches, and maketh one overcome
contentions, it taketh away scarcity and mischief: Under Alchameth they made the image of an Horse or
Wolf, or the Figure of a man dancing; it is good against Feavers, it astringeth and retaineth the bloud [blood]:
Under Elphrya, they made the image of an Hen, or of a man crowned and advanced; it bestoweth the good
will and love of men, and giveth chastity. Under the Heart of Scorpio they made the image of a man armed,
and with a coat of Male [mail], or the Figure of a Scorpion; it giveth understanding and memory, it maketh a
good colour, and aideth against evil spirits, and driveth them away, and bindeth them: Under the Vulture,
they made the image of a Vulture or Hen, or of a traveller; it maketh a man magnanimous and proud, it
giveth power over devils and beasts. Under the tail of Capricorn they made the image of an Hart, or Goate,
or of an angry man; it bestoweth prosperity, and increaseth wrath. These are the images of some of the fixed
stars which they command to be ingraven on their stones under them.
Chap. xlviii. Of Geomanticall Figures, which are the middle betwixt
Images and Characters.
There are moreover certain other Figures, framed by the number and situation of the stars, and ascribed both
to the Elements, and also to the Planets and Signs, which are called Geomantical, because that Geomantical
Diviners do reduce the points of their lot projected, by the excess of parity or imparity into those figures; and
they also being engraven or imprinted under the dominion of their Planets and Signs, do conceive the vertue
and power of images; and these Figures are as a middle betwixt Images and Characters; But whosoever
desireth exactly yo know the natures, qualities, proprieties, conditions, significations, and Nativities of these
Figures, let him read the Volums of Geomancy; but they are in number sixteen, whose names and figures are
these.
Figure. Name. Element. Planet. Sign.
Way
Iourney [journey] Water
People
Congregation. Water
Conjunction
An Assembling Aire
A prison
Bound The Earth
Great fortune
Greater aid
Safe-guard entering
The Earth
Lesser fortune
Lesser aid
Safe-guard going out
Fire
Obtaining
Comprehended within Aire
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (3 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:23]
Acquisition
Comprehended without Fire
Ioy [joy]
Laughing
Healthy
Bearded
Aire
Sadness
Damned
Cross
Earth
A Girle
Beautifull Water
A Boy
Yellow
Beardless
Fire
White
Fair Water
Reddish
Red Fire
The head
The threshold entring
The upper threshold
Earth
The Taile
The threshold going out
The lower threshold
Fire
Chap. xlix. Of Images, the figure whereof is not after the likeness of any
Celestiall figure, but after the likness of that which the mind of the
worker desires.
There remains as yet an other manner of images not according to the similitude of Celestiall figures, but
according to the similitude of that which the mind of the worker desires, of whose they are the effigies, and
representation: So to procure love we make images embracing one the other: to discord, striking one the
other; to bring misery, or destruction as dammage [damage] to a man, or house, or City or any thing else, we
make images distorted, broken in members, and parts after the likeness and figure of that thing which we
would destroy or damnifie; And Magicians advise us that in casting or engraving images we would write
upon it the name of the effect; and this on the back when evill, as destruction; on the belly when good, as
love. Moreover in the forehead of the image let be written the name of the species or Individuum which the
image represents, or for whom or against whom it is made. Also on the breast let the name of the signe or
face ascending, and Lord thereof be written; also the names and Characters of its Angles. Moreover in
making the image they advise that prayer for the effect for which it is made, be used. All which Albertus
Magnus in his Speculo affirms. Now they use the images being made diversly according to the vertues
thereof; Sometimes they hang them or binde them to the body; Sometimes they bury them under the Earth,
or a River; sometimes they hang them in a Chimny over the smoak [smoke], or upon a tree that they be
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (4 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:23]
moved by the wind; sometime with the head upward, & sometimes downward; sometimes they put them into
hot water, or into the fire. For they say as the workers of the images do affect the image it self, so doth it
bring the like passions upon those to whom it was ascribed, as the mind of the operator hath dictated it. As
we read that Nectanabus the Magician made images of ships with wax after that manner, and art that when
he drowned those images in water, that the ships of his enemies were in like maner drowned in the Sea, and
hazarded. Now that part of Astrology which is writ concerning elections, teacheth us that the constellations
also are to be observed for the making of images, and such like.
Chap. l. Of certain Celestial observations and the practise of some
Images.
I will now shew thee the observation of Celestiall bodyes, which are required for the practise of some of
these kind of images; So to make any one fortunate, we make an image in which these are fortunate, viz. the
significator of the life thereof, the givers of life, the signs, and Planets. Moreover let the ascendent, the
middle of the heaven, and the Lords thereof be fortunate: also the place of the Sun, and place of the Moon;
part of fortune, and Lord of conjunction or prevention made before their nativity, by depressing the
Malignant Planets. But if we will make an image to procure misery, we must do contrarywise, and those
which we place here fortunate, must there be infortunate, by raising malignant Stars. In like manner must we
do to make any place, Region, City, or house fortunate. Also for destroying or prejudicing any of the
foresaid; Let there be made an image under the ascension of that man whom thou wouldst destroy, and
prejudice, and thou shall make unfortunate, the Lord of the house of his life, the Lord of the ascending, and
the Moon, the lord of the house of the Moon, and the lord of the house of the lord ascending, and the tenth
house, and the lord thereof. Now for the fitting of any place, place fortunes in the ascendent thereof; and in
the first, and tenth, and second, and eighth house, thou shall make the lord of the ascendent, and the lord of
the house of the Moon fortunate. But to chase away certain Animals from certain places, that they may not
be generated, or abide there, let there be an image made under the ascension of that Animal, which thou
wouldst chase away, and after the likeness thereof; as if thou wouldest chase away Scorpions from any place,
let an image of the Scorpion be made, the sign of Scorpio ascending with the Moon, and thou shalt make
unfortunate the ascendent, and lord thereof, and the Lord of the house of Mars; and thou shall make
unfortunate the lord of the ascendent in the eighth house, and let them be joyned with an aspect malignant,
opposite, or quadrant: and let there be writ upon the image the name of the ascendent, of the Lord thereof,
and of the Moon, and of the lord of the day, and of the Lord of the hour. And let there be a pit made in the
middle of the place, from which thou wouldst drive them; and let there be carryed into it, some of the earth
taken out of the four corners of the same place, and let the image be buryed there with the head downward,
with saying, this is the burying of the Scorpions, that they may not come into this place, and so of the rest. So
for gain let there be made an image under the ascendent of the nativity of the man, or under the ascension of
that place to which thou wouldest appoint the gain; and thou shall make the lord of the second house, which
is in the house of substance to be joyned with the Lord of the ascendent in the trine or sextil, and let there be
a reception amongst them; thou shall make fortunate the eleventh and the Lord thereof, and the eighth; and if
thou canst, put part of the fortune in the ascendent, or second; and let the image be buryed in that place, or
carryed from that place, to which thou wouldest appoint the gain. Also for concord, and love, let there be an
image made in the day of Jupiter under the ascendent of the nativity of him whom thou wouldst have be
beloved, make fortunate the ascendent, and the tenth, and hide the evil from the ascendent; and thou must
have the Lord of the tenth, and planets of the eleveneth fortune, joyned to the Lord of the ascendent, from the
trine or sextil with reception; then make an other image for him whom thou wouldest stir up to love; consider
if he be a friend, or companion of him whom thou wouldst have be beloved; and if so, let there be an image
made under the ascension of the eleventh house from the ascendent of the first image; but if the party be a
wife, or a husband, let it be made under the ascension of the seventh; if a brother, or a sister, or a cousin, let
it be made under the ascension of the third, and so of the like; and put the significator of the ascendent of the
second image, joyned to the significator of the ascendent of the first image; and let there be betwixt them a
reception, and let the rest be fortunate, as in the first image; afterwards joyn both images together into a
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (5 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:23]
mutual embraceing or put the face of the second image to the back of the first image, and let them be wrapt
up in silk, and cast away or spoiled. Also for success of petitions, and for the obtaining of a thing denyed, or
taken, or possessed by an other, let there be an image made under the ascendent of him who petitions for the
thing; and cause that the Lord of the second be joyned with the lord of the ascendent from a trine, or sextile,
and let there be a reception betwixt them, and if it can be, let the Lord of the second be in the obeying signs,
and the Lord of the ascendent in the ruling, make fortunate the ascendent, and the Lord thereof, and take
heed that the lord of the ascendent be not retrograde or combust, or falling, or in the house of opposition i.e.
in the seventh from his own house; let him not be hindred by the malignant, let him be strong, & in an angle;
Thou shalt make fortunate the ascendent, and the Lord of the second and the Moon; and make another image
for him that petitioned to, and begin it under the ascendent belonging to him, as if he be a King or a Prince,
begin it under the ascendent of the tenth house from the ascendent of the first image; If he be a father under
the fourth; if a son under fifth, and so of the like; and put the significator of the second image, joyned with
the lord of the ascendent of the first image, from a trine,or sextile, and let him receive it, and put them both
strong, and fortunate without any let; make all evill fall from them. Thou shall make fortunate the tenth, and
the fourth if thou canst, or any of them; and when the second image shall be perfected, joy nit [knit] with the
first, face to face, and wrap them in clean linnen, and bury them in the middle of his house who is the
petitioner under a fortunate significator, the fortune being strong, and let the face of the first image be toward
the North, or rather toward the place where the thing petitioned for doth abide; or if it happen that the
petitioner goeth forward towards him with whom the thing petitioned for is, let him bring the images with
him as far as he goes. And let there be made an image of dreams, which being put under the head of him that
sleeps, makes him dream true dreams concerning any thing that he hath formerly deliberated of; and let the
figure of that be the figure of a man sleeping in the bosome of an Angel, which thou shall make in the Lyon
[Lion, i.e. Leo] ascending, the Sun keeping the nineth house in Aries; thou shalt writ upon the breast of the
man the name of the effect desired, and in the hand of the Angel the name of the intelligence of the Sun. Let
the same image be made in Virgo ascending, Mercury being fortunate in Aries in the ninth house, or Gemini
ascending in Mercury being fortunate, and keeping the ninth house in Aquarius; and let it be received from
Saturn with a fortunate aspect, and let the name of the spirit of Mercury be writ upon it. Let also the same be
made in Libra ascending, Venus being received from Mercury in Gemini in the ninth house, by writting upon
it the Angel of Venus. Besides also let the same image be made in Aquarius ascending, Saturn fortunately
possessing the ninth house in his exaltation, which is in Libra, and let there be writ upon it the Angel of
Saturn. Moreover let it be made in Cancer ascending the Moon being received by Jupiter and Venus in
Pisces, and being fortunately placed in the ninth house, and let there be writ upon it the spirit of the Moon.
There are also made rings of dreams of wonderfull efficacy; and there are rings of the Sun, and Saturn and
the constellation of them is when the Sun or Saturn ascend in their exaltations in the ninth house, and when
the Moon is joyned to Saturn in the ninth house, and in that signe, which was the ninth house of Nativity;
and let there be writ upon the rings the name of the spirit of the Sun, or Saturn. Let this which hath been
spoken suffice concerning images, for now thou mayst find out more of this nature of thy self. But know this
that such images work nothing, unless they be so vivified that either a naturall or Celestiall, or Heroicall, or
animasticall, or demoniacal, or angelicall vertue be in them, or assistant to them. But who can give a soul to
an image, or make a stone to live, or mettal [metal], or wood, or wax? and who can raise out of stones
children unto Abraham? Certanly this Arcanum doth not enter into an Artist of a stiffe neck; neither can he
give those things which hath them not. No body hath them but he who doth (the Elements being restrained,
nature being overcome, the Heavens being over-powered) transcend the progress of Angels, and comes to the
very Archetype it self, of which being then made a cooperator may do all things, as we shall speak
afterwards.
Chap. li. Of Characters which are made after the rule and imitation of
Celestial, and how with the table thereof they are deduced out of
Geomantical figures.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (6 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
Characters also have their community from the rayes of the Celestials cast together according to a certain
number by a certain peculiar property, which Celestials as in divers strokes of their rayes falling severall
ways amongst themselves produce divers vertues: so also Characters being variously protracted, according to
the various concourse of those rayes quickly obtain divers operations, and also more efficacious many times
then the properties of naturall commixtions. Now the true Characters of the heavens is the writing of Angels,
which amongst the Hebrews is called the writing Malachim, by which all things are described and signified
in the Heaven for every knowing man to read. But of these hereafter; But now they make Characters of
Geomantical figures binding together the points of each variously, and attributing them according to the
manner of their figurings, to those Planets and signs of which they were made, the making of which the
following table will shew:
The Characters of the Moon.
From the way [figure 2-70]
From the people [figure 2-71]
The Characters of Mercury.
From Conjunction [figure 2-72]
From White [figure 2-73]
The Characters of Venus.
From loosing [figure 2-74]
From girle [figure 2-75]
The Characters of the Sun.
From a greater Fortune [figure 2-76]
From a lesser Fortune [figure 2-77]
The Characters of Mars.
From Red [figure 2-78]
From a Boy [figure 2-79]
The Characters of Jupiter.
From obtaining [figure 2-80]
From joyfulness [figure 2-81]
The Characters of the Saturn.
From a prison [figure 2-82]
From sadness [figure 2-83]
The Characters of of the head of the Dragon.
[figure 2-84]
From Characters of the tayle of the Dragon
[figure 2-85]
Chap. lii. Of Characters which are drawn from things themselves by a
certain likeness.
We have spoken above of a certain manner of Images made not after the likeness of Celestial Images, but
according to the emulation of that which the minde of the Operator doth desire. In like manner also it is to be
understood of Characters; for such like Characters are nothing else then images ill dearticulated; yet having a
certain probable similitude with the Celestial images, or with that which the mind of the Operator desires,
whether that be from the whole image, or from certain markes thereof expressing the whole image. As the
Characters of Aries and Taurus we make thus from thwir horns . Of Gemini from imbracing
[embracing] . Of Cancer from a progress and regress , of Leo, Scorpio, and Capricorn, from their tail
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (7 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
, of Virgo, from Spike of Libra from a ballance [balance] of Sagittarius from a
dart , of Aquarius from Waters and of Pisces from Fishes . In like manner the Characters of Saturn
is made from a Sickle of Jupiter, from a Scepter . Of Mars from a bolt of the Sun
from roundness, and a golden brightness of Venus from a Lookinglass , of Mercury from a Wand
of the Moon from her horns of increasing and decreasing . Besides, of these, according to the
mixtions of Signs and Stars, and Natures, are made also mixed Characters, as of a fiery triplicity
or Earthly of Aiery of Watery also according to the
hundred and twentie conjunctions of Planets, result so many compound characters of various Figures; as of
Saturn and Jupiter, viz. thus, or thus or thus of Saturn and Mars, or thus
of Jupiter, and Mars or thus of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, or thus
. And as these are exemplified by two and three, so also of the rest, and of more may they be framed:
after the same manner may the Characters of other Celestial images ascending in any face or degree of signs,
be compendiously drawn after the likeness of the images, as in these which are made according to the way of
imitation of that which the minde of the Operator desires, as to love, the figures be mixed together imbracing
[embracing] and obeying one the other, but to hatred, on the contrary, turning away the one from the other;
contending, unequal, loosed. But now we will here set down those Characters which Hermes assigned to the
fixed stars, and Behenii, and they are these,
The head of Algol.
The Pleiades.
Aldaboram [Aldeboran].
The Goat Star. [Hircus]
The greater Dog-star. [Canis Major]
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (8 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
The lesser Dog-star. [Canis Minor]
[figure 110] The heart of the Lion. [Cor Leonis]
[figure 111] The Tail of the Bear.
[figure 112] The wing of the Crow.
[figure 113] Spica.
[figure 114] Alcameth. [Alchameth]
[figure 115] Elpheia.
[figure 116] The heart of the Scorpion.
[figure 117] The Vulture falling. [Vultur cadens, i.e. Lyra]
[figure 118] The tail of Capricorn.
Chap. liii. That no Divination without Astrology is perfect.
We have spoken in the foregoing Chapters of the divers kindes of Divinations: But this is to be noted that all
these require the use and rules of Astrology, as a key most necessary for the knowledge of all secrets; and
that all kinds of Divinations whatsoever have their root and foundation in Astrologie so, as that without it
they are of little or no use; yet Astrological Divination, in as much as the Celestials are causes and signs of
all those things which are, and are done in these inferiors, doth give most certain demonstrations by the
situation, and motion onely of Celestial bodies, of those things which are occult or future; of which we shall
in this place speak no further, since of this Science huge Volums have been wrote by the Ancients, and are
everywhere extant. Therefore whether the Physiognomists look upon the body, or countenance of forehead,
or hand, or the Soothsayer, searcheth by dreams or Auspicia, that the judgment may be right, the figure of
heaven is also to be enquired into. From the judgements whereof, together with conjectures of similitudes
and signs, are produced true opinions of the significators. Also if any prodigie shall appear, the Figure of the
heaven is to be erected; also such things are to be enquired after, which have gone before in the revolutions
of years from great conjunctions, and Eclipses: then also the Nativities, beginnings, intronizations,
foundations, and revolutions, perfections, directions of Princes, Nations, Kingdoms, Cities, when these shall
appear, and upon what place of the Celestial figure these fell; that by all these at length we may come to a
rational and probable signification of these things. After the same manner, but with less labour, we must
proceed in the Expofition of dreams. Moreover, they that being distempered foretell future things, do it not
but as they are instigated by the stars, or inferior instruments of these, whence their Predictions must at
length be imputed to the Celestials, as we read in Lucan the old Prophet Tuscus,
The Light'nings motion, and the veines which are
Fibrous, and warm, and motion of a fair
Plume wandring i'th aire, being taught -----
After the City was viewed, the Sacrifice slain, the inspection into the intrals did at length by the dispositions
of the Celestial stars pronounce judgement. Also Geornancy it self the most accurate of Divinations, which
divines by points of the earth, or any other superfices, or by a fall, or any other power inscribed, doth first
reduce them to Celestial figures, viz. to those sixteen which we above named, making judgement after an
Astrological manner, by the properties and observations thereof: and hither are referred all natural
Divinations by lots whatsoever, the power whereof can be from no where else then from the heaven, and
from the minde of them that work them. For whatsoever is moved, caused or produced in these inferiors,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (9 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
must of necessity imitate the motions, and influences of the superiours, to which, as to its roots, causes, and
signs it is reduced, the judgement whereof is shewed by Astrological Rules. Hence Dice, Tetracedron
[tetrahedron], Exacedron, Octocedron, Doderacedron [dodecahedron], Icocedron being made by certain
Numbers, Signs, and Stars at opportune times, under the influencies of the Celestials, and being inscribed,
obtain a wonderful vertue of Divining, and foretelling by their castings, such as those Dice Preneste had, in
which we read the Destinies of the Romans were contained.
Chap. liv. Of Lottery, when, and whence the vertue of Divining is
incident to it.
Whatsoever Divinations and Predictions of humane events are made by Lottery, must of necessity, besides
the lot, have some sublime occult cause; which indeed shall not be a cause by accident, such as Aristotle
describes Fortune to be. For in the series of Causes, seeing according to the Platonists, a cause by accident
can never be the prime and sufficient cause, we must look higher, and finde out a cause which may know and
intend the effect. Now this we must not place in corporeal Nature, but in immaterial, and incorporeal
substances which indeed administer the Lot, and dispence [dispense] the signification of the truth, as in mens
souls, or separated spirits, or in Celestial Intelligcnces, or in God himself. Now that there is in mans soul a
sufficient power and vertue to direct such kinde Of lots, it is hence manifest, because there is in our soul a
divine vertue, and similitude, and apprehension, and power of all things; And as we said in the first Book,
All things have a natural obedience to it, and of necessity have a motion and efficacy to that which the soul
desires with a strong desire; and all the vertues and operations of natural and artifical things, obey it when it
is carried forth into the excess of desire, and then all Lots of what kinde soever are assisting to the appetite of
such a minde, and acquire to themselves wonderful vertues of passages, as from that, so from the Celestial
opportunity in that hour in which the excess of such a like appetite doth most of all exeeed in it. And this is
that ground and foundation of all Astrological questions, wherefore the minde being elevated into the excess
of any desire, taketh of it self an hour and opportunity most convenient and efficacious, on which the Figure
of the heaven being made, the Astrologer may then judge in it, and plainly know concerning that which any
one desires, and is inquisitive to know. But now because Lots are not directed alwayes by mans minde, but
also, as we said before, by the help of other Spirits; nor is the minde of a Prophet alwayes disposed to that
excess of passion as we spoke of: hence amongst the Ancients, it was a Custome to premise before the
casting of the Lot, some sacred performances, in which they called upon divine Intelligencies and spirits for
to direct the Lot aright. Whatsoever kinde of presage therefore these kinde of Lots portend, must of necessity
not be by chance or fortune, but from a spiritual cause, by vertue whereof the Phantasie, or hand of him that
cast the Lot is moved, whether that power proceed from the soul of the Operator through the great excess of
his affection, or from a Celestial influence, and oppotunity, or from a certain Diety or spirit assisting, or
moving from on high, whether these Lots are placed in casting of Cockalls, or throwing of Dice, or in the
meeting of Verses, such as were formerly the Lot of Homer and Virgil, of which we read in Ælius of Sparta,
Hadrianus long since made enquiry, and which we read befell Trajanus the Emperour.
What's he far off grac'd with the Olive bough
Presenting offerings? how white chin we know,
A Roman King, whose laws first setled Rome,
And from small Curets a poor soyl [soil] shall come
To great command -----
Be which Verses he did not in vain become to have hopes of enjoying the Empire. Also amongst Hebrews,
and even amongst us Christians (some Divines not dispproving of it) Lots are taken out of Verses of Psalms.
There are also more, & other kindes of Lots, as are humane Lots, which had no Divination in them amongst
the Ancients, and are observed by as in choosing of Magistrates, to prevent envy, of which also Cicero
against Verres makes mention: but they are not of our purpose: But those which are divine, and sacred Lots,
respecting Oracles, and Religion, of which we shall discourse in the following Book: Onely thus far I would
advise you, that how much presaging, divining or Southsaying [soothsaying] soever Lots are found to have,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (10 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
they have them not as they are Lots, but by reason of a vertue of a higher operation joyned to them.
Chap. lv. Of the soul of the World, and of the Celestials, according to
the traditions of the Poets, and Philosophers.
It is necessity that the heaven and Celestial bodies, seeing they have a power, influence, and manifest
operation upon these inferiors, should be animated: seeing an operition cannot proceed from a meer body.
All famous Poets, and Philosophers affirm therefore that the world and all Celestiall bodies must have a soul,
and that also intelligent: Hence Marcus Mavillius in his Astronomy to Augustus, sings,
The great Corporeall world, which doth appear
In divers forms, of Aire, Earth, Sea, and Fire,
A divine soul doth rule, a Diety
Doth wisely govern -----
Also Lucan,
The Earth that's weigh'd i'th aire, 's sustained
By great Jove -----
And Boetius
Thou dost joyn to the worl a soul, that moves
All things of threefold nature, and diffuse
It through the members of the same, and this
Into two Orbs of motion rounded is
Being divided, and for to return
Into it self makes haste -----
And Virgil most full of all Philosophy, sings thus,
And first the Heaven, Earth, and liquid plain,
The Moons bright Globe, and Stars Titanian
A spirit fed within, spread through the whole
And with the huge heap mix'd infused a soul;
Hence man, and beastsm and birds derive their strain,
And monsters floating in the marbled main;
These seeds have fiery vigor, and a birth
Of heavenly race, but clog'd with heavy earth.
For what do these verses seem to mean, then that the world should not only have a spirit soul, but also to
partake of the divine mind: and that the originall, vertue, and vigour of all inferiour things do depend on the
soul of the world? This do all Platonists, Pythagorians, Orpheus, Trismegistus, Aristotle, Theophrastus,
Avicen, Algazeles, and all Peripateticks confess, and confirm.
Chap. lvi. The same is confirmed by reason.
The world, the heavens, the Stars, and the Elements have a soul, with which they cause a soul in these
inferior and mixed bodies. They have also as we said in the former book, a spirit, which by the mediating of
the soul is united to the body: For as the world is a certain whole body, the parts whereof are the bodies of all
living creatures, and by how much the whole is more perfect and noble then the parts, by so much more
perfect, and noble is the body of the world then the bodies of each living thing. It would be absurd, that all
imperfect bodies and parts of the world, and every base Animal, as Flies, and Worms should be worthy of a
life, and have a life and soul, and the whole entire world a most perfect, whole, and most noble body, should
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (11 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
have neither life, nor soul; It is no less absurd, that Heavens, Stars, Elements, which give to all things life,
and soul most largely, should themselves be without life, and soul; and that every plant, or tree should be of
a more noble condition then the Heaven, Stars, and Elements, which are naturally the cause of them; And
what living man can deny that earth, and water live, which of themselves, generate, vivifie, nourish, and
increase innumerable trees, plants, and living creatures? as most manifestly appears in things that breed of
their own accord, and in those which have no corporeall seed. Neither could Elements generate and nourish
such kind of living creatures, if they themselves were without life or soul. But some haply may say, that such
kind of living creatures are not generated by the soul of the earth, or water, but by the influencies of
Celestiall souls; These the Platonists answer, that an Accident cannot beget a substance, unless haply as an
instrument it be subjected to the next substance, because an instrument removed from an artificer is not
moved to the effect of the art; so also those Celestiall influencies, seeing they are certain accidents being
removed far from vital substances, or from the life it self, cannot generate a vital substance in these inferiors.
And Mercurius in his book which he cals De Communi, saith, All that is in the world is moved either by
increase, or decrease. Now what moves, must needs have life; and seeing that all things move, even the earth,
especially with a generative and alterative motion, they must themselves live. And if any doubt that the
heavens live, saith Theophrastus, he is not to be accounted a Philosopher; and he which denyes the heaven to
be animated, so that the mover thereof is not the form thereof, destroyes the foundation of all Philosophy;
The World therefore lives, hath a soul, and sense; for it gives life to plants, which are not produced of seed;
and it gives sense to Animals, which are not generated by coition.
Chap. lvii. That the soul of the world, and the Celestiall souls are
rationall, and partake of Divine understanding.
That the above named souls have reason, is apparent hence; For whereas the universall works of the foresaid
souls do with a certain perpetuall order conspire amongst themselves, it is necessary that they be governed
not by chance but by reason; by which reason they do direct, & bring all their operations to a certainty. For it
is necessary that the earth should have the reason of terrene things, and water of watery things; and so in the
rest; by which reason each in their time, place, and order are generated, and being hurt are repaired.
Therefore Philosophers do not think the soul of the earth to be at it were the soul of some contemptible body,
but to be rationall and also intelligent, yea and to be a diety. Besides it would be absurd, seeing we have
reasons of our works, that Celestiall souls, and the soul of the universe should not have reasons of theirs. But
if (as saith Plato) the world be made by very goodness it self, as well as it could be made, it is certainly
endowed with not only life, sense, and reason, but also understanding. For the perfection of a body is its soul,
and that body is more perfect which hath a more perfect soul; It is necessary therefore, seeing Celestiall
bodies are more perfect, that they have also most perfect minds. They partake therefore of an intellect and a
minde; which the Platonists also prove by the perseverance of their order, and tenor, because motion is of its
nature free, it may easily swarve, and wander now one way, now another, unless it were ruled by an intellect
and a mind, and that also by a perfect mind foreseeing from the beginning the best way, and chief end.
Which perfect mind indeed, becaue it is most powerfull in the soul, as is the soul, and as are the souls of
Celestiall bodies, and of Elements, without all doubt doth most orderly, and perfectly govern the work
allotted to it. For bodies do not resist a most powerfull soul, and a perfect mind doth not change its counsel.
The soul of the world therefore is a certain only thing, filling all things, bestowing all things, binding, and
knitting together all things, that it might make one frame of the world, and that it might be as it were one
instrument making of many strings, but one sound, sounding from three kinds of creatures, intellectall,
Celestiall, and incorruptible, with one only breath and life.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (12 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
Chap. lviii. Of the names of the Celestials, and their rule over this
inferiour world, viz. Man.
The names of Celestiall souls are very many, and diverse according to their manifold power and vertue upon
these inferior things, from whence they have received divers names, which the ancients in their hymnes and
prayer made use of. Concerning which you must observe, that every one of these souls according to
Orpheus's Divinity, is said to have a double vertue; the one placed in knowing, the other in vivifying, and
governing its body. Upon this account in the Celestiall spheres, Orpheus cals the former vertue Bacchus, the
other a Muse. Hence he is not inebriated by any Bacchus, who hath not first been coupled to his Muse.
Therefore nine Bacchus's are designed about the nine Muses. Hence in the ninth sphere Orpheus puts
Bacchus Cribonius, and the Muse Calliope; in the starry heaven Picionius, and Urania; in the sphere of
Saturn, Amphietus, and Polyphymnia; in the sphere of Jupiter, Sabasius, and Terpsichore; in the sphere of
Mars, Bassarius, and Clio; in the sphere of the Sun, Trietericus, and Melpemene, in the sphere of Venus,
Lysius, and Erato; in the sphere of Mercury, Silenus, and Euterpe; in the sphere of the Moon, Bacchus,
Lyeus, and the Muse Thalia. Also in the spheres of the Elements, he names the souls after this manner. In the
fire he puts the planet, and the morning; in the air lightening [lightning] Jupiter, and Juno; in water the
Ocean, and Thetys; in the earth Pluto, and Proserpina; but the soul of the world or universe Magicians call
the Jupiter of the world, and the mind of the world Apollo, and the nature of the world, Minerva. Besides in
the fire they put Vulcan, in the water Neptune, and they did name them by divers names. Also in the Stars of
the Zodiack the Pythagorians did put twelve particular Gods or souls placed in the hearts of those Stars, and
thence governing the whole Star, viz. in the heart of Aries is placed a particular Pallas, in the heart of Taurus
a particular Venus, of Gemini a particular Phebus, of Cancer Mercury, of Leo Jupiter, of Virgi Ceres, of
Libra Vulcan, of Scorpio Mars, of Sagittarius Diana, of Capricorn Vesta, of Aquarius a particular Juno, in
the heart of Pisces a particular Neptune: This did Manilius sing forth in these verses.
Pallas doth rule the Ram, Venus the Bull,
Phebus the Twins, and Mercury doth rule
The Cancer, and the Lyon [The Lion, i.e. Leo] guides doth Jove,
Ceres doth Virgo, Vulcan Libra move.
For Scorpion Mars; for Sagittarius faire
Diana cares; for Capricorn doth care
Vesta; Aquarius Juno doth protect;
And Neptune Pisces -----
And most ancient Orpheus writing to Muscus, reckons up more Dieties of the heavens then these, signifying
their names, respects, and duties, calling them all in proper songs. Let no one therefore think that they are the
names of evill deceiving spirits; but of naturall, and divine vertues, distributed to the world by the true God,
for the service, and profit of man, who knew how to use them: and antiquity it self hath ascribed to each of
these Dieties the severall members of man; as the ear to memory, which Virgil also dedicates to Phebus,
saying, Cynthius puls my ear, and admonisheth me. So the right hand being a token of fortitude, & by which
an oath is made, Numa Pompilius, as saith Livy, hath dedicated to faith: The fingers are under the tuition of
Minerva, and the knees given to Mercifullness; Hence they that beg pardon bend them. Some dedicate the
Navell to Venus as the place of luxury; some who refer all the members to it as the center, say it is dedicated
to Jupiter Hence in the Temple of Jupiter Hammon the effigies of a navel is celebrated. Many other things
the ancients did observe, ascribing every little member and joynt to their Dieties, which if they be rightly
understood, and the true Dieties ruling over them known, would not at all swerve from their duty, seeing also
sacred writ testifies that all our members are governed by the superior vertues, of which we shall speak more
largely in the following book; and not members only, but every exercise of men is distributed to its Dietie
[diety], as huntings to Diana, wars to Pallas, husbandry to Ceres, of which thus speaks Apollo in his Oracles
in Porphyrie [Porphyry].
Pallas loves wars, woods to Diana fair
Ascribed are, to Juno humid Aire,
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (13 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
To Ceres Corn, and fruits; to Oryris [Osiris]
The water, also humors waterish.
Chap. lix. Of the seven governers of the world, the Planets, and of their
various names serving to Magicall speeches.
Moreover they did call those governors of the world, (as Hermes calls them) Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun,
Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, by many names, and epithites; viz. calling Saturn Coelius, sithe-bearer
[scythe-bearer], the father of the Gods, the Lord of the time, the high Lord, the great, the wise, the intelligent,
ingenious revolutor, of a long space, an old man of great profundity, the author of secret contemplation,
impressing, or depressing great thoughts in the hearts of men, destroying and preserving all things,
overturning force and power, and constituting, a keeper of secret things, and a shewer of them, causing the
loss, and finding of the author of life and death. So Jupiter is called as it were a helping Father, the King of
heaven, Magnanimous, thundering, lightning, unconquered, high and mighty, great and mighty, good,
fortunate, sweet, mild, of good will, honest, pure, walking well, and in honour, the Lord of joy and of
judgements, wise, true, the shewer of truth, the judge of all things, excelling all in goodness, the Lord of
riches, and wisdome. Mars is called Mavors, powerfull in war, bloody, powerfull in arms, a sword-bearer,
magnanimous, bold, untamed, generous, lightning, of great power and furious hast [haste], against whom
none can defend himself if he resist him, who destroyes the strong, and powerfull, and deposeth Kings from
their thrones, the Lord of heat and power, the Lord of fiery heat, and of the planet of blood; who inflames the
hearts of contenders, and gives them boldness. The Sun is called Phæbus, Diespiter, Apollo, Titan, Pean
Phanes, Horus, Osiris, as it is in that Oracle,
The Sun, Osyris [Osiris], Dionysus gay,
Apollo, Horus, King ruling the day
Who changeth times, who giveth winds and rain,
The King of Stars, and the immortall flame.
He is called also Arcitenens, burning fiery, golden flaming, radiating, of a fiery hair, of a golden hair, the eye
of the world, Lucifer, seeing all things, ruling all things, the creator of light, the King of Stars, the great Lord,
good, fortunate, honest, pure, prudent, intelligent, wise, shining over the whole world, governing, and
vivifying all bodies that have a soul, the prince of the world keeping all the Stars under himself, the light of
all the Stars, darkening, burning, overcoming their vertue by his approach, yet by his light and splendor
giving light and splendor to all things: in the night he is called Dionysius, but in the day Apollo, as if driving
away evill things. Therefore the Athenians called him Alexicacon, and Homer Vlion, i.e. the driver away of
evil things. He is also called Phæbus from his beauty and brightness, and Vulcan from his fiery violence,
because the force thereof consists of many fires. He is also called the Sun, because he contains the light of all
the Stars: hence he is called by the Assyrians êàãà Adad, which signifies only, and by the Hebrews ùîù
Schemesch, which signifies proper. Venus is called the Lady, nourishing, beautifull, white, fair, pleasing,
powerfull, the fruitfull Lady of love and beauty, the progeny of Ages, the first parent of men, who in the
beginning of all things joyned diversity of sexes together with a growing love, and with an eternall off-spring
propagates kinds of men and Animals, the queen of all delights, the Lady of rejoycing, friendly, sociable,
pittifull, taking all things in good part, alwaies bountifull to mortals, affording the tender affection of a
mother to the conditions of them in misery, the safegard of mankind, letting no moment of time pass without
doing good, overcoming all things by her power, humbling the high to the low, the strong to the weak, the
noble to the vile, rectifying, and equalling all things: and she is called Aphrodite, because in every sexe, she
is found to be of every mind: and she is called Lucifera, i.e. bringing light, bringing the yeers of the Sun to
light; and she is called Hesperus, when she follows the Sun, and Phosperus, because she leads through all
things though never so hard. Mercury is called the son of Jupiter, the cryer of the gods, the interpreter of
gods, Stilbon, the Serpent-bearer, the rod-bearer, winged on his feet, eloquent, bringer of gain, wise, rationall
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (14 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
robust, stout, powerfull in good and evil, the notary of the Sun, the messenger of Jupiter, the messenger
betwixt the supernall and infernall gods, male with males, female with females, most fruitfull in both sexes;
and Lucan cals him the Arbitrator of the gods. He is also called Hermes i.e. interpreter, bringing to light all
obscurity, and opening those things which are most secret. The Moon is called Phebe, Diana, Lucina,
Proserpina, Hecate, Menstruous, of a half form, giving light in the night, wandring silent, having two horns,
a preserver, a night-walker, horn-bearer, the queen of heaven, the chiefest of the Deities, the first of the
heavenly gods and goddesses, the queen of spirits, the mistris [mistress] of all the Elements, whom the stars
answer, seasons return, Elements serve; at whose nod lightnings breath forth, seeds bud, plants increase, the
initiall parent of fruit, the sister of Phæbus, light, and shining, carrying light from one planet to another,
enlightening all powers by its light, restraining the various passings of the Stars, dispensing various lights by
the circuits of the Sun, the Lady of great beauty, the mistris of rain and waters, the giver of riches, the nurse
of mankind, the governor of all States, kind, mercifull, protecting men by Sea and land, mitigating all
tempests of fortune, dispensing with fate, nourishing all things growing on the earth, wandering into divers
woods, restraining the rage of Goblins, shutting the openings of the earth, dispensing the light of the Heaven,
the wholsome rivers of the Sea, and the deplored silence of the infernals, by its nods; ruling the world,
treading hell under her feet; of whose majesty the birds hasting in the Aire are affraid, the wild beasts
straggling in the mountains, Serpents lying hid in the ground, fishes swiming in the Sea; But of these and the
like names of Stars and planets, and their Epithites [epithets], Sirnames [surnames], and callings upon, he
that will know more, and make more curious enquiry, must betake himself to the hymnes of Orpheus, which
he that truely understands, hath attained to a great understanding of naturall Magick.
Chap. lx. That humane imprecations do naturally impress their powers
upon externall things; And how mans mind through each degree of
dependencies ascends into the intelligible world, and becomes like to
the more sublime spirits, and Intelligencies.
The Celestiall souls send forth their vertues to the Celestial bodies, which then transmit them to this sensible
world. For the vertues of the terrene orb proceed from no other cause then Celestiall. Hence the Magician
that will worke by them, useth a cunning invocation of the superiors, with mysterious words, and a certain
kind of ingenious speech, drawing the one to the other, yet by a naturall force through a certain mutuall
agreement betwixt them, whereby things follow of their own accord, or sometimes are drawn unwillingly.
Hence saith Aristotle in the sixth book of his Mysticall Philosophy, that when any one by binding or
bewitching doth call upon the Sun or other stars, praying them to be helpfull to the work desired, the Sun and
other Stars do not heare his words, but are moved after a certain manner by a certain conjunction, and
mutuall series, whereby the parts of the world are mutually subordinate the one to the other, and have a
mutuall consent, by reason of their great union: As in mans body one member is moved by perceiving the
motion of another, and in a harp one string is moved at the motion of another. So when any one moves any
part of the world; other parts are moved by the perceiving the motion of that. The knowledge therefore of the
dependency of things following one the other, is the foundation of all wonderfull operation, which is
necessarily required to the exercising the power of attracting superior vertues. Now the words of men are
certain naturall things, and because the parts of the world mutually draw one the other, therefore a Magician
invocating by words, works by powers fitted to nature, by leading some by the love of one to the other, or
drawing others by reason of the following of one after the other, or by repelling by reason of the enmity of
one to the other, from the contrariety, and difference of things, and multitude of vertues; which although they
are contrary, and different, yet perfect one part; sometimes also he compels things by way of authority, by
the Celestiall vertue, because he is not a stranger to the heaven. A man therefore, if he receives the
impression of any ligation, or fascination, doth not receive it according to the rationall soul, but sensuall, and
if he suffers in any part, suffers according to the Animall part. For they cannot draw a knowing and
intelligent man by reason, but by receiving that impression and force by sense, in as much as the Animal
spirit of man is by the influence of the Celestials, and cooperation of the things of the world, affected beyond
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (15 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
his former and naturall disposition. As the son moves the father to labor, although unwilling, for to keep and
maintain him, although he be wearied; and the desire to rule is moved to anger and other labors, for to get the
dominion. And the indigency of nature, and fear of poverty, moves a man to desire riches. And the
ornaments, and beauty of women is an incitement to concupiscence. And the harmony of a wise Musitian
[musician] moves his hearers with various passions, whereof some do voluntary follow the consonancy of
art, others conform themselves by gesture, although unwillingly, because their sense is captivated, their
reason not being intent to these things. But these kinds of fascinations & ligations the vulgar doth neither
admire, nor detest, by reason of their usualness: but they admire other naturall things, becaue they are
ignorant of them, and are not accustomed to them. Hence they fall into errors, thinking those things to be
above nature, or contrary to nature, which indeed are by nature, and according to nature. We must know
therefore that every superior moves its next inferior, in its degree, and order, not only in bodies, but also in
spirits. So the universall soul moves the particular soul; and the rational acts upon the sensual, and that upon
the vegetable; and every part of the world acts upon another, and every part is apt to be moved by another;
and every part of this inferior world suffers from the heavens according to their nature, and aptitude, as one
part of the Animall body suffers from another. And the superior intellectuall world moves all things below it
self, and after a manner contains all the same beings from the first to the last, which are in the inferior world.
Celestiall bodyes therefore move the body of the elementary world, compounded, generable, sensible, from
the circumference to the center, by superior, perpetual, and spirituall essences, depending on the primary
intellect, which is the acting intellect; but upon the vertue put in by the word of God, which word the wise
Chaldeans of Babylon call the cause of causes, because from it are produced all beings, the acting intellect
which is the second from it depends; and that by reason of the union of this word with the first author, from
whom all things being are truely produced; The word therefore is the Image of God, the acting intellect the
image of the word, the soul is the image of this intellect; and our word is the image of the soul, by which it
acts upon naturall things naturally, because nature is the work thereof. And every one of those perfects his
subsequent, as a father his son, and none of the latter exists without the former. For they are depending
amongst themselves, by a kind of ordinate dependency, so that when the latter is corrupted, it is returned into
that which was next before it, untill it come to the heavens, then unto the universall soul, and lastly unto the
acting intellect, by which all other creatures exist, and which it self exists in the principall author, which is
the creating word of God, to which at length all things are returned. Our soul therefore, if it will work any
wonderfull thing in these inferiors, must have respect to their beginning, that it may be strengthened, and
illustrated by that, and receive power of acting through each degree from the very first author. Therefore we
must be more diligent in contemplating the souls of the Stars then their bodies, and the supercelestiall, and
intellectuall world, then the Celestial corporeall, because that is more noble, although this be excellent, and
the way to that; and without which medium the influence of the superiour cannot be attained to. As for
example, the Sun is the King of Stars, most full of light, but receives it from the intelligible world above all
other Stars, because the soul thereof is more capable of intelligible splendor. Wherefore he that desires to
attract the influence of the Sun, must contemplate upon the Sun, not only by the speculation of the exterior
light, but also of the interior. And this no man can do unless he return to the soul of the Sun, and become like
to it, and comprehend the intelligible light thereof with an intellectuall sight, as the sensible light with a
corporeal eye. For this man shalbe filled with the light thereof; and the light thereof which is an under type
impressed by the supernal Orb it receives into it self, with the illustration whereof his intellect being
endowed, & truely like to it, & being assisted by it shall at length attain to that supreme brightness, and to all
forms that partake thereof. And when he hath received the light of the supreme degree, then his soul shall
come to perfection, and be made like to the spirits of the Sun, and shhall attain to the vertues, and
illustrations of the supernaturall vertue, and shall enjoy the power of them, if he hath obtained faith in the
first author. In the first place therefore we must implore assistance from the first author, and praying not only
with mouth but a Religious gesture and supplicant soul, also abundantly, uncessantly, and sincerely, that he
would enlighten our mind, and remove darkness growing upon our souls by reason of our bodies.
Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa: Occult Philosophy. Book II. (Part 4, excerpts)
file:///M|/ PDF-Bücher/Esoterik & Magie/HTML/Agrippa2/agripp2d.htm (16 von 17) [20.02.2001 16:12:24]
The third and last Book of Magick,
or Occult Philosophy; written by
Henry Cornelius Agrippa.
Book III.
Chapter i. Of the necessity, power, and profit of Religion.
Ow it is time to turn our pen to higher matters, and to that part of Magick which teacheth
us to know and perfectly understand the rules of Religion, and how we ought to obtain
the truth by Divine Religion, and how rightly to prepare our mind and spirit, by which
only we can comprehend the truth; for it is a common opinion of the Magicians, that
unless the mind and spirit be in good case, the body cannot be in good health: But then a
man to be truly sound when body and soul are so coupled, and agree together, that the
firmness of the mind and spirit be not inferior to the powers of the body; But a firm and
stout mind (saith Hermes) can we not otherwise obtain, than by integrity of life, by piety,
and last of all, by Divine Religion: for holy Religion purgeth the mind, and maketh it
Divine, it helpeth nature, and strengtheneth naturall powers, as a Physitian [physician]
helpeth the health of the body, and a Husbandman the strength of the earth. Whosoever
therefore, Religion being laid aside, do consider only in naturall things, are wont very oft
to be deceived by evill spirits; but from the knowledge of Religion, the contempt and cure
of vices ariseth, and a safeguard against evil spirits; To conclude, nothing is more
pleasant and acceptable to God than a man perfectly pious, and truly Religious, who so
far excelleth other men, as he himself is distant from the Immortall gods. Therefore we
ought, being first purged, to offer and commend our selves to divine piety and Religion;
and then our senses being asleep, with a quiet mind to expect that Divine Ambrosian
Nectar (Nectar I say, which Zachary the prophet calleth Wine making maids merry)
praising and adoring that supercelestiiall Bacchus, the chiefest ruler of the gods and
priests, the author of regeneration, whom the old poets sang was twice born, from whom
rivers most Divine flow into our hearts.
Chapter ii. Of concealing of those things which are secret in Religion.
Whosoever therefore thou art that now desireth to study thisd science, keep silence and
constantly conceal within the secret closets of your Religious breast, so holy a
determination; for (as Mercury saith) to publish to the knowledge of many a speech
throughly filled with so great majesty of the Deity, is a sign of an irreligious spirit; and
Divine Plato commanded, that holy and secret mysteries should not be divulged to the
people; Pythagoras also and Porphyrius consecrated their followers to a Religious
silence; Orpheus also, which a certain terrible authority of Religion did exact an oath of
silence, and from those he did initiate to the Ceremonies of holy things: Whence in the
verses concerning the holy word he sings,
You, that Admirers are of vertue, stay,
Consider well what I to you shall say.
But you, that sacred laws contemn, prophane?
Away from hence, return no more again.
But thou O Museus whose mind is high,
Observe my words, and read them with thine eye,
And them within thy sacred breast repone,
And in thy journey, think of God alone
The Author of all things, that cannot dye,
Of whom we shall not treate ---
So in Virgil we read of the Sybill
The goddess comes, hence, hence, all ye prophane,
The Prophet cries, and from her grove refrain.
Hence also in celebrating the holy mysteries of Ceres Eleusine, they only were admitted
to be initiated, the cryer proclaiming the prophane vulgar to depart; and in Esdras we
read this precept concerning the Cabalisticall secret of the Hebrews, declared in these
verses, Thou shalt deliver those books to the wise men of the people, whose hearts thou
knowest can comprehend them, and keep those secrets. Therefore the Religious volumes
of the Egyptians & those belonging to the secrets of their ceremonies, were made of
consecrated paper; in these they did write down leters [letters] which might not easily be
known, which they call holy. Macrobius Marcellinus and others say, they were called
Hieroglyphics, least perchance the writings of this kind should be known to the prophane,
which also Apuleius testifies in these words, saying, The sacrifice being ended, from a
secret retyred closet he bringeth forth certain books noted with obscure letters, affording
compendious words of the conceived speech, partly by the figures of beasts of this kind,
partly by figures full of knots, and crooked in the manner of a wheel & set thick, twining
about like vine tendrels, the reading thereby being defended from the curiosity of the
prophane; Therefore we shall be worthy scholars of this science, if we be silent and hide
those things which are secret in religion, for the promise of silence (as saith Tertullian) is
due to Religion; but they which do otherwise are in very great danger, whence Apuleius
saith concerning secrets of holy Writs; I would tell it you, if it were lawfull to tell it; you
should know it; if it were lawfull to hear it; but both ears and tongue would contract the
same guilt of rash curiosity. So we read Theodorus the tragick poet, when he would have
referred somethings of the mysteries of the Jews Scripture to a certain fable, was
deprived of sight. Theopompus also who began to translate somethings out of the Divine
law into the Greek tongue, was presently troubled in mind and spirit, whence afterward
earnestly desiring God, wherefore this had happened to him, received an answer in a
dream, because he had basely polluted Divine things, by setting them forth in publike
[public]. One Numenius also being very curious of hidden things, incurred the displeasure
of the Divine powers, because he interpreted the holy mysteries of the goddesse Eleusina
and published them for he dreamed that the goddesses of Eleusis stood in a whores habit
before the Brothell house, which when he wondred at, they wrathfully answered, that
they were by him violently drawn from their modestly and prostituted everywhere to all
commers, by which he was admonished, that the Ceremonies of the gods ought not to be
divulged. Therefore it hath alwaies been the great care of the Ancients to wrap up the
mysteries of God and nature, and hide them with diverse Aenigmaes [enigmas], which
law the Indians, Brachmans [Brahmans], Æthiopians, Persians, and Egyptians also
observed; hence Mercurius, Orpheus, and all the ancient Poets and Philosophers,
Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato Aristoxenus, Ammonius, kept them inviolably. Hence
Plotinus and Origenes and the other disciples of Ammonius (as Porphyry relates in his
book of the education and Discipline of Plotinus) sware, never to set forth the Decrees of
their master. And because Plotinus, brake his oath made to Ammonius, and published his
mysteries, for the punishment of his transgression, he was consumed (as they say) by the
Horrible disease of Lice. Crist also himself, while he lived on earth, spoke after that
manner and fashion that only the more intimate disciples should understand the mystery
of the word of God, but the other should perceive the parables only: commanding
moreover that holy things should not be given to Dogs, nor pearles cast to Swine:
Therefore the Prophet saith, I have hid thy words in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. Therefore it is not fit that those secrets which are amongst a few wise men, and
communicated by mouth only, should be publikly written. Wherefor you will pardon me,
If I pass over in silence many and the chiefest secret mysteries of Ceremonial Magick. I
suppose I shal do enough, if I open those things which are necessary to be known, and
you by the reading of this book go not away altogether empty of these mysteries; but on
that condition let these things be communicated to you, on which Dionysius bound
Timothy, that they which perceive these Secrets, would not expose them to the unworthy,
but gather them together amongst wise men, and keep them with that reverence that is
due to them. Furthermore I would also warne you in the beginning, that even as the
divine powers detest publike things and profane, and love secrecy: So every Magical
experiment fleeth the publike, seeks to be hid, is strengthened by silence, but is destroyed
by publicationm neither doth any compleate effect follow after; all these things suffer
losse, when they are poured into prating and incredulous minds; therefore it behoveth a
Magicall operator, if he would get fruit from this art, to be secret, and to manifest to
none, neither his work nor place, not time, neither his desire nor will, unless either to a
master, or partner, or companion, who also ought to be faithfull, believing, silent, and
dignified by nature and education: Seeing that even the prating of a companion, his
incredulity and unworthiness hindreth and disturbeth the effect in every operation.
Chapter iii. What dignification is required, that one may be a true
Magician and a worker of miracles.
About the beginning of the first book of this work, we have spoken what manner of
person a Magician ought to be; but now we will declare a msyticall and secret matter,
necessary for every one who desireth to practize [practise] this art, which is both the
beginning, perfection and key of all Magicall operations, and it is the dignifying of men
to this so sublime vertue and power; for this faculty requireth in man a wonderfull
dignification, for that the understanding which is in us the highest faculty of the soul, is
the only worker of wonders, which when it is overwhelmed by too much commerce with
the flesh, and busied about the sensible soul of the body, is not worthy of the command of
Divine substances; therefore many prosecute this art in vain; Therefore it is meet that we
who endeavor to attain to so great a height should especially meditate of two things; first
how we should leave carnall affections, fraile sense, and materiall passions. Secondly, by
what way and means we may ascend to an intellect pure & conjoyned with the powers of
the gods, without which we shall never happily ascend to the scrutiny of secret things,
and to the power of wonderfull workings, or miracles; for in these dignification consists
wholly, which, nature, desert, and a certain religious art do make up; naturall dignity is
the best disposition of the body and its Organs, not obscuring the soul with any grossness,
and being without al distemper, and this proceedeth from the situation, motion, light, and
influence of the Celestiall bodies and spirits which are conversant in the generation of
every one, as are those whose ninth house is fortunate by Saturn, Sol, and Mercury; Mars
also in the ninth house commandeth the spirits; but concerning these things we have
largely treated in the books of the Stars: But who so is not such a one, it is necessary that
he recompense the defecr of nature by education, and the best ordering and prosperous
use of natural things untill he become commpleat in all intrinsecall and extrinsecall
perfections. Hence so great care is taken in the law of Moses concerning the priest, that
he be not polluted by a dead carcase or by a woman a widow, or menstruous, that he be
free from leprosie, flux of blood, burstness, and be perfect in all his members, not blind,
nor lame, nor crook-backed, or with an illfavored nose. And Apuleius saith in his
Apology, that the youth to be initiated to divination by magick spels [magic spells], ought
to be chosen, sound without sickness, ingenious, comely, perfect in his members, of a
quick spirit, eloquent in speech, that in him the divine power might be conversant as in
the good houses; That the mind of the youth having quickly attained experience, may be
restored to its divinity. But the meritorious dignity is perfected by two things; namely
learning and practice. The end of learning is to know the truth; it is meet therefore, as is
spoken in the beginning of the first book, that he be learned and skilful in those three
faculties; then all impediments being removed, wholly to apply his soul to contemplation
& to convert it self into it self; for there is even in our own selves the apprehension and
power of all things; but we are prohibited, so as that we little enjoy these things, by
passions opposing us even from our birth, and vain imaginations and immoderate
affections, which being expelled, the divine knowledge and power presently takes place;
but the Religious operation obtains no ness efficacy which ofttimes of it self alone is
sufficiently powerfull for us to obtain this deifying vertue, so great is the vertue of holy
duties rightly exhibited and performed, that though they be not understood, yet piously
and perfectly observed, and with a firm faith believed, they have no less efficacy then to
adorn us with a divine power; But what dignity is acquired by the art of Religion, is
perfected by certain Religious Ceremonies, expiations, consecrations, and holy rites,
proceeding from him whose spirit the publike Religion hath consecrated, who hath power
of imposition of hands, and of initiating with Sacramentall poer, by which the Character
of the divine vertue and power os stampt on us which they call the divine consent, by
which a man supported with the divine nature, and made as it were a companion of the
Angels beareth the ingrafted power of God; & this rite is referred to the Ecclesiastical
mysteries: If therefore now thou shalt be a man perfect in the sacred understanding of
Religion, and piously and most constantly meditatest on it, and without doubting
believest, and art such an one on whom the authority of holy rites and nature hath
conferred dignity above others, amd one, whom the divine powers contemn not, thou
shalt be able by praying, consecrating, sacrificeing, invocating, to attract spiritual and
Celestial powers, and to imprint them on those things thou pleasest, and by it to vivifie
every magicall work; But whosoever beyond the authority of his office, without the merit
of Sanctity and Learning, beyond the dignity of nature and education, shall presume to
work any thing in Magick, shall work in vain, and deceive both himself and those that
believe on him, and with danger incur the displeasure of the Divine powers.
Chapter iv. Of the two helps of Ceremoniall Magick, Religion and
Superstition.
There are two things, which rule every operation of Ceremoniall Magick, namely
Religion and Superstition. This Religion is a continuall contemplation of Divine things,
and by good works an uniting one self with God and the Divine powers, by which in a
reverent family, a service, and a sanctification of worship worthy of them is performed,
and also the Ceremonies of Divine worship are rightly exercised; Religion therefore is a
certain discipline of externall holy things and Ceremonies by the which as it were by
certain signs we are admonished of internall and spirituall things, which is so deeply
implanted in us by nature, that we more differ from other creatures by this then
Rationality; whosoever therefore neglects Religion (as we have spoken before) and
confides only in the strength of naturall things, are very often deceived by the evil spirits;
therefore they who are more religiously and holily instructed, neither set a tree nor plant
their vinyard, nor undertake any mean work without divine invocation, as the Doctor of
the Nations commands the Colossians, saying, whatsoever you shall do in word or deed,
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ giving thanks to him, and to God the Father by
him. Therefore to superadde the powers of Religion to Physical and Mathematicall
vertues is so far from a fault, that not to joyn them, is an hainous sin. Hence in libro
senatorum saith Rabbi Hemina, he that enjoyeth any of the creatures without Divine
benediction, is supposed both by God and the Church to have used it as taken by theft and
robbery, of whom it is written by Salomon [Solomon], he that takes away any things
violently from father and mother, is a destroyer; But God is our father, and the Church
our mother, as it is written, Is not he thy father who possesseth thee? and elsewhere, Hear
my son the discipline of thy father, and despise not the law of thy mother; nothing more
displeaseth God, then to be neglected and contemned; nothing pleaseth him more, then to
be renowned and adored. Hence he hath permitted no creature of the world to be without
Religion. All do worship God, play (as Proclus saith) frame hymnes [hymns] to the
leaders of their order; but some things truly after a naturall, others after a sensible, othere
a rationall, others an intellectuall manner, and all things in their manner, according to the
song of the three children, bless the Lord: But the rites and Ceremonies of Religion, in
respect of the diversity of times and places, are diverse. Every Religion hath something of
good, because it is directed to God his creator; and although God allows the Christian
Religion only, yet other worships which are undertaken for his sake, he doth not
altogether reject, and leaveth them not unrewarded, if not with an eternal, yet with a
temporal reward, or at least doth punish them less; but he hateth, thundreth against and
utterly destroys prophane persons and altogether irreligious as his enemies; for their
impoety is greater then he others who follow a false and erroneous Religion: For there is
no Religion (saith Lactantius so erroneous, which hath not somewhat of wisdom in it, by
which they may obtain pardon, who have kept the chiefest duty of man, if not indeed, yet
in intention: But no man can of himself attain to the true Religion, unless he be taught it
of God. All worship therefore, which is different from the true Religion, is superstition;
In like manner also that which giveth Divine worship, either to whom it ought not, or in
that manner which it ought not. Therefore we must especially take heed least at any time,
by some perverse worship of superstition, we be envious to the Almighty God, and to the
holy powers under him; for this would be not only wicked, but an act most unworthy of
Philosophers; superstition therefore altogether it be far different from the true Religion,
yet it is not all and wholly rejected, because in many things it is even tolerated, and
observed by the chief rulers of Religion; But I call that superstition especially, which is a
certain resemblance of Religion, which for as much as it imitates whatsoever is in
Religion, as miracles, Sacraments, rites, observations and such like, from whence it gets
no small power, and also obtains no less strength by the credulity of the operator; for how
much a constant credulity can do, we have spoken in the first book, and is manifestly
known to the vulgar. Therefore superstition requireth credulity, as Religion faith, seeing
constant credulity can do so great things, as even to work miracles in opinions and false
operations; whosoever therefore in his Religion, though false, yet beleeveth most strongly
that it is true, and elevates his spirit by reason of this his credulity, untill it be assimilated
to those spirits who are the chief leaders of that Religion, may work those things which
nature and reason discern not; but incredulity and diffidence doth weaken every work not
only in superstition, but also in true Religion, and enervates the desired effect even of the
most strong experiments. But how superstition imitateth Religion, these examples
declare; namely when worms and locusts are excommunicated, that they hurt not the
fruits; when bels and Images are baptised and such like; but because the old Magicians
and those who were the authors of this art amongst the ancients, have been Caldeans
[Chaldaeans], Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians and Arabians, all whose Religion was
perverse and polluted idolatry, we must very much take heed, least we should permit their
errors to war against the grounds of the Catholick Religion; for this were blasphemous,
and subject to the curse; and I also should be a blasphemer, if I should not admonish you
of these thigs, in this science; wheresoever therefore you shall finde these things written
by us, know that those things are only related out of other Authors, and not put down by
us for truth, but for a probable conjecture which is allyed to truth and an Instruction for
imitation in those things which are true; Therefore we ought from their Errors to collect
the Truth, which work truly requireth a profound Understanding, perfect Piety, and
painfull and laborious Diligence, and also Wisdom which knoweth out of every Evill to
extract Good, and to fit oblique things unto the right use of those things which it
governeth, as concerning this Augustine gives us an Example of a Carpenter to whom
Oblique and Complicate things are no less necessary and convenient then the Straight.
Chapter v. Of the three Guides of Religion, which bring us to the path of
Truth.
There are three Guides which bring us even to the paths of truth and which rule all our
Religion, in which it wholly consisteth, namely Love, Hope and Fayth [faith]: for Love is
the chariot of the Soul, the most excellent of all things, descending from the Intelligences
above even to the most inferior things It congregates and converts our mind into the
Divine beauty, preserves us also in all our works, gives us Events according to our
wishes, administreth power to our supplications: as we read in Homer, Apollo heard
Chrysons prayers because he was his very great friend: and some read of Mary
Magdalene in the Gospell, many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much; But
hope immoveably hanging on those things it desireth, when it is certain and not wavering,
nourisheth the mind and perfecteth it; But Faith the superior vertue of all not grounded on
humane fictions, but Divine revelations wholly, peirceth [pierceth] all things through the
whole world, for seeing it descends from above from the first light, and remains neerest
[nearest] to it, is far more noble and excellent than the arts, sciences and beliefes arising
from inferior things: this being darted into our intellect by reflexion [reflection] from the
first light. To conclude, by faith man is made somewhat the same with the superior
powers and enjoyeth the same power with them: Hence Proclus saith. As belief which is
a credulity, is below science: so belief which is a true faith, is supersubstantially above all
science and understanding conjoyning us immediately to God; for Faith is the root of all
miracles, by which alone (as the Platonists testifie) we approach to God, and obtain the
Divine power and protection. So we read that Daniel escaped the mouths of the Lyons
[lions], because he believed on his God. So to the woman with the bloody issue saith
Christ, thy Faith hath made thee whole; and of the blind man desiring sight, he required
faith, saying, Do ye believe, that I can open your eyes? so Pallas in Homer comforteth
Achilles with these words, I am come to pacifie your wrath, if you will believe. Therefore
Linus the Poet sings all things are to be beleeved [believed], because all things are easie
[easy] to God; nothing is impossible to him, therefore nothing incredible; therefore we
believing those things which belong to Religion, do obtain the vertue of them; but when
we shall faile in our Faith, we shall do nothing worthy admiration, but of punishment; As
we have an example of this in Luke, in these words, Therefore certain of the vagabond
Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call, over them which had evil spirits in the name of
the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth; and the evil spirit
answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who art thou? and the man in
whom the evil spirit was, lept [leaped] on them, and over came [overcame] them, so that
they fled out of the house naked and wounded.
Chapter vi. How by these guides the soul of man ascendeth up into the
Divine nature, and is made a worker of Miracles.
Therefore Our mind being pure and divine, inflamed with a religious love, adorned with
hope, directed by faith, placed in the hight [height] and top of the humane soul, doth
attract the truth, and sudainly comprehend it, & beholdeth all the stations, grounds,
causes and sciences of things both natural and immortal in the divine truth it self as it
were in a certain glass of Eternity. Hence it comes to pass that we, though Natural, know
those things which are above nature, and understand all things below, and as it were by
divine Oracles receive the knowledg [knowledge] not only of those things which are, but
also of those that are past and to come, presently, and many years hence; Moreover not
only in Sciences, Arts and Oracles the Understanding challengeth to it self this divine
vertue, but also receiveth this miraculous power in certain things by command to be
changed. Hence it comes to pass that though we are framed a natural body, yet we
sometimes prædominate [predominate] over nature, and cause such wonderfull, sodain
and difficult operations, as that evil spirits obey us, the stars are disordered, the heavenly
powers compelled, the Elements made obedient; so devout men and those elevated by
these Theologicall vertues, command the Elements, drive away Fogs, raise the winds,
cause rain, cure diseases, raise the dead, all which things to have been done amongst
diverse Nations, Poets and Historians do sing and relate: and that these things may be
done, all the famousest Philosophers, and Theologians do confirme; so the prophets,
Apostles, and the rest, were famous by the wonderfull power of God; therefore we must
know, that as by the influx of the first agent, is produced oftentimes something without
the cooperation of the middle causes, so also by the work of Religion alone, may
something be done without the application of naturall and Celestiall vertues; but no man
can work by pure Religion alone, unless he be made totally intellectuall: But whosoever,
without the mixture of other powers, worketh by Religion alone, if he shall persevere
long in the work, is swallowed up by the Divine power and cannot live long: But
whosoever shall attempt this and not be purified, doth bring upon himself judgement, and
is delivered to the evil spirit, to be devoured.
Chapter vii. That the knowledge of the true God is necessary for a
Magician, and what the old Magicians and Philosophers have thought
concerning God.
Seeing that the being and operation of all things, depend on the most high God, Creator
of all things, from thence also on the other dlvine powers, to whom also is granted a
power of fashioning and creating, not principally indeed, but instrumentally by vertue of
the first Creator (for the beginning of every thing is the first cause, but what is produced
by the second causes, is much more produced by the first, which is the producer of the
second causes: which therefore we call secondary gods) It is necessary therefore that
every Magitian [magician] know that very God, which is the first cause, and Creator of
all things; And also the other gods, or divine powers (which we call the second causes)
and not to be ignorant, with what adoration, reverence, holy rites conformable to the
condition of every one, they are to be worshipped: Whosoever therefore invocates the
gods, and doth not confer on them their due honour, nor, rightly distribute to them what
belongs to them, shall neither enjoy their presence, nor any successfull effect from them.
As in Harmony, if one string be broken, the whole musick jars, and sometimes incurs the
hazard of punishment, as it is written of the Assyrians, whom Salmanasar planted in
Samaria, because they knew not the customes of the God of the Land, the Lord did send
Lyons amongst them, who slew them, because they were ignorant of the rights of the god
of the Land. Now therefore let us see, what the old Magicians and Philosophers thought
concerning God; for we read that Nicocreonte, a tyrant of Cyprus, long since asking, who
was the greatest God, the Serapian Oracle answered him, That he was to be accounted
the greatest God, whose head was the Heavens, the Seas his Belly, the Earth his feet, his
ears placed in the sky, his eyes the light of the glorious Sun; not much unlike to this,
Orpheus sang in these verses,
The Heaven's Joves Royall Palace, he's King,
Fountain vertue and God of every thing;
He is Omnipotent, and in his breast
Earth, water, fire and aire do take their rest.
Both night and day, true wisdom with sweet Love,
Are all contain'd in this vast bulk of Jove.
His neck and glorious head if you would see,
Behold the Heavens high, and majesty;
The glorious rayes of Stars do represent
His golden locks, and's heads adornament.
And elsewhere,
Bright Phebus [Phoebus] and the Moon, are the two eyes
Of this great Jove by which all things he spies;
His head which predicts All, is plac'd i'th skie [sky],
From which no noise can whisper secretly.
It pierceth all; his body vast extends,
Both far and wide, and knows no bounds nor ends.
The spacious Air's his breast, his wings the wind,
By which he flies far swifter then the mind.
His belly is our mother earth, who swels [swells]
Into huge mountains, whom the Ocean fils [fills]
And circles; hls feet are the rocks and stones
Which of this Globe are the foundations.
This Jove, under the earth conceals all things,
And from the depth into the light them brings.
Therefore they thought the whole world to be Jupiter, and truly he hath produced the soul
of this world, which containeth the world in it self. Hence Sophocles saith, in truth there
is but one onely God, who hath made this heaven and this spacious earth; and Euripides
saith, Behold the most high, who every where embraceth in his Arms, the immensurable
heaven and earth; believe that he is Jupiter, account him God; and Ennius the Poet sings,
Behold this bright sublime shining, whom all
Call Jove---------- ----- -------
Therefore the whole world is Jupiter, as Porphyry saith, a creature made of all creatures,
and a God constituted of all gods; but Jupiter is, so far as we can understand, from
whence all things are produced, creating all things by his wisdom. Hence Orpheus sings
concerning the Holy Word;
There is one God, who all things hath created,
Preserves, and over all is elevated.
He only by our mind is comprehended,
And to poor mortals He ne'r ill intended.
Besides whom, there no other is ---
And a little after,
He himself is the beginning, middle and end, as the ancient Prophets have taught us, to
whom God long since delivered these things in two tables; and he calleth him in the same
verse the only great Creator, and immortall. Zoroastes [Zoroaster] likewise in his sacred
History of the Persians defineth God thus, God is the first of all those things which suffer
neither decay nor corruption, unbegot, never dying, without parts, and most like himself,
The author and promoter of all good things, the father of all, most bountifull and wise,
the sacred light of justice, the absolute perfection of nature, the contriver, and wisedom
[wisdom] thereof. Apuleius also describs [describes] him to be a King, the cause,
foundation and original, beginning of all nature, the supreme begetter of spirits, eternal,
the preserver of living creatures, a Father with propagation, not to be comprehended by
time, place or any other circumstance, and therefore imaginable to a few, utterable to
none; from hence therefore Euripides commanded the highest God to be cal'd Jupiter,
through whose head Orpheus sang all things came into this light, but the other powers he
supposeth to be subservient, viz. which are without God, and separated from him, and are
by the Philosophers called the Ministers or Angels of God, and separated intelligences;
therefore they say Religious worship to be due to this most high Jupiter and to him only,
but to the other Divine powers not to be due unless for his sake.
Chapter viii. What the Ancient Philosophers have thought concerning the
Divine Trinity.
Austine [Augustine] and Porphyry testifie, that the Platonists held three persons in God,
the first of which, they call the father of the world; the second they call the Son and the
first mind, and so he is named by Macrobius. The third, the spirit or soul of the world,
which Virgil also from Plato's opinion calleth a spirit, when he sings,
Within the Spirit nourisheth, the mind'
Diffus'd through th' whole doth in its kind
The lump both act, and agitate ---
Plotinus and Philo deliver, that the Son of God, viz. the first mind or Divine intellect
floweth from God the Father, even as a word from the speaker or as light from light; from
hence it is that he is called both the word and speech, and splendour of God the Father;
for the Divine mind by it self, with one only and uninterrupted act understandeth the
chiefest good without any vicissitude, or mediate knowledge; he generateth in himself an
Issue and Son, who is the full Intelligence, compleat image of himself, and the perfect
pattern of the world, whom our John and Mercurius name the word or speech; Plato the
Son of God the Father; Orpheus, Pallas born from Jupiters brain, that is, wisdom: This is
the most absolute image of God the Father, yet by a certain relation, or some intrinsecall
absolute thing, as it were begot and distinguished from the Father, who saith in
Ecclesiasticus, I have proceeded from the mouth of the most high, I am the first begot
before all creatures: Iamblichus testifieth this Son to be One and the same God with the
Father in Essence, namely calling God, both the Father and Son of himself. Also
Mercurius Trismegistus in Asclepius mentioneth the Son of God in diverse places; for he
saith my God and Father begat a Mind a work diverss from himself; And elsewhere, unity
begets unity, and reflecteth his flagrant love on himself; and in Pimander (where he
seemeth to prophesie of the Covenant of grace to come, and of the mystery of
regeneration) saith, the author of Regeneration is the Son of God, the man by the will of
the one only God, and also that God is most replenished with the fruitfulness of both
sexes. In like manner the Indian philosophers affirm, the World to be an Animal, partly
Masculine, and partly Feminine; and Orpheus also calleth Nature or the Jove of this
world, both the male and female thereof, and that the gods partake of both Sexes. Hence
it is, that in his Hymnes he thus salutes Minerva, You are indeed both man and woman;
and Apuleius in his book of the world, out of the Divinity of Orpheus produceth this
verse of Jupiter,
Jove is both male and female, immortall.
And Virgil speaking of Venus saith,
I descend, and the God guiding -----
And elsewhere, understanding Juno or Alecto, he saith
Neither was God absent from her praying.
And Tibullus sings,
I who prophaned have the Deities
Of Venus great -----
And it is reported that the people of Cacenia wonderfully adored the God Moon. From
this compleat intelligence of supream fecundity his love is produced, binding the
intelligence with the mind. And by so much the more, by how much it is infinitely more
intimate to it self, than other off springs to their parents. This is the third person, viz. the
holy spirit. Iamblichus also brings the oracles of the Chaldeans placing a fatherly power
in God, and an Emanation of the intellect from the Father, and a fiery love proceeding
from Father and Son, and the same to be God. Hence we read in Plutarch, that the
Gentiles described God to be an intellectuall and fiery spirit, having no form, but
transformilig himself into whatsoever he pleaseth, equalizing himself to all things; and
we read in Deuteronomy, Our God is a consuming fire; of whom also Zoroastes
[Zoroaster] saith, all things were begot of fire alone; so also Heraclitus the Ephesian
teacheth; Hence Divine Plato hath placed Gods habitation in fire, namely understanding,
the unspeakable splendour of God in himself, and love about himself; and we read in
Homer, The Heavens to be the Kingdom of Jupiter, when he sings,
Jove darkning clouds and reigning in the skie,
And the same elsewhere.
The lot of Jove the Heaven is i'th' aire,
He sits -----
But Aether is derived according to the Greek Grammer, from Aetho, which signifies to
Burn, and Aer spiritus quasi Aethaer, that is, a burning spirit; And therefore Orpheus
calleth the Heaven Pyripnon, that is a fiery breathing place; therefore the Father, Son, and
the aimable spirit, which is also fiery, are by the Divines called three Persons; Whom
Orpheus also in his adjurations invocateth with these words, Heaven I admire thee, thou
wise work of the great God; I adjure thee, O thou word of the Father, which he first spake
when he established the whole world by his wisdom. Hesiode [Hesiod] also confesseth
the same things under the names of Jupiter Minerva and Bule in his Theogony, declaring
the twofold birth of Jupiter in these words: The first daughter called Tritonia with gray
eyes, having equal power with the Father, and prudent Bule, that is counsel, which
Orpheus in the forenamed verses pronounceth plurally, because of his twofold
Emanation, for he proceedeth both from Jupiter and Minerva. And Austin [Augustine]
himself in his fourth Book De Civit Dei doth testify that Porphyry the Platonist placed
three Persons in God; the first he cals the father of the universe, the second, the first
mind, and Macrobius the Son, the third the soul of the world, which Virgil according to
Plato's opinion, calleth a spirit, saying, the spirit within maintains. Therefore it is God, as
Paul saith, from whom, in whom, by whom are all things: for from the father as from a
fountain flow all things, but in the Son as in a pool all things are placed in their Ideas,
and by the Holy Ghost are all things manifested, and every thing distributed to his proper
degrees.
Chapter ix. What the true and most Orthodox faith is concerning God and
the most holy Trinity.
The Catholik [Catholic] Doctors and faithfull people of God, have decreed, that we ought
thus to believe and profess that there is one only true God, increate, infinite, omnipotent,
eternal Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three persons, coeternall and coequall, of one most
simple Essence, substance and nature. This is the Catholike faith, this is the Orthodox
Religion, this is the Christian truth, that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. The Father begat the
Son from all eternity and gave him his substance, and nevertheless retained it himself.
The Son also by being begot, received the substance of the Father, but assumed not the
proper Person of the Father; for the Father translated it not into the Son; for they are both
of one and the same substance, but of diverse persons. This Son also although he be
coeternall with the Father, and begot of the substance of the Father before the world, yet
notwithstanding was born into the world out of the substance of a Virgin, and his name
was called Jesus, perfect God, perfect man, of a reasonable soul and humane flesh, who
in all things was man, sin excepted. Therefore it is necessary, that we beleeve [believe],
that our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God and man, one person, two natures; God
begot before the world without a mother, man born into the world; without a father, from
a pure Virgin, both before and after his birth; he suffered on the Cross, and dyed [died],
but on the Cross restored life, and destroyed death by his death; he was buried and
descended into hell, but brought forth the souls of the Fathers from hell, and rose again
by his own power; the third day he ascended into the Heavens, & sent his spirit the
Comforter, & shall come to Judge the quick [=living] and the dead; and at his coming all
men shall rise again in their flesh, and shall give an account of their works; this is the true
faith, concerning which if any man doubt, and not firmly believe, he is far from the hope
of eternall life and salvation.
Chapter x. Of Divine emanations, which the Hebrews call Numerations,
others attributes; The gentiles gods and Deities; and of the ten Sephiroths
and ten most sacred names of God which rule them, and the interpretation
of them.
God himself, though he be Trinity in persons, yet is but one only simple Essence;
notwithstanding we doubt not but that there are in him many Divine powers, which as
beams flow from him, which the Philosophers of the Gentiles cal gods, the Hebrew
masters numerations, we name Attributes; as wisdom which Orpheus call Pallas;
understanding, which he Mercury; The conception of the Form, which he Saturn; The
Productive power, which he Neptune; the secret nature of things, which he Iuno [Juno];
Love, which he Venus; pure life, which he the Sun, or Apollo. The matter of the whole
world, he calleth Pan; the soul, as it ingendereth things below, contemplateth things
above, and retracteth it self into it self, he honoured with three names, viz. Maris,
Neptune and Ocean, and more of this kind, of which he sings elsewhere,
Pluto and Jupiter, and Phebus, are one;
But why do we speak twice? Gods one alone.
And of the same Valerius Soranus sang,
Omnipotent Jove the God and King of Kings,
The Father of the gods, One, yet all things.
Therefore the most prudent Theologians of the Gentiles did worship the One God, under
diverse names and powers, yea diverse sexes; whom, as Pliny saith, Fraile and weak
mortality hath digested unto more, being mindfull of his one frailty, that every man might
worship that portion which he especially wanteth; so those who had need of faith
invocated Jupiter; they that wanted providence, Apollo; wisdom, Minerva; and so as they
wanted other things, they invocated other powers. Hence arose that great variety of
Dieties [deities], by reason of the many and diverse distribution of graces; but God is one,
from whom all things. Therefore Apuleius in his book De mundo to Faustin saith,
Whereas there is but one God and one power, yet he is named by diverse names, for the
multitude of species, by whose variety he is made of many shapes; and Marcus Varro in
his book of the worship of God, saith, As all souls are reduced to the one soul of the
world or universe, so are all the gods referred to Jupiter, who is the same God,
worshipped under diverse names. Therefore it is meet to know the sensible proprieties,
and perfectly to intellectualize them by the way of more secret Analogy; whosoever
understandeth truly the Hymnes of Orpheus and the old Magicians, shall find that they
differ not from the Cabalisticall secrets and Orthodox traditions; for whom Orpheus cals
Curets and unpolluted gods, Dionysius names Powers; the Cabalists appropriate them to
the numeration Pahad, that is to the Divine fear: so that which is EnSoph in the Cabala,
Orpheus calleth Might; and Typhon is the same with Orpheus, as Zamael in the Cabala;
but the Mecubales of the Hebrews, the most learned in Divine things, have received the
ten principal names of God, as certain Divine powers, or as it were members of God,
which by ten numerations which they call Sephiroth as it were vestiments, Instruments or
examplars of the Archetype, have an influence on all things created, through the high
things, even to the lowest, yet by a certain order; for first and immediately they have
influence on the nine orders of Angels, and quire of blessed souls, and by them into the
Celestiall Spheres, Planets and men, by the which Sephiroth every thing then receiveth
power and vertue; The first of these is the name Eheia, the name of the Divine Essence;
his numeration is called Cether [Kether], which is interpreted a Crown or Diadem, and
signifieth the most simple Essence of the Divinity, and it is called that which the eye
seeth not, and is attributed to God the Father, and hath his influence by the order of
Seraphinus, or as the Hebrews call them Haioth Hacadosch, that is creatures of holiness,
and then by the primum mobile, bestows the gift of being to all things, filling the whole
Universe both through the circumference and center, whose particular intelligence is
called Meratiron [Metatron], that is, the prince of faces, whose duty it is to bring others
to the face of the prince; and by him the Lord spake to Moses. The second name is Iod or
Tetragrammaton joyned with Iod; his numeration is Hochma, that is wisdom, and
signifieth the Divinity full of Ideas, and the first begotten; and is attributed to the Son,
and hath his influence by the order of Cherubins, or that the Hebrews call Orphanim, that
is, forms or wheels; and from thence into the starry Heaven, where he fabricateth so
many figures as he hath Ideas in himself, and distinguisheth the very Chaos of the
creatures, by a particular Intelligence called Raziell, who was the ruler of Adam. The
third name is called Tetragrammaton Elohim; his numeration is named Prina, viz.
providence and understanding, and signifies remission, quietness, the Jubilee, penitentiall
conversion, a great Trumpet, redemption of the world, and the life of the world to come;
it is attributed to the Holy Spirit, and hath his influence by the order of the thrones, or
which the Hebrews call Aralim, that is great Angels mighty and strong, and from thence
by the sphere of Saturn administereth form to the unsettled matter, whose particular
intelligence is Zaphchiel, the ruler of Noah, and another intelligence named Iophiel the
ruler of Sem; and these are three supream and highest numerations as it were seats of the
Divine persons, by whose commands all things are made, but are executed by the other
seven, which are therefore called the numerations framing. Therefore the fourth name is
El whose numeration is Hesed, which is Clemence or goodness, and signifieth grace,
mercy, piety, magnificence, the scepter and right hand, and hath his influx by the order of
the Dominations, which the Hebrews call Hasmalim, and so through the sphere of Iupiter
[Jupiter] fashioning the Images of bodyes [bodies], bestowing clemency and pacifying
justice on all; his particular intelligence is Zadkiell the ruler of Abraham: The fifth name
is Elohim Gibor, that is, the mighty God, punishing the sins of the wicked; and his
numeration is called Geburach, which is to say, power, gravity, fortitude, security,
judgement, punishing by slaughter and war: and it is applyed [applied] to the Tribunall of
God, The girdle, the sword and left hand of God; it is also called Pachad, which is fear,
and hath his influence throw [through] the order of powers which the Hebrews call
Seraphim, and from thence through the sphere of Mars, to whom belongs fortitude, war,
affliction, it draweth forth the Elements; and his particular intelligence is Camael, the
ruler of Samson; The sixt [sixth] name is Eloha, or a name of four letters, joyned [joined]
with Vaudahat, his numeration is Tiphereth, that is apparel, beauty, glory, pleasure, and
signifieth the tree of life, and hath his influence through the order of vertues [virtues],
which the Hebrews call Malachim, that is Angels into the spere [sphere] of the Sun,
giving brightness and life to it, and from thence producing mettals [metals]; his particular
intelligence is Raphael, who was the Ruler of Isaac and Toby the younger, and the Angel
Peliel, ruler of Iacob [Jacob]. The seventh name is Tetragrammaton Sabaoth, or Adonai
Sabaoth, that is the God of hosts; and his numeration is Nezah [Netzach], that is triumph
and victory; the right Columne is applyed to it, and it signifies the eternity and justice of a
revenging God; it hath his influence through the order of principalities, whom the
Hebrews call Elohim, that is Gods, into the sphere of Venus, gives zeal and love of
righteousness, and produceth vegetables; his Intelligence is Haniel and the Angel Cerviel,
the ruler of David; The eighth is called also Elohim Sabaoth, which is also interpreted the
God of Hoasts [Hosts], not of war and justice, but of piety and agreement; for this name
signifieth both, and precedeth his Army; the numeration of this is called Hod, which is
interpreted both praise, confession, honor and famousness. The left column is attributed
to it; it hath his influence through the order of the Archangels, which the Hebrews call
Ben Elohim, that is the sons of God, into the sphere of Mercury, and gives elegancy and
consonancy of speech and produceth living creatures; his intelligence is Michael, who
was the ruler of Salomon [Solomon]; The ninth name is called Sadai, that is Omnipotent,
satisfying all, and Elhai, which is the living God; his numeration is Iesod, that is
foundation, and signifieth a good understanding, a Covenant, redemption and rest, and
hath his influence through the order of Angels, whom the Hebrews name Cherubim, into
the sphere of the Moon, causing the increase and decrease of all things, and taketh care of
the genui, and keepers of men, and distributeth them; his intelligence is Gabriel, who was
the keeper of Joseph, Joshua and Daniel; The tenth name is Adonai Melech, that is Lord
and King; his numeration is Malchuth, that is Kingdom and Empire, & signifieth a
Church, Temple of God, and a Gate, and hath his influence through the order of
Animastick, viz. of blessed souls, which by the Hebrews is called Issim, that is Nobles,
Lords and Princes; they are inferior to the Hierarchies, and have their influence on the
sons of men, and give knowledge and the wonderfull understanding of things, also
industry and prophesie [prophesy]; and the soul of Messiah is president amongst them, or
(as others say) the intelligence Metattron [Metatron] which is called the first Creature, or
the soul of the world, and was the ruler of Moses.
Chapter xi. Of the Divine names, and their power and vertue [virtue].
God himself though he he only one in Essence, yet hath diverse names, which expound
not his diverse Essences or Deities, but certain properties flowing from him, by which
names he doth pour down, as it were by certain Conduits on us and all his creatures many
benefits and diverse gifts; ten of these Names we have above described, which also
Hierom reckoneth up to Marcella. Dionysius reckoneth up forty five names of God and
Christ. The Mecubales of the Hebrews from a certain text of Exodus, derive seventy-two
names, both of the Angels and of God, which they call the name of seventy two letters,
and Schemhamphores, that is, the expository; but others proceeding further, out of all
places of the Scripture do infer so many names of God as the number of those names is:
but what they signifie is altogether unknown to us: From these therefore, besides those
which we have reckoned up before, is the name of the Divine Essence, Eheia äéäà,
which Plato translates ων, from hence they call God TO ON , others O UN that is the
being. Hu àåä is another name revealed to Esay, signifying the Abysse of the Godhead,
which the Greeks translate TAUTON , the Latins, himself the same. Esch ùà is another
name received from Moses which soundeth Fire, and the name of God Na àð is to be
invocated in perturbations and troubles. There is also the name Iah äé and the name
Elion ïåéìò and the name Macom í÷åî , the name Caphu åôë , the name Innon
ïðåé & the name Emeth [=aemeth] úîà which is interpreted Truth, and is the seal of
God; and there are two other names Zur øåö and Aben ïáà both of them signifie a solid
work, and one of them express the Father with the Son; and many more names have we
placed above in the scale of numbers; and many names of God and the Angels are
extracted out of the holy Scriptures by the Cabalisticall calculation, Notarian and
Gimetrian [Gematria] arts, where many words retracted by certain of their letters make up
one name, or one name dispersed by each of its letters signifieth or rendreth more.
Somtimes they are gathered from the heads of words, as the name Agla àìâà from this
verse of the Holy Scripture
íìåòì øáéì éðãà äúà
that is the mighty God for ever; in like manner the name Iaia àéàé from this verse
äåäé ãçà äåäé åðéäìà
that is God our God is one God; in like manner the name Iava àåàé from this verse
øåà éäéå øåà éäé
that is let there be light, & there was light; in like maner the name Ararita àúéøàøà
from this verse
ãçà éúøéîú åãåäéé ùàø åúåãçà ùàø ãçà
that is one principle of his unity, one beginning of his Individuality his vicissitude is one
thing; and this name Hacaba äá÷ä is extracted from this verse
àåä ùåã÷ä êåøá
the holy and the blessed one; in like manner this name Jesu åùé is found in the heads of
these two verses, viz.
åì åäåìù àéáé
that is, untill the Messiah shall come, and the other verse
úéå åîù ïåðé
that is, his name abides till the end, Thus also is the name Amen ïîà extracted from this
verse
ïîàð êìî éðãà
that is the Lord the faithfull King; sometimes these names are extracted from the end of
words, as the same name Amen, from this verse
íéòùøä ïë àì,
that is, the wicked not so, but the letters are transposed; so by the finall letters of this
verse
äî åîù äî éì,
that is, to me what? or what is his name? is found the name Tetragrammaton, in all these
a letter is put for a word, and a letter extracted from a word, either from the beginning,
end, or where you please; and sometimes these names are extracted from all the letters,
one by one, even as those seventy two names of God are extracted from those three
verses of Exodus beginning from these three words,
èéå àáéå òñéå
the first and last verses being written from the right to the left, but the middle
contrarywise from the left to the right, as we shall shew hereafter; and so sometimes a
word is extracted from a word, or a name from a name, by the transposition of letters, as
Messia äéùî from Ismah çîùé and Michael ìàëéî from éëàìî Malachi. But
sometimes by changing of the Alphabeth, which the Cabalists call Ziruph óåøéö so
from the name Tetragrammaton äåäé are drawn forth öôöî Maz Paz åæåë Kuzu
sometimes also by reason of the equality of numbers, names are changed, as Metattron
[Metatron] ïåøèèî for Sadai éãù for both of them make three hundred and fourteen,
so Iiai éàéé and El ìà are equall in number, for both make thirty one. And these are the
hidden secrets concerning which it is most difficult to judge, and to deliver a perfect
science; neither can they be understood and taught in any other language except the
Hebrew; but seeing the names of God (as Plato saith in Cratylus) are highly esteemed of
the Barbarians, who had them from God, without the which we can by no means perceive
the true words and names by which God is called, therefore concerning these we can say
no more, but those things which God out of his goodness hath revealed to us; for they are
the mysteries and conveyances of Gods omnipotency, not from men, nor yet from
Angels, but instituted and firmly established by the most high God, after a certain
manner, with an immovable number and figure of Characters, and breath [breathe] forth
the harmony of the Godhead, being consecrated by the Divine assistance; therefore the
creatures above fear them, those below tremble at them, the Angels reverence, the devils
are affrighted, every creature doth honor, and every Religion adore them; the religious
observation whereof, and devout invocation with fear and trembling doth yeeld us great
vertue, and even deifies the union, and gives a power to work wonderfull things above
nature: Therefore wee may not for any reason whatsoever, change them; therefore Origen
commandeth that they be kept without corruption in their own Characters; and Zoroastes
[Zoroaster] also forbiddeth the changing of barbarous and old words; for as Plato saith in
Cratylus, All Divine words or names, have proceeded either from the gods first, or from
antiquity, whose beginning is hardly known, or from the Barbarians: Iamblicus in like
manner adviseth, that they may not be translated out of their own language into another;
for, saith he, they keep not the same force being translated into another tongue: Therefore
these names of God are the most fit and powerfull means of reconciling and uniting man
with God, as we read in Exodus, in every place in which mention is made of my name, I
will be with thee, and bless thee; and in the book of Numbers, the Lord saith, I will put
my name upon the sons of Israel and I will bless them: Therefore Divine Plato in
Cratylus & in Philebus commandeth to reverence the names of God more than the
Images or statues of the gods: for there is a more express Image and power of God,
reserved in the faculty of the mind, especially if it be inspired from above, than in the
works of mens hands; Therefore sacred words have not their power in Magicall
operations, from themselves, as they are words, but from the occult Divine powers
working by them in the minds of those who by faith adhere to them; by which words the
secret power of God as if were through Conduite pipes, is transmitted into them, who
have ears purged by faith, and by most pure conversation and invocation of the divine
names are made the habitation of God, and capable of these divine influences; whosoever
therefore useth rightly these words or names of God with that purity of mind, in that
manner and order, as they were delivered, shall both obtain and do many wonderfull
things, as we read of Medea.
Most pleasant sleep she causd, words thrice she spake,
The Seas appeasd, and soon their fury brake.
Which the Ancient Doctors of the Hebrews have especially observed, who were wont to
do many wonderfull things by words; the Pythagorians [Pythagoreans] also have shewed,
how to cure very wonderfully the diseases both of body and mind, with certain words; we
read also, that Orpheus, being one of the Argonauts diverted a most fierce storm by
certain words; in like manner that Apollonius, by certain words whispered, raised up a
dead maide at Rome; and Philostratus reporteth that some did by certain words call up
Achilles Ghost; and Pausanias relates, that in Lydia in the Cities of Hiero-Cesarea and
Hypepis, were two temples consecrated to the Goddess whom they called Persica, in both
of which when divine service was ended, a certain Magitian [magician], after he had laid
dry wood upon the Altar, and in his native language had sang Hymnes, and pronounced
certain barbarous words, out of a book which he held in his hand, presently the dry wood,
no fire being put to it, was seen to be kindled, and burn most clearly. Also Serenus
Samonicus delivereth amongst the precepts of Physick, that if this name Abracadabra be
written, as is here expressed, viz. diminishing letter after letter backward, from the last to
the first, it will cure the Hemitritean Fever or any other, if the sheet of paper or
parchment be hanged about the neck, and the disease will by little and little decline and
pass away.
a b r a c a d a b r a
a b r a c a d a b r
a b r a c a d a b
a b r a c a d a
a b r a c a d
a b r a c a
a b r a c
a b r a
a b r
a b
a
But Rabbi Hama in his book of speculation delivereth a sacred seal more efficacious
against any diseases of man, or any griefes whatsoever, in whose foreside are the four
squared names of God, so subordinated to one another in a square, that from the highest
to the lowest those most holy names or seales of the Godhead do arise, whose intention is
inscribed in the circumferentiall circle, but on the backside is inscribed the seven lettered
name Araritha, and his interpretation is written about, viz. the verse from which it is
extracted, even as you see it here described.
The former part.
The hinder part.
But all must be done in most pure gold, or Virgin Parchment, pure, clean and unspotted,
also with Inke made for this purpose, of the smoak [smoke] of consecrated wax lights, or
incense, and holy water; The actor must be purified and cleansed by sacrifice, and have
an infallible hope, a constant faith, and his mind lifted up to the most high God, if he
would surely obtain this Divine power. In like manner against the affrightments and
mischief of evil spirits and men, and what dangers soever, either of journey, waters,
enemies, arms, in the manner as is above said, these Characters on the one side ååååá
and these on the backside äáøîö which are the beginnings and ends of the five first
verses of Genesis, and representation of the creation of the world; and by this Ligature
they say that a man shall be free from all mischiefes, if so be that he firmly beleeveth
[believeth] in God the creator of all things.
In the fore part. In the hinder part.
Neither let any distrust or wonder, that sacred words, applyed outwardly can do very
much, seeing by them the Almighty God made the heavens and the earth; and further, by
experience it is found, as saith Rab Costa Ben Luca, that many things not having
Physicall vertues do very much, As for example, the finger of an abortive child hanged
on the neck of a woman hindereth conception, so long as it remaineth there; Moreover
that in diverse sacred words and names of God, there is great and Divine power, which
worketh miracles, Zoroastes [Zoroaster], Orpheus, Iamblicus, Synesius. Alchindus, and
all the famous Philosophers testifie; and Artephius both a Magician and Philosopher, hath
written a peculiar book concerning the vertue of words and Characters. Origen not
inferior to the famousest Philosophers, doth maintain against Celsus, that there doth ly
[lie] hid wonderfull vertue in certain Divine names, and in the book of Judges the Lord
saith, my name which is Pele àìô, signifieth with us, a worker of miracles. or causing
wonders; but the true name of God is known neither to men nor to Angels, but to God
alone, neither shall it be manifested (as the holy Scriptures testifie) before the Will of
God be fulfilled; Notwithstanding God hath other names amongst the Angels, others
amongst us men; for there is no name of God amongst us (as Moses the Egyptian saith)
which is not taken from his works, and signifieth with participation, besides the name
Tetragrammaton, which is holy, signifying the substance of the Creator in a pure
signification, in which no other thing is partaker with God the Creator; therefore it is
called the separated name, which is written and not read, neither is it expressed by us, but
named, and signifieth the second supernall Idiome, which is of God, and perhaps of
Angels. In like manner the Angels have their name amongst themselves, and in their
Idiome, which Paul calleth the tongue of Angels, concerning which we have very little
knowledge with us, but all their other names are taken from their offices and operations,
which have not so great efficacy, and therefore the Magicians call them by their true
names, namely the heavenly ones, which are contained in the holy Bible.
Chapter xii. Of the influence of the divine names through all the middle
causes into these inferior things.
The most high Creator and first cause, although he ruleth and disposeth all things, yet
distributeth the care of execution to diverse Ministers, both good and bad, which John in
the Revelations cals assisting, and destroying Angels: of which the prophet sings
elsewhere; The Angel of the Lord remains in the presence of them that fear him, that he
may preserve them: and elsewhere he describes immissions by evill Angels. Now
whatsoever God doth by Angels, as by ministers, the same doth he by heavens, Stars, but
as it were by instruments, that after this manner all things might work together to serve
him, that as every part of Heaven, and every Star doth discern every corner or place of
the earth, and time, species and Individuall: so it is fit that the Angelical vertue of that
part and Star should be applyed to them, viz. place, time, and species. Whence Austin
[Augustine] in his book of questions, saith, Every visible thing in this world, hath an
Angelicall power appointed for it: Hence Origen on the book of Numbers saith, the world
hath need of Angels, that may rule the Armies of the earth, Kingdoms, provinces, men,
beasts, the nativity, and progress of living creatures, shrubs, plants, and other things,
giving them that vertue which is said to be in them, from an occult propriety; much more
need is there of Angels that may rule holy works, vertues and men, as they who alwaies
see the face of the most high father, and can guide men in the right path, and also even
the least thing to this place, as fit members of this world in which God as the chief
president, dwelleth, most sweetly disposing all things, not being contained, or
circumscribed, but containing all things, as John in the Revelations describeth the
heavenly City, whose twelve gates are guarded with twelve Angels, infusing on them
what they receive from the Divine name, twelve times revolved; and in the foundations of
that City the names of the twelve Apostles, and the Lamb; for as in the Law, in the stones
of the Ephod and foundations of the Holy City described by Ezekiel, were written the
names of the tribes of Israel, and the name of four letters did predominate over them; so
in the Gospel, the names of the Apostles are written in the stones of the foundation of the
heavenly City, which stones stand for the tribes of Israel in the Church, over which the
name of the Lamb hath influence, that is, the name of Jesus, in which is all the vertue of
the four lettered name; seeing that Jehovah the Father hath given him all things:
Therefore the Heavens receive from the Angels, that which they dart down; but the
Angels from the great name of God and Jesu, the vertue whereof is first in God,
afterward diffused into these twelve and seven Angels, by whom it is extended into the
twelve signs, and into the seven planets, and consequently into all the other Ministers and
instruments of God, pourtraiting even infinitely. Hence Christ saith, Whatsoever you
shall ask the Father in my name, he will give you; nd after his resurrection saith, In my
name they shall cast out devils, and do as followeth; so that the name of four letters is no
further necessary, the whole vertue thereof being translated into the name of Jesus, in
which only miracles are done; neither is there any other (as Peter saith) under heaven
given unto men, by which they can be saved, but that; but let us not think, that by naming
Jesus prophanely [profanely], as the name of a certain man, we can do miracles by vertue
of it: but we must invocate it in the holy Spirit, with a pure mind and a fervent spirit, that
we may obtain those things which are promised us in him; especially knowledge going
before, without which there is no hearing of us, according to that of the Prophet, I will
hear him because he hath known my name; Hence at this time no favour can be drawn
from the heavens, unless the authority, favor and consent of the name Jesu intervene;
Hence the Hebrews and Cabalists most skilfull [skillful] in the Divine names, can work
nothing after Christ by those old names, as their fathers have done long since; and now it
is by experience confirmed, that no devil nor power of Hell, which vex and trouble men,
can resist this name, but will they, nill they, bow the knee and obey, when the name Jesu
by a due pronunciation is proposed to them to be worshipped, and they fear not only the
name but also the Cross, the seal thereof; and not only the knees of earthly, heavenly, and
hellish creatures are bowed, but also Insensible things do reverence it, and all tremble at
his beck, when from a faithfull heart and a true mouth the name Jesus is pronounced, and
pure hands imprint the salutiferous sign of the Cross: neither truly doth Christ say in vain
to his Disciples, In my name they shall cast out Devils, &c. unless there were a certain
vertue expressed in that name over divels [devils] and sick folk, serpents, and persons,
and tongues, and so forth, seeing the power which this name hath, is both from the vertue
of God the institutor, and also from the vertue of him who is expressed by this name, and
from a power implanted in the very word. Hence is it that seeing every creature feareth
and reverenceth the name of him who hath made it, sometimes even wicked and ungodly
men, if so be they believe the invocation of Divine names of this kind, do bind devils, and
operate certain other great things.
Chapter xiii. Of the members of God, and of their influence on our
members.
We read in diverse places of the holy Scripture, of diverse members of God, and
ornaments; but by the members of God, are understood manifold powers, most simply
abiding in God himself, distinguished amongst themselves by the sacred names of God;
but the garments of God and Ornaments, are as it were certain wayes and relations, or
Emanations, or conduit pipes, by the which he diffuseth himself; the hemmes of which as
oft as our mind shall touch, so often the Divine power of some member goeth forth, even
as Jesus cryed [cried] out, concerning the woman with the bloody Issue, Some body hath
touched me, for I perceive vertue to go forth from me. These members therefore in God
are like to ours; but the Ideas and exemplars of our members, to the which if we rightly
conform our members, then being translated into the same Image, we are made the true
sons of God, and like to God, doing and working the works of God: therefore concerning
the members of God, many things are drawn forth out of the Scriptures; for we read of his
head in the Canticles; Thy head as Carmel, and the locks of thy head as the purple of a
King; but this Carmel signifieth not the mountain in the Sea coast of Syria, but a little
creature, which ingendreth [engendereth] the purple. Also of his eyes, eyelids and ears,
we read in the Psalmes, the eyes of the Lord on the Just, and his ears to their prayers, his
eyes look towards the poor, and his eyelids enquire [inquire] after the sons of men: also
of his mouth, tast [taste], throat, lips, and teeth, we read in Esay, Thou hast not enquired
at my mouth; and in the Canticles, Thy throat as the best wine for my beloved, that goeth
down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak; there are also Nostrils, by
the which (as we often find in the Law) he smelleth the sacrifices for a sweet odour: he
hath shoulders, armes, hands, and fingers, of the which we read in Esay; the government
is laid upon his shoulders; to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? and the Kingly
Prophet singeth, thy hands O Lord have made me and fashioned me, and I will behold the
heavens, the work of thy fingers; he hath also a right and left hand; hence the Psalmist
saith, The Lord saith to my Lord, sit at my right hand: and of the left we read, in the
Gospel, on which the damned shall be placed at the last day: further we read of the heart,
breast, back, and back parts of God; as in the book of Kings, that God found David a man
according to his own heart; we read also in the Gospel his breast upon which the Disciple
sleeping conceived divine mysteries; and the Psalmist describeth his back, in the paleness
of gold; and he himself saith in Jeremiah, I will shew my back and not my face in the day
of their perdition, and he saith to Moses, Thou shalt see my back parts; of his feet the
Psalmist also saith, Darkness under his feet, and in Genesis he is said to walk to the
South. In like manner also we read of the garments, and ornaments of God, as with the
Psalmist, the Lord hath reigned, he hath put on beauty, cloathed [clothed] with light as
with a garment; and elsewhere, Thou hast put on comliness and beauty; The Abysse as a
garment and his cloathing; and in Ezekiel, the Lord speaketh, saying, I spread my
garment over thee and covered thy nakedness; moreover also we read of the rod, Staffe,
Sword and Buckler of God, as in the Psalmist, Thy rod and thy staffe, they have
comforted me; his truth hath compassed thee about as with a shield; and in Deuteronomy
we read of the sword of his glory; and very many of this sort the sacred word declares to
us; from which members and Divine ornaments, there is no doubt, but that our memhers
and all things about us, and all our works, are both ruled, directed, preserved, governed,
and also censured, as the prophet saith, He hath put my foot upon a rock, and directed my
goings; and elsewhere he saith, Blessed be the Lord my God, who teacheth my hand to
war, and my fingers to fight; and of his mouth he saith, the Lord hath put a new song into
my mouth; and elsewhere our Saviour saith, I will give you a mouth and wisdom; and of
the hair he saith, an hair of your head shall not perish; and in another place, the hairs of
your head are numbred [numbered]; for the Almighty God seeing he would have us to be
his Images and like to himself, hath framed members, limbs, and figures after many ways
laid open in us, according to the similitude of his hidden vertues, as it were signs keeping
the same order and proportion to them: whence the Mecubals of the Hebrews say, that if
a man capable of the Divine influence do make any member of his body clean and free
from filthiness, then it becometh Habitale and proper seat of the secret limb of God, and
of the vertue to the which the same name is ascribed: so that if that member want any
thing, the name being invocated, whence it dependeth, it is presently heard effectually,
according to that, I will hear him, because he hath known my name; and these are the
great and hidden mysteries, concerning which it is not lawfull to publish more.
Chapter xiiii. Of the Gods of the gentiles, and souls of the Celestiall bodies,
and what places were consecrated in times past, and to what Deities.
The Philosophers have maintained, as we have shewed before, that the Heavens and Stars
are Divine Animals, and their souls intellectuall, participating of the Divine mind; and
they averre, that some separated substances are superior, others inferior to them, as it
were governing and serving, which they call intelligences and Angels; moreover Plato
himself affirmed, that Celestiall souls' are not confined to their bodies, as our souls to our
bodies, but to be, where they will, and also that they rejoyce [rejoice] in the vision of
God, and without any labor or pains do rule and move their bodies, and together in
moving them do easily govern these inferior things; therefore they often called the souls
of this kind, Gods, and appointed Divine honors for them, and dedicated prayers and
sacrifices to them, and did worship them with Divine worship, and these are the gods to
the which all people are attributed, concerning which Moses commanded in
Deuteronomy, saying, least perchance your eyes being lifted up to Heaven, thou
shouldest see the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars of Heaven, and being turned back
shouldest adore and worship them, to which all the Nations are subjected, which are
under the Heaven; but the Lord Jehovah hath taken and brought you forth from the
furnace of Egypt, that thou shouldest be an Hereditary people to himself; and in the same
book chap. 17 he calleth the Sun, Moon, & Stars Gods; and the Doctors of the Hebrews
upon that place of Genesis where it is said, that Abraham gave gifts to the sons of the
concubines, viz. Shemoth, Steltoma, that is strange names, but left Isaac heir of all that he
possessed, say, that the sons of the concubines were not in the blessing of Abraham,
given to Jehovah the most high creator, but to strange gods and deities, but that Isaac and
his seed were given to the omnipotent Jehovah, and in no part to any strange Deities;
therefore they are upbraided in Deuteronomy, because they served strange gods and
worshipped them they knew not, and to whom they were not given; and also Joshua
Nave, after that the people were brought into the land of promise, their enemies
overcome, and the lots of the possessions of Israel distributed, gave the people leave to
choose that God whom they would worship, saying, leave is given you this day to choose
whom you will especially serve, whether the gods which your fathers served in
Mesopotamia, or the gods of the Amorites, whose land you inhabite; but the people
answered, we will serve the Lord Jehovah, and he shall be our God; Joshua said to them,
ye cannot do it, for the Lord Jehovah is holy, strong, and jealous; but the people
persevering to serve Jehovah; he saith to them, ye are witnesses your selves, that ye have
chosen for your selves the Lord, to serve him; take away therefore strange gods out of the
midst of you, and incline your hearts to the Lord God of Israel and he erected a great
stone saying, this stone shalbe for a witness, least perhaps afterwards ye will deny and lye
[lie] to the Lord your God; therefore the other gods, to which the other Nations were
given, were the Sun, Moon, twelve Signs, and other Celestial bodies, and Divine fabricks,
yet not as they were bodies, but as the soul adhereth to them, and the whole Militia of
Heaven, which Jeremy cals the queen of Heaven, that is the power by which the Heaven
is governed, viz. the soul of the world, of which Jeremy saith, The sons gather sticks, and
part thereof maketh a fire, and the women mingle oyl [oil], that they might make a cake
for the Queen of heaven, neither was the worship of Doulia, to this Queen and other
Celestiall souls prohibited them, but of Latria only, which they that gave, are reproved of
the Lord; but the name of these souls or Gods, we have declared; but to what Regions,
People, and Cities they were ascribed as proper and tutelar gods; Origen, Tertullian,
Apuleius, Diodorus, and very many other historians, partly relate to us: Therefore all
people worshipped their gods with their proper ceremonies; The Beotians, Amphiarus;
The Africans, Mopsus; the Egyptians, Osiris and Isis; the Ethiopians, who inhabite Mero,
Jupiter and Bacchus; The Arabians; Bacchus and Venus; the Scythians, Minerva; the
Naucratians, Serapis; the Syrians, Atargates; the Arabians, Diaphares; the Africans,
Celestus; the Nornians, Tibelenus: In Italy also by the free Cities consecration,
Delventius, was the God of the Crustumensians, Viridianus of the Narvensians, Aucharia
of the Æsculans, Narsia of the Volsians, Valentia of the Otriculans, Nortia of the
Sutrinians, Curis of the Phaliscians; these especially were famous. The Latians did adore
with the highest worship, Mars; the Egyptians, Isis; the Moors, Iuba; the Macedonians,
Cabrius; the Carthaginians, Uranus; the Latines, Faunus; the Romans, Quirinus; the
Sabines, Sangus; the Athenians, Minerva; Samos, Juno; Paphos, Venus; Lemnos, Vulcan;
Naxos, Bacchus; Delphos, Apollo; and as Ovid singeth in his Fasti,
Athens do Pallas; Crete, Dian' implore.
The island Lemnos Vulcan doth adore.
The Spartans, Juno ----
The Carthaginians and Leucadians did worship Saturn; Crete, Pyreus, Homole, Ida, Elis
and Lybia [Libia], Jupiter, where was his Oracle: Epirus, Latium, Gnidus, Lycia, Pisa,
Macedonia, Mars; The Thermodonians, Scythians, and Thracia, the Sun; the Scythians
did worship only one God, sacrificing an horse to him; the same also the Heliopolitans,
and Assyrians did worship; and under the name of Apollo, the Rhodians, Hyperboreans
and Milesians; and the mountains Parnassus, Phaselus, Cynthus, Soracte, were holy to
him, and the Islands Delos, Claros, Tenedos and Mallois, a place in the Isle Lesbos, and
the Grynean Grove or Town, besides the Cities, Patara, Chrysa, Tarapnas, Cyrrha,
Delphos, Arrephina, Entrosi, Tegyra; Also Thebes, the Island Naxos, Nise a City of
Arabia, Callichoros a river of Paphlagonia, were consecrated to him under the name of
Bacchus and Dionysus; also Parnassus, and Cytheros mountains of Boetia, in which
every second yeer [year] by course, the feasts Bacchanalia were kept; also the
Thamaritans a people neighbors to the Hircanians did worship Bacchus with their own
Ceremonies. The Assyrians first of all introduced the worship of Venus; then the
Paphians in Cyprus, and Phenicians [Phoenicians], and Cythereans, whom (as Ageus
reports) the Athenians followed: amongst the Lacedomonians, Venus Armatha was
worshipped; at Delphos, Venus Epitybia; she was also adored of the Coans; and in
Amathus an island of the Aegean Sea, and in Memphi [Memphis] a City of Egypt, and in
Gnido and Sicilia, and the Idalian Grove, and the City Hypepa, and Erice a mountain of
Sicilia, and in Calidonia, Cyrene and Samos; and no Deity of the old Gods (Aristotle
being witness) is reported to have been worshipped with greater ceremonies, and in more
places; the French did especially worship Mercury, calling him Teutates; so also the
Arcadians, Hormopolites, Egyptians and Memphites. The Scythians about mount Taurus,
did worship the Moon under the name of Diana; and in Ephesus, she had a most stately
Temple; and in Mycena after the death of Thoantes, King of Taurica, her Image being
stollen away by Iphigenia and Orestes, she was worshipped nigh Aricia. The Rite of
Ceremonies being changed, she was worshipped likewise by the Magnesians, a people of
Thessalia, and in Pisa, a City of Achaia, and in Tybur, and the Aventinum a Roman hill,
and in Perga a City of Pamphila, and in Agras in the Kingdom of Attica; and the
Catenian people are reported to have worshipped the Moon under the Masculine sexe;
there were also other places consecreted to other Deities, as to Pallas, who is called
Minerva, were consecrated Athens, the mountains Pyreus, Aracynthus, the River
Tritones, and Alcomeneum a city of Boetia, and Neo one of the Islands of the Cyclades;
The holy places of Ceres are, Eleusis, Attica, Enna, and Catana, Cities of Sicilia, and
Mount Aetna; The chief worship to Vulcan was in the Island of Lemnos, and in Imbres,
an Island of Thracia and Therasia, an Island consecrated to Vulcan, and also Sicilia.
Vesta was the goddess of the Trojans, whom runaway Aeneas carryed into Italy, and to
her are given the Phrygians, Idea, and Dindymus, mountains of Phrygia, and Reatum a
City of Umbria; also the mountain Berecynthus, and Pessinuntium, a City of Phrygia;
The Cities Carthage, Prosenna, Arhos, and Mycena, worshipped Juno; also the Island
Samos, and the people of Phaliscia, Orchestus a City of Boetia, and Tenatus a
Promontory of Laconia, were consecrated to Neptune, and the Trezenian Nation and City
were under the protection of Neptune: of this sort therefore were the gods of the Nations,
which did rule and govern them, which Moses himself in Deuteronomy calleth Gods of
the earth, to the which all Nations were attributed, not signifying others then the heavenly
Stars, and their souls.
Chapter xv. What our Theologians think concerning the Celestiall souls.
That the heavens and the heavenly bodies are animated with certain Divine souls, is not
only the opinion of Poets, and Philosophers, but also the assertion of the sacred
Scriptures, and of the Catholicks; for Ecclesiates also describeth the soul of heaven, and
Jerom upon same same expresly confesseth it: In like manner Origen in his book of
Principles, seemeth to think that Celestiall bodies are animated, because they are said to
receive commands from God, which is only agreeable to a reasonable nature; for it ii
written, I have enjoyned a command on all the Stars; Moreover Job seemeth to have fully
granted, that the Stars are not free from the stain of sin; for there we read, the Stars also
are not clean in his sight; which cannot verily be referred to the brightness of their bodies;
moreover that the Celestiall bodies are animated, even Eusebius the Pamphilian thought,
and also Austin [Augustine] in his Enchiridion; but of the latter writers Albertus Magnus
in his book of four co-equals, and Thomas Aquinas in his book of Spiritual Creatures, and
John Scot upon the second of the sentences; to these the most learned Cardinall Nich.
Cusanus may be added; Moreover Aureolus himself in a strong disputation doth convince
these things; who moreover thinketh it not strange, that the Heavenly bodies are
worshipped with the worship of Doulia, and that their suffrages and helps are implored;
to whom also Thomas himself consenteth, unless the occasion of Idolatry should hinder
this rite; moreover Plotinus maintaineth that they know our wishes, and hear them; but if
any one would contradict these, and account them sacrilegious tenents [tenets], let him
hear Austin [Augustine] in his Enchiridion, and in his book of Retractions, and Thomas in
the second book against the Gentiles, and in his Quodlibets, and Scotus upon the
sentences, and Gulielmus Parisiensis in his sum of the universe, who unanimously
answer, that to say the heavenly bodies are animated or inanimated, nothing belongeth to
the Catholick faith. Therefore although it seemeth to many ridiculous, that the souls
themselves be placed in the spheres and Stars, and as it were the Gods of the Nations,
every one doth govern his Regions, Cities, Tribes, People, Nations and Tongues, yet it
will not seem strange to those who rightly understand it.
Chapter xvi. Of Intelligences and spirits, and of the threefold kind of them,
and of their diverse names, and of Infernall and subterraneall spirits.
Now consequently we must discourse of Intelligences, spirits and Angels. An Intelligence
is an intelligible substance, free from all gross and putrifying mass of a body, immortall,
insensible, assisting all, having Influence over all; and the nature of all intelligences,
spirits and Angels is the same. But I call Angels here, not those whom we usually call
Devils, but spirits so called from the propriety of the word, as it were, knowing,
understanding and wise. But of these according to the tradition of the Magicians, there
are three kinds, the first of which they call supercelestiall, and minds altogether separated
from a body, and as it were intellectuall spheres, worshipping the one only God, as it
were their most firm and stable unity or center; wherefore they even call them gods, by
reason of a certain particiption of the divinity; for they are always full of God, and
overwhelmed with the Divine Nectar. These are only about God, and rule not the bodies
of the world, neither are they fitted for the government of inferior things, but infuse the
light received from God unto the inferior orders, and distribute every ones duty to all of
them; The Celestial intelligences do next follow these in the second order, which they
call worldly Angels viz. being appointed besides the Divine worship for the spheres of the
world, and for the government of every heaven & Star, whence they are divided into so
many orders, as there are heavens in the world, & as there are Stars in the Heavens, and
they called those Saturnine, who rule the Heaven of Saturn & Saturn himself; others
Joviall, who rule the heaven of Jupiter and Jupiter himself, and in like maner they name
diverse Angels, as well for the name, as the vertue of the other Stars; and because the old
Astrologers did maintain maintain fifty five motions, therefore they invented so many
Intelligences or Angels; they placed also in the Starry heaven, Angels, who might rule the
signs, triplicities, decans, quinaries, degrees and Stars; for although the school of the
Peripateticks assigne one onely intelligence to each of the Orbs of the Stars: yet seeing
every Star and small part of the heaven hath its proper and different power and influence,
it is necessary that it also have his ruling intelligence, which may confer power and
operate; therefore they have established twelve Princes of the Angels, which rule the
twelve signs of the Zodiack, and thirty six which may rule the so many Decans, and
seventy two, which may rule the so many Quinaries of heaven, and the tongues of men
and the Nations, and four which may rule the triplicities and Elements, and seven
governors of the whole world, according to the seven planets, and they have given to all
of them names, and seals, which they call Characters, and used them in their invocations,
incantations, and carvings, decribing them in the instruments of their operations, images,
plates, glasses, rings, papers, wax lights and such like; and if at any time they did operate
for the Sun, they did invocate by the name of the Sun, and by the names of Solare
Angels, and so of the rest. Thirdly they established Angels as Ministers for the disposing
of those things which are below, which Origen calleth certain invisible powers to the
which those things which are on earth, are committed to be disposed of. For sometimes
they being visible to none do direct our journies [journeys] and all our businesses, are oft
present at battels [battles], and by secret helpes do give the desired successes to their
friends, for they are said, that at their pleasures they can procure prosperity, and inflict
adversity. In like manner they distribute these into more orders, so as some are fiery,
some watery, some aerial, some terrestrial; which four species of Angels are computed
according to the four powers of the Celestiall souls, viz. the mind, reason, imagination,
and the vivifying and moving nature; Hence the fiery follow the mind of the Celestiall
souls, whence they concur to the contemplation of more sublime things, but the Aeriall
follow the reason, and favor the rationall faculty, and after a certain manner separate it
from the sensitive and vegetative; therefore it serveth for an active life, as the fiery for a
contemplative, but the watery following the imagination, serve for a voluptuous life; The
earthly following nature, favour vegetable nature; moreover they distinguish also this
kind of Angels into Saturnine and Joviall, according to the names of the Stars, and the
Heavens; further some are Orientall, some Occidentall, some Meridional, some
Septentrionall; Moreover there is no part of the world destitute of the proper assistance of
these Angels, not because they are there alone, but because they reign there especially,
for they are everywhere, although some especially operate and have their influence in this
place, some elsewhere; neither truly are these things to be understood, as though they
were subject to the influences of the Stars, but as they have correspondence with the
Heaven above the world, from whence especially all things are directed, and to the which
all things ought to be conformable; whence as these Angels are appointed for diverse
Stars, so also for diverse places and times, not that they are limited by time or place,
neither by the bodies which they are appointed to govern, but because the order of
wisdom hath so decreed, therefore they favor more, and patronize those bodies, places,
times, stars; so they have called some Diurnall, some Nocturnall, other Meridionall; in
like manner some are called Woodmen, some Mountaineers, some Fieldmen, some
Domesticks. Hence the gods of the Woods, Country gods, Satyrs, familiars, Fairies of the
fountains, Fairies of the Woods, Nymphs of the Sea, the Naiades, Neriades, Dryades,
Pierides, Hamadryades, Potumides, Hinnides, Agapte, Pales, Pareades, Dodonæ, Feniliæ,
Lavernæ, Pareæ, Muses, Aonides, Castalides, Heliconides, Pegasides, Meonides,
Phebiades, Camenæ, the Graces, the Genii, Hobgoblins, and such like; whence they call
them vulgar superiors, some the demi-gods [demigods] and goddesses; some of these are
so familiar and acquainted with men, that they are even affected with humane
perturbations, by whose instruction Plato thinketh that men do oftentimes wonderfull
things, even as by the instruction of men, some beasts which are most nigh unto us, as
Apes, Dogs, Elephants, do often strange things above their species; and they who have
written the Chronicles of the Danes and Norwegians, do testifie, that spirits of diverse
kinds in those regions are subject to mens commands; moreover some of these to be
corporeall and mortall, whose bodies are begotten and dy [die], yet to be long lived is the
opinion of the Egyptians and Platonists, and especially approved by Proclus. Plutarch
also and Demetrius the Philosopher, and Aemilianus the Rhetoritian affirm the same;
Therefore of these spirits of the third kind, as the opinion of the Platonists is; they report
that there are so many Legions, as there are Stars in the Heaven, and so many spirits in
every Legion, as in heaven it self Stars, but there are (as Athanasius delivereth) who
think, that the true number of the good spirits, is according to the number of men ninety
nine parts, according to the parable of the hundred sheep; others think only nine parts,
according to the parable of the ten groats; others suppose the number of the Angels equal
with men, because it is written, He hath appointed the bounds of the people according to
the number of the Angels of God; and concerning their number many have written many
things, but the latter Theologians following the master of the dentences, Austin
[Augustine] and Gregory easily resolve themselves, saying, that the number of the good
Angels transcendeth humane capacity; to the which on the contrary, innumerable unclean
spirits do correspond, there being so many in the inferior world, as pure spirits in the
superior, and some Divines affirm that they have received this by revelations; under these
they place a kind of spirits, subterrany or obscure, which the Platonists call Angels that
failed, revengers of wickedness, and ungodliness, according to the decree of the Divine
justice, and they call them evill Angels and wicked spirits, because they oft annoy and
hurt even of their own accords; of these also they reckon more legions, and in like
manner distinguishing them according to the names of the Stars and Elements, and parts
of the world, they do place over them Kings, Princes and Rulers and the names of them;
of these, four most mischievous Kings do rule over the other [others], according to the
four parts of the world; under these many more Princes of Legions govern, and also many
of private offices. Hence the Gorgones, Statenocte, the furies. Hence Tisiphone, Alecto,
Megæra, Cerberus: They of this kind of spirits, Porphyry saith, inhabite a place nigh to
the earth, yea within the earth it self; there is no mischief, which they dare not commit;
they have altogether a violent and hurtfull custome, therefore they very much plot and
endeavor violent and sudden mischiefs; and when they make incursions, sometimes they
are wont to lie hide [hid], but sometimes to offer open violence, and are very much
delighted in all things done wickedly and contentiously.
Chapter xvii. Of these according to the opinion of the Theologians.
But our Theologians, together with Dionysius, maintain the three distinctions of Angels;
every one of which they divide into three orders, they call these Hierarchies, those quires,
whom Proclus also distinguisheth by the number nine. They place therefore in the
superior Hierarchies, Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones, as it were supercelestiall Angels
contemplating the order of the Divine providence; the first in the goodness of God; the
second in the Essence of God, as the form; the third in the wisdom. In the middle
Hierarchy they place the Dominations, Vertues, and Powers, as it were wordly Angels
concurring to the government of the world; the first of these command that which the
other execute; the second are Ministers to the Heavens and sometimes conspire to the
working of miracles; the third drive away those things which seem to be able to disturbe
the Divine Law; but in the inferior Hierarchy they place the Principalities, Archangels,
[and Angels,] whom also Iamblicus reckoneth up, these as ministering spirits descend to
take care of inferior things; the first of these take care of publike [public] things, princes
and magistrates, provinces and kingdoms, every one those that belong to themselves;
when we read in Daniel, But the prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty
one dayes; and Jesus the son of Syrach testifieth, that for every Nation a ruling Angel is
appointed; which also Moses by his song in Deuteronomy seemeth to shew forth, saying,
when the most High divided the Nations, he appointed them bounds according to the
number of the Angels of God. The second are present at sacred duties, and direct the
Divine worship about every man, and offer up the prayers and sacrifices of men before
the gods. The third dispose every smaller matter, and to each thing each one is a
preserver. There are also of these, who afford vertue to the least plants and stones and to
all inferior things; to whom many things are common with God, many with men, and
they are mediating Ministers; But Athanasius, besides Thrones, Cherubins, and
Seraphins, who are next to God, and magnify him uncessantly with hymns and continuall
praises, praying for our salvation, nameth the other orders, which by a common name he
calleth the militia of heaven. The first of these is the Doctrinall order, of the which he
was, who spake to Daniel, saying, Come, that I may teach thee what shall come to thy
people in the last dayes: Then there is the tutelar order, of the which we read also in
Daniel. Behold, Michael one of the Princes cometh to my help; and there, In that time
shall rise up Michael a great Prince, who standeth for the sons of thy people; of this order
was that Raphael also, who carryed forth and brought back Tobiah the younger; after this
is the Procuratory Order, of the which mention is made in Job, where we read, if the
Angel shall speak for him, he will intreat the Lord, and the Lord will be pleased with
him; and of the same order is expounded also that which is written in the sixteenth
Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, about the end. The works of the Lord have been made by his
appointment from the beginning, and he hath distributed their portions from the time they
have been made, he hath adorned their works for ever, they have not hungred [hungered],
nor been wearied, and have not desisted from their works, none of them shall oppress his
neighbor even for ever. The Ministeriall order followeth, of the which Paul to the
Hebrews saith, Are they not all Ministring spirits, sent forth for them who shall be heirs
of salvation? After these is the Auxiliary order, of the which we read in Esay, The Angels
of the Lord went forth and slew in the tent of the Assyrians 185. thousands. The
Receptory order of souls followeth this, of which we read in Luke, the soul of Lazarus
was carryed by Angels into the bosom of Abraham, and there we are taught, that we
should make to our selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that we may be received
into eternall Tabernacles. Moreover, there is the order of the Assistants, of the which we
reade in Zachary. These are the two sons of the Oyl [oil] of splendor, who assist the ruler
of the whole earth, but the Theologians of the Hebrews do otherwise number and call
these orders; for in the highest place are those which they call ùã÷ä úåéä [Haioth
Hacadosh] that is, creatures of sanctity, or by the which God äéäà giveth the gift of
being. In the second place succeed Ophanim íéðôåà that is forms or wheels, by the
which God äåäé distinguisheth the Chaos: In the third place are Aralim íéìàøà great,
strong, and mighty Angels, by the which Jehova [L: Tetragrammaton] Elohim
pronounced or Jehova [L: Tetragrammaton] joyned with He äåäéä administreth form
to the liquid matter: In the fourth place are Hasmalim íéìîùä by which El ìà God
framed the effigies of bodies. The fifth order is Seraphim íéôøù by the which God
Elohim Gibor øáéâ íéäìà draweth forth the elements. The sixt [sixth] is Malachim
íéëàìî that is of Angels, by the which God Eloha äåìà, produceth metals. The seventh
Elohim íéäìà that is the gods by the which God Jehovah Sabaoth úåàáö äåäé
produceth vegetables; The eighth Beni Elohim íéäìà éïá that is the sons of God, by the
which God Elohim Sabaoth úåàáö íéäìà procreateth Animals; The ninth & lowest
Cherubim íéáåøë by the which God Sadai éãù createth mankind; under these is the
order Animasticus called Issim íéùéà that is nobles, strong men, or blessed, by the
which God Adonai éðãà bestoweth prophecie.
Chapter xviii. Of the orders of evil spirits, and of their fall, and divers
natures.
There are some of the School of the Theologians, who distribute the evill spirits into nine
degrees, as contrary to the nine orders of the Angels; Therefone the first of these are
those which are called false gods, who usurping the name of God, would be worshipped
for gods, and require sacrifices and adorations, as that Devil, who saith to Christ, if thou
wilt fal [fall] down and worship me, I will give thee all these things, shewing him all the
kingdoms of the world; and the Prince of these is he who said, I will ascend ahove the
height of the clouds, and will he like to the most High; who is therefore called Beelzebub,
that is, an old god. In the second place follow the spirits of lies, of which sort was he who
went forth, and was a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets of Achab; and the Prince
of these is the Serpent Pytho; from whence Apollo is called Pythius, and that woman a
witch in Samuel, and the other in the Gospel, who had Pytho m their belly. Therefore this
kind of Devils joyneth himself to the Oracles, and deludeth men by divinations, and
predictions, so that he may deceive. In the third order are the vessels of iniquity, which
are also called the vessels of wrath, these are the inventors of evil things and of all
wicked arts, as in Plato, that devill Theutus who taught Cards and Dice; for all
wickedness, malice and deformity proceedeth from these; of the which in Genesis, in the
Benedictions of Simeon and Levi, Jacob saith, vessels of iniquity are in their habitations;
into their counsel let not my soul come; whom the Psalmist calleth vessels of death, Esay
vessels of fury, and Jeremy vessels of wrath, Ezekiel vessels of destroying and slaying,
and their prince is Belial, which is interpreted without a yoak [yoke] or disobedient, a
prevaricator and an Apostate, of whom Paul to the Corinthians saith, what agreement
hath Christ with Beliall? Fourthly follow the revengers of evil, and their Prince is
Asmodeus, viz. causing judgement; After these in the fifth place come the deluders, who
Imitate miracles, and serve wicked conjurers and witches, and seduce the people by their
miracles, as the serpent seduced Eve, and their Prince is Satan, of whom is written in the
Revelations, that he seduced the whole world, doing great signs, and causing fire to
descend from heaven in the sight of men, seducing the inhabitants of the earth, by reason
of the signs, which are given him to do. Sixthly the Aeriall powers offer themselves; they
joyn [join] themselves to thundering and lightnings, corrupting the aire, causing
pestilences and other evils; in the number of which, are the four Angels, of whom the
Revelation speaketh, to whom it is given to hurt the Earth and Sea, holding the four
windes, from the four corners of the earth; and their prince is called Meririm; he is the
Meridian Devill, a boyling [boiling] spirit, a devill raging in the South, whom Paul to the
Ephesians calleth the Prince of the power of this air, and the spirit which worketh in the
children of disobedience. The seventh mansion the furies possess, which are powers of
evil, discords, war and devastations, whose Prince in the Revelations is called in Greek
Apollyon, in Hebrew Abaddon, that is destroying and wasting. In the eighth place are the
accusers, or the inquisitors, whose Prince is Astarath [Astaroth], that is, a searcher out: in
the Greek language he is called Diabolos, that is an accuser, or calumniator, which in the
Revelations is called the accuser, of the brethren, accusing them night & day before the
face of our God. Moreover the Tempters and Ensnarers have the last place, one of which
is present with every man, which we therefore call the evill Genius, and their Prince is
Mammon, which is interpreted covetousness: But all unanimously maintain that evil
spirits do wander up & down in this inferiour world, enraged against all, whom they
therefore call Devils, of whom Austin [Augustine] in his first hook of the incarnation of
the word to Januarius, saith: Concerning the devils and his Angels contrary to Vertues,
the Ecclesiasticall preaching hath taught, that there are such things; but what they are and
how they are, he hath not clear enough expounded: yet there is this opinion amongst
most, that this Devill was an Angel, and being made an Apostate, perswaded very many
of the Angels to decline with himself, who even unto this day are called his Angels:
Greece notwithstanding thinketh not that all these are damned, nor that they are all
purposefully evil, but that from the Creation of the world, the dispensation of things is
ordained by this means, that the tormenting of sinful souls is made over to them: The
other Theologians say that not any Devill was created evill, but that they were driven and
cast forth of Heaven, from the orders of good Angels for their pride, whose fall not only
our and the Hebrew Theologians, but also the Assyrians, Arabians, Egyptians and Greeks
do confirm by their tenents [tenets]; Pherecydes he Syrian describeth the fall of the
Devils and that Ophis, that is, the Devilish serpent, was the head of that rebelling Army;
Trismegistus sings the same fall in his Pimander, and Homer under the name of Ararus,
in his verses; and Plutarch in his speech of usury, signifieth, that Empedocles knew that
the fall of the devils was after this manner: the devils also themselves often confess their
fall: they therefore being cast forth into this valley of misery, some that are nigh to us
wander up and down in this obscure air, others inhabit lakes, rivers and seas, others the
earth, and terrifie [terrify] earthly things, and invade those who dig Wells and Metals,
cause the gapings of the earth, strike together the foundation of mountains, and vex not
only men, but also other creatures; some being content with laughter and delusion only,
do contrive rather to weary men, then to hurt them, some heightning themselves to the
length of a Giants body, and again shrinking themselves up to the smallness of the
Pigmies, and changing themselves into divers forms, do disturb men with vain fear:
others study lies and blasphemies, as we read of one in the third book of Kings, saying, I
will go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets of Achab: but the worst
sort of devils are those, who lay wait and overthrow passengers in their journeys, and
rejoyce in wars and effusion of blood, and afflict men with most cruell stripes: we read of
such in Matthew, for fear of whom no man durst pass that way; moreover the scripture
reckoneth up nocturnall, diurnall, and meridionall devils, and describeth other spirits of
wickedness by divers names, as we read in Esay of Satyrs, Scrichowls [screech owls],
Syrenes, storks, Owls; and in the Psalms of Aspes, Basiliskes, Lions, Dragons; and in the
Gospel we read of Scorpions and Mammon and the prince of this world and rulers of
darkness, of all which Beelzebub is the prince, whom Scripture calleth the prince of
wickedness. Porphyrie [Porphyry] saith, their prince is Serapis, who is also called Pluto
by the Greeks, and also Cerberus is chief amongst them, that three-headed dog: viz.
Because he is conversant in three elements, air, water, and earth, a most pernicious devill;
whence also Proserpina, who can do very much in these three elements, is their Princess,
which she testifies of her self in her answers, in these verses.
Of threefold nature I Lucina fair,
The daughter am, sent from above the air;
The golden Phoebe am, and with heads trine,
Whom many forms do change, and the trine sign
Which I bear with forms of earth, fire, and air,
I for black mastives [mastiffs] of the earth do care.
Origen's opinion concerning the devils, is: The spirits who act of their own free will, left
the service of God with their Prince the devil; if they began to repent a little, are clothed
with humane flesh; That further by this repentance, after the resurrection, by the same
means by the which they came into the flesh, they might at the last return to the vision of
God, being then also freed from etheriall and aeriall bodies, and then all knees are to be
bowed to God, of Celestiall, Terrestrial, and Infernal things, that God may be all in all:
Moreover Saint Ireneus approveth the opinion of Justine Martyr, who hath said, Satan
never durst speak blasphemy against God, before that the Lord came on the earth,
because that he knew not as yet his condemnation; but there are many of the devils who
are fallen, who hope for their salvation: Very many think by the History of Paul the
Hermite written by Jerome, & reverenced by the Church with Canonical hours, also by
the Legend of Brandan, they are so taught; and even by this Argument they maintain that
their prayers are heard; that we read in the Gospels, that Christ heard the prayers of the
devils, and granted that they should enter into the Herd of Swine; to these also agreeth the
71. Psalm, according to our supputation, but according to the supputation of the Hebrews
the 72, where we read, the Ethiopians shall fall before him, and his enemies lick the dust;
there it is read according to the Hebrew text, they that inhabit the desert, shall bend their
knees before him, that is, the aiery spirits shall adore him, as the Cabalists affirm, and his
enemies shall lick the dust, which they understand of Zazell, and his Army: of which we
read in Genesis, Dust shalt thou eat all the dayes of thy life, and elsewhere the Prophet
saith, because the dust of the earth is his bread; hence the Cabalists think, that even some
devils shall be saved, which opinion also it is manifest that Origen was of.
Chapter xix. Of the bodies of the Devils.
Concerning the bodies of Angels, there is a great dissension betwixt the late Divines, and
Philosophers; for Thomas affirms that all angels are incorporeall, yea evil angels, yet that
they do assume bodies sometimes, which after awhile they put off again; Dionysius in
Divine Names strongly affirms that Angels are incorporeal. Yet Austin [Augustine] upon
Genesis delivers his opinion, that Angels are said to be Aery, and Fiery Animals: because
they have the nature of Aeriall bodies, neither can they be dissolved by death, because the
element which is more active than passive is predominant in them; the same seem to
affirm, that all Angels in the beginning of their creation had Aeriall bodies, being formed
of the more pure, and superiour part of the air, being more fit to act, then to suffer; and
that those bodies were after the confirmation preserved in good Angels, but changed in
the evil in their fall, into the quality of more thick air, that they might be tormented in the
fire: Moreover Magnus Basilius doth attribute bodies not only to Devils, but also to pure
angels, as certain thin, Aeriall, pure spirits; to which Gregory Nazianzen doth agree.
Apuleius was of opinion, that all angels had not bodies; for in the book of the Demon of
Socrates, he saith, that there is a more propitious kind of spirits, which being alwayes free
from corporeal bonds, are procured by certain prayers. But Psellus the Platonist, and
Christianus do think that the nature of spirits is not without a body; but yet not that the
body of angels, & devils are the same; for that is without matter; but the bodies of devils
are in a manner materiall, as shadows, and subject to passion, that they being struck are
pained, and may be burnt in the fire, into conspicuous ashes, which as is recorded, was
done in Tuscia. And although it be a spirituall body, yet it is most sensible, and being
touched, suffers; and although it be cut asunder, yet comes together again, as air and
water, but yet in the mean time is much pained. Hence it is that they fear the edge of the
sword, and any weapon. Hence in Virgil the Sybill saith to Aeneas,
Do thou go on thy way and draw thy sword.
Upon which Servius saith that she would have Aeneas have his sword consecrated.
Orpheus also describes the kinds of Demoniacall bodies; there is indeed one body, which
onely abides the fire, but being seen, doth not suffer, which Orpheus calls fiery, and
Celestiall Demons: the other is contemperated with the mixtion of fire, and air, whence
they are called Etheriall, and Aeriall; to which if any waterish thing was added, there
arose a third kinde, whence they are Called watery, which sometimes are seen: to which
if any earthiness be added, this is not very thick; they are called Terrene Demons, and
they are more conspicuous, and sensible. Now the bodies of sublime Demons are
nourished of the most pure Etheriall element, and are not rashly to be seen of any, unless
they be sent from God; being weaved of such bright threads, and so small, that they
transmit all the rayes of our sight by their finess, and reverberate them with splendor, and
deceive by their subtlety; of which Calcidius saith, Etheriall, and Aeriall Demons,
because their bodies have not so much fire as that they are conspicuous, nor yet so much
earth that the solidity of them resists the touch, and their whole composure being made up
of the clearness of the skie [sky], and moisture of the air, hath joyned [joined] together an
indissoluble superficies. The other Demons are neither so appearable, nor invisible, being
sometimes conspicuous are turned into divers figures, and put upon themselves bodies
like shadows, of blood-less images, drawing the filthiness of a gross body, and they have
too much communion with the Wood (which the Ancients did call the wicked soul) and
by reason of their affinity with earth, and water, are also taken with Terrene pleasures,
and lust; of which sort are hobgoblins, and Incubi, and Succubi, of which number it is no
absurd conjecture to think that Melusina was: yet there is none of the Demons (as Mareus
supposeth) is to be supposed male or female, seeing this difference of sex belongs to
compounds, but the bodies of Demons are simple, neither can any of the Demons turn
themselves into all shapes at their pleasure; but to the fiery, and aiery it is easie so to do,
viz: to change themselves into what shapes their imagination conceives: now
subterraneall and dark Demons, because their nature being concluded in the streights of a
thick and unactive body, cannot make the diversity of shapes, as others can. But the
waterie, and such as dwell upon the moist superfices of the earth, are by reason of the
moistness of the element, for the most part like to women; of such kinde are the fairies of
the Rivers, and Nymphs of the Woods: but those which inhabite dry places, being of dryer
bodies, shew themselves in form of men, as Satyrs, or Onosceli, with Asses legs, or
Fauni, and Incubi, of which he saith, he learned by experience there were many, and that
some of them oftentimes did desire, and made compacts with women to lie with them:
and that there were some Demons, which the French call Dusii, that did continually
attempt this way of lust.
Chapter xx. Of the annoyance of evil spirits, and the preservation we have
by good spirits.
It is the common opinion of Divines, that all evil spirits are of that nature, that they hate
God as well as men; therefore Divine providence hath set over us more pure spirits, with
whom he hath entrusted us, as with Shepheards [shepherds], and Governours, that they
should daily help us, and drive away evil spirits from us, and curb, and restrain them, that
they should not hurt us as much as they would; as is read in Tobia, that Raphael did
apprehend the Demon called Asmodeus, and bound him in the wilderness of the upper
Egypt. Of these Hesiod saith, there are 30000 of Jupiters immortall spirits living on the
Earth, which are the keepers of mortall men, who that they might observe justice and
mercifull deeds, having clothed themselves with air, go every where on the Earth. For
there is no Prince, nor potentate could be safe, nor any woman continue uncorrupted, no
man in this valley of ignorance could come to the end appointed to him by God, if good
spirits did not secure us; Or if evill spirits should be permitted to satisfie the wils [wills]
of men; As therefore amongst the good spirits there is a proper keeper or protector
deputed to every one, corroborating the spirit of the man to good; so of evil spirits there is
sent forth an enemy ruling over the flesh, and desire thereof; and the good spirit fights for
us as a preserver against the enemie [enemy], and flesh; Now man betwixt these
contenders is the midle [middle], and left in the hand of his own Counsell, to whom he
will give victory; we cannot therefore accuse Angels, if they do not bring the Nations
entrusted to them, to the knowledge of the true God, to true piety, and suffer them to fall
into errours and perverse worship: but it is to be imputed to themselves, who have of their
own accord declined from the right path, adhering to the spirits of errours, giving victory
to the Devill; for it is in the hand of man to adhere to whom he please, and overcome
whom he will, by whom, if once the enemy the devill be overcome, he is made his
servant, and being overcome, cannot fight any more with another, as a wasp that hath lost
his sting: to which opinion Origen assents in his book Periarchon, concluding, that the
Saints fighting against evil spirits, and overcoming, do lessen their armie [army], neither
can he that is overcome by any, molest any more; As therefore there is given to every
man a good spirit, so also there is given to every man an evil Diabolicall spirit, whereof
each seeks an union with our spirit, and endeavours to attract it to it self, and to be mixed
with it, as wine with water; the good indeed, through all good works conformable to it
self, change us into Angels, by uniting us, as it is writ of John Baptist in Malachie:
Behold I send mine Angel before thy face: of which transmutation, and union it is writ
elsewhere; He which adheres to God is made one spirit with him. An evil spirit also by
evil works, studies to make us conformable to it self, and to unite, as Christ saith of
Judas, Have not I chosen twelve, & one of you is a devil? And this is that which Hermes
saith, when a spirit hath influence upon the soul of man, he scatters the seed of his own
notion, whence such a soul being sowen [sown] with seeds, and full of fury, brings forth
thence wonderfull things, and whatsoever are the offices of spirits: for when a good spirit
hath influence upon a holy soul, it doth exalt it to the light of wisdom; but an evil spirit
being transfused into a wicked soul, doth stir it up to theft, to man-slaughter, to lusts, and
whatsoever are the offices of evil spirits. Good spirits (as saith Iamblicus) purge the souls
most perfectly; and some bestow upon us other good things; they being present do give
health to the body, vertue to the soul, security to the soul, what is mortall in us they take
away, cherish heat, and make it more efficacious to life, and by an Harmonie [harmony]
do alwayes infuse light into an intelligible mind. But whether there be many keepers of a
man, or one alone, Theologians differ amongst themselves; we think there are more, the
Prophet saying, he hath given his Angels a charge concerning thee, that they should keep
thee in all thy wayes: which as saith Hierome, is to be understood of any man, as well as
of Christ. All men therefore are governed by the ministry of divers Angels, and are
brought to any degree of vertue, deserts, and dignity, who behave themselves worthy of
them; but they which carry themselves unworthy of them are deposed, and thrust down,
as well by evil spirits, as good spirits, unto the lowest degree of misery, as their evil
merits shall require: but they that are attributed to the sublimer Angels, are preferred
before other men, for Angels having the care of them, exalt them, and subject others to
them by a certain occult power; which although neither of them perceive, yet he that is
subjected, feels a certain yoke of presidency, of which he cannot easily acquit himself,
yea he fears and reverenceth that power, which the superiour Angels make to flow upon
superiours, and with a certain terrour bring the inferiours into a fear of presidency. This
did Homer seem to be sensible of, when he saith, that the Muses begot of Jupiter, did
alwayes as inseparable companions assist the Kings begot of Jupiter, who by them were
made venerable, and magnificent. So we read that M. Antonius being formerly joyned
[joined] in singular friendship with Octavus Augustus, were wont alwayes to play
together. But when as alwayes Augustus went away conquerour, that a certain Magician
Counselled M. Antonius thus. O Antony, what dost thou do with that yong [young] man?
shun, and avoid him, for although thou art elder then he, and art more skillfull then he,
and art better descended then he, and hast endured the Wars of more Emperours, yet thy
Genius doth much dread the Genius of this yong man, and thy Fortune flatter his Fortune;
unless thou shalt shun him, it seemeth wholly to decline to him. Is not the Prince like
other men, how should other men fear, and reverence him, unless a Divine terrour should
exalt him, and striking a fear into others, depress them, that they should reverence him as
a Prince? Wherefore we must endeavour, that being purified by doing well, and following
sublime things, and choosing opportune times, and seasons, we he entrusted or
committed to a degree of sublimer, and more potent Angels, who taking care of us, we
may deservedly be preferred before others.
Chapter xxi. Of obeying a proper Genius, and of the searching out the
nature thereof.
As every Region in the Celestials hath a certain Star, and Celestiall image which hath
influence upon it before others: so also in supercelestials doth it obtain a certain
Intelligence set over it, and guarding it, with infinite other ministring spirits of its order,
all which are called by a common name, the Sons of Elohim Sabaoth úåàáö íéäìà éðá
i.e. Sons of the God of hosts. Hence as often as the most high doth deliberate of War, or
slaughter, or the desolation of any Kingdom, or subduing of any people in these
inferiours, then no otherwise, when these shall come upon the earth, there proceeds a
conflict of these spirits above, as it is written in Isaiah, The Lord of Hosts shall visit the
Army of the high, in the heavens; and the Kings of the earth, in the earth; of which
conflicts of spirits and presidents, we read also in Daniel, viz. of the Prince of the
Kingdom of the Persians, of the Prince of the Grecians, of the Prince of the peoplc of
Israel; and of their conflict amongst themselves, of which also Homer seemed formerly
to be sensible of, when he sang,
Great was the rumour in the Court above
When that the gods War mutually did move:
When Phoebus did to Neptune battle give,
Pallas with Mars the god of War did strive,
Diana did withstand in hostile way
Juno, and Latona did for to slay
Mercury attempt. -----
Nevertheless seeing there he in every region spirits of all sorts, yet they are more
powerfull there which are of the same order with the president of that region. So in the
Solary region, the Solary spirits are most potent; in the Lunary, Lunary, and so of the rest.
And hence it is that various events of our affairs offer themselves, & follow us in places
and provinces, being more Fortunate in one place more then another, where viz. the
Demon our Genius shall receive more power, or we shall there obtain a more powerfull
Demon of the same order. So Solary men, if they shall travell into a Solary region, or
province, shall he made there far more fortunate, because there they shall have more
powerfull, and more advantagious conducters or Genii, by the present aid of whom they
shall be brought beyond expectation, and their own power, to happy events. Hence it is
that the choice of a place, region, or time doth much conduce to the happiness of life
where any one shall dwell, & frequent, according to the nature & instinct of his own
Genius. Sometimes also the change of the name doth conduce to the same, for whereas
the properties of names being the significators of things themselves, do as it were in a
glass declare the conditions of their forms; thence it comes to pass, that names being
changed, the things oftentimes are changed. Hence the sacred writ doth not without cause
bring in God, whilest he was blessing Abram, and Jacob, changing their names, calling
the one Abraham, and the other Israel. Now the ancient Phylosophers [philosophers]
teach us to know the nature of the Genius of every man, by Stars, their influx, and
aspects, which are potent in the Nativity of any one; but with instructions so divers, and
differing amongst themselves, that it is much difficult to understand the mysteries of the
heavens by their directions. For Porphyrie [Porphyry] seeks the Genius of the Star, which
is the Lady of the Nativity: but Maternus either from thence, or from the Planets, which
had then most dignities, or from that into whose house the Moon was to enter after that,
which at the birth of the man it doth retain. But the Caldeans [Chaldeans] enquire after
the Genius, either from the Sun above, or from the Moon. But others, and many Hebrews
think it is to be enquired after from some corner of the heaven, or from all of them.
Others seek a good Genius from the eleventh house, which therefore they call a good
Demon; but an evil Genius from the sixth, which therefore they call an evil Demon. But
seeing the inquisition of these is laborious, & most occult, we shall far more easily
enquire into the nature of our Genius from our selves, observing those things which the
instinct of nature doth dictate to, and the heaven inclines us to from our infancy, being
distracted with no contagion, or those things which the minde, the soul being freed from
vain cares, and sinister affections, and impediments being removed, doth suggest to us:
These without all doubt are the perswasions [persuasions] of a Genius which is given to
every one from their birth, leading, and perswading us to that whither the Star thereof
inclines us to.
Chapter xxii. That there is a threefold keeper of man, and from whence
each of them proceed.
Every man hath a threefold good Demon, as a proper keeper, or preserver, the one
whereof is holy, another of the nativity, and the other of profession. The holy Demon is
one, according to the Doctrine of the Egyptians, assigned to the rationall soul, not from
the Stars or Planets, but from a supernaturall cause, from God himself, the president of
Demons, being universall, above nature: This doth direct the life of the soul, & doth
alwaies put good thoughts into the minde, being alwaies active in illuminating us,
although we do not alwaies take notice of it; but when we are purified, and live
peaceably, then it is perceived by us, then it doth as it were speak with us, and
communicates its voyce [voice] to us, being before silent, and studyeth daily to bring us
to a sacred perfection. Also by the ayd [aid] of this Demon we may avoid the malignity of
a Fate, which being religiously worshipped by us in honesty, and sanctity, as we know
was done by Socrates; the Pythagoreans think we may be much helped by it, as by
dreams, and signs, by diverting evill things, and carefully procuring good things.
Wherefore the Pythagorians were wont with one consent to pray to Jupiter, that he would
either preserve them from evill, or shew them by what Demon it should be done. Now the
Demon of the nativity, which is called the Genius, doth here descend from the disposition
of the world, and from the circuits of the Stars, which were powerfull in his nativity.
Hence there be some that think, when the soul is coming down into the body, it doth out
of the quire of the Demons naturally choose a preserver to it self, nor only choose this
guide to it self, but hath that willing to defend it. This being the executor, and keeper of
the life, doth help it to the body, and takes care of it, being Communicated to the body,
and helps a man to that very office, to which the Celestials have deputed him, being born.
Whosoever therefore have received a fortunate Genius, are made thereby vertuous in
their works, efficacious, strong, and prosperous. Wherefore they are called by the
Phylosophers [philosophers] fortunate, or luckily born. Now the Demon of profession is
given by the Stars, to which such a profession, or sect, which any man hath professed, is
subjected, which the soul, when it began to make choyce [choice] in this body, and to
take upon itself dispositions, doth secretly desire. This Demon is changed, the profession
being changed; then according to the dignity of the profession, we have Demons of our
profession more excellent and sublime, which successively take care of man, which
procures a keeper of profession, as he proceeds from vertue to vertue. When therefore a
profession agrees with our nature, there is present with us a Demon of our profession like
unto us, and sutable [suitable] to our Genius, and our life is made more peaceable, happy,
and prosperous: but when we undertake a profession unlike, or contrary to our Genius,
our life is made laborious, and troubled with disagreeing patrons. So it falls out that some
profit more in any science, or art, or office, in a little time, and with little pains, when
another takes much pains, and studies hard, and all in vain: and, although no science, art,
or vertue be to be contemned, yet that thou maist live prosperously, carry on thy affairs
happily; in the first place know thy good Genius, and thy nature, and what good the
celestiall disposition promiseth thee, and God the distributor of all these, who distributes
to each as he pleaseth, and follow the beginnings of these, profess these, be conversant in
that vertue to which the most high distributor doth elevate, and lead thee, who made
Abraham excell in justice and clemency, Isaac with fear, Jacob with strength, Moses with
meekness and Miracles, Joshua in war, Phinias n zeal, David in religion, and victory,
Solomon in knowledge and fame, Peter in faith, John in charity, Jacob in devotion,
Thomas in prudence, Magdalen in contemplation, Martha in officiousness. Therefore in
what vertue thou thinkest thou canst most easily be a proficient in, use diligence to attain
to the height thereof; that thou maist excell in one, when in many thou canst not: but in
the rest endeavour to be as great a proficient as thou canst: but if thou shalt have the
overseers of nature, and religion agreeable, thou shalt finde a double progress of thy
nature, and profession: but if they shall be disagreeing, follow the better, for thou shalt
better perceive at some time a preserver of an excellent profession, then of nativity.
Chapter xxiii. Of the tongue of Angels, and of their speaking amongst
themselves, and with us.
We might doubt whether Angels, or Demons, since they be pure spirits, use any vocal
speech, or tongue amongst themselves, or to us; but that Paul in some place saith, If I
speak with the tongue of men, or angels: but what their speech or tongue is, is much
doubted by many. For many think that if they use any Idiome, it is Hebrew, because that
was the first of all, and came from heaven, and was before the confusion of languages in
Babylon, in which the Law was given by God the Father, and the Gospell was preached
by Christ the Son, and so many Oracles were given to the Prophets by the Holy Ghost:
and seeing all tongues have, and do undergo various mutations, and corruptions, this
alone doth alwaies continue inviolated. Moreover an evident sign of this opinion is, that
though each Demon, and Intelligence do use the speech of those nations, with whom they
do inhabit, yet to them that understand it, they never speak in any Idiome, but in this
alone. But now how Angels speak it is hid from us, as they themselves are. Now to us
that we may speak, a tongue is necessary with other instruments, as are the jaws, palate,
lips, teeth, throat, lungs, the aspera arteria, and muscles of the breast, which have the
beginning of motion from the soul. But if any speak at a distance to another, he must use
a louder voice; but if neer, he whispers in his ear: and if he could be coupled to the
hearer, a softer breath would suffice; for he would slide into the hearer without any noise,
as an image in the eye, or glass. So souls going out of the body, so Angels, so Demons
speak: and what man doth with a sensible voyce [voice], they do by impressing the
conception of the speech in those to whom they speak, after a better manner then if they
should express it by an audible voyce. So the Platonists say that Socrates perceived his
Demon by sense indeed, but not of this body, but by the sense of the etheriall body
concealed in this: after which manner Avicen believes the Angels were wont to be seen,
and heard by the Prophets: That instrument, whatsoever the vertue be, by which one spirit
makes known to another spirit what things are in his minde, is called by the Apostle Paul
the tongue of Angels. Yet oftentimes also they send forth an audible voyce, as they that
cryed at the ascension of the Lord, Ye men of Galile [Galilee], why stand ye there gazing
into the heaven? And in the old law they spake with divers of the Fathers with a sensible
voyce, but this never but when they assumed bodies. But with what senses those spirits
and Demons hear our invocations, and prayers, and see our ceremonies, we are altogether
ignorant.
For there is a spirituall body of Demons everywhere sensible by nature, so that it
toucheth, seeth, heareth, without any medium, and nothing can be an impediment to it:
Yet neither do they perceive after that manner as we do with different organs, but haply
as sponges drink in water, so do they all sensible things with their body, or some other
way unknown to us; neither are all animals endowed with those organs; for we know that
many want ears, yet we know they perceive a sound, but after what manner we know not.
Chapter xxiv. Of the names of Spirits, and their various imposition; and of
the Spirits that are set over the Stars, Signs, Corners of the Heaven, and
the Elements.
Many and divers are the names of good spirits, and bad: but their proper, and true names,
as those of the Stars, are known to God alone, who only numbers the multitude of Stars,
and calls them all by their names, whereof none can be known by us but by divine
revelation, and very few are expressed to us in the sacred writ. But the masters of the
Hebrews think that the names of the angels were imposed upon them by Adam, according
to that which is written, The Lord brought all things which he had made unto Adam, that
he should name them, and as he called any thing, so the name of it was. Hence the
Hebrew Mecubals think, together with Magicians, that it is in the power of man to
impose names upon Spirits, but of such a man only who is dignified, and elevated to this
vertue by some divine gift, or sacred authority: but because a name that may express the
nature of divinity, or the whole vertue of angelical essences cannot be made by any
humane voyce, therefore names for the most part are put upon them from their works,
signifying some certain office, oe effect, which is required by the quire of Spirits: which
names then no otherwise then oblations, and sacrifices offered to the Gods, obtain
efficacy and vertur to draw any spirituall substance from above or beneath, for to make
any desired effect. I have seen, and known some writing on virgin parchment the name
and seal of some spirit in the hour of the Moon: which when afterward he gave to be
devoured by a water-frog, and had muttered over some verse, the frog being let go into
the water, rains, ans shours [showers] presently followed. I saw also the same man
inscribing the name of another Spirit with the seal thereof in the hour of Mars, which was
given to a Crow, who being let go, after a verse muttered over, presently there followed
from that corner of the heaven, whither he flew, lightnings, shakings, and horrible
thunders, with thick clouds: Neither were those names of spirits of an unknown tongue,
neither did they signifie any thing else but their offices. Of this kinde are the names of
those angels, Raziel, Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, Haniel, which is as much as the vision
of God, the vertue of God, the strength of God, the medicine of God, the glory of God. In
like manner in the offices of evill Demons are read their names, a player, deceiver, a
dreamer, fornicator, and many such like. So we receive from many of the ancient Fathers
of the Hebrews the names of angels set over the planets and signs: over Saturn, Zaphiel
[Zaphkiel]; over Jupiter, Zadkiel; over Mars, Camael; over the Sun, Raphael; over Venus,
Haniel; over Mercury, Michael; over the Moon, Gabriel. These are those seven Spirits
which always stand before the face of God, to whom is entrusted the disposing of the
whole celestial, and terrene Kingdoms, which is under the Moon. For these (as say the
more curious Theologians) govern all things by a certain vicissitude of hours, daies
[days], and years, as the Astrologers teach concerning the planets which they set over;
which therefore Mercurius Trismegistus calls the seven governors of the world, who by
the heavens, as by instruments, distribute the influences of all the Stars and signs upon
these inferiours. Now there are some that do ascribe them to the Stars, by names
somewhat differing, saying, that over Saturn is set an intelligence called Oriphiel; over
Jupiter Zachariel; over Mars Zamael; over the Sun Michael; over Venus Anael; over
Mercury Raphael; over the Moon Gabriel. And every one of these governs the world 354
years, and four months; and the government begins from the Intelligence of Saturn;
afterward in order, the Intelligences of Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, the Moon, the Sun
raign, and then the government returns to the Spirit of Saturn. Abbas Tritemius
[Trithemius] writ to Maximilian Caesar a speciall Treatise concerning these, which he
that will thoroughly examine, may from thence draw great knowledge of future times.
Over the twelve Signs are set these, viz. over Aries Malchidael; over Taurus Asmodel;
over Gemini Ambriel; over Cancer Muriel; over Leo Verchiel; over Virgo Hamaliel; over
Libra Zuriel; over Scorpio Barchiel; over Sagittarius Advachiel; over Capricorn Hanael;
over Aquarius Cambiel; over Pisces Barchiel. Of these Spirits set over the planets, and
Signs, John made mention in the Revelation, speaking of the former in the beginning;
And of the seven Spirits which are in the presence of the Throne of God, which I finde
are set over the seven planets, [the latter] in the end of the book, where he describes the
platform of the heavenly City, saying that in the twelve gates thereof were twelve Angels.
There are again twenty eight Angels, which rule in the twenty eight mansions of the
Moon, whose names in order are these: Geniel, Enediel, Amixiel, Azariel, Gabiel,
Dirachiel, Seheliel [Scheliel?], Amnediel, Barbiel, Ardefiel, Neciel, Abdizuel, Jazeriel,
Ergediel, Ataliel, Azeruel, Adriel, Egibiel, Amutiel, Kyriel, Bethnael, Geliel, Requiel,
Abrinael, Aziel, Tagriel, Alheniel, Amnixiel. There are also four Princes of the Angels,
which are set over the four winds, and over the four parts of the world, whereof Michael
is set over the Eastern wind; Raphael over the Western; Gabriel over the Northern;
Nariel, who by some is called Uriel, is over the Southern. There are also assigned to the
Elements these, viz. to the air Cherub; to the water Tharsis; to the Earth Ariel; to the Fire
Seruph, or according to Philon, Nathaniel. Now every one of these Spirits is a great
Prince, and hath much power and freedome in the dominion of his own planers, and
signs, and in their times, years, months, daies, and hours, and in their Elements, and parts
of the world, and winds. And every one of them rules over many legions; and after the
same manner amongst evil spirits, there are four which as most potent Kings are set over
the rest, according to the four parts of the world, whose names are these, viz. Urieus,
King of the East; Amaymon, King of the South; Paymon, King of the West; Egin, King of
the North, which the Hebrew Doctors perhaps call more rightly thus, Samuel, Azazel,
Azael, Mahazuel, under whom many other rule as princes of legions, and rulers; also
there are innumerable Demons of private offices. Moreover the ancient Theologians of
the Greeks reckon up six Demons, which they call Telchines, others Alastores; which
bearing ill will to men, taking up water out of the river Styx with their hand, sprinkle it
upon the earth, whence follow Calamities, plagues, and famines; and these are said to be
Acteus, Megalezius, Ormenus, Lycus, Nicon, Mimon. But he which desires to know
exactly the distinct names, offices, places, and times of Angels, and evil Demons, let him
enquire into the book of Rabbi Simon of the Temples. And in his book of lights, and in
his treatise of the greatness of stature, and in the treatise of the Temples of Rabbi
Ishmael, and in lmost all the Commentaries of his book of formation, and he shall finde it
written at large concerning them.
Chapter xxv. How the Hebrew Mecubals draw forth the sacred names of
Angels out of the sacred writ, and of the seventie two [seventy-two] Angels,
which bear the name of God, with the Tables of Ziruph, and the
Commutations of letters, and numbers.
There are also other sacred names of good, and evil Spirits deputed to each offices, of
much greater efficacy then the former, which the Hebrew Mecubals drew forth out of
sacred writ, according to that art which they teach concerning them; as also certain names
of God are drawn forth out of certain places: the generall rule of these is, that
wheresoever any thing of divine essence is expressed in the Scripture, from that place the
name of God may rightly be gathered; but in what place soever in the Scripture the name
of God is found expressed, there mark what office lies under that name. Wheresoever
therefore the Scripture speaks of the office or work of any spirit, good, or bad, from
thence the name of that spirit, whether good, or bad, may be gathered; this unalterable
rule being observed, that of good spirits we receive the names of good spirits, of evill the
names of evill: & let us not confound black with white, nor day with night, nor light with
darkness: which by these verses, as by an example, is manifest. Let them be as dust
before the face of the winde, and let the Angel of the Lord scatter them: Let their waies
[ways] be darkness, And slippery, and let the angel of the Lord pursue them.
ääø äåäé êàìàîå çåø éðôì õåîë åéäé
íôãø äéäé êàìîå úå÷ì÷ìçå êùç íëøã éäé
In the 35. Psalme with the Hebrews, but with us the 34, out of which the names of those
angels are drawn, ìàãéî , & ìàøéî Mirael, of the order of warriers [warriors]. So out of
that verse, Thou shalt set over him the wicked, and Satan shall stand at his right hand.
Out of the Psalm 109. with the Hebrews, but with the Latines the 108:
åðéîé ìà øîàé ïèùå òùø åéìò ã÷ôä
is extracted the name of the evill spirit Schii éòéù which signifies a spirit that is a work
of engines. There is a certain text in Exodus conteined in three verses, whereof every one
is writ with seventy two letters, beginning thus: The first, Vajisa òñéå the second,
Vajabo àáéå : the third, Vajot èéå : which are extended into one line, viz. the first, and
third from the left hand to the right, but the middle in a contrary order, beginning from
the right to the left, is terminated on the left hand: then each of the three letters being
subordinate the one to the other, make one name, which are seventy two names, which
the Hebrews call Schemhamphorae: to which if the divine name El ìà or Jah äé be
added, they produce seventy two trissyllable names of angels, whereof every one carries
the great name of God, as it is written: My Angel shall go before thee; observe him, for
my name is in him. And these are those that are set over the seventy two Celestial
quinaries, and so many Nations, and tongues, and joynts [joints] of mans body, and
cooperate with the seventy two seniors of the Synagogue, and so many disciples of
Christ: and their names according to the extraction which the Cabalists make, are
manifest in this following table, according to one manner which we have spoke of. Now
there are many other manner or waies of making Schemhamphorae out of those verses, as
when all three are in a right order written one after the other from the right to the left,
besides those which are extracted by the tables of Ziruph, and the tables of commutations,
of which we made mention above. And because these tables serve for all names, as well
divine, as angelical, we shall therefore subjoyn them to this Chapter.
These are the seventy two Angels, bearing the name of God, Schemhamphoræ.
Mebahiah äé ä á î Aniel ìà é ð à Leuuiah äé å å ì Vehuiah äé å ä å
Poiel ìà é ò ô Haamiah äé î ò ä Pahaliah äé ì ä ô Ieliel ìà é ì é
Nemamiah äé î î ð Rehael ìà ò ä ø Nelchael ìà ç ì ð Sitael ìà è é ñ
Ieialel ìà ì é é Ieiazel ìà æ é é Ieiaiel ìà é é é Elemiah äé î ì ò
Harahel ìà ä ø ä Hahahel ìà ä ä ä Melahel ìà ä ì î Mahasiah äé ù ä î
Mizrael ìà ø ö î Michael ìà ç é î Hahuiah äé å ä ä Lelahel ìà ä ì ì
Umabel ìà á î å Vevaliah äé ì å å Nithhaiah äé ä ú ð Achaiah äé à ç à
Iahhel ìà ä ä é Ielahiah äé ä ì é Haaiah äé à à ä Cahethel ìà ú ä ë
Annauel ìà å ð ò Sealiah äé ì à ñ Ierathel ìà ú ø é Haziel ìà é æ ä
Mehekiel ìà ÷ ä î Ariel ìà é ø ò Seehiah äé ä à ù Aladiah äé ã ì à
Damabiah äé á î ã Asaliah äé ì ù ò Reiiel ìà é é ø Lauiah äé å à ì
Meniel ìà é ð î Mihael ìà ä é î Omael ìà î å à Hahaiah äé ò ä ä
Eiael ìà ò é à Vehuel ìà å ä å Lecabel ìà á ë ì Ieiazel ìà æ é é
Habuiah äé å á ä Daniel ìà é ð ã Vasariah äé ø ù å Mebahel ìà ä á î
Roehel ìà ä à ø Hahasiah äé ù ä ä Iehuiah äé å ä é Hariel ìà é ø ä
Iibamiah äé î á é Imamiah äé î î ò Lehahiah äé ä ä ì Hakamiah äé î ÷ ä
Haiaiel ìà é é ä Nanael ìà à ð ð Chavakiah äé ÷ å ç Leviah äé å à ì
Mumiah äé î å î Nithael ìà ú é ð Monadel ìà ã ð î Caliel ìà é ì ë
The Right Table of the Commutations.
ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à
à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á
á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â
â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã
ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä
ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å
å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ
æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç
ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è
è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é
é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë
ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì
ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î
î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð
ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ
ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô ò
ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö ô
ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷ ö
ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø ÷
÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù ø
ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú ù
ù ø ÷ ö ô ò ñ ð î ì ë é è ç æ å ä ã â á à ú
The Averse Table of the Commutations.
à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú
ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù
ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø
ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷
÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö
ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô
ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò
ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ
ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð
ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î
î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì
ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë
ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è é
é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç è
è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ ç
ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å æ
æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä å
å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã ä
ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â ã
ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á â
â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à á
á â ã ä å æ ç è é ë ì î ð ñ ò ô ö ÷ ø ù ú à
Another Averse Table, called the irregular.
[figure 7]
The Table of the Combinations of Ziruph.
[figure 8]
Another table of Ziruph, which is called the Rational.
[figure 9]
Tables of the Numeral transpositions.
[figure 10]
[figure 11]
Chapter xxvi. Of finding out of the names of spirits, and Genius's from the
disposition of Celestiall bodies.
The ancient Magicians did teach an art of finding out the name of a spirit to any desired
effect, drawing it from the disposition of the heaven; as for example, any Celestiall
Harmonie [harmony] being proposed to thee for the making an image or ring, or any
other work to be done under a certain constellation; if thou will finde out the spirit that is
the ruler of that work; the figure of the heaven being erected, cast forth letters in their
number and order from the degree of the ascendent, according to the succession of signes
through each degree by filling the whole circle of the heaven: then those letters which fall
into the places of the Stars the aid whereof thou wouldest use, being according to the
number, and powers of those Stars, marked without into number, and order, make the
name of a good spirit: but if thou shalt do so from the beginning of a degree falling
against the progresse of the signes, the resulting spirit shall be evil. By this art some of
the Hebrew and <I<>Caldean [Chaldean] masters teach that the nature, and name of any
Genius may be found out; as for example, the degree of the ascendent of any ones,
nativity being known, and the other corners of the heaven being Coequated, then let that
which had the more dignities of Planets in those four corners which the Arabians call
Almutez, be first observed amongst the rest: and according to that in the second place,
that which shall be next to it in the number of dignities, and so by order the rest of them,
which obtain any dignitie [dignity] in the foresaid corners: this order being used, thou
maist know the true place, & degree of them in the heaven, beginning from the degree of
the ascendent through each degree according to the order of the signs to cast 22. of the
letters of the Hebrews; Then what letters shall fall into the places of the aforesaid Stars,
being marked, and disposed according to the order found out above in the Stars, & rightly
joyned [joined] together according to the rules of the Hebrew tongue, make the name of a
Genius: to which, according to the custome, some Monosyllable name of Divine
omnipotency, viz. El, or Iah is subjoyned. But if the casting of the letters be made from
an angle of the falling, and against the succession of signs, and the letters which shall fall
in the Nadir (that is the opposite point) of the aforesaid Stars, be after that order as we
said, joyned together, shall make the name of an evil Genius. But the Chaldeans proceed
another way; for they take not the Almutez of the corners, but the Almutez of the eleventh
house, and do in all things as hath been said. Now they finde out an evil Genius from the
Almutez of the angle of the twelfth house, which they call an evil spirit, casting from the
degree of the falling against the progress of the signs. There are also the Arabians, and
many others, and some Hebrews, who finde out the name of a Genius by the places of the
five Hylegians, and making projection alwayes from the beginning of Aries, and the
letters being found out according to the order of Hylegians with the Astrologers, being
reduced into a known order, and being joyned together, make the name of a good Genius:
but they draw the name of an evil Genius from the opposite Hylegian places, projection
being made from the last degree of Pisces against the order of signs. But other some do
not take the places of Hylegians, but the places of Almutez upon the five Hylegians
making projection from an Horoscope, as abovesaid: and these names being thus
distributed according to the proportioned numbers to the Starry account, compacted or
joyned, and changed letters, although unknown in sound, and significative, we must of
necessity confess may do more by the secret of the chiefest Philosophy in a magick work,
then significative names, whilest the mind being astonished at the obscurity of them, and
deeply intent, firmly believing that something Divine is under it, doth reverently
pronounce these words, and names, although not understood, to the glory of God,
captivating himself with a spirituall affection of piety, in the obedience of him.
Chapter xxvii. Of the calculating Art of such names by the tradition of
Cabalists.
There is yet another Art of these kinds of names, which they call calculatory, and it is
made by the following tables, by entring [entering] with some sacred, Divine, or
Angelicall name, in the column of letters descending; by taking those letters which thou
shalt find in the common angles under their Stars, and Signs: which being reduced into
order, the name of a good spirit is made of the nature of that Star, or Sign, under which
thou didst enter: but if thou shalt enter in the column ascending, by taking the common
angles above the Stars, and Signs marked in the lowest line, the name of an evil spirit is
made. And these are the names of spirits of any order, or heaven ministring [ministering];
as of good, so of bad, which thou maist after this manner multiply into nine names of so
many orders, in as much as thou maist by entring with one name draw forth another of a
spirit of a superior order out of the same, as well of a good, as bad one. Yet the beginning
of this calculation depends upon the names of God; for every word hath a vertue in
Magick, in as much as it depends on the word of God, and is thence framed. Therefore we
must know that every Angelicall name must proceed from some primary name of God.
Therefore Angels are said to bear the name of God, according to that which is written,
because my name is in him. Therefore that the names of good Angels may be discerned
from the names of bad, there is wont oftentimes to be added some name of Divine
omnipotency, as EI, or On, or Jah, or Jod, and to be pronounced together with it: and
because Jah is a name of beneficence, and Jod the name of a deity, therefore these two
names are put only to the names of angels; but the name El, because it imports power,
and vertue, is therefore added not only to good but bad spirits, for neither can evil spirits
either subsist, or do anything without the vertue of El, God. But we must know that
common angles of the same Star and Sign are to be taken, unless entrance be made with a
mixt [mixed] name, as are the names of Genii, and those of which it hath bin spoken in
the preceding Ch. which are made of the dispositions of the heaven, according to the
harmony of divers Stars. For as often as the table is to be entred with these, the common
angle is to be taken under the Star, or Sign of him that enters. There are moreover some
that do so extend those tables, that they think also if there be an entrance made with the
name of a Star, or office, or any desired effect, a Demon whether good, or bad, serving to
that office, or effect, may be drawn out. Upon the same account they that enter with the
proper name of any person, beleeve [believe] that they can extract the names of the Genii,
under that Star which shall appear to be over such a person, as they shall by his
Physiognomy, or by the Passions and inclinations of his mind, and by his profession, and
fortune, know him to be Martial, or Saturnine, or Solarie, or of the nature of any other
Star. And although such kinde of primary names have none or little power by their
signification, yet such kind of extracted names, and such as are derived from them, are of
very great efficacy; as the rayes of the Sun collected in a hollow glass, do indeed most
strongly burn, the Sun it self being scarce warm. Now there is an order of letters in those
tables under the Stars, and Signs, almost like that which is with the Astrologers, of tens,
elevens, twelves. Of this calculatory Art Alfonsus Cyprius once wrote, and I know who
elss, and also fitted it to Latine Characters; But because the letters of every tongue, as we
shewed in the first book, have in their number, order, and figure a Celestiall and Divine
originall, I shall easily grant this calculation concerning the names of spirits to be made in
only by Hebrew letters, but also by Chaldean, and Arabick, Ægyptian [Egyptian], Greek,
Latine, and any other, the tables being righty made after the imitation of the presidents.
But here it is objected by many, that it falls out, that in these tables men of a differing
nature, and Fortune, do oftentimes by reason of the sameness of name obtain the same
Genius of the same name. We must know therefore that it must not be thought absurd that
the same Demon may he separated from any one soul, and the same be set over more.
Besides, as divers men have many times the same name, so also spirits of divers offices
and natures may be noted or marked by one name, by one and the same seal, or
Character, yet in a divers respect: for as the serpent doth sometimes typifie Christ, and
sometimes the devill; so the same names, and the same seals may be applied sometimes
to the order of a good Demon, sometimes of a bad. Lastly, the very ardent intension
[intention] of the invocator, by which our intellect is joyned to the separated
intelligencies, causeth that we have sometimes one spirit, sometimes another, although
called upon under the same name, made obsequious to us.
There follow the tables of the calculation of the names of spirits, good and bad, under the
presidency of the 7. Planets, and under the order of the 12. Militant Signs.
[figure 12]
[The entrance of the evil Angels. / The Entrance of the good Angels.]
[figure 13]
Chapter xxviii. How sometimes names of Spirits are taken from those
things over which they are set.
Chapter xxix. Of the Characters and Seals of spirits.
We must now speak of the Characters and Seals of spirits. Characters therefore are
nothing else then certain unknowable letters and writings, preserving the secrets of the
Gods, and names of spirits from the use and reading of prophane men, which the
Ancients called Hyeroglyphicall [hieroglyphical], or sacred letters, because devoted to
the secrets of the Gods only. For they did account it unlawfull to write the mysteries of
the God [gods] with those Characters with which profane and vulgar things were wrote.
Whence Porphyry saith, that the Ancients were willing to conceal God, and divine
vertues by sensible figures, and by those things which were visible, yet signifying
invisible things, as being willing to deliver great mysteries in sacred letters, and explain
them in certain Symbolical figures; as when they dedicated all round things to the World,
the Sun, the Moon, hope, and fortune, a circle to the heaven, and parts of a circle to the
Moon, Pyranide [pyramids] and Obelisks to the fire, and Olympian Gods; a Cylinder to
the Sun and Earth; a mans Yard to generation and Juno, to whom also by reason of the
feminine sex the triangular figure. Wherefore this kind of Characters hath another root
beside the pleasure, and authority of the institutor, of him I say, who received power of
instituting, and consecrating these kind of letters, such as were many Prelates amongst
divers Nations, and Sects of Religions, whose institutions came not to us, by reason that
few of them were delivered by the Authors scatteringly, and by fragments. Of this kind of
character therefore are those which Peter Apponus [Petrus d'Abano] notes, as delivered
by Honorius of Thebes, the figures whereof are such, being related to our Alphabet.
Chapter xxx. Another manner of making Characters, delivered by
Cabalists.
Chapter xxxi. There is yet another fashion of Characters, and concerning
marks of spirits which are received by revelation.
Chapter xxxii. How good spirits may be called up by us, and how evil
spirits may be overcome by us.
Chapter xxxiii. Of the bonds of spirits, and of their adjurations, and
castings out.
Chapter xxxv. Of the Mortall and Terrestrial Gods.
Chapter xxxvi. Of Man, how he was created after the Image of God.
Chapter xxxvii. Of mans soul and through what means it is joyned [joined]
to the body.
Chapter xxxviii. What Divine gifts man receiveth from above, from the
severall Orders of the Intelligences and the heavens.
Chapter xxxix. How the superior Influences, seing they are good by nature,
are depraved in these inferior thing, and are made causes of evil.
Chapter xl. That on every man a divine character is imprinted, by the
vertue of which man can attain the working of miracles.
Chapter xli. What concerning man after death, diverse Opinions.
Chapter xlii. By what wayes the Magicians and Necromancers do think
they can call forth the souls of the dead.
By the things which have been already spoken, it is manifest that souls after death do as
yet love their body which they left, as those souls do whose bodies want a due buriall: or
have left their bodies by violent death, and as yet wander about their carkasses
[carcasses] in a troubled and moist spirit, being as it were allured by something that hath
an affinity with them; the means being known by the which in times past they were
joyned to their bodi, they may easily be called forth & allured by the like vapours, liquors
and savours, certain artificiall lights being also used, songs, sounds and such like, which
do move the imaginative and spirituall Harmony of the soul; also sacred invocations, and
such like, which belong to Religion, ought not to be neglected, by reason of the portion of
the rationall soul, which is above nature: So the witch is said to have called up Samuel,
and the Thessalian prophetesse in Lucan, to have caused a carcasse to stand upright:
Hence we read in Poets, and those who relate these things, that the souls of the dead
cannot be called up without blood and a carkasse [carcass]: but their shadowes to be
easily allured by the fumigations of these things; eggs being also used, and milk, honey,
oil, wine, water, flowre [flour], as it were yeelding a fit medicine for the souls to
reassume their bodies, as you may see in Homer, where Circe at large instructeth
Ulysses; yet they think, that these things can be done in those places only where these
kinds of souls are known to be most conversant, either by reason of some affinity, as their
dead body alluring them, or by reason of some affection imprinted in their life, drawing
the soul itself to certain places, or by reason of some hellish nature of the place; and
therefore fit for the punishing or purging of souls: places of this kind are best known by
the meeting of nocturnall visions and incursions, and such like Phantasmes; Some are
sufficiently known by themselves, as buriall places and places of execution, and where
publike [public] slaughters have lately been made, or where the carkasses [carasses] of
the slain, not as yet expiated, nor rightly buried, were some few yeers since put into the
ground; for expiation and exorcisation of any place, and also the holy right of buriall
being duely perfomeed to the bodies, oftentimes prohibiteth the souls themselves to come
up, and driveth them farther off the places of judgement; Hence Necromancy hath its
name, because it worketh on the bodies of the dead, and giveth answers by the ghosts and
apparitions of the dead, and subterrany spirits, alluring them into the carkasses
[carcasses] of the dead, by certain hellish charms, and infernall invocations, and by
deadly sacrifices, and wicked oblations; such we read in Lucan of Erichthone the witch,
who called up the dead, who foretold to Sextus Pompey all the events of the Pharsalian
War: There were also in Phigalia a city of Arcadia, certain magicians, priests most skilful
in sacred rites, & raisers up of the souls of the dead: and the holy scriptures testifie, that a
certain woman, a witch called up Samuels soul: even so truely the souls of the saints do
love their bodies, and hear mote readily there, where the pledges of their reliques [relics]
are preserved: but there are two kinds of Necromancy, the one called Necromancy,
raising the carkasses [carcasses], which is not done without blood. The other Sciomancy,
in which the calling up of the shadow only sufficeth: to conclude, it worketh all its
experiments by the carkases [carcasses] of the slain, and their bones and members, and
what is from them, because there is in these things a spirituall power friendly to them.
Therefore they easily allure the flowing down of wicked spirits, being by reason of the
similitude and propriety very familiar: by whom the Necromancer strengthened by their
help can do very much in humane and terrestriall things, and kindle unlawfull lusts, cause
dreams, diseases, hatred and such like passions, to the which also they can confer the
powers of these souls, which as yet being involved in a moist and turbid spirit, and
wandering about their cast bodies, can do the same things that the wicked spirits commit;
seeing therefore they experimentally find, that the wicked and impure souls violently
plucked from their bodies, and of men not expiated, and wanting buriall, do stay about
their carcases, and are drawn to them by affinity, the witches easily abuse them for the
effecting of their witchcrafts, alluring these unhappy souls by the apposition of their body
or by the taking of some part thereof, and compelling them by their devillish charmes, by
entreating them by the deformed carkases dispersed through the wide fields, and the
wandering shadowes of those that want burials, and by the ghosts sent back from
Acheron, and the guests of hell, whom untimely death hath precipitated into Hell; and by
the horrible desires of the damned, and proud devils revengers of wickedeesses. But he
which would restore the souls truely to their bodies, must first know what is the proper
nature of the soul from whence it went forth, with how many and how great degrees of
perfection it is replenished, with what intelligence it is strengthened, by what means
diffused into the body, by what harmony it shall be compacted with it; what affinity it
hath with God, with the intelligences, with the heavens, elements, and all other things
whose image and resemblance it holdeth. To conclude, by what influences the body may
be knit together again for the raising of the dead, requireth all these things which belong
not to men but to God only, and to whom he will communicate them, as to Elishai who
raised up the son of the Shunamite; so also Alcestis is reported to have been raised by
Hercules, and to have lived long after; and Apollonius Tyanensis restored a dead maid to
life. And here is to be noted that sometimes it happeneth to men, that their vivifying spirit
is retracted in them, and they appear as dead and without sense, when as yet the
intellectuall nature remaineth united to the body, and it hath the same form, and
remaineth the same body, although the power of vivifying extendeth not it self into it
actually, but remaineth retracted in the union with the intellectual nature; yet it ceaseth
not to be; and although that man may truly be said to be dead, inasmuch as death is a
want of a vivifying spirit, yet is it not truly separated; and that body can be wakened
again and live; and thus many miracles appear in these; and of this kind many have been
seen amongst the Gentiles and Jewes in former ages, in the number of which is that
which Plato reciteth in his tenth book de Republ. [Republic], viz. that one Phereus of
Pamphilia lay ten dayes amongst the slain in battle, and after that he had been taken away
and laid to the fire two dayes, he revived and told many wonderfull things which he had
seen in the time of his death; and concerning these things we have spoken partly in the
first book, and shall yet speak further anon where we shall speak of Oracles, which come
forth in a Rapture, Extasie [ecstasy], and in the Agony of dying men.
Chapter xliii. Of the power of mans soul, in the mind, reason and
imagination.
Mans soul consisteth of a mind, reason and imagination; the mind illuminates reason,
reason floweth into the imagination: All is one soul. Reason unless it be illuminated by
the mind, is not free from errour: but the mind giveth not light to reason, unless God
enlighten, viz. the first light; for the first light is in God very far exceeding all
understanding: wherefore it cannot be called an intelligible light; but this when it is
infused into the mind, is made intellectuall, and can be understood: then when it is
infused by the mind to the reason, it is made rationall, and cannot only be understood but
also considered: then when it is infused by the reason into the phantasie [phantasy] of the
soul, it is made not only cogitable, but also imaginable; yet it is not as yet corporeall; but
when from hence it goeth into the Celestiall vehicle of the soul; it is first made corporeall,
yet not manifestly sensible till it hath passed into the elementall body, either simple and
Aerial, or compound, in the which the light is made manifestly visible to the eye; The
Chaldean [Chaldaean] Philosophers considering this progresse of light, declare a certain
wonderfull power of our mind: viz. that it may come to passe, that our mind being firmly
fixed on God, may be filled with the divine power; and being so replenished with light,
its beams being diffused through all the media, even to this grosse, dark, heavy, mortall
body, it may endow it with abundance of light, and make it like the Stars, and equally
shining, and also by the plenty of its beams and lightness lift it on high, as straw lifted up
by the flame of fire, and can presently carry the body as a spirit into remote parts. So we
read of Philip in the Acts of the Apostles, who baptizing the Eunuch in India, was
presently found, in Azotus. The like we read of Habacuc in Daniel: so others going
through the doors being shut, escaped both their keepers and imprisonment; as we read of
Peter the Apostle and of Peter the Exorcist: He may the less wonder at this, who hath
seen those famous melancholick men, who walk in their sleepes and passe through places
even unpassible, and ascend even unaccessible places, and exercise the works of those
that are awake, which they themselves being awake could not do; of the which things
there is no other reason in nature, then a strong and exalted imagination: but this power is
in every man, & it is in the soul of man from the root of his Creation; but it is varied in
diverse men, in strength and weakness, and is encreased and diminished according to his
exercise and use, by the which it is drawn forth from power into act, which thing he that
rightly knoweth, can ascend by his knowledge, even untill his imaginative faculty doth
transcend and is joyned with the universall power, which Alchindus, Bacon, and
Gulielmus Parisiensis do call the sense of nature; Virgil the Etheriall sense, and Plato the
sense of the vehicle: and his imagination is made most strong, when that etherial and
Celestiall power is poured out upon it, by whose brightness it is comforted, untill it
apprehend the species, notions and knowledge of true things, so that that which he
thought in his mind, cometh to passe even as he thought, and it obtaineth so great power,
that it can plunge, joyn and insinuate it self into the minds of men, and make them certain
of his thoughts, and of his will and desire, even thorow large and remote spaces, as if they
perceived a present object by their senses; and it can in little time do many things, as if
they were done without time; yet these things are not granted to all, but to those whose
imaginative and cogitative power is most strong and hath arrived to the end of
speculation; and he is fitted to apprehend and manifest all things, by the splendour of the
universall power, or intelligence and spirituall apprehension which is above him: and this
is that necessary power, which everyone ought to follow and obey, who followeth the
truth; if therefore now the power of the imagination is so great, that it can ininuate itself
unto whom it pleaseth, being neither hindered nor let by any distance of time or place,
and can sometimes draw its heavy body along with it, whither it imagineth and dreameth:
There is no doubt but that the power of the mind is greater, if at any time it shall obtain
its proper nature, and being no way oppressed by the allurements of the senses, shall
persevere both uncorrupted and like it self; but now for example, that the souls abound
with so plentifull Light of the Celestiall Stars, and hence, a very great abundance of light
redoundeth into their bodies; so Moses face did shine, that the children of Israel could not
behold him by reason of the brightness of his countenance; thus Socrates was
transfigured, as we read, that in light he overcame the luciferous wheels of the Sun; So
Zoroastes [Zoroaster] being transfigured, his body was taken up. So Eliah and Enoch
ascended to heaven in a certain fiery chariot, so Paul was rapt up into the third heaven:
So our bodies after the judgement of the world, shall be called Glorified, and in like
manner be rapt up, and we may say by this means, shall shine as the Sun and Moon;
which thing that it is possible, and hath formerly been done, Avicebron the Moore, and
Avicen the Arabian and Hippocrates of Cous, and all the school of the Chaldeans
[Chaldaeans] do acknowledge and confirm: Moreover it is reported in Histories, that
Alexander the great being circumvented and in great danger in India, did so burn in mind,
that he seemed to the Barbarians to cast forth light; the father of Theodoricus also is
reported to have cast forth sparks of fire tilmugh his whole body; the same thing a wise
man also delivered concerning himself, so that sparkling flames did break forth here and
there even with a noise; neither is this power of the soul found in men only, but
sometimes even in beasts, as in the horse of Tiberius, who seemed to send forth flames
out of his mouth. But the mind is above fate in providence, therefore is not affected either
with the influences of the heavenly bodies, or the qualities of naturall things; Religion
therefore can only cure it; but the sensitiveness of the soul is in fate, above nature, which
is in a certain manner the knot of the body and soul, and under fate, above the body;
therefore it is changed by the influences of the heavenly bodies, and affected by the
qualities of naturall and corporeall things: now I call the sensitiveness of the soul, that
vivifying and rectifying power of the body, the originall of the senses; the soul it self doth
manifest in this body its sensitive powers and perceiveth corporeall things by the body,
and locally moveth the body, and governeth it in his place, and nourisheth it in a body. In
this sensitiveness two most principal powers predominate; viz. one which is called the
Phantasy, or imaginative or cogitative faculty, of whose power we have already spoken,
where we have handled the passions of the soul: the other which is called the sense of
nature, of the which also we have spoken, where we made mention of witchcraft. Man
therefore by the nature of his body is under fate; the soul of man, by the sensitiveness
moveth nature in Fate; but by the mind is above fate, in the order of providence; yet
reason is free at its own choice; therefore the soul by reason ascendeth into the mind,
where it is replenished with divine light; sometimes it descendeth into sensitiveness and
is affected by the influences of the heavenly bodies, and qualities of naturall things, and
is distracted by the passions and the encountring of sensible objects: sometimes the soul
revolveth it selfe wholly into reason, searching out other things either by discourse, or by
contemplating it self: for it is possible, that that part of the reason, which the
Peripateticks call the possible Intellect, may be brought to this, that it may freely
discourse and operate without conversion to his Phantasmes: for so great is the command
of this reason, that as often as any thing incurreth either into the mind, or into the
sensitiveness, or into nature, or into the body, it cannot passe into the soul, unless reason
apply it self to it; by this means the soul perceiveth it self neither to see, nor hear, nor
feel, nor that it suffereth any things by the externall senses, untill cogitative reason first
apprehend it; but it appiehendeth it when it is at leisure, not when it earnestly gapeth after
another thing, as we manifestly see by these who heed not those that they meet, when
they more seriously think on something else. Know therefore that neither the superiour
influences, nor naturall affections, nor sensations, nor passions either of the mind or
body, nor any sensible thing whatsoever, can work or penetrate into the soul unless by the
Judgement of reason it self. Therefore by its act, not by any extrinsecall violence, can the
soul be either affected or disturbed, which thing even innumerable Martyrs have proved
by their Martyrdom: So Anasarchus a Philosopher of Abdera, who, by the command of
Nicocreontes a tyrant of Cyprus, being cast into a concave stone neglecting the pains of
his body, while he was pounded with iron pestils [pestles], is reported to have said:
pound, pound the shell of Anasarchus, thou nothing hurteth Anasarchus himself: The
tyrant commanded his tongue to be cut off, but he with his own teeth did bite it off, and
did spit it in the face of the Tyrant.
Chapter xliv. Of the degrees of souls, and their destruction, or
Immortality.
The minde, because it is from God, or from the intelligible world, is therefore immortal
and eternal; but reason is long-lived by the benefit of its celestial original from the
Heaven; but the sensitive because it is from the bosome of the matter and dependeth on
sublunary nature, is subject to destruction and corruption: therefore the soul by its minde
is immortall, by its Reason long-lived in its etherial vehicle, but resolvable unless it be
restored in the circuit of its new body; therefore it is not immortal, unless it be united to
an immortal mind: therefore the sensitiveness of the soul or the sensitive or animal soul,
because it is produced out of the bosome of a corporeal matter, the body being resolved,
perisheth together with it, or the shadow thereof remaineth not long in the vapours of its
resolved body, partaking nothing of immortality, unless it be also united to a more
sublimed power; therefore the soul which is united to the minde, is called the Soul
standing not falling; but all men obtain not this minde, because (as Hermes saith) God
would propound it as it were a prize and reward of the souls, which they that shall
neglect, being without minde, spotted with corporeall senses, and made like to irrational
creatures, are allotted to the same destruction with them, as Ecclesiastes saith: there is the
same destruction of man and beasts, and the condition of both is equall; as man dieth, so
also they dye [die], yea they have all one breath, so that man hath no preheminence
[preeminence] over a beast; thus far he. Hence many Theologians think, that the souls of
men of this kinde have no immortality after they have left their body, but an hope of the
resurrection only, when all men shall be restored. Austin relateth that this was the heresie
[heresy] of the Arabians, who affirmed that the souls perished together with their bodies;
and in the day of judgement did arise again with them; whosoever therefore being upheld
by the divine grace have obtained a mind, these according to the proportion of their
works become immortal (as Hermes saith) having comprehended all things by their
understanding, which are in the earth, and in the sea, and in the Heavens, and if there be
any thing besides these above heaven, so that they behold even goodness it self: but they
who have lived a middle life, though they have not obtained the divine intelligence, but a
certain rationall intelligence of it; these mens souls, when they shall depart from their
bodies, are bound over to certain secret receptacles, where they are affected with
sensifive powers, and are exercised in a certain kind of act; and by imagination, and the
irascible & concupiscible vertues, do either extreamly rejoyce [rejoice], or greivously
[grievously] lament. Of which opinion Saint Austin also was, in his book which he wrote
of the spirit and soul; The wise men of the Indians, Persians, AEgyptians & Chaldeans
[Chaldaeans] have delivered, that this soul superviveth much longer then its body, yet
that it is not made altogether immortal, unless by Transmigration. But our Theologians do
philosophize far otherwise concerning these things, that although there be the same
common originall and beginning of all souls, yet they are distinguished by the creator
with divers degrees, not only accidentall, but also intrinsecall, founded in their very
essence, by the which one soul differeth from another, by that which is proper to it self;
which opinion John Scotus also holdeth, and the Parisian Theologians have so decreed in
their articles; Hence the wise man saith, I was an ingenuous child, and obtaihed a good
soul, viz. a better then many others; and according to this inequality of souls, every one is
capable in their degree, of their charge; which gift is freely given by God, as we read in
the Gospel, that he gave to one five Talents, to another two, to another one, to every one
according to his vertue; and the Apostle saith, he hath given some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists and Doctors, for the consummation of the Saints in the work
of the Ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ; for there are (saith Origen)
certain invisible perfections, to the which are committed those things which are dispensed
here upon earth, in which there is no small difference, as also is required in the men;
wherefore some one attaineth the highest degree of wisdome and dignity; another little
differeth from beasts, & feeding beasts is made half a beast; another aboundeth in vertues
and in wealth; another hath even little or nothing, & oftentimes that little which he hath is
taken away from him, & given to him that hath; and this is the divine justice in the
distribution of gifts, that they may correspond to the vertues of every receiver, to whom
also rewards are given according to their works: that what proportion there is, of gifts to
gifts, and of deserts to deserts, there may be the same proportion of rewards to rewards;
to conclude, we must know this, that every noble soul hath a fourfold operation; First
divine, by the Image of the divine propriety; the second intellectual, by formality of
Participation with the intelligences; the third rational, by the perfection of its proper
essential essence; the fourth animal or natural, by communion with the body and these
Inferior things; So that there is no work in this whole world so admirable, so excellent, so
wonderfull, which the soul of man, being associated to his Image of divinity, which the
Magitians [magicians] call a soul, standing and not falling, cannot accomplish by its own
power without any externall help: Therefore the form of all Magical power is from the
soul of man standing and not falling.
Chapter xlv. Of Soothsaying, and Phrensie [phrensy].
Soothsaying is that which the priests or others were stricken withall, and discerned the
causes of things, and foresaw future things, viz. when Oracles and Spirits descend from
the Gods or from Demons upon them, and are delivered by them; which descendings the
Platonists call the falling down of superior souls on our souls; and Mercurius calls them
the senses of the Demons, and the spirits of Demons. Of which sort of Demons the
Ancients called Eurideae, and Pythonae, who, as the Ancients believed, were wont to
enter into the bodies of men, and make use of the voyces, and tongues, for the prediction
of things to come; of which Plutarch also made mention in his dialogue of the causes of
defect of Oracles. But Cicero following the Stoicks [Stoics], affirms that the foreknowing
of future things belongs only to the Gods; and Ptolomie [Ptolomy] the Astrologer saith,
that they only that are inspired with a diety [deity] foretell particular things. To these
Peter the Apostle consents, saying, Prophesying is not made according to the will of man,
but holy men spake as they were moved by the holy ghost. Now that the foretellings of
things to come are properly the fallings down of the Gods. Isaiah affirms, saying, And tell
unto us those things that are coming, and we will tell them, because ye are Gods; But
these kinds of fallings down, or senses, come not into our souls when they are more
attently busied ahout any thing else; but they pass into them, when they are vacant. Now
there are three kinds of this vacancy, viz. phrensie, extasie [phrensy, ecstasy], and
dreams, of each of which in their order.
Chapter xlvi. Of the first kind of phrensie [phrensy] from the Muses.
Phrensie [phrensy] is an illustration of the soul coming from the Gods, or Demons.
Whence this verse of Ovid,
God is in us, Commerces of the throne
of God, that spirit from above came down.
Plato defines this by alienation, and binding; for he abstracts from those by which the
corporeal senses are stirred up, and being estranged from an animal man, adheres to a
diety [deity] from whom it receives those things which it cannot search into by its own
power; for when the minde is free, and at liberty, the reines of the body being loosed, and
going forth as out of a close prison, transcends the bonds of the members, and nothing
hindring of it, being stirred up by its own instigations, and instigated by a divine spirit,
comprehends all things, and foretells future things. Now there are four kinds of divine
phrensie [phrensy] proceeding from several dieties [deities], viz. from the Muses, from
Dionysius, from Apollo, and from Venus. The first phrensie therefore proceeding from the
Muses, stirs up and tempers the mind, and makes it divine by drawing superior things to
inferior things by things natural. Now Muses are the souls of the celestial spheres,
according to which there are found several degrees, by which there is an attraction of
superior things to inferior. The inferior of these resembling the sphear [sphere] of the
Moon, possesseth those things which are from vegetables, as plants, fruits of trees, roots,
and those which are from harder matters, as Stones, Metals, their alligations, and
suspensions. So it is said that the stone Selenites i.e. Moon-Stone, and the stone of the
Civet-cat cause divination; also Vervain, and the Hearb [herb] Theangelis cause
soothsaying, as hath been ahove said. The second degree resembling Mercury, possesseth
those things which are from animals, and which are compounded of the mixtion of divers
natural things together, as Cups, and Meats; upon this account the heart of a Mole, if
anyone shall eat it whilest it is warm, and panting, conduceth, as it is said, to the
foretelling of future events. And Rabbi Moses in his commentaries upon Leviticus tells,
that there is an animal called òåãç Jedua, having a humane shape, in the midle [middle]
of whose navel comes forth a string, by which it is fastened to the ground like a gourd,
and as far as the length of that string reacheth, it devours and consumes all that is green
about it, and deceiving the sight, cannot be taken, unless that string he cut off by the
stroke of a dart, which being cut off, it presently dies. Now the bones of this animal being
after a certain manner laid upon the mouth, presently he whose mouth they are laid on, is
taken with a phrensie [phrensy], and soothsaying. The third degree answers to the sphear
[sphere] of Venus; This possesseth subtile powders, vapours, and odours, and oyntments
[ointments], and suffumigations, which are made of these of which we have spoke above.
The fourth degree belongs to the sphear [sphere] of the Sun; this possesseth voyces
[voices], words, singings, and harmonical sounds, by the sweet consonancy whereof it
drives forth of the minde any troublesomeness therein, and chears [cheers] it up. Whence
Hermes, Pythagoras, Plato, advise us to compose a discontented minde, and chear
[cheer] it up by singing and harmony. So Timotheus is said to have with sounds stirred up
King Alexander to a phrensie [phrensy]: so the Priest Calame (Aurelius Augustus being
witness) was wont at his pleasure by a certain shrill harmony to call himself forth out of
his body into a rapture, and extasie [ecstasy]; of these also we have before spoken. The
fifth degree is answerable to Mars: this possesseth vehement imaginations, and affections
of the minde, conceits also, and motions thereof, of all which before. The sixth degree
answers to Jupiter: this possesseth the discourses of reason, deliberations, consultations,
and moral purgations: of these we have spoken in part above, and further we shall speak
afterwards; It possesseth also admirations, and venerations, at the astonishment of which,
the phantasie [phantasy], and reason are sometimes so restrained, that they suddenly let
pass all their own actions: whence then the minde it self being free, and exposed to a
diety [deity] only, whether to any God, or Demon, doth receive supernal, and divine
influences, viz. those concerning which it did deliberate before. So we read that the Sybils
[Sibyls], and the Priests of Pythia were wont to receive oracles in the caves of Jupiter,
and Apollo. The seventh degree resembles Saturn: this possesseth the more secret
intelligencies, and quiet contemplations of the minde. I call here, the contemplation, the
free perspicacity of the minde, suspended with admiration upon the beholding of wisdom.
For that excogitation which is made by riddles, and images, is a certain kind of
speculation, or discourse belonging to Jupiter, and not a contemplation. The eighth
degree resembles the starry heaven; this observes the situation, motion, raies [rays], and
light of the celestial bodies: it possesseth also images, rings, and such like, which are
made after the rule of celestials, as we have abeve spoken. The ninth degree answers to
the primum mobile, viz. the ninth sphear [sphere], as the very universe: this possesseth
things more formal, as Numbers, Figures, Characters, and observes the occult influences
of the intelligences of the heaven, and other mysteries, which because they bear the
effigies of celestial dieties [deities], and invocated spirits, easily allures them, and
compelleth them being forced by a certain necessity of conformity to come to one, and
detains them, that they shall not easily go back, of which we read in the Oracles in
Porphyrie [Porphyry].
Cease now at length, spare words, to life give rest,
Dissolve, and leave old shapes (I thee request),
Dishape the members, and the winding sheet
Unloose -----
And in another place in the same book.
Ye Garlands loose the feet, with water clean
Let them be sprinkled, and the Laurel green
Be taken off from th' hands, and every line
And Character be blotted out -----
Of these we have sufficiently treated already, and shall afterwards treat further of them.
Chapter xlvii. Of the second kinde from Dionysius [Dionysus].
Now the second phrensie [phrensy] proceeds from Dionysius: this doth by expiations
exterior, and interior, and by conjurations, by mysteries, by solemnities, rites, temples,
and observations divert the soul into the mind, the supream [supreme] part of it self, and
makes it a fit and pure temple of the Gods, in which the divine spirits may dwell, which
the soul then possessing as the associate of life, is filled by them with felicity, wisdom,
and oracles, not in signs, and marks, or conjectures, but in a certain concitation of the
mind, and free motion: So Bacchus did soothsay to the Beotians, and Epimenides to the
people of Cous, and the Sybil [Sibyl] Erithea to the Trojans. Sometimes this phrensie
[phrensy] happens through a clear vision, sometimes by an express voyce: So Socrates
was governed by his Demon, whose counsel he did diligently obey, whose voyce [voice]
he did often hear with his ears, to whom also the shape of a Demon did often appear.
Many prophesying spirits also were wont to shew themselves, and be associats with the
souls of them that were purified; examples of which there are many in sacred Writ, as in
Abraham, and his bond maid Hagar, in Jacob, Gideon, Elias, Tobias, Daniel, and many
more. So Adam had familiarity with the Angel Raziel. Shem the son of Noah with
Jophiel; Abraham with Zadkiel: Isaac and Jacob with Peliel; Joseph, Joshua and Daniel
with Gabriel; Moses with Metattron [Metatron]; Elias with Malhiel; Tobias the younger
with Raphael; David with Cerniel; Mannoah with Phadael; Cenez with Cerrel; Ezekiel
with Hasmael; Esdras with Uriel; Solomon with Michael. Sometimes the spirits by
vertue of the souls enter into, and seize upon organical bodies, whether of brutes or men,
and using the souls thereof as the basis, utter voyces [voices] through organical
instruments, as is manifest in Baalams Ases, and in Saul, on whom the spirit of the Lord
fell, and Prophecyed. Of these Apollo in his answers in Porphyry thus;
Phebean fulgor charmed, did from on high
Come down, and through pure air was silently
Conveyed; came into souls well purified
With a sonorous breath, a voyce uttered
Through a mortal throat -----
Chapter xlviii. Of the third kind of phrensie [phrensy] from Apollo.
Now the third kind of phrensie [phrensy] proceeds fom Apollo, viz. from the mind of the
world. This doth by certain sacred mysteries, vows, sacrifices, adorations, invocations, &
certain sacred arts, or certain secret confections, by which the spirits of their God did
infuse vertue, make the soul rise above the mind, by joyning it with dieties [deities], and
Demons: so we read concerning the Ephod, which being applied, they did presently
prophecie [prophesy]: so we read in the books of the Senats [Senates] in the chapter of
Eleazar, that Rabbi Israel made ceraain cakes, writ upon with certain divine and
angelicall names, and so consecrated, which they that did eat with faith, hope, and
charitie [charity], did presently break forth with a spirit of prophecie [prophecy]. We read
in the same place that Rabbi Johena the son of Jochahad, did after that manner enlighten
a certain rude countryman, called Eleazar, being altogether illiterate, that being
compassed about with a sudden brightness, did unexpectedly preach such high mysteries
of the Law to an assembly of wise men, that he did even astonish all that were neer him.
And it is reported of a certain man called Herviscus, an Aegyptian, that he was endowed
with such a divine nature, that at the very sight of images that had any diety [deity] in
them, he was forthwith stirred up with a kind of divine phrensie [phrensy]. We read also
in the scripture, that when Saul was amongst the Prophets, the spirit of the Lord came
upon him, and he prophecied, and when he went forth from the assembly of the Prophets,
he ceased to prophesie; the same happened to those officers which Saul sent to catch
David: who when they saw the company of the Prophets, and Samuel standing in the
midst of them, received the spirit of the Lord on them, and prophesied also. So great is
the abounding of divine light oftentimes in the prophets, taken with a divine phrensie
[phrensy], that it also seiseth [seizeth] on them that are neer them, and makes them have
the same spirit of phrensie [phrensy]: It is not therefore incredible, that an ignorant man
should presently be made wise, and again that a wise man become ignorant: for there is a
certain art (known but to few) of informing, adorning, & illustrating a pure mind, so that
it should presently be recovered out of the darkness of ignorance, and brought to the light
of wisdom: and on the contrary, there is a way by certain hid secrets, to make them that
have unclean, and unbelieving minds to become ignorant again, although for the present
they are learned and wise. Mans mind also, especially when it is simple, and pure, may
(Apuleius being witness) by some sacred, and mysterious recreation, and appeasing, be so
brought into a sleep, and astonied, that it may forget things present so utterly, as to be
brought into its divine nature, and so be enlightned [enlightened] with the divine light,
and inspired with a divine phrensie [phrensy] that it may foretell things to come, and
withall receive the vertue of some wonderfull effects. Whence Iamblicus saith, when the
prophets are inspired with a diety [deity], they fear nothing, for they go through wayes
unpassable, and are carried into the fire without any hurt, and passe over rivers. So we
read of certain caves, as of Apollo, Trophonius, the three footed stools, dens, fountains,
lakes, and such like, that were consecrated to the gods after this manner, or made by that
mysterie [mystery], that from thence the priests might draw the spirit of prophecying, as
Iamblicus in Porphyrie [Porphyry]: The Sybill [Sibyl] (saith he) in Delphi was wont to
receive God after two wayes: either by a subtill [subtile] spirit, and fire, which did break
forth somewhere out of the mouth of the cave, where she sitting in the entrance upon a
brazen three footed stool dedicated to a diety [deity], was divinely inspired, and did utter
prophecyings; or a great fire flying out of the cave did cirround [surround] this
prophetess, stirring her up, being filled with a diety [deity], to prophesie, which
inspiration also she received as she sate upon a consecrated seat, breaking forth prently
into predictions. Moreover there was a prophetess in Branchi which sate upon an extree,
and either held a wand in her hand, given to her by some diety [deity], or washed her feet,
and sometimes the hem of her garment in the waters, or drew the vapour of fire from the
waters. By all these she was filled with divine splendour, and did unfold many Oracles.
We also read that in the country of Thracia there was a certain passage consecrated to
Bacchas, from whence predictions, and Oracles were wont to be given: the Priors of
whose temples having drank wine abundantly did do strange things. Amongst the
Clarians also, where the temple of Clarius Apollo was, to whom it was given to utter
divine things, they having drank much wine did strange things. There was also a
propheticall fountain of Father Achaia, constituted before the temple of Ceres, where
they that did enquire of the event of the sick did let down a glass by degrees tied to a
small cord, to the top of the water, and certain supplications and fumes being made, the
event of the thing did appear in the glass. There was also not far from Epidaurus a City of
Laconia a deep Fen, which was called the water of Juno, into which cakes of corn being
cast, answers were given, fortunate, if the waters did quietly retain what was cast in; but
unhappy, if they did as it were, scorning of them, cast them back. The like they say do the
caves of Aetna, into which money or sacrifices did shew the same presage of good or ill,
by being retained, or rejected. The like things reports Dion in his Romane History, in a
place which they call the Nymphs: where Frankincense being cast into the flames,
Oracles were received concerning all those things which he did desire to know, especially
concerning death, and those things which belonged to marriages. Wonderfull also is that
which Aristotle relates of a certain fountain of the Paliscans of Sicilia, to which they that
did take an oath did go, and whatsoever they did affirm upon oath writ it upon tables,
which they cast into the fountain. If those things were true, the tables would swim; if
false, sink; then fire coming suddenly forth burned him that was perjured into ashes.
There was also in the City Dodona an Oak, which assoon as any one entered in to receive
an answer, did forthwith move, and make a sound; there was also a statue holding a
wand, which did strike a bason [basin], whereby the bason made answer by moderated
strokes. Whence it is read in the Epistle of Austinus to Paulinus,
Answers did give the Dodonean brass,
With moderated strokes; so docile t'was.
Chapter xlix. Of the fourth kinde of Phrensie [phrensy], from Venus.
Now the fourth kind of Phrensie proceeds from Venus, and it doth by a fervent love
convert, and transmute the mind to God, and makes it altogether like to God, as it were
the proper image of God; whence Hermes saith, O Asclepius! Man is a great miracle, an
animal to be honoured and adored: for he passeth into the nature of God, whereby he
becomes God: He knows the rise of Demons, and he knows himself to have his originall
with them, despising the part of his humane nature in himself, having a sure confidence
of the divinity of the other; The soul therefore being converted, and made like to God, is
so formed of God, that it doth above all intellect, know all things by a certain essential
contract of Divinity: therefore Orpheus describes love to be without eyes, because it is
above the intellect. Now then the soul being so converted into God by love, and
sublimated above the intellectuall spear [sphere], doth beside that it hath by its integrity
obtain'd the spirit of prophecie [prophecy], sometimes work wonderfull things, and
greater then the nature of the world can do, which works are called miracles. For as the
heaven by its image, light, and heat, doth those things, which the force of the fire cannot
do by its naturall quality (which in Alchymie [alchemy] is most known by experience) so
also doth God by the image and light of himself do those things, which the world cannot
do by its innate vertue. Now the image of God is man, at least such a man that by a
phrensie [phrensy] from Venus is made like to God, and lives by the mind only, and
receives God into himself. Yet the soul of man according to the Hebrew Doctors and
Cabalists, is defined to be the light of God, and Created after the image of the word, the
cause of causes, the first example, and the substance of God, figured by a seal whose
Character is the eternall word. Which Mercurius Trismegistus considering, saith, that
such a man is more excellent then they that are in heaven, or at least equall to them.
Chapter l. Of rapture, and extasie [ecstasy], and soothsayings, which
happen to them which are taken with the falling sickness, or with a swoune
[swoon], or to them in an agonie [agony].
A rapture is an abstraction, and alienation, and an illustration of the soul proceeding from
God, by which God doth again retract the soul, being falled from above to hell, from hell
to heaven. The cause of this is in us a continuall contemplation of sublime things, which
as far as it conjoyns [conjoins] with a most profound intention of the mind, the soul to
incorporeal wisdom, doth so far recall it self with its vehement agitations from things
sensible and the body, and (as Plato saith) in such a manner sometimes, that it even flieth
out of the body, and seemeth as it were dissolved: even as Aurelius Austin reporteth
concerning a Priest of Calamia; (or whom we have made mention before) he lay (saith
he) most like unto a dead man, without breath; and when he was burnt with fire and
wounded, he felt it not; so great therefore is the command of the soul: viz. when it hath
obtained its own nature, and is not oppressed by the allurements of the senses, that by its
own power it suddenly ascendeth, not only remaining in the body, but even sometimes
loosed from its fetters, and flyeth forth of the body to the supercelestiall habitations,
where now it being most nigh, and most like to God, and made the receptacle of divine
things, it is filled with the divine Light and Oracles. Whence Zoroastes [Zoroaster] saith,
thou must ascend to the light it self, and to the beams of the Father, whence thy soul was
sent thee, clothed with very much mind; and Trismegisius saith, it is nccessary that thou
ascend above the heavens, and be far from the quire of spirits; and Pythagoras saith, if
thou by leaving the body shalt pass into the spacious heavens, thou shalt be an immortall
god. So we read that Hermes, Socrates, Xenocrates, Plato, Plotine [Plotinus], Heraclitus,
Pythagoras and Zoroastes [Zoroaster], were wont to abstract themselves by rapture, and
so to learn the knowledge of many things: also we read in Herodotus, that there was in
Proconnesus a Philosopher of wonderfull knowledge, called Atheus, whose soul
sometimes went out of the body, and after the visitation of places far remote, returned
again into the body more learned: Pliny reporteth the same thing, that the soul of Harman
Clazomenius was wont to wander abroad, his body being left, and to bring true tidings of
things very far off; and there are even to this day in Norway and Lapland very many who
can abstract themselves three whole dayes from their body, and being returned declare
many things which are afar off; and in the meantime it is necessary to keep them, that not
any living creature come upon them or touch them; otherwise they report that they cannot
return into their body. Therefore we must know, that (according to the doctrine of the
Aegyptians,) seeing the soul is a certain spirituall light, when it is loosed from the body, it
comprehendeth every place and time, in such a manner as a light inclosed in a Lanthern
[lantern], which being open, difffseth it self every where, and faileth not any where, for it
is every where, and continually; and Cicero in his book of Divination saith, neither doth
the soul of man at any time divine, [except] when it is so loosed that it hath indeed little
or nothing to do with the body; when therefore it shall attain to that state, which is the
supream [supreme] degree of contemplative perfection, then it is rapt from all created
species, and understandeth not by acquired species, but by the inspection of the Ideas,
and it knoweth all things by the light of the Ideas: of which light Plato saith few men are
partakers in this life; but in the hands of the gods, all: also they who are troubled with the
syncope and falling sickness, do in some manner imitate a rapture, and in these
sicknesses sometimes as in a rapture do bring forth prophesie [prophecy], in which kind
of prophesying we read that Hercules and many Arabians were very excellent, and there
are certain kinds of soothsayings, which are a middle betwixt the confines of naturall
predictions, and supernaturall Oracles, viz. which declare things to come from some
excess of passion, as too much love, sorrow, or amongst frequent sights, or in the agony
of death, as in Statius, of the mother of Achilles;
----------Nor she without parents dear
Under the glassie [glassy] gulf the oars did fear.
For there is in our minds a certain perspicuous power, and capable of all things, but
encumbred and hindred by the darkness of the body and mortality, but after death it
having acquired immortality, and being freed from the body it hath full and perfect
knowledge. Hence it cometh to pass, that they who are nigh to death, and weakened by
old age, have sometimes somewhat of an unaccustomed light, because the soul being less
hindred by the senses, understandeth very acutely, and being now as it were a little
relaxed from its bands, is not altogether subject to the body, and being as it were nigher
to the place, to the which it is about to go, it easily perceiveth revelations, which being
mixed with its agonies, are then offered to it; whence Ambrose in his book of the belief of
the resurrection, saith, Which being free in the aerial motion, knoweth not whither it
goeth, and whence it cometh; yet we know that it superviveth the body, and that it being
freed, the chains of its senses being cast off, freely discerneth those things which it saw
not before, being in the body, which we may estimate by the example of those who sleep,
whose mind being quiet, their bodies being as it were buried, do elevate themselves to
higher things, and do declare to the body the visions of things absent, yea even of
celestial things.
Chapter li. Of Prophetical Dreams.
Now I call that a dream, which proceedeth either from the spirit of the phantasie
[phantasy] and intellect united together, or by the illustration of the Agent intellect above
our souls, or by the true revelation of some divine power in a quiet and purified mind; for
by this our soul receiveth true oracles, and abundantly yieldeth prophesies [prophecies] to
us: for in dreams we seem both to Ask questions, and learn to read and find them out;
also many doubtfull things, many Policies, many things unknown, and unwished for, nor
ever attempted by our minds, are manifested to us in Dreams: also the representations of
unknown places appear, and the Images of men both alive and dead, and of things to
come are foretold; and also things which at any times have happened, are revealed, which
we knew not by any report; and these dreams need not any art of interpretation, as those
of which we have spoken in the first book, which belong to divination, not fore-
knowledge; and it cometh to pass that they who see these dreams, for the most part
understand them not; for (as Abdala the Arabian saith) as to see dreams, is from the
strength of imagination, so to understand them, is from the strength of understanding;
whose intellect therefore, being overwhelmed by the too much commerce of the flesh, is
in a dead sleep, or its imaginative or phantastick spirit is too dull and unpolished, that it
cannot receive the species and representations which flow from the superior intellect, and
retain them when received, this man is altogether unfit for the soothsaying by dreams.
Therefore it is necessary, that he who would receive true dreams, should keep a pure,
undisturbed, and an undisquieted imaginative spirit, and so compose it, that it may be
made worthy of the knowledge and government by the mind and understanding: for such
a spirit is most fit for prophesying, and (as Sinesius saith) is a most clear glass of all the
Images which flow everywhere from all things: when therefore we are sound in body, not
disturbed in mind, not dulled by meat or drink, nor sad through poverty, nor provoked by
any vice of lust or wrath, but chastly going to bed, fall asleep, then our pure and divine
soul being loosed from all hurtfull thoughts, and now freed by dreaming, is endowed with
this divine spirit as an instrument, and doth receive those beams and representations
which are darted down, and shine forth from the divine minde into it self; and as it were
in a deifying glass, it doth far more certainly, clearly, and efficaciously behold all things,
then by the Vulgar enquiry of the intellect, and by the discourse of reason; the divine
power instructing the soul, being invited to their society by the opportunity of the
nocturnal solitariness; neither further will that deity be wanting to him when he is
awaked, which ruleth all his actions: whosoever therefore doth, by quiet and religious
meditation, and by a diet temperate and moderated according to nature, preserve his spirit
pure, doth very much prepare himself, that by this means he may become divine, and
knowing all things; but whosoever, on the contrary, doth languish with a phantastick
spirit, receiveth not perspicuous and distinct visions, but even as the divine sight, by
reason of its weakness, Judgeth confusedly and indistinctly; and also when we are
overcome with wine and drunkenness, then our spirit being oppressed with noxious
vapours (as a troubled water is wont to appear in divers forms) is deceived, & waxeth
dull; for which cause Amphiarus the Prophet (as we read in Philostratus) commanded
those, who would receive Oracles, to abstain one whole day from meat, and three days
from wine, that the soul could not rightly prophesie [prophecy] unless it were free from
wine, and meat; for to sober and religious minds, attending on the divine worship, the
Gods are wont to give Oracles; whence Orpheus crieth out,
----- Thou spirit great of prophecy
Dost go to souls that sleep fill quietly,
And them inspire with knowledge of the Gods,
And makest them soothsay -----
Hence it was a custom amongst the ancients, that they who should receive answers,
certain sacred expiations and sacrifices being first celebrated, and divine worship ended,
did religiously ly [lie] down even in a consecrated chamber, or at least on the skins of the
sacrifices; of which ceremony Virgil makes mention in these verses,
----- Hence they sought
Answers to doubts; when gifts the priests had brought,
Here he reposed on skins of slaughtred sheep,
And under silent night prepares to sleep.
And a little after he singeth,
----- But now
Here King Latinus Oracles to know,
They did a hundred choyce sheep sacrifice,
And on their skins, and spreding fleeces lyes -----
And the rulers of the Lacedemonians (as Cicero saith) were wont to lye [lie] down in the
Temple at Pasiphae, that they might dream. The same was done in the Temple of
Aesculapius, from whom true dreams were thought to be sent forth. And the Calabrians,
consulting Podalyrius the son of Aesculapius, did sleep neer his Sepulchre in lambes
skins; for so doing they were told in their dreams whatsoever they desired to know; for
the most usuall time for dreams is the night, when the senses are freed from wandring
objects, and meridian errours, and vain affections; neither doth fear strike the minde, nor
the thought tremble, and the mind being most quiet, doth steadfastly adhere to the Deity;
for there are, (as Rabbi Johenan in his book of Senatours saith) four kinds of true dreams:
the first Matutine, which is made betwixt sleep and awaking: the second, which one seeth
concerning another: the third, whose interpretation is shewen to the same dreamer in the
nocturnall vision: the fourth, which is repeated to the same dreamer, according to that
which Joseph saith to Pharaoh, But that thou hast seen the dream belonging to the same
thing the second time, it is a sign of confirmation; But that dream is most sure, which is
concerning those things which one did meditate on, and revolve in his minde, when he
goeth to bed, as it is written, Thou O King didst think upon thy bed, what should become
of these things; but it is necessary, that he which interpreteth other mens dreams, hath the
knowledge by the which he can distinguish and discern the similitudes of all things, and
know the customes of all nations, according to the laws which they have received from
God and his Angels; farther this must be known, that there is scarce any dream without
some vanity, as no grain of corn without his chaffe, which thing even the dream of
Joseph the Patriarch manifesteth; which his father Jacob interpreted, saying; what
meaneth this dream, that thou hast seen? what shall I, and thy mother, and thy brethren
fall down and worship thee? which effect concerning his mother, who shortly after died,
followed not. Also Rabbi Johenan in the forecited book, saith these things; and also
Rabbi Levi affirmeth, that no prophetical dream can be kept back from his effect longer
then twenty two years; so Joseph dreamed in the seventeenth year of his age; which was
accomplished in the thirty ninth year of his age; therefore whosoever would receive
divine dreams, let him be well disposed in hody, his brain free from vapours, and his
mind from perturbations, and let him that day abstain from supper, neither let him drink
that which will inebriate, let him have a clean and neat chamber, also exorcised and
consecrated: in the which, a perfume being made, his temples anoynted [anointed], things
causing dreams being put on his fingers, and the representation of the heavens being put
under his head, and paper being consecrated, his prayers being said, let him go to bed,
earnestly meditating on that thing he desireth to know: So he shall see most true and
certain dreams with the true illumination of his intellect: whosoever therefore shall know
to joyn together those things which here and there we have delivered concerning this
matter in these books, he shall easily obtain the gift of oracles and dreams.
Chapter lii. Of Lots and marks possessing the sure power of Oracles.
There are also certain Lots having a divine power of Oracles, and as it were Indexes of
divine judgement, being before sought for by earnest prayer, and sometimes commanded
by God himself to be done, as is read in Leviticus concerning a goat to be offered to the
Lord, and of the scape goat; and in the book of Numbers of the rods of the Tribes of
Israel. Now both Moses and Joshua did by Lots in the presence of the Lord divide the
lands, and inheritances to the tribes of Israel according to the command of God. The
Apostles of Christ, prayers going before, did by lot choose Matthias into the place of
Judas the traitor. Jonas the Prophet when he flying from the presence of God did sail to
Tharsus, a dangerous storm being raised, was by lot found out by the Mariners to be the
cause of the danger, and being cast into the sea, the tempest seased [ceased]. Caesar
reports of M. Valerius Procillus, being taken by his enemies, concerning whom it was
consulted whether he should be presently burnt, or reserved to another time, that by lot he
escaped safe. There was formerly at Bura, a Town of Achaia, an oracle of Hercules
constituted by a chest bord [chessboard], where he that went to consult of any thing, after
he had prayed, cast four dice, the cast of which the Prophet observing, did find written in
the chestboard [chessboard] what should come to pass: now all such dice were made of
the bones of sacrifices. Now this you must know, that the Ancients were not wont upon
every slight cause to cast lots, but either upon necessity, or for some advantageous end,
and that not but with great devotion, reverence, expiations, fasting, purity, prayers,
invocations, vowes, sacrifices, consecrations, and such like sacred mysteries of religion.
For these sacred ordinances were wont to go before our works, especially to procure the
divine good will, and pleasure, and the presence of the divine spirits, by whose
dispensation the lot being directed, we may receive a true judgement of the things sought
for. Every one therefore that works by lots, must go about it with a mind well disposed,
not troubled, nor distracted, and with a strong desire, firm deliberation, and constant
intention of knowing that which shall be desired. Moreover he must, being qualified with
purity, chastity, and holiness towards God, and the celestials, with an undoubted hope,
firm faith, and sacred orations, invocate them, that he may be made worthy of receiving
the divine spirits, and knowing the divine pleasure; for if thou shalt be qualified, they will
discover to thee most great secrets by vertue of lots, and thou shalt become a true
Prophet, and able to speak truth concerning things past, present, and to come, of which
thou shalt be demanded. Now what we have spoken here concerning lots, is also to be
observed in the auguries of all discemings, viz. when with fear, yet with a firm
expectation we prefix to our souls for the sake of prophecying some certain works, or
require a sign, as Eleasar, Abrahams countryman, & Gideon Judge in Israel are read to
have done. There was once at Pharis a City of Achaia in the midle of the market a statue
of Mercury, where he that went to receive any omen, did, frankincense being fumed, and
candies being lighted, which were set before it, and that country coin being offered on the
right hand of the statue, whisper into the right ear of the statue whatsoever he would
demand, and presently his ears being stopped with both his hands, did make haste away
from the market place, which when he was past, did presently, his ears being opened,
observe the first voice he did hear from any man for a certain Oracle given to him.
Although therefore these kinds of lots seem to the ignorant to be casuall, or fortuitous,
and to have nothing of reason in them, yet they are disposed by God, and the higher
vertues by certain reasons, neither they do fall beside the intention of him that moderates
them. Was not the lot in choosing Saul to be King of Israel, thought to fall upon him
casually, and fortuitously? Yet he was before appointed by the Lord to be King, and
annointed by the Prophet Samuel. And God that appointed him King, disposed of the Lot
that it should fall upon him. And thus much of these.
Chapter liii. How he that will receive Oracles must dispose himself.
Whosoever therefore being desirous to come to the Supream state of the soul, goeth to
receive oracles, must go to them being chastly and devoutly disposed, being pure and
clean go to them, so that his soul be polluted with no filthiness, and free from all guilt. He
must also so purifie [purify] his mind and body as much as he may from all diseases, and
passions, and all irrationall conditions, which adhere to it as rust to iron, by rightly
composing and disposing those things which belong to the tranquillity of the mind; for by
this means he shall receive the truer and more efficacious Oracles. Now by what things
the mind is purged, and reduced into a divine purity, we must learn by Religion, and
wisdom. For neither wisdom without Religion, nor Religion without wisdom is to be
approved off: For wisdom (as saith Solomon) is the tree of life to them that lay hold on it.
And Lucretius saith that it is the intention of God, or the breathings of God, where he
sings.
Most famous Memmius! This that god is he,
The prince of life, who reason, which all we
Call wisdom, first found out, and who by art
The life from troubles, darkness set apart
And freed, and unto light, and peace reduc'd.
He also understandeth that to be a divine illustration, whence Democritus thinketh that
there are no men wise but they that are struck with some divine phrensie [phrensy], as
was Menos that Cretensian, whom they report learned all things of Jupiter, whence he
had frequent converse with God in the mount Ida: so also the Athenians report that
Melosagora Eleusinus was taught by the Nymphs; so also we read, that Hesiod when he
was a Shepherd in Beotia, and kept his flock neer the mountain Helicon, had some pens
given him by the Muses, which having received, he presently became a Poet, which to
become so sodainly [suddenly] was not of man, but by a divine inspiration; for God
conveying himself into holy souls, makes men Prophets, and workers of miracles, being
powerfull in work and speech, as Plato and Mercurius affirm, and also Xistus the
Pythagorian [Pythagorean], saying that such a man is the temple of God, and that God is
his guest: to whom assents our Paul, calling man the temple of God; and in another place
speaking of himself, I can do all things in him that strengtheneth me; for he is our power,
without which (as he saith) we can do nothing; which also Aristotle confesseth in his
Meteors and Ethicks, saying, that there is no vertue whether naturall or morall but by
God; and in his secrets he saith that a good and sound intellect can do nothing in the
secrets of nature without the influence of divine vertue. Now we receive this influence
then only, when we do acquit our selves from burdensome impediments, and from carnall
and Terrene occupations, and from all external agitation; neither can a blear or impure
eye behold things too light, neither can he receive divine things who is ignorant of the
purifying of his mind. Now we must come to this purity of mind by degrees; neither can
any one that is initiated newly unto those mysteries presenfly comprehend all cleer [clear]
things, but his mind must be accustomed by degrees, until the intellect becomes more
enlightened, and applying it self to divine light be mixed with it. A humane soul therefore
when it shall be righfly purged, and expiated, doth then, being loosed from all impurity,
break forth with a liberall motion, and ascends upwards, receives divine things, instructs
it self, when happily it seems to be instructed from elsewhere; neither doth it then need
any remembrance, or demonstration by reason of the industry of it self, as by its mind
which is the head and the pilot of the soul, it doth, imitating by its own nature the angels,
attain to what it desires, not by succession or time, but in a moment. For David when he
had not learning, was of a Shepherd made a Prophet, and most expert of divine things.
Solomon in the dream of one night, was filled with the knowledge of all things above and
below. So Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the other Prophets, and Apostles were taught. For
the soul (which is the common opinion of the Pythagorians [Pythagoreans], and
Platonists) can by way of purification, without any other study, or searching, only by an
easie, and adventitious collating on these intelligibles received from above, acquire the
perfect knowledge of all things knowable. It can also by an extrinsecall expiation attain to
this, as to understand all things Invisibly by its substantiall form. For the mind is purged,
and expiated by cleansing, by abstinence, by penitency, by almes: and then also do
thereunto conduce certain sacred institutions, as shall afterward be discovered. For the
soul is to be cured by the study of Religions, and indeed these which are commonly
called occult, that being restored to its soundness, confirmed by truth, and fortified by
divine graces, may not fear any rising shakings.
Chapter liv. Of cleanness, and how to be observed.
We must therefore first observe cleanness in food, in works, in affections, and to put
away all filthiness, and perturbations of the mind, and whatsoever sense or spirit that
offends, and whatsoever things are in mind unlike to the heavens, not only if they be in
mind and spirit, but also if they be in the body, or about the body: for such an externall
cleanness is beleeved not to help a litde to the purity of the mind. For this cause the
Pythagorian Philosophers being taken with the desire of Oracles, divine praises being
celebrated, did wash themselves in a river as in a bath, & did put on white rayment and
linen; for they did account wooll a prophane clothing being the excrements of beasts, and
they did inhabit in a pure chamber, and altogether unspotted. In like manner the
Bragmanni [Brahmans], the wise men of the Indians were wont to wash themselves
naked in a fountain, which is called Dirce in Beotia, their heads being first annointed
with amber drops, and odours fit for that purpose; then after they were according to
custome sufficiently clean, they were to go forth about noon, clothed in white linen, with
a white attire, having rings on their fingers and staves in their hands. In like manner
amongst the Gymnosophists it was a custom to wash themselves thrice in a day, and twice
in the night, in cold water, before they entred into the holy places. They did also every
day use linen garments every day newly washed. We read also of the manner of this kind
of washing in Hesiod in his books of works and dayes, where he sings,
None dare with hands unwashed unto Jove
Wine pour forth, nor unto the gods above;
For then they do refuse for to be heard,
Though being pray'd unto -----
And elswhere,
When wicked men the rivers do passe by
With hands unwash'd, then are the gods angry
With them, and them afflict -----
Hence in Virgil, Aeneas thus speaks to his father,
O Father, take the household gods, and hold
Them in thy sacred hands; to be so bold
As them to handle after so great fights
I dare not till that washed in streams most bright.
It was also a custom amongst the Gentiles, when they were wont to perform any holy
services to the gods, to cleanse their bodies by washing; and when they were to contend
with the infernall gods, sprinkling only did suffice. Hence in Virgil, Dido, when she did
perform any solemnities to the gods, saith,
Cause that my sister Ann (my nurse most dear:)
Come, and my body wash with water clear.
And in another place where Aeneas is brought in amongst the infernals bringing a bough
to Proserpina, he sings thus,
The passage doth Aeneas keep, and wash
His body with fresh water -----
Also when he relates of Misenas to be buried, he sings,
His friends he thrice did wash with water new,
And with an Olive branch, wett in the dew,
He did them sprinkle -----
Now man being made thus clean becomes celestiall, and spirituall, and is fitted for the
sight of and union with God, whilest he ministers to God with a clean body, and pure
mind, and delights in the cleanness of all things, as inwards, skin, garments, houses,
utensils, oblations, gifts, and sacrifices; the cleanness of all which even purifies the air,
and attracts the most pure influence of celestiall, and divine things, and allures the pure
ministers of God, and good Demons: although sometimes impure spirits, and ill Demons,
as the apes of the good Demons, take upon them this kind of cleanness, that either they
may be adored, or may deceive: therefore first of all we must observe that the mind be
pure, and the heart pure, and then the impure powers cannot ascend.
Chapter lv. Of abstinence, fastings, chastity, solitariness, the tranquillity
and ascent of the mind.
Abstinence also doth commonly fortifie, and defend the observers thereof against vices,
and evil Demons, and makes the mind an unpolluted temple of God, uniting it to God.
For nothing doth more conduce to health, and temperance of the complexion, then not to
heap together superfluities, and not to exceed the bounds of necessary food. Neither is
nutriment to be taken that is too strong for nature, but rather, let nature be stronger then
the meat, as some affirm of Christ, that he took meat in that proportion that it should not
breed any excrement of the third concoction. Many others also taking meat sparingly,
enjoyed thereby health and agility of body, as Moses, and Elias, who fasted fortie [forty]
dayes: whence his face shined, and he lifted up, could easily guide his body as if it were a
spirit. For Magicians, and Philosophers affirm that our spirit is not as a terrene thing, or
body nourished by nutriment received through certain organs by the concoction of meat,
and drink, but draws in their aliment like sponges through the whole body, viz. from the
thin vapours penetrating the body on all sides. Therefore they that desire to have this
spirit pure, and potent, let them use dryer [drier] meats, and extenuate this gross body
with fastings, and they make it easily penetrable, and least by the weight thereof, the
spirit should either become thick, or be suffocated, let them preserve the body clean by
lotions, frictions, exercises, and clothings, and corroborate their spints by lights, and
fumes, and bring it to a pure and thin [finess] fineness. We must therefore in taking of
meats be pure, and abstinent, as the Pythagorian Philosophers, who keeping a holy and
sober table, did protract their life in all temperance. The temperance therefore of life and
complexion, because thereby no superfluous humour is bred, which may dull the
phantasie [phantasy], makes, that our soul oftentimes dreaming, and sometimes watching,
is alwayes subjected to the superiour influences. Moreover the Pythagorians, if any one
doth by abstinence moderate prudently every motion of the mind, and body, promise
perpetuall health of both, and long life. So the Bragmani [Brahmins] did admit none to
their colledge [college], but those that were abstinent from wine, from flesh, and vices,
saying that none could understand God, but they that emulate him by a divine
conversation: which also Phraotes in Philostratus taught the lower Indians. Moreover we
must abstain from all those things which infect either the mind, or spirit, as from
covetousness, and envy, which are handmaids to injustice (as Hermes saith) enforcing the
mind and the hand to evil practices; also from idleness, and luxury; for the soul being
suffocated with the body, and lust, cannot foresee any celestiall thing. Wherefore the
priests of the Athenians who are called in Greek Hierophantae (as Hierom reports) that
they might live more chastly in their sacred employments, and might follow their divine
affairs without lust, were wont to castrate themselves by drinking of hemlock. Moreover
the chastity of a mind devoted to God doth make our mind (as Orpheus teacheth Museus
in the hymne of all the gods) a perpetuall temple of God. Also we must abstain from all
multitude and variety of senses, affections, imaginations, opinions, and such like
passions, which hurt the mind and pervert the judgement of reason, as we manifestly see
in the lascivious, the envious, and ambitious. Wherefore Cicero (in his Tusculans
questions) cals these passions the sicknesses of the mind, and the pestiferous diseases
thereof. But Horace calls them furies or madness, where he sings,
Girles have a thousand furies, so have boyes.
The same also seems to he of opinion that all men are fools in something. Whence is read
in Ecclesiasticus, there are an infinite number of fools. Therefore the Stoicks deny that
passions are incident to a wise man; I say such passions, which follow the sensitive
apprehension: for rational, and mental passions, they yeld [yield] a wise man may have.
This opinion did Boetius seem to be of, where he sings that some passions are to be laid
aside in the inquisition of truth, in these verses,
If truth thou wouldst discover with clear sight,
And walk in the right path, then from thee quit
Joy, fear, grief, hope expel; for where these raign,
The mind is dark, and bound -----
We must therefore acquit and avert our minds from all multitudes, and such like passions,
that we may attain to the simple truth; which indeed many Philosophers are said to have
attained to in the solitude of a long time. For the mind by solitude being loosed from all
care of humane affairs is at leisure, and prepared to receive the gifts of the celestial
dieties [deities]. So Moses the law-giver to the Hebrews, and the greatest of prophets, and
learned in all the knowledge of the Chaldeans [Chaldaeans] and Aegyptians [Egyptians],
when he would abstract himself from senses, went into the vast wildernesses of Ethiopia,
where all humane affairs being laid aside, he applied his mind to the sole contemplation
of divine things, in which thing he so pleased the omnipotent God, that he suffered him to
see him face to face, and also gave him a wondrous power of miracles, as sacred writ
testifies of him. So Zoroastes [Zoroaster] the father and prince of the Magicians, is said
to attain to the knowledge of all naturall and divine things by the solitude of twenty years,
when he wrot, and did very strange things concerning all the art of divining, and
soothsaying. The like things do the writings of Orpheus to Museus declare him to have
done in the deserts of Thracia. So we read that Epimenides of Crete because learned by a
very long sleep, for they say that he slept fifty years, i.e. to have lay hid so long;
Pythagoras also in like manner to have layen hid ten years, and Heraclitus, and
Democritus for the same cause were delighted with solitariness. For by how much the
more we have [relinquished] the animal and the humane life, by so much the more we
live like angels, and God, to which being conjoyned [conjoined], and brought into a
better condition, we have power over all things, ruling over all. Now how our mind is to
be separated from an animal life, and from all multitude, and to be erected, untill it
ascend to that very one, good, true, and perfect, through each degree of things knowable,
and knowledges, Proclus teacheth in his Commentaries upon Alcibiades, shewing how
that first sensible things are to be shunned, that we may pass to an incorporeal essence,
where we must exceed the order of souls yet multiplied by divers rules, habitudes, and
various proportions, many bonds, and a manifold variety of forces, and to strive after an
intellect, and intelligible kingdome, and to contemplate how far better these are then
souls. Moreover we must bear an intellectual multitude, although united, and individuall,
and come to the superintellectual and essential unity, absolute from all multitude, and the
very fountain of good, and truth. In like manner we must avoid all knowledge that doth
any ways distract, and deceive, that we may obtain the most simple truth. The multitude
therefore of affections, senses, imaginations, and opinions is to be left, which in it self is
as different, as some things are contrary to others in any subject; and we must ascend to
sciences, in which although there be a various multitude, yet there is no contrariety. For
all are knit one to the other, and do serve one the other, under one the other, untill they
come to one, presupposed by all, and supposing none beyond it; to which all the rest may
be referred: yet this is not the highest top of knowledges, but above it is a pure intellect.
Therefore all composition, division, and various discourse being laid aside, let us,
ascending to the intellectual life, and simple sight, behold the intelligible essence with
individual and simple precepts, that we may attain to the highest being of the soul, by
which we are one, and under which our multitude is united. Therefore let us attain to the
first unity, from whom there is a union in all things, through that one which is as the
flower of our essence: which then at length we attain to, when avoyding all multitude we
do arise into our very unity, are made one, and act uniformly.
Chapter lvi. Of Penitency, and Almes.
Now the greatest part of purgations is a voluntary penitency for faults: for (as saith
Seneca in Thyeste) he whom it grieves that he hath offended, is in a manner innocent.
This brings to us the greatest expiation, whilest it opposeth afflictings to delights, and
purgeth out of the soul a stupid joyfulness, and gives a certain peculiar power, reducing
us to the things above. Penitency therefore is not only a mortification of vices, but a
spiritual Martyrdome of the soul; which with the sword of the spirit is on all sides
mortified; Now the sword of the spirit is the word of God; whence Jeremiah the Prophet
saith, and also Paul, writing to the Ephesians, Cursed is he that with-holdeth his sword
from blood; and the Psalmist sings: A sword is in their lips. Therefore our cogitations,
affections of our mind, and all evils that proceed from our heart and mouth, must be
uttered to the priest in confession, that he may according to the word of God judge those
things; and according to the power granted to him by God, penitency being joyned with
it, may purifie [purify], & purge them, & direct them to that which is good; neither is
there found in religion for the expiating hainous [heinous] offences a stronger Sacrament.
Hence the Gods themselves (Ovid in Pontus being witnes),
Do often ease the pains, restore the lights
Which were caught away, when that mortall wights
They see repenting of their sins -----
There is as yet another Sacrament of expiation, viz. Almsgiving, of which as I remember I
have read very little in Philosophers, but the very truth taught us that, saying, Give ye
almes, and all things shall be clean to you; and in Ecclesiasticus it is read; as water
extinguisheth fire, so almes doth sin; and Daniel taught the King of Babylon, that he
should redeem his sins by almes; and the Angel Raphael testifieth to Tobias; because
alms frees from death, and is that which purgeth sins, and make us find eternal life.
Hence Christ commanded us to pray to the Father, Forgive as we forgive others, give us
as we give to others; of which he said in another place, ye shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall possess eternal life. He shall when he comes to judge the quick and the deed,
upbraid the wicked above all things for their neglect of almes and works of mercy, when
he shall say, I was hungry, and thirsty, and ye gave me neither meat, nor drink; and in
another place he speaks of the poor; what ye have done to any one of them ye have done
to me. Which Homer also seems to be sensible of, when he brings in a young man
wooing Antinoe, saying these words, Antinoe how plausibly hast thou slain a poor
begger! he shall destroy thee if God be in heaven; for the Gods themselves being likened
to strangers, and guests, go out into the whole world, overturning Cities, and beholding
the injuries, and wickednesse of men.
Chapter lvii. Of those things which being outwardly administred conduce
to Expiation.
It is believed, and it is delivered by them that are skilful in sacred things, that the mind
also may be expiated with certain institutions, and sacraments ministred outwardly, as by
sacrifices, baptismes, and adjurations, benedictions, consecrations, sprinklings of holy
water, by anoyntings [annointings], and fumes, not so much consecrated to this, as having
a naturall power thus to do; upon this account sulphur hath a place in Religions, to
expiate ill Demons with the fume thereof. An egge also was wont to be used in
Purgations; hence eggs are called holy, whence Ovid,
Let the old woman come, and purge the bed,
And place, and bring sulphure and eggs sacred
In her trembling hand -----
Proclus also writes, that the priests in purifyings were wont to use sulphur, and bitumen,
or the washing of sea water: For sulphur purifies by the sharpness of its odour, and sea
water by reason of its fiery part; In like manner the hearb [herb] Cinquefoil: wherefore by
reason of its purity the ancient priests did use it in purifications, also the boughs of
Olives. For these are said to be of so great purity, that they report that an olive tree
planted by an harlot is thereby for ever made unfruitfull, or else withers. In like manner,
frankincense, myrrhe, vervain, valerian, and the hearb called phu condace to expiation.
Also the blessed Clove flower; and the gall of a black dog being fumed is said to be very
powerfull in these, as well for expiating of ill spirits, as any bewitchings: also the feathers
of a lapwing being fumed, drives away Phantasmes. It is wonderfull, and scarce credible,
but that that grave and worthy Author Josephus relates it in his history of Jerusalem, of a
root of Baaras, so called from a place neer Machernus, a Town of Judea, being of a
yellow colour, that in the night it did shine, and was hard to be taken, that it did
oftentimes deceive the hands of them that went to take it, and go out of their sight, never
stood still, till the urine of a menstrous woman was sprinkled on it. Neither yet being thus
retained, is it pulled up without danger, but suddain death fals upon him that drawes it up,
unless he were fortified with an amulet of the said root; which they that want, sacrificing
about the earth do bind the root to a dog by a cord, and presently depart: at length the dog
with a great deal of pains drawes up the root, and as it were supplying the place of his
master presently dies, after which anyone may handle the root without danger; the power
of which is much excellent in expiations, as is manifest for the delivery of those that are
vexed with unclean spirits; now that these kind of matters should act upon spirituall
substances by putting them to flight, or by alluring them, or mitigating them, or by
inciting them, they are of no other opinion then that the fire of Sicilia acts upon souls:
which (William of Paris being witness) not hurting the bodies, doth most intolerably
torment the souls of them that are neer. But of those in part we have treated before.
Chapter lviii. Of Adorations, and vowes.
Adorations, and vowes, sacrifices, and oblations are certain degrees in sacred things to
find out God, and those things which principally provoke the divine pleasure, and procure
a sacred and indissolvable communion of God with souls; for by prayers which we utter
with true and sacred words, sensibly, and affectionately, we obtam a great power, when
by the application of them to any diety [deity] we do so far move it, that he may direct his
speech and answer by a divine way, by which (as saith Dionysius) God speaks with men,
but so occultly that very few perceive it. But oftentimes that King and Prophet David
perceives it, when he saith, I will hear what the Lord will speak in me. Adoration
therefore being a long time continued, and often ftequented, perfects the intellect, and
makes the soul more large for the receiving of divine lights, inflaming divine love,
producing faith, hope, and sacred manners, purifieth the soul from all contrariety, and
what is any away adverse to it, and doth also repell divers evils, which would otherwise
naturally fall out. Hence Ovid sings,
----- With prayers mov'd is Jove;
I oftentimes have seen when from above
He would seed dreadfull lightnings, him to be
Appeas'd with frankincense -----
Now man is returned to God by prayers, by which coming he (saith Plato in Phedrus
[Phaedrus]) stops horses, and enters into the chambers of repose, where he feeds upon
Ambrosia, and drinks Nectar. Therefore they that desire to enjoy any vertue, must pray,
and supplicate often to him who hath all vertue in himself. Now that is the best prayer,
which is not uttered in words, but that which with a Religious silence and sincere
cogitation is offered up to God, and that which with the voice of the mind and words of
the intellectuall world, is offered to him. Now a vow is an ardent affection of a chast
[chaste] mind given up to God, which by vowing wisheth that which seems good. This
affection (as Iamblichus, and Proclus testifie) doth so joyn the soul to God, that the
operation of the mind and of God is one; viz. of God as an artificer, of the mind as a
divine instrument: all antiquity testifies that by vowes sometimes miracles are done,
diseases are cured, tempests are diverted, and such like. Hence we read that the most
excellent and wise in all nations, the Bragmanni [Brahmins] of the Indians, the
Magicians of the Persians, the Gymnosopists [Gymnosophists] of the Aegyptians, the
divines of the Greeks, and Caldeans [Chaldaeans] which did excell in divine secrets, did
apply themselves to divine vowes, and prayers, and thereby did effect many wonderfull
things. Now to the perfection of a vow, and adoration (for a vow cannot be perfect
without an adoration, nor an adoration without a vow) there are two things especially
required, viz. First the knowledge of the thing to be adored, and to which we must vow,
and in what manner, and order, and by what Mediums it must be worshiped; for there are
various cooperators and instruments of God, viz. The heavens, Stars, administring spirits,
the celestiall souls, and Heros, which we must implore as porters, interpreters,
administrators, mediators, but first of all him, who goeth to the Archetype God, who only
is the utmost term of adoration; the other dieties [deities] are as it were passages to that
very God. Know therefore that adorations and vowes must with a pure and pious mind be
principally made to that one only God, the highest father, King and Lord of all the gods.
But when they shall come before to the inferiour gods, let the intention of the
administration be terminated in them; therefore to adorations, and vowes, when they be
directed to the inferiour dieties [deities], Zoroastes [Zoroaster], and Orpheus thought
fitting that suffumigations and characters should be used; but when they are erected to
the majesty of the supream [supreme] God, they must not in any wise; which also
Hermes, and Plato forbid to be done. Whence Hermes to Tatius; This (saith he) is like to
sacrilege when thou prayest to God to be willing to kindle frankincense, and such like;
for (saith Porphyrie [Porphyry]) they are not agreeable to piety. For there is not any
materiall thing can be found, which to the immateriall God is not unclean. Therefore
neither is that prayer which is uttered by words agreeable to him, nor that prayer which is
mentall, if the mind be polluted with vice; Secondly there is also required a certain
assimilation of our life to the divine life, in purity, chastity and holiness, with a lawfull
desire of that which we wish for; for by this means we especially obtain the divine
benevolence, and are subjected to the divine bounty; for unlesse we, having our minds
purged, be worthy to be heard, and also those things which we desire, be worthy to be
done, it is manifest that the gods will not hearken to our prayers; whence divine Plato
saith, that God cannot be bound by our prayers or gifts to do unjust things; therefore let
us desire nothing of God, which we think uncomely to wish for: for by this means only,
we see that very many are frustrated of their prayers and vowes, because that neither they
themselves are Religiously disposed, nor are their desires and prayers made for those
things which are well pleasing to God, neither do they know to discern in what order they
ought to pray, and through what mediatours they ought to go to God; the ignorance of
which doth very oft reduce our prayers and supplications to nothing, and causeth our
desires and wishes to be denied.
Chapter lix. Of sacrifices and oblations, and their kinds and manners.
A sacrifice is an oblation which is both holy by offering, and sanctifieth and maketh Holy
the offerer, unless either Irreverence or some other sin be an impediment to him;
therefore these sacrifices and oblations do yeld [yield] us much hope, and make us of the
family of God, and do repel from us many evils hanging over our heads, which the
doctors of the Hebrews do especially confirm, saying by this that we kill our living
creatures, and dissipate our wealth by sacrifice, we turn away mischiefs which do hang
over us: for as this mortall priest sacrificeth in this inferior world the soul of irrational
creatures to God, by the separating of the body from the soul: so Michael the Archangel
the priest of the higher world, sacrificeth the souls of men, and this by the separation of
the soul from the body, and not of the body from the soul, unless perchance, as it
happeneth in fury, Rapture, Extasie [ecstasy] and sleep, and such like vacations of the
soul, which the Hebrews call the death of the body. But sacrifices & oblations are first of
all and principally to be offered up to the most high God; but when they are to be directed
to the secondary divine powers, this ought to be done even as we have spoken concerning
prayers and vows: but there are many kinds of sacrifices: one kind is called a burnt
offering, when the thing sacrificed was consumed by fire; another, is an offering for the
effusion of blood; moreover there are salutiferous sacrifices which are made for the
obtaining of health, others pacifying for obtaining peace, others praising for the freeing
from some evill, and for the bestowing of some good thing; others Gratulatory, for divine
worship and thanksgiving; but some sacrifices are made neither for the honor of God, nor
out of good will, of which sort was that amongst the Hebrews, called the sacrifice of
Jealousie [jealousy], which was made only for the detecting of occult adultery. There was
in times past amongst the Gentiles the sacrifice of expiation, by the which cities were
purged from famine, pestilence, or some horrible calamity; whose rites were to search out
the most wicked man in that city, and to lead him to the place appointed carrying in his
hands a cheese and wafers and dry figs; afterwards to whip him seven times with Rods,
and then to burn him to ashes with the same rods, and to cast the ashes into the sea; of
these Lycophron and Hipponax make mention; neither doth Philostratus relate things
much different from these, concerning Apollonius of Tiana [Tyana] while he chased
away the Pestilence from Ephesus. Moreover there were many kind of sacrifices and
offerings, as Agonalia, Dapsa, Farreationes, Hecatombe, Hostia, Hyacinthia, Armilustra,
Janualia, Lucalia, Lupercalia, Munychia, Novendinalia, Nyctiluca, Palatialia,
Pastillaria, Popularia, Protervia, Scenopegia, Solitaurilia, Stata, Rubigalia, Fontanalia,
Ormia, Parentalia, Inferiae, Consualia, Lampteria, Amburbia, Ambarvalia, Vivalia,
Thyia, Holocaustomata, Orgia, Latialia, Dianetaurica, Bacchanalia, Trieterica,
Liberalia, Cocytia, Cerealia, Thesmophoria, Adonia, Teonia, Laurentalia , Opalia,
Palilia, Quirinalia, Vertumnalia, Gynaecia, Panathenea, Quinquatria, Diapalia, Diasia,
Horma, Hormea, Nemea, Mytriaca, Palogygia. And the offerings of these were proper
and divers; for a Goat and an Ass were sacrificed to Bacchus, a Sow to Ceres, an horse to
the Sun, an hart and dogs to Diana, an Ass to Priapus, a Goose to Isis, a dunghil-cock to
the Night, a she-Goate to Faunus, a Bull to Neptune, a she-Goate to Minerva, a Bull to
Hercules, a child to Saturn, a Sow with piggs to Maja, a Cock to Aesculapius: moreover
they did sacrifice to Hercules Gnidius with scouldings and railings; there were also divers
orders of Priests, as high priests, Flamines, Archiflamines, Phylades, Saelians,
Hierophantes, & diverse names of religions, and superstitions, and sacrifices,
ceremonies, feasts, consecrations, dedications, vowes, devotions, expiations, oathes,
offerings, satisfactory works; by the which the seduced gentiles did sacrifice to false
Gods and devils; but the true sacrifice, which purgeth any man, and uniteth him to God,
is twofold; one which the high priest Christ offered for the remission of sins, purifying all
things by the blood of his cross; the other, by the which a man offereth up himself clean,
unspotted, for a living sacrifice to God, as Christ the high priest offered himself, and
taught us to be offered together with him, as he was offered, saying of the sacrament of
his body, and blood, Do this in remembrance of me; viz. that we should offer our selves
together, being mortified by the passion of his mortal body, and quickned in spirit; of the
which Porphyry saith, Let us labor to offer up holines of life for a sacrifice; for no man
can be a good priest of God, but he which bringeth forth himself for a sacrifice, and
buildeth up his own soul, as it were for an Image, and doth constitute both his mind, and
understanding for a Temple in the which he may receive the divine light; but eternal
sacrifices (as Heraclitus saith) are certain cures of the soul, instituted by the most High
Physician; for the evill spirit possesseth a man (as Proclus saith) even untill he be
expiated by sacrifices; therefore sacrifices are required to pacifie [pacify] God and the
Heavenly powers, and to expiate a man, who beareth the Image both of God and the
world; But our Lord Iesus [Jesus] Christ the true high priest concluded all sacrifices in
bread and wine only, as in the primary substance of mans meat, needing further the
offering up of no animals, nor other things, or the effusion of blood, in which we may be
cleansed, being perfectly cleansed in his blood. There were also amongst the Aegyptians
six hundred sixty six [666] kinds of sacrifices; for they did appoynt [appoint] divine
honors, and holy sacrifices to each star, and planet, because they were divine animals
partaking of an intellectual soul and a divine mind; whence they say that the stars being
humbly prayed unto, do hear our prayer, and bestow celestial gifts, not so much by any
natural agreement, as by their own free will. And this is that which Iamblicus saith, that
celestial bodies, and the dieties [deities] of the world have certain divine and superior
powers in themselves, as also natural and inferior, which Orpheus calls the keyes to open
and shut; and that by those we are bound to the fatall influences, but by these to loose us
from fate. Whence if any misfortune hang over any one from Saturn, or from Mars, the
Magicians command that he must not forthwith fly to Jupiter, or Venus, but to Saturn or
Mars themselves. So that Apuleian Psyche who was persecuted by Venus for equalling
her in beauty, was forced to importune for favor, not from Ceres, or Juno, but from Venus
her self. Now they did sacrifice to each star with the things belonging to them; to the Sun
with solary things, and its animals, as a Laurel tree, a Cock, a Swan, a Bull; to Venus with
her animals, as a Dove, or turtle, and by her plants, as Vervain; as Virgil sings,
----- Water bring out
With garlars soft, the altar round about
Compass, and burn fat boughs and frankincense
Thats strong and pure -----
Moreover the Magicians when they made any confection either natural, or artificial,
belonging to any star, this did they afterward religiously offer, and sacrifice to the same
star, receiving not so much a natural vertue from the influence thereof being opportunely
received, as by that religious oblation receiving it divinely confirmed and stronger. For
the oblation of any thing, when it is offered to God after a right manner, that thing is
sanctified by God by the oblation as is a sacrifice, and is made part thereof. Moreover to
the celestial and etherial Gods white sacifices were offered; but to the terestial
[terrestrial] or infernal, black: but to the terrestial [terrestrial] upon the altars, but to the
infernal in ditches; to the aerial and watery, flying things: But to these white, to those
black. Finally, to all the Gods and Demons besides terrestrial and infernal, flying things
were offered, but to those only four-footed animals, for like rejoyceth in like. Of these
only which were offered to the celestial, and etherial, it is lawfull to eat, the extream
[extreme] parts being reserved for God, but of the other not. Now all these the Oracle of
Apollo hath expressed in these verses,
A threefold sacrifice to th' Gods above.
White must be slain for them; for them below
Threefold also, but black for them; withall
With open altars Gods celestiall
Are taken, when th' infernal Gods require
Pits embru'd with black blood, and fill'd with mire;
And are not pleas'd but with a sacrifice
That's buried; but of th' aire the deities
Delight in honey, and in wines most clear,
And that on altars kindled be the fire,
Require, with flying sacrifice, and white:
But of the earth the dieties [deities] delight
That earthly bodies should with frankincense
And wafers offered be in reverence.
But for the Gods that rule the sea thou must
Thy sacrifices lay on the sea coasts,
And on the waves cast the whole animal.
But to the dieties [deities] celestial
Give th' extream [extreme] parts, and them consume with fire;
What then remains thou maiest if thou desire
Eat up, and let the air with vapors thick
And sweet smelling drop -----
These doth Porphyry make mention of in his book of answers, to whom the rest assent.
For they say that these sacrifices are certain natural Mediums betwixt the Gods and men;
which Aristotle affirming saith, that to sacrifice to God is in a man naturally. They are
therefore they say, Mediums, which favor of the nature of both, and represent divine
things analogically, and have with the diety [deity] to whom they are offered, certain
convenient analogies, but so occult that a mans understanding can scarce conceive of
them, which God, and the Dieties [deities] require in particular for our expiation with
which the celestial vertues are pleased, and withhold themselves from execution of the
punishment which our sins deserve. And these are (as Orpheus calls them) keys which
open the gate of the elements and the heavens, that by them a man may ascend to the
supercelestials; and the intelligences of the heavens, and the demons of the elements may
descend to him. Now men that are perfect, and truly Religious need them not, but only
they, who (saith Trismegistus) being fallen into disorder, are made the servants of the
heavens and creatures; who because they are subjected to the heavens, therefore think
they may be corroborated by the favour of the celestiall vertue, untill they flying higher
be acquitted from their presidency, and become more sublime then they.
Chapter lx. What imprecations, and rites the ancients were wont to use in
sacrifices, and oblations.
Now let us see what imprecations they did joyn to oblations and sacrifices; for he that did
offer any sacrifice to God, did say these, or the like things: I thy servant do offer and
sacrifice these things to thee; I confesse that thou art the author of all sanctity, and I call
upon thee to sanctifie this oblation, that thou wouldst pour upon it the vertue of thy high
and excellent spirit, that by it we may oblain what we ask for. Moreover also as this thing
present by any oblations is made thine, as to live, or die to thee, so also let me be made
thine who by this oblation, and communion, by this thing which I come to offer, and
sacrifice to thee, profess to be one of thy family, and worshippers. Besides in offerings it
was said, As that animal is in my power to be slain, if I pleased, or to be saved: so it is in
thy power to take away in wrath, or to give in love that which we desire. Lastly, when for
expiation, or the avoyding of any evil, any sacrifice was to be made, it was said, As that
animall dies in my hand, so die all vice in me, also all uncleanness, or so let die and be
annihilated such or such an evil, or discommodity. Also, As the blood of this animal is
poured forth out of its body, so let all vice and uncleanness flow out from me. In
sacrifices laid on the altar to be burnt, it was said, as this oblation is consumed by this
present fire, so that nothing remains of it; so let all evel be consumed in me, or let such or
such an evil which we would repell and avoyd be consumed. It was also a custom when
imprecation was made, to touch the altar with the hands of all those for whom such a
sacrifice was made, or of them who did desire to be partakers of it, because prayer only
cannot prevail, unless he thai prays toucheth the altar with his hands; whence in Virgil,
Those that in these words pray, and altar touch
Th' omnipotent doth hear ----------
And elsewhere,
I touch the altars, and the middle fires,
And the Dieties [deities] beseech.
Chapter lxi. How these things must be performed, as to God, so as to
inferiour dieties [deities].
Every Adoration therefore, oblation, or sacrifice, deprecation, invocation, are differenced
thus, viz. either because they are made to God only, or to inferiour dieties [deities], as
angels, Stars, Heroes. In these therefore such rules are to be observed, that when any
prayer is to be offered to God alone for the obtaining of any effect, it must be done with
the commemoration of some work, miracle, sacrament, or promise, taken somewhere out
of Scripture; as if there be a deprecation made for the destruction of enemies, let it be
commemorated that God destroyed the Giants in the deluge of waters, and the builders of
Babel in the confusion of tongues, Sodom, and Gomorrha in raining of fire, the host of
Pharaoh in the Red-sea, and the like; adding to those some malediction out of the
Psalms, or such as may be gathered out of other places of scripture. In like manner when
we are to deprecate against dangers of waters, let us commemorate the saving of Noah in
the flood; the passing of the children of Israel through the Red-sea, and Christ walking
dryshod upon the waters, and saving a ship from shipwrack [shipwreck], commanding the
winds and waves, and lifting up Peter sinking in the waves of the sea, and such like. But
if a prayer be necessary for obtaining Oracles, or dreames, whether it be to God, Angels,
or Heros, there are many places offer themselves out of the old testament, where God is
said to talk with men, promising in very many places Presages, and Revelations, besides
the propheticall dreams of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh, Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar, in the old
Testament, and the Revelation of John, Paul, in the new; also of holy Magicians, as
Helen, Constantine and Charles; also of later Prophets, as Methedius, Cyrillus, Joachim,
Merlin, Brigitta, Mechtindis, Hildegardis, the dieties [deities] of whom being piously
invocated, render us oftentimes partakers of divine Revelations. Moreover we must
invocate the sacred names of God, but those especially, which are significative of the
thing desired, or any way applicable to it; as for the destruction of enemies we must
invocate the name of Gods wrath, of the revenge of God, fear of God, justice of God,
fortitude of God: but for the avoiding of any danger we most invocate the names of pity,
defence, salvation, goodness, and the like. Moreover we must petition for and to the
effecters of the thing desired, viz. such an Angel, Star or Heroe on whom that office lies,
but observing that our invocation on them must be made with due number, weight, and
measure, and according to the rules delivered concerning inchantments [enchantments].
For betwixt these there is no difference, but that inchantments are such as affect our
mind, disposing the Passions thereof into a conformity to certain dieties [deities]; but
prayers are such as are exhibited to any diety [deity] by way of worship, and veneration;
and from the same root also may the manner of consecrations be taken, of which we shall
in the next place speak.
Chapter lxii. Of Consecrations, and their manner.
Consecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which a spiritual soul, being drawn by
proportion and conformity, is infused into the matter of our works according to the
tradition of Magicall art rightly and lawfully prepared, and our work is vivified by the
spirit of understanding. The efficacy of consecrations is perfected by two things
especially, viz. the vertue of the person himself consecrating, and the vertue of the prayer
it self. In the person himself is required holinesse of life, and a power to consecrate; the
former, nature and desert perform; the latter is acquired by imitation, and dignification, of
which we have spoken elsewhere. Then it is necessary that he that sacrificeth must know
this vertue and power in himself, with a firm and undoubted faith. Now what things are
required in prayer, are these. There is also a certain power of sanctifying placed in it by
God, as if it be so ordained of God for this or that very thing (of which sort we read of
many in the holy writ) or instituted to this or that thing, by the vertue of the holy ghost,
according to the ordination of the Church, of which sort are many every where extant: or
this holiness is in the prayer it selfe, not by vertue of institution, but of the
commemoration of sacred things, as of sacred letters, histories, nriracles, works, effects,
favours, promises, sacraments and such sacramentall things, which shall seem to cohere
with the thing to be consecrated, either properly, or improperly, or analogically. And of
these we shall now give some examples, by which a way easily may be laid open to the
whole consideration of it. So in the consecrating of water there is this comemoration
made, viz. because God placed the firmament in the middle of waters; because in the
middle of the earthly paradise he made a holy fountain, from which through four rivers
the whole Earth is watered: because he made the waters an instrument of his justice, in
the destruction of the Giants, by the generall deluge over the whole earth: and in the
destruction of the Army of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, and because he led the people dry-
shod through the middle of the Red sea, and through the middle of Jordan, and because
he brought water miraculously out of a rock of the wilderness; and brought forth a
fountain of living water out of the jaw bone of an asse at the prayers of Sampson, and
because he appointed the waters as an instrument of his pity, and of salvation for
remission of sins: and because Christ being baptized in Jordan, purified and sanctified the
waters; and the like also by invocating divine names sutable [suitable] to these things, as
when God is called a living fountain, living water, a living river. In like manner in
consecration of fire, let there be a commemoration that God created the fire to be an
instrument of his justice for punishment, revenge, purgation of sins, and when he comes
to judge the world he will command burning to go before; and he appeared to Moses in a
burning bush, went before the children of Israel in a pillar of fire, and commanded that
inextinguishable fire should be kept in the tabernacle of the Covenant, & kept fire
unextinguished under the water. Also we must use such divine names as offer
themselves, as because God is a consuming fire, and a melting fire: and such as are
proper to these, as the shining of God, the light of God, the brightness of God, and such
like. So in the consecration of oil such solemnities must be commemorated as belong to
these, as in Exodus the oil of unction & sweet perfumes, and sacred names sutable
[suitable] to these, such as is the name Christ, which signifies annointed, and such as this,
and that in the Apocalypse concening the two olive trees distilling sanctified oil into
lamps burning in the presence of God. So in the consecration of places let there be
commemoration made of mount Sinai, of the Tabernacle of the Covenant, of the sanctum
sanctorum, the temple of Solomon, and of the sanctification of the hill Golgotha through
the mystery of the passion of Christ, and of the field which was bought with the price of
Christs blood; also of mount Tabor, where the transfiguration and ascent into heaven
was. Sacred names also being used as of the place of God, the throne of God, the chair of
God, the tabernacle of God, the altar of God, the seat of God, and the habitation of God,
and of such like. After the same manner we must proceed in the benediction of other
things, by enquiring [inquiring] into holy writ by divine names, and profession of
Religion for such things which may seem to be after a manner sutable [suitable] to this or
that thing. As for example, if there be a paper, or a book having some of the mysteries
which we should commemorate, as the tables of the ten commandments given to Moses
on mount Sinai, and the sanctification of the law, and of the Prophets, and Scriptures
promulgated by the holy spirit: and let the divine names of the testament of God, the
book of God, the book of life, the knowledge of God, the wisdom of God, and of such
like be commemorated. So if a sword be to be consecrated, we may remember out of the
second of Maccabees there was a sword sent from God to Judas Macchabeus, that he
should destroy the children of Israels enemies: also that in the prophets, Take unto you
two edged swords; also in the Gospel, coats being sold, swords must he bought; and in
the History of David an Angel was seen hiding a bloody sword; and many such like we
shall find in the Prophets, and Apocalyps [Apocalypse], as also the sacred names of the
sword of God, the rod of God, the staff of God, the vengeance of God, and such like. And
now let these things which have been exemplified concerning real consecrations, and
benedictions suffice: by which personall consecrations, and benedictions may easily be
understood. But there is yet another powerfull and efficacious rite of consecrating, and
expiating, which is of the kinds of superstitious, viz: when the rite of any sacrament is
transsumed to another thing, which is intended to be consecrated, or expiated, as the rite
of baptisme, confirmation, funerall, and such like. Moreover we must know, that a vow,
oblation, and sacrifice, have a certain power of consecration, as well reall as personall, as
the things or persons are vowed or offered.
Chapter lxiii. What things may be called holy, what consecrated, and how
these become so betwixt us and the Dieties [deities]; and of sacred times.
Now those things are called sacred, which are made holy by the gods themselves, or their
Demons, being (as I may say) dedicated to us by the gods themselves. By this account we
call Demons holy, because in them God dwells, whose name they are often said to hear.
Whence it is read in Exodus: I will send my Angel who shall go before thee; observe him,
neither think that he is to be despised, because my name is in him. So also mysteries are
called sacred. For a mystery is that which hath a holy and an occult vertue, and favour
given by the gods or Demons, or dispensed by the most high God himself; such as are
those sacred names and Characters, which have been spoken of. So the crosse is called
holy and mysterious, being made so by the passion of Jesus Christ. Hence also certain
prayers are called holy, and mysticall, which are not instituted by the devotion of man,
but by divine Revelation, as we read in the Gospel that Christ instituted the Lords prayer.
In like manner certain confections are called holy, into which God hath put the especiall
beam of his vertue, as we read in Exodus of the sweet perfume, and oil of anointing, and
as with us there is a sacred fountain, and a sacred ointment; There is also another kind of
holiness, whereby we call those things holy which are dedicated and consecrated by man
to God, as vows, and sacrifices, of which we have spoken already: Whence Virgil,
But Cesar [Caesar] with a tripple [triple] triumph brought
Into the City Rome, as most devout,
Did dedicate unto the Italian gods
An immortall vow -----
And Ovid in his Metamorphosis sings thus,
A feast was kept, wherein Aeacides
For Cicnus death with heifers blood did please
Propitious Pallas, when the entralls laid
On burning altars, to the Gods convaid
An acceptable smell; a part addrest
To sacred use, the board receiv'd the rest.
In like manner the representations, resemblances, Idols, Statues, Images, Pictures, made
after the similitudes of the Gods, or dedicated to them, are called sacred, even as Orpheus
singeth in his hymn to Lycian Venus,
The chieftains that the sacred things protect
Of our country, did for our town erect
A Sacred Statue -----
And Virgil.
O father, take the household gods, and hold
Them in thy sacred hands -----
Hence divine Plato in his eleventh book of Lawes, commanded that the sacred Images
and Statues of the Gods should be honoured, not for themselves, but because they
represent the Gods to us, even as the ancients did worship that Image of Jupiter, thus
interpreting it: for in that he bares the resemblance of a man, was signified that he is a
mind which produceth all things by his seminary power; he is feigned to sit, that his
immutable and constant power might he expressed; he hath the upper parts bare and
naked, because he is manifest to the intelligences and the superiors; but the lower parts
are covered, because he is hid ftom the inferior creatures: he holdeth a scepter in his left
hand, because in these parts of the body the most spiritual habitation of life is found. For
the Creator of the intellect is the King and the vivifying spirit of the world; but in his
right hand he holdeth forth both an Eagle and victory; the one, because he is Lord of all
the Gods, as the Eagle is of other birds; the other, because all things are subject to him; in
like manner we also reverence the Image of a Lamb, because it representeth Christ, and
the picture of a Dove, because it signifieth the holy Ghost, and the forms of a Lion, Oxe,
Eagle, and a man, signifying the Evangelists, and such like things, which we find
expressed in the Revelations of the Prophets, and in divers places of the holy Scripture:
moreover those things confer to the like revelations and dreams, and therefore are called
sacred pictures; there are also sacred rites and holy observations, which are made for the
reverencing of the Gods, and religion, viz. devout gestures, genuflexions, uncoverings of
the head, washings, sprinklings of Holy water, perfumes, exterior expiations, humble
processions, and exterior Ornaments for divine praises, as musical Harmony, burning of
wax candles and lights, ringing of bells, the adorning of Temples, Altars and Images, in
all which there is required a supream and special reverence and comeliness; wherefore
there are used for these things, the most excellent, most beautifull and pretious [precious]
things, as gold, silver, pretious stores, and such like: which reverences and exterior rites
are as it were lessons and invitations to spiritual sacred things, for the obtaining the
bounty of the Gods; concerning which Proserpina beareth witness in these verses,
Who ever did the brazen statues slight,
The yellow gifts of gold, or silver white,
Who would not wonder, and not say that these
Are of the Gods? -----
The priests also are called sacred, and the ministers of the divine powers, and Gods, and
they themselves being consecrated do both administer all the holy things, and also
consecrate them, whence Lucan.
The consecrated priests, to whom great power
Is granted -----
And Virgil saith of Helenus the priest of Apollo,
He praies [prays] for peace of th' Gods, and doth unloose
The Garlands of his sacred head -----
Those holy rites are as it were certain agreements betwixt the Gods and us, exhibited with
praise, reverence or obedience, by the means of which we very oft obtain some
wonderfull vertue from that divine power, on whom such reverence is bestowed; so there
are sacred Hymns, Sermons, Exorcismes, Incantations, and words, which are
compounded and dedicated for the praises and divine services of the Gods, whence,
Orpheus in a verse composed for the stars, saith.
With Holy words, now on the Gods I call.
And the primitive Church did use certain holy incantations against diseases and snf
tempests, which we either pronounce praying to some divine powers, or also sometimes
carrying them along with us, written and hanging on our neck, or bound to us, we obtain
very oft some power from such a Saint, which men very much admire; by this means also
there are sacred names, figures, Characters, and seals, which contemplative men, in
purity of mind, for their secret vows, have devoted, dedicated and consecrated to the
worship of God; which things truly, if any man afterwards shall pronounce with the same
purity of mind, with the which they were first instituted, he shall in like manner do
miracles; further also, the manner and rules delivered by the first institutor must be
observed, for they who are ignorant of these things, loose their labour, and work in vain;
Thus not only by barbarous words, but also by Hebrew, Aegyptian [Egyptian], Greek,
Latine, and the names of other languages, being devoted to God, and attributed and
dedicated to his essence, power or operation, we sometimes do wonders; such names
there are in Iamblicus, viz. Osyris, Icton, Emeph, Ptha, Epies, Amun; so in Plato, and
amongst the Greeks, [Greek text omitted], so the Greeks call Jupiter [Greek text omitted]
which signifieth to live, because he giveth life to all things; in like manner [Greek text
omitted (Dia)] which signifieth through, because through him are all things made, so
[Greek text omitted (Athanaton)], which signifieth Immortall; so amongst the Latines he
is called Jupiter, as it were an adjuvant father, and such like, and also certain names are
devoted to men, as Eutychis, Sophia, Theophilus, that is, prosperous, servant, dear to
God. In like manner certain materiall things receive no little sanctity and vertue by
consecration, especially if done by a priest, as we see those waxen seals, in which are
imprinted the figure of Lambs, to receive vertue by the benediction of the Romane High
priest, against lightnings and tempests, that they cannot hurt those who carry them, for a
divine vertue is inspired into Images thus consecrated, and is contained in them, as it
were in a certain sacred Letter, which hath the Image of God; the like vertue those holy
waxed lights receive at Easter, and at the feast of the purification of the virgins; in like
manner bells by consecration and benediction receive vertue, that they drive away and
restrain lightnings, and tempests, that they hurt not in those places where their sounds are
heard; in like manner salt and water, by their benedictions and exorcismes receive power
to chase and drive away evil spirits; and thus in things of this kind, there are also sacred
times alwaies observed by the nations of every religion with very great reverence, which
are either commanded that we should sanctify by the Gods themselves, or are dedicated
to them by our fore-fathers and Elders, for the commemoration of some benefit received
of the Gods, and for a perpetual Thanksgiving. Thus the Hebrews have received their
Sabbaths, and the Heathens their holy daies, and we the solemn dayes of our holy rites,
alwaies to be reverenced with the Highest solemnity; there are also times contrary to
these, which they call penitential, and we black dayes, because that in those daies the
commomwealth hath suffered some notable blow, and calamity, of which sort amongst
the Romans was the day before the fourth nones of August, because that on that day they
suffered that extraordinary blow at the Battle of Canna. In like manner all Postriduan
daies are called black dayes, because that most commonly battles succeeded ill on these
dayes: So amongst the Jews the black dayes are the seventeenth day of June, because on
that day Moses brake the Tables, Manasses erected an Idol in the Sanctum Sanctorum, &
the walls of Jerusalem are supposed to have been pulled down by their Enemies; likewise
the ninth of July is a black day with them, because on that day the destructions of both
the Temples happened, by this neason they are called Ægyptian [Egyptian] dayes, in the
old time observed by the Ægyptians, and every Nation by this way may easily make a
like calculation of days fortunate or unfortunate to them, and the Magicians command
that these holy and religious daies be observed no less then the planetary daies [days],
and the celestial dispositions; for they affirm that they are far more efficacious, especially
to obtain spiritual and divine vertues, because that their vertue is not from the Elements
and celestial bodies, but descendeth from the intelligible and supercelestial world, and
being helped by the common suffrages of the Saints, is not infringed by any adverse
disposition of the heavenly bodies, nor frustrated by the corruptible contagion of the
Elements, if so be that firm belief and religious worship be not wanting, that is, joyned
with fear and trembling, for religion properly holdeth forth thus much; Hence those daies
are called religious, which to violate is a sin, which if we carefully observe, we fear not
any great mischief, which we may do, if we do otherwise.
Chapter lxiv. Of certain Religious observations, ceremonies, and rites of
perfumings, unctions, and such like.
Whosoever therefore thou art, who disirest [desirest] to operate in this faculty, in the first
place implore God the Father, being one, that thou also maiest he one worthy of his
favour, be clean, within and without, in a clean place, because it is written in Leviticus,
Every man who shall approach those thing which are consecrated, in whom there is
uncleanness, shall perish before the Lord; Therefore wash your selves oft, and at the daies
appointed, according to the mysteries of number, put on clean clothes, and abstain from
all uncleanness, pollution, and lust; for the Gods will not hear that man (as Porphyry
saith) who hath not abstained many dayes from venereous Acts; Be not thou coupled to a
polluted or menstruous woman, neither to her who hath the Hemorhoides [hemorrhoids],
touch not an unclean thing; nor a Carkass [carcass], whence Porphyry saith, whosoever
shall touch a dead man, may not approach the Oracles, perhaps, because that by a certain
affinity of the funeral ill odour, the mind is corrupted and made unfit to receive divine
influences; Thou shalt wash, and anoynt [anoint], and perfume thy self, and shalt offer
sacrifices: for God accepteth for a most sweet odour those things which are offered to
him by a man purified and well disposed, and together with that perfume condescendeth
to your prayer and oblation, as the Psalmist singeth; Let my prayer, O Lord, be directed
to thee, as incense in thy sight; Moreover, the soul being the offspring and Image of God
himself, is delighted in these perfumes and odours, receiving them by those nostrils, by
the which it self also entred into this corporeal man, and by the which (as Job testifieth)
the most lively spirits are sometimes sent forth, which cannot be retained in mans heart,
boyling [boiling] either through choler, or labor; whence some think that the faculty of
smelling is the most lively and spiritual of all the senses. Further, perfumes, sacrifice, and
unction penetrate all things, and open the gates of the Elements and of the Heavens, that
through them a man can see the secrets of God, Heavenly things, and those things which
are above the Heavens, and also those which descend from the Heavens, as Angels, and
spirits of deep pits, and profound places, apparations of desart [desert] places, and doth
make them to come to you, to appear visibly, and obey you; and they pacify all spirits,
and attract them as the Loadstone Iron, and joyn them with the elements, and cause the
spirits to assume bodies: for truly the spiritual body is very much incrassated by them,
and made more gross: for it liveth by vapours, perfumes and the odours of sacrifices:
moreover whatsoever thou operatest, do it with an earnest affection and hearty desire;
that the goodness of the Heavens and heavenly bodies may favour thee, whose favour,
that thou maiest more easily obtain, the fitness of the place, time, profession, custome,
diet, habite, exercise and name also do wonderfully conduce: for by these the power of
nature is not only changed, but also overcome, for a fortunate place conduceth much to
favour: neither without cause did the Lord speak to Abraham that he should come into the
land which he would shew him; and Abraham arose and journeyed towards the south: in
like manner, Isaac went to Gerarath, where he sowed & gathered an hundred fold, and
waxed very rich: but what place is congruous to each one, must he found out by his
nativity, which thing he that knoweth not, let him observe where his spirits are especially
recreated, where his senses are more lively, where the health of his body and his strength
is most vigorous, where his businesses succeed best, where most favour him, where his
enemies are overthrown, let him know that this region, this place is preordained by God
and his Angels for him; and is also well disposed, and prepared by the Heavens.
Therefore reverence this place, and change it according to your time and business, but
alwayes flie an unfortunate place: fortunate names also make things more fortunate: but
unfortunate, unhappy; Hence the Romans in lifting their souldiers [soldiers] were wary,
least that the first souldiers names should be in any measure unfortunate; and for paying
tributaries, and mustrings of their Armies and Colonies, they did chuse Censours with
good names. Moreover they believed, that if unfortunate names were changed into
fortunate, that the fortune of things would also be changed into better; So Epidamnus,
least that sea men going that way should suffer damage, they commanded to be called
Dyrachius; for the same cause they called Maleoton, least he should cause some mischief,
Beneventus; but they thought good to call Lacus, Lucrinus, for the goodness of the name
being the most happy place of all: make election also of hours and dayes for thy
operations, for not without cause our Saviour spake, Are there not twelve hours in the
day, and so forth? for the Astrologers teach that times can give a certain fortune to our
businesses; the Magicians likewise have observed, and to conclude, all the ancient wise
men consent in this, that it is of very great concernment; that in what moment of time,
and disposition of the heavens, every thing, whether naturall or Artificiall hath received
its being in this world; for they have delivered, that the first moment hath so great power,
that all the course of fortune dependeth thereon, and may be foretold thereby, and in like
manner, by the successes of the fortune of every thing, they both firmly believed, and
experience also testifleth, that the beginning of any thing may thereby be found out; even
as Sulla the Astrologian foretold, that a most certain destruction approached Caligula,
who asked him advice concerning his nature; Metheon the Astrologer foresaw the
calamity of the wars which happened afterward to the Athenians, making an expedition
against the Syracusans: to the same about to sail to Sicilia, Meson the Astrologer foretold
a great tempest. Anaxagoras by the knowledge of the times, forewarned on what dayes a
great stone should fall from the Sun; as afterward it happened at Aegos, a river of
Thracia; on the contrary, L. Tarnucius Firmianus by the acts and fortune of Romulus,
found both the time of his conception and nativity; the same man found out also the
nativity of the City of Rome, by making the successes and fortunes of that City: so
Maternus reporteth, that the beginning and Creation even of this world was found out by
the events of things: For that times can do very much in naturall things, may be
manifested by many examples; for there are trees, which after the Solstice do invert their
leaves, as the Poplar, Elm, Olive, Linetree, whitewillow; and shelfishes, Crabs and
Oisters [oysters] do increase, the Moon increasing, and when the Moon decreaseth, do
grow lean; & the Seas in ebbing and flowing do observe the motions and times of the
Moon; and Euripus in Euboea, doth it not seven times with wonderfull swiftness ebbe
and flow? and three dayes in every moneth, viz. the 7. 8. and 9. day of the Moon it
standeth still; and amongst the Troglotides there is a lake, which thrice in a day is made
bitter and salt, and again sweet; moreover in the winter time, when all things wither and
dry, Penyroyall [pennyroyal] flourisheth: on the same day, they say, that blown bladders
do break, and that the leaves of Sallows and Pomegranats are turned and forced about;
and its known to all, that which I have seen both in France and Italy, and I know also the
sowing thereof, viz. that a nut-tree, which seemeth dry all the year, on the Even of Saint
Johns day doth produce both leaves, and flowres [flowers], and ripe fruits: and this
miracle doth wholly consist in the observation of the time of its sowing: moreover that
times can yield some wonderfull power to artificiall things, the Astrologers in their books
of Elections and Images do constantly affirm; and by this means, we read in Plutarch,
That there was an image amongst the Peleneans made with such art, that what way
soever it did look, it did strike all things with terrour and very great perturbation, so that
no man durst through fear behold it; and we read in the life of Apollonius, that the
Magicians of Babylon had tied to the roof of their house, four golden fowls, which they
called the tongues of the gods; and that they had power to reconcile the minds of the
multitude to the love and obedience of the King. In the Iland [island] Chios there was the
face of Diana placed on high, whose countenance appeared sad to those which caine in,
but to those that went out, it appeared chearfull [cheerful]: In Troas, the sacrifices which
were left about the Image of Minerva did not putrifie; In the temple of Venus at Paphos,
it never rained in the court: If any thing was taken forth from the Tomb of Antheus,
showers were powred down from heaven till that which was digged up, was restored into
its place: In the tomb of King Bibria of Pontus, did arise a Laurell, from which if any one
did break a branch and carry it on shipboard, quarrells would never cease untill it was
thrown over. In the Iland [island] Boristhenes, no bird did haunt the house of Achilles: at
Rome, neither flie [fly], nor dog did enter into the Palace of Hercules, in the oxe market.
In Olynthus of Thracia there was a place, into the which if a Beetle had fallen, it could
not get forth, but writhing it self every way it died; I could bring even innumerable
examples, and far more wonderfull then these, which Antiquity reporteth to have been
done by the Art of images, and by the observation of times: but least any one should think
them long since, obsolete, and repute them for fables, I will bring more new things, and
such as remain even to this time in some places, and I will joyn to these some artificiall
wonders; for they say, that by the Art of images it cometh to passe, that at Byzantine
Serpents hurt not, and that Jackdaws flie [fly] not over within the wals [walls]; that in
Crete there are no night Owls, that about Naples Grasshoppers are never heard; that at
Venice, no kind of flie [fly] doth enter the publike [public] houses of Barbers, that in
Toledo in the publike shambles, one only flie is seen all the year long, of a notable
whiteness: and we in the foregoing book have declared already both the fashions and
times, by the observation of which, these things and such like may be done; moreover
you ought especially to observe the vertue of speeches and words, for by these the soul is
spread forth into inferiour substances, into stones, metals, plants, animals, and all naturall
things, imprinting divers figures and passions on them, inforcing all creatures, or leading
and drawing them by a certain affection: So Cato testifieth, that weary Oxen are
refreshed by words, and also that by prayers and words, you may obtain of Tellus, that it
produce unusuall trees; trees also may by this means be entreated to pass over to another
place, and to grow in another ground: Rapes grow the greater, if they be entreated when
they are sown, to be beneficiall to them, their family, and neighbours; the Peacock also
being commended, presently extends his feathers: but on the contrary, it is found by
experience that the hearb [herb] Basill, being sown with cursings and railings, is more
flourishing; also a kind of Lobster doth cure burnings and scaldings, if so be that in the
mean time his name be not named: further, they which use witchcraft, kill trees by
praising them, & thus do hurt sown Corn and children: moreover they say that there is so
great power in mans execrations, that they chase and banish even wicked spirits:
Eusebius declareth that by this means Serapis amongst the Ægyptians [Egyptians], did
publish short sentences, by the which devils were expelled, and he taught also, how
devils having assumed the forms of brute beasts, do ensnare men: To conclude, in all
businesses, put God before your eyes, for it is written in Deuteronomie [Deuteronomy],
When you shall seek the Lord your God, you shall find him. Whence we read in Mark,
That whatsoever ye shall desire and pray for, believing that you shall receive it, it shal
come to pass for you; and in Matthew, If you shall have faith as a grain of mustard seed,
nothing shall be impossible for you; also the fervent prayer of a righteous man prevaileth
much, for Elias (as James saith) was a man like unto us, subject unto passions, and he
prayed earnestly, that it might not rain upon the earth, and it rained not in three yeers
[years] and six moneths [months]; and again he prayed, and the heaven gave rain, and the
earth brought forth its fruit: but take heed in your prayers, least that you should desire
some vain thing, or that which is against the will of God; for God would have all things
good: neither shalt thou use the name of thy God in vain, for he shall not go unpunished,
who taketh his name for a vain thing: be abstemious and give alms, for the Angel saith to
Tobiah, prayer is good with fasting and alms; and we read in the book of Judith: Know
ye, that the Lord will hear your prayers, if ye shall persevere in fastings and prayers in his
sight.
Chapter lxv. The Conclusion of the whole Work.
These are the things, which for an introduction into Magick we have collected out of the
tradition of the ancients, and diversly compiled in this book, in short words, yet sufficient
for those who are intelligent; some of these things are written in order, some without
order, some things are delivered by fragments, some things are even hid, and left for the
search of the intelligent, who more acutely contemplating these things which are written,
and diligently searching, may obtain the compleat rudiments of the magicall Art, and also
infallible experiments: for we have delivered this Art in such a manner, that it may not be
hid from the prudent and intelligent, and yet may not admit wicked and incredulous men
to the mysteries of these secrets, but leave them destitute and astonished, in the shade of
ignorance and desperation: You therefore sons of wisdom and learning, search diligently
in this book, gathering together our dispersed intentions, which in divers places we have
propounded, and what is hid in one place, we make manifest in another, that it may
appear to you wise men; for, for you only have we written, whose mind is not corrupted,
but regulated according to the right order of living, who in chastity, and honesty, and in
sound faith fear and reverence God: whose hands are free from sin and wickedness,
whose manners are gentle, sober, and modest, you only shall find out this knowledge
which is preserved for you, and the secrets which are hid by many Enigmaes cannot be
perceived but by a profound intellect, which when you shall obtain, the whole science of
the invincible magicall discipline will insinuate it self into you: and those vertues will
appear to you, which in times past Hermes, Zoroastes [Zoroaster], Apollonius, and the
others, who wrought miracles, obtained. But ye, envious, caluminators, sons of base
ignorance, and foolish lewdnest, come not nigh our writings, for they are your enemies,
and stand on a precipice, that ye may erre and fall head-long into misery: if any therefore
through his incredulity or dulness of intellect, doth not obtain his desire, let him not
impute the fault of his igorance to me, or say that I have erred, or purposely written falsly
and lied, but let him accuse himself, who understandeth not our writings; for they are
obscure, and covered with divers mysteries, by the which it will easily happen, that many
my erre and lose their sense; therefore let no man be angry with me, if we have folded up
the truth of this science with many Enigmaes, and dispersed it in divers places, for we
have not hidden it from the wise, but from the wicked and ungodly, and have delivered it
in such words which necessarily blind the foolish, and easily may admit the wise to the
understanding of them.
FINIS.
To the Reverend Father, and Doctor of Divinity Aurelius de Aquapendente,
Austin Fryar [friar]; Henry Cornelius Agrippa sendeth greeting.
By those letters (most reverend Father!) which you sent me since the second of this
month, I understand your candidness towards me, and great learning, and indeed the
curious searching after these things which lye hid in darkness; I did presently rejoyce,
and do bless my self that I have entred into acquaintance with such a friend, with whom I
may improve my gifts; And now (this hand-writing being my witness) I reckon you
amongst the cheifest [chiefest] of my friends. But oh, who are your leaders that you
follow, daring to enter into the house of Dedalus, from whence is no return, and of most
dreadfull Minois, and daring to go through the watches, and commit your self to the
sisters of destiny? Who are your masters that you are conversant about such huge things,
daring to attempt to make a wandring diety [deity], stable, perfidious, faithful; and the
most fugatious of all the gods to be more constant then Adrastia; Take heed that you be
not deceived by them that are deceived. Neither can the great reading of books direct you
here, since they are but as riddles. How great writings are there made of the irresistible
power of the Magical Art, of the prodigious Images of Astrologers, of the monstrous
transmutations of Alchymists [alchemists], of that blessed stone, by which, Mydas
[Midas] like, all metals that were touched are presently transmuted into Gold, or Silver,
all which are found vain, fictitious, and false, as often as they are practised according to
letter. Yet such things are delivered, and writ by great and grave Philosophers, and holy
men, whose traditions, who dare say are false? Nay, it were impious to think that they
were lyes [lies]. There is therefore another meaning then what is written in letters, and
that is vailed with divers mysteries, and as yet clearly explained by none of the Masters,
and which I believe no man can attain to by reading of books only, without a skilfull, and
faithfull master, unless he be divinely illuminated, as very few are. Therefore it is a
vanity for any man that searcheth into the secrets of nature, to give himself to bare
reading. For they that thus do, are, being ensnared in the gins of the exterior spirits, to
whom it is given to rule, made dangerous slaves, not knowing themselves, and go back
into the footsteps of their flocks, seeking without themselves, what they have in
themselves. And this is that which I would have you know, because in us is the operator
of all wonderfull effects, who knows how to discern, and effect, and that without any sin
or offence to God, whatsoever the monstrous Mathematicians, the prodigious Magicians,
the envious Alchymists [alchemists], and bewitching Necromancers can do by spirits. In
us I say is the operator of Miracles.
Not the bright stars of th' skie [sky], nor flames of Hell,
But th' spirit that these doth make, doth in us dwell.
But of these I shall discourse more fully, but in your presence (for these things are not to
be written, but to be infused by a few sacred words, and with face to face), and that when
I shall haply see you. Now as concerning those books which you desire of me, some of
them were sometimes in my custody, but now are not. But as for those books which you
have of mine which were made in my youth, being intituled, Of Occult Philosophy, the
two former of them were dificient in many things, the third is wholy imperfect, and
contains but a certain Epitome of my writings. But I will (God willing) set forth the
whole work, being made entire, and revised, reserving the key thereof for most intimate
friends only, one whereof you need not at all question but that I reckon you. Farewell and
prosper. From Lyons the XXIV. of September, Annoq; Domini. M.D.XXVII.
Unto the same Man.
By your courteous letters (most reverend Father!) I have seen, as in a glass, your whole
mind, which I heartily embrace, and I would have you know that you shall he welcome to
me beyond expression, and that you are seated deeply in my affections, and that I am
such an one (I write this out of the abundance of my heart) as am not wont upon any
occasion to forsake my friends. Wherefore that you may obtain the desires, which are no
less then mine, I will hasten to come to you. When we shall come face to face, hear and
speak with one the other, I know our friendship will be indissoluble, and endure for ever.
But now concerning that Phylosophy [philosophy] which you require to know, I would
have you know, that it is to know God himself, the worker of all things, and to pass into
him by a whole image of likeness (as by an essential contract, and bond) whereby thou
mayest be transformed, and made as God, as the Lord spake concerning Moses, saying;
Behold, I have made thee the God of Pharaoh. This is that true, high Occult Phylosophy
[philosophy] of wonderfull works. The key thereof is the intellect, for by how much
higher things we understand, with so much the sublimer vertues are we endowed, and so
much greater things do work, and that more easily, and efficaciously. But our intellect
being included in the corruptible flesh, unless it shall exceed the way of the flesh, and
obtain a proper nature, cannot be united to these vertues (for like to like) and is in
searching into these occult secrets of God, and nature, altogether efficacious; for it is no
easy thing for us to ascend to the heavens. For how shall he that hath lost himself in
mortal dust, and ashes, find God? How shall he apprehend spiritual things that is
swallowed up in flesh and blood? Can man see God, and live? What fruit shall a grain of
corn bear if it be not first dead? For we must dye [die], I say dye to the world, and to the
flesh, and all senses, and to the whole man animal, who would enter into these closets of
secrets, not because the body is separated from the soul, but because the soul leaves the
body: of which death Paul wrote to the Collossians [Colossians]: Ye are dead, and your
life is hid with Christ: And elsswhere he speaks more clearly of himself. I know a man,
whether in the body, or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows, caught up unto the third
heaven, &c. I say by this death, pretious [precious] in the sight of God, we must dye
[die], which happens to few, and perhaps not alwaies. For very few whom God loves, and
are vertuous [virtuous], are made so happy. And first those that are born, not of flesh and
blood, but of God. Secondly those that are dignified to it by the blessing of nature, and
the heavens at their birth. The rest endeavour by merits, and art, of which more fully
when I see you. But this I will advise you, that you be not deceived concerning me, as if I
at any time having received such divine things should boast of them to you, or should
arrogate any such thing to my self, or could hope to have them granted to me, who
hitherto have been a souldier [soldier], consecrated with mans blood, having been almost
alwaies belonging to the Kings Court, bound to a most dear wife by the bond of flesh,
exposed to all the blast of inconstant fortune, and being crossed in my flesh, in the world,
and worldly affairs, and therefore could not obtain the sublime gifts of the immortal God.
But I would be accounted as a director, who waiting alwayes at the dores [doors], shews
to others which way they must go. But as for my love to you, you are indeed a little
deceived: I do not see how you are my debtor, seeing I have bestowed nothing upon you,
only I am ready when occasion serves to bestow all things. So farewell and prosper. From
Lyons XIX Novemb. Anno Dom. M. D.XXVII.
Henry Cornelius Agrippa sendeth greetings to a certain friend of the Kings
Court.
The Ancients were wont to brand notorious folly with this proverb, viz. To bring Owls to
Athens: but it is not a part of less folly, but of most great impiety, to send divels [devils]
to hell. You know what I call hell, viz. that School of wickednesses, which with much
displeasure I have elsewhere in its colours notoriously shewed the Court to be. But there
was never so just an occasion of writing and of indignation given as now, if it were
lawfull to treat of the whole business as I should, yet I cannot contein but give you an
argument of it. Now therefore hear a thing both foolish and impious: There was sent for
out of Germany with no small charges a certain master of Spirits, that is a Necromancer,
who possesseth a power over spirits, that as James and Jambres resisted Moses, so he
should oppose Cæsar [Cesar]; for they were perswaded by the father of lies, that he could
foretel [forwtell] all things to come, and disclose all secret counsels, and manifest even
the thoughts; moreover that he was endowed with so great power, that he could bring
back the Kings childien through the aire, even as we read that Habacuck with his pulse
was carryed to the den of Lions, and that he could do as Elisha did being besieged in
Dotham, shew mountains full of horsemen and fiery Chariots, and a very great Army;
moreover that he could find out and fetch up the treasures of the earth, and compell what
marriages and affections he pleased, to break them off, and cure all desperate diseases, by
a Stygian medicine, as a confirmed Hectick, a radicated Dropsy, Leprosy in the bones;
and
Who wisely can the Knotty gout soon cure,
And health even to the desperate procure.
See where their faith is plaeed, where their hope is reposed, who endeavour to subject the
Elements, Heaven, Fate, Nature, Providence, God, and all things to the command of one
Magitian [magician]; and seek for the preservation of a kingdom from Devils the enemies
of publike [public] preservation; saying in their heart with Ochozias, there is not a God in
Israel, let us go and consult Beelzebub the God of Achron, and as Saul speaking to the
witch, saith, the Philistins [Philistines] fight against me, & God hath deserted me, and
will not hear me, therefore am I come to you. What do they so much despair of God, that
they have judged it requisite to desire aid of the Divels [devils]? is not this according to
the word of Iude and Peter, to deny God and Iesus [Jesus] Christ our Lord and Saviour
who hath redeemed us, and to bring upon themselves swift destruction? do they not
treasure up for themselves the fierce wrath of the Lord who will send it upon them by
evill spirits? are they not delivered over to a reprobate sense, who desire the certainty of
secret counsels from the divel [Devil], the father of lies, and hope for victory elsewhere
than from the Lord of Hoasts [Hosts]? and further, this addeth boldness to this
abominable worker of Idolatry and Sacriledge [sacrilege], that the Orthodox mother doth
very much favour those things, and the authority of her most Christian Son is
accommodated, and gifts bestowed out of the sacred pence; the Pillars of the Church,
Bishops and Cardinals, winking at, yea furthering this abominable work; and the wicked
Nobles applaude this operation of Impiety, as the crowes the works of the Wolf. What
greater wickedness have Pharaoh, Balack, Saul, Ahab with his Jezabel, Ochozias,
Nabuchadnezar, Balthazar, Senacherib and the other worshippers of Balaam,
committed? Pharaoh called forth his magitians [magicians] against Moses; they being
convicted in the third plague, confessed the finger of God: but the King being obstinate
through the ten plagues perished in the red sea; Balack the Moabite sent forth Baalam the
Sorcerer that he should curse Israel, but God himself turned the curse into a blessing;
Balack is cursed; what did the answers of Samuel or the witch profit Saul? was he not
slain in the mountain Gilboah? Ahab and Jezabel being wickedly marryed together, did
confide in the prophets of Baal, and according to the word of the Lord, a lying spirit went
forth into the mouthes of all the prophets who promised prosperity to Ahab going up
against Ramoth Gilead, but Ahab fell, and Jezabel was thrown down headlong, and the
dogs did eat her: Asa a King of Juda is reproved by the prophet of the Lord, because that
in his sickness he sought not the Lord, but trusted to the skill of his physitian [physician]:
have not they committed a greater sin, who leave God the saviour, and the wholesome
vertues of nature, and seek for help of Satan? Ochozias did thus in times past, & therefore
heard from the prophet of the Lord, Thou shalt not descend from thy bed on which thou
art, but shalt certainly dy [die]. Let the series of the other unrighteous Kings be run over,
and also the histories of the Gentiles. Zoroastes [Zoroaster], Diatharus, Croesus,
Pompey, Pyrrhus, Crassus, Nero, Iulian [Julian], what have they gayned by their
Magitians [magicians] and Diviners, who falsely fained [feigned] prosperity for them?
were they not all reduced to nothing, and did they not wickedly perish in their sins? So
are all these ungodly follyes wont to bring destruction to the admirers thereof, to the
which truly, they who especially confide, are made the most unfortunate of all men. I
deny not but that there are natural sciences, Metaphysical arts, Occult Ingenuities, which
can, without offending God, or injuring faith or religion, preserve Kingdomes, dive into
counsels [councils], overcome Enemies, deliver captives, encrease [increase] wealth,
obtain the good will of men, expell diseases, conserve health, prolong life, and restore
strength of youth: There are moreover sacred religious intercessions, publike [public]
supplications, private prayers of good men: by the which we may not only turn away the
wrath of God, but also entreate him to be gratious [gracious] unto us; besides if there be a
certain art to foretell, and work miracles, which the Ancients call Calomagia or Theurgia,
surely it is unknown unto these fooles and slaves of the Divel [Devil], for to find out
things to come, and to pronounce truth concerning those things which hang over our
heads, & are occult, and from heaven portended unto men; and to effect things which
exceed the common course of nature, belongeth only to a man of profound and perfect
knowledge, and of a most pure life and faith, and not to men most vain and unlearned.
But every Creature serveth those who are Innocent, and learned in the law of God, for
their faiths sake; and whatsoever they shall ask they shall receive: so the Ravens fed
Eliah, and at his prayers the earth withheld her fruits, the Heaven denyed rain, and
showred down fire upon the wicked: So the Ravens served Elisha, the Angels fought for
him; rivers are passed dry-foot; the Lions laying aside their fierceness, and not regarding
their hunger, fawn on Daniel, and the hot fiery furnace burneth not the children. These
are not works of Necromancers and Sorcerers, nor of Devils, but of faithfull and godly
men; for not the Divels [devils], but the spirit of God doth assist them: I confess there are
some, (perhaps many) even at this time, who are very wise, and of wonderfull
knowledge, vertue and power, and of a pure conversation, most prudent, and also
disposed by age and strength, that they can very much profit the Commonwealth by their
counsel and operations; but your courtiers contemn these men, as those who are very far
from their purpose, who for wisdome have malice, guile and deceit; for counsel deceit,
and craft for knowledge; guile, and perfidiousness for prudence. Superstition is in the
place of religion, and God is blasphemed in afflictions: and what faith (as saith the
Apostle) is perfected in weakness is contemned: but they run to the invocations of evil
spirits. Every good man is mocked at by them, bold hypocrisie is promoted, truth is
accounted a crime; praise and rewards are reserved for foolishness and wickedness. O
fools, and wicked, who by these arts would establish a kingdome, by which formerly
most potent Empires have fallen, and have been utterly overthrown; Of whom it was truly
spoken by Jeremiah, our Crown is fallen, wo [woe] to us because we have sinned: which
I wish might not be so truly as fitly applyed to you. For truly that verse, the numeral
letters being gathered together M.C.V.I. expresseth the year M.D.XXIV. wherein
according to the account your King was taken at Papia: Did not ye see these things, and
admire at them, which before they were done you judged impossible? And as yet you are
proud, and obdurate in your affliction. You despise the prophets, and the threatenings of
God are as tales to you. Behold it is at hand, and as yet you shall see, and feel the great
things of God upon the whole earth, and shall tremble because the misery which you
know not shall come upon you suddenly; Whither then will ye fly? Stand with your
inchanters, and with the multitude of your Sorceries, if haply they can profit you, or you
can be made thereby stronger. Will not that German Sorcerer that is sent for, save you,
and make lying, Prophets, and prevail against the wrath of the Lord, and deliver you from
evil? No, ye wicked, No, unless the Lord shall build, and keep the Cities, and Kingdom,
all the keepers thereof labor and watch in vain. It is the work of God alone, not of Devils,
not of Magicians to suspend or change the sentence of the Prophets. But if you will with
your whole heart turn unto his mercy, and will change your wickedness, then you may be
freed from evil, as was Nebucadnezar [Nebuchadnezzae], who by the counsel of Daniel
redeeming his sins by almes, and his iniquities by taking pitty [pity] on the poor, avoided
the imminent wrath of God for a time, until in the Court at Babylon he with a proud
speech recalled it back to himself again. Achab most impious, with his Iezebel [Jezebel],
to whom the Lord threatned death by Elias, was, because he turned to God made again
the word of the Lord to Eliah. Because Achab feared my face I will not bring the evill in
his daies. The Ninevites, because by the Edict of the King and Princes they repented at
the preaching of Jonas, were totally freed from the imminent punishment. Esaias brought
this sentence to Ezechias, that he should set his house in order, because he should dy
[die]; He praied [prayed] and wept, and was hesled, and fifteen years added to his life, for
thus the Lord spake to the same man by the same Prophet, I have seen thy tears, and
heard thy prayers, behold I will add to thy daies fifteen years; moreover I will deliver
thee from the hand of the King of Assyria & this City, and protect it; So much could the
conversion and prayer of this pious King do, who though he prayed for himself alone, yet
obtained not only for himself, but also for the City and people; It is the Lord only who
preserveth the King, and who giveth wisdome to the Kings Son; they ought to fly to this
master, who seek salvation, and not to Magicians and Sorcerers: put on righteousness and
fear of the Lord, you who desire prosperity: if the stability of a Kingdom be sought for; it
is written; the just shall inherit the Land, the just shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, he shall not be moved for ever; if security be sought for; They that fear the
Lord shall not be afraid for evil tidings, but shall scorn all their enemies. If honour, and
wealth be sought for; In his house are glory, and riches. If praise, and favour; The
generation of the righteous shall be blessed: If power; He shall be powerfull on the earth,
and his seed also. His strength shall be exalted in glory: If marriage, and prosperity of
wedlock; His wife shall be as a vine flourishing on the house side, and his children as
olive branches. If health of body, and strength; the Lord will not suffer his holy one to see
corruption. Lastly, blessed is the man in all things that fears the Lord, who is unspotted in
the way, who goes not into the counsell of the wicked, who takes pitty [pity] on the poor,
and needy. For in an evil day the Lord shall deliver him, and shall not deliver him into the
hands of his enemies. All the wicked shall see, and be vexed, and shall gnash their teeth,
and pine away, their desire shall perish. Let this suffice for admonition. For I will not
more curiously prosecute this matter, lest haply the evilness of the subject should provoke
me to write more then is expedient. Farewel, from Paris, XIII of February, Anno M.D.
XXVIII. after the Romane account.
This appendix consists of excerpts from Agrippa's De incertitudine et vanitate Scientiarum,
one of the great classics of sceptical literature. Only the chapters relating to subjects in De
Occulta Philosophia are included. From a cursory comparison, this translation appears to be
much more accurate than the English translation published in 1684 (The vanity of arts and
sciences / by Henry Cornelius Agrippa, Knight ... London : Printed by R.E. for R.B. and are
to be sold by C. Blount ..., 1684.)
The Censure, or Retraction of Henry Cornelius
Agrippa, concerning Magick, after his declamation of
the vanity of Sciences, and the excellency of the word of
God.
Of Magick in generall.
This place doth require that we speak of Magick; for it is so neer joyned to, and of
affinity with Astrologie [astrology], in so much that be that professeth Magick without
Astrologie, doth nothing, but altogether is in an errour. Suidas is of the opinion that
Magick had its name, and originall from the Maguseans [Magi]. It is the common
opinion, that it is a Persian name, to which Porphyry, and Apuleius assent, and that in
that tongue it signifies a priest, wise man, or Philosopher. Magick therefore
comprehending all Philosophy, naturall, and Mathematicall, joyns the powers of
Religions to them. Hence also they contain in them Goetia, and Theurgia, for which
cause many divide Magick into two parts, viz. Naturall, and Ceremoniall.
Of Naturall Magick.
It is thought that naturall Magic is nothing else but the highest power of naturall Sciences,
which therefore is called the height of naturall Philosophy, and the most absolute
consummation thereof, and that which is the active part of naturall Philosophy, which by
the help of naturall vertues, from a mutuall, and opportune application of them, brings
forth operations even to Admiration: which Magick the Aethiopians, and Indians
especially did use, where the vertue of herbs, and stones, and other things looking
towards it was sufficient. It is said that Hierome made mention of it to Paulinus, where he
saith that Apollonius the Tyanean was a Magician, or Philosopher, as also the
Pythagorians; of this kind were those wise men which came to worship Christ with gifts
when he was born, which the interpreters of the Chaldeans [Chaldaeans] expound the
Philosophers of the Chaldeans, such as were Hiarchas amongst the Bragmanne
[Brahmans], Tespion amongst the Gymnosophists, Budda [Buddhists] amongst the
Babylonians, Numa Pompilius amongst the Romans, Zamolxides amongst the Thracians,
Abbaris amongst the Hyperboreans, Hermes amongst the Ægyptians [Egyptians],
Zoroastes [Zoroaster] the son of Oromasus [Ohrmazd = Ahura Mazda] amongst the
Persians. For the Indians, Æthiopians [Ethiopians], Chaldeans [Chaldaeans], and
Persians chiefly did excell in this Magick. With which therefore (as Plato relates in
Alcibiades) the sons of the Persian Kings were instructed, that they might learn to
administer, and distribute their image to the common wealth of the world, and the
common wealth to it: and Cicero saith in his books of divination, that there was none
amongst the Persians did enjoy the Kingdom, but he that first had learned Magick.
Naturall Magick therefore is that which contemplates the powers of all naturall and
celestiall things, and searching curiously into their Sympathy, doth produce occult
powers in nature into publique [public] view, so coupling inferior things as allurements to
the gifts of superiour things, that by their mutuall application, that from thence arise
wonderfull miracles, not so much by art as by nature, to which art becomes an assistant
whilest it works these things. For Magicians, as the most curious searchers of nature,
making use of those things which are prepared by nature, by applying active things to
passive, produce oftentimes effects before the time ordained by nature, which the vulgar
think are miracles, which indeed are naturall works, the prevention of the time only
coming betwixt: as if any one should produce Roses in the moneth [month] of March, and
ripe Grapes, or sowed Beans, or make Parsly [parsley] to grow into a perfect plant within
few hours, nay, and cause greater things, as clouds, rains, thunders, and animals of divers
kinds, and very many taansmutions of things, many of which sort Roger Racon boasted
that he did do by meer [mere] naturall Magick. Of the works thereof wrote Zoroastes
[Zoroaster], Hermes, Eranthes King of Arabia, Zacharias the Babylonian, Joseph the
Hebrew, Bocus, Aaron, Zenotenus, Kiramides, Almadal, Thetel, Alchindus, Abel,
Ptolomy, Geber, Zahel, Nazabarub, Thebith, Berith, Solomon, Astaphon, Hipparchus,
Alcmeon, Apollonius, Triphon, and many others, many of whose works are yet entire, and
many fragments are yet extant, and have come into my hands. Some modern men have
also wrote of naturall Magick, but they but a few things, as Albertus, Arnoldus de villa
nova, Raimundus Lullie, Bacon, and Apponus, [i.e. Peter de Abano] and the Author of the
book to Alfonsus, set forth under the name of Picatrix, who also together with naturall
Magick, mixeth much superstition, which indeed the rest have done.
Of Mathematicall Magick.
There are moreover other most witty emulators of nature and most bold inquisitors,
which promise they can by the influences of the heavens, obtained without naturall
vertues, but only by Mathematicall learming, produce works like to those of nature, as
walking, or talking bodies, which have not animall vertues: such was the wooden dove of
Archita, which did flie [fly], and the statue of Mercury which did speak; and the brazen
head made by Albertus Magnus, which they say did speak. Boetius a man of a great wit
and much learning, excelled in these things, to whom Cassiodorus writing concerning
such like things, saith, to thee it is appointed to know hard things, and shew miracles: by
the ingenuity of thy art metals speak, Diomedes in brass trumpets, the brazen Serpent
hisseth, birds are feigned, and those which know no proper sound, are heard sending forth
sweet melody, we relate small things of him, who hath power to imitate the heavens;
concerning these arts I think that is spoken which we read in Plato in the eleventh book
of Laws. There is an art given to mortall men, by which they should generate certain
latter things, not partaking of truth or divinity, but should deduce certain representations
of affinity with them: and thus far have Magicians gone, being men most bold to do all
things, especially that old strong Serpent, the promiser of all Sciences favoring them, that
they like apes endeavour to emulate God, and nature.
Of Enchanting Magick.
There is moreover a kind of naturall Magick, which they call bewitching, medicinary,
which is done by cups, love-potions, and divers medicaments of Sorcerers: Of which sort
Democritus is said to make some, whereby good, happy, and fortunate sons may be
begotten: and another whereby we may rightly understand the voyces [voices] of birds, as
Philostratus and Porphyrie [Porphyry] relate of Apollonius. Virgil also speaking of
certain Pontick herbs, saith,
I many times, with these have Moeris spide [spied],
Chang'd to a wolf, and in the woods to bide:
From sepulchres would souls departed charm,
And corn bear standing fom anothers farm.
And Pliny relates that a certain man, Demarchus Parrhasitus, in a sacrifice which the
Arcades made by a humane sacrifice to Jupiter Lyceus, tasted of the entrals [entrails] of a
boy that was sacrificed, and turned himself into a wolfe, by reason of which changing of
men into a wolf [werewolf, lycanthropy], Austin [Augustine] thinks that the name was
put upon Pan Lyceus, and Jupiter Lyceus. The same Austin relates, that whilest he was in
Italy, there were certain women Magicians like Circe, who by giving cheese to travellers
turned them into cattle; and when they had carried what burdens they pleased, restored
them into men again; and that the same happened to a certain Father called Prestantine.
But least any one should think these things to be but foolish toyes, and things impossible,
let him call to mind what Scripture mentions concerning Nebuchadnezar
[Nebuchadnezzar] the King, how he was turned into an ox, and lived seven yeers with
hay, and at length returned through the mercy of God into a man again, whose body after
his death, his son Evilmerodac gave as a prey to the Vulters [vultures], least he should
again rise from the dead, who returned from a beast into a man: and more of this kind
doth Exodus relate of the Magicians of Pharaoh. But Solomon speaks of the same,
whether Magicians, or Sorcerers, when he saith, Thou hast terrified them O God! because
they have done horrible deeds by inchantments [enchantments]. Moreover, this I would
have you know, that these Magicians do not search into naturall things only, but also
those things which do accompany nature, and after a manner put it off, as motions,
numbers, figures, sounds, voyces [voices], concents, lights, affections of the mind, &
words. So the Psylli, and Marsi called together serpents, and others by other things
depressing them, put them to flight. So Orpheus repressed the tempest of the Argonaute
with a hymn; and Homer relates of Ulysses that his blood was restrained with words. And
in the law of the twelve tables punishment was ordained for them who enchanted the
corn: that without all doubt the Magicians did produce wonderfull effects by words only,
affections, and such like, not upon themselves, but also upon extraneous things; all which
things are thought to put forth their innate vertue upon other things, draw them to them,
or expell them from them, or any otherwise affecting of them, no otherwise then the
Loadstone draws Iron, or Jeat Chaff, or a Diamond or Garlick bind them, so that by this
graduall, and concatenated Sympathy of things, not only naturall, and celestiall gifts, but
also intellectuall, and divine may, as Iamblicus [Iamblichus], Proclus, and Synesius
confirm by the opinion of Magicians, be received from above, which Proclus in his book
of sacrifice, and Magick confesseth, viz: That by the consent of these kinds of things, the
Magicians were wont to call up the dieties [deities] themselves. To such a height of
madness some of them are grown, that from divers constellations of the Stars, through
intervals of times, and a certain rule of proportions being observed, think that an image of
the gods can with a beck receive the spirit of life, and intellect, and so give an answer to
them that ask counsell of it, and reveal the secrets of occult truth. Hence it is manifest
that this naturall Magick is sometimes inclining to Goetia, and Theurgia, entangled in the
wyles and errours of evill Spirits.
Of Goetia Necromancy.
Now the parts of Ceremonial Magick are Goetia and Theurgia, Goetia is unfortunate, by
the commerces of unclean spirits made up of the rites of wicked curiosities, unlawfull
charms, and deprecations, and is abandoned and execrated by all laws. Of this kinde are
those which we now adayes call Necromancers, and Witches.
A people envy'd by the Gods, have skill,
Begot by th' evill one, even at their will
The heavens for to blemish, and the things
Which are in heaven, and on earth to bring
Out of order, and the poles for to force,
And of the rivers for to turn the course,
The mountains level, and the skie to drive
Under the earth -----
These therefore are they which call upon the souls of the dead, and those which the
Ancients called Epodi, who enchant boys, and bring them out into the speech of the
Oracle, and which carry about them familiar spirits, as we read of Socrates and such, as it
is said, they fed in glasses, by which they feign themselves to prophesy. And all these
proceed two waies. For some endeavour to call and compell evill spirits, adjuring by a
certain power, especially of divine names, for seeing every creature fears, and
reverenceth the name of him who made it, no marvel, if Goetians, Infidels, Pagans, Jews,
Saracens, and men of every prophane sect and society do bind Divels [devils] by
invocating the divine name. Now there are some that are most impiously wicked indeed,
that submit themselves to Divels [devils], sacrifice to, and adore them, and thereby
become guilty of Idolatry, and the basest abasement: to which crimes if the former are not
obnoxious, yet they expose themselves to manifest dangers. For even compelled divels
[devils] alwaies deceive us whithersoever we go. Now from the sect of the Goetians have
proceeded all those books of darkness, which Vulpianus the Lawyer calls books
disallowed to be read, and forthwith appointed them to be destroyed, of which sort the
first is Zabulus reported to invent, who was given to unlawfull arts, then Barnabas a
certain Cyprian; and now in these dayes there are carryed about books with feigned titles,
under the names of Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon, also Paul, Honorius,
Cyprianus, Albertus, Thomas, Hierome, and of a certain man of Yorke, whose toies [toys]
Alphonsus King of Castile, Robert an English man, Bacon, and Apponus [i.e. Peter de
Abano], and many other men of a deplored wit have foolishly followed. Moreover they
have not made men only and Saints, and Patriarkes [Patriarchs], and the angels of God,
the authors of such execrable opinions, but they boast also that those books were
dilivered by Raziel, and Raphael the Angels of Adam and Tobias; Which books openly
betray themselves to him that looks narrowly [i.e. closely] into them, to be a rule, rite,
and custome of their precepts, and a kind of words, and characters, an order of extruction,
an empty phrase, and to contain nothing but meer toyes, and impostures, and to be made
in latter times by men ignorant of all ancient Magick, and forlorn artists of pernitious
[pernicious] art, of prophane observations mixed with the ceremonies of our religion,
with many unknown names, and seals intermixed, that thereby they may terrifie and
astonish the simple, and ignorant. Moreover it doth not yet appear that these arts are
fables: for unless there were such indeed, and by them many wonderfull and hurtfull
things done, there would not be such strict divine, and humane lawes made concerning
them, for the utter exterminating of them. And why do the Goetians use those evill spirits
only, but because good Angels will hardly appear, expecting the command of God, and
come not but to men pure in heart, and holy in life: but the evill are easily called up,
favouring him that is false, and counterfeiting holiness are alwaies ready to deceive with
their craft, that they may be worshipped, and adored: and because women are rnost
desirous of secrets, and less cautious, and prone to superstition, they are the more easily
deceived, and therefore give up themselves the more readily to them, and do great
prodigies. The poets sing of Circe, Medea, and others of this sort; Cicero, Pliny, Seneca,
Austin, and many others as well Philosophers as Catholike [Catholic] Doctors, and
Historians, also the Scriptures, testifie the like. For in the books of the Kings we read,
that a woman who lived at Endor, called up the soul of Samuel the Prophet, although
many interpret it not to be the soul of the Prophet, but an evil spirit, which took upon him
his shape. Yet the Hebrew masters say that Austin to Simplicianus doth not deny but it
might be the true spirit of Samuel, which might easily be called up fom its body before a
compleat year after his departure, as also the Goetians teach. Also Magician
Necromancers suppose that might be done by certain natural powers and bonds, as we
have said in our books of Occult Philosophy. Therefore the ancient Fathers, skilfull of
spiritual things, did not without cause ordain that the bodies of the dead should he buried
in a holy place, and be accompanied with lights, and sprinkled with holy water, and be
perfumed with fiankincense, and incense, and be expiated by prayers as long as they
continued above ground. For as the Masters of the Hebrews say, All our body and carnal
Animal, and whatsoever in us depends upon the matter of the flesh, being ill disposed, is
left for meat to the Serpent, and as they called it, to Azazel, who is the Lord of the flesh
and blood, and the Prince of this world, and is called in Leviticus the Prince of deserts, to
whom it is said in Genesis, Thou shalt eat dust all the daies of thy life. And in Isaiah,
Dust thy bread, i.e. our body created of the dust of the earth, so long as it shall not be
sanctified, and turned into better, that it be no longer an effect of the serpent, but of God,
viz. a spiritual made of carnal, according to the word of Paul, saying, that which is sowed
a carnal, shall arise a spiritual; and els where, All indeed shall rise up, but shall not be
changed, because many shall remain forever as meat of the Serpent. This filthy and horrid
matter of the flesh and meat of the Serpent we therefore cast off by death, changing it for
a better and spirituall, which shall be in the resurrection of the dead; and is already done
in those, who have tasted of the first fruits of the resurrection, and many have already
attained to, by the vertue of the divine spirit, in this life, as Enoch, Eliah and Moses,
whose bodies were changed into a spirituall nature, and have not seen corrupted; neither
are their carkasses [carcasses] left to the power of the Serpent. And this was that dispute
of the devill with Michael the Archangel, concerning the body of Moses, of which Jude
makes mention in his Epistle. But of Goetia, and Necromancy let this suffice.
Of Theurgia.
Now many think that Theurgia is not unlawfull, as if this be governed by good Angels,
and a divine diety [deity], when as yet oftentimes it is under the names of God, and the
fallacies of evil Angels obstringed by the wicked fallacies of the devils. For we do
procure, and attract not by naturall powers only, but also by certaln rites, and ceremonies,
celestials, and by them divine vertues to our selves; Of which together with many rules
the ancient Magicians did treat in many volumes. But the greatest part of all ceremonies
consists in observing cleanness, and purity, first of the mind, then of the body, and of
those things which are about the body, as in the skin, in garments, in habitations, in
vessels, utensils, oblations, sacrifices, the purity of which disposeth to the acquaintance
with and beholding of divine things, and is very much required in sacred things,
according to the word of Isaiah, Be ye washed, and made clean, and take away the evil of
your thoughts. Now impurity, because it oftentimes infects the air, and man, disturbes
that most pure influence of Celestiall and divine things, and chaseth away the pure spirits
of God. But sometimes impure spirits, and deceiving powers, that they be worshipped,
and adored for gods, require also this purity. Therefore here is great need of caution, as
we have lately discoursed at large in our books of Occult Philosophy. But of this
Theurgia, or Magick of divine things Porphyrie [Porphyry] disputing at large, at length
concludes that by Theurgicall consecrations the soul of man may be fitted to receive
spirits, and Angels, and to see God; but he altogether denies that we can by this art return
to God. Of his School therefore is the Art Almadel, the Notary art, the Pauline Art, the art
of Revelations, and many such like superstitions, which are so much the more pernicious,
by how much they seem the more divine to the ignorant.
Of Cabalie.
Here the words of Pliny come into my mind, who saith the faction of Magick depends
upon Moses and Lutopea, being Jews; which words put me in mind of the Cabalie of the
Jews, which the Hebrews are of opinion was delivered to Moses by God himself on
mount Sinai, and then by degrees of succession without the monuments of letters was
untill the times of Esdra delivered to others by word of mouth only: as the Pythagorian
opinions were formerly delivered by Archippus, and Lysiaus, who had Schools at Thebes
in Greece, in which the Scholers [scholars] keeping the precepts of their masters in their
memorie [memory], did use their wit, and memorie instead of books: So certain Jews
despising literature, placed this in memorie, and observations, and vocall traditions,
whence Cabalie was by the Hebrews called as it were the reception of any thing from
another only by hearing. That art (as it is reported) is very ancient, but the name was
known but of late times amongst Christians: They deliver a double science therefore, the
one of Bresith, which they call Cosmologie, viz: explaining the powers of things created,
naturall, and Celestiall, and expounding the secrets of the Law and Bible by
Philosophicall reasons: which truly upon this account differs nothing at all from naturall
Magick, in which we believe K. Solomon excelled. For it is read in the sacred Histories of
the Hebrews, that he was skilled in all things, even from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the
Hyssop that grows upon the wal [wall]: also in cattle, birds, creeping things, and fishes;
all which shew that he knew the Magicall vertues of nature. Moses the AElig;gyptian
[Egyptian], amongst the later writers followed after this in his exposition upon the
Pentacles; also many more Talmudists. They call the other Science thereof of Mercara,
which is concerning the more sublime contemplations of divine & Angelick vertues, & of
sacred names, and seals, being a certain Symbolical divinity, in which letters, numbers,
figures, things, & names, and tops of elements, and lines, points, and accents, are all
significative of most profound things, & great secrets. This again they divide into
Arithmancy, viz. that which is called Notariacon, treating of Angelical vertues, names, &
seals, also of the conditions of spirits, and souls; and into Theomancy, which searcheth
into the mysteries of divine majesty, as the emanations thereof, & sacred names, and
Pentacles, which he that knows may excell with wonderful vertues; as that when he
pleaseth, he may fore-know all future things, & command whole nature, have power over
devils, and Angels, and do miracles. By this they suppose, that Moses did shew so many
signs, and turned the rod into a Serpent, and the waters into blood, and that he sent Frogs,
Flies, Lice, Locusts, Caterpillars, fire with hail, botches and boyls [boils] on the
Egyptians; and slew every first born of man and beast; and that he opened the Seas, and
carryed his thorow, and brought forth fountains out of the rock, and quails from Heaven,
that he sent before his, clouds and lightnings by day, a pillar of fire by night, and called
down from Heaven the voice of the living God to the people, and did strike the haughty
with fire, and those that murmured with the Leprosie; and on the ill deserving brought
suddain destruction; the earth gaping and swallowing them up; further he fed the people
with heavenly food; pacified Serpents, cured the envenomed, preserved the numerous
multitude from infirmity, & their garments from wearing out, & made them victors over
their enemies. To conclude, by this art of miracles Joshua commanded the Sun to stand
still, Eliah called down fire from Heaven upon his enemies, restored a dead childe to life;
Daniel stopt the mouths of the Lyons [lions]; The three children sang songs in the fiery
Oven; moreover by this art the incredulous Jews affirm, that even Christ did do so many
miracles; Solomon also very well knew this art, and delivered charms against devils, and
their bonds, and the manner of conjurations, and against diseases, as Joseph reporteth, but
as I doubt not but that God revealed to Moses many secrets, contained under the bark of
the words of the Law, which were not to be revealed to the prophane vulgar. So I
acknowledge that this Cabalisticall art, which the Hebrews brag of, and I sometimes
diligently and laboriously sought after, is nothing else then a meer rhapsody of
superstition, and a certain Theurgicall Magick: but if it proceeded from God (as the Jews
boast) and conduceth to the perfection of life, health of men, to the worship of God, and
to the truth of understanding; truly that spirit of truth, which hath left this Synagogue, and
come to teach us all truth, would not have concealed it from his Church even untill these
last times, which indeed knoweth all things that are of God, whose benediction, baptism,
and other mysteries of salvation are revealed and perfected in every tongue, for every
tongue hath the same equall power, if so be that there be the same equall piety, neither is
there any name, either in heaven or earth, by the which we must be saved, and by which
we work miracles, besides this one name Jesus, in which all things are recapitulated and
contained. Hence it is, that the Jews, who are most skilful in using the names of God, can
operate little or nothing after Christ, as their ancient fathers did; but that we by
experience find, and see, that by the revolution of this art (as they call them) oftentimes
wonderful sentences, full of great mysteries, are wrested from the holy Scriptures, this is
nothing else then a certain playing upon Allegories, which idle men busymg themselves
with all the points, letters, and numbers, which this tongue and the custome of writing do
easily suffer, do fain and disguise at their pleasures; which although sometimes they hold
forth great mysteries, yet they can neither prove nor evince any thing; but we may
(according to the words of Gregory) with the same facility contemn them, as they are
affirmed. Rabanus the Monk, by the same artifice hath feigned many things, but in Latin
Characters and verses, with certain pictures inserted, which being read any way by the
delineations of the superficies and pictures, do declare some sacred mysterie [mystery],
representing the histories of the things painted; which also may without doubt be wrested
from prophane writings, as every one may know, who hath read the Cantones of Valena
Proba, composed out of the verses of Virgil, concerning Christ; All things of this kind are
the speculations of idle brains, but what belongeth to the working of miracles, there is
none of you, I suppose, of so foolish an understanding, who believeth that they have any
art or science of them; therefore this Cabala of the Jews is nothing else then a most
pernicious superstition, by the which they gather at their pleasure, divide, transfer words,
names and letters, scatteringly put in the holy Scriptures, and by making one thing out of
another, they dissolve the connections of the truth, the speeches, inductions and parables,
and here and there construing them by their own fictions, would bring the words of God
to their follies, defaming the Scriptures, and saying that their fictions have foundation on
them. They calumniate the Law of God, and by the supputations of words, syllables,
letters, numbers impudently extorted, they assay to bring violent and blasphemous proofs
for their unbelief. Besides, they being puft up by these trifles, do boast that they finde and
search out the unspeakable mysteries of God, and secrets, which are ahove the Scriptures,
by the which also they irnpudently affirm, and without blushing, that they can even
prophecy, and do miracles and wonders; but it happeneth to them, as to Aesops Dog, who
leaving his bread, and gaping after the shadow, lost his food; so this perfidious and stiff
necked people, being always busied in the shadows of the Scriptures, and about their own
vanities, and doing violence by their artificiall, but superstitious Cabala, do loose the
bread of eternall life, and being fed with vain words, do destroy the word of truth; from
this Judaicall ferment of Cabalisticall superstition proceeded (as I suppose) the Ophitane,
Gnostican, and Valentinian Hereticks, who together with their disciples, feigned a certain
Greek Cabala, perverting all the mysteries of the Christian faith, and by their heretical
corruption wresting them to the Greek letters and numbers, by the which they constituted
a body of truth (as they call it) and taught, that without these mysteries of letters &
numbers the truth could not be found in the Gospel, because that the writings thereof are
various, and sometimes repugnant to themselves, and full of parables; that they who see,
might not see, and that they who hear, might not hear, and that they who understand,
might not understand, and that they are propounded to the blind and erroneous, according
to the capacity of their blindness and error; But that the sincere truth lying hid under these
things, is committed to the perfect only, not by writings, but by word of mouth, and that
this is that Alphabetary and Arithmatical Theology which Christ in private manifested to
his Apostles; and which Paul speaketh to the perfect only; for seeing that these are the
highest mysteries, therefore they are not written, nor ought so to be, but to be kept in
secret amongst wise men; but no man is a wise man amongst them, who knoweth not to
refrain the greatest monsters of Heresie.
Of Juggling or Legerdemain.
But let us return to that Magick, part of which is an art of jugglings (i.e.) delusions, which
are made according to appearance only, by which Magicians shew phantasmes, and play
many miracles by circulatory frauds, and cause dreams, which they do not so much by
Geotick inchantments, and imprecations, and deceits of devils, as by certain vapors,
perfumes, lights, love-medicines, collyries, alligations, and suspensions, also by rings,
images, glasses, and such like drugs, and instruments of Magicall art, and a naturall and
Celestiall power. Also many things are done daily by sleight [slight] of hand, of which
sort we see some are done daily by stage players, and sporters which we call
Chirosophers (i.e.) skilful in sleight of hand. There are extant concerning this art, books
of the Legerdemain of Hermes, and some others. We read also of a certain man called
Paseton, a most notable juglar [juggler], that was wont to shew a banquet to guests, and
when he pleased, to make it vanish away again, all rising with hunger, and thirst, being
deluded. We read that Numa Pompilius did use these kinds of jugglings, and also that
most learned Pythagoras did sometimes do this toy, that what things he pleased, he
would write in a glass, which being set against the full Moon, he would shew to any one
that stood behind it, those things represented in the Globe of the Moon; Hither belongs
whatooever Poets sing of the transmutations of men, which also is delivered by
Historians, and by some Christian Divines, and also is recorded in the Scripture. So men
may appear like Asses, or horses, or other Animals with fascinated eyes, or a troubled
medium, and that by a naturall art. Sometimes these are done by good and evil spirits, or
by God himself at the request of some good men, as in the Scripture we read of Elisha the
Prophet beset by an Army of the King fortifying Dotham. But to pure eyes, and such as
be opened by God, those cannot deceive; so that woman which was judged to be a kind of
cattle, did seem to Hilario to be not any such thing, but a woman. These things therefore
which are done according to appearance only, are called jugglers.
But those things which are done by the Art of transmuting, or translating, as of
Nebuchadnezar, or of Corn carryed to another field, we have spoke of before; but of this
art of juggling, thus saith Iamblicus, These things which are supposed to be juggled or
bewitched, besides imagination, have no truth of action or essence. The end of these is
but to hold forth things to the imagination according to appearance, of which there
presently remains no footsteps or signs. Now by what hath been said, it is manifest that
Magick is nothing else but a collection of Idolatry, Astrology, and superstitious
medicines; And now there is by Magicians raised a great company of hereticks in the
Church, who as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, do in the like manner resist the
Apostolicall truth. The chief of these was Simon the Samaritan, on whom by reason of
this art was bestowed at Rome in Claudius Caesars time, a Statue, with this Inscription,
To Simon the holy God. Of his blasphemies Clemens Eusebius, and Irenaeus make
mention. From this Simon, as from a Seminary of all Heresies proceeded by successions
the monstrous Ophites, the filthy Gnosticks, the impious Valentinians, Cerdonians,
Marcionists, Montanians, and many other Hereticks, lying against God for gain and vain
glory, doing no good to men, but deceiving them, and drawing them into destruction and
error, to whom they that give credit shall be confounded in the judgement of God. But of
Magick I wrote whilest I was very yong [young] three large books, which I called Of
Occult Philosophy, in which what was then through the curiosity of my youth erroneous,
I now being more advised, am willing to have retracted, by this recantation; I formerly
spent much time and costs in these vanities. At last I grew so wise as to be able to
disswade others from this destruction; For whosoever do not in the truth, nor in the power
of God, but in the deceits of divels [devils], according to the operation of wicked spirits
presume to divine and prophesy, and practising through Magicall vanities, exorcismss,
incantions and other demoniacall works and deceits of Idolatry, boasting of delusions,
and phantasmes presently ceasing, brag that they can do miracles, I say all these shall
with Jannes, and Jambres, and Simon Magus, be destinated to the torments of eternall
Fire.
Of the Occult Philosophy of Henry Cornelius Agrippa,
FINIS.