Holy Daimon

holy
daimΩn

Frater Acher
SCARLET IMPRINT
LONDON · MMXVIII

Holy Daimon © Frater Acher 2018
Published by Scarlet Imprint under the Bibliothèque Rouge banner;
edited by P. Grey & A. Dimech; designed & typeset by A. Dimech.
The digital edition was made by CPI Antony Rowe.
eISBN 978 1 912316 03 8
All rights reserved: no part of this book may be reproduced in any form, without written
permission from the copyright holder.
SCARLETIMPRINT.COM

HOLY DAIMON WAS PUBLISHED BY SCARLET IMPRINT IN 2018 IN THREE
EDITIONS, COMPRISING: A STANDARD HARDBACK LIMITED TO 600 COPIES
BOUND IN DARK GREY BOOKCLOTH; A FINE EDITION OF 60 COPIES HALF
BOUND IN DARK GREEN GOATSKIN WITH MARBLED BOARDS; AND AN
UNLIMITED PAPERBACK EDITION.

Contents
Preface
Introduction
1 HISTORY

Among the Chaldeans
Among the Zoroastrians
Among the Ancient Greeks
2 MEMORY

Communion with my Holy Daimon
3 PRACTICE

Systasis with your Holy Daimon
Trust
Joy
Darkness
Encounter
Selected resources

I do my thing and you do your thing.
I am not in this world to live up to your
expectations,
And you are not in this world to live up to
mine.
You are you and I am I.
And if by chance we find each other, it’s
beautiful,
If not, it can’t be helped.

Fritz Perls

For you are I, and I am you;
your name is mine, and mine is yours.
For I am your image.

PGM VIII, 36 – 38

Preface
Where does this doubt come from, I ask you. From weakness of faith?
No! It derives logically from the unconscious awareness that too few
among the priests are fiery enough to search for the path of
sanctification, as do the Yogis and Sadhus of India. There are too few of
them who take the heavenly kingdom by force. Trust me: there are more
paths towards resurrection than the Church would ever dream of! The
loud hoping for ‘mercy’ sure enough is not enough. How many of your
rank is it who can say of themselves: ‘As a deer pants for flowing
streams, so pants my soul for you, O God’?1
But where there is danger, there grows also what saves.2
There are three reasons why you are holding this book in your hands. While
only the last one truly matters, all three shall be mentioned here.
The World
Many books have been written about achieving communion with our holy
daimon. Unfortunately the vast majority of them have brought an exclusively
magical lens to the subject. Magic, however, is worth nothing if it doesn’t
stand in the service of something greater. The best magic stands in the service
of life. The magic of creating communion with our holy daimon is one of the
most powerful forms of serving life—not only our own lives, but especially
those of the many beings, large and small, visible and invisible, around us.
Even to the casual observer it could not be more obvious why such a goal
would matter so critically these days. We are living in times that no longer
have any appreciation of the status quo. The relative calm and peace the West
experienced after the Cold War seems to be quickly fading to a distant

memory. It is being pushed aside in particular by the many forces that run
counter to the achievement of the UN’s sustainable development goals.
Among these are the following dynamics:
• A continuation of competing territorial interests over increasingly scarce
natural resources and fewer remaining emerging markets.
• An institutionalized economic operating system built on a double loop of
exploitation: exploitation of labour for value creation (e.g. services and
goods) and exploitation of capital for financial short-term gains (e.g.
dividends).
• A new wave of crusades, just like their medieval predecessors, utilizing
organized religion as a means to rally the masses, create collective enemy
stereotypes, and distract from pressing local issues.
• New technology and ‘social’ media creating the illusion of constant
immediacy and ubiquitous instant gratification despite an increasing reality
of individual isolation and passivity.
• A natural environment finally beginning to fight off the destructive virus
called humanity which for decades has conveniently paid only lukewarm
attention to its warning signs.
• And particularly in the West, a factual loss of the collective memory of the
horrors of the Second World War as the first generation grows up whose
grandparents did not experience those horrors firsthand. Thus nationalist
agendas are on the rise again and the Pan-European social contract is at
risk.
Surrounded by such disruptive and largely destructive forces, it’s quite
easy to quit caring. More than that, while these dynamics work at a global
level, we still all suffer from them within our individual realities. The
relentless pace of our lives, the mental numbing from the constant onslaught
of images and news, the atomization of local communities, and the suffering
caused by floods and storms—all these lead to a continual degradation of
personal as well as collective resilience.
Standing skinned and naked in life is a powerful spiritual and often
necessary experience. Being left alone without support in these moments is
not.
So this is the first reason why this book exists. Living a life constantly

exposed to the negative forces described above, it is incredibly easy (and
comfortable) to feel entitled to behave like an arse. If the world around us
constantly seems to flip the bipolar switch between utter despair and
aggressive exploitation, then why not do ourselves the favour of blending
right in?
Our holy daimon, once we have created a conscious connection with her/
him, will do whatever she/he can to prevent us from making such a foolish
choice. Being able to converse and commune with this powerful force, that
forms the essence of who we are, replenishes us like very few other sources
of resilience accessible to our species. She/he literally breathes in our pain,
tiredness, and exhaustion, and breathes out the substance that rebuilds our
spiritual bodies. This is no metaphor, no use of poetic language, but what
communion with our holy daimon truly does for us. The reason why it sounds
like romanticism is because that’s how people for decades have comforted
themselves and chosen to remember it—as a poetic fantasy rather than as a
magical calling.
Judging without even trying is incredibly convenient—especially if it lets
us remain the victims of circumstances created by global forces far beyond
our realm of control or influence. Behaving like a wolf when surrounded by
wolves often seems like the safest option. Unfortunately as human beings,
rather than following our blood, instinct and tribe, each one of us carries the
burden of first finding a vision, and then realizing a version of our noble
selves.
What does it mean to be you? What does it take to live up to this meaning
everyday? Nobody will be able to answer this question but you. The
resources you have at your control on this journey of aspiration and
exploration are limited: a finite number of days, a select group of loved ones,
a fistful of dollars, and another fistful of liminal chances to prove yourself.
Our holy daimon is the one exception to that rule. She/he will keep on
giving if we find a way of allowing her/him to. Today our human
personalities are the valves that hold back her/his force. Our holy daimon is
the force that not only never runs dry, but that also knows the nameless place
we keep on looking for, the place where we become who are meant to be, and
fulfil our fate.
The Magic

The second reason why this book exists is the state of decay that ritual magic
has fallen into. Now, magic being in such a state is not a modern
phenomenon. But what is at risk of snapping today is the chain that for
centuries has been formed by direct, living lineages passed on from teachers
to students.
Instead of being guided by the same person for many years through many
stages of magical development—a journey so individual it would never fit
any grade system—what we have created today is a virtual strip mall filled
with shops that sell magic as a mass-produced service on neon-lit shelves
whose owners teeter on the brink of their own existence. Students have
become customers, coming and going, dipping in and out of practices,
quickly getting bored and treating magic like a menu to order from with the
expectation of instant gratification. Such a state of decay does not affect
magic itself, yet it seeps into people and generations like a poison. Rather
than being a menu on a shelf, magic is a pitch black shaft that you either walk
around in a wide circle or throw your entire self into. Not even Alice got to
visit the white rabbit without falling for a long time first.
The idea of recreating the bond that once existed between teacher and
student is certainly romantic, yet it is with equal certainty not something that
the majority of twenty-first century magical students will ever experience.
Only in retrospect is it that I realize my own story was a rare exception.
So this is the second reason why this book exists. Presuming we have
thrown our entire selves into it, presuming we have put in several years of
regular, honest, self-guided study and seen our magical skills grow, slowly,
like seedlings from soil … what then?
The first years of magical apprenticeship can easily be recreated with the
help of the many books and online courses available (one advantage we have
over previous generations). But once we have learned to walk magically,
once we have found the temple, passed through its atrium and opened the
doors to the vestibule, what then? Few will make it that far. Most give up
while they are still learning to lace their shoes, some get lost in the open
desert, and of those remaining, many move on to founding a family just when
the temple begins to come into sight. Of the small minority that keeps
walking, passes through the atrium, and manages to pull open the doors of the
temple, their (magical) heart is broken with a blow when they realize that the
temple itself is a stage set. With the handle of the temple door still in their

hand, they then look out into the same endlessly wide desert from whence
they came.
Beginning to see, and then to create, our noble selves is something we each
must do, by immersing ourselves entirely in our everyday reality. By making
each day and each encounter matter. The same is true on a magical level.
Once we move from being an apprentice to becoming an adept, our journey is
no longer paved for us.
It is from this moment on our magical journey that contact with our holy
daimon becomes essential.
It should never be forgotten for a single moment that the central and
essential work of the Magician is the attainment of the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. Once he has achieved this he
must of course be left entirely in the hands of that Angel, who can be
invariably and inevitably relied upon to lead him to the further great step
—crossing of the Abyss and the attainment of the grade of Master of the
Temple.3
When the chain that for centuries connected students to teachers breaks,
the being that can take both ends and mend it is our holy daimon. Creating
this chain, link by link, did not happen all at once; neither will mending it. It
is a slow, generative process, watched over and perfected by each of us in
partnership with our holy daimon; should we choose to do so.
And You
The third reason why this book exists is you. Literally you, the person
reading this right now. If you are reading this then you are one of a few
hundred people. If you actually finish reading this book, cover to cover, then
you will be one of a few dozen. Those who begin to practice its exercises will
be less than can be counted on the fingers of one hand. So this is why this
book exists. Because just as your holy daimon believes in you, so do I.
You matter immensely. Not in the modern sense of celebrity to which we
are all encouraged to aspire, but in a much more profound way. You matter
because your life sends a ripple across this planet and up into the sky. You
matter because over the course of your life hundreds, thousands of spirits will

be watching you, observing you, and trying to learn from you what they do
not have and often do not understand: free will, ethics, kindness, and
firmness, and when to use each of them. And of course, many people will
watch to learn from you as well.
Most of these encounters will happen when we are not aware of them. We
might be saying something, doing something that will forever leave a mark
on another being, whether they are corporeal or spiritual. People and spirits
will move on from us, forever changed, just as they transform us in return.
That is the process by which we co-create the worlds we live in.
It would be foolish of us to aspire to be flawless in the thousands of
encounters we pass through each day. Flawlessness is for tyrants and the
mythical dead. As living humans, our hands are always stained. We mess up,
we clean up, and mostly are blissfully ignorant of the damage or good we
have done. That is not a bad state to be in. As we will explore in this book,
the goal of communion with our holy daimon is not to perfect ourselves.
Even our ‘noble self’ will still struggle and fail; it is defined not by its
perfection, but by its persistent aspiration. Despite being surrounded by
constant proof of the opposite, our noble self holds fast to the ideal. This
Platonic idea of who we are meant to be is at one with, and yet entirely
separate from, our mortal personalities. It is waiting for us within our holy
daimon.
You matter immensely, not because of who you are, but because of the
possibility to act that you have been given. You can begin to reach out to
your holy daimon every day. Like one hand reaching out for another. From
spirit to man. From inside to outside. Closing the current that brought to life
all of creation. That is how you become the mender of the chain.
One doesn’t pray with words, one prays with their hands. Whoever is
praying with words is begging. One doesn’t beg. The spirit knows quite
well what you require. When the palms touch each other, the Left is
closed by help of the Right inside man to form a chain. That is how the
body is bound firmly, and through the tip of the fingers, pointing
upwards, a free flame arises.—That is the secret of prayers, which is not
mentioned in any script.4

1 Gustav Meyrink, Der Weisse Dominikaner, 1921.
2 Friedrich Hölderlin.
3 Aleister Crowley, Magic Without Tears, 1954.
4 Gustav Meyrink, Der Weisse Dominikaner, 1921.

Introduction
This book consists of three parts: History, Memory, and Practice, which can
be read in any order. The academic in me recommends that we first ground
ourselves in an historical overview of our subject. The ritualist, on the other
hand, would prefer to start with a detailed firsthand account of a ritual whose
purpose is to create communion with our holy daimon. My inner pragmatist,
hasn’t even read this introduction, and just opened the book on the first page
of Practice. Irrespective of the sequence in which you read this book, there is
value in each of its parts.
The History section offers an overview of the ideas surrounding
communion with our holy daimon in three ancient cultures: the Chaldeans,
the Zoroastrians, and the ancient Greeks. Grounding ourselves in their
concepts and ideas will greatly benefit the modern reader, for the following
reasons:
• Amongst modern magicians the practice of creating communion with our
holy daimon is often narrowed down to the techniques of The Book of
Abramelin and Aleister Crowley’s Liber Samekh. Whilst these sources have
incredible value, limiting the subject to these texts significantly
compromises our understanding.
• By looking at three specific and very different ancient cultures, we begin to
realize how diverse, colourful, and often contradictory are the various ideas
and concepts surrounding the topos of the personal daimon. Each of these
cultures would have claimed orthodoxy for their spiritual ideas as well as
orthopraxy for their related rites (two terms we will explore in the Practice
section). Yet from our historical viewpoint all three cultures peacefully coexist in the ancient past of our tradition. Understanding the richness of our
past helps us embrace the fact that there is never only one truth.
• Finally, exploring three cultures through the lens of our particular study

should make it easier for you to explore further cultures on your own. In
particular the Jewish mystical tradition has rich material and many
advanced studies to offer. Initial leads for further exploration are the term
zelem, as it refers to the higher image of man, and the memuneh, which
refers to man’s deputy angel.
The Memory section offers a complete account of my own communion
with the holy daimon. Deciding to include such very personal material in this
book was the second hardest choice I had to make on this journey. What
finally convinced me was not its practical value to other magicians, but rather
its character as a magical artefact in itself. I am offering it here as another
small link in the chain and an example that this chain remains accessible to
everyone. Nothing described in this book is out of reach; all that is needed is
sufficient grit, persistence, and playfulness. Finally, I decided to include this
personal material because of its differences from the practical path I suggest
for you. Seeing these two chapters side by side—my personal journey
looking backwards and your journey looking forward—should demonstrate
that there is no one right way. For each of us, there is our own particular way.
The Practice section is what inspired this book. In late 2010 I published an
essay online called ‘The Everyday Path to Your Holy Guardian Angel.’1 In it
I offered a sequence of practical steps to establish communion with the holy
daimon. What struck me at the time was how little ‘magic’ was required to
achieve and maintain the goal of communion, but how much hard work was
required in our mundane lives. It also struck me that acknowledging this was
an oversight in most related books on the subject.
Almost ten years later—years filled with continuous, daily practice with
my holy daimon—I realized that my experience on this path had progressed
further, and I now saw my essay with the benefit of hindsight. While I had
been right to address the importance of integrating one’s magical practice
into everyday activities, I had missed an essential part of this spiritual
journey; the mystical side of this spiritual path.

So in 2017 I began extended sessions of inspired writing in communion
with my holy daimon. To avoid bringing through another version of the work
that remained limited by my personality, I asked my daimon to take charge
and to write these chapters together with me. She/he did not hesitate, but gave
one condition: I was not to interfere with her/his guidance, but had to follow
wherever she/he needed to take it. The sudden image that she/he gave me was
the flight of an arrow, swift and straight, reaching its target.
Accepting this condition was the hardest part of writing this book. I was
especially hesitant about including the last phase of the practical work,

Encounter. There are things we get to write about, and there are things we
have to explore on our own. Yet, my holy daimon was determined. She/he
showed me the related sections of the Greek Magical Papyri she/he wanted
included, told me how to make them work as a ritual, and told me to get to
work. This is the result.
A final word of warning. I do not know the true nature of the being with
whom I have been working every day since that night in 2010. To me she/ he
is my holy daimon. But does she/he have a name? Does she/he have a
gender? Is she/he truly a being in his/her own right? Or maybe she/he is a
spiritual gateway that I have created myself? I have no definitive answers to
these questions. If magic is the bastard child of art and science, then
mysticism is a bastard born of devotion and diligence. What I do know about
the being whom I have come to know as my holy daimon are its effects on
me, my life, and how I touch the world around me. By far her/his presence
has been the greatest gift I have ever received. No other source of life, no
other source of healing and happiness, compares to her/him. It is with an
awareness of my ignorance that I place this book in your hands.
LVX,

Frater Acher 2018
May the serpent bite its tail.
It is impossible to lay down precise rules by which a man may attain to
the knowledge and conversation of His Holy Guardian Angel; for that is
the particular secret of each one of us; a secret not to be told or even
divined by any other, whatever his grade. It is the Holy of Holies,
whereof each man is his own High Priest, and none knoweth the Name
of his brother’s God, or the Rite that invokes Him.2
1 theomagica.com, 2010.
2 Aleister Crowley, One Star in Sight, Book 4.

Part one
history

Among the Chaldeans
Evil fiends and demons that lie in wait … Pursuing after a man, turned
him from his purpose.1
Introduction
Some of the earliest attestations of ritual magic date to the Chaldean period of
Mesopotamian history. However, defining what the term ‘Chaldean’ means
has long been a problem for scholars. The main challenge is that the meaning
of the term has shifted repeatedly over the centuries. Originally it referred to
an ancient Semitic people who first came to prominence in the late eighth
century BCE, and who came to rule Babylon in 620 BCE. It is interesting to
note that the Chaldeans were the culture who created the magical foundations
from which many later cultures drew their astrological and ritual practices—
for example the famous Sabians of Harran. Yet, the name Chaldean ceased to
refer to a specific ethnic group in 539 BCE, when the Babylonian Empire was
absorbed into the Persian Empire. Subsequently the term applies much more
generally to people versed in occult teachings, particularly astrology and
spells involving the planetary spirits.
It is important to remember the ambiguity of the term Chaldean as we
investigate the idea of an individual spirit guardian among the ‘Chaldeans.’
We must also remember how few written records have come down to us from
this ancient period, and that Chaldean cosmology, magical practices, and rites
were all influenced by cultures which both preceded and paralleled theirs,
such as the Sumerians, Assyrians and Egyptians.
Chaldean Demonology

For the Chaldeans, daimonic forces were abundant and so were the means to
regulate human interaction with them:
The gods of the Euphrates, like those of the Nile, constituted a countless
multitude of visible and invisible beings, distributed into tribes and
empires throughout all the regions of the universe. A particular function
or occupation formed, so to speak, the principality of each one, in which
he worked with an indefatigable zeal, under the orders of his respective
prince or king; but, whereas in Egypt they were on the whole friendly to
man, or at the best indifferent in regard to him, in Chaldea they for the
most part pursued him with an implacable hatred, and only seemed to
exist in order to destroy him.2
Man had no real chance of confronting and surviving the constant demonic
onslaught which underlay his daily life without some sort of omniscient help.
Some of these demons were even audacious enough to attack the gods of
light themselves, such as the seven wicked maškim, evil subterranean demons
who were counterforces to the seven planetary spirits.3 Luckily for man, there
were good spirits who could protect him from the evil spirits who assailed
him, good spirits who existed in a dynamic dualistic relationship with their
evil counterparts—a balance comparable in its purity only to Zoroastrianism.4
However, a major difference between the Zoroastrian and Chaldean
dualism is that for the Chaldeans, the continual battle between the hordes of
evil and benevolent demonic spirits was not synthesized, on the cosmic level,
into two antagonistic supreme beings. As we shall see later, the Zoroastrians
viewed Ahura Mazdā, the good creator, and his antagonist, Ahriman, his evil
adversary, as two eternally struggling forces which formed the mythical
blueprint for every struggle between the forces of good and evil in the lower
realms of creation. Chaldean cosmology, however, was much more
polytheistic in tone, with divine beings residing in and bringing to life all
natural phenomena.
Nevertheless, scholars have long debated whether there was some level of
divine unity and successive emanation lurking beneath the surface of the
apparently polytheistic Chaldean rites and incantations. One scholar who
believed he could perceive such a divine unity was Lenormant:

Underneath the exterior garb of a coarse polytheism (…) were the
conceptions of a higher order from which it had originated; and foremost
among them the fundamental idea of a divine unity, although disfigured
by the monstrous illusions of pantheism, which confounded the creature
with the Creator, and transformed the Divine Being into a multitude of
derivate gods who were manifested in all the phenomena of nature.5
Today most scholars disagree with Lenormant’s view, and consider the
Chaldean religion to be polytheistic at heart. In fact, even many of his
contemporary peers disagreed with him, including the respected Egyptologist
Gaston Maspero:
If the idea of uniting all these divine beings into a single supreme one,
who would combine within himself all their elements and the whole of
their powers, ever for a moment crossed the mind of some Chaldean
theologian, it never spread to the people as a whole.6
If there was a supreme being from which the other gods had been born—
such as the god Ilu—then it never became the centre of a cult or fellowship
among the Chaldeans.7 What has never been in doubt is that the practical
aspects of Chaldean cosmology—their rites and magic—are best described as
an overflowing ‘adoration of the elementary spirits.’8
The focus of the Chaldeans’ religious rites were the many demonic and
divine forces which they saw represented in nature and the celestial night
sky: adoring the planets and their divine spirits, and obtaining their protection
from their evil subterranean counterparts.9
There can be no doubt of the Sabaeanism of the Chaldees, and
apparently of the early Assyrians, whose pantheon, from its fusion of
human and animal forms, resembles the Egyptian and Hindu. The
relation of religion with astronomy is, however, more striking in Assyria
than in Egypt; the system of the latter country being solar, while the
Assyrian worship was rather astral. On the Babylonian cylinders and
monuments, the sun and moon constantly occur, and often seven stars
arranged more in the manner of the Pleiades than of the Great Bear, but
probably the latter. Zodiacal signs are frequently placed in the area along

with the sun, moon, and seven stars, and show unequivocally that the
Greek derived their notions and arrangements of the Zodiac from the
Chaldees.10
Magical devotions to the planetary spirits were the cornerstone of
Chaldean rites; yet despite all of man’s efforts to engage with them, predict
their actions, and control their influence, he always remained confined by his
own nature, and he continuously sought magical empowerment through
divine or demonic assistance. The possibility of the direct ascension of man,
of his becoming a godlike being in his own right, was never part of the
Chaldean worldview. Just as they didn’t strive to synthesize the plethora of
gods into a single higher divine being, so they didn’t strive to free man from
the confines of his essential nature as a being caught in an eternal struggle
between chthonic and celestial forces. The goal of Chaldean magic was to
win the battle one day at a time, not to transcend it altogether.
For the Chaldean magicians, man was permanently bound into the natural
realm; he had no chance of breaking free from the daimonic dualism of his
surroundings. Only later were ideas of theurgy and apotheosis introduced into
magic—ideas of the ascension of man towards the divine and the selfdirected sublimation of his nature so that he would be able to receive the
governance and direction of certain spiritual realms.11
Upon this dualistic conception rested the whole edifice of sacred magic, of
magic regarded as a holy and legitimate intercourse established by rites of
divine origin, between man and the supernatural beings surrounding him.
Placed unhappily in the midst of this perpetual struggle between the good and
the bad spirits man felt himself attacked by them at every moment; his fate
depended upon them. All his happiness was the work of the former, all the
evils to which he was subject were attributable to the latter.12
Understanding the basic belief system of the Chaldeans is essential if we
are to grasp their perspective as it applies to a personal spirit guardian
assigned to each human being. However, before we examine them, we should
take a closer look at how Chaldeans understood the daimonic nature itself.
In the Jewish, Gnostic, Christian, Muslim, and Neoplatonist cosmologies,
the universe is arranged in a strict hierarchy, with each part having a
particular place in relation to its creator. The various ranks of angels are

defined by their closeness to God’s throne, while the demons are in ranks
which descend into increasing darkness, away from God’s eternal light. The
Neoplatonist chains of emanation are the purest example of this kind of
cosmological ordering: they stretch out from the eternal source of creation
into the abundant diversity of the material realm, creating order and
alignment in what would otherwise be chaos. But, in all of these cosmologies,
the organization of the universe depends ultimately on its creator. The true
identity of each object and being, as well as its function in creation, rests on
its relationship to the creator. But this ordering principle, so familiar to us
today, is not to be found in early polytheistic cultures: it cannot be traced
back to the early pantheons of the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, or Chaldeans.
While polytheist religions do develop, protect, and pass on myths to do with
divine creation and succession, these stories tend to carry little meaning or
emphasis in daily cult practices.
So while the Chaldeans did have distinct divine hierarchies, stories about
the creation of the sky and earth out of chaos, and of the overthrow of gods
by their own offspring, these are of little importance and value in the rites
they actually practised, rites which often centred round local gods. What
mattered most to the Chaldeans was the personal relationship they developed
with a particular god, spirit, or demon, not how it had originally come into
being. The Chaldeans viewed their gods as just as time-bound as humans:
generation after generation of divine beings handed over their devotees once
their time had passed and the stars of their offspring were rising. Affairs in
the spiritual realm were as fluid and unstable as in the material. As above, so
below.
So while Chaldean gods and demons couldn’t hope for the eternal stability
of their rule, they at least did not have to worry about being dependent on a
single supreme being of the sort so common in later monotheistic religions.
Personal Spirit Relations
According to the Chaldeans, each spirit exists in its own right. Furthermore,
in their animistic worldview a distinct spirit existed for every element of
creation. Every plant, stone, and mineral; every animal or artefact created by
humans; everything that existed came with a spirit attached. Nothing was

organized in the sort of sympathetic chains that we find in the later
Hellenistic period.13
What mattered to the Chaldean mage wasn’t discovering where gods or
demons came from, but striking positive alliances with the benevolent ones
and aiming deadly blows at the wicked ones. He was concerned with the
personal impact that each spirit could have on him, not their genealogy. A
Chaldean mage did not worry about ascending into the heavens through
theurgy. Spiritual actions were valued for their immediate effect, with no
thought of recreating any bond with a distant primordial creator god. To
borrow a kabbalistic expression, for the Chaldeans Kether always rested
solidly in Malkuth.
This is why there was no notion among the Chaldeans of a transcendent or
supralunar personal daimon assigned to each human at birth. Chaldeans
would have frowned at Crowley’s maxim, ‘Every man and woman is a star.’
They did not think of humans (or their higher selves) as stars in their own
right: magically, their focus was on binding the spirits of specific stars to
humans or sacred objects.14 Indeed, for Chaldean magic to work at all, the
difference between the human realm and the realm of the stars was essential.
The stars, who were messengers from and to the divine realm,15 had to be
invoked into the human realm precisely because they were alien to it.
Stars function in a dual role in relation to man: they exert a direct
influence and serve as mediators between man and god. Directly,
through astral irradiation, they transform ordinary substances into potent
ones that will be effective in magic, medicine, or ritual, as Materia
Medica, amulets, or cultic appurtenances. Stars also provide reliable
answers to the query of the diviner. More important, in their second role
stars are man’s medium of communication with the divine.16
For the deeply pragmatic Chaldean mage, the point of his magic was to
create whatever spirit bonds were most appropriate for a given situation; not
to achieve a single transcendent union of spirit which was owed to him as a
birthright. Good luck, health, wealth, and longevity were what he was after;
and these things were to be got through deliberately chosen magical patrons,
spirit alliances and demon traps, not through some higher state of being that
could be unlocked only through mystical ascension.

Though the Chaldeans had no time for the idea of a supracelestial holy
daimon, there are many examples of individual spirits acting as familiars or
patrons to humans for both good and evil ends;17 spirit alliances were crucial
to the Chaldeans for their survival. And demonic possession—the most
intimate type of spirit communion—was not only possible, but common.
Though such possession was naturally dreaded when the possessing demon
was evil, and treated with exorcism, it could equally be intentionally induced
when the demon in question was viewed as useful.
Here is an example of an incantation to protect from possession by an evil
spirit:
The wicked god, the wicked demon, the demon of the desert, the demon
of the mountain, the demon of the sea, the demon of the marsh, the evil
genius, the enormous uruku, the bad wind itself, the wicked demon
which seizes the body, which disturbs the body. Spirit of the heavens,
conjure it! Spirit of the earth, conjure it!18
And here is an example of an incantation to induce beneficial possession:
The king, the shepherd of his people, may he (hold) the sun in his right
hand, may he (hold) the moon in his left hand. May the favourable
demon, the favourable giant, which governs the lordship and the crown,
penetrate into his body!19
However, demonic influence, whether good or evil, was always perceived
as an entirely external intervention in the human realm. Demonic influence
was always an outside influence. No demon was naturally connected to
man’s soul. As a denizen of an animist world filled with influencing spirits, it
was man’s everyday interaction with these beings that brought about
afflictions, ill fate, and various forms of diseases (and equally boons, good
luck, and rude health):
They, the products of the infernal regions, on high they bring trouble,
and below they bring confusion. Falling in rain from the sky, issuing
from the earth, they penetrate the strong timbers, the thick timbers; they
pass from house to house. Doors to not stop them, Bolts do not stop

them, They glide in at the doors like serpents, They enter by the
windows like the wind.20
While the idea of an inborn holy daimon didn’t exist for the Chaldeans, the
later Babylonian sorcerers deliberately created bonds with demonic patrons,
which were bound either into objects or directly into human beings.
Here is an example of an incantation to the guardian spirit of king
Esarhaddon, a king of Assyria who reigned between 681 and 669 BCE:
May the guardian bull, the guardian genius, who protects the strength of
my throne, always preserve my name in joy and honour until these feet
move themselves from their place.21
Summary
The Chaldeans, one of the earliest cultures to influence our Western magical
tradition, did not have the concept of a personal holy daimon of the sort
known in later centuries. However, one potential source of the idea of the
holy daimon is their use of demonic patrons or guardian spirits. This was an
established practice in their magic, and an important method for warding and
gaining protection from evil influences. Furthermore, the idea of individual
mystical or magical ascension was unknown to them. In a world where
spiritual genealogy meant little and efficacious curses and protection charms
meant everything, man’s goal was not to spiritualize himself or to escape the
physical boundaries of his existence. Rather than aspiring to reconnect with
his personal star, the Chaldean mage worked to connect with those stars most
helpful in resolving whatever problem was at hand.
1 Horne: 181.
2 Maspero, Vol. 3: 136–137.
3 Lenormant: 18 / Butler: 5–6 / Horne: 230.
4 Lenormant: 145.
5 Lenormant: 111–112.
6 Maspero, Vol. 3: 154.
7 Lenormant: 113–114.

8 Lenormant: 143.
9 Lenormant: 112.
10 Layard, Vol.2: 440.
11 Lenormant: 74, 107.
12 Lenormant: 146.
13 Reiner: 141.
14 Reiner: 127–128, 139.
15 Reiner: 16.
16 Reiner: 15.
17 Reiner: 109.
18 Lenormant: 3.
19 Lenormant: 35.
20 Lenormant: 30.
21 Lenormant: 54.

Among the Zoroastrians
Although the Greater Bundahishn or Creation was written in Middle
Persia in the ninth century BCE, this work preserves older traditions
about the teachings of Zarathustra or Zoroaster, a religious reformer on
the steppes of southern Russia late in the second millennium.
Challenging the prevailing polytheism, his creed entered eastern Iran
about 1200 and moved west to the Iranian tribes of Media by about 600.1
An ancient tradition like Zoroastrianism is a strong tree with many
branches and deep taproots. Trying to identify a single line of tradition or
ritual practice would not only be naive, but would neglect the beauty that
such a rich tradition has to offer. As a result, this chapter features many
lengthy quotes. Primary and secondary sources on Zoroastrianism are vast,
and still relatively unknown among Western magicians. As a result the reader
may find some of this chapter’s conclusions surprising but they will be
backed by academic testimony.
Introduction
Understanding the origins of the concept of the holy daimon is impossible
without understanding the significant influence of Zoroastrianism. Just as
Zoroastrianism influenced the later Western monotheistic religions,2 its ideas
about personal spirit guardians profoundly influenced the Western occult
tradition.
Zoroastrianism had its origin in a branch of the great Iranian race. It rose
to power as the religion of the Medo-Persian empire, and while it spread
widely among the subject peoples, particularly in Asia Minor, its

strongholds were always the Iranian lands (…).3
As soon as we try to date the origins of Zoroastrianism as we might date
the origins of the various religious beliefs of the ancient Hindus, Egyptians,
and Chaldeans—and indeed the later monotheistic religions such as Judaism
and Christianity—then we find ourselves faced with a fundamental problem:
the origin of Zoroastrianism in Ancient Persia has yet to be firmly
established. Surprisingly, we find vast variations of more than two thousand
years in scholarly estimates of the religion’s genesis: different experts have
located this anywhere from 3000 to 600 BCE. This is due to the fact that
despite its antiquity, Zoroastrianism only enters recorded history in the
middle of the fifth century BCE.4 Even then, the earliest attestation of
Zoroaster’s existence, which places him in the sixth century BCE, seems to be
flawed:
By now it is agreed by almost all scholars actively working in the field
that this date is in fact fictitious, calculated piously but quite erroneously
by Persian Magi, perhaps early in the Christian era, in order to place
Zoroaster in a historical setting and so make him equal in this respect
with Jesus and the Gnostic prophets of that time.5
It appears that the dispute about the real age and origin of Zoroastrianism
has a long history which stretches all the way back to the Magi of antiquity
and the Greek philosophers.6 But irrespective of Zoroastrianism’s exact date
of origin, we do know a lot about the religion’s content and cosmology.
Probably the most important source are the Gāthās, a compendium of loosely
connected ancient hymns that are said to have been composed by Zoroaster
himself.
From these early sources we learn that the most distinct aspect of creation
is the eternal struggle between two opposing forces, and this is played out on
various levels of existence. On the divine level we find the concepts of
ahuras and daevas.7 First and foremost among the ahuras is Ahura Mazda or
Spenta Mainyu,8 the principal creator god and the only ahura mentioned by
name in the Gāthās.9 The eternal struggle between Ahura Mazda, and his
devil-opponent, Ahriman or Angra Mainyu,10 is the foundation and

background of every earthly event and fate, and the central divine dynamic
within Zoroastrianism.11
Life is co-operation with good and conflict with evil. Good and evil are
co-existing polarities. Man can think of things only in terms of their
opposites. Light is light because of darkness. Health is a coveted boon,
as its loss heralds sickness. Life is valued as Ahura Mazda’s most
incomparable gift, as lurking death threatens its extinction. Happiness is
pleasant, for misery is unbearable. Riches rise in worth owing to the
dread of poverty. Joy is gratifying, for sorrow aims at killing it. Virtue is
the health of the spirit, for vice is its disease. Righteousness is the life of
the spirit, for wickedness spells its death. There can be no compromise
between good and evil. Incessant warfare is raging between good and
evil. Man’s duty is to commend good and co-operate with it; to condemn
evil and enter into conflict with it.12
Man is given an active role to play in this transcendent battle. He is put in
the middle of two opposing forces: on the one side truth and order, and on the
other chaos, falsehood and destruction. Thanks to his free will, he has an
active choice to support either the forces of Ahura Mazda or Ahriman; and
this will tip the scales and ultimately decide the fate of life and all creation.
The importance of leading an ethical life is deeply embedded in Zoroastrian
religion. Pursuing truth and order through good thoughts, good words, and
good deeds was central to its everyday practice. Furthermore, man’s
relationship with the divine is less that of a subordinate and more that of a
devoted partner or a co-creator of reality.
The eternal battle between Ahura Mazda and Ahriman occurs at the most
transcendent layer of creation, where these two opposing forces collide. Yet,
as we will see later, on the next, lower layer—the layer closely connected
with the nature of the human soul—this struggle is fought just as hard.13 And
it is here that we shall encounter one of the earliest recorded versions of the
concept of the holy daimon. Before that, however, it will be helpful to take a
brief look at the fundamental beliefs of Mazdean demonology.
Mazdean Demonology

In the ninth-century Pahlavi books, dualism is omnipresent. Good and
evil forces are presented in an almost perfect symmetry, and for each
good creature a symmetrical evil corresponds.14
According to the dualistic Mazdean cosmology, the primordial evil being
Ahriman or Angra Mainyu (‘destructive spirit’) is the creator of all that is
evil, destructive, and chaotic. Assigning all evil creations directly to him
solved many complex theological problems for Zoroastrianism,15 as they
didn’t have to explain why a genuinely positive creator god would have
created evil. Most Zoroastrian sources, such as the Vendīdād or the
Bundahishn, simply say that it was Ahriman himself who brought forth all
chaos, evil, sicknesses, and—first and foremost—the evil demons called
daevas.
The infernal crew. The diabolic spirits who have entered into a compact
with Angra Mainyu to mar the good creation of Ahura Mazda are the
Daevas, or demons. They are the offspring of the Evil Mind and spread
their mischief over all the seven zones. The Evil Spirit has taught them
to mislead man through evil thought, evil word, and evil deed.16
Apart from Ahriman himself, the source texts mention six, or more rarely
seven, main daevas. Beyond this inner circle of evil spirits, vast hordes of
additional and increasingly lowly evil spirits spread out into the material
realm. Their numbers extend into infinity, as new demons are constantly
brought to life by the evil deeds of every creature:
Various new devs are those who spring on to the creatures, ever and
anon, out of the sins which they commit.17
DAEVA
MEANING
(EVIL DEMON)

AMESHA
SPENTA
(DIVINE
SPARK)

Akoman

‘evil thought’ Vohu Manah

Indar

‘who freezes
the mind’

MEANING

RULERSHIP

‘good purpose’ Animals

Asha Vahishta ‘righteousness’ Fire

Sarvar

‘oppression’

Kshatra Vairya ‘desirable
dominion’

Metals &
minerals

Nanghait

‘discontent’

Spenta Armaiti ‘holy
devotion’

Earth

Tawrich

‘destruction’

Haurvatat

Water

Zariz

‘who poisons Ameretat
plants’

‘wholeness’

‘immortality’ Plants

The source of all these evil demons is Ahriman’s relentless desire to
counter the benign creation of Ahura Mazda. This motive is clear in the
creation account of the main six daevas, each of whom is the antithesis of one
of the six Amesha Spentas (see table), the divine sparks of Ahura Mazda.
As Ahura Mazda holds his council of celestial beings, so Angra Mainyu
maintains in his infernal court a retinue of male and female demons. In
opposition to every archangel and angel (…) the younger literature sets
up a corresponding fiend. These form exact counterparts of the powers
of goodness, and always act in direct opposition to them. We do not find
the symmetry of diametric opposites between these rival forces carried
out to completion in the extant Gathic literature. The names of not all the
corresponding demons, who are the opponents of Mazda’s ministering
angels, are found.18
The basic antagonism between the six highest Zoroastrian angels and
demons mirrors the war between the two eternal divine principles Ahura
Mazda and Ahriman, but on a lower cosmological level. It is this principle of
antagonistic demonic and angelic forces that we rediscover in the Solomonic
tradition several centuries later.
The Solomonic Connection
For practitioners of the traditional ritual magic of the West, the
correspondence between the seventy-two spirits of the Ars Goetia and the
seventy-two angels of the Shem HaMephorash is the most famous example of

dualism between angelic and demonic forces wherein each power is balanced
by the power of its opponent. A fascinating development of this can be found
in the seventeenth century grimoire of Dr. Thomas Rudd, who matched the
seals of the goetic demons with corresponding angelic seals.19 A full account
of all seventy-two antagonisms can be found in Carroll Runyon’s The Book
of Solomon’s Magick (consolidated in the ‘Master Mandala’) and in Stephen
Skinner and David Rankine’s The Goetia of Dr Rudd.
Adam McLean, in his A Treatise on Angel Magic, characterizes the
dualism present in Rudd’s works in a simplistic fashion, viewing it as nothing
more than an expression of a ‘primitive dualism,’20 which he explains as an
unfortunate legacy of the ‘Jewish patriarchal religion.’21 According to
McLean, this dualism is evidence of our ancestors’ inability to understand
evil as ‘nothing else but an encounter of the magician with his unconscious
mind.’22 According to McLean, encountering evil in the outside world is a
projection that ‘must be integrated in order to avoid pathological conditions
arising through repressing in a dualistic way a side of our being.’23 Without
passing judgement on what appears to be a highly Eurocentric take on ritual
magic, and demonic evocation in particular, McLean’s identification of
Jewish influence as the root cause for this historic dualism is at the very least
shortsighted. His claim that ‘before this period magicians could work
naturally to invoke spirits without any inner qualms’24 is questionable: this
certainly was not the case in many pre-Christian cultures. As we have seen in
the previous chapter, some ancient cultures did indeed divide the spiritual
realm into benevolent and malefic beings and prohibited any evocation of the
latter sort; this was equally true of Zoroastrian magic.25
Both the title of ‘Magi’ for the devotees of Zoroastrianism, and Pliny the
Elder’s comment that Zoroaster was the inventor of magic, are misleading.
Sorcery is condemned in the harshest way in every Zoroastrian text that
mentions it. Zoroaster himself labelled magicians as the hands, feet, eyes, and
ears of the evil spirit Ahriman.26 Though the mythical Zoroaster was always
held in high regard as a master of astrology, his connection with magic was
introduced much later, and deliberately, by the Greeks.27
Rather than being essentially magical, most Zoroastrian religious rituals
were exacting cleansing and purification rites. To understand the
development of these rites, we first need to take a closer look at the

Zoroastrian view of the nature of matter.
The Nature of Matter
In Zoroastrian literature, the Evil Spirit’s creation has a negative
character because it begins in opposition to that of the Beneficent Spirit.
The material state is the creation of the Beneficent Spirit; the Evil Spirit
can only attack, contaminate, and corrupt it.28
According to Zoroastrianism, the world had already been fully created
when the first evil spiritual beings came into existence. Before the daevas
arrived, all creation was in perfect harmony: the idea of either a human or
divine Fall, as found in Lurianic Kabbalah for example, is not found in
Zoroastrianism. Only upon the arrival of the daevas, and as a result of their
actions, did evil start to exist and actively affect humans—and indeed the
whole material realm. According to Zoroastrianism, matter itself has a perfect
and pure nature, and demons can affect the life forces encapsulated in the
world of creation only by penetrating through matter. According to Mazdean
cosmology, every evil demonic being depends on matter to materialize itself
on any level of creation. Thus the nature of demons is essentially parasitic, as
they require a foreign body or shell to dwell in. Their primal and most deeply
rooted urge is to enter the world of substance to be clothed in matter and
become effective beings in the physical realm.29
Once a demon has managed to break into a body, they can exert a direct
influence on the spirit residing in it. Then, in accordance with their own
nature, they change the feelings, behaviour, and thoughts of the spirit whose
body they have entered, and trigger a process of moral and physical
corruption that ultimately leads to decay.
For Zoroastrians, demonic influence was not restricted to humans: it was
also to be found in the animal, plant, metal and mineral kingdoms. In the
animal realm demonic influence was particularly clear, they categorized each
animal as either beneficial or maleficent. Such a division is especially
important when we consider that animals were considered to be
intermediaries between humanity and the divine or demonic worlds.30

The Demonic Animal
The animal world is likewise divided between ‘beneficial’ animals,
creatures of the Beneficent Spirit, and ‘maleficent’ animals, creatures of
the Evil Spirit. The partition of animals as beneficial or maleficent
represents one of the most important and original aspects of the ancient
Iranian religious worldview.31
While the physical bodies of animals were originally created by Ahura
Mazda, many of their spirits were later overtaken by the sinfulness and
malevolence of Ahriman. These maleficent animals, called xrafstars,
corrupted Ahura Mazda’s benign creation and become agents of the Evil
Spirit. Their influence was directed not only against the benevolent creatures,
but also against the raw elements of creation itself: water, fire, earth, and
plant life. Evil animals functioned as parasitic forces of pollution, impurity,
and destruction from within creation itself.32
The Bundahishn (…) divides evil animals by whether they live in the
water, on earth, or in the air—of the water, the frog; of the earth, the
many-headed dragon; and of the air, the winged snake are the worst.33
The killing of evil animals was an important form of devotion among the
Magi. Not only was this done collectively on important dates in their ritual
calendar to honour the feminine angelic spirit of earth, Spandarmad, but it
was also practised individually as a way to atone for grave sins. Given that
the long lists of evil animals assigned to the night included most species of
snakes, reptiles, amphibians, and flying and crawling insects, we may rightly
wonder whether an echo of the idea of the demonic animal is to be found in
the convoluted recipes attributed to the medieval witches; especially as
Zoroastrian sources state that the bodies of dead evil animals may be used to
prepare remedies. This was possible because the malevolent spirit was cut off
from its animal host once the physical body was dead, leaving only the pure
physical remains, made of the benevolent elements of water, earth, wind and
fire.34
Another striking similarity between the Zoroastrian rosters of evil animals
and the iconography of the medieval witch is the cat, which in both cases was

viewed as an evil animal associated particularly with demons and sorcerers.
Considering that ancient Iranians were nomads, perhaps they would have
considered cats ambiguous, restive, and perfidious, quite unlike the loyal
dogs that watched over their cattle and tents.35
From the above, two central characteristics of the Zoroastrian cult become
obvious:
• First, its deeply entrenched dualism leaves no space for any shades of grey.
It was impossible to contact any spiritual being through prayer whose
nature wasn’t clearly delineated as either good or evil. The demarcation line
between good and evil even extended into the land of the fairies. A person’s
ritual actions, just as much as their everyday decisions, testified as to
whether they were ultimately on the side of the forces of good or evil.
• Second, the main corpus of the Zoroastrian cult was aimed at the cleansing
and purification of substance and matter. After all, an eternal divine battle
was being fought over immanence in matter itself, i.e. whether creation
would maintain its inborn purity and benevolence thanks to the
guardianship of watchful angelic beings, or lose it through the malice,
cunning, and destructiveness of evil spirits.36
A class of bewitching fairies has been created by Angra Alainyu to
seduce men from the right path and injure the living world. Nimble as
birds they go along flying in the shape of shooting stars between the
earth and the heavens. They come upon fire, water, trees, and other
creations from which they are to be driven away by the recital of
spells.37
The Constitution of Man
In our discussion of the main aspects of Mazdean demonology, we learned
that man had a crucial role to play in ending the onslaught of evil and helping
the forces of Ahura Mazda to overcome the eternal fiend. The struggle
between good and evil took place on all levels of creation, encompassing the
divine, demonic, angelic, and human worlds.
Thus, unsurprisingly, we find that every man possessed two demons bound

into his own nature: an evil demon and an beneficial angel. The Zoroastrian
texts call these beings ‘twins,’38 the ‘animal’ and ‘angel’ within man, or
simply the lower and the higher selves. While the higher self supports the
evolution of man towards light and righteousness, the animal within him is
constantly laying pitfalls in his way, hoping that he will stumble over desires,
false needs, and deceiving emotions behind which the ‘animal’ lies in wait.
Man was animal but yesterday. Today he is man, though not devoid of
animal traits. His destiny is to be angel, and tomorrow he shall be that
also. Everyone has in his or her power to be a saint. But the way to attain
sainthood and divinity is distant and beset with countless difficulties.
Every step in advance is a struggle. The animal in man is obdurate and
persistent, cunning and resourceful. To escape from his grip, to destroy
his power, to eliminate him, man has to fight a hundred battles. Man’s
inner life is a perpetual warfare between animal and human within his
breast. A violent struggle is going on in every human heart between the
higher impulses to renounce animal appetites, and the lower instincts to
satisfy them. Man is a divided self, divided mind, divided will, and feels
within him the conflict of two opposing natures. The one half of man’s
being is always at war with his other half. When the Good Spirit first
met the Evil Spirit, he said that he was opposed to him in his thoughts
and words and deeds and faith and conscience and soul and every thing.
The same complete polarity obtains between the higher self and the
lower self in man.39
It is here that we perhaps encounter the first example of what became the
philosophy of the ‘Holy Genius and Evil Demon’ as portrayed in the Divine
Pymander of the Corpus Hermeticum in the second or third century ad:
(…) for I the Mind [the logos or holy genius] come unto men that are
Holy and good, pure and merciful, and that live piously and religiously;
and my presence is a help unto them. (…) But to the foolish, and evil,
and wicked, and envious, and covetous, and murderous, and profane, I
am far off, giving place to the revenging Demon, which applying unto
him the sharpness of fire, tormenteth such a man sensible, and armeth
him the more to all wickedness, that he may obtain the greater

punishment. And such an one never ceaseth, having unfulfilled desires,
and unsatisfiable concupiscences, and always fighting in darkness; for
the Demon always afflicts and tormenteth him continually, and
increaseth the fire upon him more and more.40
I myself, the mind, am present to the blessed and good and pure and
merciful—to the reverent—and my presence becomes a help; (…) But
from these I remain distant—the thoughtless and evil and wicked and
envious and greedy and violent and irreverent—giving way to the
avenging demon who [wounds the evil person], assailing him sensibly
with the piercing fire and thus arming him the better for lawless deeds so
that greater vengeance may befall him. Such a person does not cease
longing after insatiable appetites, struggling in the darkness without
satisfaction. [This] tortures him and makes the fire grow upon him all
the more.41
Thus the notion that man is torn between the inner guidance of two
opposing spiritual beings can be traced from Zoroastrianism all the way to
the Hermetica. Moreover, evidence of this belief is visible in early Christian
scriptures such as The Shepherd of Hermas from the first or second century
AD:
7 And now, says he; understand first of all what belongs to faith. There

are two angels with man; one of righteousness, the other of iniquity. 8
And I said unto him: Sir, how shall I know that there are two such angels
with man? Hear says he, and understand. 9 The angel of righteousness, is
mild and modest, and gentle, and quiet. When therefore, he gets into thy
heart, immediately he talks with thee of righteousness, of modesty, of
chastity, of bountifulness, of forgiveness, of charity, and piety. 10 When
all these things come into thy heart, know then that the angel of
righteousness is with thee. Wherefore hearken to this angel and to his
works. 11 Learn also the works of the angle of iniquity. He is first of all
bitter, and angry, and foolish; and his works are pernicious, and
overthrow the servants of God. When therefore these things come into
thy heart; thou shalt know by his works, that this is the angel of

iniquity.42
Some thirteen centuries later, the same philosophy of man’s soul is
repeated in that most famous compendium of medieval Western magic,
Agrippa’s Three Books of Occult Philosophy (1531–1533):
As therefore there is given to every man a good spirit, so also there is
given to every man an evil Diabolical spirit, whereof each seeks an
union with our spirit, and endeavours to attract it to itself, and to be
mixed with it, as wine with water; the good indeed, through all good
works conformable to itself, change us into Angels, by uniting us, as it is
writ of John Baptist in Malachi: behold I send mine Angel before thy
face: of which transmutation, and union it is writ elsewhere; He which
adheres to God is made one spirit with him. An evil spirit also by evil
works, studies to make us conformable to itself, and to unite, as Christ
saith of Judas, Have not I chosen twelve, & one of you is a devil? And
this is that which Hermes saith, when a spirit hath influence upon the
soul of man, he scatters the seed of his own notion, whence such a soul
being sown with seeds, and full of fury, brings forth thence wonderful
things, and whatsoever are the offices of spirits: for when a good spirit
hath influence upon a Holy soul, it doth exalt it to the light of wisdom;
but an evil spirit being transfused into a wicked soul, doth stir it up to
theft, to manslaughter, to lusts, and whatsoever are the offices of evil
spirits.43
According to Mazdean sources, man is composed of five elements:
ELEMENT PURPOSE

AFTER
DESCRIPTION
DEATH
RETURNS
TO

Baodhagh Connection to matter
(body)

Earth

Man’s physical force and
nature

Uštana
(life)

Connection to wind and
complexion

Wind

Vital principle

Urvan

Connection to the mind

Fravashi

Conscious mind;

(soul)

and senses

characterizing
individuality,

Aghva
Connection to the Sun
(prototype)

Sun

Self, the seat of life

Fravashi

-

Supreme spiritual
principle

Connection to Ahura
Mazda

We do not know the level at which the Zoroastrians believed the fight
between the lower and higher selves of man occurred. Perhaps the struggle
took place at every level, or perhaps it occurred between specific elements of
his constitution, such as between his baodhagh, the animal nature of his
body, and his aghva, his higher self. Given that Zoroastrianism is known to
have influenced the early phases of Judaism, perhaps the latter interpretation
might find some support in the Jewish tradition of the good and evil urge.
Both the Talmud and the Zohar know this principle, one that often keeps man
trapped between good and evil, unable to fulfil his true destiny. According to
the Zohar, the good inclinations spring from the highest level of the soul, the
neshamah,44 whereas the evil urge attaches itself to the body of a baby at its
moment of birth.45
We learn from Zoroastrian scripture that it is first and foremost the urvan,
the soul of man, that requires protection from the afflictions of evil if it is not
to degenerate and decay:
And in that wind he saw his own religion and deeds as a profligate
woman, naked, decayed, gaping, bandy-legged, lean-hipped, and so
spotted so that spot was joined to spot, like the most hideous, noxious
creature, most filthy and most stinking. Then that wicked soul spoke
thus: ‘Who art thou, than whom I have never seen any creature of
Auharmazd and Akharman uglier, or filthier, or more stinking?’ To him
she spoke thus: ‘I am thy bad actions, O youth of evil thoughts, of evil
words, of evil deeds, of evil religion. It is on account of thy will and
actions that I am hideous and vile, iniquitous and diseased, rotten and
foul-smelling, unfortunate and distressed, as it appears to thee.’46
Luckily, man had a strong ally at his side in his fight against the evil within

and around him. According to Mazdean tradition, this is his fravashi, his
personal defender spirit.
The Fravashi
The fravashi, or guardian-spirit, is a totally distinct spiritual adjunct
which every individual and object of the good creation possesses; it is a
kind of primary idea, and is the spiritual counterpart of a deceased
person, that is invoked, or reverenced, in certain ceremonies. Its duty is
to protect the body which it represents.47
In the Zoroastrian worldview, the essential antidote to all demonic
affliction was the fravashi. As soon as anything was created, it was assigned
a ‘double or spirit form.’48 In the relationship between the fravashi and the
material body that it guards, we find another proof of Zoroastrianism’s
positive view of matter, for having a physical body was the prerequisite of
being assigned a personal spirit guardian. The fravashis were individual spirit
patrons for everything made of matter, and embodied ‘the simple essence of
all things, the celestial creatures corresponding with the terrestrial, of which
they were the immortal types.’49
For anybody familiar with Plato’s theory of forms, this might sound
suspiciously similar to his concept of ‘ideas.’ As a disciple of Socrates, Plato
recorded and expanded upon his teacher’s view that all material forms were
connected to the realm of the essential good or divine. According to one of
Plato’s most famous premises, a material form had the same relationship with
the divine idea from which it emerged as a shadow had with the object by
which it was cast. The shadow itself is ephemeral and has no substance;
rather the object that casts it has actual structure and solidity. This allegory of
Plato’s, which claimed that our physical reality was really nothing but the
distorted reflection of an original reality populated by divine ideas, initiated
one of the most significant paradigm shifts in the history of thought, as it
inverted the locus of ontological reality from the physical realm to the divine
realm.
Plato did not consider the material realm to be completely illusory,
however: a shadow exists somewhere between an illusion of, and a

representation of, the object which casts it. And just as a shadow can hint at
what casts it, so the material realm allows conclusions be drawn about the
shape and nature of the divine reality. The changeable material realm is
caught in a process of constantly ‘miming’ the good or divine forms from
which it emerges. And with this knowledge, man’s purpose could easily be
divined. Our species’ proper service to the Good was its cooperation in
implementing the ideal in the world of shadows; that is, in miming the Good.
The apparent affinity between Zoroastrianism and Platonism has long been
recognized, and it has even been suggested that Zoroaster was the chief
authority behind Plato. Whatever the truth, such musings certainly ensured
the lasting popularity of Zoroaster’s name among scholars, especially those
writing in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.50
Returning to the subject of the fravashis, however, there is no evidence that
they were viewed as the ‘real’ objects lurking behind the Platonic
shadowplay. Rather, both the material being and its spiritual double were
held to be real, but existed on different levels. Humans, animals, plants, and
crystals were mortal creatures who dwelt in the material realm, and the
fravashis were their immortal celestial counterparts. And while the fravashis
indeed created the matrices of life for their respective material beings, both
parties had an independent, individual existence: the latter ephemeral, the
former eternal. Thus every created being was viewed as having its own fixed
point or guiding principle in the shape of its individually assigned fravashi.
[The fravashis] are like the guardian-angels of all individual persons.
They are a duplicate of the soul, existing before birth and uniting
themselves with the soul after death. Their name seems to mean
‘confession’, ‘conscience,’ and it may be an equivalent of the daena, the
‘conscience’ or ‘religion’ which survives a man and is shaped after his
conduct during life.51
Interestingly, as far as the Zoroastrians were concerned, the idea of man
having both a Holy Genius and an Evil Demon attached to his soul was not
considered to be irreconcilable with the idea of his having only one immortal
holy daimon.
Man was constantly tormented by his evil urge and had to battle demonic
attacks from within and around him if he was to fulfil his purpose in creation

and follow his good urge with ‘good thoughts, good words, and good deeds.’
The dualistic struggle between good and evil was not something one could
ever hope to decisively resolve; rather, one’s essential purpose in creation
was to endure it and to tilt the balance ever further in the favour of the forces
of good. Each individual had his own celestial ally in his personal fravashi, a
safe place of powerful protection against evil, and a place of personal
guidance and counsel. Therefore, we might consider the fravashi an early
ancestor of Socrates’ personal daimonion. As an individually-assigned
‘unseen agent,’52 in the fravashi we encounter, for the first time, the idea of
an immortal and self-conscious higher being completely dedicated to guiding
and protecting its mortal counterpart through the struggles of everyday life:
The fravashis, however, are not restricted to the departed, though their
fravashis are most frequently invoked. Every being, whether living or
dead, has its Fravashi, its unseen agent, which is joined to the body at
the time of birth, and leaves it again at the time of death. The fravashis
remind us of the Greek Daimones and the Roman Genii. The fravashis
belong to the spiritual, the body to the material creation. Not only men,
but the gods also, Ormazd, the sacred word, the sky, the water, the
plants, all have their fravashis. We may call the Fravashi the genius of
anything.53
The glory and praise that the influence and powers of the fravashi receive
in Mazdean ritual practice is well illustrated in the following quote from the
Fravardin Yasht (probably 559 – 330 BCE):
Ahura Mazda spoke to Spitama Zarathushtra: To thee alone I shall tell
the power and strength, glory, usefulness, and happiness of the Holy
guardian angels, the strong and victorious, O righteous Spitama
Zarathushtra! how they come to help me. By means of their splendour
and glory I uphold the sky which is shining so beautifully and which
touches and surrounds this earth; it resembles a bird which is ordered by
God to stand still there; it is high as a tree, wide-stretched, iron-bodied,
having its own light in the three worlds. Ahura Mazda, together with
Mithra, Rashnu, and Spenta Armaiti, puts on a garment decked with
stars and made by God in such a way that nobody can see the ends of its

parts. By means of the splendour and glory of the fravashis I uphold the
high strong Anahita (the celestial water) with bridges, the salutary who
drives away the demons, who has the true faith and is to be worshipped
in the world. If the strong guardian-angels of the righteous should not
give me assistance then cattle and men, the two last of the hundred
classes of beings, would no longer exist for me; then would commence
the devil’s power, the devil’s origin, the whole living creation would
belong to the devil. By means of their splendour and glory the ingenuous
man Zarathushtra who spoke such good words, who was the source of
wisdom, who was born before Gotama, had such intercourse with God.
By means of their splendour and glory, the sun goes on his path; by
means of their splendour and glory the moon goes on her path; by means
of their splendour and glory the stars go on their path.54
At the soul’s death, it returns to the fravashi and unites with it.55 But even
though fravashis were immortal, they were not unchanging. Their
relationship with the material creature over whom they watched could be
affected by its thoughts, words, and deeds. Possibly this was a later
development of Zoroastrian thought; yet upholding the relationship with your
fravashi was important not only because of how this could support you in the
struggle between your good and evil urges, but also because this increased
the amount of support that your fravashi could give you in the first place.
According to Zoroastrian teachings, the fravashi’s support could not be taken
for granted:
Similarly, the fravashis or Guardian Spirits are the most helpful genii,
but on the condition that man propitiates them with sacrifices. When
satisfied they are of indescribable help but once offended they are hard
to deal with. They are to be approached with religious awe. They are to
be feared rather than loved. This fear of the celestial beings may
engender obedience in man, but not devotion. And devotion is the higher
of the two virtues.56
Ritual Practice

When we look at the spiritual practices used by the Zoroastrians to engage
with their guardian spirits, we discover something that will immediately
interest Western practitioners of ritual magic. For Zoroastrians, the
invocation of the fravashi was a crucial part of their spiritual life and
practice.57 Such an invocation was not at all an occult or secret practice, and
it didn’t require an extended period of purification or preparation.
As mentioned earlier, the ritual setup for a Zoroastrian is restricted to its
most basic components. There is a sacred fire, always kept burning in each
temple and devotee’s house, which is ideally fed with sandalwood. There is
incense to be sprinkled on its flames. There may be an offering of bread and
milk. And there is the barsom, a bundle of twigs held in the hands as prayers
are recited.58 And that was it: the Zoroastrians repeatedly stated in their
sacred books that these were the only accoutrements required to invoke one’s
holy daimon.
Just one of the many possible examples of prayers for invoking one’s
fravashi can be found in the Vendīdād:
Invoke, O Zarathushtra! my Fravashi, who is Ahura Mazda, the greatest,
the best, the fairest of all beings, the most solid, the most intelligent, the
best formed, the highest in holiness, and whose soul is the Holy Word!
Invoke, Zarathushtra! this creation of mine, which is Ahura Mazda.
Zarathushtra imitated my words from me, and said: I invoke the Holy
creation of Ahura Mazda.59
From a Western ritual perspective, it makes good sense that we never
encounter evocations but only invocations of the fravashis or other gods in
Zoroastrian literature. This was a religion that tried to overcome the tribal
cults of its nomadic origins by focusing mainly on prayer and devotion in its
liturgical practice. And as the battle between good and evil raged at every
level of creation—from the most divine to the most mundane—the powers of
the fravashi were needed first and foremost where they mattered most: within
each individual human being. Only if the devotee properly adored his
fravashi and kept it close in thought, word, and deed could he hope to
achieve an increasing assimilation between his being and his fravashi’s
powers. The forces of the guardian spirit had to be drawn repeatedly into his
being and soul to benefit fully from their divine power.

But it was not only one’s own fravashi that could be invoked. Invocations
of the fravashis of other people are also attested, especially those of powerful
and righteous ancestors.60
Irrespective of the target of such an invocation—whether it was one’s own
fravashi, the fravashi of some righteous person, or the powers of the stars and
gods—the invocation had to drip with profound reverence. And the praise
and adoration was not limited to the target of the invocation: it was extended
to everything involved in the ritual, both material and spiritual:
The following are the objects that come in for a share of invocation in
the ritual: Haoma, Aeshma or the wood for the fire altar, Barsom or the
sacred twigs, zaothra or libations, one’s own soul and Fravashi, the
Gathas, the chapters of the Yasna Haptanghaiti, meters, lines, words of
the chapters of the Haptanghaiti, intellect, conscience, knowledge, and
even sleep. Thus the creator and his creature, angel and man, ceremonial
implements and scriptural texts are all alike made the objects of
adoration and praise.61
The power that emanated from the prayers of the devotee dissolved the
boundaries between the ritual’s objective and subjective features. The ritual
paraphernalia, one’s soul, one’s fravashi, one’s consciousness, intellect,
knowledge, and even sleep—they all merged and became one in prayer and
reverence. Recognizable in this early Zoroastrian practice is a description of a
state of deep devotional ecstasy.62
The importance of devotional ecstasy or trance is supported by the final
characteristic of Zoroastrian ritual practice that we shall examine: haoma.
Besides this there was, despite Zoroaster’s ban upon it, the sacrifice of
haoma (= Skr. soma), an intoxicating plant of which the stems were
crushed in a mortar and the juice strained off; this was presented before
the fire and drunk by the officiating priest and his acolytes.63
There was much academic dispute regarding the botanical nature of haoma
until, in the nineteenth century, it was finally identified convincingly as a
species of the genus Ephedra. Drunk as an extract, the plant has a stimulant
effect. The twigs held in prayer were also taken from the haoma plant. The

name haoma, however, described not only the plant itself but also its divinity,
that is, its fravashi.
We can now see a clearer picture emerge: We rediscovered an ancient
Zoroastrian spiritual practice to create union with one’s fravashi; the related
instructions convey a unique synthesis of a tradition of liturgical invocations,
combined with shamanistic trance techniques.
Let us visualize the scene. The Mazdean priest stands in the half-light of
the temple, the sacred haoma twigs in his folded hands, reciting long prayers
learned by heart as he stares, motionless, into the flames of the sacred fire.
Clouds of incense rise from the flames, and, with his gaze deeply fixed on the
blaze and the melody of the prayers flowing from his lips, the effect of the
potion slowly takes effect.
It is revealing what Christian Rätsch, one of the leading botanists
specializing in hallucinogens, had to say about the ancient spiritual goal of
such practices (though the following quote describes that of inhaled
psychoactive incense):
It was in the smoke or odour of the incense that one realized the actions
of gods, demons, angels, spirits, souls of the plants and others. They
manifested within man once they were inhaled. This is why the smoke of
certain sacred plants was breathed in or inhaled in order to give space in
one’s own body to the related spiritual beings.64
We can assume a similar purpose behind drinking the haoma potion,
staring into flames for extended periods, and reciting the related prayers: to
create a spirit vessel within one’s own body for the powers one was
attempting to invoke. Just as the ancient Egyptians and Greeks created spirit
dwellings within statues, so it seems did the Zoroastrians within their own
bodies, by invoking the powers of their fravashis, their personal spirit
guardians.
1 Copenhaver: 77.
2 Moore: 181 / Scheftelowitz, Vorwort.
3 Moore: 181.
4 Kingsley: 245.

5 Boyce, quoted after Kingsley: 245.
6 Kingsley: 245.
7 Blois: 3. The latter term survives in modern Persian as dew, Western Persian div, ‘demon.’
8 ‘Holy Spirit,’ ref. Dhalla, 1914: 48.
9 Note: this is why Zoroastrianism is also called Mazdaism, according to the principle divine
being’s name being Ahura Mazda.
10 i.e. ‘Evil Spirit,’ ref. Dhalla, 1914: 48.
11 Panati: 252, 358.
12 Dhalla, 1938: Chapter X.
13 Blois: 4.
14 Moazami: 301.
15 Russel: 73.
16 Dhalla, 1914: 49.
17 Bundahishn XXVII.51.
18 Dhalla, 1914: 49.
19 Skinner, Rankine: 73.
20 McLean: 15.
21 McLean: 13.
22 McLean: 14.
23 McLean: 13.
24 McLean: 13.
25 Kiesewetter: 123.
26 Kiesewetter: 123.
27 Beck: 2002.
28 Moazami: 316.
29 ref. Bruce Lincoln during a lecture at Duke University in 2010.
30 Moazami: 317.
31 Moazami: 301.
32 Moazami: 301, 302.
33 Moazami: 302.
34 Moazami: 308.
35 Moazami: 314.
36 Russell: 76 / Kiesewetter: 120,134.
37 Dhalla, 1914: 172.
38 Blois: 4 / Carnoy: 864.
39 Dhalla, 1938: Chapter X
40 Westcott: 27–28

41 The Hermetica, Copenhaver 1992: 5.
42 Shepherd of Hermas, Command Vi: 7–11: 218–219.
43 Agrippa, Book 3, Chapter XX: 521– 522.
44 Prophet: 167.
45 Müller: 152.
46 The Book of Arda Viraf (226 – 640 AD), chapter XVII, quoted after Müller: 205.
47 West: 606.
48 Horne: 2.
49 Lenormant: 199.
50 Hanegraaff: 1183.
51 Carnoy: 865.
52 Müller: 205.
53 Müller: 205.
54 Müller: 205–206.
55 Carnoy: 868.
56 Dhalla, 1914: 79.
57 Lenormant: 199.
58 Carnoy: 868.
59 Horne: 144.
60 Horne: 148 / Müller: 205.
61 Dhalla: 80.
62 We will return to this essential aspect of Zoroastrian practice when we come to describe how
to create the communion with our own holy daimon, particularly in the section devoted to
joy.
63 Carnoy: 868.
64 Rätsch: 27.

Among the Ancient Greeks
Plato’s Elements of the Soul
The unexamined life is not worth living.1
Plato compares the human soul to a charioteer with two winged horses. The
charioteer can be identified with the rational mind or reason; the noble horse
with the thumos, a concept which we will explore shortly; and the unruly
horse with our biological appetites, eros. When looking at the constitution of
the human soul according to the ancient Greeks, this is as straightforward as
we can make it.
Concerning the immortality of the soul this is enough; but about its form
we must speak in the following manner. To tell what it really is would
be a matter for utterly superhuman and long discourse, but it is within
human power to describe it briefly in a figure; let us therefore speak in
that way. We will liken the soul to the composite nature of a pair of
winged horses and a charioteer. Now the horses and charioteers of the
gods are all good and of good descent, but those of other races are
mixed; and first the charioteer of the human soul drives a pair, and
secondly one of the horses is noble and of noble breed, but the other
quite the opposite in breed and character. Therefore in our case the
driving is necessarily difficult and troublesome.2

Let us now explore a slightly more detailed explanation of Plato’s allegory,
by John Michael Greer in The Blood of the Earth:
One horse represents what we may as well call the biological self,
guided by what Romantics called the instincts and Platonists called the
appetites. The other horse, though, represents what the ancient Greeks
called thumos, the spirited or irascible part of the self, the part that
responds non-rationally to praise or blame from others, and more
generally is guided by the pressures and influences of the community to
which the individual belongs. To use a phrase Plato didn’t, where the
first horse is the biological self, the second horse can be described as the
social self.3
To better understand the interplay between these two non-rational aspects
of ourselves, I strongly recommend reading the full chapter in Greer’s book.
As simple as it might seem at first glance, the thumos is a critical part of the
ancient Greek understanding of our soul. The word can best be translated in
English as ‘spiritedness’ or ‘courage.’ Etymologically the word has an
association with the breath or the blood, and it is also used to express the
human desire for social recognition. Thus the nobler of the two dominating

non-rational driving forces in the human soul is enmeshed with the social
environment in which a person was raised.
As far as I know, there is no analogy to this idea in either Christianity,
Judaism, or Kabbalah. What we find here is a term that describes the nonrational and nonverbal patterns in our behaviour which are shaped and
emotionally charged by the social communities into which we are born. It is
through the thumos that the collective being of a tribe or society leaves a
significant imprint on the individual. In other words, it is in the thumos that
our microcosm reflects our social macrocosm.
This explains why, according to Plato, the thumos represents the noble
horse. Our capacity for nobility, honour, glory, virtue, and even our basic
values are all the results of our social norms and interactions, condensed and
imprinted into the thumos of our soul. Following its impulses, even if the
results were angry, violent, and untamed, was the only way to achieve social
status. It was also the power that drove warriors into battle.4
The ancient Greek thumos, however, was not a mere social construct: it
was a real life force, guarded over and replenished by the gods themselves. In
fact, when the thumos left the body of a person it meant their immediate
death:
After Dioreus had been fatally hit ‘he fell backwards in the dust … while
he blew forth his thumos.’ (…) Ajax hit Sarpedon’s comrade-inarms
Epikles, who ‘like an acrobat fell down from the high wall, and the
thumos left his bones. (…) Diomedes slew the sons of Phaenops and
‘took out the thumos from both.’5
A person dominated by their thumos was destined to become a warrior of
high social status in life. On the other hand, the talents of a person dominated
by the other horse, the unruly one, disposed him more to becoming
something like a successful merchant. It is worth noting that the word eros
has become overgrown with romantic associations in the last two thousand
years. Its archaic origin, however, referred to the much more basic and raw
desire for sustenance and material life. Here is how Plato describes this lower
part of the soul in his Timaeus:
The part of the soul which desires meats and drinks and the other things

of which it has need by reason of the bodily nature, they placed between
the midriff and the boundary of the navel, contriving in all this region a
sort of manger for the food of the body; and there they bound it down
like a wild animal which was chained up with man, and must be
nourished if man was to exist.6
In many aspects the eros, or epithumetikon as opposed to the thumetikon,
can be imagined as the complete opposite of the thumos. Whereas the thumos
rules over the positive (social) emotions, the eros yearns to set free the
(biological) desires and urges. Whereas the thumos represents the vitalizing
force of spiritedness, the eros reveals our basic cravings—our appetites, as
the Greeks would say—for food, sex, and shelter. The thumos was viewed as
masculine in nature, whereas the eros was feminine. We might map thumos
and eros onto Maslow’s hierarchy of human needs by viewing thumos as the
higher, social needs, and eros as the source and container of the physiological
‘life energy’—a term in which sense the word eros has often been used in
Greek philosophy.
As we can see, both horses had a place and function in the human soul, and
when a healthy mind holds the reins, it can drive the ‘chariot’ forwards. The
logos, therefore—the charioteer in the analogy—was of utmost importance.
This was where intellect had its throne, and from which reason and logic
emerged. Whereas the horses pulled in the directions of social status and
biological needs, the logos desired nothing but learning and wisdom. Only by
means of this mental function was the soul able to balance the impulses and
urges of the two winged horses. According to Plato, people dominated by the
logos or logistikon made great philosophers or politicians.
Nous—The Ancient Higher Self
At this point we encounter a philosophical problem that particularly
interested the ancient Greeks. The faculties of the soul—eros, thumos, and
logos— must necessarily be extremely biased. Eros is driven by the sensual
impressions of the world and our bodily appetites, while thumos is driven by
social norms and expectations. Logos, the pure capacity for mental reflection,
can generate nothing by itself: it can only process the data provided by the

eros and thumos, and this data is filtered by them before the logos receives it.
What so worried the Greeks was that, while our physical senses do collect
raw data about the reality that surrounds us, the tripartite soul cannot process
this data without significantly altering or biasing it. What we truly touch,
hear, smell, and see is not what we perceive and process in our mind. For this
raw information to reach our mind, it first has to be processed by the inner
organs of our soul. Thus we are caught in a world where the faculties of our
soul distort perception according to their nature, depriving us of the ability to
perceive nature as it truly is.
Here is another way to understand this problem. Think of your mind as a
traveller in a strange land, who does not speak the native language.
Thankfully this traveller always has two translators at his side, though neither
is reliable. One of them has a tendency to focus unnecessarily on physical
appetites and desires, while the other is obsessed with social status and is
constantly on the lookout for chances to prove his courage and nobility. As
the traveller has no means to communicate directly with the people around
him, his interactions are always distorted by the personal preferences of his
two translators. By the end of his sojourn, the chances are high that our
traveller has learned more about his two translators than the country through
which he was travelling. Such is the situation of the charioteer (the logos)
when it comes to objectively perceiving and making sense of the world. It is
dependent on two functions that don’t provide it with accurate data. To make
things even worse, later philosophers showed that there is no way to correct
the data once it has been filtered through thomos and eros. So how can we
know what really happens beyond the reach of our senses? Well, luckily there
is a fourth function of the soul, one we haven’t yet examined. It is called the
nous, the faculty of the mind we can perhaps understand as being similar to
intuition.
It is the function of nous that allows us to understand nature in an
undistorted way and to achieve true insights about reality. While physical
reality is constantly changing, and while our perceptions will always be
biased due to their being filtered through eros and thumos, the nous ever
remains pure and untouched by the tides of matter. Thus nous not only allows
us to piece together the information received through our senses in an
undistorted way, but it also provides us with a higher form of insight and
knowledge. Nous can be translated both as understanding and intuition.

Plato uses two metaphors to describe the way the nous functions. In his
metaphor of the sun, he compares it to the sunlight that helps our eyes see.
And in his Socratic dialogue Meno, he explains nous as those ideas
embroidered into a man’s soul which he might recall from previous lives.
Either way, Plato makes it clear that this light which helps us see, or these
ideas which help us remember, come from the immortal part of our soul; all
other parts of it vanish at our death. Both metaphors illustrate how the nous
surpasses both the material and human realms. It allows its human carriers to
ascend beyond the limitations of illusory reality and to glimpse behind the
veils of matter. Nous was often understood as the divine or spiritual
assistance that humans receive to help them comprehend reality. It is the
living spiritual force that allows us to draw true reasoning from flawed
perceptions. Because of this, it was also said that nous as a divine principle is
something that could never mix with any other substance, but instead
effortlessly penetrated all created things. Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, born
circa 500 BCE, had the following to say about the nous:
All other things partake in a portion of everything, while nous is infinite
and self-ruled, and is mixed with nothing, but is alone, itself by itself.
For if it were not by itself, but were mixed with anything else, it would
partake in all things if it were mixed with any; for in everything there is
a portion of everything, as has been said by me in what goes before, and
the things mixed with it would hinder it, so that it would have power
over nothing in the same way that it has now being alone by itself. For it
is the thinnest of all things and the purest, and it has all knowledge about
everything and the greatest strength; and nous has power over all things,
both greater and smaller, that have soul.7
According to Anaxagoras it was the nous itself that gave order and
intelligence to creation. And as it wasn’t bound to any material shell, it
existed on many levels. Humans were understood to partake in the benefits of
nous; yet at the same time the celestial spheres had their own nous or
understanding.

The spiritual significance of this concept becomes yet more obvious when
we consider the etymological connections between the words nous (mind),
noesis (understanding, from noein, to perceive), and gnosis (divine
knowledge). Let’s pause and consider what we have found: an ancient idea of
an all-permeating force too subtle to be contained or confined by any type of
substance. Nevertheless, it is in the nature of this force to attach itself to
individual objects and entire celestial realms alike, and to grant them the
power of true insight and the ability to create meaning. The name of this
force is sometimes translated as ‘intellect’ and sometimes as ‘understanding,’
but most commonly simply as ‘mind.’ And it exists separate from the mental
and spiritual functions of the being to which it attaches itself: it is something
entirely different from logos, eros, or thumos.

Over two thousand years later, this same concept is still an integral part of
Western ritual magic. It is still called ‘intelligence,’ and we find many occult
writers and practitioners, among them Agrippa of Nettesheim, explaining its
function in great detail:
It is affirmed by Magicians, that there are certain tables of numbers
distributed to the seven planets, which they call the sacred tables of the
planets, endowed with many, and very great vertues of the Heavens, in
as much as they represent that divine order of Celestiall numbers,
impressed upon Celestials by the Ideas of the divine mind, by means of
the soul of the world, and the sweet harmony of those Celestiall rayes,
signifying according to the proportion of effigies, supercelestiall
Intelligencies, which can no other way be expressed, than by the marks
of numbers, and Characters. For materiall numbers, and figures can do
nothing in the mysteries of hid things, but representatively by formall
numbers, and figures, as they are governed, and informed by
intelligencies, and divine numerations, which unite the extreams of the
matter, and spirit to the will of the elevated soul, receiving through great
affection, by the Celestiall power of the operator, a power from God,
applyed through the soul of the universe, and observations of Celestiall
constellations, to a matter fit for a form, the mediums being disposed by
the skill, and industry of Magicians (…).8
The word ‘Intelligencies’ describes the same concept as the Greek nous:
this is a strand of occult philosophy that has survived for nearly two thousand
years. The ‘celestial intellect’ of the planetary squares is the living, divine
mind (nous) of the planet itself. This explains why its nous cannot be
expressed other than through numbers and figures: they are the most abstract
ways for us to think about things, and as distinct from physical substance as it
is possible for us to get. Just as the Greeks considered the function of the
nous in the human soul to be to unite the ephemeral nature of matter with the
eternal spirit behind it, Agrippa states that the celestial intelligence of each
planet can unite the extremes of matter and spirit.
Considering the above, it is of no surprise to find a strong tendency in
Plato’s writing to deify the spiritual nature of nous.9 According to Plato, nous
was implanted in man as something divine, as ‘a daimon in man.’10 By

following Plato’s principle of giving each thing the food most natural to it,11
a man could increasingly align the state of his own soul with the nature of his
daimon. All that was needed was to lead his life according to the principles of
divine understanding:
But he who has been earnest in the love of knowledge and of true
wisdom, and has exercised his intellect [i.e. his nous] more than any
other part of him, must have thoughts immortal and divine, if he attains
truth, and in so far as human nature is capable of sharing in immortality,
he must altogether be immortal; and since he is ever cherishing the
divine power, and has the divinity within him in perfect order, he will be
perfectly happy.12
What we discover here is a process of co-creation between the external
forces of the nous and the internal forces of the human logos. A
harmonization and approximation between these two is achieved only
through their mutual approach. Just as the daimon of the nous directs us
‘upward from earth to kinship with heaven,’13 so must our own logos tame
the horses of thumos and eros to ascend this ladder by actively pursuing
knowledge and true wisdom.
The spiritual relationship between the daimon of the nous and the human
logos is an interdependent one: even though they are separated by nature, the
true fulfilment of their nature can be achieved only through each other.
Someone once said to me: ‘It is in the nature of our holy daimon to, from
the day of our birth, constantly pray down to us. We can meet it halfway,
though, by starting to pray upwards to it.’ We can still hear the echo of
Plato’s thoughts in this analogy, Plato who described humans as ‘plants of
heaven on earth.’14 The intricate connection of the human soul with the
celestial sphere is further strengthened by Plato’s assertion that each soul has
its own native star from which it has come and to which it will return after
death.15
And having made it [the soul mixture], he [the Demiurge] divided the
whole mixture into souls equal in number to the stars, and assigned each
soul to a star; and having there placed them as in a chariot, he showed
them the nature of the universe, and declared to them the laws of destiny

(…). He who lived well during his appointed time was to return and
dwell in his native star, and there he would have a blessed and congenial
existence.16
Thus the daimon of the nous can be understood as a mediator between the
earthly realm and the celestial sphere from which we stem and to which we
will ultimately return. This view was, of course, echoed by Crowley in his
famous aphorism, ‘Every man and woman is a star.’ We could even go so far
as to view the daimon of the nous as a living, spiritual chain that connects
man to his eternal higher self. The ancient Greeks viewed such a mediating
function as being the essential nature of their daimones.17
The Early Greek Idea of the Daimon
The original technical meaning and the etymological origin of the Greek
δαίμων (daimon) is lost in the darkness of ancient history. Our understanding
of the word, ‘a lowly spiritual being of a preponderantly dangerous and evil
character’18 is strongly influenced by the works of Plato and Xenocrates,
which were composed between 396 – 313 BCE. The meaning of the word
daimon before then, however, was much more ambiguous. To get a better
understanding of its meaning before the time of Plato we must scrape away
three distinct layers of ideological sediment that have accreted to the word
daimon over the last two and a half thousand years. According to Walter
Burkert19 and many other scholars, the early use of the word did not specify
any specific category of spiritual beings, nor was any relationship with any
god implied. Nor did it imply anything about the daimon’s moral character.
The early use of the term daimon is best illustrated with a few examples taken
from ancient Greek literature:
In the Iliad, the gods assembled on Mount Olympus can be called
daimones, and Aphrodite leads the way ahead of Helen as daimon. A
hero may rush headlong ‘like daimon and still be called god-like,
isotheos. Conversely, the demons that fly from Pandora’s jar are
personified ‘illnesses’, nousoi, but are not called daimones; the deathbringing spirits of destruction, keres, are called theoi, as are the Erinyes

in Aeschylus. Possession, too, is the work of a god.20
Originally, then, the word daimon did not describe a particular category of
spiritual beings, but rather a peculiar mode of activity.21 Being under the
influence of a daimon meant being in a certain state of being. Just as we
distinguish the states of trance and gnosis from the state of the normal waking
mind, so the ancient Greeks used the word daimon to indicate a specific state
of being that was different from normal everyday consciousness. This state of
being was not confined to human experience, for almost anything could be
affected by it: humans, heroes, and even the gods.
Even if all statements about it [the daimon] may be very difficult, the
definition that helps to approach the topic is one which understands it as
an immense driving force, neither good nor evil, and which increases the
level of experience through a dangerous tension.22
Unfortunately, unlike Plato’s triad of thumos, eros and logos, the ancient
Greeks never seem to describe the ‘immense driving force’ of the daimon in
any abstract or generalized fashion. The word daimon seems to have been so
familiar to them, and its various nuances so well known, that its intended
meaning always seems to have been understandable by context alone, without
ever requiring further explanation. What we do know is that the daimon
always represented some sort of occult force, some nameless power that
overcame people like a dark wave and withdrew them from the bright lights
of social encounters. Under the influence of the daimon, the causes of a
person’s actions became arcane and veiled to the human realm. Something
took hold of them and started to work through them. It was the power of the
daimon that could turn any hitherto self-determined being into a willing agent
of some occult force.23
For daimon (…) is more reproach than praise, and therefore certainly
does not mean divine; it is used when the speaker does not understand
what the addressee is doing and why he is doing it. Daimon is occult
power, a force that drives man forward where no agent can be named.
The individual feels as it were that the tide is with him, he acts with the
daimon, syn daimoni, or else when everything turns against him, he

stands against the daimon, pros daimona (…).24
With such an interpretation of the term, the importance of being on good
terms with one’s daimon becomes obvious. It was an occult, invisible force
which could be perceived only indirectly through its actions and effects. It
was the driving power behind the tides of fate and thus behind the fortune of
a person’s life.
Now we can understand why the average man experienced his daimon not
only as deeply uncanny but mostly as something to be feared. It was not
because it was attached to any specific type of spiritual being or moral
category, but simply because it was completely unknown and beyond human
control. The daimon appeared out of darkness, took hold of the beings it used
as its agents for a period of time, then disappeared again.
A man could not control whether he was the subject of a good or an evil
daimon, which made for fortune or misfortune. This is how the terms ‘good’
and ‘evil’ daimon, the agathodaimon and kakodaimon, need to be
understood. Originally they did not refer to different categories of spiritual
beings, but rather the effects, for better or worse, that the occult tides of the
daimon would have on one’s personal life.
The daimon defined the quality of one’s fate.25 It was only at a later point
in the evolution of Greek philosophy that this view of the daimon developed
into discrete categories of spiritual beings who could take control of our lives.
Whether he is happy or unhappy is not something which lies in man’s
control; the happy man is the one who has a good daimon, eudaimon, in
contrast to the unhappy man, the kakodaimon, dysdaimon. (…) A
general belief in spirits is not expressed by the term daimon until the
fifth century.26
The Socratic Daimonion
Serve the gods and you will experience how they are looking after you
and that they are sending you mentors.27
With Socrates and Plato, the idea of a personal daimon becomes part of the

historical record, though most likely the notion had already been around for
quite some time.28 While Socrates’ confident claim of a personal daimonion
that advised him throughout his life ultimately led to his death sentence, he
refused to give details about this being or inner voice during his apologia at
court. Indeed, his daimonion had advised him not to defend himself; thus he
appeared unprepared during his trial and even rejected an apologia offered to
him by the speaker Lysias.29
The most interesting aspect of Socrates’ daimonion, which has been widely
researched, is that it would never encourage him towards any action, but only
warn and restrain him. Or as Plato put it:
To confine the daimonion coerces me, to create it refuses me.30
What exactly do we know about Socrates’ understanding of his personal
daimonion—a concept that despite the dreadful sentence it brought upon
Socrates became so widespread and well known in later centuries? First, it
must be noted that Socrates always used a particular Greek word to denote
this supporting inner agency: he called it his daimonion, never his daimon.
The difference lies in the gender of the noun. Socrates chose a neuter gender,
indicating that he viewed it as a daimonic something or even a divine sign,
and not necessarily a conscious entity in itself.31 We can only assume that
this specific verbal expression was grounded in his inner experience. The
charge that he faced in his trial was of introducing new gods and not devoting
himself to the old ones. In light of this, his choice of a neuter noun to
describe his enigmatic inner voice becomes more understandable.
Furthermore, Socrates clarifies that his inner voice wasn’t something he
got access to through conscious practice, spiritual devotion, or any types of
religious ritual and had been with him since childhood.32 In this sense in
particular, Socrates’ daimonion exemplifies the function of an inner guardian.
His inner voice actively watched over the choices he made in life,
irrespective of their seeming significance or insignificance. Its only mode of
operation was to ensure that Socrates did not stray from the path assigned
him by the gods. The daimonion was the inner guardian that made sure
Socrates fulfilled the pattern of his fate—and a significant destiny it was, for
he inspired the entire Western philosophical tradition.

The ancient notion of the term daimon as an occult force responsible for
making a man’s life happy or miserable is perhaps reflected in the consistent
quality Socrates ascribed to his inner voice. Both the ancient daimon and
Socrates’ neutral inner daimonion are occult forces intrinsically connected to
one’s quality of life. But whereas the daimon took hold of people in
mysterious ways and made them act under its influence without seeming
reason, the daimonion proactively and consciously warned Socrates not to
stray from his assigned path. The reason for the difference lies in the
conscious bond that Socrates had made with his inner guardian. Whereas the
average man experienced his daimon only as a force outside of his control—
as a blow of fate or a run of good luck—Socrates experienced his daimonion
as an intimate inner relationship that he valued so much he didn’t hesitate to
call it divine.33
Even you, Euthydem, will realize that my faith in the daimonion and
divine mentorship is true, if you’ll honour and serve the gods and realize
them in their deeds instead of waiting to perceive them incarnated face
to face.34
As this quote demonstrates, Socrates believed that the sort of relationship
he had with his daimonion was accessible to anyone. Even though he had
been granted this gift in childhood, he offers clear guidance on how to
develop this inner contact: by understanding the world and all experiences
within it as direct expressions of the gods, by recognizing the divine spirits
according to their deeds and creations, and by not waiting to be granted a
direct vision of them. Thus next to dreams and oracles35 any experience in
life can become an encounter with the divine. Hidden in the book of nature is
the voice of our daimonion. Interestingly, there is a modern parallel to this
explanation of attaining communion with one’s daimonion that we should
highlight here. In the magical tradition of the Golden Dawn, the initiate needs
to take several oaths when progressing through liminal grades such as
Adeptus Minor and Adeptus Major. The final oath to be taken, when the
adept is aspiring to journey from Chesed (7 = 4) to Binah (8 = 2) and to cross
the Abyss, is the Oath of the Master of the Temple, and it concludes with the
following statement:

I swear to interpret every phenomenon as a particular dealing of God
with my soul.36
This is strikingly similar to Socrates’ guidance on how to achieve
communion with one’s daimonion or divine mentor: to comprehend the gods
in the deeds they perform in the world that surrounds us rather than waiting
until they reveal themselves. Some twenty-five centuries after Socrates drank
the hemlock, the same voice still calls to the spiritual seeker, one that the
ancient Kabbalists came to express simply as ‘Kether is in Malkuth and
Malkuth is in Kether, but after another manner.’
The Deification of Man
Having explored the ancient origin of the Greek word daimon and Socrates’
particular take on the daimonion, we return to Plato, with whose analogy of
the soul we began this chapter. It is in Plato’s writings, and in his
unparalleled influence on both Western and Arabic thought, that we discover
the foundation of the concept of the holy daimon as it evolved in later
centuries.
Since Plato and through him, religion has been essentially different from
what it had been before. For the Greeks as we know them since Homer,
religion had always meant acceptance of reality, in a naive and yet adult
way, acceptance of a reality that included corporeality, transitoriness,
and destruction, in heroic defiance or in tragic insight. Through Plato
reality is made unreal in favour of an incorporeal, unchangeable other
world which is to be regarded as primary. The ego is concentrated in an
immortal soul which is alien to the body and captive in it. ‘Flight from
the world’ is a watchword which actually occurs in Plato.37
With Plato, and for the first time in Greek philosophy, truth and
ontological reality shifted outside of corporeal reality. Whereas gods had
previously mingled with humans and changed their forms to take animal,
plant, stone, and marine forms, now this direct way of experiencing the
divine through the manifest world began to be replaced by a more abstract

conception of divinity. Now true being and ontological reality were to be
found only behind the veils and analogies of corporeal nature.
Plato derived many of his original thoughts from mathematics.38
Fascinated by the fact that humans couldn’t experience mathematical truths
directly through their physical senses but instead had to leverage their
rational minds to pierce through the effects caused by hidden laws, Plato
proceeded to apply the principles of mathematics to philosophy. The result
was a revolutionary view about where truth was to be found. Mathematicians
and seekers of wisdom alike had to use the force of their logos to pierce
through the phenomena of the material world and discover the eternal ideas
and living substance hidden behind them. Other philosophers, such as
Parmenides, had already assumed a deeper, timeless ontological reality
behind the veil of nature; however, it was Plato who broadened and
diversified this idea and postulated that there was not one absolute source of
being beyond matter, but as many sources as there were beings.39 Just as each
human being had unique facial features, so there was an eternal idea assigned
to them in which they alone participated.40 Thus amongst the Ancient Greeks
it was Plato who introduced the philosophical idea of deifying all beings
through a direct personal bond with divine reality.
At the same time he made the human soul immortal—or at least the part of
it connected to the eternal idea from which it had emerged. Plato states that in
his day it was a common belief that the soul, when it left its body at the
moment of death, was grasped by the wind and diffused in all directions into
the sky.41 Even today traces of this ancient belief persist in the myth, still
alive in some parts of Europe, that when a man dies by hanging a storm rises
and takes his soul away—probably in the form of the storm ghosts of the
Wild Hunt.42
Plato took essential elements of the traditions of the mystery schools, as
well as earlier ones such as the Orphic tradition, and combined them with his
own metaphysical concept of a realm of pure and eternal ideas beyond
physical matter.43 In his cosmology, the fixed stars were the closest physical
representation of the realm of the eternal ideas, as they were considered
unchangeable, divine living beings. Below them were the planets, which
partook more strongly in the principles of creation, as they could be observed
to move, changing and developing through time. Below the planets was a

vast sphere filled with daimones or gods.
The status of these divine beings, sometimes called gods and sometimes
referred to as daimones, was considerably lower in Plato’s cosmology than in
earlier Greek thought. However, these divine beings, together with the
influence of the stars and planets, were still viewed as causing all created
things to take their respective forms and states of being,44 while the daimones
were active mediators operating between the fixed, starry sphere, the moving
planetary one, and the sublunary human realm.
For such is the nature of daimones: they stand in the middle between
gods and men, they are ‘interpreters and ferrymen’ who communicate
the messages and gifts from men to the gods and from gods to men,
prayers and sacrifices from one side, commands and recompenses from
the other.45
Earlier we investigated the nous, a principle in the human soul that lets
man free himself from the bonds of matter and reach out into the
transcendental realm of truth and eternal being. Just as the Greek gods can
affect the physical realm but don’t belong there, so the nous can penetrate all
physical matter and speak to man in his mind and heart, yet it doesn’t belong
there. The highest function of the human soul has thus itself become a
daimon: an intermediary being building a living bridge between the man
caught in matter and the eternal star assigned to him at birth. By deifying the
nous, Plato laid the foundation for the philosophical and occult tradition that
knows of a personal and immortal divine being assigned to and watching
over each man and woman.46 This tutelary genius (Latin for Greek daimon)
remains invisible and veiled as the personal nous-daimon while humans are
alive. During this time, interaction takes place through inner dialogue and
divine intuition. But after death the guardian daimon becomes perceptible as
an entity, a living being, in its own right, though still bound to and yet still
separate from the incarnated being that was its charge. Plato describes this
clearly in both Phaedo and Laws, and the relevant sections are worth quoting
in full:
And so it is said that after death, the tutelary genius of each person, to
whom he had been allotted in life, leads him to a place where the dead

are gathered together; then they are judged and depart to the other world
with the guide whose task it is to conduct thither those who come from
this world; and when they have there received their due and remained
through the time appointed, another guide brings them back after many
long periods of time.47
Cronos was aware of the fact that no human being (…) is capable of
having irresponsible control of all human affairs without becoming filled
with pride and injustice; so, pondering this fact, he then appointed as
kings and rulers for our cities, not men, but beings of a race that was
nobler and more divine, namely, daimons. He acted just as we now do in
the case of sheep and herds of tame animals: we do not set oxen as rulers
over oxen, or goats over goats, but we, who are of a nobler race,
ourselves rule over them. In like manner the God, in his love for
humanity, set over us at that time the nobler race of daimons who, with
much comfort to themselves and much to us, took charge of us and
furnished peace and modesty and orderliness and justice without stint,
and thus made the tribes of men free from feud and happy.48
The Evil Daimon
In the history of the Western occult, we come across several accounts of a
being complementary to the daimon of nous, the so-called evil daimon.
Whereas the good genius helps us break through the biased veils of sensual
perception and reconnect with the eternal realm of truth and being, the evil
daimon tries to hinder us in these efforts and pull us back behind the veils of
matter. We have already encountered the following explanation of this evil
daimon in the Divine Pymander of the Corpus Hermeticum:
But to the foolish, and evil, and wicked, and envious, and covetous, and
murderous, and profane, I am far off, giving place to the revenging
Demon, which applying unto him the sharpness of fire, tormenteth such
a man sensible, and armeth him the more to all wickedness, that he may
obtain the greater punishment. And such an one never ceaseth, having
unfulfilled desires, and unsatisfiable concupiscences, and always

fighting in darkness; for the Demon always afflicts and tormenteth him
continually, and increaseth the fire upon him more and more.49
But from these I remain distant—the thoughtless and evil and wicked
and envious and greedy and violent and irreverent—giving way to the
avenging demon who [wounds the evil person], assailing him sensibly
with the piercing fire and thus arming him the better for lawless deeds so
that greater vengeance may befall him. Such a person does not cease
longing after insatiable appetites, struggling in the darkness without
satisfaction. [This] tortures him and makes the fire grow upon him all
the more.50
Agrippa, in De Occulta Philosophia, describes nine orders of evil spirits
counterbalancing the nine celestial orders of angels. The last rung of this
infernal ladder he reserved for the evil daimon assigned to each person:
Moreover the Tempters and Ensnarers have the last place, one of which
is present with every man, which we therefore call the evil Genius, and
their Prince is Mammon, which is interpreted as covetousness (…).51
In Chapter XXVI of the same book Agrippa details an Arabian method of
drawing out the names of the good and evil genii from one’s astrological
chart—a topic to which we shall return.
Given the widespread belief in a twofold daimonic presence within each
human being, let’s see what we can learn from the ancient Greeks about its
origins. As we have already seen, in the early stages of Greek philosophy
there is little if any evidence to be found of the concept of an evil daimon: the
daimon was considered an undifferentiated occult force that struck from the
darkness and which had the power to alter a person’s fate in all manner of
directions. This force was beyond human control: even gods and heroes were
affected by it. We have also seen that the daimon was defined not by its
morality, but by its agency. The daimon didn’t put good or evil thoughts into
the mind of man; it seized him and enchanted him in a strange rhythm that
had the power to change the tides of his life.52 This Homeric understanding
of the daimon is different from what we generally mean by daimon today: our
sort of daimon is first attested in the works of Xenocrates, who was writing

several hundred years after Homer.53
Both Xenocrates and Aristotle attended Plato’s Academy in Athens. But
whereas for Aristotle mathematics and science were unquestionably the
correct basis for philosophy, having little time for his mentor Plato’s oldfashioned mysticism, Xenocrates worked on investigating the mystery cults
and traditional religion of the ancient Greeks and integrating them with
Plato’s occult teachings.54
The character of Xenocrates thought was much rougher and more concrete
than both Plato and many of his successors. Whereas Plato was deliberately
ambiguous as to whether the highest god was a philosophical principle or a
living being, Xenocrates called him ‘Zeus’ and saw him sitting on a throne
next to the All-Mother, who personified the soul of all created things.55 This
tendency of Xenocrates to simplify complex spiritual matters is also found in
his approach to the daimonic.
Before Xenocrates, there had been no articulated doctrine of the daimonic.
Though it appears as an uncanny and elusive presence in both the early epics,
and is dealt with as such in the teachings of Socrates, Plato, and many other
Greek philosophers, it had never been given a defined place, function, or
definition. It was Xenocrates, with his love of objectifying the abstract, who
first set the daimonic on a more concrete footing.56
Like Plato, Xenocrates divided the cosmos into three concentric spheres.
The most primal gods were the monad (‘the One’) and the dyad (‘Two’ or
‘Otherness’) who ruled over the first, outermost sphere. Under them was the
sphere of the celestial stars and visible planets, which were considered to be
divine, living beings. Under these, and separated by the sphere of the Moon,
was the earthly realm, which was filled with a multitude of different spiritual
forces and beings. This last, ‘sublunary’ realm according to Xenocrates was
the sphere of the daimones.57
Xenocrates’ view of the ‘evil daimon’ was a strange hybrid of Plato’s ideas
about the nature of evil and his own. This hybrid proved exceptionally hardy,
for it shaped Western beliefs about evil for the next two millennia. Plato
himself was not particularly clear about the origin of evil, though on this
subject ‘various dialogues drop scattered hints.’58 Nevertheless, most
scholars agree that he ascribed evil’s origin to the nature of matter itself. As
we have already discussed, for Plato, eros, being fixated on fulfilling its

material desires, necessarily biases perception, logic, and the influence of the
all-pervading nous.59 But why should matter distort the purity of the nous, the
sublime and good? Plato had an intriguing explanation. According to him, the
first beings were the divine ideas, which were the absolutely pure, sublime,
and perfectly defined forms from which everything else in creation would
emerge. The limitation of the unlimited into specific ideas is the basic
principle of the emergence of god into creation. The nature of evil can,
therefore, be explained in the following way:
[It is] the failure of the particular to represent the idea, or (…) the failure
of the unlimited to participate rightly in the limited. That is to say, evil
has a purely negative existence. (…) [A] thing is good in so far as it
represents the idea, evil in so far as it fails to do so, and the varying
kinds and degrees of good and evil represent the degrees and kinds of
approximation to or divergence from the ideal standard. The problem of
the origin of evil, therefore, may now be stated thus: ‘What is it which
causes the particular to diverge from the idea?’ The answer generally
given to this question (…) is that there is an inherent incompatibility
between the idea and matter; the former must always struggle to subdue
the latter, and in many cases partially fail.60
According to Plato, therefore, evil is any lack of equivalence or analogy
between a divine idea and its physical manifestation—and physical matter is
inherently unable to represent divine ideas perfectly. The difference between
the divine ideas and their worldly expressions is the space where all evil
emerges.
Traces of this line of thought appear several centuries later in the Safed
school of Kabbalah, out of which Lurianic Kabbalah developed, in the
concept of the breaking of the vessels that set divine forces free in an
uncontrolled manner which thus gave birth to the origin of evil to the
Qliphothic forces. This cosmic accident was caused by the inadequacy of the
vessel of Geburah to capture and sustain the related divine ray of light.
The evil daimon is therefore what distorts the reflection of the primal ideas
in man. Unlike the nous, however, it does not have any ontological reality of
its own. The evil daimon is not a being in its own right; it is the imperfect
alignment between the divine and the material. If anything, the evil daimon

could be viewed as the unruliness of matter itself, the fractiousness of the
appetites that prevents the good from unfolding in its perfect shape in the
sublunary realm.
The purpose of man can be thought of as the work of a stonemason: to set
free an invisible shape caught in rough matter, to bring to light a perfect idea
in a world of unruly senses. The logos is man’s chisel, the thumos his
hammer, the eros the stone he works on, and the nous the light that shines in
his mind. A good sculptor is guided by vision and well supported by the skill
of his craft. A bad sculptor, however, is not necessarily led astray by an evil
daimon; more likely he is simply insufficiently skilled to tame his stone’s
unruliness.
To each human being is assigned at the moment of his birth a good
spirit, his guide through the mysteries of life. We must not believe that
the spirit is evil and can harm our lives; he is good, and there is no evil
in him. Every good must be good. But those who are bad themselves,
who have bad characters and make a muddle out of their lives, managing
everything badly through their own foolishness (…) they make a divine
being responsible and call it ‘bad’, while they are actually bad
themselves.61
At the end of our journey into ancient Greek philosophy, we have
discovered a straightforward, yet powerful idea—though of course it is but
one voice in the philosophical choir of ancient thought. The idea is this: that
from the moment of birth until we leave our mortal bodies, a good being is
assigned to us, watching over and supporting all our efforts to draw down the
divine into matter and so make matter sublime. Possibly some of our failures
to do this may be down to some member of the evil daimonic horde which
shares the sublunary realm with us. Yet none of these daimones is personally
attached to us, unlike the good daimon of our nous. None of them are bound
into the nature of our soul.
However, more often than not, our failures are not due to any evil daimon:
they are all our own work. For it is exceptionally hard to become what only
humans can become: a bridge which allows for undistorted communication
between nous and matter, one flowing into the other. Yet man can be such a
bridge, standing in the service of what passes through him, unconditional and

free from all appetites and desires. Man can be a noble soul.
1 Socrates.
2 Plato, Phaedrus: 246a – b.
3 Greer: 38f.
4 For more on the relationship between the thumos and warrior fury, have a look at the idea
of menos as something located within the thumos in Bremmer: 58f.
5 Bremmer: 75.
6 Plato, Timaeus: 3.38.
7 https://www.ellopos.net/elpenor/greek-texts/ancient-greece/anaxagoras-/nous/.asp
8 Agrippa, Three Books of Occult Philosophy, Book II, chapter XXII.
9 Burkert: 331.
10 Burkert: 328.
11 Timaeus: 90a.
12 Timaeus: 90a.
13 Timaeus: 90a.
14 Burkert: 328.
15 Timaeus: 42b / Burkert: 328.
16 Timaeus: 41 d – e.
17 Symposium: 202e.
18 Burkert: 179.
19 Burkert: 180.
20 Burkert: 180.
21 Burkert: 180.
22 Müller-Sternberg: 82.
23 Müller-Sternberg: 37.
24 Burkert: 180.
25 Müller-Sternberg: 57.
26 Burkert: 181.
27 Socrates Mem.I: 4,18, after Volquardsen: 18.
28 Burkert: 181.
29 du Prel: 125.
30 Plato, Theaetet 7; acc. to du Prel.
31 du Prel: 122.
32 Apol. Plato 31; Volquardsen: 8.
33 Volquardsen: 8, 9.

34 Socrates Mem. IV, 3, 13, after Volquardsen: 18.
35 Volquardsen: 18.
36 Crowley: 180.
37 Burkert: 322.
38 Burkert: 322.
39 Rohde: 278.
40 Burkert: 323.
41 Rohde: 264.
42 Rohde: 264.
43 Rohde: 279.
44 Burkert: 328, 332.
45 Burkert: 331.
46 Burkert: 328 – 331.
47 Plato, Phaedo: 107d/e.
48 Plato, Laws: 713 c – e.
49 The Divine Pymander, Book II, 56, 57, quoted after Westcott: 27, 28.
50 The Hermetica, Copenhaver 1992: 5.
51 Agrippa, Book III, Chapter XVIII.
52 Müller-Sternberg: 244.
53 We should, however, bear in mind that Xenocrates’ views on daimons may have reflected
widespread folk beliefs that were already centuries old in his day.
54 Heinze: VII.
55 Heinze: VIII.
56 Heinze, VIX
57 Heinze, VIII
58 Chilcott: 27.
59 Heinze: 27.
60 Chilcott: 28
61 Menander, 342–291 BCE, quoted after Luck: 172.

Part two
memory

Communion with my holy daimon
This part of the book relates my own experiences of creating a communion
with my holy daimon. The following pages contain those parts of my magical
diary which describe the intense Saturn Retreat (Saturn Exerzitium, in its
original German title) that I put myself through in the Spring of 2010. The
retreat lasted four weeks and culminated, on the final day, with my first
encounter with my holy daimon. This particular kind of extended ritual
practice is taught as part of the curriculum of the magical training
organization IMBOLC. This organization was founded in 1992 by Roland
Gabler in Kempten, Germany, as an independent study institute, and it offers
an indepth magical training for the solitary practitioner in all aspects of
Western Hermeticism.1
After ten years of active practice and study with IMBOLC, I chose to
conduct this extended ritual retreat as my final piece of work with them
before pursuing my own path. Those four weeks consisted of several magical
interventions combined with sleep deprivation, fasting, and social isolation.
The culmination of the work was the final night when I underwent the Ritus
Thanatos, an experience of being buried alive in the wilderness.
The core structure of the Saturn Retreat
• The focus of the first week was to reduce sleep to a minimum. This was
done through a sequence of hourly risings at night with dedicated prayers to
Saturn at each interval.
• The focus of the second week was to reduce food consumption to a
minimum. This was done through a week-long fast.
• The focus of the third week was to reduce speech to a minimum. This was
done through a week spent in silence, or at least speaking no more than was
absolutely required.

• The focus of the fourth week was to combine all three reductions: minimal
sleep, minimal food, minimal speech.
• In addition, every Saturday, on the morning and evening hours of Saturn, a
full ritual of Saturn was performed, and detailed notes and reflections
captured in my magical diary.
• On the final night of the fourth week, following the eighth and final Saturn
ritual, a ceremonial burial rite was conducted, known as the Ritus Thanatos.
The diary entries in this part of the book have been translated from German
into English. Where additional context is required, I have added it. Some
entirely personal matters have been omitted. However, I have made no other
changes, so while this record is obviously subjective in nature, it accurately
conveys the nature of the ritual experience. I include it in this book for two
reasons; firstly, it is a reaction against the West’s current fetish for objectivity
and secondly, as evidence of my experiences.
Objectivity—the deliberate elimination of every subjective aspect of an
experience—has become an unquestioned and seemingly universal standard
in every field of research. While objectivity is certainly necessary in, for
instance, medicine and some fields of physics, it causes real problems when it
is applied to all modes of human enquiry.
Today, ‘subjective’ is mainly used as a pejorative term which expresses a
strong reservation about the reliability of some insight or correlation. It
implies some imperfection, some loss of quality, and speaks of phenomena
which must remain outside of rational science until they can be reliably
replicated and their cause-and-effect patterns established.
Such a perspective rules out a scientific approach to most fields of practical
magical enquiry—though there are of course exceptions, such as pragmatic
‘folk’ and ‘success’ magic: Did the charm change the weather in time, yes or
no? Did the spell bring the lover, yes or no? Did the curse inflict the
requested disease, yes or no? Did the prophecy or divination turn out to be
true, yes or no? This book, however, is not concerned with that sort of magic.
Not only is the ‘raw data’ of spirit contact necessarily subjective, but it can
no more be replicated than sitting down at the same table in a café every day
can be expected to reproduce the same conversation—even with all the same
people present. (And of course in real life, and in magic in particular, we are
never in a single operator environment.) The essential test for spirit contact is

instead whether the information thereby acquired can be applied to the world
with positive results. ‘Does it work,’ not ‘can it be objectively scrutinized,’
has always been the mantra of the successful magician.
So when you read my magical diary, remember that the content of spirit
messages is much less relevant than the methods illustrated for successfully
applying that content. Imagine that you are trying to learn to cross rivers by
jumping from one stone to another. Memorizing the locations of the stones in
any one river is pointless, as every river has different stones. Instead you
want to learn what makes for good jumping. How do you alternate movement
with stillness? Where are the moments of instability and balance, of
relaxation and watchfulness? By publishing some of my subjective
experiences, I hope to help you learn, by example, the skill of crossing your
own rivers.
Now to my second reason for including part of my diary in this book.
Given the subjective nature of our craft, it is imperative for us to provide as
much tangible evidence of our work as we can. What have we really done?
What have we truly experienced in the circle of the spirits? And how can we
demonstrate that we are making reliable observations, drawing reliable
conclusions, and avoiding empty claims? The following extracts are intended
as evidence of my own path: they illustrate some of the experiences that led
to the creation of this book. And as I shall be relying on those experiences
when, in the third part of this book, I make suggestions about how you might
commune with your holy daimon, it seemed only fair to open this part of my
diary to you, so that you could judge my expertise, or lack thereof, for
yourself.
It should also be noted that this four week retreat was performed after ten
years of active magical practice. For the first five of those years I practised
persistently for between one and two hours a day, with almost no exceptions.
Our Tibetan relatives seclude themselves for years at a stretch in remote
caves to accomplish certain magical processes. The famous Abramelin rite
requires eighteen months. There is no shortcut to magical accomplishment.
Any solid craft requires persistence, focus, dedication, and humility; and no
one easily achieves the spiralling ascent in which one finds oneself shifting
constantly between student and teacher. What results a similar four week
Saturn Retreat might have for other magicians, I do not know. I know of
many magicians whose training ended with a burial rite which did not

culminate in communion with their holy daimon—and of course they may
not have intended it to. Each of our rivers is different.
Finally, a word on the practical conditions under which this retreat was
undertaken. I had just started a new job that required frequent travel, though
it also allowed me many days of work from home. However, those days had
to be spent mainly on the telephone. Taking an extended vacation was
therefore not an option, and I kept a somewhat suboptimal silence in the
retreat’s third week. The retreat was a difficult burden for both me and my
wife, and our circumstances at the time did not make it any easier. On the
positive side, in 2010 there was no social media to distract me, which made
concentrating exclusively on this work somewhat easier than it would be for
me today. And we were lucky enough to live out in the relative wilderness, in
a 1920s farmhouse. Next to our house were several old barns and a large
brick building, covered in ivy, that had been a saddle factory during the
Second World War. I had cleaned out this abandoned space and built a large
temple area on the ground floor. It was heated by a woodburning stove, and
thick black curtains sealed off a spacious square inner temple which
contained a handmade altar, banners, and a large magical circle drawn in
sanctified chalk on the old wooden floorboards. The wide and empty attic
above the ground floor was accessed by means of an outside staircase which
ascended over what had once been a chicken coop, but which now housed
mainly spiders, mice, and the occasional weasel. I could not have asked for a
better or more romantic environment to perform the many related rituals in—
despite the bone-deep cold that left me shivering morning and night after I
locked the aged, green door behind me.
From the magical diary of Brother Camaysar, a.k.a. Frater Acher
V.III.MMX · FIRST NIGHT

Tonight, in twenty minutes, my four week Saturn Exerzitium (SatEx) will
begin. To the extent that it is possible, I feel reasonably prepared. Today I
will spend the first night in the prepared room, interrupting my sleep every
hour for brief meditations on Saturn. In memoriam Camaysar. I expect a long
march. Patience and sacrifice will be my companion. If a new version of
myself is meant to emerge, then the old one first has to yield. Both, old and

new selves, however, deserve respect and tolerance. Slow, slow while we
walk in Saturn.
V.III.MMX · FIRST DAY

The getting up every hour of the night was exhausting, as expected. I slept
through the hour at 2 am as the alarm did not go off. I awoke again at 3:20
am, lit some olibanum incense, and meditated just as in the following hours.
Initially it was hard to find an anchor point for my thoughts.
In front of me lay the unveiled talisman and the Zazel egregore, and the
image of the Tree of Life hung on the wall before me. A still life. It dawned
on me that this would be precisely the journey that I would be on while in
SatEx: from the ritualized contact with Saturn, via his dark face called Death
and the shadow of excess, to the truthful splendour of Tiphareth. A long path,
full of unknown questions and familiar fears.
This morning I initiated the SatEx during the first hour of Saturn with a
sixty minute meditation. It seems as if the pressure in my body has slightly
increased. Everything seems tighter, yet also somewhat heavier.
Now I am learning by heart the text of the ritual for the first rite, which I
shall perform this noon during the second hour of Saturn.
Yesterday night with leads from Agrippa of Nettesheim and the internet I
discovered the method to extract the name of my Holy Genius and Evil
Demon from my radix. What a coincidence that this happened during the last
night before my SatEx dying process.
First Saturn ritual performed. As I needed to stick to the specific hour of
Saturn and unfortunately did not have any vacation days leading up to the
SatEx, I was busy with preparations until the last minute. During the initial
Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Pentagram (LBRP) I realized how long it had
been since I had performed a proper ritual, i.e. worked consciously on the
astral plane. Yet as soon as the four angels were present, things improved,
and I got access to the current. Good increase of tension following the LBRP
and a powerful Hexagram Ritual (HGR). Unfortunately, the prayer and the
conjuration I had to read from paper, which reduced my astral consciousness
and awareness quite significantly. It is during these moments of the rite,
when speaking words learned by heart, that the most powerful forces are set
free. The consecration that followed went well; however it took quite a long
time for me to perceive Saturn specifically, i.e. subsumable by my astral

senses.

It was only at the end of charging the talisman that I suddenly realized the
limitless, lifeless vastness beyond the boundary of the magical circle. All life
had been confined to something like underground cells in an earth made
entirely from ice. Radiating, white snow covered everything, and the sky was
starless and filled with deep blackness. Only at the end, when I moved
towards the East for the finale LBRP, did I suddenly perceive a presence, an
immediate coexistence with me, in the circle. It was not evil; yet it was
watchful and completely devoid of any love for life, cold and dry, taking
effect in darkness, just like the dissecting knife, a mixture of stone, white
snow, and deep night. I left the covered altar prepared for tonight’s second
ritual.

What a day. Following the second ritual I am completely exhausted (and
reeking from incense). If Saturn in the first rite showed me his cold side, so
tonight he showed me his dark side. I made many small mistakes, especially
in the sequencing. In the middle of the ritual I still felt completely alone, as if
surrounded by a silent, gaping emptiness. All force and life emitted only from
myself. The thought passed through my mind that this may have been
because I tried to charge the same talisman twice, so it would not attract the
forces anymore as my pledge had already been fulfilled. Maybe that is what it
was. Yet towards the end, after fears of failure and loss had seeped into me

and I felt crushed by the ritual as if under an immense burden, I realized that
this was precisely the dark side of Saturn. Zazel without Agiel. The swamps
of sadness. So perhaps the ritual actually worked better than I realized. What
remains is my exhaustion, just like after an unacceptably long day. During
my meditations tonight I might need to complain to Zazel—and return a few
of his thoughts.
After all this I went for a walk with Thor in the afternoon. It was bright
sunshine when we left the house. I parked the car and five minutes later a
snowstorm engulfed us which lasted for half an hour. When we returned to
the car from our walk, the sun smiled on us again. The weather today could
not have been more fitting for the SatEx. The previous day it was still so
mild, yet today twenty centimetres of new snow. Lo, a beginning.
VII.III.MMX · SECOND DAY

The second night was like the first, except a light headache joined me for it.
The day had been exhausting and the thick clouds of incense in the temple
had been good for Tzaphkiel and the Aralim, but less good for me. I spent the
morning cleaning the house for three hours. Unbelievable how much dirt one
sees through the eyes of Saturn. The sun is back and the snow is melting
again. Just now I see the head of a flower outside around whose petals the
snow has already disappeared. It is good to see that Saturn is but one of many
forces, and that life knows how to persist.
Tonight during my meditation came the thought: what kind of deaths have
I already been dying? Which cuts, that seemed such definite farewells, have I
experienced so far in this life? I had to think of my youth, the relationships I
had before I met my wife, and the way I had misapplied Saturn towards the
end of each one of them and made myself guilty. If I am going to die in four
weeks, then how can I forgive myself for this? Or do I simply accept it
without redemption?
I still have to clean the temple, create a silk bag for the talisman, and
continue the work on the name of my Genius.
I finished the work on the name of my Genius. A significant, solemn
moment, to hold its name in my hands. And suddenly I realize what this
work, what the insight of the name of the Higher Self, has to do with Saturn.
Once I am ready to give up myself as an incarnate one, in my mortal shell,
then the door will open that leads to the things that lie beyond my birth. And

this presence waits, one that outlasts and guides me, one that released me
from its arms at my birth and will embrace me again at my death. These
things all happen by themselves; they find their own place; only rational
deeds can destroy them.
Does the name of the Genius outlast my incarnation? Is it a key for which I
will search again in my next life? Or is it a continually present expression of
time, an arch which spans my possible life and decays with me after it has
been lived? Is it a path or a goal? From the eyes of my mortal body it is both,
my goal and a path.
The work on the calculation of the name was quite mathematical,
structured, factual, and logical, like the pursuit of a hidden and sealed burial
chamber. I wonder whether the conjured forces of Saturn were helping me. I
can see no other explanation apart from the effects of the ritual contact and
the radiating ahead and following echo in time these rites have created. Their
effect stretches out in all three dimensions of time, past, present, and future. I
am full of gratefulness; something is with me.
VIII.III.MMX · THIRD DAY

The third night was easier than the first two. The getting up, the lighting of
the candles, the staring at the Saturn image, it is becoming a ritual. It also
helped that I slept nine hours in the last two nights, despite my hourly
awakenings, so I gained enough sleep in total. That will definitely change in
the coming days and during my trips to Geneva and Milan.
Currently, since yesterday morning it seems I am truly in touch with the
bright side of Saturn. I was all by myself during the weekend so didn’t have
to speak, the house was clean, the outside was covered in snow, and I had
time to work on all things Saturnine and magical. For the first time I did not
experience any kind of loneliness or fear of being left, but was able to enjoy
the silence in quiet contemplation. In between all my jobs, and in all kind of
situations, thoughts about death germinated.
IX.III.MMX · FOURTH DAY

Tonight during the meditation the thought: Saturn rules all things of
substance. Irrespective of how much I withdraw from it, in the end it will
take from me what I love most: my wife. Two thoughts lie buried within this:
I dissolve from substance by walking through it in death. And: to dissolve

love from substance might be the hardest art of all.
It is 5:30 am, and I am almost on my way to Geneva.
X.III.MMX · FIFTH DAY

An interesting observation yesterday: is it the aim of the SatEx to immerse
oneself fully in the realm of Saturn and to drown within it? Or is the aim to
overcharge oneself deliberately with the forces of Saturn, and so learn to
balance them in everyday life? Is it mainly about the experience of
overcharging Saturn, or about one’s ability to control the forces of Saturn in
even the most extreme circumstances? Should my attitude in this endeavour
be mainly an active or a passive one?
The day in Geneva yesterday brought Saturn back into its balance with the
other planetary forces, particularly Mercury and Jupiter. Nevertheless, the
focus on Saturn was present with me all the time. For the first time in the last
five days I experienced Saturn as one force among seven equals, and not as
the dominant, tall, black figure made of shadows. Its effect, once considered
as one of seven integral components, is entirely different: it’s a force that
structures, clarifies, and that maintains a distance. Simultaneously I felt how
uncomfortable it was for my Saturn-saturated presence to grant the other six
forces their own rightful space.
A second point: In the invocation I turn to all mediating agents of Saturn:
the planet, the divine name, choirs of angels, archangel, intelligence, and
demon. My assumption is that this has an inherently balancing and positive
impact on the full spectrum of Saturnine forces. A conjuration of Tzaphkiel
or Zazel by themselves would most likely yield altogether different results.
Saturn is an entire world with forces in itself, a planet, as the name says. One
just needs to consider the differentiation we see in the forces of our own
planet, Earth. We speak of the sublunary forces, and those of the four
elements in particular. Saturn knows a similar diversity—or more
specifically, below its moons. A significant job within the SatEx is therefore
to maintain the various Saturnine forces in balance. No excess in Zazel, no
lack of functioning of the Aralim. Only once one has passed in such manner
through the gate of Saturn does one gain access to its sublunary atmosphere
where one can begin to explore the various force-fields in particular.

The hours between 3 am and 5 am are the most exhausting ones of the
night. I started using the six sacred names as a mantra over the Saturn
talisman. Tonight this induced Saturnine dreams: tomorrow night I shall
check if this was a coincidence.
Rose is back from Berlin.
XI.III.MMX · SIXTH DAY

Exhausting night. The day in Geneva and the work until 9 pm yesterday
required a lot of energy. Tonight I missed the hourly awakening twice by
thirty minutes due to tiredness. Also yesterday evening Rose wasn’t doing

well, and I was doubting the SatEx and the additional strain it will put on our
relationship for now and for the three weeks to come.
On the way home from Mailand it clicked. I read several blogs in which
grimoire magicians from the USA shared their experiences with the spirits.
And suddenly my grasp of the whole thing opened up like a door. So much of
my previous magic will become obsolete, even distracting, in the future. I had
been present with the spirits, but I had never opened my eyes. They are all
here, a living, sleeping, acting reality. The aim of ritual trance is not only the
experience of the daimonic current, inarticulate and all-perceiving as it is, but
also dialogue with it. They are here, have always been here, ready to
participate, to talk and partake. All I have to do is to pull out a chair for them
and offer them a seat at the table.
While thinking this through it also clicked, regarding the SatEx, that Acher
is withdrawing into himself, even retreating into death, to make space in life
and spirit for someone else. This is a radical change, a turning away from the
Malkuth that is without spiritual life, and an entrance into the Malkuth that is
full of the forces of the magical realm. Only now do I see a vision of the goal
of my search.
XII.III.MMX · SEVENTH DAY

Following the lines from yesterday and the day in Mailand I was completely
exhausted. I got up once again to meditate at 1 am, then I slept through until
5 am, completely exhausted. That’s why today I felt more replenished than
all last week. As I said: the more I seem to wane as an incarnated person, the
more my magical Higher Self seems to gain in agency and shine through me.
Do I have to exhaust and starve out the veil of Malkuth to see through it?
Tomorrow is the second Saturday: two further Saturn rites are awaiting me,
as well as the beginning of the fast.
XIII.III.MMX · EIGHTH DAY

The first night in my own bed next to Rose made a huge difference. How
easily good sleep pulls one back from imbalance. Instead today was the first
day without food. It is now 7:45 pm and I cannot recall ever not having eaten
for such a long time. It is not even unpleasant. I only hope my stomach
remains this stoic.
I am sure the difference between the first and the second week will be

obvious. Withdrawal of sleep and induction of hunger in their own way both
create space for the forces of Saturn. The rite of Saturn today cannot be
compared to those of last week: the talisman had already been charged, I used
my magical mirror to speak to Saturn directly. Furthermore I did not wear my
old lamen. It was inscribed with the name of Camaysar and it’s not fitting for
Acher any longer. These were the answers to the questions I asked in the rite:
1. What can I learn from you? The black art.
2. On what matters can I enquire of you? I cleanse life through death.
3. Shall I call you in ritual or in meditation? I am here, all the time.
4. In what circumstances do you bring death? When the blood is saturated.
5. What can I do for you? Lend me your senses (mouth and eye).
After the final question I felt Saturn flowing into me, filling and saturating
my whole being. It was black and at the same time bright white; it was totally
clear and completely undiluted. I asked one final question:
6. How can you help me strengthen my magic? By making you stronger.
Just like last week, I realize there is a Day-Saturn and a Night-Saturn. The
one during the day clarifies and provides structure; the one during the night is
dark, fear-inducing, threshold-like.

In terms of procedure, the second ritual was good, yet my magic had
already been drained and was significantly lower. The sphere of the elements
was clear and enclosed, and the sphere of Saturn within was made strong and
stable. It turns out to make a huge difference if my spoken words are actually
addressed to another being, if I speak to an actual conscious, living force—
and if my voice is not acting only as a tool to build up rhythm and vibration
in space. Again, I had questions for Saturn:
1. What is the black art? To turn

(lead) into

(gold).

2. To which kind of knowledge are you the gate? To life I am the gate.
3. What is it that humans can do to prevent your pain? Humility, modesty,
and having a goal.
4. Why did I suffer so much under you as a child? An alchemical process, a
transformation of soul.
5. What is my function today in your realm? To teach how to solve and how
to bind.
6. What can I do for you? Carry me into life.
After completing the rite the last question still echoed in me. Suddenly I
saw a heavily disabled child in front of me. I was shocked, in emotional
upheaval provoked by the analogy of the image, and I needed to concentrate
completely on the closing act of banishing. Then I realized: a crippled child is
the crippled Saturn brought to life, or maybe a metaphorical image
expressing this idea. I would have to ask him in the next rite what could lead
to such disfigurement, and how it could be prevented.
XIV.III.MMX · NINTH DAY

The fast is taking energy, it starves my body. My legs feel as if I had come in
from a long run: their muscles ache. The walks with Thor are exhausting. In
addition, they are beginning to affect my mood and I realize how irritable I
have become. Possibly I shall have to change to dry bread and soup when I
am in England next week.
I began reading the Arbatel. Based on it I will be able to build my own
path into evocation magic, beginning with the Olympic Spirits. I believe my
time with IMBOLC has come to an end. From here on I have to train myself
if I truly aspire to walk a mystical path. There is no longer any reason to wait.
I just finished a Saturn meditation and spirit journey. Behind the door of
Saturn there was a labyrinth of black metal mines. They were crystalline in
shape and deeply jagged. Bottomless pits fell off in all directions, the rock
was cold, black, and metallic, and there was no path to walk. I jumped across
one of the pits and balanced on the ledge behind it. There was no advancing;
the atmosphere did not let me fly either. I called for Tzaphkiel. Nothing
happened. Then I jumped back to the place where I had come from, and
turned around. Suddenly a white, radiating angel hung in the air, holding a
spear or a scythe in its hand. It did not reply to my questions, did not provide

its name, and something seemed deceitful and malicious about it. I pushed it
away with my dagger and it disappeared into the shaft behind it. Through the
sign of Saturn I leapt back to where my body was waiting for me.

Saturn is no country for vacations.
XV.III.MMX · TENTH DAY

Because of my strict fast, I have lost three kilograms in only two days. I have
begun to feel a slight pain in my heart. It seems my metabolism is still
working too fast. I started today to take a little liquid nutrition: a processed

muesli and a carrot and ginger soup. A lot of energy returned immediately.
Even though I felt weak, I could work with focus from 8 am until 9 pm,
interrupted only by two walks with Thor.
XVI.III.MMX · ELEVENTH DAY

This morning I did a forty-five minute Saturn meditation, just as on Sunday.
As part of this I change my entire body, through and through, into black stone
which I pull down from the sphere of Saturn. For the first time today I felt the
power and might of the planet as I approached it in vision. It is made of the
toughest dead rock and so are its shadowy rings. Saturn is a guardian of
borders who keeps his silence and never alters his goal until the assignment is
accomplished or it makes him perish in the process. His silence is threatening
and yet a foundation on which anything can be built.
When I took up the SatEx, my expectation was that it would basically cut
out anything dead from my life and that it would overhaul my everyday
world. But I had already let go so many old and used-up things over the
course of the last eighteen months. London, my old job, my tendency to
overburden, my habit of contemplating which is futile in itself, the tension
between boy and man, all this ended in 2009. What I did not expect was the
sweeping effect that it would have on my magic. Here evocation magic,
angelic magic, contact with my holy guardian angel and new techniques are
all stepping right into my life, and overthrowing long-respected and deeply
familiar beliefs and rituals. Welcome! I have waited so long for this, I have
been so busy having taken so long approaching it that walking was all that I
had in my view and my actual goal had disappeared from sight. It feels so
right and healthy to take this new path, this new beginning.
XVII.III.MMX · TWELFTH DAY

This day has been atypical, and the next two will be likewise. I am north of
Oxford at our regional company meeting. I can’t live on buttermilk and
juices, and am surrounded all day by many people. Saturn doesn’t like this at
all. It will be hard to reestablish balance; I will meditate in the morning and at
night, and will reduce my nutrition, even though I must also eat solid food
here, though an absolute minimum of it. It goes to show how little space we
have in our everyday work lives for Saturn. Quite the opposite. Everything
has its time, and it is quite hard to live as a hermit for even four weeks. It is

much more like a coming and going of waves which unknowingly pull
oneself further out to sea. A sea full of Saturn, full of cold, black stone.
We managed to book a really run-down hotel in the countryside, much to
the dismay of everyone else, but to my pleasure. The food is bad and scant
and the rooms are old and unkempt. Concentration, reduction, letting go,
preventing, giving in. Being silent to be able to speak again.
An interesting thought in the book by Stephen Flowers yesterday: when
faced with suffering or problems, and equally when especially happy,
attempting to further increase light and love resembles the man who, standing
on train tracks, covers his eyes with his hands and refuses to step off them.
Only the path into darkness, into loneliness, the acknowledgement of silence
and reflection, even death and letting die, is to step off the tracks. Life does
not create such a balance by itself. We do. It’s our free will that decides.
XVIII.III.MMX · THIRTEENTH DAY

This day just passed by so quickly. I had to give an important presentation;
the Saturnine aspects of concentration, structure, clarity, and logic came in
handy. Towards the end of the day NN spoke to us in quite a moving way. It
took a while for the spark to catch me. Then I suddenly realized that it was
precisely this warmth of heart which I had abandoned over the previous days,
and for which I tend to live so much on all other days. It is unbelievable the
drastic changes we can induce within ourselves before we ever begin to
notice them. A change of paradigm is the best example: adapting to the new
normal with unbelievable speed, integrating it, embracing it, until we no
longer even recognize it as something foreign. And possibly it has stopped
being foreign. The true loss in such a moment, however, is the one over the
certainty of what is truly of oneself. If anything foreign can become innate,
then what really differentiates myself? If Sondersein (being different) is no
longer possible, and yet no gnostic unity dawns beyond it, then I am losing
myself in multiplicity, in fragmentation. Loss of identity.
XX.III.MMX · FIFTEENTH DAY

Third Saturday, first Saturn ritual. Despite my rushed preparations,
successful. Already right after the Hexagram ritual I could feel the vibrations
of the name IHVH Elohim. It was a mosaic made up of a structure of
radiating white triangles that filled, vibrating and yet incredibly stable, the

entire magical circle. At this point I had not yet intoned any of the other
names of Saturn. I realized in this moment how significantly diverse the
various aspects of Saturn’s being are as identified by its many names. It is an
entirely unique microcosm within them, and the ritual structure of the Golden
Dawn is just aiming at a mean average, i.e. the simultaneous vibration of all
its influences. Under such circumstances the targeted contact with e.g.
Tzaphkiel is impossible; however, it allows the meta- or hive being of Saturn
a direct interaction with me, and vice versa. I have never before encountered
these different octaves with such rich texture.
During the peak of the rite, Saturn took the whole magical sphere and filled
it completely with clear black stone. It penetrated me, my body, grew through
me, and still let me move within it. Here are the answers to my questions:
1. How can you assist me in a full astral journey? Do not look for a border,
look for a gate. The black mirror.
2. Which border is marked by your planet Shabbathai? The border of life
sustaining structures. The border of Zimzum.
3. What is the nature of Aratron? The stone engraving chisel. Metal.
4. What is the nature of Tzaphkiel? The pillar of ascent. The black canal.
5. What is the function of the Aralim? The black circle bounding life. They
herd all living things like sheep. They are the circular mirror, enclosed in
itself, and reflecting all influences of life upon one another.
As it replied to the last question, I saw a closed circle of black-feathered
angels with red eyes all around me. They stood in complete silence, like a
living wall or chain of darkness that concentrated all life and light in itself.
The outer skin of creation.

Even though the last few days in England have not been as strict as the
previous ones, I still feel exhausted. On the one hand this is due to work
itself, on the other it is due to the mental and spiritual effort of the SatEx. It
seems as if I am dragging myself up a ladder, holding on to my own head.
Unforgiving, estranged from life in order to transcend life. I wonder if there
is a parallel path that goes through love? Or is this the path of ascesis and
therefore always the path of austerity from all things beloved?

I am putting Rose and myself through a hard test. Saturn radiates even
upon her.
XXI.III.MMX · SIXTEENTH DAY

The second Saturn ritual, just as with the previous Saturdays, was of a
different character. The presence, nearness, and density of the morning ritual
was replaced by a black, empty, cold void. At some point the five hexagrams
seemed like the silver bars of a cage beyond which the infinite extent of
emptiness spreads itself out. Here are the answers to my questions to Saturn:
1. How should I make use of the black mirror? A black ocean, a current
through the mirror. Swim.
2. For which functions can I enquire of Aratron? The duration within time
and within the body. Works of preservation and destruction.
3. For which functions can I enquire Tzaphkiel? The ascending and
descending. Works of motion within time and across the planes.
4. What is causing miscarriages? (white silver demons against a black
background)

5. What is causing disabled children? Particular circumstances and
requirements for particular alchemical (soul) processes.
6. What can man do to preserve health through you? Avoid poisons, live in
purity, do not spoil things, allow the alchemical processes to take place
without interference.
Saturn increasingly seems to me like the guardian overseeing each
individual’s predetermined developmental processes. It is the sealed athanor,
the goal of the alchemist which takes time and yet aims to transcend all
cyclical changes through time. It is the concentration on each phase of the
work, so that the whole work might succeed. While engaged in this work,
Saturn is entirely without mercy, just like the alchemist is without mercy to
the ashes, the fire, and the metals. His laws are boundaries, dosages,
insulation, conjunction, and patience. And it is a fickle and blind man who
crosses Saturn’s path. That’s why the coercion, that’s why all the awful
suffering. We are amidst the fire. We simmer, evaporate, burn, blacken,
blaze, and fall to ashes.
What roles do the other planets play in this process? If Saturn is the
guardian of the alchemical stages of life, then what functions do the other
planets have?
XXIV.III.MMX · NINETEENTH DAY

The last two days passed without any special events. My periods of silence
are short and therefore not especially hard, as I cannot avoid talking while
working. Abstinence from all media, sugar, and coffee is harder. Just as in
previous weeks, I take any opportunity to relax or recharge unconsciously
and purely by use of sensual stimuli.
I sense a huge tiredness within me; on the one hand it is purely from the
exhausting last two-and-a-half weeks; on the other hand it is also tiredness
from the energies of Saturn itself. The lack of Moon, Venus, Jupiter—and
especially the Sun. The tiredness of being a prisoner within oneself and the
exhaustion of the ascetic.
Two days ago I had an interesting dream. Through a kind of grey mist, I
walked into the astral realm. There I was haunted by black shadows in the
shape of humans. It seemed like a training camp, where my job was to
channel names, to grasp them mentally as they were given to me by the

shadows. Then I was in a foreign medieval town. An old man, gaunt but
strong, lived in a church with a large mechanical instrument that was buried
deep underground. It seemed like a mechanical-alchemical process
maintained by use of fire, smoke, steam, and swinging wheels, all
underground. Everything was spinning and hissing like a huge piece of
clockwork, and the old man was jumping from a lever to the fire to a bucket
of water and pushing the whole thing steadily further. He permitted me to
stand in the entrance to his cellar; he somehow even seemed proud to be
watched as he conducted his meticulous work; yet he did not show any
emotions, but was entirely concentrated on his work.
The old man is Saturn itself. The church is a metaphor for the living
current beginning to fill my faith and magical work. But how in the long haul
can I keep this living clockwork in motion, deep beneath the foundations of
my church?
XXVI.III.MMX · TWENTY-FIRST DAY

Tonight I went to the gym and encountered the white and black Saturn. The
black: the witch Saruya suddenly appeared with her daughter and
granddaughter in the doorway. Almost ten years ago I visited her in her shop
in Munich. Back then she made a real impression on me, almost a
personification of the ‘real’ magical life. Today she seemed more like a failed
attempt to personify Saturn. Haggard, sunken, labouring after beauty and yet
radiating sternness through and through. Her granddaughter, who I remember
having seen lodged in the dark back of the shop like a piece of furniture, must
now be eight or nine years old. She was completely overwrought, as if
suffering from the lack of exchange and contact at home, in the house in
which Saturn lives. I have to add here that when I met Saruya in her shop, she
told me she was preparing incense for remote killings for some of her more
special clients. I remember her large, white hands, strong as a man’s. She
probably just wanted to impress me. Yet I have come to remember her as
pure, black Saturn.
The white Saturn: In the dressing room I suddenly found myself before an
old, white-haired man whom I had already seen in the gym area. He had been
doing each exercise extremely slowly, with incredible concentration and
steadiness. He asked me if I would come back tomorrow and I declined,
saying that once a week was enough for me. He shook his head, smiling, and

said that I had to come at least two or three times per week. Then he told me
that he was seventy-four years and had been training in this place for at least
ten years now. That was the only reason, according to him, that he had stayed
so fit and didn’t suffer from his age as much as his sisters did. He had a
cataract and could no longer hear well—hearing and vision were failing him
—but other than that he was perfectly healthy thanks to his discipline,
perseverance, and training. He kept on smiling all the while, and seemed to
be amused by his own smartness or just about the simplicity of a good life.
The SatEx works like a rock thrown into the sea. I am the rock. In
exchange for giving up my ability to breathe, I get to make wonderful
discoveries on the ocean floor. But this ocean is made entirely of rock, and
there is no up or down. Not my body alone, but my entire self, the entire
human being, is what forms the athanor. I am the flask—body, spirit, and
soul—for the Higher Brother and his influence through the prism of the seven
rays. The SatEx teaches me not to intervene, not to disturb the processes, to
be subdued and silent, and to give up all thoughts that emerge from the place
called ‘I.’
Two nights ago I had a dream. I had been captured and someone had
injected a yellow, viscous liquid into my blood. The yellow substance wanted
to mix with my blood, and it was able to enter or leave my body through all
my orifices. It was this liquid that makes humans moaning, suffering,
lethargic, and inert. It was this substance that keeps humans trapped within
themselves. My torturers made fun of me as I grew weaker and weaker.
Then, suddenly, I chopped off my whole arm, and in a single stroke cleared
my whole body of the liquid. Suddenly I was unbound, strong, and free. I ran
and escaped from my torturers, floating upwards from the town into the
night. I awoke and had the following sentence or insight in my mind:
‘Alchemy is what resides behind the Magic.’
XXVII.III.MMX · TWENTY-SECOND DAY

The first Saturn ritual on this fourth Saturday was weaker than some of the
previous ones. I was exhausted just as before, and didn’t give myself enough
time to prepare. Still, I was in contact with Saturn and received answers to
my questions:
1. What is the raw substance of the alchemical process called life? Blood

fertilized by light.
2. What is the aim of this alchemical process called life? Experience,
feathers, ascent, Solve.
3. How can I support this process through magic? A blade. Separating.
4. Which function does Shabbathai have in this process? To uphold the
boundaries of life; to bound the place of creation.
5. Which function does Shemesh have in this process? Impetus; to create the
tension of life.
6. Which function does Levanah have in this process? Connecting; the
rhythmical equalization of forces.
7. Reveal to me the current alchemical process within myself? To create
ashes for new life.
8. What do I have to do to communicate with my Holy Angel? Trumpet,
trombone. To call for it.
9. What can I do for you? Lend me your senses.
After the last answer, clear, clashing ice rushed through me and filled the
whole magical circle. It seems to me that I lost a lot of energy in this moment.
When I got to the end of the ritual, I was completely exhausted. I thought
of the end of the SatEx, felt like a stone underwater, being crushed by the
weight of Saturn.
The rest of the day I spent crafting a Saturn lamen. It came out as I wanted
it: a heavy and black plate of metal with black chains. Its front and cover
have the two sides of my Saturn pentacle. It should help with the vision in the
mirror and work as a bridge to close the magical circuit. It will certainly
require charging energy. I really should charge it from the energy of the ritual
circle and not take further energy from my own organism.

The second Saturn ritual was the strongest so far. I went into the temple an
hour early, lit the fire, sat down in front of it, stared into the flames, and
meditated. The ritual took exactly an hour. It helped me clarify a lot.
First the answers:
1. What is the goal of the process called life? (no answer)
2. How can I produce blood fertilized by light? Lightning that strikes into
water.
3. Of which nature is the angel Hocroel? (no answer, then:) Dragon. Red.

4. What is the learning goal of next week for me? (I see a black cross on a
coffin. There is life surrounding the coffin.)
5. What can I do to support this process? To withdraw from all sensual
impressions.
6. Should I perform the finishing rite of the SatEx in the forest or here? In the
forest. Through the dark into fear.
7. Which advice do you have for me for the time afterwards? A tight belt.
Strictness and deprivation uphold contact.
I had already realized earlier that each name of Saturn (IHVH Elohim Tzaphkiel - Aralim - Shabbathai - Agiel - Zazel) brings an entirely unique
dynamic and motion into the magical circle:
• IHVH Elohim creates the magical circle of Saturn.
• Tzaphkiel is a middle pillar of energy;
• Aralim are a choir of black angels surrounding the circle;
• Shabbathai fills the sphere of Saturn with substance;
• Agiel’s impact is centripetal.
In their entirety, these forces come together like living clockwork, a key
that unlocks the forces of Saturn. At the same time the banner seems to have
a kind of shielding function.
My thoughts were more focused and precise during this ritual. My
questions on the details of the alchemical process, however, were not
relevant. Saturn is just one component in the entire process, thus it could not
answer the question regarding the goal of the process called life.
Furthermore, my consciousness couldn’t lend Saturn the right vocabulary, as
my untrained mind could only express itself in crude images. If only I knew
more about this kind of alchemy, if only I knew the exact vocabulary, then
Saturn could provide me with precise answers.
Question 6 opened my eyes. Saturn’s advice doesn’t need to be to the same
as my own. He wants me to bury myself in the forest and pass through the
terror and fear that follows. In this case the extremity and intensity of the
death rite would come to the fore. The alternative is to construct a coffin right
above the temple, in the old empty attic of the barn, and be confined there.
Here the analogy of dying on a ‘higher plane’ (and being born again) is front
and centre. Here I turn myself into the golem of my higher guardian angel

and destroy my ego. In the forest, fear and the destruction of my physical
body and ego is the focus; in the attic, gaining a new stability beyond the
grave is the focus.
XXVIII.III.MMX · TWENTY-THIRD DAY

Yesterday night, after the second rite and throughout the night, I was
exhausted. The remaining five days will be a tug of war with my willpower.
It is not even that I am physically drained or exhausted; quite the opposite.
Rarely have I ever felt as healthy and strong (even if not vital) as I do right
now. Saturn seems to be a paradox: on the one hand it grants health for as
long as one subdues oneself to its strict discipline. On the other hand it brings
death when the time is ripe.
Moments of deep magical insight and progress mix with moments of
complete despondency. I could also say: whenever I live Saturn, I am
charged with concentration and perseverance. As soon as I dip my toe into
any of the other of the seven planetary realms, the floor crumbles beneath my
feet.
I spent most of the day today creating Abbot Trithemius’ Table of Practice
for crystal visions. As I need all the planetary and archangelic kameas, I will
continue to create these on the computer tomorrow. On Tuesday I will be
able to put the mirror into service on its new throne in the temple. I am
interested to learn what will happen if I conjure e.g. Tzaphkiel outside of a
full rite, but as part of a meditation, into the black mirror. It would be such a
practical relief to take up the contact outside of a ritual, and possibly even in
a stable manner.
XXIX.III.MMX · TWENTY-FOURTH DAY

Tonight, Rose and I argued. She asked why I was doing this to us. I said
because I had already welched on too many of Saturn’s tests in my life. It
tore my heart out to say it. I am so far removed from normal life, from love,
happiness, and togetherness. And still I know, this exercise, this boundary
violation, is what takes the wind out of death’s sails. For now.

Why am I doing this to her? Normally such pain is accepted only under
duress, and at times of insoluble paradox, and even then one does not stop
trying to understand why. Perhaps it is ultimately about separating the
experience of pain from the experience of harm so that Saturn need not harm
me to enter my life. Because enter it shall, according to the rule of life.
Saturn’s chalice passes by no one. However, precisely because of the SatEx I
get to taste its bitterness, I get to have the experience of bitterness without
swallowing the actual poison. Undoubtedly this is a paradox not to be
understood by anyone who does not walk an occult path.

And it is true: Saturn is bitter, without a doubt. Yet instead of his harmful
side, I am beginning to discover the healing side of Saturn. This side of
Saturn is so rarely observed because normally, when he appears on one’s
doorstep, one immediately slams the door upon him; he has to find his way in
through the chimney, or through people’s bodies. His healing side is unruly,
strict, uniform, cold. But it is rich in insights, full of secrets, and full of things
well hidden from the hands of life.
Today I almost completed the Table of Practice. Only the final printed seal
is still missing. The summary of all the seals of the planetary angels was
much more time consuming than expected. Also I purchased all the
components of my coffin. Tomorrow I will paint the wood and screw it
together. It is time for this to end. My willpower is running dry. I feel like an
animal who has forgotten the path to its watering hole. If we were rider and
mount, then I would have climbed off days ago and started walking next to
my donkey. Be brave now.
XXX.III.MMX · TWENTY-FIFTH DAY

I barely slept this night. It was a full moon and thoughts of the construction
of my coffin kept me awake. After all, how often in life does one get to
construct the place of one’s death? But the coffin is more than a place; much
more. It is the symbol for the territory that I have traversed in the SatEx.
Creating it was like a glance into the valley, having already climbed the
nearby steep mountain. So much will I have to leave behind in it. Some of it I
know already; much hasn’t even begun to dawn on me. Not knowing whom I
will be in ten months, triggered by these weeks, by this approaching moment.
More precisely: it is the glance into the valley, before one jumps off the
mountain.
Despite the terrible night, I worked for twelve hours straight without a
single break. First I had to finish the Table of Practice, then clean the house,
and finally I began work on the coffin. It is done now and rests, waiting, in
the large empty attic above the temple. I am going to be the golem of my
angel; my spirit with it, my body here on earth. I am the root, and it is the
light above my crown.
Still three days to go.

XXXI.III.MMX · TWENTY-SIXTH DAY

Yesterday, in the gym sauna, I suddenly realized the meaning of the magical
sacrifice. And now I seem to understand the whole meaning of the SatEx. It
was so close all along.
I wrote in the beginning that the SatEx is both a turning away from and an
entering into Malkuth. In reality, however, it is a passage. That is what Saturn
meant when he said my current alchemical process was creating ‘ashes for
new life.’ That is the function of the sacrifice, and the meaning of the ascetic
purification process of the sacrifice itself in advance of its offering: to prepare
the cleanest, purest, most unspoiled ashes for a new life. The creation of this

new substance, of the ashes, that is what it is all about.
Here is a straightforward example. When people eat the Easter lamb, the
power of the lamb is not converging with them. But in their stomachs the
lamb is losing its form (Saturn) and being burned to ashes. It is these ashes
that are the carrier, the mediating substance, of a much higher force—the
force to which it was consecrated. That is how direct contact with the divine
is made possible: by producing the divine substance within our own bodies.
And when I lay down as a sacrifice in the coffin, it is nothing else; as a
sacrifice I offer my bodily form, and my emotional and mental gestalt. Over
four long weeks I have purified them and prepared them for this moment. Yet
the asceticism was no end, but merely an alchemical condition. In the passage
of the sacrifice, in the moment of losing my shape and becoming ashes, I
shall pass over the threshold of Saturn. That is why he is misunderstood as
terrifying: because he cannot allow anything over his threshold that still holds
a form. He needs the demonic agency—the sleeping on the ground, the
hunger, the exhaustion, the tiredness, the single-mindedness and yes, the fear
—to raise the energy and force it takes to shed all forms. Only then may we
cross over his threshold, and on the other side, discover truly new things.
However, all these new things are connected directly to abilities that we
already have, yet today they are tarnished and cloaked, made invisible by the
veil of Malkuth. The force that grasps the ashes of the lamb, that begins to
dwell in it and saturate it, is an analogue of the spirit of the original lamb, but
of an entirely different plane. Only then does Kether arrive in Malkuth. So
today I am an analogue of what I will become, and even what I will ever be
capable of becoming. But in my current form I am holding back these forces
and do not let them through. I have to shed all form (the ‘I’) to initiate the
embodiment of the other possibilities (the ‘Self’). That is the meaning of
magical sacrifice. And that is the goal of the SatEx, a goal no one has ever
described to me in such a fashion. That is why the burial rite in the attic
seemed so much more fitting, and the idea of turning myself into the golem
of my angel. Maybe this is where the Book of Clay finds its full meaning?
So many insights, so many revelations. But at what price? I had always
thought that once we live a happy, ungrudging, fulfilled life, we get to
experience the happiness of God. It seems I was naive to want both a
perfected and a formless love at the same time.

If I have to let go of everything and turn my back on life just to be this
close to the angels, then I know what I will choose. I love my life
wholeheartedly; I love Rose, at once so close and so far from me; I love our
togetherness, our adventures, our lust for life, our house, our dog, our going
to bed, our evenings, our mornings. What could ever beat this? My life, my
love with Rose is priceless. I separated myself from her for four weeks. Not a
day longer.
I came closer than ever before in my life to death, to pain, to loneliness, to
the forces of Saturn, and to the voices of the angels. But nothing can compare

to my life, or could be better than it. If I am to become the golem of my
angel, then I just hope my angel will love my life as much as I do. Together
we can travel and be victorious on our further magical adventures, just like
this one. But if it cannot love this life, right here and right now, then we will
see each other but once again, upon my death, when I must return to Saturn
and the black Aralim one last time.
Yet deep inside myself I know: this is but the experience of a single path.
This is not the only door to the house of the angels.
(…)
I.IV.MMX · TWENTY-SEVENTH DAY

The image of becoming the golem of my angel doesn’t quite hit the nail on
the head. Certainly many parts of my life and personality will need to become
mutable and somewhat formless, like clay, so that my angel and I can bring
each other into alignment.
Rose and I recently talked a lot about how many of our single friends had
become so ‘whole’ in their singleness that it was hard for anyone else to find
an opening into their perfectly orchestrated lives. This is precisely how it is
with the contact with the angel—and Saturn is the moment as well as the tool
of breaking myself open. This was the idea that led me to the image of the
golem.
The symbol of the Seventeenth Path, however, is the twins. Despite being
attuned, we will still remain two separate beings, both alive and full of
individuality. Gareth Knight uses the metaphor of Castor and Pollux, two
brothers of the same mother, yet one of human descent (Castor/Malkuth) and
the other divine (Pollux/Binah). Pollux, the half-divine one, decides to spend
half his life in hell to rescue his brother Pollux. What a terrific image to
illustrate the humility and the ‘downwards-directed meditation’ of our angel.
Impressed by the love of the brothers, Zeus turns them into a twin star in the
heavens. The trump of the Seventeenth Path is the Lovers: in the image of
Castor and Pollux we see the love between the higher and lower mirror
images of the same divine spark.
The answer to my question, though, lies neither in Binah nor in Saturn, but
in Tiphareth. Thanks to Gareth Knight’s wonderful explanation, I am now
realizing what has to become of the ashes: it is Tiphareth itself.
(…)

II.IV.MMX · TWENTY-EIGHTH DAY (FINAL DAY)

Let us bring this to completion. Outside, dusk is settling and the last day of
the SatEx is coming to an end.
The last four weeks have been a long march through a dark tunnel. The
tunnel of single-mindedness, of complete devotion to Saturn, and the
darkness of asceticism. How many things have I lost? What did Saturn
consider dead and make fall away? It is still much too early to say.
What I know since yesterday, though, is that I walked through this tunnel
backwards, with my back to the light at the far end. As soon as I turn around,
the sun will shine again on my face. It is good to know what I want to
maintain from these weeks and which character traits I shall be giving up for
good tonight.
What will follow from this work is not entirely clear yet. First I must
reestablish the balance of my energies. My throat chakra is completely
overcharged and my heart chakra is dead silent, like an empty house. Then to
create a talisman for my angel in Tiphareth. It will help me remain in touch
with Pollux and strengthen and grow my magical intent. Thirdly, to leave
IMBOLC and to hand over the place of the guide to my angel and myself. An
important step to begin forging my own path. And finally, to possibly work
through the Arbatel in 2010 and 2011 as my first practical grimoire and to
gain familiarity with the Olympic Spirits and the method of evocation. I
actually had the thought that I could work on this last point together with NN.
That would be quite a nice celebration of our brotherhood in magic.
And here is the list of the things that will be dying tonight:
• I will move from a perspective of ego towards a perspective of you.
• I will move from the foolishness of the child to the smile of a man.
• I will move from relaxation by overloading my senses to relaxation by
offloading my senses.
• I will move into speaking only half of everything I say to everything I say.
• I will move into understanding words as talismans.
• I will move from the consciousness in Malkuth towards a consciousness in
Tiphareth.
• I will move from I to Thou.
One more hour until the ritual preparations begin. I am nervous and I am

afraid. This is how someone must feel who is about to enter the operating
room for some long-awaited yet still-dreaded surgery.
III.IV.MMX

Yesterday night, around 10 pm, I started with the temple preparations. I
returned to the house at about 2 am.
I was in a strange mood, somewhere between expectation and fear,
certainty and uncertainty. One the one hand I was beginning to see my life
after the SatEx increasingly clearly, and on the other hand I was full of
expectations of death and thoughts of conclusion.
The ninth Saturn ritual went well. Overall it was somewhat shorter than the
previous ones. Initially I lacked concentration, probably because of that
strange mix of excitement, tiredness, and exhaustion. Several times I had to
bring myself back into ritual trance by intoning the divine names.
At the peak of the rite I had a vivid understanding of Saturn as the Urfather as well as in the shape of his angelic forces. My plea was understood
and accepted.
Then I asked Saturn for advice about the time that would follow this night.
He gave me the four letters H-E-V-D, which I yet have to analyse and
understand.
Following the rite I changed my clothes, put on the new robe, and with
candle in hand left the temple, walked through the cold night and over the old
staircase behind the barn, up into the attic for the Ritus Thanatos.
I lit some Saturn incense behind the talisman of Agiel and Zazel and sat
down in a triangle of candles in the middle of which stood the coffin.
Staring at the coffin I meditated on death and immersed myself entirely
into the perspective of my dying self. This moment was about a farewell
without a return, about the decay inside the house of the coffin, about my
farewell to Rose, to all the things unfinished as well as about the sadness of
everyone left behind.
I extinguished the candles and placed myself in the coffin.
It was a cold night. As I blew out the candles I saw the silver clouds of my
breath, and a cold draught blew through the air holes at the top and bottom of
the coffin. Only now, in the complete, pitch black darkness of the coffin, did
I once again feel my tiredness and exhaustion. Coldness and stiffness crept
into my body and I took up the visualization of death and the decay of my

body.
At an early stage I had a clear vision of a radiating and pulsating silver
spiral, in whose centre was my dead body. The spiral seemed alive, and
something inside it—or maybe the lights it consisted of—began to work on
me. Again and again the images of the vision blurred. It certainly wasn’t a
linear process, more a slow flood made of individual waves, each one pulling
me further away from life.
Finally I lay completely reduced to bones in the coffin, dead, half-naked,
half covered by the decaying scraps of what once had been my clothes. At
this point I was completely without fear. I tested myself several times, to see
if I had withheld or suppressed fears. But neither seemed to be the case. Even
when my flesh was falling apart, and heaps of maggots piled up in my
stomach, my sex and legs, it still seemed like a completely organic and
appropriate process.
At a certain point, entirely by itself, my skeleton fell apart into ashes. Then
a particular process set in whose vision I followed with complete surprise and
without any interference on my part. Things happened quite quickly: the
ashes were lifted up (or did they rise aloft themselves?) and were sifted
through a fine screen. Rough, white residue was caught on the screen and left
behind. Then the finer, sifted ashes were picked up again and poured into a
phial in which they were washed. The residue of this washing was then
heated, the fluid began to sweat, and it evaporated and condensed at the upper
end of the glass flask. The drops trickled down the glass and into another
vessel—or perhaps back into the coffin—and settled down into a human form
made entirely of the purified material. The substance seemed like a firm
powder, somewhere between silver and sand, and between grey and white in
colour, and it was quietly radiating.
Without warning I was pushed back into this body—changed from
immovable spectator into participant—having ‘become’ this form of ashes. It
seemed as if my spirit had waited outside while the substance of my life was
processed and refined, and then with one big pull I was back, in the form of
these ashes. It felt slightly cold, and yet I was incredibly alive and brimming
with energy.
I had almost no time to experience this before thousands of small,
colourful flower buds broke through the grey surface of the ashes. In a
heartbeat their little heads covered my whole body, without leaving a single

inch clear. I could now sense that my feet, legs, stomach, chest, and
especially my featureless face were all made of these tiny, bright blossoms.
The feeling was completely inexpressible: firm and light at the same time,
stable and agile, fluid and yet solid. My insides were still made entirely of the
strange, grey, ash-like substance, only its whole surface was covered in
thousands, maybe millions, of blossoms.
I expected this to be the highly fulfilling end of the vision. My breath was
calm and steady, and pure energy was flowing into and out of me. Then from
out of nowhere something like a tube pierced my solar plexus. Through it a
current of pure, fluid gold poured into my body. The gold—or a brightly
shining substance that seemed to be gold—began to fill the grey bodily
substance underneath the skin of petals. Only then did I recognize a tall,
silver-black figure standing at the head of the coffin. From out of itself—or
did it hold it in its hands?—it threw down a second bodily form into mine.
This form was bright, almost piercingly white, and seemed to be made of
pure, polished silver. This shape immediately merged with the inner gold of
my body and disappeared under the skin of blossoms. At that moment I saw
my angel standing behind me at the head of the coffin. What an entirely
strange sensation! As if a blind spot was finally being revealed, shutters being
taken down. Certainly not as if my angel had ‘appeared’ or entered the room,
but much more as if I had finally, after decades of blindness, managed to look
above my own head.

The physical state in which I found myself at this point is still a complete
mystery to me. There was almost too much beauty and shining love within
me to bear. Was it a vibration of pain or joy? Looking back I can only
describe it as the purest form of a sun-body that I could conceive.
Yesterday I wrote that I was planning to do a talisman for my angel in
Tiphareth, in order to reactivate my heart chakra and to support the process of
transformation. The experience in the coffin tonight was so much more than
that. It is a present from my angel to me, to us, and it will keep us in
communion from now on. I have only to return in vision to the faceless body
made of gold, with its skin of petals, and immediately I feel the closeness and
the contact of my angel.
Brother Pollux, I will wax and wane, but you will remain. I will miss and
fall, but you will stand; I will become blind and err, but you will see; I will
waste and spend, but you will turn everything to gold. Even if some years
from now I will not return to you more than a single gram, a grain of dust,
then you will accept it and remain infinite in your love.
I guess, after all, that I did become the golem of my angel—and yet I still
remain miles apart from it. Though a golem of clay is not the same as a
golem of flowers. I am humbled and overjoyed. What begins from here is a
path walked side by side. I will be able to overcome my perplexity only by
beginning to share. Silence over the secret, but sharing the good fortune.
What flowers can I sow? Where do I see ashes today? Where can I become
an agent of such change? In every moment. I would have never thought it
possible in this life. The tallest boundary between him and myself, between
Castor on earth and Pollux in Hades, was the absence of my belief. It does
not require a path; it requires acceptance.
IV.IV.MMX

I am just returning from my first complete meditation, focused on
strengthening my bond to Pollux and of the influx of the body of flowers. It
did not require any groundwork or effort to return to conscious communion.
Pollux again gave me the body of flowers; then he stood behind me and laid
his hands (or something similar, as he doesn’t have a corporeal body) on my
shoulders. A current of deep peace and solar force filled me.
It was an incredible experience, so dense, weightless, and entirely without

effort, as I held the contact. He is there whenever I let him be. It doesn’t
require any particular technique, any magic. Just silence and awareness of our
communion.
VI.IV.MMX

Over the weekend I looked up the term Saturn gave me as advice for the time
after the SatEx: HEVD. In volume 2 of A Book of the Beginnings by Gerald
Massey, the word appears with the translation ‘to be green, fresh, and hale.’
An encouragement to see the world with fresh eyes and to further pursue
many newfound perspectives.
Similarly impressively is that HEVD appears in Massey’s book under the
heading of the chapter ‘The Phenomenal Origin of Jehovah-Elohim’! IHVH
Elohim, it seems, correlates directly with this advice, which makes particular
sense as this divine name is the highest octave of Saturn. As this advice
relates not only to all things Saturnine but also to the future of my life—or at
least, that’s how I like to interpret it—it makes sense that it was given by
IHVH Elohim, and not Agiel for instance, who as the intelligence of Saturn is
more one dimensional and rooted within Saturn alone.
What a wonderful farewell gift from the black brother, Saturn.
1 Further information, in German only, at www.magieausbildung.de

Part three
practice

Systasis with your holy daimon
Introduction
It is necessary also that you should fully understand how you ought to
enjoy these immense riches, so that they may not be in your hands
unfruitful, or even harmful.1
Genuine Initiates do not grasp for powers they are unqualified to use
beneficially, but they do seek to extend their capacity for rightdoing, so
whatever power comes to them will be properly applied.2
Many pathways exist for achieving communion with your holy daimon.
Some of them are less costly than others, and most of them have been
forgotten today. What all of them have in common, though, is that they
require you to work on yourself first; only then can you encounter another
higher being. The focus of the work moves from inward to outward. The raw
stone has to be finished before it can be set in its final position in the temple.
The journey towards communion with our holy daimon is a journey
towards fulfilment, towards becoming who we are meant to be and filling
with life every part of our patterned fate. This is the purpose to which our
personal daimon has been assigned to us, and if we want to connect to it
consciously then this is the journey to which we must dedicate ourselves. The
majority of this journey consists of the arduous task of transforming our
embodied personalities from obstacles to the work of our holy daimon into
partners and co-creators in that process. Despite the significance of such
work, achieving it is the first step on an even longer journey.
We do not have enough power at our own disposal to do anything very
wonderful.3

What is really important to understand before we begin, is this: you are the
interface through which communion with your holy daimon will ultimately
be achieved. Your daimon is ready for communion, and has been since long
before your birth. So it is not on her/him that you have to work, but on
yourself. It is the interface between your daimon and the world that has to be
refined. This interface is composed of your personality, or more specifically,
the person you think you are at the moment. Once you have achieved
communion, your work is to maintain this channel (i.e. your physical and
spiritual senses) and keep it clear of anything that could impede it again.
I suggest four different stages to uncloak the voice and presence of your
holy daimon. It would be wise to follow these stages in sequence, and work
through each chapter in the order given. The work within each of these four
stages is cyclical and will never end. Once we have finished the first cycle,
we return to where we began, only in a slightly elevated position, and must
then begin the next cycle of the operation. That’s how we continually refine
ourselves, and stay attuned to the level of consciousness where our holy
daimon dwells. Despite this cyclical return, the expression of your practice
will vary over time, and increasingly you’ll discover your own methods.
Slowly, without rushing we transform ourselves from a vessel that receives to
a vessel ready to give. The four stages are: Trust, Joy, Darkness, and
Encounter.
What I will present is the essential work, stripped bare of any romantic
ideas, mysticism, or lodge affairs. Why? Because your daimon is a raw, pure,
essential reality: it simply occupies a different realm. So let’s mirror this in
our work. Walking this path is not about our personal dreams, dramas,
desires, or preferences. It is about the work that has to be done. Nothing else.
That work is to turn your senses into vehicles for, rather than obstacles to, the
presence of your daimon.
Because this work will include a lot of teeth grinding and letting go of
what you thought you were or needed, it is important to start this journey
with an attitude of joyfulness. Though joy is the second stage of the initial
cycle—let’s do some teeth grinding first—it might be the most important
stage of all. A joyful place is waiting for us; to get there the first step is to
trust that we actually deserve to discover it. Let us begin with spiritualizing
matter so we can become better agents of materializing spirit.

A Metaphor
Following the historical accounts given in previous chapters, and before we
delve into actual practice, it is important to fill one last gap. That is, to equip
us with a twenty-first century metaphor. This metaphor should feel a little
more prosaic, a little closer to home. It should cut through the pages of the
centuries and anchor us back in our own reality. So here is how I suggest you
think of your relationship with your holy daimon:
Imagine a doctor who has a difficult disease to cure. The disease is hidden
in the body of a patient. As the disease is widespread, the doctor cannot
simply cut open the patient and take out the affected organs. The approach
has to be more subtle, yet no less determined or effective. The doctor inserts
a thin cable into the body of the patient. Attached to the end of the cable is a
tiny device consisting of a camera and a laser. The recorded images from
inside the patient’s body are sent through the cable to a screen for the doctor
to look at as he directs the device and and operates on the patient.
Now this little setup in our imaginary operating theatre is all we need to get
a more realistic picture of our relationship with our holy daimon. ‘You,’ as in
your current incarnated self, are the camera at the end of the tube. The doctor
is your holy daimon. The patient is the world of creation into which you have
been fully immersed. The beginning of this operation was the point of your
first incarnation, and its end will be your last. Over the course of the entire
operation the doctor will use many different cameras on the tube. However,
both the screen and the hard drive that stores the camera’s images will always
be the same.
What can we take from this?
• First, there is no need for the holy daimon to ‘talk’ to the camera at the end
of the tube. She/he is in control of it already. Even if they never see each
other, their ‘relationship’ is perfectly fine. It ‘just works.’
• Second, the only thing the doctor needs the camera to do is to ‘record’: to
point the laser and follow the lead she/he is giving.
• Third, emotions don’t play a role here. It doesn’t matter if the camera finds
what it records pleasant or unpleasant. Its only job is to explore the body of
the patient objectively and operate on it successfully.

• Fourth, if the camera developed a conscious free will of its own and started
to act independently from the doctor’s lead, then it would mess up the
operation. The camera has no idea where it is, why it was put there, or how
deliberate actions to save something much bigger than it are being acted out
through it.
What does this metaphor tell us about the process of gaining knowledge
and conversation with our holy daimon? It tells us that there are a few
operating principles we have to accept if we are to be successful:
First, gaining conscious contact with our holy daimon (the doctor) is not at
all necessary for the successful completion of the operation. All organic life
has the tendency to work just fine without human intervention. However, in
fairness, under certain conditions having conscious access to one’s holy
daimon can be incredibly beneficial for the positive outcome of the operation.
To stay with our metaphor, that condition would be improving the quality
of the interaction between doctor and camera by giving the camera a more
conscious idea of the process in which it is involved. This means we need to
be prepared to listen much more once we are connected to our holy daimon,
and to talk less. The operating principles we can derive from this metaphor
also demonstrate that the ‘true will’ of the camera is really the will of the
doctor. The camera has to accept that it doesn’t have the processing power to
understand everything the doctor knows or intends to do. The camera can
become a better version of itself, a more sophisticated tool; yet it can never
become the doctor.
It should be noted that traditional approaches for achieving knowledge of
our holy daimon (i.e. helping the camera see the doctor), such as the Saturn
Rite given in this book and the much longer Abramelin ritual, are completely
fine alternatives to the path we will lay out here. From the above it should be
clear that the doctor doesn’t really care how the camera becomes a better
version of itself. She/he only cares about the clarity of the image that the
camera can display, and how well its laser responds to her/his intent.
So while approaches such as my own or Abramelin work well, they can be
significantly simplified. My journey took more than ten years, and it’s only
when looking back that I can see the many detours I took. The goal of this
section is to simplify the approach, and get straight to business. Your holy
daimon is talking to you already. All we need to do is to get you to a point

where you are able to listen consciously to her/him and observe that she/he is
working on you already.
Stage 1: Trust
Why Trust Matters
The description of a landscape is called its topology. This word does not only
describe physical landscapes; it can also describe the characteristics and
details of a mental territory. When it is used in this way, any recurring
feature, anything we consistently come across within a particular mental
landscape (i.e. a specific time, culture, or region) is called a topos. Literary
topoi (the plural of the Greek topos, ‘place’ or ‘theme’) are deeply embedded
motifs that are foundational to the understanding of a particular culture or
time.
When we look at our Western magical tradition (which is both oral and
literary) as a landscape, we quickly realize that the concept of power is one of
its most essential topoi.
From Prometheus to Faust, for more than twenty-five centuries magicians
have been characterized by their disregard for social norms and rules in their
pursuit of personal power. The nature of their lifelong voyages stood in stark
contrast to the increasing levels of social regulation which slowly evolved
into the threefold separation of powers (legislature, executive, judiciary) that
all democratic governments respect today. Apotheosis or deification, the idea
that an individual through their own choice, hard work, sweat and tears could
raise themselves to a godlike stature, was the ultimate testament to the
antisocial agenda of the magician.
In light of this it is no surprise that we find the magician standing at the
crossroads of the paths of taboo and power. Countless generations of aspiring
magicians have sought to leverage practices that are taboo, but which
promise to increase their personal power. The chances were high that such an
approach would get you quite far on your magical path—or at least on your
way to the pyre. It is helpful to remind ourselves, that for centuries these two
paths were one and the same.
Now, the kind of magic we are interested in here is of a very particular
nature. Whether we call them fravashis, holy guardian angels, personal

daimones, or something else, the object of our magic is the same: we want to
establish a conscious communion between this being and ourselves. This
significantly narrows down the magical techniques in which we are
interested. We do not need to look at the vast majority of the West’s magical
literature, which concerns itself with such ends as healing warts, finding
treasures, becoming invisible, stealing horses without getting caught, and
bedding that special someone whose heart you have made yourself too small
to believe you could ever win without magic.
The pursuit of magical power is both a necessity as well as a distraction.
Over the centuries it has kept innumerable magicians from making any real
progress in the Great Work. Gaining access to the poison of magical power,
and learning to apply it with moderation and absolutely clear intent, is a skill
that only few of us will master in our lifetime. Without it we won’t be able to
achieve anything truly magical; yet once addicted to it this poison will
equally keep us from creating anything meaningful beyond the narrow
confines of our own ego. So at what point does this poison turn from a bare
necessity into a dangerous distraction?
The answer is quite simple: Once you have acquired sufficient power to
master yourself, you are ready to proceed into more complex areas of magic.
For the kind of magic we are pursuing here, we are not trying to increase the
power we have over the world at large; we are trying to increase the power
we have over the world within ourselves. Ruling over our own elements, over
the forces of life and destruction as they are sown into our blood, bones, and
brain, and as they are woven into one beneath our skin—that is the whole
premise of this stage of the Great Work.
What we gain from this process is the most foundational magical necessity
of all: we stop being an obstacle in the Great Work and we become its most
essential tool and source of power. We, as human beings, stop being part of
the problem and finally become part of the solution. People who have
mastered the art of handling magical power without getting addicted to its
poison have developed a set of core skills that I would describe like this.
They have a validated and genuine trust in the following abilities:
• To get shit done if they set their will to it.
• To not get carried away in the process of doing so.

• To stay focused over long periods of time.
• To be okay with failing often and coming back to try again.
What we are talking about here is no magic at all, yet without these skills,
no magic will ever come from you. And dangerously, seeing this process
work in the world can become a drug in itself. Have you ever watched young
boys play in the woods? Having been one of them long ago, I can tell you
that they love breaking branches, carving bark, chopping down saplings, and
generally destroying anything their small bodies allow them to. Obviously
this is not because they are bad kids, but because this is their playful way of
experiencing self-efficacy—the ability to apply oneself to the world and leave
a mark. If this kind of immediate feedback and gratification loop is still
required as an adult, then we are caught in the vicious circle of reproducing
the same behaviour over and over again, still caught in the childish hope that
breaking this or breaking that will ultimately create a higher degree of trust in
ourselves. But it doesn’t. And being hooked on seeing how we leave a dent in
the world will make for a pretty dented world. We have to learn how to put
our power into the service of something greater than ourselves.
To become a magician we have to become a gateway for significant
(spiritual, elemental, celestial, chthonic, you name it) power. Handling these
forces is actually quite straightforward, so long as we do not desire to abuse
them to prove our human self-efficacy to the world. The level of magical
power you’ll be able to handle successfully depends more than anything on
your ability to remove yourself from the equation. This is neither an act of
servile self-denial nor of divine bondage: it is about trusting that you’ll be
okay whatever happens.
Exercises in Trust
So let’s focus on a few ways to develop trust in our ability to handle magical
powers without getting stuck in the game. At the heart of these exercises lies
the skill of quickly switching one’s mode of presence, or better, being present
in two modes at once. Here we will focus on the opposing modes of ‘holding
onto’ and ‘letting go of.’
First we need to become comfortable with handling a significant amount of
power. Once we have become comfortable with this, we need to switch mode

and become equally comfortable with letting go of that power. We need to
trust in our ability to shift between and be successfully present in both states,
powerless and powerful.
Practising this skill in magic is hard, which is why we’ll aim to introduce it
as playfully as possible. And yet, once you have understood this concept,
you’ll have laid a foundation for your future practice that too few magicians
accomplish these days. This foundation will serve you well in both magical
and mundane life. In leadership training this skill is called ‘polarity
management,’ and in Gestalt coaching it is called ‘finding the middle mode.’
STRETCHING YOUR POLARITIES

You can do this exercise anywhere: in public or in private, alone or in a
crowd. It can be done in less than a minute, and should be practised little and
often. Do not underestimate its impact just because it seems so plain and
inconspicuous.
Open your left hand and let it rest gently wherever it is placed. Bring your
consciousness into it and slowly allow all tension to fade from its muscles.
Just as you would put a child to bed at night, carefully lay your left hand to
rest. Or if you are walking, let it move gently with the motion of your body.
Give it space, and allow it to be present and entirely unconstrained. You
might want to reflect on the nature of your open hand. Maybe you’ll think
something like this: ‘This is a hand. It is an open hand. In being entirely itself
it also is the gestalt of all hands that have ever been. This is a hand. It
happens to be attached to my body. Through it flows the history of
everything all hands have ever done on this planet. This is the open hand.’
Let your left hand rest calmly in this state, and bring your focus to your right
hand.
Form the fingers of your right hand together into a fist. Slowly, while
keeping your left hand relaxed, increase the muscular tension in your right
hand. Let your fist become tighter and tighter. Let your fingertips press hard
into the flesh of your palm. Feel how the power of your body is increasingly
being drawn and absorbed by your right hand. Keep building and holding this
strength in your right hand. If you are walking, your right hand should no
longer be moving with your body, but be firm as a rock at your side. Now
keep on walking like this, or sitting wherever you are.
You might want to reflect on the nature of your fist. Maybe you’ll think

something like this: ‘This is a fist. It is a building tool. It is a killing tool. The
force that forms this fist is the force of all of creation. Rocks and metals and
oceans are all formed by this force, held together now by my bones, muscles,
and flesh. This is a fist. It is attached to my body. Yet through it flows the
history of everything that has ever been done with a fist. This is the fist.’
Then, keeping your left hand relaxed and your right fist under tension, stop
concentrating on them. You are neither your left hand nor your right hand.
You are in between them. You are the bridge that links them together. Stay in
this space for as long as you want. Feel the presence of your hands in their
opposite states. Feel yourself, breathing, holding on and letting go, right
inbetween them.
Then let go of both states. Notice how quickly both hands return to a state
of comfort and normality. Now they are neither fully relaxed nor fully
strained. Your hands are wise. They are already experts in handling the
poison of power. They know so perfectly well how to mix tension and
calmness that you hardly ever notice them doing it.
TWO MODES OF TRATAK

This exercise takes a little longer, and you will need a dark, windless and
undisturbed place for it. Just as with the previous exercise, it’s best to work
on this skill little and often. Ideally you can practice Mode 1 in the morning
and Mode 2 in the evening. You can also do both exercises at the same time
each day for no less than five minutes each.
Mode 1
Sit in a dark place and light a candle. Place it in front of you so that you can
easily see its flame while your eyes are relaxed. Now gaze at the flame
without moving. Do not move your hands, swallow or blink. Just sit and gaze
motionlessly at the flame. When you are ready, close your eyes and focus on
the flame’s negative imprint on your retina. Inside or outside, it does not
matter; the flame is still with you and you are with it. When your vision of
the flame fades, open your eyes again and refresh it, not moving anything
except your eyelids.
See how long you can practice in this manner. Five minutes is good;
several hours (just for the stage with open eyes) is getting closer to expert
level. Also, do not worry if your eyes begin to water as you stare without

blinking. This is a natural and healthy way for the eye to clean itself and keep
your retina covered with the film of fluid that is renewed by blinking.
Keep a record in your magical diary of your observations about this
exercise. Helpful questions for exploration could be: What is a flame? How
much of yourself can you merge with the flame? When you are one with the
flame, how do you perceive the space surrounding the flame? Where does the
flame go when the candle is extinguished?
Mode 2
For this exercise you will need two candles. Light both of them and place
them to your far left and right respectively. Position them in such way that
you can just about hold both flames in the corners of your field of vision.
You do not need to see them clearly: they should be on the edge of your
peripheral vision. Rest your gaze in the centre and perceive both flames at
once. Aim to hold both flames in your visual field without seeing either of
them clearly. When you are ready, you can close your eyes and continue the
exercise on the inside. Behind your eyelids, gaze at the peripheral impression
the flames have left on your retina. When your vision of the flames fades,
open your eyes again and refresh it.
As with the previous exercise, make notes in your magical diary and
continue to add observations as you progress with your practice. Helpful
questions for exploration could be: What is the space that exists between the
two flames? What do you merge with by not focusing on either of them?
How does this exercise affect you differently from the previous one? What is
similar?
Mode 1 strengthens your focused vision, Mode 2 teaches you peripheral or
open vision. The latter mode of viewing tends to be much harder to get
accustomed to. Mode 2 has also been called ‘eternity gaze.’
Should you want to learn more about these gaze-meditation techniques
then start by researching the Sanskrit term tratak. Unlike the purpose of
traditional tratak-methods, the intent here is not primarily to become expert at
either mode of vision, but to experience the difference between them, to
become acquainted with them, and most importantly to develop the ability to
easily switch between them. Just as we are neither the open hand nor the
closed fist, so we are neither the focused vision nor the peripheral one.

THE SERPENT AND THE EGG

Phanes, the Orphic primeval deity of new life hatched from an egg with a
serpent wound about it, has been called the ‘Revealer’; and indeed new
wisdom awaits us by learning more about this mystical image. The serpent
wound about the egg has been an object of gnostic reflection for many
centuries. Countless times it has been hammered into stone, painted in oil,
tattooed on skin, or conjured in vision.
Before we begin this third exercise in Trust, let’s take a moment to
meditate on the body of the serpent. Can you see the polarity here? The
painful and deeply personal dilemma of the snake? At every moment the
serpent has to make a decision. Should it continue to incubate the egg with
the warmth of its coiled body, or should it tighten its muscles just a little
more and break its fragile shell? The snake’s immediate desire is to break it:
serpents love devouring fresh eggs. Yet it can choose to resist this desire,
even though this means resisting its every instinct. Instead of breaking the
egg, it can choose to turn its body into a tool of generation and creation. But
this is a process with high stakes. It would leave the snake hungry for a long
time, and there is no guarantee of success. After all, no snake has ever before
witnessed an egg hatch. So this is the snake’s choice: how should it apply the
power that was granted to it? To foster destruction or creation? To feed itself
or feed new life? To follow its desire, or to resist it and follow a path into
uncertainty?
For this exercise you will need two eggs. Either both should be raw, or one
should be hard-boiled; I would recommend that you start with one raw and
one hard-boiled egg.
This exercise should be done in the morning, before your day begins. Sit in
a quiet place. Place the two eggs before you, just as you placed the single
candle in the previous exercises. You should be able to see them clearly
while keeping your eyes relaxed. When your mind and body have settled into
calm and silence, pick up the raw egg. Hold it in your hands and meditate on
it. Here are a few guiding questions to explore: What is the nature of an egg?
Where did the perfect smoothness of its shell come from? Is the world
captured inside the egg, or is the world surrounding the egg? And what about
your hands holding it? Are you now the serpent, ready either to incubate the
seed of life or to break its shell? How many eggs have you broken
unthinkingly in your life before? Who are you to the egg?

When your mind has fully explored the egg, its nature, and your
relationship with it, take a deep breath. Then, without hesitation, throw the
egg forcefully on the floor before you.
Settle back into your position of calm, look at the broken egg, and continue
your meditation. What are your thoughts now? Maybe you want to reflect on
these questions: Where did the power to break this egg come from? Where
does it rest in your body when it is not being used? When in your life have
you used this sort of destructive power before? What do you see now about
the dangers of being you?
When your exploration has ended, clean up the broken egg and get ready
for your day. When you are about to start, return to your meditation place and
pick up the second egg. Now you’ll reverse your earlier decision, and rather
than breaking the second egg you will carry it with you, in your left or right
hand, for an entire day. Your goal is to incubate it with the warmth of your
palms to learn about the sacrifice it takes to gestate and protect new life.
You’ll realize that protecting life is much harder than destroying it. In my
own practice, I gave myself permission to place the egg next to my hands
when holding it was impossible, for instance when I was driving or writing.
Now you will realize why I recommended that you boil the second egg at
first! You might find yourself riding a bike with an egg in your hand, sitting
in meetings with an egg in your hand, having lunch or dinner with an egg in
your hand—and of course people asking you why you have an egg in your
hand. My default answer was always this: ‘I am doing a mindfulness course,
and this is part of my training. I need to be mindful of this egg over the
course of an entire day and bring it home safely again.’
Reflections on Trust
In these exercises we have exposed ourselves to three polarities: the polarity
of power in our bodies, the polarity of mastering that power without
becoming attached to it, and the polarity of creation and destruction that sits
at the heart of so many of our decisions, whether mundane or magical.
When you have done these exercises, you may find yourself faced with the
single most important question that can emerge from them. It should be
obvious by now that this question is not: ‘Do I have sufficient power at my

disposal, and if not, how can I increase it?’ Rather, it is the more intimate
question: ‘Can I trust myself? Whatever power is accessible to me right now,
can I trust myself to handle it wisely? What reason do I have to believe that I
am fully qualified to balance my desire with my will?’ There are three
reasons why your personal answer to this question matters so much:
1 Achieving communion with your holy daimon will significantly change
how you’ll have to work with power as a magician. It will also significantly
increase the force and volume of power that will flow into you as a vessel.
Are you properly prepared to handle these forces? Or will they break you?
The answer to this has nothing to do with stamina or strength, but with the
firmness of your ethics and the flexibility with which you apply yourself to
an ever-changing world.
2 Achieving communion with your holy daimon is no mean feat. It is a feat
that few magicians in any generation achieve. One of the main blocks for
those who don’t achieve it is that deep under their skin, in the quiet of their
own heart, they inherently doubt that they could ever really do it. They
haven’t developed enough trust in their ability to get shit done in this world
before attempting to achieve something that is out of this world. If you
don’t want to number yourself among them, then learn to handle polarities
really well, rather than trying to increase the amount of power available to
you. First apply what you have learned to this world, before stepping
forward into the magical realm.
3 Finally, achieving communion with your holy daimon is a feat which
noone else will ever be able to assess. Even after years of successful work
in conscious conjunction with your holy daimon, your physical eye will
still never have seen it; nor will your physical hands ever have touched it.
Trust plays a crucial role here: do you trust yourself enough to stay honest
with yourself throughout this journey? Are you gentle enough with yourself
when you fail, and strict enough when you risk getting carried away? Do
you trust yourself to judge yourself without emotion, and in the absence of
any other kind of orientation?
The answer to all three of these questions literally rests in the palm of your

hand as you carry an unbroken egg through a busy day of work or study. It is
also reassuring to know that all our ancestors struggled with this same
essential question. The seventeenth-century mystic Jakob Böhme provided
me with some of my deepest meditations on what it truly means to generate
the necessary readiness within oneself to successfully channel the force he
called ‘magia.’ The following quote is taken from his Six Points On
Mysticism (Sex Puncta Mystica). Here he defines the most essential
components of magic, or magia:
Magia is the mother of eternity, the being of all beings, because she
creates herself and is understood in Desire. Within herself she is nothing
but a Will; the same Will is the Great Mystery of all wonders and
secrecy. (…) The Desire, however, creates such a nature in the Will so
that the Will is within itself. The true magia is not a being, but the
desiring spirit of the being. She is a matrix without substance and yet
reveals itself in being.4
Böhme’s language is hard to decipher, but if we read it slowly and
carefully enough, then its meaning reveals itself. Böhme explains that magic
is not a force embedded in nature, but rather it is the heart of nature itself. It
is a force that has no substance in itself, but it allows all substance to come
into existence. It is the cosmic, patterning power that leads to all being and
creation. This is why Böhme called magic ‘the mother of eternity,’ for all
created beings, in their eternal waves of coming and going, are her offspring.
Following this introduction, Böhme offers an unambiguous clue as to how
we humans can connect with this process of constant weaving and patterning
and become its co-creators: it is by mastering the twin forces of desire and
will. The former is the fire within which we forge the latter. Then, one day,
the latter becomes the hand that holds tightly to the former. According to
Böhme, getting ready to handle magia successfully is a side-effect of
mastering one’s desire and will and combining them in one balanced vessel
of power.
Obviously the work of acquiring this skill is not limited to our magical
practice. All aspects of our life, even the most mundane, must become
laboratories for our work. While getting ready to handle significant amounts
of magical power may be our goal, the bulk of the work to achieve this must

be conducted on the periphery of our magical lives.
The English word ‘power’ has its root in the Latin posse, ‘to be able to.’
With any new skill, the power we ultimately gain from mastering it is not
what we focus on while we are in the process of acquiring it. What we must
focus on when we learn a new skill are the countless small movements that
comprise it, movements that we need to replicate, sequence, and combine. As
Böhme tells us, the core skills of magic are to be gained by mastering our
desire and will: tools that when placed in the hands of man will propogate or
destroy the seeds of life.
Mystery is nothing other than the magical will, which still lies caught in
desire. (…) The Magician has power in this Mystery to act according to
his will, and can do what he pleases. But he must be armed in that
element wherein he would create; else he will be cast out as a stranger,
and given into the power of the spirits thereof, to deal with him
according to their desire.5

Stage 2: Joy
Why Joy Matters
Achieving communion with your holy daimon is supposed to be hard magical
work. The story of the Book of Abramelin begins with the Jew Abraham of
Worms going on a quest that takes him far out of his comfort zone, away
from all familiar lands and out into the Egyptian desert. What does joy matter
on this journey? Well, it matters a lot. And in this chapter we will explore
why, and how, we can equip ourselves with this powerful shield.
I both have exhorted, and do exhort unto a solitary life, which is the
source of all good; it is true that it is difficult to accustom oneself
thereunto; but once thou shalt have obtained the Sacred Science and
Magic the love for retirement will come unto thee of thine own accord,
and thou wilt voluntarily shun the commerce with and conversation of
men; for the pleasure and contentment thou wilt enjoy when thou shalt
be the possessor of this Science will be so great that thou wilt despise all
amusements, excursions, riches, and every other thing however
attractive such may be.6
Achieving communion with your holy daimon will require periods of
isolation and withdrawal. And as Abraham of Worms, the alleged author of
the Book of Abramelin said, isolation ‘is difficult to accustom oneself’ to. He
also said that it was easy once you have ‘obtained the Sacred Science and
Magic.’ But how do we accustom ourselves to the difficulties of this path
before we have acquired the divine tools magic has to offer? This is where
Joy comes in.
Think of yourself as a vessel. Normally this vessel is being continuously
filled with water from many sources, and thus is in a state of overflowing
sensual experience. New water pours in while old water flows out, and there
is a neverending coming and going of experiences, some delightful and
others painful, some of them indifferent and many invisible to our conscious
minds.
When we go into isolation, we stop all of this. We deliberately create
emptiness and openness within us. We make of ourselves an untouched
space, an empty vessel that attracts the attention of all sorts of spiritual beings

who would love to take up residence in it and fill it with their own waters. It
offers shelter and food and richness to all the spiritual beings who cannot
provide these things for themselves, who prey on carrion. And carrion is
exactly what such energy is to them.
So in isolation we strive to empty our vessel of new impressions. We strive
to empty it of our senses, both mental and physical. We create an empty
space that will ultimately be used by our holy daimon to create a conscious
communion with us. However, until then we must guard this empty vessel
and ensure that we don’t get tricked and abused by other beings who would
prey on our openness. This is why we seal this vacant space with joy.
The type of joy we mean is the most wonderful protective seal. Joy is the
shield that shines like the sun. And just like the sun it has no source but is
self-sustaining: we have but to learn to ignite it within ourselves.
Once we have experienced real joy, we’ll see how vastly different it is
from the other contemplative emotions experienced in seclusion such as
melancholia, nostalgia, and daydreaming. None of these can work as a
protective seal on our empty vessel. Quite the opposite, in fact. Melancholia,
nostalgia, and daydreaming are red carpets rolled out for beings who would
take up residence in the vessel of our mind. For as long as we are attached to
these emotional states, our vessel cannot be considered empty.
Finally, a word of caution. It is true that when we encounter our holy
daimon an incredible source of joy and wellbeing is unlocked for us.
However, in many cases this source doesn’t open like a floodgate; more often
what comes through is a little trickle that only moistens the ground. Later we
might notice its waters between the rocks and plants, and much later it
becomes a slowly broadening stream. That is, assuming we have kept up our
practice and remained in touch with our holy daimon. Eventually, that small
creek will have grown deep and broad enough for us to be carried upon it out
into the ocean.
Exercises in Joy
It seemed to me as though I was listening to a Voice, not human but
celestial, and I felt a joy in mine heart such as I could not express. 7

(…) for it is absolutely necessary to perform this Operation unto the
praise, honour, and glory of God.8
In recent decades significant efforts have been made in our Western societies
to regain access to the kind of joy with which we are dealing here, the joy
that seals the empty space of our minds. Most of the techniques and pathways
that were revived as part of this trend stem from the Far East, and today they
are easily accessible through articles, books, workshops, and mobile apps.
We find them filed under topics such as meditation, mindfulness, and, more
broadly, wellbeing.
The chances are that you will already have some personal experience of
these approaches. If not, let me encourage you to explore these powerful
techniques for yourself. Building up proper meditation skills and keeping our
body and mind attuned to them is a journey that is never finished, but rather
is a process of constant refinement. We should not, therefore, be reticent to
start out on such a journey at any point in our lives, whether we are fifteen or
fifty, and whether our lives are currently calm or caught in a swirling storm.
However, here we wish to explore something quite different. From the stream
of our collective past we want to help recover an ancient practice that has not
yet received the same level of attention as its quiet sibling, meditation. While
it is closely related to other mindfulness exercises, this ancient technique in
some respects runs quite contrary to them. It is deeply rooted in our Western
magical tradition, and thus of particular interest to our current study. It is part
of a body of practice that it would greatly benefit Western magicians to
remember and reawaken. And the way into this practice can be found in a
most unexpected place.
Our human hubbub, which invites everything in, all of the light, the
music, all madness of thought and all shades of pain, the wealth of
memory and the wealth of expectations, it is only shut to one thing: to
unity. In every glance a thousand further lurking glances blink who do
not want to become closely united; every fair and pure amazement is
confused by a thousand memories; and even in the innermost silent
sorrow a thousand questions whisper. The hubbub is lush and scant, it
amounts to abundance and refuses embrace, it builds a whirl of objects
and a whirl of emotions, whirlwind to whirlwind, making it fly over and

against each other, and it makes us pass through, all while on this our
own path, devoid of unity. (…)9
Only there is a kind of experience which arises from the soul itself,
without touch and without obstruction, in its naked own being. It
becomes and accomplishes itself beyond the everyday hubbub, free of
the other, inaccessible to the other. It does not require sustenance and no
poison can reach it. The soul, who stands within it, stands within itself,
belongs to itself, experiences itself boundlessly. Not any longer because
it is has subjected itself entirely to an object of the world, not because it
has summoned itself within an object of the world it experiences itself as
the unity, but because it has immersed itself entirely in itself, it has dived
down deep on its own bed, pit and husk, sun and eye, drunkard and drink
in one. This innermost experience is what the Greek called ekstasis, the
stepping outside.10
The term ‘ecstasy’ is a combination of the words ek, ‘out’ and histanai, ‘to
place, cause to stand.’ So in its original form the term defined a state in which
one had left one’s proper place, one had shifted outside of one’s normal
perspective. In the seventeenth century European mystical writers began to
use the word to describe a state of rapture that numbed the body while the
soul was in gnosis and experienced the divine. Over time the meaning of the
word shifted to a more general positive notion of an exalted state of good
feeling.
Just like entering inner calm, entering ecstasy is an art form. But unlike the
inner calm now taught in Meditation and Mindfulness classes around the
globe, no modern trend has yet revived the ancient techniques of mystical
ecstasy in the West. This is why ecstasy is largely misunderstood as the
opposite of calmness. And that is also why the kind of ecstasy we are dealing
with here has been almost entirely forgotten.
One of the last active Western communities to know about the power of
this kind of spiritual state, as well as the particular practices to induce and use
it practically, were the eighteenth century Polish Hasidim, founded by the
enigmatic Rabbi Yisroel ben Eliezer (circa 1700 – 1760), often called the
Baal Shem Tov. Just as their name refers to the fourth sephirah, Chesed, so
their entire communal lifestyle, which promoted kindness and piety, aimed to

bring principles of (Lurianic) Kabbalah into the experience of daily life.
The great German Jewish philosopher Martin Buber, at the beginning of
the twentieth century, began to collect and publish their mystical tales which
contained the living memories of these communities and their holy tzadikim,
or ‘righteous ones.’ For practitioners of Western magic the importance of
these half-fictional records cannot be overestimated. For centuries the
magical tradition of the West was an underground movement practised at the
periphery of European society. Whenever it dared to surface or to come too
close to the centre of society, it was persecuted and its records and
practitioners burned. Many of its artefacts were encrypted or reduced to the
bare bones of ritual instructions and recipes. As a result of this process, the
literary tradition of Western magic lost much of its poetry and much of its
practical connection to individual and communal reality. Such is the fissure
which the accounts of the mystical Hasidic tales can somewhat begin to heal
for us.
While the early Hasidim themselves were not practising magicians, many
of their holy men were experienced mystics. The way they incorporated
deeply magical and mystical principles into their everyday lives is entirely
unique and deeply educational for any modern Western practitioner. This is
also why many critics have held that Hasidism is ‘less of a world-view than a
religious technique. The main tool of its magic is the prayer.’11
The Polish Hasidim had not only a wonderful word for the kind of ecstasy
we are exploring here, but also a deeply entrenched practice to access it. They
called it hitlahavut. Derived from the Hebrew l-h-v, lahav, ‘burning, flame, to
be inflamed,’ the word illustrates the primal principle of Hasidic life in the
idea of a burning within the practitioner.12 Buber, in his introduction to The
Legend of the Baal-Shem, explains that this inner light must be lit through a
combination of divine love, fear, and fervour. The Oxford Dictionary of the
Jewish Religion describes the power of such a spiritual state: ‘profound joy in
God is rooted in an inner fervour—hitlahavut—from which one can achieve
complete self-effacement.’13
Now we can understand why hitlahavut has not yet made it into the
Western mainstream. Unlike mindfulness, and most Westernised forms of
meditation, it cannot be stripped from its deeply spiritual foundation.
Hitlahavut has a truly unruly nature, mystical fervour cannot be accessed

before one has had a highly intimate and initiatory spiritual experience; and
neither does it accept the confines of religious orthopraxy or orthodoxy. This
kind of joy, therefore, is both a deeply mystical principle and one that by
definition promotes ‘religious anarchism.’14 In the introduction to his
Ecstatic Confessions, Martin Buber gives us this beautiful first-person
account of hitlahavut:
I am the dark side of the moon: you know about my existence, yet what
you determine for the bright side does not apply to me. I am the
remainder of the equation, that which does not come out even. You may
impose a sign on me, but you cannot resolve me.15
But how, then, do we light this flame within us? Or in other words, how do
we walk out onto the dark side of the moon? The key to this for the Hasidim
was found in their particular practice of prayer. However, the kind of prayer
that they regarded so highly was quite distinct from earlier Jewish mystical
traditions. Unlike the intricate letter combinations of an Abraham Abulafia,
the Hasidim promoted an entirely non-intellectual way of approaching the
divine through ecstasy. In a famous story the Baal Shem Tov praised the
unlearned young son of a shepherd who at the height of the Yom Kippur
prayers in the synagogue could no longer hold back his fervour, and, as he
could not yet read the prayers, took out his flute and played it in the
synagogue. The Baal Shem, in his wisdom, rather than condemning the boy
for interrupting that most holy moment of their prayers, praised him before
the whole community. It was the pure, burning melody of the shepherd son’s
flute, he said, that had finally raised everyone else’s prayer into the heavens.
The story concludes that ‘every service which proceeds from a simple or a
unified soul is sufficient and complete.’16
This kind of ecstasy is not bound to erudition, ritual, or religious tradition.
Instead, for the soul to catch fire and become a sun, we have to discover ways
to empower our hearts to speak directly to the divine world, as well as to be
spoken to.
IGNITING YOUR HITLAHAVUT

One who rejoices, utters not words, but it is a certain sound of joy

without words: for it is the expression of a mind poured forth in joy,
expressing, as far as it is able, the affection, but not compassing the
feeling.17
The human voice is one of the most powerful magical tools. It can resound
in the world around us or silently within us; and it is the one tool that has
always been considered essential for prayer. It is also the most efficient tool
for igniting the dormant force of hitlahavut within us.
To practice this, you’ll need a remote place where your singing cannot be
overheard. If you do not have the luxury of a suitable indoor space then find
an outdoor place that does. You would not be the first magician who has had
to spend hours in the woods at night practising this core skill.
One of the biggest stumbling blocks for learning to sing magically is the
thought of how you sound to other people. But you are not singing for others;
you are singing to make your body vibrate at the particular frequency that
elevates mind, body, flesh, and blood.
The most essential quality of this sort of singing is that it heals. It heals
ourselves, and it heals the beings around us. The very vibrations of our voice
can mend the broken, open the closed, and erect the fallen. But the intention
behind those vibrations is also important, as is the fire of fervour that it
ignites in us and in the world around us. The kind of singing we are pursuing
speaks to the flesh, the spirits, and the gods. The only reason we don’t call it
praying is to avoid the associations of that word. For many of us, the word
‘prayer’ smells of hierarchy, tradition, structure, and a path that thousands
have already trodden over the centuries. Magical singing is not like this. It is
entirely ephemeral and unique to you. Some sounds you will produce once in
your life and then never again. Some melodies will be given to you to unlock
a specific moment, gate, or being, and you’ll forget them before the echo of
your voice has faded. Magical singing lives; each of us must find our own
version of it.
Much has been written about the magical use of the psalms, and there is a
long tradition in the West of linking certain psalms to specific magical acts
and artefacts. There are books dedicated to the subject, such as the Sepher
Shimmusch Tehillim, and many grimoires employ psalms as protective
charms, often inscribed on seals and around magical circles.
You will use individual lines from psalms to train the flow and vibration of

your voice. Do not consider this a traditional Christian or Jewish practice; it
is not, it is your own. Direct your song only at your heart, your hands, and
your blood. It can echo out into the world on its own.
Choose a line from a psalm that particularly resonates with you. This can
be done by taking a Bible, opening it randomly somewhere in Psalms, and
seeing what line immediately jumps out. Don’t overthink this. Letting
yourself follow little coincidences as they arise is a good attitude when you
are easing yourself into this practice.
Commit the line to memory, then go to your remote space where your
singing cannot be overheard or disturbed. You may prefer to sit somewhere
quietly or go for a walk: it does not matter at this point. Later, though, it
would be beneficial to stand or sit calmly in your mediation position, with an
upright back, a relaxed chest, a lengthened neck and spine, and wearing
nothing that could constrain your breathing or vocal chords. When the time is
right, begin to sing your line. Don’t try to create anything beautiful or
particularly meaningful, just let your voice play with the words.
Singing a statement of magical intent can grow to become one of the most
powerful and immediate forms of magic open to us. Spirits love (or
depending on the song and their nature, fear) listening to the voice of
humans. The human voice, if used well, is capable of creating all-vibrating
rays of power that can stir, sublimate, or separate spirit and substance. And
most importantly, the physical human voice is something entirely out of the
reach of spirits. The spoken word is the sword blade of the magician. It forms
the bridge between the realm of the spirits and the realm of matter. It is itself
a hybrid power, half born from flesh, half born from spirit. Singing—making
our voice carry particular melodies and vibrations that express intent not only
in the words spoken but also in the meaning of the melody—is a force not
many beings or objects in creation can resist.
You’ll easily be able to track your progress in your training. Here are just a
few ways of measuring some of the milestones on this particular path of
practice:
1. When you sing, in which parts of your body do you feel your voice most
clearly? As you tune and alter your voice, can you feel how different parts
of your body start to resonate? Can you map the resonance of the five
vowels to particular parts of your body?

2. When you sit in silence after practising singing, what do you sense? How
long does the echo of your voice remain with you? What other thoughts
come to you? How is this experience altered by different lines from
Psalms?
3. How well can you maintain the impact of your voice when you sing
softly? How quietly can you sing while keeping your voice impacting fully
on yourself and the world around you?
4. When you sing can you use your voice as a tool on the world around you?
With your eyes closed, can you direct it to touch or interact with objects in
your imagination and in the space around you? How do you see your voice
in vision? Is it a light, a pattern, or a mixture of both?
I am about to say what ye know. One who jubilates, utters not words, but
it is a certain sound of joy without words: for it is the expression of a
mind poured forth in joy, expressing, as far as it is able, the affection,
but not compassing the feeling. A man rejoicing in his own exultation,
after certain words which cannot be uttered or understood, bursts forth
into sounds of exultation without words, so that it seems that he indeed
does rejoice with his voice itself, but as if filled with excessive joy
cannot express in words the subject of that joy ….Those who are
engaged at work in the fields are most given to jubilate; reapers, or
vintners, or those who gather any of the fruits of the earth, delighted
with the abundant produce, and rejoicing in the very richness and
exuberance of the soil, sing in exultation; and among the songs which
they utter in words, they put in certain cries without words in the
exultation of a rejoicing mind; and this is what is meant by jubilating.18
SINGING WITH THE PLANETS

Spells can draw the moon down from the skies.19
Song is the most potent imitator of all. (…) When song, with equal
power, imitates heavenly things, the stimulus is amazing—for our spirit
to accept heaven’s influence and for the influence to reach our spirit. But
the very material of singing is purer and much more like the heavens

than medicinal: this material is air (…). Singing, therefore, full of spirit
and sense—if the song responds to this star or to that one by its
meanings, by its linkages and the form resulting from them, and also by
the effect of the imagination—transfers from sources to the singer, and
from him to the listener nearby, no less power than anything else that
can be put together, as long as the singing sustains its strength and the
singer’s spirit.20
What we are trying to accomplish here, is something quite simple: singing
while bathing in the light of a particular planet. We will see what happens,
take notes, chose a different planet, and compare our results. It is like
learning the stages of a musical scale, where our voice is the string, our
(spiritual and physical) bodies the sound box, and the planets the conductors.
First, decide on the planet in whose presence you’ll be singing. We
recommend focusing your practice in particular on the Sun, as this is the
planet with which we will continue to work in the following exercise.
Determine the position of this planet relative to your position at the time that
you will practise. Today this can be easily done with mobile apps. For this
exercise we do not recommend that you use psalms to guide your singing. At
this point you should allow your voice to be guided by the experience itself.
Whether you sing actual words, long sequences of vowels, self-made
‘barbaric’ words, or switch between all three is of no concern. Rather than
trying to find the ‘right’ psalm that matches the planet of your choice,
meditate again on the quote of Martin Buber on ecstasy as the ‘dark side of
the moon’ or the one from the Church father St. Augustine on jubilation as ‘a
certain sound of joy without words.’
Should you still want to begin your practice with the use of a psalm, you
should choose one that corresponds to the spirit of the planet with which
you’ll be working. Suitable psalms are inscribed around some of the
planetary pentacles in the Key of Solomon. But here is a warning: should you
indeed want to experiment with these psalms, you must not use the psalms
related to Jupiter and Saturn for this exercise. Even Venus or Mars are better
left for later. For your initial stage of learning, concentrate your time and
experience on the psalms corresponding to Moon and Sun.
Moon: Psalm 56:11

In God I trust; I will not be afraid. What can mere humans do to me?
Venus: Psalm 22:14
I am poured out like water, and all my bones are disjointed; my heart is
like wax, melting within me.
Mercury: Psalm 24:7
Lift up your heads, you gates! Rise up, ancient doors! Then the King of
glory will come in.
Sun: Psalm 91:11 – 12
For he will order his angels to care for you and guard you wherever you
go.
They will carry you in their hands, so that you won’t trip on a stone.
Mars: Psalm 110:5
The Lord is at your right hand; he will crush kings on the day of his
anger.
Jupiter: Psalm 112:3
Wealth and riches are in his house, and his righteousness endures
forever.
Saturn: Psalm 18:7
Then the earth shook and quaked; the foundations of the mountains
trembled, they shook because he burned with anger.
Go to your remote space where you cannot be disturbed or overheard, and
find somewhere to sit comfortably. Ground yourself in silence and presence
using the meditation technique of your choice, one of the tratak exercises
described above, or the Meditation of the Void.21
With your eyes closed, visualise the location of the planet you are working
with relative to your body. Then reach out to this planet and draw it down
into your presence. The term ‘drawing down’ is often used in magic,
particularly in Wiccan circles. What this means is to establish a sound and
undisturbed connection between yourself and the target of your attention.
Your exact process for drawing down a planet will depend on your skills and

experience. Simply reach out for the planet in its current position and pull it
towards you. On occasion you may find yourself close to an ancient celestial
object in all its massiveness and radiance. Whatever happens, trust your
vision to guide you.
When the time is right and you are within the planet’s light, begin to sing
to it. As your voice finds it path, gently guide it towards, or even into, the
body of the planet. Once you have both tuned into each other, witness what is
happening around you. How do your voice and the light of the planet
interact? What happens to your body, both in vision and physically? If
nothing happens at first, don’t worry; simply continue to sing. And remember
not to hold on to the structure or melody of your voice. You are just the string
and the sound box, the planet is the conductor.
A word of caution. The longest I ever managed to sing for a planet was
close to an hour. It left me completely exhausted and vulnerable to this
planet’s influence for many years to come. Do not impose any artificial goals
on yourself as part of this practice, such as singing for all seven planets at
least once or for a certain amount of time. Remember, it is not about how
much power is available to us, but the agility and flexibility with which we
can respond to such power. In magic, most of the really important work
happens at the periphery, which in this case is once the singing has stopped.
Before moving on, be sure to note down your observations carefully in
your magical diary. You might find it helpful to reflect on the following
questions: How did the planet respond to your singing? How did its response
affect your body as well as your voice? Did you see the planet’s light in your
vision? And more specifically, did you witness any kind of patterns or
currents in the space between you and the planet? Which differences did you
observe when singing during the planet’s day hour versus its night hour? If
you worked with multiple planets, what differences did you observe?
SEALING THE VESSEL WITH JOY

I came to this realization while working in vision out in the stars. I was
out in the stars, drifting among the planets, when I heard a series of
sounds. Each of the planets have their own ‘sound’ or vibration, and I
was amazed to listen to this ‘choir’ as I drifted.22

In the previous two exercises you gained access to some of the most
powerful techniques that our ancestors discovered for us: the skill of lighting
your inner fire through the sound of your voice, and the skill of working the
light of the seven planets. As you gain experience in combining and applying
these skills, you’ll come to realize how efficient and impactful they are. Most
twentieth century planetary rituals look overly cumbersome once you have
established your own practice of singing in planetary light. Just remember
these two basic facts: Firstly, both the planet and you can produce sounds and
melodies. Secondly, both the planet’s body (made up of gas, rock, water, etc.)
and yours (made up of flesh, bone, blood, etc.) are sources of a constantly
modulating and cyclically returning pattern of light. In your visionary work
with these skills, much of your practice will focus on effectively tuning into,
combining, and separating the twin forces of sound and light, emitted from
two beings (you and the planet) engaged in a celestial exchange.
Creating communion with your holy daimon might take extended periods
of isolation. If this is not actually physical isolation, it will certainly be
isolation in regard to the nature of your spiritual work. For this process to
work effectively you should not discuss the details of it with others; at least
not until you have managed to establish a sound initial connection with your
holy daimon. The journey has to be undertaken in silence.
Emptying our vessel of sensory impressions is a process that can open us
up to the experience of stillness and ultimately one-pointedness; it can also
expose us more actively to those emotions we tend to avoid. In the process,
sadness, loneliness, yearnings and cravings are experiences we must be ready
to encounter and deal with.
The tools given to you in the previous chapters provide some essential help
in tackling these situations constructively. Many of our potentially negative
experiences in silence are rooted in the patterns of our individual
personalities. From an astrological viewpoint, our personality is made from a
living web of planetary influences and power dynamics. Singing in the light
of the respective planets can become a powerful tool of counterbalancing and
healing imbalanced aspects in our natal charts.
For communion with our holy daimon, we only need to expose ourselves
to one particular planet, and that is the Sun. Return to your space of practice
where you are undisturbed and your work cannot be overheard. Sit in a
comfortable position. For this exercise you will not need anything with you.

You must know where the Sun is at the time of your practice; to achieve the
best possible results, you should practice during the morning hour of the Sun.
You will use the (barbaric) words, psalm line, or sentence that enables you to
tune into the Sun’s light. Now, as you are sitting in your quiet space, settle
yourself into a place of silence and presence with the meditation technique of
your choice. As before, you can use one of the tratak techniques or the
Meditation of the Void.
When the time is right and you are centred in silence, reach out to the
celestial body of the Sun. Stretch your vision until you reach this burning,
ever-exploding mass of gas and fire, and draw it down towards you. Again,
do not attempt to control this process too much. And do not draw the Sun too
close: the goal is to establish a space of shared presence between yourself and
the Sun, not to become another Icarus.
A good outcome would be to have a vision the Sun before you on the
horizon, perhaps slightly larger than normal. Much more important is the
inner connection established between you and the Sun through the act of
drawing it down. Begin to sing for the Sun, and at the same time tune
yourself to be receptive to its answering sound. Concentrate your awareness
on the midpoint between you and the Sun and tune your senses to pick up
what is happening there. You could pick up information through any of your
senses—sight, smell, touch, hearing, even taste.
Do not spend too much time at the focal point between your two energy
patterns. Rather return to it often, and learn how to tune yourself into it even
when you are not in vision. This is the place, outside of yourself, where you
seal your vessel with joy. This sort of joy could not be further removed from
the common emotional reaction to good fortune or good luck. This kind of
joy is silent as the muttered prayer yet loud as the roar of the celestial lion. It
is our mind and body radiating the vibration triggered by synchronizing our
voice with the utterance of the Sun. This kind of joy is not an emotional
response, but the experience of a natural force. Going too deeply into this joy
will burn us up; and if we stray too far from it we will drown in sadness.
The planetary spirits are not all-knowing, all-powerful mummies and
daddies who will spoon-feed you and answer every dumb question you
can think to ask. Rather they are the mediators of forces that affect
everything. They are intermediaries from whom you can seek guidance

in relation to the influence they mediate. They do not care if you live or
die, fail or succeed; they engage only when you are looking to work
consciously with the power they mediate. They are the stepped-down
voice of a very large chunk of rock and metal hurtling through space. Do
not be tempted to put human ideals and emotions onto them (…). Learn
to work with them as they are.23

Stage 3: Darkness
Why Darkness Matters
We are about to enter the most daring and challenging stage of this path. As
an introduction to the spirit of the work awaiting us, let us look at two pieces,
the first is ‘A Vision at Night,’ an episode from The Legend of the BaalShem:
The angel of the Lord seized me in the night and led me out, and I stood
in the void, and the night weighed on my shoulders like a huge burden,
and from below the night rolled onto me towards my soles. And the
angel spoke: ‘Behold!’ and the darkness vanished and I stood
effortlessly in a bright void and I beheld. There was a circle between two
abysses. And in the area of the circle, a red abyss was engulfed like a
lake of blood; and outside the area of the circle, a black abyss extended
like an ocean of night. And I saw, behold!, a man was walking on the
ridge like a blind man, with staggering feet, and his two weak hands
touched upon the abysses to his right and to his left, and his chest was
made from glass, and I beheld his heart fluttering like leaves in the wind,
and on his forehead was the sign of the ice. And the man walked on and
on, on the path formed by the ridge, without looking left or right, and he
had almost reached the end of the circle which also marked its
beginning. And I wanted to shout out to him, yet my gaze dazed my
tongue. And suddenly the man lifted his view, and saw left and right,
and stumbled, and from the two abysses, arms reached up to hold him.
There the angel touched my lips, and my tongue was released, and I
called and cried out to that man: ‘Raise your wings and fly!’ And lo, the
human raised his wings, and no weakness or stupor was any longer
about him, and the ridge disappeared from underneath his feet, and the
abyss of blood was devoured by God’s reservoirs of water and the abyss
of the night vanished in God’s light, and the city of God was there, open
to all sides.
The second piece to consider is a poem by Rainer Maria Rilke:
The Panther

His vision, from the constantly passing bars,
has grown so weary that it cannot hold
anything else. It seems to him there are
a thousand bars; and behind the bars, no world.
As he paces in cramped circles, over and over,
the movement of his powerful soft strides
is like a ritual dance around a center
in which a mighty will stands paralyzed.
Only at times, the curtain of the pupils
lifts, quietly—. An image enters in,
rushes down through the tensed, arrested muscles,
plunges into the heart and is gone.
Now, as different as these two accounts seem, they both convey a picture
of a being caught in a pattern of suffering: here the man walking on the ridge
of the lake of blood, there the panther in its cage, trapped behind metal bars.
Before we dare throw ourselves headlong into the stage of Darkness, we
should undertake a quick mental exercise: What would it take for you, despite
their obvious states of suffering, to yet imagine both panther and man as
happy beings? You can also work the experiment in reverse. Consider the
panther freed from its cage and the man elevated by mysterious wings: can
you still imagine them as unhappy?
Darkness is the stage in which we prepare ourselves to be ripped out of the
habitual patterns we have created for ourselves. It is the stage in which we
prepare ourselves to make a commitment to the universe; the commitment
that we are ready to let go.
The problem with such a commitment is that whatever will be taken from
us, whatever we will be forced to let go off, might still seem better in
retrospect than what we receive in return. To the panther at least its enemies
are nearby and clearly known: the metal bars of its cage and the human that
holds the key. The same goes for the man on the ridge, his heart might be
trembling, yet his steps are predictable, bound to the circumference of the
lake of blood.
Every painful situation, as much as it costs, also affords us some sort of

(indirect) gain. Clinically such gains are called ‘secondary gains.’ A
secondary gain might present itself as an illness or a stroke of bad luck which
actually shields us from performing certain tasks, from carrying out certain
responsibilities, or from having to fulfil certain social demands. Looked at in
bright daylight such ‘deals’ might seem cynical at best, yet they do provide
some sort of positive return on their unpleasant investments.
What are the deals we have locked ourselves into? Would we be willing,
together with the pain they inflict, to give up all the gains we make from
them? We might be caged like the panther, muscles atrophied behind the
metal bars but at least there is regular food and no need to worry about bigger
panthers. Or our hearts might be trembling and our hands might be weak like
the man walking the ridge around the lake of blood but at least following our
own footsteps makes for a familiar path. Whatever the scale of our suffering,
repeating the same patterns of pain again and again makes for a damn fine
predictable rhythm.
Few of us truly know how much we have to lose, or how much we take for
granted. To walk consciously into darkness, lead by nothing but one’s free
will, is no mean feat. Like most of man’s great adventures, it balances on that
fine edge between courageous boldness and reckless stupidity.
So before we proceed, you might want to take a moment to give thanks for
everything you have received. Think about your situation right now, of all the
things you risk taking for granted. Look at them before they disappear in
darkness, and acknowledge your thankfulness for their presence. Look
especially upon the things you haven’t noticed for a long time with
thankfulness. What do you learn from them about your present situation? Can
you see how they form your circle of blood? Are you fully prepared to be
lifted away from them?
Here are my personal words after acknowledging my situation:
How much grace is in my limitations! I am graced by being bound into
this present time. I need to only think about the here and now; not my
father’s sins, not my grandfather’s sins. I am graced by being bound into
this present body. I need to only feel the here and now; whatever reaches
towards me, whatever I am reaching towards, right here, right now. I am
graced by being bound into this present place. I need to only see the here
and now. I see this place, this night, this moon; I do not see my mother’s

night, I do not see my grandmother’s moon. Blessed be my boundaries.
Whether it is the darkness of cosmic space, the darkness of the womb, or
the darkness of the grave, it is in darkness where all new life is born and to
which it returns. Darkness is the realm in which one can no longer uphold
one’s own boundaries. It is the place where ‘other’ and ‘us’ bleed into one.
Since time immemorial, darkness has swallowed whole the dream of human
sovereignty. Since the first dying fire in our ancestor’s cave, darkness has
been the boundless home of all our demons and fears.
On our journey towards communion with our holy daimon we have already
experienced the powers of trust and joy. There is one more pearl to add to
this string, and that is courage. Courage is often misunderstood as the blunt
boldness that is the apparently natural gift of those few who seem immune
from the fear and angst that binds the rest of us. The reality could not be more
different.
Courage, at least the kind that will support us magically, cannot exist
without the profound firsthand experience of its shape-shifting black twin, the
one that we call fear. To deliberately develop such courage we have to make
a conscious decision, and that is to walk up to our fears and look them
straight in the eye. To stand calmly, face to face with everything our instincts
tell us to hide from, to run from, to avoid, and to abhor. It is a decision to
overcome our inborn instinct against acknowledging our own darkness.
What follows is a raw experience: the experience of still being able to
stand up, despite everything we have lost. Despite everything that threatens
what we have left, despite all that devalues us, that fills us with shame, that
makes our heart sink, our throats tighten, our teeth chatter. Out of this painful
experience comes a new kind of courage, a courage born from the knowledge
that despite all that has happened, we can co-exist with this darkness and still
be fine. Standing naked like this before the mirror of our fears, we see our
true form. Most of us will see that form a little differently than we expected,
but we are still here, nonetheless. And having beheld that vision, having
ceased to evade it, we can then start to change it.
As adept magicians, much of our work consists of preparing for our own
death while we are living, so that we can die skilfully when the time comes.
In that way we can walk out of death and into another life gracefully and with
as much wisdom, gentleness, and forgiveness towards ourselves and others as

possible. That is how creation purifies itself, by us purifying ourselves from
one death to another. It is a cycle that spans centuries, millennia even. A
cycle of lives and deaths, woven by fate, and watched over by our holy
daimon as the protector of the spark that we are, as it walks out into creation
and returns from it.
So how could facing the mirror of our fears and standing in darkness
possibly hurt us more than we can bear? We have done nothing that has not
been done before, we have told no lie that has not been told before, and we
have neither suffered nor caused any newborn evil to enter this world on our
watch. None of our lives are new births; no evil scar, no lying song, no
tearful eye is altogether new. The newness of our lives lies not in their raw
materials, but in what we choose to make of them; not in our experiences, but
in our reactions to them. We are judged not by our unethical thoughts, by our
amoral feelings, or by our opinion of our self worth. We are judged by our
deeds.
This third stage is called Darkness, not courage, because to learn a new
skill we must focus on the necessary work before us, not on what we hope to
gain from it. And what we have to work on is our exposure to, our resilience
to, and our ease with, the reality of our own darkness. Because it is absolutely
impossible for our holy daimon to talk to us in a manner that we can
consciously apprehend while we choose to hide behind a mask, armour, or
second skin.
Exercises in Darkness
STANDING AT THE THRESHOLD

If every Initiate would only attend to his own development before
seeking to perform all sorts of activities far beyond his capabilities, the
Mysteries would be much more effective among humans than they are at
present. Good intentions are insufficient substitutes for good sense.24
This exercise brings you to a threshold from which, having crossed over it,
you cannot return. For it you will need a lightproof and ideally soundproof
space. I used a small walk-in cupboard. As a last resort, you could use a
sleeping mask to create a virtual black space. Learn the following incantation

by heart:
Take what is worn. Devour what is waste. Peruse what is I. For I am not
afraid, but born from your fire. We will meet again and again. In your
crucible of ashes and life.
At the morning or night hour of Saturn, sit with a lit candle before you and
ground yourself in silence and presence, then perform the Meditation of the
Void. When you are in the centre of the flame and you can feel the void
surrounding you, carefully lean forward. Then, at the same time as you blow
out the candleflame, see the central flame vanish in vision. Now sit centred in
the void, in a space that no longer has a centre.
When you have grown accustomed to the darkness, reach out towards the
eastern horizon. Let your mind reach further into the void of the East, in a
straight line, deeper and deeper into the vast horizon. Reach out until your
vision finds the sphere of Saturn. Far ahead, emerging out of darkness, you
can see the Old One who never speaks yet always listens. Settle back into
stillness as you watch the outline of Saturn. There is nothing in this world
now, only the void, Saturn, your vision, and the distance between you.
Now begin to sing for Saturn, the fearmonger. Sing to the planet and sing
to the consciousness from which it is built. Sing to this ancient being, caught
in a body of rock and gas and celestial rings. Sing to Saturn who has both
formed and destroyed every single human being, and who now stands before
you.
Take what is worn. Devour what is waste. Peruse what is I. For I am not
afraid, but born from your fire. We will meet again and again. In your
crucible of ashes and life.
When you are done, fall back into silence and observe what is happening
right here, right now. When you are ready, return to the flame in vision. (You
need not light the physical candle.) Just as you reached out to Saturn before,
reach out to the flame and let yourself be pulled back into it. Stay in the flame
and keep your vision in the flame’s bright, cleansing light. Then return to
your body. With open eyes, sit in darkness awhile.
Write down your observations and insights in your magical diary. You

might find it helpful to reflect on the following questions: What happened
before you began singing, and how did it change when you sang? What
prompted you to end the exercise? Before you entered the flame again, what
do you remember? In the hours following your Saturn practice, what thoughts
arose, which ideas formed? What did these thoughts or ideas reveal to you
about your current relationship with Saturn?
Spend anything from a few weeks to a few years on this exercise. The
celestial cycle of Saturn lasts twenty-seven years; this gives you an
impression of this planet’s slow rhythm and the kind of changes you have
unleashed on yourself. In our short lives we only go through a few cycles like
these. Do this exercise no more than thirteen times. Do not deliberately force
yourself to initiate or change anything in your life; quite the opposite.
Perhaps perform the exercise every Saturday morning and evening at
Saturn’s planetary hour. Then spend the rest of the week observing, taking
the world in, and being gentle with yourself. Don’t forget: you are being
worked on now. Changes will manifest themselves in their own time; do not
be afraid to follow your instincts, for it will be your instincts that will change
first.
CROSSING THE THRESHOLD

Denn wo du anfängst, musst du auch schliessen.25
Because where you begin, you will also need to end.26
Our tradition includes many different techniques for deriving our holy
daimon’s name from our birth chart. In truth, our holy daimon will not care
too much about what name we assign her/him. She/he will care
tremendously, though, what we do with this name—a name that only we
should know.
For now, you need to obtain your natal chart. Another possibilty is to use
the time of your conception if it is calculable, or if your parents can
remember the event!
As this process involves a series of rather specific astrological calculations,
I have made an Excel spreadsheet which is available for free on my

website.27 You should be careful to use the correct tab on the Excel sheet for
your calculation, the first tab, called ‘Daytime’ if your birth was during the
day, and the second tab, ‘Nighttime’ if it was at night. Or you can make the
calculation yourself. The method is detailed in chapter twenty-six of
Agrippa’s Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy.
Once you have the name, write the following incantation from the Greek
Magical Papyri in your magical diary, putting the name of your holy daimon
in place of N.N. Then learn the short incantation by heart:
For you are I and I am you; your name is mine, and mine is yours. For I
am your image, N.N.28
Now return to your lightproof, soundproof space, get into your preferred
meditation posture, and settle into the presence and silence. You can use the
tratak exercises given previously. When you are calm and centred, close your
eyes and perform the Meditation of the Void. When you are fully settled in
the flame, and entirely surrounded by the void, extinguish the light in your
vision. Float in darkness for a while. Stay present in the ocean of darkness, in
the absence of everything around you, then begin to sing the incantation of
your holy daimon. Do not sing it expecting your holy daimon to appear,
rather, expect her/him to hear you.
Sing in devotion. Continue to sing towards the presence of your holy
daimon. It may take a while. Expect your holy daimon to be surprised when
she/he begins to hear your song, because for the first time in your life, you
are no longer singing to the mirror, but you have turned around and started
singing to the real thing. Keep on singing. You do not need instructions on
how to follow up on this practice. You will know by now.
Reflections on Darkness
Some say that doing philosophy began with the barbarians.29
Hans-Dieter Betz remarked that the link between the Delphic maxim
‘Know yourself’ and the Greek Magical Papyri (PGM) is far more complex
than a simple footnote.30 Indeed, the relationship between one of the most

famous ancient Greek maxims and one of the oldest collections of Western
magical texts is very hard to unravel. At the heart of the matter is the question
faced at some point by everyone interested in the PGM, which is whether the
corpus is one of ritualized philosophy or philosophized ritual. Which came
first, the magical act or the philosophical notion? Was magic a way of
validating a map that had already been worked out theoretically by
philosophers, or was the map drawn on the basis of magically acquired data?
Did the best magicians develop into philosophers, or did the most daring
philosophers develop into magicians?
Above all this stands Socrates’ discussion of the maxim ‘Know yourself’
in Plato’s Alcibiades Maior.31 Here, according to Plato’s account, Socrates
questions what the self really is that we are encouraged to know. His answer
ends with a few pithy statements which have profoundly influenced the
concept of self-control and self-knowledge in the West:
‘So the human being is an entity different from his own body.’ ‘Then
what is the human being?’ ‘The soul is the human being.’ ‘Then the god
who instructs us to know ourselves orders us to know the soul.’32
The magicians behind the PGM interpreted Socrates’ words quite
differently from the philosophers. Generations of philosophers took Socrates’
words as an exhortation to deep philosophical self-examination. The
magicians took it as an exhortation to conjure the holy daimon. Both
responses were attempts to resolve the same paradox. If the physical world is
a theatre of illusion under whose spell we are born, live and die, then how can
we free ourselves from it without outside help? Socrates, in Plato’s
Alcibiades Maior, slightly alters the Delphic maxim to better illustrate this
paradox and its philosophical consequences. Instead of saying to a human
‘know thyself,’ he commands an eye to ‘see itself.’ Let us read the relevant
section in full:
SOCRATES: I will tell you what I suspect to be the real advice which the

inscription [of the Delphic Maxim] gives us. I rather think there are
not many illustrations of it to be found, but only in the case of sight.
ALCIBIADES: What do you mean by that?
SOCRATES: Consider in your turn: suppose that, instead of speaking to a

man, it said to the eye of one of us, as a piece of advice ‘See thyself,’
how should we apprehend the meaning of the admonition? Would it
not be, that the eye should look at that by looking at which it would
see itself?
ALCIBIADES: Clearly.
SOCRATES: Then let us think what object there is anywhere, by looking
at which we can see both it and ourselves.
ALCIBIADES: Why, clearly, Socrates, mirrors and things of that sort.
SOCRATES: Quite right. And there is also something of that sort in the
eye that we see with?
ALCIBIADES: To be sure.
SOCRATES: And have you observed that the face of the person who
looks into another’s eye is shown in the optic confronting him, as in a
mirror, and we call this the pupil, for in a sort it is an image of the
person looking?
ALCIBIADES: That is true.
SOCRATES: Then an eye viewing another eye, and looking at the most
perfect part of it, the thing wherewith it sees, will thus see itself.
ALCIBIADES: Apparently.
SOCRATES: But if it looks at any other thing in man or at anything in
nature but what resembles this, it will not see itself.
ALCIBIADES: That is true.
SOCRATES: Then if an eye is to see itself, it must look at an eye, and at
that region of the eye in which the virtue of an eye is found to occur;
and this, I presume, is sight.
ALCIBIADES: That is so.
SOCRATES: And if the soul too, my dear Alcibiades, is to know herself,
she must surely look at a soul, and especially at that region of it in
which occurs the virtue of a soul—wisdom, and at any other part of a
soul which resembles this?
ALCIBIADES: I agree, Socrates.
SOCRATES: And can we find any part of the soul that we can call more
divine than this, which is the seat of knowledge and thought?
ALCIBIADES: We cannot.
SOCRATES: Then this part of her resembles God, and whoever looks at
this, and comes to know all that is divine, will gain thereby the best

knowledge of himself.33
So this is the escape route that Socrates lays out for us. In the theatre of
illusion in which we are all caught, there is only one way out: gaining true
knowledge of our selves. What breaks the spell of the mirror (the world
around us) is to turn away from it and instead look deeply into the wide open
eyes of the person next to us, that we might see ourselves in the reflection.
This is the metaphorical answer to the Delphic maxim. But how do we apply
it in practice?
Once again we receive guidance from Socrates’ dialogue with Alcibiades.
We must search within the soul for its most divine part, the part that is the
seat of all knowledge and thought. Identifying the seat of knowledge was
surprisingly straightforward for an ancient Greek magician, as the most
divine part of the soul was a divine being in its own right; it was one’s
personal daimon.
Once the equation of the self with the soul and the deity was made,
another equation offered itself almost necessarily. The older concept of
the soul as daimon had become highly important in the Socratic and
Platonic traditions of thought, especially because of its connection with
the so-called Daimonion of Socrates.34
Thus for the PGM magicians, knowledge of one’s self was not to be gained
through speculative thinking or scientific extrapolation, but by gaining
sensual access to the being that encapsulated the essence of one’s self. The
logic implied in Socrates’ explanation was not one of speculative selfexamination, but one of ‘oracular enquiry and reply.’35 For the magicians,
Socrates’ instruction was no philosophical metaphor, but a gnostic method.
We have evidence that such ‘oracular interpretation’36 goes back at least to
the first century ad. In the writings of the Stoic philosopher Epictetus we find
an interesting and somewhat more pragmatic version of the Delphic maxim:
Take council very carefully, know yourself, consult your personal
daimon, without God undertake nothing.37
Amongst the vast corpus of the PGM we find several references to working

with one’s holy daimon and a specific rite detailed in PGM VII.505–528. In
the following, final chapter we will use a restored version of this gnostic
ritual to initiate the final stage of our work. However, we should also mention
that we have already integrated and activated an alternative technique, which
is also given in the PGM, for achieving divine union, in the previous
exercise.
For you are I, and I am you; your name is mine, and mine is yours. For I
am your image.38
In the PGM, the above invocation is directed at Hermes as the highest god.
However, this is a widespread ancient formula of identification, and versions
of it—and especially of its opening line—are found throughout both
occidental and oriental mystical traditions. In his 1919 study on the history of
prayer titled Das Gebt, Friedrich Heiler (1892 – 1967) brilliantly
demonstrated this mystical prayer’s ubiquity, and provided Indian,
Hellenistic, Gnostic, and Sufi versions of it.39 This ‘formula of reciprocal
identity’40 between the practitioner and the divine was what Heiler viewed as
the highest form of mystical experience.
The mystics form an invisible brotherhood ranging over all countries
and times; separated by miles of distance and centuries of years, they
reach for each others’ hands and join the choir: man and god are
separated only by outer appearance, both are in unresolvable union. And
in drunken passion they utter the great mystical prayer: ‘I am you and
you are I.’41
Letting another spiritual being dwell within us, whether a god-form or our
holy daimon, can indeed be considered the highest goal of mystical union.
But it can equally be interpreted as the expulsion of our mortal selves.
Are we really deifying ourselves when we invite the divine to dwell within
us? Or are we in fact extinguishing our mortal selves (and materializing the
divine), by offering ourselves up as an empty vessel? To the ancient monastic
mystic this question would not have mattered. But it might matter to those of
us with everyday lives to lead, families to support, and other mundane traits
that we are not ready to give up. When we say ‘For you are I, and I am you,’

we are consenting to be lifted away from the lake of blood, to be broken out
of our cage. You have come a long way. Now be careful with your choices.
Singing these lines to Saturn is an invitation to enter darkness, a darkness
equally required for the growth of our divine seed and for dissolving what
constrains it.
Like the fluidum of a god flows into his statue, in order to take its effect
there as the living divine I, so it also flows into the body of the initiate.42

Stage 4: Encounter
Systasis with your personal daimon
Strive on indeed, and be sure that it is not you that is mortal, but only
your body. For that man whom your outward form reveals is not
yourself; the Daimon is the true self, not that physical figure that can be
pointed out by the finger. Know, then, that you are a god, if a god is that
which lives, feels, remembers and foresees, and which rules, governs
and moves the body over which it is set, just as the supreme God above
us rules the universe.43
Entering conscious communion with our holy daimon is the result of a
successful process of inner alchemy. Any methods to induce such a process
are but a catalyst for something that nature is perfectly capable of achieving
on her own terms. Nature creates gold, however, it requires a very specific set
of circumstances and actively involved forces.
As magicians we have a dual function in this process: we are both active
agents and passive recipients. To achieve communion with our personal
daimon we work upon ourselves. We are the substance to be transformed and
one of several forces necessary to achieve this transformation. In working
such alchemy on ourselves, it is critical to balance our active agency with our
passive absorption, allowing our spiritual body to be activated while aiding
the process by assuming the right posture and presence at the right moment.
It is important to remember that it is when we as magicians are quiet and
seemingly passive that the spirits become most active. It is precisely during
the state of our silent absorption that we find our daimon working most
actively upon us.
When the atmosphere is charged sufficiently with electricity, it discharges
as lightning. Just because we haven’t seen any lightning yet, we cannot
assume that nothing is happening. Producing a thin vein of gold takes
millennia within the natural setting of subterranean rock. Spending a few
years or an entire decade on achieving conscious communion with our holy
daimon is an incredibly accelerated timeline by mother nature’s standards.
The ritual instructions are intended to induce, not shortcut, a natural spiritual
process.
The main body of this ritual stems from the third or fourth century ad, and

is taken from PGM VII.505 – 528. While the brief ritual has been analysed by
several academic scholars, it has not, so far, gained the attention of practicing
magicians. Here I will suggest a way of applying it to a practical rite of
visionary ritual magic.
Before we explore the practice of PGM VII.505, note that we are assuming
that the original text was left intentionally ambiguous. The following detailed
instructions are one of many possible ways of activating the dormant magical
patterns in the text. We want to encourage readers to develop their own
practical versions of this rite. However, any adjustments or alterations should
not be based on personal preference or theoretical speculation, but on
firsthand experience of what practically yields the best results.
In Part II, I shared my path for achieving communion with my holy
daimon. It has value for other practitioners in two main ways. First, it offers
evidence that such processes are still achievable today. I hope my own
account will serve as spiritual encouragement, if it is needed. Second, and
more importantly, my personal account shows how this particular spiritual
encounter unfolded for me, before I came across the PGM ritual.
During the night of contact, my holy daimon took me through a series of
experiences in quick succession. In retrospect I’d describe them as alchemical
reactions. They were very intense physically and spiritually, and at the time I
had no idea what was happening to me.
Many years later I came across PGM VII.505 and the ritual process of
‘skinning’ the magician of several spirits that normally interfere with the
perception of everyday reality. The parallels with my own experience were
immediately striking. In fact, they helped me better understand the purpose of
a ritual that my holy daimon had since instructed me to perform, at least once
a month, without any explanation. As so often in magic, the spirits do not
care whether we understand what we do, only that we do it right.
Sharing these ritual instructions is a closing of a circle of almost twenty
years of spiritual study and work. I should mention that as I had already
established communion with my holy daimon by the time I came across PGM
VII.505, I cannot confirm how this rite will work for someone at a different
stage in their alchemical process. I can attest, however, to its impact on my
own practice, and how incredibly coherent it is with aspects of inner alchemy
that are not normally spoken about in the Western tradition.
Finally, before we proceed to the ritual, we should establish a shared

understanding of how our ancestors worked these kinds of rites. What is
critical to highlight, and what is most often overlooked, is the difference
between orthodoxy and orthopraxy.
Understanding orthopraxy
The term orthopraxy stands in direct opposition to today’s more familiar term
orthodoxy. The latter means ‘correct belief,’ the former ‘correct practice.’
Our Egyptian and Greek ancestors were deeply concerned about orthopraxy,
and could not have cared less about orthodoxy. Now let us explore why that
was the case.
For our ancient ancestors, the spiritual realm with all its inhabitants was an
everyday reality that was experienced directly, firsthand. How people thought
about spiritual beings or whether or not they believed in them simply wasn’t
a relevant question. Let us go to a present day example for comparison: we
would never ask whether someone believes in computers, electricity, or even
virtual reality. We experience all three of them every day: for us they are a
matter of firsthand knowledge, not faith. As far as this example is concerned,
we are concerned with correct practice: we could not care less about correct
belief. Our ancestors were exactly the same in regard to the spiritual realm.
A strict translation of the Greek όρθοδοξία (orthodoxia) is ‘right opinion.’
Opinions did not matter in a world that required continuous magical action:
acts to guard the forces of the underworld, acts to balance the tides and rivers,
acts to sway life-weaving forces, acts to extract oracles from the guardians of
fate—to name just a few.
Our ancient ancestors most likely did not care much about what people
believed so long as they performed the correct ritual acts. However, unlike
modern academics, adepts in the ancient world would have certainly taken
great care to coordinate the inner and outer performance of their rituals. That
is, aligning and combining acts of magic performed in vision with acts of
magic performed with their physical bodies.
Orthopraxy in our present context, therefore, needs to be understood as
concern over the ‘correct practice’ in both the inner and outer realms. The
synchronization of these two is the goal of the following rite.

Ritual for systasis with your holy daimon
PGM VII.505:
Meeting with your own daimon: ‘Welcome, Tyche, and you daimon of
this place, and you, the present hour, and you, the present day - and
every day as well. Welcome, All-embracing, that is, earth and heaven.
Welcome, Helios, for you are the one who has established yourself in
invisible light over the holy firmament ORKORĒTHARA. You are the
father of the reborn Aion ZARACHTHŌ; you are the father of the
inaccessible Nature Thortchophanō; you are the who has in yourself the
mixture of universal nature and who begot the five wandering stars,
which are the entrails of heaven, the guts of earth, the fountainhead of
the waters, and the courage of fire AZAMACHAR ANAPHANDAŌ EREYA
ANEREYA PHENPHENSŌ IGRAA; you are the youthful one, highborn,
scion of the holy temple, kinsman to the holy mere called Abyss which
is located beside the two pedestals SKIATHI and MANTŌ. And the earth’s
four foundations were shaken, O master of all, holy Scarab, AŌ
SATHREN ABRASAX IAŌAI AEŌ ĒŌA ŌAĒ IAO IĒO EY IE IAŌAI’ Write
the name in myrrh ink on two male eggs. You are to cleanse yourself
thoroughly with one; then lick off the name, break it, and throw it away.
Hold the other in your partially open right hand and show it to the sun at
dawn and (crowned with) olive branches; raise up your right hand,
supporting the elbow with your left hand. Then speak the formula seven
times, crack the egg open, and swallow its contents. Do this for seven
days, and recite the formula at sunset as well as sunrise.
The restored inner and outer performance of PGM VII.505:
What you will need for this rite:
• A quiet, undisturbed place where you can speak without being overheard.
• A candle and matches.
• Six pebbles, the size of an egg, not used in any previous magical acts.
• Two fresh, washed, organic, raw eggs.
• A water-soluble ink that is safe to ingest, ideally made from pure myrrh.

• A fine brush.
• The location of the Sun at the time of the rite.
• Sufficient commitment to repeat this rite ideally twice a day at dusk and
dawn for several weeks.
Preparing the eggs:
Prepare the ink and use the brush to write the following divine name on
both eggs. Start at the base or top of the egg and coil the text around the shell:
‘AŌ SATHREN ABRASAX IAŌAI AEŌ ĒŌA ŌAĒ IAO IĒO EY IE IAŌAI’
Ritual to induce a meeting with your Holy Guardian Angel:
Return to the quiet, undisturbed place where you cannot be overheard. Sit
in a comfortable position. Taking the six stones you brought with you, place
three to your left and three to your right. Place the two eggs behind you. All
the items must be within reach without your needing to move about much.
Finally, light the candle and place it in front of you.
As in the previous exercises, ground yourself in silence and presence and
perform the Meditation of the Void. Once you are surrounded by darkness,
abide in it awhile, then step through the void and once more take up position
in your resting physical body.
Pick up the first stone. Quietly keep it in your hands until it is the same
temperature as your body, then begin to roll it between your palms. In vision,
see how with each turn of the stone you are drawing off some of your own
skin and working it into the stone. When you have worked an entire layer of
your skin into the stone, hold it still in the womb of your hands, breathe into
it, and say, ‘Welcome, Tyche, spirit of fate.’ Place it in front of you, behind
the invisible line marked by the candle flame.
Now pick up the second stone. Repeat the process above. When you have
taken off another layer of your skin in vision, hold the stone still between
your palms and say, ‘And welcome to you, daimon of this place.’
Pick up the third stone and repeat the process again. When you have taken
another layer from your body and are sitting in stillness, say, ‘And welcome
to you, daimon of the present hour.’
Now pick up the stones from your other side, one by one. Repeat the
process, and speak as follows:

• With the fourth: ‘And welcome to you, daimon of the present day.’
• With the fifth: ‘And welcome to you, daimon of time and every day.’
• With the sixth: ‘And welcome to you, daimon of the All-embracing, that is,
earth and heaven.’
Keep your eyes open or closed, as you prefer, and sit for a moment in the
presence of the six daimons you have called forth. Whatever your visionary
sensual preferences are, ensure that you are in touch with each of them as
they are represented by the physical substance of the stones in front of you.
Perhaps your magical body will see them in vision as they rest in front of you
bound into the stones. Maybe your magical body will hear them in vision or
perceive slightly different astral smells or melodies. Do not force it, simply
sit and feel the connection between you and the six spirits, however it
manifests.
Now take the first egg and carefully stroke it over your body. Without
cracking its shell, rub yourself with the egg as if it was a sponge. This will
draw out any residue left by the six spirits whom you have already called
forth. Cleanse yourself carefully with the egg. When you are done, lick off
the divine name written on it, crack it open and empty it onto the ground
between you, the candle, and the six stones. Observe in vision how the
residue taken off by the egg is now picked up by each of the six spirits. No
life force remains in the egg or its shell.
You now sit skinned and purified before the candle. Inspect your body in
vision, how it looks, and how the absence of your six normal skins (fate,
place, hour, day, time, sublunary realm) has affected and changed it.
Take the second egg. Centre yourself again in the void and, as you have
done before, reach out for the Sun. Push further and further into the dark until
you draw close to that vast celestial body. As we have said before, do not get
too close to the Sun, especially now that you are without your six skins. Just
as with your earlier work with planetary light, nothing exists now except for
you, the Sun, and the distance between you. Do not rush this part of the ritual,
take your time to establish good contact. Reach for the Sun’s light and pull
some of its cosmic fire into the egg in your hands. You can do this with your
hands in vision or, if you prefer, through sound and song. Continue to fill the
egg with fire until it is warm in your palms. In vision you will see how it
begins to glow, like a burning ember held in your hands full of cosmic fire.

Then raise your right hand, supporting your elbow with your left hand, with
the egg in your palm, and speak these words:
Welcome, Helios, for you are the one who has established yourself in
invisible light over the holy firmament ORKORĒTHARA. You are the
father of the reborn Aion ZARACHTHŌ; you are the father of the
inaccessible Nature Thortchophanō; you are the one who has in yourself
the mixture of universal nature and who begot the five wandering stars,
which are the entrails of heaven, the guts of earth, the fountainhead of
the waters, and the courage of fire AZAMACHAR ANAPHANDAŌ EREYA
ANEREYA PHENPHENSŌ IGRAA; you are the youthful one, highborn,
scion of the holy temple, kinsman to the holy mere called Abyss which
is located beside the two pedestals SKIATHI and MANTŌ. And the earth’s
four foundations were shaken, O master of all, holy Scarab, AŌ
SATHREN ABRASAX IAŌAI AEŌ ĒŌA ŌAĒ IAO IĒO EY IE IAŌAI.
You can speak the formula up to seven times. Make sure, however, that
you know it by heart. Repeat it until its rhythm fills your whole mind and the
sacred space around you. Then crack open the egg and swallow its contents.
In vision, follow the cosmic fire bound into the egg as it travels into your
body. Observe how it affects you. What you now see are pure, divine forces
at play, preparing your spiritual body for the touch of your holy daimon. Do
not interfere with this process, do not touch it with your mortal wishes or
imagination. Just be present while the cosmic fire spreads through your body.
Now you have become the vessel into which your holy daimon can
descend. For as long as you wish, sit in silent presence and observe the space
around you. When you are ready, call for your holy daimon. Normally it is
enough to sing the name of your daimon. Realize that the burning body of the
Sun is still before you, its solar wind brushing over your purified body, as
you sing to call your holy daimon.
Finally, in whatever shape or geometric form it assumes, visualize your
holy daimon approach you from behind. It is vast and beautiful. Take all the
time you need to realize its presence. Then see how it is reaching out for you.
It is now touching you on your shoulders. Everything else will transpire
naturally. You are now in holy communion.

Interpretation
The ritual can be divided into five stages. In practice these stages may well
blur and blend, but in order that we understand the underlying spiritual
process clearly, we’ll examine them in turn. Note that we will not discuss the
fifth stage, the communion with your holy daimon, as this happens in vision
alone.
Stage 1: Skinning
The first stage consists of welcoming six spiritual beings who normally
remain indistinguishable from our everyday reality, too close to us to be seen.
We tend to forget about these ‘skins’ of fate, space, and time.
The first part of this ritual peels back these layers of our skin and changes
them from inherent aspects of our subjective experience into objective,
spiritual counterparts so that we can begin to see them for what they truly are.
This ‘peeling back’ is accomplished through a combination of inner vision
and outer ritual as the magician welcomes and calls forth these spirits to stand
beside them. We must recognize them for what they are: spirits in their own
right, each with a unique spiritual essence. As they are already here, no
complex rituals are needed, simply the spoken acknowledgement that they
are present with us. By welcoming these spirits, the magician stops
identifying with them:
Be welcome Tyche and you, Daimon of this place, and you, the present
hour, and you the present day—and every day as well.
Now they stand next to us, bound in their own shapes and forms. We can
see the weavers of life: the spirits of fate (Tyche), of the place, of the hour, of
the day, and of the time. Imagine that your life is a play that lifts its curtain
when you are born and lets it fall again when you return to the grave. The
five spirit forces we just called forth provide everything required to put on
that play:
• Fate (Tyche) = the plot.
• The spirit of the place = the stage and its actors.
• The spirits of the hour and day = the tone and the quality.

• The spirit of the time = the era and the setting.
We take one more step and call forth the spirit of the whole sublunary
sphere:
Welcome, All-embracing, that is, earth and heaven.44
To return to the play analogy, having distanced ourselves from the stage,
its settings, the other actors, and the plot, we now leave the building entirely.
Doing so requires that the magician hold six unique spirit relationships in his
mind: the spirits of his fate, the place, the hour, the day, the time, and the
sublunary realm. Freeing ourselves from these skins means us giving them
permission to go from being aspects of our individuality to once more being
perceptible spirits in their own right. A magician who has proper command of
their visionary skills will not have any problems accomplishing this. When
invited to, the spirits will simply step forward from the body of the magician,
and will present themselves in whatever forms are appropriate.
We use the physical anchors of six stones to identify and bind the six
spirits. In principle this ritual could be done without those anchors. The
stones, however, help a great deal. They let us involve our physical senses
more deeply in the process, their substance provides homes for the spirits,
and their round forms are ideal for the skins to coil around.
Stage 2: Purifying
The second stage of the ritual is one of purification. To prepare for it, we
wrote the divine name of Helios on two raw eggs, using either liquid myrrh
or some other organic colour that can be licked off and ingested safely. As
the name is relatively long, it will form several spirals round the egg: a
wonderful reminder of the serpent and egg we encountered when we were
building our trust.
AŌ SATHREN ABRASAX IAŌAI AEŌ ĒŌA ŌAĒ IAO IĒO EY IE IAŌAI

Now we take the first of the two eggs and use it like a sponge over our
whole body. We do not need to be naked for this, but thin, light clothing is
preferable. Make sure you can feel the egg’s pressure on your skin through

the fabric, without risking breaking the egg accidentally.
The magical purpose of this stage is to ensure that our spiritual body is left
completely clear and unblemished. When performed properly and by
someone with sufficient magical skill, this stage is a very delicate process. It
is a step further on from pulling the six skins from our body, which was
already a sensitive matter. (Not because it was particularly hard, but because
taking off these six skins has an enormous impact on our spiritual self; it is a
major intervention into a process which is normally entirely self-regulated.)
The divine name written on the egg consecrates it to the cosmic force of
creation, the spirit of which, in our present paradigm, is called Helios. This
means the egg has become the active agent of a force so powerful that rarely
reaches human beings unfiltered. Under normal conditions it is mediated and
mitigated by several critical filters: the gate of the moon, the spirits of the
sublunary realm (in particular the 360 genii of the Zodiac), and finally the
filters of time, day, hour, place, and fate, which are specific to each person.
All these are the filters or skins we have just removed. Don’t be fooled by the
simplicity and straightforwardness of the act, using Helios to purify ourselves
is quite the intervention. The use of the consecrated egg to extract the
remaining residue can easily damage your spiritual pattern, which is why you
licked off the divine name before you threw away the first egg. It was a safety
measure to ensure that you actively reabsorb and take back any aspect of
yourself that should remain within you.
Stage 3: Charging
In the third stage we charge the second egg with cosmic fire pulled directly
out of the sun. Little needs to be added to the instructions provided above.
However, this stage does require good visionary skills, which is one reason
why I had you practising the exercises to do with joy.
The formula to conjure Helios makes reference to many mythological
concepts, some of which are Egyptian, others Greek. I recommend
researching the meaning of each of these references thoroughly, some
suggestions are to be found in the bibliography. As you’ll be swallowing
cosmic fire, you should know as much as possible about it beforehand. It will
also help you appreciate the full beauty, richness, and depth of this ritual text.

Here are some observations to help begin that process.
The original title of the PGM extract is systasis idiou daimonos. Various
translations of this have been proposed, ranging from ‘meeting with your
personal daimon’45 to ‘communicating with your own daimon.’46 Our
attention should be drawn in particular to the word ‘systasis.’ We find the
same word used in the PGM in many rituals and spells to describe the
relationship magicians aspire to create with other spirits, divinities, and even
their paredroi. Early scholarly views about the word systasis tended to it
being a literal meeting; later ones add more abstract connotations of
connection and conjunction. As moderns, it is important to realize that for the
ancient Greeks the term systasis was not a mystical term but a pragmatic,
everyday word that described a meeting, whether this was a meeting between
two people, or a person and a daimon.
Two other names in the conjuration deserve further attention, Skiathi and
Mantō:
You are the youthful one, highborn, scion of the holy temple, kinsman to
the holy mere called Abyss which is located beside the two pedestals
SKIATHI and MANTŌ.
Jan Bergman was the first scholar to provide a deep analysis of this
important section of the ritual. The words skiathi kai mantō are the earliest
known Greek transliterations of the two Ancient Egyptian solar barks,
(Me)Sektet, the Night Barque, and Manedjet, the Day Barque.47 Even the
sequence of naming the Night Barque before the Day Barque aligns with
older Egyptian ritual texts such as The Book of the Dead. Also noteworthy is
the word that comes before the two barques: ‘pedestals’ in the current
translation. This likely refers to the floats on which models of such barques
were placed for public rituals, though it could also be a translation error, in
which case it should read ‘boats.’ The difficulty stems from the similarity
between the Greek words basis and baris, the latter being a flat-bottomed
Egyptian boat.48
Such a direct link between the PGM and an authentic Egyptian religious
tradition is very rare; the author of this ritual knew exactly what they were
doing. To better follow their line of thought, we recommend researching this
lead further, paying particular attention to the god Khepri, often represented

as a scarab beetle.

… for the Egyptian there was no form, no existence, no transformation,
no coming into being without Khepri, the very prototype of birth and
existence. This fundamental idea explains why exactly Khepri is chosen
as the most effective god for our systasis-action.49
Stage 4: Inflaming
In the fourth and final stage of the rite the purified body is thoroughly
embalmed and consecrated in cosmic fire. This fire has the potential to
destroy as well as to create, it makes the ashes and the phoenix. It is not to be
meddled with. Experiencing it was by far one of the most beautiful and
breathtaking events of my life.
After you have performed this rite several times, you may start to notice
significant changes to your spiritual body. Most of these are temporary and
will last only for your systasis with your daimon. Remember again the
analogy of the lightning. Just because it hasn’t yet struck does not mean that
no charge is building up. Have patience and confidence, and keep performing
the rite. Results take time, not necessarily due to magical gestation, but
because your spiritual senses have to sharpen.
Closing
If you take only one thing from this book, I hope it will be how much you
personally matter. You, as an ethical blueprint for all the wild spirits who

admire us as beings of free-will. You, as a partner, student, teacher and
cocreator with the myriad beings whom you’ll encounter on the path.
What does it mean to be you? And what would it take to be the best
version of yourself? Aspiring to answer this question—everyday—is a
journey of significant sacrifice and humility, of collaboration over
competition, and of being willing to fail often and recover quickly. Yet, it is
also a journey of unparalleled gifts and insights, of learning to ignite our own
hitlahavut and seal our vessel in joy, of singing to ourselves and the light of
the seven planets, and of separating ourselves from the daimones that
normally bind us into body, time and space.
The gifts you’ll receive and the sacrifices you’ll be asked to make will
differ on your own journey. There are many paths that lead to communion
with your holy daimon. I hope you feel encouraged and empowered to follow
your own path. And while traveling, let’s remember that we are not alone,
that complexity and sophistication are not the criteria that indicate
effectiveness or efficacy in the art we are aspiring to master. The more we
progress, the more we realize how little magic it takes to achieve true magic.
Our role in this journey is not to be the protagonist, but the substance that
is acted upon. We are not the alchemist, but the powder in the flask. We are
not the mason, but the raw stone in the quarry. Nature is the wisest being of
all, and perfectly capable of bringing about communion with our holy daimon
entirely by itself. All we need to do is to create the right conditions so that
this process can happen right here, and right now.
May the art and the artist be united perfectly within us.
1 The Book of Abramelin.
2 William Gray, Inner Traditions of Magic.
3 William Gray, Inner Traditions of Magic.
4 ‘Magia ist die Mutter der Ewigkeit, das Wesen aller Wesen, denn sich machet sich selber
und wird in der Begierde verstanden. Sie ist in sich selber nichts als ein Wille; und derselbe
Wille ist das große Mysterium aller Wunder und Heimlichkeiten (…) Die Begierde aber
machet in dem Willen ein solch Wesen, als der Wille in sich selbst ist. Die rechte Magia ist
kein Wesen, sondern der begehrende Geist des Wesens. Sie ist eine unsubstantialische
Matrix, und offenbar sich aber im Wesen.’ Jakob Böhme: 407, tr. Frater Acher)
5 Jakob Böhme.
6 The Book of Abramelin.

7 The Book of Abramelin.
8 The Book of Abramelin.
9 Martin Buber, Ekstatische Konfessionen, §.11.
10 Martin Buber, Ekstatische Konfessionen, §.12.
11 Friedrich Gundolf, quoted after Bourel: 157.
12 Urban: 125.
13 Berlin: 352.
14 Urban: 125.
15 Martin Buber, Ekstatische Konfessionen: 5.
16 Buber, The Legend of the Baal-Shem: 18.
17 Augustine of Hippo (354 – 430 AD) on spiritual singing, in: Exposition on Psalm 100.
18 St. Augustine, Expositions on the Psalms.
19 Virgil (70 – 19 BCE), Eclogue 8.64, quoted after Copenhaver: 124.
20 Marsilio Ficino (1433 – 1499), Three Books on Life, 3.21, after Copenhaver: 364 – 365.
21 A free recording of it is available at www.josephinemccarthy.com/audio-file-archive.
22 Josephine McCarthy, Quareia: The Apprentice, Module 9, Lesson 1
23 Josephine McCarthy, Quareia: The Apprentice Module 9, Lesson 8
24 W. G. Gray.
25 Abramelin, Book 3, Chapter 2, §.209.
26 Abramelin, Book 3, Chapter 2, §.209.
27 https://theomagica.com/tools.
28 PGM after Betz, The Delphic Maxim ‘Know Yourself.’
29 Diogenes Laërtius, 1.1, quoted after Copenhaver: 88.
30 Betz, 1981: 156.
31 Betz, 1981: 157.
32 Plato, Alcibiades Maior 1.129e, 130c, 130e, according to Betz, 1981: 157.
33 Plato, Alcibiades Maior 132d –133c, from Plato in Twelve Volumes, Vol. 8.
34 Betz, 1981: 158.
35 Betz, 1981: 159, ref. also 171.
36 Betz, 1981: 159.
37 Epictetus, Diss.III.22.53, quoted after Betz, 1981: 159.
38 PGM VIII, lines 36 – 38.
39 Heiler: 306.
40 Heiler: 306.
41 Heiler: 307.
42 Betz, 1981: 166.
43 Cicero, De Re Publica, 6.24.26.

44 My translation of Preisendanz’s German rendering of PGM VII.509 (Sei gegrüsst,
Umfasendes, das ist Erde und Himmel.), as Betz’s version is not so clear.
45 Pachoumi.
46 Bergman.
47 Bergman: 30.
48 Bergman: 30.
49 Bergman: 32.

For you are I, and I am you;
your name is mine, and mine is yours.
For I am your image.

PGM VIII, 36 – 38

I do my thing and you do your thing.
I am not in this world to live up to your
expectations,
And you are not in this world to live up to
mine.
You are you and I am I.
And if by chance we find each other, it’s
beautiful,
If not, it can’t be helped.

Fritz Perls

Selected resources
Chaldea
Butler, Elizabeth M. Ritual Magic. Magic in History Series, Sutton Publishing 1998
(1949).
Carnoy, Albert. ‘Zoroastrianism’ in: Hastings, James, Encyclopaedia of Religion and
Ethics, Volume XII. 1912.
Daicher, Samuel. Babylonian Oil Magic in the Talmud and in the later Jewish Literature.
London 1913.
Horne, Charles Francis. The Sacred Books and Early Literature of the East, Volume VII,
Ancient Persia. 1917.
Lenormant, Francois. Chaldean Magic: Its Origin and Development. London 2004 (1874).
Layard, Austen. Nineveh and its remains, Vol 1. London 1849.
———. Nineveh and its remains, Vol 2. London 1849.
Maspero, Gaston. History of Egypt, Chaldea, Syria, Babylonia and Assyria, Vol.3, London
1904.
Zimmern, Heinrich. Beiträge zur Babylonischen Religion. Leipzig 1901.

Zoroastrianism
Blois, Francois de. Dualism in Iranian and Christian Traditions, in: Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society, Third Series, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2000.
Copenhaver, Brian. Hermetica: The Greek Corpus Hermeticum and the Latin Asclepius in
a new English translation with notes and introduction. Cambridge University Press,
1992.
———. The Book of Magic: From Antiquity to the Enlightenment. Random House 2015.
Dhalla, Maneckji Nusservanji. History of Zoroastrianism. Oxford University Press 1938.
———. Zoroastrian Theology. 1914.
Ford, Michael. Liber HVHI: Magick of the Adversary. Lulu 2005.
Kiesewetter, Karl. Der Occultismus des Altertums. Georg Olms 1987 (1896).
Kingsley, Peter. ‘The Greek Origin of the Sixth-Century Dating of Zoroaster,’ in: Bulletin
of the School of Oriental and African Studies, Vol. 53. No.2, 1990.
Moazami, Mahnaz. ‘Evil Animals in the Zoroastrian Religion,’ in: History of Religions,
Vol.44, No.4. University of Chicago Press 2005.

Moore, George. ‘Zoroastrianism’ in: The Harvard Theological Review, Vol.5, No.2, 1912.
Müller, Ernst. Der Sohar, Das heilige Buch der Kabbala. Diederichs 1997.
Müller, Friedrich Max. Theosophy Or Psychological Religion: the Gifford lectures
delivered before the University of Glasgow in 1892. Longmans, Green & Co 1899.
Panati, Charles. Populäres Lexikon der religiösen Gegenstände und Gebräuche. Eichborn
1996
Prophet, Elizabeth Clare. The Mysteries of the Soul, Vol.2. 1992.
Rätsch, Christian. Räucherstoffe: Der Atem des Drachen. AT Verlag 2002 (1996).
Reiner, Erica. Astral Magic in Babylonia. 1995
Russel. ‘On Mysticism and Esotericism among the Zoroastrians,’ in: Iranian Studies, Vol
26, No.1/2, 1993.
Scheftelowitz, Isidor. Die altpersische Religion und das Judentum. Gießen 1920.
Wake, William (ed.). ‘The Shepherd of Hermas,’ in: The Apocryphal New Testament:
being all the gospels, epistles, and other pieces now extant, attributed in the first four
centuries to Jesus Christ, His apostles and their companions; and not included, by its
compilers, in the authorized New Testament. Philadelphia 1880.
West, E.W. ‘Notes on Zaratusthra’s Doctrine regarding the Soul,’ in: Journal of the Royal
Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland. 1899.
Westcott, William Wynn, The Pymander of Hermes, Vol.2. 1894.

Greek
Bremmer, Jan. The Early Greek Concept of the Soul. Princeton University Press 1993.
(1987)
Burkert, Walter. Greek Religion. Harvard University Press 1985.
Cherniss, Harold. ‘The Sources of Evil according to Plato,’ in: Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society, Vol. 98, No. 1 (Feb. 15, 1954):23–30. 1954.
Chilcott, C.M. ‘The Platonic Theory of Evil,’ in: The Classical Quarterly, Vol. 17, No. 1
(Jan., 1923):27–31. 1923.
Crowley, Aleister. Magick: Liber ABA, Book 4, Parts I–IV. Weiser 2008 (1913).
Greer, John Michael. The Blood of the Earth. Scarlet Imprint, 2012.
Heinze, Richard. Xenocrates: Darstellung der Lehre und Sammlung der Fragmente.
Leipzig 1892.
Hopfner, Theodor. Griechisch Ägyptischer Offenbarungszauber, Band 1. Amsterdam 1974.
———.Griechisch Ägyptischer Offenbarungszauber, Band 2. Amsterdam 1983.
Luck, Georg. Arcana Mundi: Magic and the Occult in the Greek and Roman Worlds. John
Hopkins University Press 1986.
Müller-Sternberg, Robert. Die Dämonen. Wesen und Wirkung eine Urphänomens.
Dieterich 1964.
Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius. Edited and annotated by Donald Tyson. Three Books of
Occult Philosophy: A Complete Edition. Llewellyn 1993.
Pope, Alton. Daimonion of Socrates: a search for definition and an epistemological
assessment. Kansas State University 1969.

Du Prel, Carl. Die Mystik der alten Griechen. Ernst Günthers Verlag, Leipzig 1888.
Rohde, Erwin. Seelenkult und Unsterblichkeitsglaube der Griechen, Band I und II. Verlag
Mohr, Freiburg 1898.
Volquardsen, C.R. Das Dämonium des Sokrates und seine Interpreten. Verlag von Karl
Schröder, Kiel 1862.
Hanegraaff, J. Wouter. Dictionary of Gnosis & Western Esotericism. Brill 2006.

Practice
Bergman, Jan. ‘An Ancient Egyptian Theogony in a Greek Magical Papyrus (PGM VII, ll
516–521),’ in: Studies in Egyptian Religion: Dedicated to Professor Jan Zandee. Brill
1982.
Berlin, Adele. The Oxford Dictionary of the Jewish Religion, 2nd edition 2011.
Betz, Hans Dieter. ‘The Delphic Maxim “Know Yourself” in the Greek Magical Papyri,’ in
History of Religions 21, no. 2 (Nov., 1981): 156–171. University of Chicago Press 1981.
Böhme, Jakob. ‘Sex Puncta Mystica,’ in: Schiebler, K.W. Jakob Böhme’s Sämmtliche
Werke, Sechster Band; Leipzig 1846.
Buber, Martin. Die Legende des Baal-Shem. Frankfurt am Main 1908.
———. Ekstatische Konfessionen. Diederichs 1909.
———. Erzählungen von Engeln, Geistern und Dämonen. Berlin 1934.
———. The Legend of the Baal-Shem. Routledge 1955.
———. The Way of Man, According to the Teaching of the Hasidim. Citadel Press 1966.
Dehn, Georg (ed.). Buch Abramelin. Edition Araki, 2001.
———. The Book of Abramelin: A New Translation. Nicolas-Hays 2011.
Fauth, Wolfgang. Helios Megistos: Zur Synkretistischen Theologie der Spätantike. Brill
1997.
Forrest, Adam P. Liber Spiritum: A compendium of Writings on Angels & Other Spirits in
Modern Magick. Azoth Press 2016.
Heiler, Friedrich. Das Gebet: Eine religionsgeschichtliche und religionspsychologische
Untersuchung. München 1920.
Janzen, James D. Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs: The Road to Unity and Spiritual
Maturity. Friesen Press 2015.
Jungkurth, Marcus M. ‘Neither-Neither: Austin Osman Spare and the Underworld.’
https://fulgur.co.uk/austin-osman-spare/neither-neither-austin-osman-spare-underworld
Pachoumi, Eleni. The Concepts of the Divine in the Greek Magical Papyri. Mohr Siebeck
2017.
Selig, Gottfried. Sepher Schimmusch Tehillim, oder Gebrauch der Palme zum leiblichen
Wohl der Menschen. Berlin 1788, reprint 1972.
Scholem, Gershom. Von der mystischen Gestalt der Gottheit. Suhrkamp 1977.
Skinner, Stephen. The Complete Magician’s Tables. Golden Hoard Press 2006.
Tyson, Donald (ed.). The Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy: The Companion to Three
Books of Occult Philosophy. Llewellyn 2009
Urban, Martina. Aesthetics of Revival, Martin Buber’s Early Representation of the Hasidim

as Kulturkritik. University of Chicago Press 2008.

Online
http://ieg-ego.eu/de/threads/crossroads/religionsraeume-und-konfessionsraeume/yeshayahu-balog-matthias-morgenstern-chassidismus
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chaldea
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?oldid=452947408
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daimon\_(classical\_mythology)
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eros\_(concept)
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maslow’s\_hierarchy\_of\_needs
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nous
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soul
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zoroastrianism
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=1023144
http://spacezilotes.wordpress.com/2010/02/12/the-evolution-of-the-concept-of-psychefromhomer-to-aristotle-a
https://theomagica.com/tools
http://www.behindthename.com/names/usage/greek-mythology
http://www.berdichev.org/hitlahavut.html
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/658081/Zoroastrianism
http://www.ellopos.net/elpenor/greek-texts/ancient-greece/anaxagoras-nous.asp
http://www.experiment-resources.com/aristotles-psychology.html
http://www.thefreedictionary.com/Chaldean