Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s FuÒÙÒ al-Íikam

Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s FuÒÙÒ al-Íikam is a translation of one of the most important works
written on Islamic Mysticism.
MuhyÐ al-DÐn Ibn al-ÝArabÐ (1165–1240) is deemed the greatest mystic of
Islam and his mystical philosophy has attracted the attention of both Muslims
and non-Muslims from his time to the present day. Believing that the world is
the self-manifestation of God, he claimed that all religions are equal and that the
perfect human being is he who knows all the religious phenomena in the world.
FuÒÙÒ al-Íikam examines the singular characteristics of twenty-seven prophets of
Islam and constitutes the best summary of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s thought. The translation
of these twenty-seven chapters is preceded by an introduction that explains the
main ideas of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’ and is accompanied by explanatory notes to the text.
Providing an easily accessible translation of one of the greatest mystics of
Islam, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s FuÒÙÒ al-Íikam is essential reading for students, scholars
and researchers of Islamic Philosophy, Mysticism and Islamic Mysticism in
particular.
Binyamin Abrahamov is Emeritus Professor, Department of Arabic, at Bar
Ilan University. He has published five books, including Divine Love in Islamic
Mysticism (Routledge, 2003) and his research interests focus on Islamic Theology,
Philosophy, Mysticism and Qur’anic exegesis.

Routledge Sufi Series
General Editor: Ian Richard Netton
Professor of Islamic Studies, University of Exeter

The Routledge Sufi Series provides short introductions to a variety of facets of the
subject, which are accessible to both the general reader and the student and scholar
in the field. Each book will be either a synthesis of existing knowledge or a distinct contribution to, and extension of, knowledge of the particular topic. The two
major underlying principles of the Series are sound scholarship and readability.

Previously published by Curzon
Al-Hallaj
Herbert I. W. Mason
Beyond Faith and
Infidelity
The Sufi Poetry and Teaching of
Mahmud Shabistari
Leonard Lewisohn

Persian Sufi Poetry
An Introduction to the Mystical Use of
Classical Poems
J.T.P. de Bruijn
Aziz Nasafi
Lloyd Ridgeon

Ruzbihan Baqli
Mysticism and the Rhetoric of
Sainthood in Persian Sufism
Carl W. Ernst

Sufis and Anti-Sufis
The Defence, Rethinking and
Rejection of Sufism in the Modern
World
Elizabeth Sirriyeh

Abdullah Ansari of Herat
An Early Sufi Master
A.G. Ravan Farhadi

Sufi Ritual
The Parallel Universe
Ian Richard Netton

The Concept of Sainthood in Early
Islamic Mysticism
Bernd Radtke and
John O’Kane

Divine Love in Islamic Mysticism
The Teachings of al-GhazÁlî and
al-Dabbâgh
Binyamin Abrahamov

Suhrawardi and the School of
Illumination
Mehdi Amin Razavi

Striving for Divine Union
Spiritual Exercises for Suhrawardi Sufis
Qamar-ul Huda

Revelation, Intellectual Intuition and
Reason in the Philosophy of Mulla
Sadra
An Analysis of the Al-Hikmah
Al-‘Arshiyyah
Zailan Moris

Published by Routledge
1 Muslim Saints of South Asia
The Eleventh to Fifteenth Centuries
Anna Suvorova
2 A Psychology of Early Sufi Sama
Listening and Altered States
Kenneth S. Avery
3 Sufi Visionary of Ottoman
Damascus
‘Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulusi,
1941–1731
Elizabeth Sirriyeh
4 Early Mystics in Turkish
Literature
Mehmed Fuad Koprulu
Translated, Edited and with an
Introduction by Gary Leiser &
Robert Dankoff
5 Indian Sufism Since the
Seventeenth Century
Saints, Books and Empires in the
Muslim Deccan
Nile Green

8 The Naqshbandiyya
Orthodoxy and Activism in a
Worldwide Sufi Tradition
Itzchak Weismann
9 Sufis in Western Society
Global Networking and Locality
Edited by Ron Geaves, Markus
Dressler and Gritt Klinkhammer
10 Morals and Mysticism in
Persian Sufism
A History of Sufi-Futuwwat in Iran
Lloyd Ridgeon
11 Spiritual Purification in Islam
The Life and Works of
al-Muhasibi
Gavin Picken
12 Sufism and Society
Arrangements of the Mystical in
the Muslim World,
1200–1800 CE
Edited by John J. Curry and Erik
S. Ohlander
13 Islamic Mysticism and AbÙ
ÓÁlib Al-MakkÐ
The Role of the Heart
Saeko Yazaki
14 Gender and Sufism
Female Religiosities in a
Transnational Order
Marta Dominguez Diaz

6 Sufi Castigator
Ahmad Kasravi and the Iranian
Mystical Tradition
Lloyd Ridgeon

15 MullÁ ÑadrÁ and Eschatology
Evolution of Being
Eiyad S. al-Kutubi

7 Popular Sufism in Eastern Europe
Sufi Brotherhoods and the
Dialogue with Christianity and
‘Heterodoxy’
H. T. Norris

16 Ibn Al-‘ArabÐ’s FuÒÙÒ
Al-Íikam
An Annotated Translation of ‘The
Bezels of Wisdom’
Binyamin Abrahamov

7KLVSDJHLQWHQWLRQDOO\OHIWEODQN

Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s FuÒÙÒ
al-Íikam
An Annotated Translation of
‘The Bezels of Wisdom’
Binyamin Abrahamov

First published 2015
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
 2015 Binyamin Abrahamov
The right of Binyamin Abrahamov to be identified as author of this work has
been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent
to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, 1165–1240, author.
[Fusus al-hikam. English]
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s Fusus al-hikam: an annotated translation of “The bezels of
wisdom”/Binyamin Abrahamov.
p.cm. — (Routledge sufi series)
Includes bibliographical references and Index.
1. Sufism—Early works to 1800. I. Abrahamov, Binyamin, translator. II. Title.
BP189.26.I2513 2015
297.4—dc23
2014032194
ISBN: 978-1-138-83131-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-73665-5 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Swales & Willis Ltd, Exeter, Devon, UK

Contents

Acknowledgments

x

Introduction

1

1 The bezel of the wisdom of divinity exists in the
essence of Adam

14

2 The bezel of the wisdom of expiration exists in the
essence of Seth

27

3 The bezel of the wisdom of transcendence exists in the
essence of Noah

36

4 The bezel of the wisdom of holiness exists in the
essence of Enoch

44

5 The bezel of the wisdom of excessive love exists in the
essence of Abraham

50

6 The bezel of the wisdom of reality exists in the
essence of Isaac

54

7 The bezel of the wisdom of loftiness exists in the
essence of Ishmael

59

8 The bezel of the wisdom of spirituality exists in the
essence of Jacob

63

9 The bezel of the wisdom of light exists in the
essence of Joseph

68

10 The bezel of the wisdom of unity exists in the
essence of HÙd

74

viii Contents

11 The bezel of the wisdom of opening exists in the
essence of ÑÁliÎ

82

12 The bezel of the wisdom of the heart exists in the
essence of ShuÝayb

86

13 The bezel of the wisdom of spiritual power exists in the
essence of Lot

93

14 The bezel of the wisdom of predetermination exists in
the essence of Ezra

98

15 The bezel of the prophetic wisdom exists in the
essence of Jesus

104

16 The bezel of the wisdom of mercy exists in the
essence of Solomon

114

17 The bezel of the wisdom of existence exists in the
essence of David

122

18 The bezel of the wisdom of breath exists in the
essence of Jonah

128

19 The bezel of the wisdom of the unseen exists in the
essence of Job

132

20 The bezel of the wisdom of the majesty exists in the
essence of John

136

21 The bezel of the wisdom of the dominion exists in the
essence of Zakariah

138

22 The bezel of the wisdom of the intimacy exists in the
essence of Elias

142

23 The bezel of the wisdom of virtue exists in the
essence of LuqmÁn

148

24 The bezel of the wisdom of leadership exists in the
essence of Aaron

151

Contents ix

25 The bezel of the wisdom of exaltation exists in the
essence of Moses

156

26 The bezel of the wisdom of recourse exists in the
essence of KhÁlid

170

27 The bezel of the wisdom of uniqueness exists in the
essence of MuÎammad

172

References
Index

183
187

Acknowledgment

I am grateful to three anonymous readers for their comments on my translation
and notes. Thanks are also due to David Brauner, who became a student of Ibn alÝArabÐ, for correcting my English. My students in the course of FuÒÙÒ al-Îikam, at
Bar Ilan University, deserve my gratitude for their insights of the Greatest Master.

Introduction

Our author, MuÎyÐ al-DÐn MuÎammad ibn ÝAlÐ ibn al-ÝArabÐ, was born in 560/1165
in Murcia in al-Andalus to a family of high social position. At the age of thirtyseven he left al-Andalus and travelled to the eastern lands of Islam, staying for
various lengths of time in Mecca, Egypt, Syria and RÙm (Turkey). Finally he
settled in Damascus (620/1223), where he died in 638/1240. During these years
he wrote hundreds of works, met many Sufis, whom he mentioned by name, and
taught his mystical and philosophical ideas. Claude Addas gathered and analyzed
many details of his biography, available in his writings in a very informative book
Quest for the Red Sulphur: The Life of Ibn ÝArabÐ.1
My interest in Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s writings began several years ago after coming
across Chittick’s book The Sufi Path of Knowledge.2 As a student of Islam in
general and Islamic theology and QurÞÁnic exegesis in particular, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s
ideas seemed to me extraordinary even in terms of extreme Sufism. From the first
reading of his writings, he appeared to me as an original thinker3 whose daring
concepts exceed the boundaries of Islam.4 Undoubtedly, his mixing of mysticism,
theology, philosophy, hermetic sciences, and law5 in his voluminous6 writings is
unprecedented. Furthermore, he used a complex style of writings, which contains
symbols,7 allusions and rhetorical forms, with the presumption that he had an
1 SPK, pp. 10f.
2 Chittick’s contribution to the understanding of the Greatest Master’s works is enormous,
and one cannot learn Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s thought without consulting this book, SDG, and his
other writings.
3 I discussed his originality in my book Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, published by Anqa
Publishing, Oxford 2014.
4 Peter Coates, Ibn ÝArabi and Modern Thought – The History of Taking Metaphysics
Seriously, Oxford 2002; Ian Almond, Sufism and Deconstruction: A Comparative
Study of Derrida and Ibn ÝArabi, London and New York 2004.
5 Sells, Mystical Languages, p. 63.
6 Apart from The Meccan Revelations (Al-FutÙÎÁt al-makkiyya), which consists of 560
chapters in 3,000 pages (Cairo edition), he wrote, according to his own testimony, 250
treatises. Morris, Part I, p. 540, n. 3. Of these only 95 are extant. J. Clark and Stephen
Hirtenstein, “Establishing Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Heritage,” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ÝArabi
Society, 52(2012):1–32.
7 See, for example, the beginning of ch. 25 in FuÒÙÒ.

2

Introduction

expert audience who could understand him.8 Add to these appealing factors his
influence on later generations,9 even into the modern era,10 in the spheres of mysticism and philosophy, and you can understand why scholars and laypeople alike
are eager to learn his thought.
The desire to know Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s thought involves overcoming several difficulties. First, the presentation of his ideas in many works forces the reader to
examine thousands of pages. Second, as noted, the amalgamation of different
spheres of Islamic culture compels the researcher to be an expert in these fields
in order to detect influences and to assess the author’s originality. Third, Ibn alÝArabÐ’s style of writing is very complex and often terse and unclear. He also uses
poetry as a means of conveying his thoughts.
To overcome the first obstacle, one can begin his study of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ by
examining his FuÒÙÒ al-Îikam (The Bezels of Wisdom), because this treatise is
relatively short (179 pages in Affifi’s edition) and contains the basic principles of
his thought. It is worth noting that the Muslims’ reactions to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s teachings were derived from reading this work, because it was so accessible.11 The two
other impediments can be confronted by using the commentaries written on this
work12 and the available translations.13 Naturally, the translator’s knowledge of
Islamic theology, philosophy, mysticism and the QurÞÁn plays an important role
in understanding the author’s approaches.
After considering these problems and the ways to solve them, taking into consideration the development in the research on Ibn al-ÝArabÐ that has been carried
out over the past thirty years, and examining the present translations, I reached
the conclusion that a new translation of the FuÒÙÒ is required to enhance the study
of the Greatest Master (al-shaykh al-akbar). It is not my intention to criticize
my predecessors to justify my own initiative in translating the FuÒÙÒ. Indeed, I
owe much of my understanding of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s texts to previous translations.
However, every translator finds his way to elucidating the text, to identifying its
ideas and their sources, to recognizing QurÞÁnic paraphrases, and to avoiding the
errors of language which lead to incorrect translation. A literal translation of a
sentence into English seems superfluous, if the reader is unable to follow the idea
8 Morris, Part I, p. 540.
9 Knysh, Ibn ÝArabÐ in the Later Islamic Tradition.
10 Coates, Ibn ÝArabi and Modern Thought.
11 Knysh, pp. 10f.
12 Muslim scholars, beginning with his immediate disciples, wrote more than a hundred
commentaries on the FuÒÙÒ. Morris, Part I, p. 540, n. 5.
13 Austin, Burckhardt, Rauf, Dagli and al-Tarjumana. According to Rešid Hafizovic, the
Turkish translation of the FuÒÙÒ which, in Bulent Rauf’s view, was done by Ismail
Hakki Bursevi, is really the work of a Bosnian Muslim scholar named Abdulla Effendi
al-Bosnawi (d. 1644). Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ÝArabi Society 47 (2010):83–94. At
any rate, Rauf translated the Turkish translation into English.
Stephen Hirtenstein kindly supplied me with a draft of his translation of several
chapters of the FuÒÙÒ. He translated chapters 1–4, chapters 5 and 6 with Cecilia Twinch,
and chapter 7 with Jane Clark. I benefited greatly from their translation and explanatory
notes.

Introduction 3
conveyed by the sentence in the light of its context. Hence, I tried to translate the
text in a simple and lucid manner, so that the reader may understand the purport
in its context. This translation is destined not only for those who do not know
Arabic, but also for those proficient in Arabic who might be perplexed in trying
to understand this complicated text, in which even the meaning of technical terms
changes depending on the context. Hence, I added transcription of the Arabic
terms and tried to explain these terms, for two reasons: Ibn al-ÝArabÐ was prudent
in choosing his terms, and frequently no equivalent terms exist in English matching the Arabic terms.14
The FuÒÙÒ consists of twenty-seven chapters, each treating a different prophet
and his distinctive essence.15 In the short introduction to the book, the author
relates that he saw in a vision the Prophet giving him a book entitled FuÒÙÒ alÎikam and commanding him to deliver it to the people. Elsewhere, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ
testifies to the divine source of his writings.16 One might get the impression that
our author tries to compare himself to MuÎammad, who received the whole
QurÞÁn from the angel JibrÐl.
The book is replete with repetitions of the author’s ideas and terms. However,
sometimes the same concept is discussed from different perspectives in such a
way that minimizes the repetitiveness.17 Furthermore, as Austin observes, “The
overall impression on the reader is lack of proper organization and continuity.”18
Notwithstanding Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s statement of the book’s source, it seems that its
chapters consist of lectures delivered before an audience. The repetition of sentences and phrases, and mainly the reiteration of causal phrases, such as “because
of” (li-anna), may support this supposition. Another possibility explaining the
structure of the FuÒÙÒ is Chittick’s characterization of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s way of
writing: “The writings of Ibn ÝArabÐ tend to be like sudden inspirations flowing
from his pen with such force and velocity that they destroy horizontal and logical
continuity. QÙnawÐ on the contrary is the model of logical consistency and pointby-point reasoning.”19 However, this description of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s style does not
characterize all the passages in the FuÒÙÒ, for example the discussion of the universals in ch. 1.
The structure of the chapter headings20 is one and the same. The first word faÒÒ
(pl. fuÒÙÒ) denotes the bezel or setting in which the gemstone is set.21 Thus, the

14 SDG, p. XXXVI I I.
15 All the prophets are QurÞÁnic figures, except Seth (ShÐth) and KhÁlid ibn SinÁn. There is
no order of time, except for the appearance of Àdam as the first prophet and MuÎammad
as the last.
16 FutÙÎÁt, Vol. VI, p. 233; SDG, p. 296; Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” p. 2.
17 Ch. 4, n. 1.
18 Austin, p. 20.
19 “The Perfect Man as the Prototype of the Self in the Sufism of JÁmi,” p. 141.
20 No clear connections between the chapter headings and the text of the chapters are
always examined. Austin, p. 20. The reader might ask why a certain chapter heading is
appropriate only to one prophet and not to another.
21 Austin, p. 16.

4

Introduction

title of the book, FuÒÙÒ al-Îikam, means the bezels of wisdom which exist in the
essence (kalima)22 of each prophet. In his essence, each prophet has a predisposition (the bezel) which enables him to receive a specific wisdom. According to this
interpretation, the bezel is the setting of the gemstone. However, at the beginning
of chapter 1, the bezel is the gemstone itself and the setting is the universe. The
perfect human being is placed in the universe to complete God’s self-manifestation, because without him the mirror, that is, the cosmos, is not smooth and so
things are not clearly seen in it.
Interpretations of QurÞÁnic verses occupy a wide range of the work. In his
interpretations, the author uses, apart from allusions and symbols, several other
devices to support his ideas. He employs the plain meaning of the text,23 points
to the first meanings of words,24 plays with the etymology of words,25 changes
words26 and brings together verses from different sÙras of the QurÞÁn to complete his ideas.27 No doubt, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ assumes that, although the sacred Text
consists of separate sÙras, the whole QurÞÁn is one entity, each part supporting
another. In this manner, the author can take a verse from one sÙra and incorporate
it in another to create one meaning.
Obviously, in his interpretations of the QurÞÁn, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ implements the
three principles of interpretation enjoined by the Sufis:
1
2
3

The QurÞÁn contains many layers of meanings.28
The human being is capable of discovering these layers.
The interpretation of the QurÞÁn is an endless task.

Furthermore, the philosophic notion Ibn al-ÝArabÐ adopts that the QurÞÁn was destined to the common people helps him articulate his complicated interpretation.29
Consequently, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s interpretations of the QurÞÁnic text often deviate from the ordinary orthodox interpretations. One of the conspicuous examples
is chapter 3 on Noah (NÙÎ). Also, the cases of Moses (MÙsÁ) and al-KhiÃr and
that of Moses and Pharaoh (FirÝawn) (ch. 25) are interpreted in the light of Ibn
al-ÝArabÐ’s conceptions. Likewise, he freely interprets traditions and makes these
fit his ideas.30
The present work is an annotated translation of the FuÒÙÒ. I have tried to translate the text in the manner called in the field of QurÞÁnic translations tarjamat
22 Ch. 1, n.27.
23 FuÒÙÒ, p. 70 of the Arabic text (QurÞÁn 42:11).
24 Ibid., pp. 73f.
25 Ibid., p. 71.
26 Ibid., p. 51.
27 Ibid., pp. 72f.
28 Nicholas Heer, “AbÙ ÍÁmid al-GhazÁlÐ’s Esoteric Exegesis of the Koran,” in The
Heritage of Sufism, ed. L. Lewisohn, Oxford 1999, Vol. I, pp. 235–239.
29 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 25. This contradicts what he says about special audience he has. See n. 7
above.
30 Austin, p. 22.

Introduction 5
al-maÝÁnÐ or tarjama tafsÐriyya, which can be rendered “translation of the meanings” and “interpretative translation,” respectively. This is not a literal translation, but rather a translation which conveys the meanings of the text.31 Hence, I
have interlaced the text with sentences and phrases in round parentheses which
fill missing parts in the original or explain opaque expressions. In so doing, I
follow the method of Izutsu’s translation of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s texts.32 Furthermore,
short footnotes with references to appropriate bibliographical entries, which are
intended to widen the reader’s knowledge, explain ideas and terms appearing in
the text.
In trying to understand obscure passages, I used mainly the commentaries of
al-KÁshÁnÐ (d. 730/1330), al-QayÒarÐ (751/1350), MuÒÔafÁ ibn SulaymÁn BÁlÐ
ZÁdeh (d. 1069/1658) and Affifi, the editor of the text. Other translations were
infrequently consulted when the translator was not confident in his understanding and wished to see other suggestions.33 In treating long sentences, I tended to
divide them into shorter ones in order to make the understanding easier.
Believing that the researcher’s role in the humanities is not only to present a
text and to analyze its contents, but also to criticize the author whenever he contradicts himself or is unfaithful to his own convictions, I did not hesitate to comment
on Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s inconsistencies.
Some technical notes are needed. In round parentheses appear the following items: references to QurÞÁnic verses, numbers of pages in Affifi’s edition of
the text, necessary additions to the text, and words and terms in transcription.
Intentionally, I did not use square brackets or other kinds of parentheses to make
the reading easier, because the text suffers no lacuna. Also, all blessings for God
and the prophets were omitted.34
As a thinker who tried to explain existence by using previous as well as his
own notions, Ibn al-ÝArabi can be regarded as a philosopher. However, employing

31 For example, The Meaning of the Glorious Koran, An Explanatory Translation, by
Mohammed Marmaduke Pickthall, New York 1953. Meir M. Bar-Asher, “Muslim
Views Regarding the Translation of the QurÞÁn” (Hebrew), in On Translating the
QurÞÁn, ed. Yohanan Friedmann, Jerusalem 2012, pp. 24f.
32 Sells, “Garden,” pp. 287f, n. 1. Sells represents an opposite view and tries to translate
the text as is without interpolations. He states in an exaggerated manner, to my mind,
the following: “No particular expression or manifestation of the central principles is
self-sufficient or transparent. Each new passage reveals something and veils something.
There is always an obscurity (the emphasis is mine), an undefined term, a new paradox.”
He reaches the conclusion that “Finally, it is impossible to separate what is being said
and how it is said and thus impossible to paraphrase faithfully the text…”
33 French translations such as Gilis’s were not consulted.
34 The blessings for God, such as “may He be exalted,” are not, in Sells’s view, primarily
expressions of piety, as usually understood, but rather “they evoke the entire apophatic
dialectic, and might be translated as follows: ‘May he (or it) be praised through the
attribute being attributed to him here, but also exalted beyond this attribute.’” “Polished
Mirror,” p. 137. However, since the apophatic dialectic is often explicitly expressed by
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ in the FuÒÙÒ, the rendering of these blessings seems to me superfluous.

6

Introduction

the mystical ideas of his Sufi predecessors35 and blending these with philosophical teachings turns his thought into mystical philosophy, as Affifi rightly states
in his introduction to the edition of the FuÒÙÒ.36 Naturally, I do not ignore the
Sufi practice that Ibn al-ÝArabÐ extensively deals with in his writings.37 However,
when taking into consideration the ultimate goal of the Sufi, that is, coming close
to God, one should note that Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s Sufi practice is tightly connected to
his mystical philosophy. Even in this volume in which Ibn al-ÝArabÐ mainly treats
his mystical philosophy, some examples of mystical practice appear, such as the
invocation to God at the end of chapter 15 (Jesus - ÝÏsÁ).
Two basic ideas lie at the core of our author’s thought. The first is the unity or
oneness of existence or being (waÎdat al-wujÙd), an idea that had not appeared in
its complete form in Islam before,38 and the second is the theory of aspects, which
explains or makes the first idea conceivable.39 The first term never appeared in his
writings and was coined by his commentators, while the second idea constitutes a
device I used to elucidate his notions. The author himself does not speak of such
a theory, although he uses many times the formula “from this perspective.” This
formula goes back to earlier Sufis.40
In Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s view, the true existence is one and it is God’s Existence.
Thus, God’s Essence, attributes and names,41 and the cosmos including all its
phenomena are one existence.42 However, the Greatest Master distinguishes
between God’s Essence (dhÁt)43 which cannot be known and His names which
can be known. In explaining the relationships between God as Essence and His
names, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ mentions a KalÁm formula according to which the names
are neither Himself nor other than Himself.44 However, he prefers the view of
the Mutakallim AbÙ al-Hudhayl, who asserts that God knows by virtue of His
attribute of knowledge which is identical to His Essence. Anyhow, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ
considers the attributes to be relationships and attributions or states, and as such

35 See my book Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis.
36 Affifi, Mystical Philosophy, pp. 10f.
37 Morris, Part I, p. 541.
38 Affifi, I, p. 25.
39 Izutsu (p. 152) writes that Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s concept of God’s self-manifestation (tajallin)
“is the very basis of his world view.” However, from a logical point of view, the oneness
of existence is the foundation of his theory and God’s self-manifestation explains the
relationships between God and the cosmos in a unified existence. The fact that our
author dedicates much space to God’s self-manifestation and its ramifications does not
cancel the place of the theory’s cornerstone.
40 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 172f.
41 From this point onward I will use only the term “names,” because it designates the
concepts of the attributes. Thus, mercy is the attribute and Merciful is the name.
42 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 23.
43 Although Ibn al-ÝArabÐ states that God’s absolute existence cannot be known, he
ascribes to this entity the power of existentiating everything. Also, the assertion that
no multiplicity exists in it means that humans have some knowledge of the Essence.
44 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 21.

Introduction 7
they are not separate entities existing in God’s Essence. Thus, God’s Unity is
absolute from the standpoint of His Essence but many from the perspective of the
cosmos.46
God’s names are different from each other and also arranged in hierarchical
order; for example, knowledge is higher than will,47 but regarding God’s Essence
they are equal to each other.48 Mercy encompasses everything, and as such it
brings all things into existence.49 As noted, these names represent relationships
between God and His self-manifestation.50 The cosmos is under the control of
God’s names.51 From this perspective each name is called rabb (lord) and is
responsible for certain acts and for specific people.52 Since the phenomena in the
cosmos are infinite, God’s names are infinite, but they can be reduced to some
basic names.53 For example, the name Merciful functions as the Creator.54
A distinction exists between the term allÁh (God) and the term rabb (lord).
Whereas the Lord is the Real who is manifested in a particular name, which is
dedicated to a specific person or an event, AllÁh denotes all the names which
always change.55
The cosmos reflects God’s names, or God’s self-manifestation through His
names. Not only does the cosmos as a whole express God’s names, but also the
perfect human being, Adam, or other extraordinary figures such as the Prophet
and the saints. They contain in their essences all the ingredients of the cosmos;
that is, God’s names.56 When Ibn al-ÝArabÐ speaks of MuÎammad, he does not
mean the historical prophet, but the spirit of MuÎammad (al-ÎaqÐqa al-muÎammadiyya), which preceded all existents. Hence, MuÎammadans, in Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s
view, are not necessarily Muslims, but rather those who comprise in themselves
all the elements of God’s self-manifestation – those who know, for example, that
all religions are expressions of His self-manifestation.57
Sometimes, our author goes further when claiming that even every atom in
the cosmos contains all the forms of the cosmos.58 That is because God’s selfmanifestation is expressed not only through the external form of everything, but
through the permeation of God’s Essence, as exists in His names, into everything. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses examples taken from philosophy or nature to illustrate
45

45 Ibid., chs. 16, 21.
46 Ibid., chs. 22, 25.
47 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 16 ; Izutsu, pp. 104–107.
48 FuÒÙÒ, chs. 2, 4.
49 Ibid., chs. 16, 21.
50 Ibid., ch. 4.
51 Ibid., ch. 3.
52 Ibid.
53 Ibid., ch. 9; Izutsu, p. 101.
54 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 21; Izutsu, ch. 9.
55 Ibid., ch. 7; Izutsu, pp. 110–115.
56 Ibid., ch. 25.
57 See ch. 3, n. 21.
58 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 16; FutÙÎÁt, Vol. IV, p. 471.

8

Introduction

this phenomenon. Thus, just as Primordial Matter (hayÙlÁ) permeates everything
and constitutes the common denominator of everything, so does God’s Essence.59
Elsewhere, water appears as a symbol of God’s Essence penetrating everything.60
In like manner, color permeates the colored thing.61 Also the number one, which
is a symbol of God, is found in all numbers, because each number is the sum of
ones. Thus God in the cosmos is like the number one in each number. This phenomenon explains the idea that a thing may be one and many at the same time.62
Also the cosmos’s phenomena are symbolized as shadows produced by the light
God’s names cast on the fixed entities.63 By this metaphor, the author states that
although the phenomena seem to be concrete, they depend for their existence on
God’s names, which means their existence is unreal.
One of the results of the notion of God’s self-manifestation is the notion that
the cause is also the effect. God’s Essence is the cause of all phenomena, which is
the effect. However, since all phenomena constitute God’s self-manifestation of
His Essence, His Essence is both cause and effect.64
In order to describe the process of the cosmos’s appearance or God’s selfmanifestation often associated with the word creation (khalq), though this is not
the creation meant by Muslim theologians, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses mythic language.
First, the motivation of God’s self-manifestation is His names’ desire to see themselves in another entity; that is, the cosmos. Or, in other words, God, the hidden
treasure, desired to be known.65 The names are also depicted as forces wishing to
burst out of their being under the pressure of an inability to act.66 Then God, as
the Merciful,67 breathed into His names, thus creating the fixed entities, and God’s
second breath caused these entities to become concrete things.68 This process is
occurring endlessly.69
In Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s view, not only the cosmos as a whole serves as a mirror of
Him, but also the Perfect Human Being, Adam, contains in himself all the forms
of God’s names. Accordingly, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ regards Adam as God’s vicegerent.70

59 Ibid., ch. 12.
60 Ibid., ch. 19.
61 Ibid., ch. 5. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ also uses God’s name al-laÔÐf (the Subtle) to signify that God
permeates everything as an immaterial substance. Ibid., ch. 23; Izutsu, 141. In his SharÎ
asmÁÞ allÁh al-ÎusnÁ (p. 253), Fakhr al-DÐn al-RÁzÐ points out that al-laÔÐf means the
imperceptible. Whereas al-laÔÐf means God’s permeation of everything in the material
world, the name al-khabÐr (the Knowing) means His pervading the consciousness of
every human being. Ibid., ch. 23; Izutsu, pp. 142f.
62 Ibid., ch. 4.
63 Ibid., ch. 9; Izutsu, ch. 6.
64 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 22.
65 Ibid., chs. 1, 25.
66 Ibid., ch. 25.
67 Ibid., ch. 12.
68 Ibid., ch. 15.
69 Ibid., ch. 25.
70 On vicegerency and messengerhood, see ch. 25.

Introduction 9
Actually, every human being reflects God, even in his outward form,71 hence to
know oneself (or one’s soul) means to know God.72 However, the most Perfect
Human Being is MuÎammad, whose spirit preceded Adam’s existence.73 As
noted, by MuÎammad, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ does not mean the historical MuÎammad, but
rather the reality or the essence of the Prophet; that is, his spiritual entity which
has been embodied in prophets and saints.74 It is worth noting that just as the
human being serves as God’s mirror, so God is the human being’s mirror through
which he sees his own soul.75 God is reflected in the cosmos, and the cosmos is
reflected in God.76 Likewise, our author says that God is known only through
the human being, and the human being through God.77 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ inevitably
concludes that the human being grants existence to God.78 The mutual relationship between God and man is also exemplified through the notion that just as God
commands humans to act in specific ways, so the human being commands God
to forgive him.79
Furthermore, since the human being reflects God’s names, and since God’s
names are arranged in a hierarchic manner, so that God as a knower is more general than God who wills, also the human being has different levels, at the highest
of which stands the gnostic (ÝÁrif) and at the lowest the ignorant (jÁhil).80
The process of God’s self-manifestation or creation is perpetual; God never
stops destroying and creating the cosmos at the same time. Only the heart of the
human being can perceive such endless changes, because, contrary to the intellect
(Ýaql), which limits, the heart (qalb), as its name testifies, is able to perceive all
changes in the cosmos.81
As he so often does, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ advances another explanation of the phenomenon of creation, this time from a theological perspective. Basing himself
on QurÞÁn 16:40, “When We will a thing (to be), We only say to it ‘be’ and it
comes into being,” he points out three divine elements: 1. God’s Essence (the
word “We”) from the perspective of His self-manifestation; 2. God’s will; and
3. God’s command (“be”). Facing these three divine elements stand three parallel
elements of the fixed entities. These are: 1. the thingness of the fixed entities; that
is, their potential being as things; 2. their hearing; and 3. their obedience to God’s
command “be.” In Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s view, the fixed entities produce themselves

71 Ibid., ch. 19.
72 Ibid., ch. 1; Izutsu, pp. 234–35.
73 Ibid., ch. 27.
74 Chittick, Imaginal Worlds, p. 31.
75 FuÒÙÒ, chs. 2, 22.
76 Ibid., ch. 5.
77 Ibid., ch. 7.
78 Ibid., ch. 5.
79 Ibid., ch. 15.
80 Ibid., ch. 10. For another classification, see ch. 22.
81 Ibid., chs. 12, 16.

10 Introduction
because they obey God’s command. In other words, the potentiality of becoming
existents is brought into actuality by the divine command.82
The tripartite principle – here mentioned in the context of the coming into
being of the fixed entities – governs Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s thought. Just as this principle
shows us the process of creation, it produces true ideas through the practice of syllogism, also composed of three parts, two premises and a conclusion.83 Moreover,
chapter 27 about MuÎammad is built on the basis of a tradition which is composed
of three parts.
The idea of the fixed entities (aÝyÁn thÁbita) plays an important role in Ibn
al-ÝArabÐ’s cosmogony. As noted, these entities, reminiscent of Plato’s ideas, are
the concrete things in their hidden forms before their appearance in the cosmos.84
Furthermore, these also determine the structure of everything, its essence and its
acts. Actually, all God’s acts, including His turning to the human being, are determined by the human fixed entity. God’s knowledge follows the content of the
fixed entities, and His will follows this content, which was previously conceived
by God. Consequently, all the human being’s acts and the time of their occurrences are decreed in the fixed entities. Strangely enough, the human being’s will,
which appears in his fixed entities, establishes the form of God’s self-manifestation to him.85 Thus, God is compelled to act in keeping with His own thought
expressed in the fixed entities.
This scheme of processes absolutely excludes the possibility of human free
will, which, to our surprise, our author holds true. How can one explain free will
in a world in which all the phenomena are preordained in the fixed entities and
even God is coerced to act in accordance with what is set firmly in them? One
can answer this question by pointing to the fact that from the human perspective
free will exists; one feels that following one’s will, one can freely act. However,
from the cosmic standpoint, one is compelled to act as is decreed in one’s fixed
entity. In other words, in the terrestrial plan, every human being possesses free
will, or at least feels he has free will, while in the divine domain all was already
determined, including one’s will. If all the phenomena, including free will, are the
expression of God’s self-manifestation, there is no meaning to the responsibility
for one’s acts.
Another result of the idea of the unity of existence, or the idea that God is
the sole true existent, is the notion that what we call “the concrete cosmos” is
nothing but imagination. Speaking of the world or dreaming it means imagination within imagination.86 Imagination as a faculty of the soul is sometimes stronger than the intellect, even though each faculty produces different approaches

82 Ibid., ch. 11; Izutsu, pp. 198–201.
83 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 11.
84 In InshÁÞ al-dawÁÞir (pp. 16f), Ibn al-ÝArabÐ states that the fixed entities are neither
existent nor non-existent, meaning they are existent in God’s thought but non-existent
from the perspective of the concrete phenomena. Izutsu, pp. 160–163.
85 FuÒÙÒ, chs. 5, 8, 10, 13, 14, 18, 25.
86 Ibid., ch. 9; Izutsu, p. 7.

Introduction 11
regarding God. Through the intellect one may reach the conclusion that God is
transcendent, while through his imagination he is aware of God’s immanence.
Gaining the knowledge that God is both transcendent and immanent means attaining the truth.88 This leads the human being to see the One in the Many and the
Many in the One, or alternatively to see the Many as One and the One as Many.
Thus, one is led to perplexity (Îayra), because one does not know whether God
is One or Many.89 However, this state characterizes the earliest stage of spiritual development; the gnostic, the one who experiences God’s self-manifestation,
does not suffer perplexity.90 Even the prophet Noah was mistaken when he spoke
to his people of only God’s transcendence.91
The human being’s knowledge of God is divided by Ibn al-ÝArabÐ into two
parts: a. one’s knowledge of God from the perspective of one’s essence; and b.
one’s knowledge of God from the perspective of God who is manifested in one’s
essence.92 In order to know the true state of the world and God’s attitude toward
it, one must relinquish his intellect and be like an animal.93 Also, using rational
arguments does not lead the human being to true knowledge.94
Still another outcome of the perception of the oneness of existence is the notion,
from the perspective of metaphysics, that all religions are equal, because they are
God’s self-manifestation. The common denominator of all religions is the worship of God. God is worshiped in every form. The Greatest Master speaks of the
god of belief (ilÁh fÐl-iÝtiqÁd) which is peculiar to each people or group, because of
their predisposition and circumstances. However, the human being should know
that beyond the god of his belief, there is God, who is the source of all religions.
For example, in prayer the Muslim should turn his face toward Mecca; however,
he should know that God is everywhere, which actually means the possibility of
other ways of worship.95
One of the most important themes in the FuÒÙÒ is God’ gifts which He gives
either from His essence or from His names. God’s gift from His essence is His
self-manifestation to the human being. God’s gifts stemming from His names are
all the other benefits humanity receives, such as sustenance. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ also
discusses the states of the human beings who request divine gifts and those who
do not and the question of which of the two groups is preferable.96
In the context of revelation, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ treats prophethood, which
derives from God’s Mercy.97 He distinguishes between general prophethood
87

87 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 22.
88 Ibid., chs. 22, 4.
89 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 3; Izutsu, p. 69.
90 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 4; Izutsu, pp. 85f.
91 FuÒÙÒ, chs. 3, 9, 22.
92 Ibid., ch. 5; Izutsu, pp. 40f.
93 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 22.
94 Ibid., ch. 12.
95 Ibid., chs. 8, 10, 24, 25.
96 Ibid., chs. 2, 16, 17.
97 Ibid., ch. 24.

12

Introduction

(nubuwwa ÝÁmma) and legislative prophethood (nubuwwat tashrÐÝ). The first kind
of prophethood, also called walÁya (sainthood, literally: proximity to God or
friendship toward God), denotes the essential quality of one who is close to God
and receives from Him revelations of any kind. Prophets, messengers and saints
(walÐ, pl. awliyÁÞ) share this quality. The second kind of prophethood is always
connected with messengerhood and denotes the transmission of God’s laws to
peoples. Thus, every messenger is a prophet and hence has the quality of walÁya,
but not every saint is a messenger. Consequently, from the perspective of the
walÁya, no difference obtains between prophets, messengers and saints. However,
whereas MuÎammad is considered the Seal of the Prophets (khÁtam al-anbiyÁÞ)
with respect to the legislative prophethood, he is not the seal of the saints, which
means the one who brought the walÁya to its highest level.98 It is worth noting that
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ regarded himself as the seal of the saints.99 At the end of chapter 14
on ÝUzayr, walÁya appears as a principle preferable to legislative prophecy, and
the author points out that after MuÎammad legislation was given to scholars. This
is seemingly an allusion that legislation has not ended. No doubt, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ
adopted his theory of the walÁya from al-ÍakÐm al-TirmidhÐ’s teachings.100
In the context of Jesus’ prophecy, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ deals with miracles. Among
these are, for example, the appearance of the angel JibrÐl in the form of a human
being, his speaking to Mary, Jesus’ procreation, and his speaking in the cradle
and revivification of the dead.101 In contradistinction to what he says elsewhere,102
here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ expresses no reservation regarding the performing of physical
miracles, very probably because they are recorded in the Sacred Books. In addition, our author also speaks of the spiritual miracle by which dead soul, a symbol
of ignorance, is restored by divine knowledge to life.103
As noted, the theory of aspects is not a doctrine developed by Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, but
deduced from his words. This theory explains away contradictions found in our
author’s thought. The notion that God is both transcendent and immanent seems at
first sight contradictory, for if God is ontologically and epistemologically beyond
our perception, how can He be within the cosmos? And if, on the other hand, He is
immanent, how can He be beyond our perception? Ibn al-ÝArabÐ solves this problem by asserting that from the standpoint of the intellect, that is, logical perception, He is transcendent; however, from the standpoint of His self-manifestation,
He is immanent. The truth comprises both aspects. In like manner, God is the First
and the Last. He is the First, because everything derives from Him, and He is the
Last, because everything returns to Him.104

98 Ibid., chs. 2, 13–15, 17.
99 Chodkiewicz, Seal of the Saints, ch. 9.
100 Radtke and O’Kane.
101 FuÒÙÒ, chs. 15, 20.
102 Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 47–49.
103 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 15.
104 FuÒÙÒ, chs. 1–4, 22, 25.

Introduction 13
Also the nature of God is twofold. From the aspect of His Essence, He is One,
but from the aspect of His self-manifestation He is Many.105 In the moral sphere,
things are not different. From the perspective of metaphysics, as expressions of
God’s self-manifestation, good and evil things are not different from each other.
However, judged by humans, one who does evil deserves punishment, and one
who does good deserves reward.106 Likewise, all religions are equal from the
cosmic perspective, because religion means worship, and each people worship a
certain god. Here, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ recommends humans to consider the equality of
religions and have the capacity to know their common source.107
One of the most important hendiadys, also known from other trends of thought,
is the manifest (ÛÁhir) and the hidden (bÁÔin). For example, from the manifest perspective, throwing Moses into the river means putting him to death, yet, from the
hidden perspective, water symbolizes knowledge; thus, Moses was thrown into
the river in order to attain knowledge. The Greatest Master explains all Moses’
and al-KhiÃr’s acts in keeping with these two aspects.108
These two aspects express one entity, the cosmos; the Real is the inward aspect
of the cosmos, while the human being expresses its outward aspect.109 Similarly,
the human being’s essence can be analyzed from two perspectives, humanity and
animality, each having a different function in the human being.110
The present survey of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s teachings in the FuÒÙÒ is, of course, not
exhaustive, but aims to give the reader the principles of his thought, so that he
will be able to understand the text. To attain a wider knowledge of the Greatest
Master’s ideas and worldview, one should consult, apart from the explanations,
the references given in the footnotes.

105 Ibid. ch. 7.
106 Ibid., chs. 8,
107 Ibid., ch. 10.
108 Ibid., chs. 5, 25. For further discussion of this topic, see Sells, “Polished Mirror,” and
“Garden” (= chs. 3, 4 in his Mystical Languages).
109 Affifi, I, p. 36.
110 FuÒÙÒ, ch. 24.

1

The bezel of the wisdom of divinity
exists in the essence of Adam

Preface
(47) In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Praise be to God who has sent down from eternity (many) kinds of wisdom
(Îikma, pl. Îikam)1 upon the hearts2 of the perfect humans (kalim)3 in a unique
right way, even if the sects and religious communities vary because of the variety
of nations. May God bless and protect him (MuÎammad) who bestows (on people) spiritual aspirations4 from the treasuries of (His) generosity (khazÁÞin al-jÙd)5
and kindness through the most valuable statements.
I saw God’s Messenger in a vision (mubashshira)6 during the latter part of the
month of MuÎarram in the year 627 (1229) in Damascus. Seizing in his hand a book,
he said to me, “This is KitÁb fuÒÙÒ al-Îikam (the book of The Bezels of Wisdom);
take it and bring it to people so that they might benefit from it.” I said, “I hear and
obey God, His Messenger and those in authority7 among us as we are commanded.”
Therefore, I implemented the Messenger’s wish with sincere intention and pure aim
and aspiration and made this book manifest as God’s Messenger determined without
increase or decrease. I asked God to include me, both in this (mission) and in all my
states (aÎwÁlÐ), among His servants over whom the Devil has no authority.8 I also
asked Him that in all that which my fingers may write, in all that which my tongue
1 For this term see Hikmet Yaman, Prophetic Niche in the Virtuous City: The Concept of
Íikmah in Early Islamic Thought, Leiden and Boston 2011.
2 In Sufism the heart is the place in which revelations are received.
3 By this word he means the realities of prophets and God’s friends. JandÐ, p. 95. Affifi,
I I, p. 4.
4 Himma, pl. himmam. For this term see SPK, p. 104 and index.
5 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ devotes a long chapter (369) in the FutÙÎÁt to the issue of the treasuries
of generosity, entitled “The knowledge of the waystation of the keys to the treasuries of
generosity.” It is also possible to understand this word as internal knowledge bestowed
by God, or as God’s names. Affifi, I I, p. 5.
6 SPK, p. 403, n. 18. SharÎ (p. 12) interprets this word as correct vision or dream (ruÞyÁ
ÒÁliÎa).
7 QurÞÁn 4:59: “You who believe, obey God and the Messenger and those in authority
among you.” Trans. AH.
8 Cf. QurÞÁn 14:22: “I had no power over you” (trans. AH), said the Devil. See also
QurÞÁn 16:99–100, 17:65.

The essence of Adam

15

may utter, and in all that which my heart may contain, to bestow only upon my mind
glorified revelation (ilqÁÞ subbÙÎÐ)9 and spiritual blowing (nafth rÙÎÐ)10 through His
protective support. (I asked this for the purpose) of my being a transmitter (mutarjim)
and not one who writes according to his own thoughts (mutaÎakkim).11 Consequently,
those who learn it (the book), among the people of God (ahl allÁh),12 the people of
contemplation, may be certain that it originates in (48) the Place of Sanctification (in
God) that is exempt from personal interests13 in which deception is involved. I hope
that God (al-Îaqq),14 having heard my prayer, will accede to my call, for I shall convey (literally: cast into – alqÁ)15 only that which He conveyed to me, and I shall not
send down (unazzilu)16 in this book anything except that which God sent down to me. I
am neither a prophet nor a messenger, but only an heir (of prophets and messengers)17
preparing for the world to come (li-ÁkhiratÐ ÎÁrith).18
Hear from God!/And return to God!
When you hear what I bring/pay attention!
Then through understanding detail/the whole and combine the
details into a whole
Then bestow it19 upon//its seekers and do not withhold (them from it)
This is the Mercy that/embraces you,20 so make it known (to others)21
I asked God to be one of those who are given revelation and accept it, and of
those who are restricted (quyyida)22 by the pure MuÎammadan Law and accept its

9 SPK, p. 35.
10 Ibid., p. 169.
11 Literally: one who rules over his thoughts. SharÎ, p. 14.
12 These are the greatest friends of God, those who achieve unveiling in its true and
extreme form. SPK, p. 388, n. 20; SDG, pp. XIV, 56.
13 Or interests of the lower soul (nafs). Austin, p. 46.
14 The Real or the Truly Real. SPK, p. 132.
15 For the use of alqÁ with the object “word” (kalima), see QurÞÁn 4:171.
16 It is not by chance that Ibn al-ÝArabÐ employs here the verb nazzala (he sent down),
because this verb designates the sending down of the QurÞÁn, and our author regards
himself as one who receives divine revelation, although he is neither a prophet nor a
messenger, but God’s friend (walÐ).
17 Here he alludes to the famous tradition that “the scholars are the heirs of the prophets
(al-ÝulamÁÞ warathat al-anbiyÁÞ). Al-GhazÁlÐ, IÎyÁ, Vol. IV, p. 98.
18 “Who so desires the tillage (Îarth) of the world to come, We shall give him increase in
his tillage . . . ” (QurÝÁn 42:20).
19 This word refers to “understanding” in the line above.
20 This sentence is a clear echo of QurÞÁn 7:156: “ . . . My mercy embraces all things.”
Trans. AH.
21 For the author’s poetry, see Denis E. McAuley, Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Mystical Poetics, Oxford
2012. Using poetry, which is regular in Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s writings, is recorded in Sufism
from its earlier time. See, for example, T. Graham, “AbÙ SaÝÐd ibn AbÐ al-Khayr and the
school of KhurasÁn,” in The Heritage of Sufism, Vol. I, pp. 96–106.
22 This sentence is reminiscent of al-Junayd’s dictum “Our knowledge (that is, mystical
knowledge) is bound (muqayyad) by the Book (the QurÞÁn) and the Sunna (Tradition).
FutÙÎÁt, I I, p. 41. Another version of this dictum reads “Our knowledge is built
(mushayyad) by the Book and the Sunna.” Ibid., Vol. I I, p. 337. Abrahamov, Ibn alÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 78f.

16 The essence of Adam
restriction and restrict (others). May God gather us in His group23 as He made us
part of His community. The first (chapter) which the Lord reveals to the servant
is as follows:

The bezel24 of the wisdom25 of divinity exists in
the essence26 of Àdam27
(48) The Real,28 from the perspective of His Names,29 wanted to see the essences
of His uncountable Most Beautiful Names (asmÁÞ ÎusnÁ),30 as they really operate, or if you wish, say to see His Essence, in an all-inclusive being containing
all of them and qualified by existence. Through this being, His mystery will be
revealed to Him. That is, because one’s self seeing is not like one’s seeing oneself
in another, which serves as a mirror for the seer. (The reason for this preference)
is that the mirror reveals to the seer himself in a shape which is (49) given by the
substrate (maÎall) which one observes. If such a substrate does not exist and does
not appear to the seer, he cannot see himself.
23 Very probably the author means by the phrase “God’s group” God’s people (ahl allÁh)
which denotes, as mentioned above, the greatest friends of God, or the highest rank of
mystics.
24 This word can also be translated as ring setting. Sometimes Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to refer
to the stones rather than to the bezels. Sells, Mystical Languages, p. 248, n. 22.
25 Íikma (wisdom) means the knowledge of things as they really are and acting accordingly.
In this meaning it is identical to philosophy. The Sufis regard Îikma as designating the
hidden knowledge (Ýilm al-bÁÔin), and Ibn al-ÝArabÐ follows them. Affifi, I I, pp. 3f.
26 The word Kalima denotes ÎaqÐqa (essence) of a prophet, which amounts to an
attribute of God. SuÝÁd al-ÍakÐm, p. 976. Also it designates a prophet. Affifi, Mystical
Philosophy, pp. 72f. If by kalima we mean logos, that is, special traits of the prophets
(Chittick, “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Summary,” p. 4), then it is equivalent to essence. It is worth
noting that in philosophical contexts one of the meanings of logos is the internal nature
of something. Walbridge, God and Logic, p. 19.
27 The perfect reality of Àdam, that is, the human kind, serves as a frame in which the
divine wisdom is placed. In other words, humanity is the perfect place wherein all
God’s attributes are manifested. Likewise, each prophet’s reality serves as a frame
for an attribute of God. In other words, each prophet possesses a predisposition for a
specific divine attribute. As noted above, it is also possible to understand faÒÒ not as
a bezel but as a ringstone. This would not change the general idea of the inherence of
God’s attributes in prophets.
28 The sentence begins with lammÁ, meaning because, but owing to the length of the
sentence, this word cannot be rendered here and will be replaced later by “because of
this idea.”
29 In Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s view, there are two aspects of God’s Essence: a. the Essence, or the
Self about which nothing can be said; and b. the Essence with respect to His Names
and Attributes, which can be known. Here His Names wish to see themselves. Sells,
“Garden,” pp. 295f, n. 12; idem, “Polished Mirror,” p. 137.
30 Although God is qualified by ninety-nine names, Ibn al-ArabÐ says that they are infinite.
It seems that the reason of his statement is the uncountable phenomena of the world
which express His names. Since the phenomena are infinite, their sources, the names,
are infinite. SharÎ al-JandÐ, p. 69. On the possibility that God’s names are more than
ninety-nine, see al-GhazÁlÐ, al-MaqÒad al-asnÁ, pp. 184–191.

The essence of Adam

17

(Because of this idea),31 the Real brought the whole cosmos into existence
(awjada),32 an existence of an indistinct shape without a spirit in it, and it was
like an unpolished mirror. According to God’s customary rule, He does not
make a substrate unless it receives the divine spirit, which is expressed by
“breathing into it.”33 This breathing means the coming to be of a predisposition
(istiÝdÁd) of this created form to receive the constant revealed overflow (fayÃ)
which has not ceased and will never cease. There is only a receptacle (qÁbil),
which derives from His holy overflow (fayÃ aqdas).34 All existents35 come from
Him, their beginning and their end, and “all things are brought back to God,”36
just as they begin from Him.
(The revelation of) all things required the disclosure (jalÁÞ)37 of the mirror of the
world. Àdam was equal to the clearness of this mirror38 and the spirit of this form
(that is, the mirror). The angels were among the faculties of this form, that is, the
form of the world, which is expressed in popular terminology through “the Great
Human Being.” The angels relate to the world like the relationship between the
spiritual and sensual faculties in the human structure (to the body). Each of these
faculties is veiled through itself from seeing something better than its essence,
for it claims that it (the human structure) has competence for every high position
and exalted rank with God, because it has the divine all-comprehensiveness (aljamÝiyya al-ilÁhiyya),39 which goes back to the divine side (al-janÁb al-ilÁhÐ)40 and
to the side of the Reality of Realities (ÎaqÐqat al-ÎaqÁÞiq), and with respect to the
structure which possesses these qualities, (it goes back) to that which is required
by the Universal Nature which comprises all the receptacles of the world, higher
and lower.41

31 This is the alternative to the lammÁ mentioned above.
32 Although in our author’s thought the creation of the world does not coincide with the
usual orthodox approach of creation ex nihilo, he uses the terminology of this approach,
such as awjada (he brought into existence), Îadatha (it came into being), and khalaqa
(he created).
33 QurÞÁn 11:123. Sells, Mystical Languages, p. 246, n. 11.
34 The holy overflow is responsible for the production of the fixed entities (aÝyÁn thÁbita),
possible intelligible forms possessing potential power of becoming existents in the
world, reminiscent of the Platonic ideas, which come into being in existence through
the sacred overflow (fayÃ muqaddas). Whereas the first overflow is the Real’s selfmanifestation in the fixed entities, the second overflow is His self-manifestation in the
concrete forms in the world. Affifi, I I, pp. 8f. In themselves these things, that is, the
objects of God’s knowledge, are nonexistent. SDG, pp. XIXf.
35 Al-amr kulluhu here designates the whole cosmos. SharÎ, p. 22.
36 QurÞÁn 2:210.
37 JalÁÞ may also mean the clearness of this mirror.
38 That is, because in his essence he reflects all the ingredients of the world.
39 SPK, p. 195.
40 By “the divine side” Ibn al-ÝArabÐ may mean God’s names. Affifi, I I, p. 10.
41 Humans reflect God’s attributes, or the divine side (al-janÁb al-ilÁhÐ), the first intellect
(ÎaqÐqat al-ÎaqÁÞiq) and the Universal Nature (al-ÔabÐÝa al-kulliyya). Cf. Affifi, I I,
pp. 10f. Sells, “Garden,” p. 312, n. 38.

18 The essence of Adam
This (idea)42 is not known by the intellect (Ýaql) through rational observation
(naÛar fikrÐ),43 but rather this kind of perception originates only in divine unveiling (kashf ilÁhÐ). Through this divine unveiling the foundation of the forms of the
world which contain its spirits is known.
The (entity) mentioned above is called (50) a human being and the vicegerent
(khalÐfa)44 (of God). As for his humanness, it derives from his comprehensive
structure and his comprising of all the realities, (because) the human being (insÁn)
relates to the Real (al-Îaqq – God) as the pupil (insÁn al-Ýayn) relates to the eye, and
through the pupil seeing (naÛar, baÒar) occurs. Hence, he is called insÁn (meaning
human being and pupil), because through him the Real looks (naÛara) at His creation and has mercy (raÎima)45 on them. This human being is both created in time
and is eternal, coming into being and living forever.46 He is both the separating and
unifying principle (literally: word – kalima).47 The world owes its existence to him.
His relation to the world is like the relation of the bezel of the seal ring to the seal
ring. The human being is the tool (literally: place or substrate) and the sign by which
the King seals His treasure. Because of (this function) God calls him the vicegerent,
for through him God preserves His creation, as the seal ring preserves the treasures.
So long as the King’s seal is on the treasures, no one dares to open them, except
with His permission. For this reason, God has appointed him as a vicegerent who
preserves His possessions (mulk). So long as the Perfect Human Being remains,
the world will not cease to exist.48 Do you not see that when he disappears and the
seal of the treasure of the world is broken, nothing of what the Real preserved in
the treasure will remain, and all the parts which exist in it will go out being united
with each other, and all of them will move to another world (al-Àkhira) and he (the
Perfect Human Being) will be an everlasting seal on the treasure of another world.49
42 This is the idea of a receptacle which contains all the forms of the cosmos.
43 In theological and philosophical discussions, fikra in most cases designates syllogistic
procedure. See, for example, the beginning of KitÁb al-fikr in the fourth volume of alGhazÁlÐ’s IÎyÁÞ.
44 The notion that the human being is the vicegerent of God is attested in the QurÞÁn
(2:30).
45 For the connection between naÛar and raÎma, see QurÞÁn 3:77 and its commentary.
46 By this sentence Ibn al-ÝArabÐ may mean either the eternal existence of the species
against the transient life of each member of the species, or alternatively, the eternal
form of human beings in opposition to the passing nature of their corporeal bodies.
In any case, this seems to prove that the present chapter does not treat Àdam, but the
human being in general. Takeshita, “The Theory of the Perfect Man,” p. 91. However,
our author immediately refers to the Perfect Human Being, who is Àdam. Yet, as seen
on pages 75, 76, 199, and 120–122 of the Arabic text, the Perfect Human beings are the
Sufi gnostics. Takeshita, ibid., pp. 93–97.
47 Since the human being is the symbol of the cosmos, from one point of view he is
divided into parts, while from another point of view he is one essence. See my article
“Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s Attitude toward al-GhazÁlÐ,” in Avicenna and His Legacy, ed. Y. Tzvi
Langermann, Turnhout, Belgium 2009, pp. 105–107.
48 Chittick, “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Summary,” p. 8.
49 The notion that God creates numerous worlds in which one hundred thousand Àdams
have existed appears in the FutÙÎÁt (Vol. VI, pp. 81, 369), in one of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s
visions. The Greatest Master seems to say that there is no possibility of nonexistence of

The essence of Adam

19

All that exists in the divine forms,50 that is, (God’s) names, appears in the
human structure. Hence these forms attained the rank of being encompassed
and included in the existence of the human structure. And through this existence
God argues against the angels.51 So take care, because God teaches you a lesson
through (telling you the story of) another, and think52 what is the reason for blaming someone. That is, the angels were neither aware of the structure of this vicegerent nor of the essential servitude (ÝibÁda dhÁtiyya) required by the presence of
the Real. For no one knows about the Real except that which is given to him by
one’s essence.53 The angels neither had the comprehensive (nature) of Àdam nor
perceived the divine names (51) which particularize his nature and through which
God is glorified and sanctified. Moreover, the angels did not know that God has
(other) names by which they can glorify and sanctify Him as Àdam did. This
situation which we have mentioned overwhelmed them and caused them to say
concerning the structure of the human being: “How can You put someone there
who will cause damage and bloodshed?” (QurÞÁn 2:30, trans. AH). These words
express only quarreling and the essence of their behavior, that is, what they said
regarding Àdam equals their attitude toward the Real. If their structure had not
imposed on them such (an ignorance of God’s names), having been unaware of
this imposition (wa-hum lÁ yashÝurÙn),54 they would not have said what they said
concerning Àdam. If they had known their souls (or selves – nufÙs), they would
have known (their predisposition),55 and if they had known, they would have been
protected (ÝuÒimÙ) (from ascribing sins to the human being). Moreover, the angels
did not cease disparaging Àdam, but added the claim that (contrary to Àdam) they
glorify and sanctify God (QurÝÁn 2:30). Àdam knew the divine Names which the
angels did not know, hence they could neither glorify their Lord nor sanctify Him
through these names as Àdam did.56
The Real described to us what happened (between Him and the angels) so that
we know it and behave toward Him accordingly. Consequently, we shall not claim
what we have realized and encompassed by limited (knowledge). How can we
make, without restrictions, comprehensive claims of what we have no experience
a world, because any world is a manifestation of God. A world always exists with the
Perfect Human Being as its seal. Cf. Chittick, Imaginal Worlds, p. 90.
50 Takeshita (An Analysis, p. 251, n. 48), basing himself on al-KÁshÁnÐ’s and alNabulusÐ’s commentaries, reads here ÒÙra (image), and not Òuwar as in Affifi’s text.
51 The angels opposed the existence of Àdam, because he would cause damage and
bloodshed on earth. Consequently, God showed the superiority of Àdam to them, for He
taught Àdam the names of all existents. QurÞÁn 2:30–33. Cf. Sells, Mystical Languages,
p. 67.
52 Read wa-nÛur instead of sa-anÛuru.
53 Thus, through his own essence the human being learns about God.
54 This phrase is taken from the QurÞÁn (7:95 and others) and designates the state of
unawareness or heedlessness.
55 They would have known the limitations of their knowledge.
56 According to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, everything behaves in keeping with its fix or immutable
entity (Ýayn thÁbita), and the angels are no exception to this rule. Thus, the angels
cannot be blamed for acting in accordance with their basic structure. Our author ignores
this logical difficulty, which can be found in other parts of the FuÒÙÒ.

20 The essence of Adam
and knowledge, for we will only be disgraced? This is the divine lesson (taÝrÐf –
literally: information) through which the Real educates His servants, the well
mannered, the faithful, the vicegerents.
Let us now return to the Wisdom mentioned above and say: Know that the
universals (al-umÙr al-kulliyya), even if they have no concrete existence in themselves, they are undoubtedly perceived and known by the mind (fÐ’l-dhihn).57
(Although) they are always hidden (bÁÔin)58 from the concrete existence (wujÙd
ÝaynÐ),59 they determine and influence each concrete existent. Moreover, the concrete existents are related only to the universals, (by which) I mean the (fixed)
entities of the concrete things. The universals are always intelligible in themselves. The universals are manifest60 from the point of view of concrete existents
and hidden from the point of view of their intelligibility. Every concrete existent is
dependent on the universals, which cannot be disconnected from the intellect. The
universals cannot exist in a concrete manner in such a way that (52) they cease to
be intelligible. Whether the concrete existence is temporal or not, its relationship
to the universal is one and the same. However, the universal serves as the source
of the determining rule of the concrete existents according to the requirements of
the latter’s essences; (it is) like the relationship of knowledge to the knower and
life to the living.61 That is because life and knowledge are intelligible realities which
differ from each other. We also say concerning the Real that He has knowledge and
life, and hence He is knowing and living. We say regarding the angel that he has
knowledge and life, hence he is knowing and living, and the same applies to the
human being. The reality of knowledge is one, as is the reality of life, and the relationship of each of them to the knower and living, respectively, is one.
Regarding the knowledge of the Real we say that it is eternal (qadÐm), while
the knowledge of the human being is brought into being (muÎdath). Consider
the determining rule which the relationship (between the act and its agent)62 creates regarding the intelligible reality, and consider the connection between the
intelligible and the concrete existents. Just as the knowledge determines that the
entity in which it exists is called knower, so the knower (literally: the one who
is described by knowledge – al-mawÒÙf bihi) determines that the knowledge is
brought into being regarding the knower who is brought into being, and that the

57 For the kinds of existents, see InshÁÞ al-dawÁÞir, pp. 7–27.
58 Internal.
59 Chittick understands this term as an entified existence, that is, existence which is not in
the mind. SPK, p. 83.
60 External.
61 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to mean that, for example, the universal that is called knowledge
entails the existence of one who knows, and this connection between the act (knowledge)
and its subject (the knower) is part of the essence of knowledge. This paragraph on the
universals is reminiscent of Aristotle’s discussion on the universals. See, for example,
Metaphysics, 1038a; D. M. Armstrong, Universals: An Opinionated Introduction,
Boulder 1989.
62 By this phrase Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means the relationship between, for instance, knowledge
and the knower.

The essence of Adam

21

knowledge is eternal regarding the eternal (entity). Each of the two (knowledge
and knower) is both determining and determined.63
It is known that even if the universals (al-umÙr al-kulliya) are intelligible, they
have no concrete existence,64 but only the (power) of determination, as they are determined by the relationship to the concrete existent.65 The universals are determined by
the concrete existents,66 but it is inconceivable that they should admit particularization
and division, for they exist in their essences in each entity they qualify, as humanity
exists in each individual of this particular species, being neither particularized nor
(53) divided by the multiplicity of the individuals. (Even though the universals are
present in concrete existents), they (the universals) remain intelligible. If the connection between that which has concrete existence and that which lacks such existence
is proved (thabata), therefore this would be a nonexistent relationship (wa-hiya nisba
Ýadamiyya),67 then the connection between the concrete existents to each other is more
easily perceived by the intellect, because the concrete existence unifies them, whereas
in the former case (the connection between the concrete existents and the universals),
there is no unifying element (jÁmiÝ). Hence, there is a connection without a unifying
element; however, a connection with a unifying element is stronger and more correct.
There is no doubt that the bringing into being (iÎdÁth) of that which is brought into
being (muÎdath) and the need of the latter to a bringer into being (muÎdith) is proved,
because the muÎdath is possible by virtue of itself.68 Consequently, its existence derives
from another, and it is connected to another with a connection of need (irtibÁÔ iftiqÁr).
The entity on which the muÎdath relies (for its existence) is undoubtedly a necessary
existent by virtue of its essence (bi-dhÁtihi); for its existence, it does not need another
entity. It is He (God) who bestows existence to this coming-into-being thing (ÎÁdith)
by His essence and the ÎÁdith relies on Him (for its existence). Since God’s Essence
necessitates the existence of the muÎdath, the muÎdath is a necessary entity by virtue
of God. Since the ÎÁdith relies on the entity from which it emerges, because of the

63 In other words, the existence of knowledge in one entails one’s being a knower, and the
characteristic of the knower as brought into being or eternal entails the characteristic of
knowledge as brought into existence or eternal.
64 For Ibn al-ÝArabÐ concrete existence does not mean existence in the mind, but only
existence outside one’s mind, in the external world. I have no evidence that he knew of
the doctrine of AbÙ al-BarakÁt al-BaghdÁdÐ (d. after 1164), who thought that existence
in the mind is one of the forms of concrete existence (wujÙd fÐ’l-aÝyÁn). Al-KitÁb almuÝtabar fÐ’l-Îikma al-ilÁhiyya, Haydarabad 1939, Vol. I I I, p. 19.
65 The knowledge of concrete existents determines the form of their universals.
66 As he said above, the concrete existent may characterize the state of the universal.
67 The author seems to say that the relationship between the concrete things and the
universals are not seen but perceived by the intellect.
68 A thing that is brought into existence is possible by virtue of itself and necessary
by virtue of another. God is the necessary existent by virtue of itself (His essence),
which means that no entity is the cause of His existence. In this characterization of the
existents, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ follows other philosophers and theologians. See, for example,
Ibn SÐnÁ, Al-ShifÁÞ: al-IlÁhiyyÁt, trans. M. E. Marmura, Utah 2005, Ch. 6; Al-ÀmidÐ
(d. 1233), GhÁyat al-marÁm fÐ Ýilm al-kalÁm, ed. Íasan MaÎmÙd ÝAbd al-LaÔÐf, Cairo
1971, pp. 48f.

22 The essence of Adam
essence of this entity, (this connection between the ÎÁdith and its source) necessitates
that the ÎÁdith reflects the source’s form. (This means) that each name and attribute
of the source is ascribed to the ÎÁdith except essential necessity (wujÙb dhÁtÐ),69 for
the latter is inadmissible regarding the ÎÁdith; although the ÎÁdith is the necessary
existent, it is necessitated by another, not by itself.
Moreover, you should know that since what we have said concerning the
emergence of the human being in His form is right, God caused us to know Him
through the observation of the ÎÁdith and pointed out that He showed us His signs
in the ÎÁdith,70 so we adduced evidence from ourselves about Him. The description
through which we described Him was not but the description of ourselves, except for
the unique essential necessity (which belongs to Him alone). Since we know Him
through knowing ourselves and from ourselves, we ascribe to Him all that which we
ascribe to ourselves. This (point is corroborated) by divine messages which come to
us through the prophets (tarÁjim).71 (In these messages) He described Himself for
us through us. If we witness Him, we witness ourselves, and if He witnesses us, He
witnesses Himself. We are doubtless many in terms of being (numerous) individuals
and species. Even if one reality unites us, we definitely know that there is a difference through which individuals are distinguished from one another. If this (rule) did
not exist, multiplicity would not subsist in one (entity). (54) Likewise, even if He
describes us through what He describes Himself, that is, through all aspects, still
there should be a difference, which is our need of Him for our existence and (the
fact) that our existence depends on Him. This is because we are possible things,
whereas He does not need that which we need. Consequently, it is right (to ascribe
to) Him eternity and pre-existence, and to deny of Him antecedence, (which means)
the beginning of existence from nonexistence. Although He is the First, antecedence
is not ascribed to Him. For this reason, it is said of Him (He is) the Last.72 If His
antecedence were antecedence in the sphere of limited existence, it would be impossible that He should be the Last existent, for there is no last possible thing, because
the possible things (mumkinÁt) are infinite, hence there is no last possible thing.73 He
is the Last, only because everything goes back to Him, after it has been attributed to
us. Hence, essentially He is both the Last and the First.74

69 This means being necessitated by virtue of its essence.
70 QurÞÁn 41:53: “We shall show them Our signs on the far horizons and in themselves,
until it becomes clear to them that this is the Truth. Is it not enough that your Lord
witnesses everything?” (trans. AH). For the concept of signs (ÁyÁt) in the QurÞÁn and
Islamic theology, see Abrahamov, “Signs,” Encyclopaedia of the QurÞÁn, ed. J. D.
McAuliffe, Leiden 2006, Vol. V, pp. 2–11.
71 For this use see SPK, p. 330. On p. 47, the word mutarjim (literally: translator) means
transmitter.
72 QurÞÁn 57:3: “He is the First and the Last, the Outward (ÛÁhir) and the Inward (bÁÔin).”
73 The possible things have no end, for they reflect God’s essence, which is infinite.
74 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ expresses the notion of the twofold nature of God. Just as God is
transcendent and immanent, depending on the aspect considered, in the same manner,
He is the First and Last. He is the First, because all entities derive from Him, and He is
the Last, because all entities return to Him.

The essence of Adam

23

You should know that God characterized Himself as the Outward and the
Inward and brought the world into existence in two forms – invisible and visible –
so that we might perceive the Inward through the invisible (things) in ourselves
and the Outward through the visible things in ourselves.75 And He described
Himself through satisfaction (riÃÁ) and anger (ghaÃab), and brought the world
into existence as containing fear (khawf) and hope (rajÁÞ), so that (people) would
fear His anger and hope for His satisfaction. And He depicts Himself as beautiful
and possessing majesty, and hence brought us into existence with (the attributes)
of reverence (hayba) and intimacy (uns).76 In this manner (one should understand) all that is ascribed to God and all His names. He expressed (each) pair of
attributes by His two hands,77 which turn from Him toward the creation of the
Perfect Human Being, because he combines the realities of the world and its individual things. That is, because the world is visible (literally: witness – shahÁda)
and the vicegerent is invisible,78 therefore the Ruler (God) is veiled. The Real
describes Himself as (concealed) through dark veils, which are the natural bodies,
and through luminous veils, which are the subtle spirits.79 The universe is either
dense (kathÐf) or subtle (laÔÐf), and it veils itself, hence it cannot perceive the
Real as it perceives itself. It does not (55) cease (to be covered) by a veil which
is not removed, knowing (maÝa ilmihi) that because of its need for its creator, it
is distinct from Him. Moreover,80 it has no part in the essential necessity which
characterizes the existence of the Real, hence it will never perceive Him. The Real
will never be known by the universe, either by mystical experience (dhawq) or by
physical witness (shuhÙd), for the created in time has no part in (the knowledge
of the eternal).
God combined in Àdam (the pair of contradictory traits) to honor him. For this
reason He said to IblÐs: “What prevented you from prostrating to (the human being)
that I created with my two hands?” (QurÞÁn 38:75) (Iblis did not prostrate himself),
because Àdam combined in himself two forms: the form of the cosmos and the form

75 Since the structure of the human being reflects the cosmos, his hidden parts correspond
to the cosmos’s hidden parts and the same applies to his manifest parts. Al-tadbÐrÁt alilÁhiyya fÐ iÒlÁÎ al-mamlaka al-insÁniyya, in Kleinere Schriften des Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, ed. H.
S. Nyberg, p. 108; trans. T. S. al-Jerrahi al-Halveti, Divine Governance of the Human
Kingdom, Louisville 1997, pp. 9–11.
76 One reveres God because of His majesty and wishes to be an intimate friend of God
because of His beauty. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ wrote an epistle entitled KitÁb al-jalÁl wa’l-jamÁl.
RasÁÞil, I, no. 2.
77 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ finds a solution to the anthropomorphic expression in QurÞÁn 38:75,
which reads: “God said: ‘IblÐs, what prevents you from prostrating to (the human being)
that I created with my two hands (bi-yadayya) . . . ” God’s two hands symbolize each
pair of His attributes.
78 The explanation of the invisibility of the vicegerent appears immediately.
79 The notion that God is veiled by seventy veils of light and darkness is based on a
ÎadÐth. Al-GhazÁlÐ, MishkÁt al-anwÁr, The Niche of Lights: A Parallel English-Arabic
text, translated, introduced, and annotated by David Buchman, Provo, Utah, 1998,
p. 44.
80 The text reads wa-lakinna (but, however), which does not make sense here.

24 The essence of Adam
of the Real; both are the two hands of the Real, while IblÐs is part of the cosmos
which does not possess this combination. Therefore, Àdam was vicegerent, and if
he were not manifest in the form of that which made him vicegerent for the purpose
of his vicegerency, he would not be vicegerent. And if he did not combine in himself
all that which the subjects, for whose sake he was made vicegerent, require from
him, because they depend on him and hence he must implement what they need, he
would not be their vicegerent. Consequently, vicegerency is valid only regarding
the Perfect Human Being. Therefore, God created his manifest form from the realities of the cosmos and its forms, and his invisible form in the form of God. For this
reason, God said of him: “I was his hearing and seeing,” and He did not say, “I was
his eye and ear.”81 He made a distinction between the two forms. (Just as the Real
is in the Perfect Human Being), He is in each existent of the cosmos in the (same)
measure that the reality of each existent requires. However, no existent possesses
the combination (of traits) possessed by the vicegerent. He gained (this status of
vicegerency) only because of this combination.
If the Real did not pervade the existents through (His) form, the cosmos would
not exist. Likewise, if the universal intelligible realities did not exist, the concrete
existents would not be determined.82 Hence, from this truth (mentioned above)
(we learn) the cosmos’s need of God for its existence.
(56) All things need (God) and cannot dispense with (Him)/this is the truth that
we express plainly
If you mention He who does not need (anything)/you know whom we mean
Everything is connected to everything without/ being separated, (so) learn
from me what I say.
Now you know the wisdom of the creation (nashÞa) of Àdam, that is, his external form, and you know the creation of his spirit, that is, his internal form, and this
is the truth regarding creation.83 And you know the creation of his position which
is the combination (of traits) that made him worthy of the vicegerency. Àdam is
the single soul from which God created the human species. This (is attested) in
God’s saying: “Mankind, fear (ittaqÙ)84 your Lord, who created you of a single
soul, and from it created its mate, and from the pair of them scattered abroad many
men and women . . . (QurÞÁn 4:1, trans. Arberry). His saying “fear (or beware)

81 Eye and ear are external and hence perceptible, while hearing and seeing are internal
and hence imperceptible. The author refers to the tradition of supererogatory acts
(ÎadÐth al-nawÁfil), according to which God rewards the believer who performs such
acts “by becoming the hearing with which he hears, the seeing with which he sees . . . ”
BukhÁrÐ, Vol. LXXXI, no. 38 (6502). Sells, Mystical Languages, p. 69. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ,
Divine Sayings, p. 70.
82 For its existence the cosmos first needs God’s spirit (form) and second universal
realities (ideas or the fixed entities – aÝyÁn thÁbita), which establish the forms of the
existents.
83 Read: al-Îaqq fÐ’l-khalq. SharÎ, p. 38. Reading fa-huwa al-Îaqq al-khalq (Affifi’s
edition) means “thus, he (Àdam) is both the Real and the creation,” which coincides
with the present context.
84 IttaqÙ may also mean “beware.”

The essence of Adam

25

your Lord” (means) make your external side a protection for your Lord and
your internal side, that is God, a protection for you.86 That is because the attitude
toward human behavior consists of blame and praise; you should protect Him
from blame (do not blame Him) and protect yourselves from praise (do not ascribe
to yourselves praise), (only) then will you be well mannered and knowers.
Then, God showed Àdam what he placed in him, and he made it abide in two
aspects relating to Àdam: the first aspect is the world and the second is Àdam and
his progeny,87 explaining the grades (of his progeny).
(The author) said: Since God showed me in secret what he placed in this great
progenitor, I have recorded in this book what he established for me, not all of what
I have been taught, for this (all the knowledge I was given) cannot be included in a
book or in the world existing now. The following is what I witnessed, that is, what
God’s messenger deposited in this book as He established it for me:
1. The Wisdom of Divinity exists in the Essence of Àdam; This is the present chapter. 2. The Wisdom of Expiration exists in the Essence of Seth (ShÐth);
3. The Wisdom of Transcendence exists in the Essence of Noah (NÙÎ); 4. The
Wisdom of Holiness exists in the Essence of Enoch (IdrÐs); 5. The Wisdom of
Excessive Love exists in the Essence of Abraham (IbrÁhÐm); 6. The Wisdom
of Reality exists in the Essence of Isaac (IsÎÁq); 7. The Wisdom of Loftiness
exists in the Essence of Ishmael (IsmÁÝÐl); 8. The Wisdom of Spirituality exists in
the Essence of Jacob (YaÝqÙb); 9. The Wisdom of Light exists in the Essence of
Joseph (YÙsuf); 10. The Wisdom of Unity exists in the Essence of HÙd; 11. The
Wisdom of Opening exists in the Essence of ÑÁliÎ; 12. The Wisdom of the Heart
exists in the Essence of ShuÝayb; 13. The Wisdom of Spiritual Power exists in the
Essence of Lot (LÙÔ); 14. The Wisdom of Predetermination exists in the Essence
of Ezra Ý(Uzayr); 15. The Prophetic Wisdom exists in the Essence of Jesus (ÝÏsÁ);
16. The Wisdom of Mercy exists in the Essence of Solomon (SulaymÁn); 17. The
Wisdom of Existence exists in the Essence of David (DÁÞÙd); 18. The Wisdom of
Breath exists in the Essence of Jonah (YÙnus); 19. The Wisdom of the Unseen
exists in the Essence Job (AyÙb); 20. (58) The Wisdom of Majesty exists in the
Essence of John (YaÎyÁ); 21. The Wisdom of the Dominion exists in the Essence
of Zakariah (Zakariyya); 22. The Wisdom of Intimacy exists in the Essence of
Elias (IlyÁs); 23. The Wisdom of Virtue exists in the Essence of LuqmÁn; 24. The
Wisdom of Leadership exists in the Essence of Aaron (HÁrÙn); 25. The Wisdom
of Exaltation exists in the Essence of Moses (MÙsÁ); 26. The Wisdom of Recourse
exists in the Essence of KhÁlid; 27. The Wisdom of Uniqueness exists in the
Essence of MuÎammad.
85

85 Probably by this phrase Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means that God is protected from any accusation
concerning human behavior which derives from the humans’ external aspect. In other
words, beware of ascribing to God your sins. SharÎ, p. 38.
86 You are not responsible for the good deeds which emanate from you. Do not ascribe
them to yourselves, but to God.
87 Àdam reflects in his essence the whole cosmos, and in addition he is the source of all
generations to come.

26 The essence of Adam
The bezel of each kind of wisdom is the essence ascribed to it.88 In the kinds
of wisdom I mentioned in this book, I limited myself to what was established in
the Source of the Book (umm al-KitÁb).89 I copied what the Messenger dictated
to me and did not go beyond what was established for me. Even if I wished to
increase (the contents given to me) I would not be able to do so, for God’s presence (ÎaÃra) prevents this action. It is God Who grants success, and there is no
Lord except Him.

88 Very probably, by “it” the author means each prophet, although the pronoun of ilÁ (to)
is in the feminine (ilayhÁ), Ibn al-ÝArabÐ might have thought on the reality (ÎaqÐqa) of
a prophet to which the essence is ascribed.
89 QurÞÁn 43:4, 13:39, trans. AH. The source of the book is equivalent to the Preserved
Tablet, the heavenly scripture, from which the QurÞÁn was taken. This is another
allusion of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ to the divine character of the FuÒÙÒ and to his status as one
who, like prophets, receives revelation from Heaven.

2

The bezel of the wisdom of
expiration1 exists in the essence of
Seth

Know that the external gifts and grants in the world, which are (given) through
people and not through them, are divided into two kinds: gifts deriving from the
Essence (of God) and gifts deriving from His Names. The people of mystical
experience (ahl al-adhwÁq) distinguish between them. Also, the two kinds of gifts
(are given) in answer to a specific or a nonspecific request. (Moreover), there are
gifts, whether of the Essence or of the Names, which are (59) (given) without
request. One who wants a specific gift will ask: “O my Lord, give me such a thing,
and he will specify a certain thing, not another.” One who wants a nonspecific
gift will say: “Give me what You know is in my (best) interest for any part of my
being, whether subtle or dense,” without specifying a certain thing.
Those who ask are divided into two kinds: those who are motivated to ask
because of natural (inclination) to hasten (matters) (istiÝjÁl ÔabÐÝÐ), for the human
being was created hasty (khuliqa ÝajÙlan);2 and those who are urged to request, for
they know that there are things belonging to God that cannot be attained (except
and) only after a request. And he (one of this group) says (to himself) perhaps
what we ask God is of this kind. Hence, his request (expresses) a precautionary
measure, because of the possibility that there are things which God can give (but)
only on request. That is because he cannot know what God knows, nor can he
know what his predisposition (istiÝdÁd) permits him to receive, because one of the
obscure objects of knowledge (aghmaÃ al-maÝlÙmÁt) is (knowing) one’s predisposition in each instant at that moment. However, if the predisposition did not make
him request (something), he would not request (it).
The best knowledge attained by the People of Presence (ahl al-ÎuÃÙr) with
God,3 who do not know (their predisposition), is the knowledge of (their gift) at
the moment of its reception. Because they are present with God, they know what
God grants them at this time and that they receive it through their predisposition.
1 After stating in the first chapter that Àdam’s role was to unify all the realities in himself,
the second chapter ascribes to Seth God’s self-manifestation of His power of creation,
which is exemplified in the act of expiration (nafth).
2 This sentence is a combination of two QurÝÁnic verses: “ . . . Man is ever hasty” (wakÁna al-insÁn ÝajÙlan – QurÞÁn 11:17) and “Man was created hasty . . . ” (khuliqa alinsÁn min Ýajal – QurÞÁn 21:37).
3 SPK, p. 105.

28 The essence of Seth
They are divided into two kinds: those who know from what they have received
(what) their predisposition is, and those who know from their predisposition what
they may receive. The latter is more complete than the former. Among those who
belong to the second kind are certain people who ask, neither because they want to
hasten (the reception of the gift) nor because there are many possible things (to be
given), but only to obey God’s command in His saying: “If you call on Me, I will
answer you” (QurÞÁn 40:60). Whoever does so is a pure servant. That is because
this requester (al-dÁÝÐ) has no aspiration (himma),4 whether specific or not, which
is connected with what he requests, but he wishes to obey his Lord’s command.
If his state requires (making a) request, he will ask servanthood (ÝubÙdiyya), and
if his state requires the entrusting (of his affairs to God) and silence, he will be
silent. Job (AyÙb) and others were afflicted by suffering, and they did not ask God
to remove their affliction. (60) Then, at another time, their state required them to
request the removal of it, and God removed it from them.
Hastening or slowing down the answer (depends) on the predetermined answer
appointed by God for those who ask. If the request fits the moment predetermined
for its answer, God hastens to answer, and if the time (of request) is delayed,
whether in this world or until the world to come, the answer is also delayed. (What
is delayed is) the thing requested, not the answer, for God is at the human being’s
service, hence you should understand this.5
By the second kind of request, “There are (gifts) that are given without
request,” I mean an articulated request, for essentially there must be a request,
whether through articulation, a spiritual state, or a predisposition. Likewise, undefined praising (Îamd muÔlaq)6 is never valid unless it is articulated; however, a
spiritual state necessarily restricts praising when it refers to a (specific) meaning.
The (knowledge) which urges you to praise God is the (knowledge) which limits
(your praise) through a name of action (ism fiÝl) or of transcendence (ism tanzÐh).7
One is not aware of one’s predisposition, but of one’s spiritual state, because one
knows the motive which is the state, for predisposition is a more hidden (form
of) request. Only the knowledge that God predetermined (their actions) prevents
such people from requesting God. They prepare their substrate to receive whatsoever comes from God, their souls and their aims being concealed from them.8
4 See p. 14, n. 4.
5 If all things and events are predetermined by God, then the suitability of the request
to the answer is also determined. Thus, there is no possibility of man’s choosing his
actions freely in this system. Even one’s thoughts and evaluations regarding one’s
actions can be considered as decreed by God.
Dr. Avraham Elqayam suggests that the word ifham (“understand”!) signifies the end
of an esoteric or profound discussion that one should deliberate on. See, for example,
ch. 12, 14, 17.
6 By this phrase, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ may be suggesting general praise, like “you are good,”
without particularizing a specific trait.
7 When one knows God’s names and actions, one praises Him by using words that are
connected with these names.
8 They are not aware of their feelings and objectives, for they are waiting only for God’s
gifts.

The essence of Seth 29
Among those persons there are those who know that God’s knowledge of them
in all their states equals the knowledge of their fixed entity before their existence.
They know that the Real does not confer (on the concrete entities) but what the
fixed entity9 confers and they know the source of God’s knowledge of them.
Among the people of God (ahl allÁh),10 this kind of people (who do not request)
are higher and more receptive to revelation than others, because they perceive the
mystery of God’s predetermination (sirr al-qadar).11 They are divided into two
groups: those who know it (the mystery) in a general way (mujmalan), and those
who know it in a detailed manner (mufaÒÒalan). One who knows it in a detailed
way is higher and more complete than one who knows it in a general way, for the
former knows that which God knows about him, whether through God’s notification to him of the knowledge latent in his fixed entity or His revelation to him of
his fixed entity whose states are endless and ever-changing. (61) Such a one is
higher than the one who knows in a general way. That is because his knowledge
of himself is like God’s knowledge of him, for the source of knowledge is one.12
However, from the point of view of the servant, (his knowledge of himself)
derives from God’s previous providence, which consists of God’s revelation to
him of all the states of his entity.13 When God makes the created being know the
fixed states of his entity, he knows them as (concrete) existents, and he cannot
know them in the state of their absence (from concrete existence),14 for they are
essential relationships15 (nisab) having no form. In this respect we say that the
two kinds of knowledge (God’s and the human being’s) are equal and originate
in God’s previous providence. That is why God said: “(We will try you) until we
know (which of you do his best)” (QurÞÁn 47:31). The phrase “until we know” has
a very clear meaning, not as the meaning imagined by those who have no mystical
inclination (mashrab). The best the one who holds God’s transcendence (can do)
is to state that the cause of the created knowledge is its connection (to the created
beings). In the gift issue, this would be the best way of the rationalist, if he did
not affirm knowledge as something added to God’s essence and ascribed the connection to the created beings and not to the Essence. Through this (direction), the

9 See p. 17, n. 34.
10 See p. 15, n. 12.
11 The mystery of God’s predetermination is based on the following tradition: “Do not
speak of anything relating to qadar, for it is God’s secret, so do not disclose God’s
secret.” Al-LÁlakÁÞÐ, AbÙ al-QÁsim Hibat AllÁh ibn al-Íasan, SharÎ uÒÙl iÝtiqÁd ahl
al-sunna wa’l-jamÁÝa min al-kitÁb wa’l-sunna wa-ijmÁÝ al-ÒaÎÁba wa’l-tÁbiÝÐn min
baÝdihim, ed. AÎmad SaÝd ÍamdÁn, Makka AH 1402 (AD 1981), Vol. I I, p. 629.
B. Abrahamov, Islamic Theology – Traditionalism and Rationalism, Edinburgh 1998,
p. 10.
12 It is one’s fixed entity.
13 Our author testifies to his own experience of receiving God’s revelation on his future
states and acts. Hirtenstein, The Unlimited Mercifier, p. 127.
14 He knows them only as they appear in concrete forms and not as ideas in God.
15 By relationships Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means attributes (ÒifÁt). SPK, p. 52. Thus, the fixed
entities or the archetypes are like God’s attributes; that is, they are not concrete spiritual
beings, which would injure God’s absolute unity.

30 The essence of Seth
rationalist is distinguished from the Verifier, the one, among the people of God,
who receives revelation and has the capability of finding (wujÙd) the truth.16
Let us now return to the (subject) of (divine) gifts, which we say derive either
from God’s Essence or Names. As for the gifts and donations which come from
the Essence, they always originate in divine revelation. Revelation originating in
the Essence is always only through the predisposition of the recipient of the revelation, not through any other way. Thus, the recipient of revelation sees only his
own form in the mirror of the Real; he does not see the Real, and it is impossible
to see the Real, although he knows that he sees his form only in the Real. This is
comparable to a mirror in the concrete existence; if you see a form in it, you will
not see the mirror itself, although you know that you see forms or your form only
in it.17 God manifests this as a simile of the revelation of His essence (62), so that
the recipient will know that he does not see God. There is no simile closer and
more similar to vision and revelation than this. When you see a form in the mirror,
try as you may to see the substance of the mirror, you can never see it. This is so
true that some people, who perceived such a phenomenon concerning the forms
seen in mirrors, thought that the form observed is placed between the beholder and
the mirror. This is the best (theory) that can be known, though the matter is as we
have said and thought. We have explained it in al-FutÙÎÁt al-makkiyya.18 If you
have tasted this matter, you have tasted the utmost degree (of knowledge) beyond
which no higher degree (can be reached by) the created being. Hence, do not strive
and weary yourself (by trying) to ascend to a higher degree than this, for He is
not there at all, and beyond this degree there is only pure non-existence (al-Ýadam
al-maÎÃ). God is your mirror, through which you see yourself, and you are His
mirror through which He sees His names and the manifestation of their rules, and
these names are nothing other than Himself.19
The matter became confused and obscure: Some of us are ignoramuses and say:
“The inability to perceive is perception.” Some others among us know, but say
nothing at all, and this is the best reaction (literally: saying): knowledge causes
them to be silent, not incapable. (One who is silent) is the best knower of God. This
knowledge belongs only to the Seal of Messengers and the Seal of God’s Friends
(or Saints). None of the prophets and messengers can perceive (this knowledge),
16 The question is how to explain God’s knowledge of the entities which are brought into
being. In other words, how this knowledge is related to God without infringing on His
eternity and unity. The verifier knows by revelation that God’s eternity and unity are
not impaired, while the rationalist knows the same idea by ascribing the change in
knowledge not to God but to the created beings. God knows from eternity what will
exist and act in the cosmos, and there is no change in his knowledge. FutÙÎÁt, ch. 411,
Vol. 7, pp. 23f.
17 Exactly, when you focus your gaze on the form in the mirror, you do not see the mirror,
although you are aware of its existence.
18 FutÙÎÁt, Vol. I, p. 249 (ch. 17).
19 The last phrase echoes the Ibn Kullab’s theory of God’s attributes, according to which
the attributes are neither identical to God’s essence nor other than His essence. Wolfson,
The Philosophy of the Kalam, pp. 208f. This doctrine was adopted by the AshÝarites, as
attested by Ibn al-ÝArabÐ. FutÙÎÁt, Vol. V, p. 406 (ch. 360).

The essence of Seth 31
except through the light-niche (mishkÁt) of the Seal of Messengers. (Likewise)
none of God’s Friends can perceive it, except through the light-niche of the Seal of
God’s Friends, so that the messengers do not perceive it – even when they perceive
it – except through the light-niche of God’s Friends. That is, because messengerhood and prophecy – I mean the prophecy of legislation and its messengerhood –
come to an end, while sainthood (walÁya) never ends.21 Because the messengers are
God’s Friends, they do not perceive that which we have mentioned, except through
the light-niche of the Seal of God’s Friends, the more so concerning those who are
more inferior than God’s Friends. Even if the Seal of God’s Friends follows the Law
promulgated by the Seal of Messengers, this does not infringe his (MuÎammad) status nor contradict that which we have said, for from one vantage point he is inferior
as he is superior from another. Accounts that appear in our plain religious sources
(ÛÁhir sharÝinÁ) (63) as regards the superiority of ÝUmar’s judgment of Badr’s prisoners22 and the pollination of palms23 support our view.
The perfect one is not necessarily superior in every respect and rank. People
consider superiority in terms of the degree one can know God and (strive) to
achieve this end. They must not think about the contingent beings. Understand
what we have said!
The Prophet likened prophethood to a complete brick wall, except for one
brick, and he was the (missing) brick. MuÎammad saw only one missing brick,
while the Seal of God’s Friends (khÁtam al-awliyÁÞ), who necessarily experienced
this vision of the Prophet’s likening, saw two missing bricks, one made of gold
and the other of silver. He saw that when these two bricks are in place, the wall
is complete, and when they are missing, the wall is incomplete. He necessarily
regarded himself as the two missing bricks needed to complete the wall.
The reason that entails his seeing two bricks is his following outwardly the
Law of the Seal of Messengers, and this is the place of the silver brick. It is the
outward aspect, (meaning) the rules that he follows. In like manner he learns from
God inwardly that which he follows outwardly, for he necessarily contemplates
things as they really are.24 Regarding the inward aspect, this is the place of the
golden brick. He and the angel, who reveals (messages) to the Messenger, acquire
their knowledge from the same source.
If you understand what I have pointed to, you will attain beneficial knowledge
of everything. That is because every prophet from Àdam to the last prophet has
acquired his knowledge from the Niche of the Seal of Prophets. Even if the corporeal existence of a prophet comes late, (64) his reality (ÎaqÐqa) always exists, and
20

20 Cf. QurÞÁn 24:35. When a lamp is placed in a niche, the light becomes stronger.
21 WalÁya (proximity to God, friendship, sainthood) is the basic trait of prophets and
saints. As such, it never ends, because nearness to God never ends. Chodkiewicz, Seal
of the Saints, ch. 3.
22 QurÞÁn 8:67–68; Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr al-qurÞÁn al-ÝaÛÐm, Beirut 1970, Vol. I I I, pp. 345f.
23 A. Guillaume, Life of Muhammad, Oxford 1955, p. 301.
24 By this Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means that the Seal of God’s Friends contemplates both the
internal and the external aspect of God’s Law.

32 The essence of Seth
the (following) saying of the Prophet (corroborates this idea): “I was a prophet
when Àdam was between the water and the clay.”25 Others became prophets only
when they were sent. Likewise, the Seal of God’s Friends became God’s Friend
while Àdam was between water and clay, and others became God’s Friends only
when they fulfilled the conditions of God’s Friendship (walÁya); that is, the divine
qualities they assumed, because God called Himself the Praised Friend (al-walÐ
al-ÎamÐd).26
As regards his walÁya, the Seal of Messengers relates to the Seal of God’s
Friends as the prophets and messengers relate to the Seal of God’s Friends, for he
(MuÎammad) is God’s friend, messenger and prophet.
As for the Seal of God’s Friends, he is the walÐ, the heir who learns from the
(divine) source and witnesses (all) the ranks (of being or of God’s Friends).
The walÁya is one of the merits (Îasana) of the Seal of Messengers, MuÎammad,
the first in the community and the lord of Àdam’s offspring regarding the opening
of the gate of intercession (shafÁÝa).27 Only MuÎammad among the prophets was
assigned to this state of intercession. In this unique state he precedes the Divine
Names, for the Merciful (al-raÎmÁn) does not intercede with the Avenger of the
people of trial (ahl al-balÁÞ)28 until intercession is made with them. MuÎammad
attained supremacy in this unique rank. He, who understands the spiritual degrees
and stations,29 will not find it difficult for him to accept this idea.
As for the gifts deriving from God’s names, know that God’s bestowal (of
these gifts) on his creatures shows His mercy toward them; all these gifts derive
from His names. (This mercy is divided into two kinds.) Either it is pure mercy
such as good and pleasant sustenance in this world, which is (also) pure in the
Resurrection.30 The name the Merciful (al-raÎmÁn) gives this sustenance, and it is
a merciful bestowal. Or it is a mixed31 mercy, such as drinking repugnant medicine
which, however, relieves. This is a divine bestowal which cannot be made except
through one of the guardians of the names. Sometimes God bestows on the servant
(a gift) through (His name) the Merciful, and the gift is free of a mixture which
does not fit the servant’s nature at a certain time, or does not cause the attainment
of his aim, or something similar. Sometimes God bestows (65) (a gift) through

25 I did not find this tradition in the canonical collections. For a similar tradition, see SPK,
p. 239.
26 QurÞÁn 42:28.
27 According to Muslim dogma, no Muslim who carried out a grave sin (kabÐra) would
stay forever in Hell, because the Prophet would plead for him. Al-ÀjurrÐ, Al-SharÐÝa, ed.
MuÎammad ÍÁmid al-FiqÐ, Beirut 1983, pp. 331–359.
28 I assume that by this phrase the author means “the people of Hell” with whom
intercession is made.
29 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ may allude to his view that an individual can excel another in one aspect
and be inferior in another.
30 Probably by “pure” the Greatest Master means that this sustenance was not obtained
by unlawful acts or, and this seems most likely, that it is not a mixture of pleasant and
unpleasant things.
31 It is a mixture of pleasant and unpleasant things.

The essence of Seth 33
(His name) the All-Encompassing (al-wÁsiÝ), so that (His bestowal) is general,
or through (His name) the Wise (al-ÎakÐm) to serve the best interests (al-aÒlaÎ) (of
the people) at a certain time. Or He may bestow through His name the Bestower
(al-wahhÁb) in such a way that the recipient is not obliged to respond either by
(expressing) gratitude or carrying out an action. Or He may bestow through His
name the Almighty (al-jabbÁr), as it relates to a certain place (mawÔin) and its
requirements.33 Or He may bestow through His name the Forgiver (al-ghaffÁr),
observing the true state (of the sinner). If the sinner deserves punishment, He will
forgive him, and if he does not deserve punishment, he will protect him from a
sin. Hence he will be called “immune” (maÝÒÙm), “protected from sins,” and other
names of a similar kind.
The giver is God, because He is the guardian of His treasuries. He brings forth
(gifts) only in a known measure (qadr maÝlÙm) and only in a name unique to
each gift. “He gives everything its (appropriate measure of) creation (khalqahu)”34
(QurÞÁn 20:50) according to the name Just (Ýadl) and other names like it.
God’s names are infinite, because they are known through the infinite things
which derive from them, even if their sources are finite principles; that is, the
foundations of the names (ummahÁt al-asmÁÞ) or the presences of the names
(ÎaÃarÁt al-asmÁÞ).35
Truly, there is only one Reality (ÎaqÐqa) which receives all these relations and
attributions which are called the Divine Names. The Reality grants to every name,
which appears endlessly, an essence (ÎaqÐqa)36 by which a name is distinguished
from (all) others. This peculiar essence constitutes the name itself, not (the characteristics) the name shares with others. Likewise, gifts differ from each other
through their distinctive characteristics (shakhsiyya); even though they derive
from the same source, it is known that each differs from (all) others. The reason
for this is the distinction of the names, for a thing never repeats itself because of
the expansion of the divine domain. This is the truth on which one relies (yuÝawwalu Ýalayhi).37
This is the knowledge of Seth. Seth’s spirit supplies any spirit that talks (66)
about this (idea) with this knowledge, except for the Seal’s spirit, because the Seal
32

32 For this name see, for example, Fakhr al-DÐn al-RÁzÐ, SharÎ asmÁÞ allÁh al-ÎusnÁ, ed.
Taha ÝAbd al-RaÞuf SaÝd, Beirut 1990, pp. 282–284.
33 By this the author may mean God’s control over every place on earth.
34 SDG, pp. XXIVf.
35 By the foundations (literally: the mothers) of the names, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ very probably
means the seven basic attributes: the Living (Îayy), the Omniscient (ÝalÐm), the Willer
(murÐd), the Omnipotent (qÁdir), the Speaker (mutakallim), the All-Seeing (baÒÐr), and
the All-Hearing (samÐÝ). And by the presences of the names, he may mean the ninetynine most beautiful names of God.
36 It is worth noting that Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses the same terms with different meanings even in
the same paragraph. Here the Reality designates God, whereas ÎaqÐqa in the context of
God’s names means the essence of the name. For this phenomenon, see Addas, p. 208.
37 Cf. the title of one of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s books: The Book of Things One Must Not Rely On
(lÁ yuÝawwalu Ýalayhi). RasÁÞil, I.

34 The essence of Seth
receives this knowledge (literally: the material – al-mÁdda) only from God, not
from a spirit. Moreover, it is from the Seal’s spirit that this knowledge (passes) to
all the spirits. If the Seal does not comprehend this (procedure) through himself at
the moment of the composition (tarkÐb) of his material body, he knows all this, as
it is, through his essence and rank. From the point of view of his material composition, he is ignorant. Thus, he is the knower and the ignorant (at the same time).
He is described through contraries, just as the Source (God) is described as the
Beautiful and the Majestic, the Manifest and the Hidden, the First and the Last.
This (joining of contraries) signifies his essence, and not another (trait). He knows
and does not know, he comprehends and does not comprehend, he witnesses and
does not witness.
Because of this knowledge, Seth was named “God’s gift,” which is the meaning
of Seth.38 In his hand is the key to gifts of different kinds and attributions. First this
key was given to Àdam, and that which Seth received is from Àdam, because the
son is the secret of his father;39 from the father he emerges and to him he returns. To
him who has understanding from God, nothing is strange in this giving. Every gift in
this world takes the same course of giving. Every gift derives from God and there is
nothing which does not come from Him, even if the forms (of gifts) are various. Not
all persons know this and that this is the truth; only a very few of the people of God
(know this). If you see one who knows it, rely on him, for this one is the very purest
individual of the choicest of the elite (Ýayn ÒafÁÞ khulÁÒt khÁÒat al-khÁÒa) among the
people of God. Every gnostic (literally: one who possesses unveiling – ÒÁÎib kashf)
who contemplates a form which gives him knowledge he did not possess before
(must know) that this knowledge originates in himself, and in no other (entity). It is
from the tree of his own self that he garners the fruit of his knowledge. It is like a
manifest form which faces a polished surface (and is seen in it), not another (form
is seen in it). However, the substrate or the plane (ÎaÃra) in which he sees his form
may change owing to the shape of this plane; a big thing may appear as a little thing
in a little mirror, and (a short thing may appear) as a long thing (in a long mirror),
and (a resting thing) may appear as a moving thing (in a moving mirror). A unique
plane may cause the reverse (67) form to be seen, or may reflect the exact thing
which it faces, in such a way that the right side is seen as right from the point of view
of the seer. However, in general, the right side appears in the mirror as the left side.
But in exceptional cases, the right side appears as a right side. All this applies to the
traits of the essence of the plane wherein (things) appear; this is the plane which
we compare to a mirror. Whoever knows his predisposition, knows that which he
receives. Not everyone who knows that which he receives knows his predisposition
except after he receives, even though he knows this (his predisposition) in a general
way.
38 Seth does not appear in the QurÞÁn. Cl. Huart and C.E. Bosworth, “ShÐth,” E I2. Very
probably Ibn al-ÝArabÐ knew the meaning of the name which is given in Genesis 4:25:
“And Adam knew his wife again: and she bore a son, and called his name Seth; For
God, said she, has given (shat) me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.”
39 The son is the hidden entity of the father.

The essence of Seth 35
However, some people of speculation (ahl al-naÛar) who are weak-minded
hold that since it has been proved that God does what he wants, it is possible for
Him to do things contrary to wisdom and to the real state of things. Consequently,
some speculative thinkers come to deny possibility (or contingency – imkÁn) and
to affirm the necessity through the Essence or through another (entity).40 One
who verifies (al-muÎaqqiq)41 affirms possibility and its attendance (ÎaÃra);42 he
knows what the possible thing is, what turns it into a possible thing and that it is
necessary by virtue of another. (He also knows) why it is legitimate to designate
that which requires the necessity of another thing. Only those who know God are
aware of the distinction between (these terms).
The last-born individual of the human species will follow the footsteps of Seth
and bear Seth’s mysteries. There will be no other offspring of this species and he
will be its seal. His sister will be born with him, and he will emerge after her, his
head lying at her feet. He will be born in China and speak Chinese. Infertility will
spread among men and women, and there will be many marriages without procreation. He will call them to God, but they will not respond. When God will make
him and the believers of his time die, those who remain will live like animals, not
permitting the lawful and not prohibiting the unlawful. They will behave as dictated by nature and passion without any regard for intellect or religion. Because of
them the Last Hour will take place.

40 They deny the existence of possible things and the fact that things are necessary through
other things and affirm that only God makes things necessary through His Essence.
Cf. B. Abrahamov, “Al-GhazÁlÐ’s Theory of Causality,” Studia Islamica 67 (1988),
especially pp. 95f.
41 This is the one who knows the truth for certain. SPK, p. 389, n. 11.
42 Here the word ÎaÃra appears in a different meaning.

3

The bezel of the wisdom of
transcendence1 exists in the
essence of Noah

Know, may God inspire you through His spirit, that according to the people of
truth (ahl al-ÎaqÁÞiq), transcendence (tanzÐh) concerning the Divine amounts to
limitation and restriction.2 Whoever believes in God’s transcendence (munazzih)
is either foolish or ill mannered. If he, as a believer in religion, holds (this doctrine) unreservedly and believes in it and does not take into consideration something else, he misbehaves, denies the truth and the messengers, without being
aware of this (consequence). He imagines that he is right, but he is wrong. He is
like one who believes in parts (of religion) and disbelieves in others,3 especially
if he knows that divine expressions in the Scriptures that speak of the Real convey easily understood meanings to the common people (ÝumÙm), but to the elite
(khuÒÙÒ) (they convey) all meanings that are comprehensible according to the
aspects of a certain phrase in the ordinary usage of a given language.
The Real is manifest in every created and comprehended (mafhÙm) thing, and
He is hidden from all comprehension, except for the comprehension of the one
who holds that the cosmos is His form and ipseity (huwiyya). The cosmos is His
manifest name, just as He is in another sense the spirit of that which is manifest,
and this spirit means His being hidden. The Real’s relationship to the manifest
forms of the cosmos is like the relationship of the spirit that governs a form.
Concerning the definition of the human being and of any other being, we can
speak of the manifest and the hidden aspects. The Real (in his manifest aspect) can
be defined by every definition, for the forms of the cosmos are infinite and cannot

1 SubbÙÎ is an attribute of God which denotes His transcendence of any trait relating to
the cosmos. Chittick, “The Chapter Headings,” p. 9. The Real in respect to His Essence
has no connection to the cosmos; however, in respect to His names and attributes,
He permeates the cosmos. According to our author, the truth lies in accepting both
God’s transcendence and immanence. Affifi, I I, pp. 31–33. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ distinguishes
between two kinds of transcendence. The first is Îikma subÙÎiyya, which denotes
purifying God from partners and imperfections, while the second is Îikma qudÙsiyya
(see the title of ch. 4), which signifies removing from God all traits of the possible
things. Izutsu, pp. 51f.
2 When you can say nothing about God, because He is transcendent, you limit your
knowledge of Him.
3 QurÞÁn 4:150.

The essence of Noah 37
be encompassed. The definitions of every form of the cosmos cannot be known
but through the measure of the knowledge of the form of the cosmos that one possesses. Consequently, the definition of the Real is not known, for His definition
cannot be attained except through the knowledge of every form, which is impossible. Therefore, the definition of the Real is inconceivable.
(69) Likewise, whoever holds the Real’s immanence (shabbaha) and does not
hold His transcendence (nazzaha) limits and restricts Him and does not know
Him. Whoever combines in his knowledge transcendence and immanence in a
general way, for it is inconceivable to know the cosmos in detail, because one
cannot embrace all the forms of the cosmos, knows the cosmos in a general way
but not in detail, just as he knows himself in general but not in detail. For this reason, the Prophet connected knowledge of the Real with knowledge of the self (or
soul), saying: “Whoever knows himself (or his soul) knows his Lord” (man Ýarafa
nafsahu Ýarafa rabbahu).4 And God said: “We shall show them Our signs on the
horizons,” meaning the outside world, “and in themselves (or in their souls),”
meaning the inside world, “until it becomes evident to them,” meaning to the
observer, “that He is the Real” (QurÞÁn 41:53), in that you are His form, and He is
your spirit.5 You relate to Him, as your bodily form relates to you, and He relates
to you as the spirit that governs the form of your body. Your definition includes
both the external and the internal aspects, for if the spirit that governs the form of
your body disappears, you are no longer called a human being; concerning this
form, it is said that it has the form of a human being, which does not differ from
a form of wood or of stone. The name “human being” applies to this form only
figuratively, not in reality. However, the Real never disconnects Himself from the
forms of the cosmos. Just as the human being when alive is defined by the spirit
in reality and not in a figurative way, so the cosmos is defined by the Divinity.
Just as the external form of the human being praises with its unique language6
its spirit and soul which govern it, so God makes the forms of the cosmos praise
Him. But we are not able to understand their praise, because we cannot encompass
all the forms of the cosmos. All the praises come from the languages of the Real
which express His praise. For this reason, God says: “Praise belongs to God, the
Lord of (all) existents (ÝÁlamÐn),”7 meaning that He is the source of all praises,
hence He is both the one who praises and the one praised.
(70) If you hold transcendence, you restrict Him/and if you hold immanence,
you limit Him
If you hold the two doctrines, you are right/and you will be a leader and a
master in knowledge
4 For this dictum, see A. Altmann, “The Delphic Maxim in Medieval Islam and Judaism,”
in Altmann, Studies in Religious Philosophy and Mysticism, New York 1969, pp. 1–40.
5 See p. 22, n. 7.
6 The body has a specific language through which it expresses its praises.
7 QurÞÁn 1:1. Most of the commentators regard the word ÝÁlamÐn (literally: worlds) as
designating all existents, except for God. See, for example, Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr al-QurÞÁn
al-ÝaÛÐm, Beirut 1970, Vol. I, p. 43.

38 The essence of Noah
Whoever holds His being as two things is a polytheist/and whoever holds that
He is one unifies Him
Beware of likening Him if you hold duality/and of making Him transcendent
if you unify Him
You are not He, but you are He and you see Him8/in the essences of things
both boundless and restricted.9
God said: “There is nothing like Him” (QurÞÁn 42:11), thus making Himself transcendent, and “He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing” (ibid.), thus likening Himself
to creation. (However), when He says “there is nothing like His likeness (kamithlihi),” He likens Himself to creation10 and makes Himself two, and when He
says “the All-Hearing the All-Seeing,” He makes Himself transcendent and united.11
If Noah had combined the two calls12 to his people, they would have answered
him. (However), he first called them to the external (doctrine of transcendence)
then to the internal (doctrine of immanence)13 and then said to them: “Ask forgiveness of your Lord, for He is always Forgiving” (QurÞÁn 71:10). And he said:
“ . . . I have called my people night and day, but the more I call them, the further
they run away” (QurÞÁn 71:5, 6, trans. AH). He said that his people did not want to
hear his call, for they knew that they should respond to it. Those who know God
apprehend what Noah pointed out regarding his people; this was praise in the form
of blame. They (those who know God) understand that the people did not respond
to his call only because his call separated (furqÁn)14 (between the transcendent
and the immanent aspects of the Reality), whereas one should combine the two
aspects (qurÞÁn) and not separate (furqÁn) them. Whoever holds a combination
(of the two aspects) does not pay attention to separation even if he is in a state of
separation, because the combination includes the separation and not vice versa.
For this reason, only MuÎammad and this community, which is the “best community singled out for people” (QurÞÁn 3:110), were distinguished by the QurÞÁn.
(The verse) “There is nothing like Him” (QurÞÁn 42:11) combines the two aspects
in one place. If Noah had uttered this verse, they would have answered him, for
the QurÞÁn likens (God to creation) and does not liken (Him) in the same verse,
moreover even in half a verse.

8 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ here refers to the question of the One and the Many. From one point of
view the cosmos is identified with the Real, because it is His manifestation, but from
another point of view it is different, because it is created. Affifi, Mystical Philosophy,
p. 12. This doctrine will also be dealt with in ch. 4.
9 These stanzas were also translated by Affifi in his Mystical Philosophy, p. 21.
10 He likens Himself, because the QurÞÁn says that God has a like.
11 That is because only God has such absolute traits.
12 That is, the call for a transcendent God and the call for an immanent God.
13 Cf. QurÞÁn 71:8, 9.
14 Here furqÁn does not appear as a synonym of al-QurÞÁn in the meaning of redemption,
but rather as an infinitive of faraqa (he divided, separated), while qurÞÁn derives from
the verb qaraÞa (he connected, joined, combined).

The essence of Noah 39
Noah called his people at night (71), (which symbolizes) their intellect and
spirituality, for they are hidden. Also he called them by day, (which symbolizes)
their external forms and senses.15 However, he did not combine the external and
the internal aspects as in “there is nothing like Him.” As a result, their innermost
perception repelled (Noah’s call) because of this separation (between the two
aspects), and his call increased their running away.16 Then he spoke about himself, (revealing) that he called them so that God would forgive (li-yaghfira lahum)
them, not that He would reveal to them (the two aspects). They understood that
which he (Noah) told them. For this reason, they “thrust their fingers into their
ears and covered their heads with their garments” (QurÞÁn 71:7, trans. AH). All
this is the form of covering (satr)17 to which he called them, and they responded
to his call in an active manner, not by yielding to God. In the verse “There is
nothing like Him,” there is both affirmation and negation of likeness to God.
MuÎammad spoke about this point of having been given (the knowledge) of the
all-comprehensive words (jawÁmiÝ al-kalim).18 MuÎammad did not call his people
at night and by day (separately), but rather at night by day and by day at night.19
In his wisdom, Noah said to his people: “He will send down abundant rain from
the sky for you” (QurÞÁn 71:11, trans. AH); that is, (various kinds) of intellectual
knowledge regarding the meanings (of things), and reflection, “and He will give you
wealth (amwÁl)” (ibid., 12, trans. AH), through which He will incline you toward Him
(yamÐlu bi-kum ilayhi).20 When He inclines you toward Him, you will see your form
in Him. However, he among you who imagines that he sees Him does not know, and
he among you who knows that he sees himself is the knower. For this reason, people
are divided into those who do not know and those who know. And “his offspring”
(waladuhu, ibid., 21) is the fruit of their reflection. The knowledge of this issue21 is
based on revelation (mushÁhada) and is far removed from the fruits of reflection.
(“Their wealth and children) will increase their ruin” (ibid.) and “their trade reaps
no profit” (QurÞÁn 2:16, trans. AH). What they grasp, that is, what they imagined
was their property, has disappeared. Concerning the MuÎammadans,22 (it is said in
15 “My Lord, I have called my people night and day” (QurÞÁn 71:5, trans. AH).
16 Ibid., 7.
17 The verb satara is equivalent to the verb ghafara mentioned above; both designate
covering.
18 This is a ÎadÐth which appears in al-BukhÁrÐ, JihÁd 122 (7013): “I was sent with the allcomprehensive words.” FutÙÎÁt, Vol. I I I, p. 160. SPK, pp. 239, 306, 330, 396, n. 17.
Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ finds corroboration for his idea that in his personality MuÎammad
joins the external and the internal aspects.
19 This means that the internal aspect (night) exists in the external aspect (day) and vice
versa.
20 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ plays with the stems m.w.l of amwÁl and m.y.l of yamÐlu, although
the meanings of both words are different.
21 The author means the combination of the two aspects mentioned above.
22 This epithet does not necessarily indicate Muslims, but those who, like MuÎammad,
manifest every divine and human trait. For example, they know the things as they
really are, transcend every station and combine the two aspects of transcendence and
immanence. In short, they are the ideal people. SPK, 376–379. SDG, p. XXV.

40 The essence of Noah
the QurÞÁn) “Give out of what He has made pass down to you” (QurÞÁn 57:7, trans.
AH) and concerning Noah (and his people) (the QurÞÁn says): “Entrust yourselves to
no one but Me” (QurÞÁn 17:2, trans. AH). (The QurÞÁn) affirms that the property is
theirs and that God is their trustee. They are appointees of the property possessed by
God, and God is their trustee. The property is in their grasp, but this is the property of
appointment (mulk al-istikhlÁf). Through this, the Real is the Owner of the Property
(mÁlik al-mulk), as al-TirmidhÐ said. “And they have deceived a mighty deception”
(QurÞÁn 71:22), because the call to God means a deception (of the people) to whom
(this call) was directed, for God (72) has not been absent from the beginning, therefore
He is always called to. “I call (the people) to God” (QurÞÁn 12:108), and this is the
essence of deception.23 “(When I called them) it was out of clear awareness” (ibid.) He
(Noah) turned their attention to (the idea) that the whole cosmos belongs to Him. They
responded by deceiving him, just as he did.
The MuÎammadan knows that the call to God is not a call to His ipseity, but
rather to His names. God said: “On the day that We shall gather the god-fearing
to (ilÁ) the Merciful as a group” (QurÞÁn 19:85). The QurÞÁn uses the particle
indicating direction (ilÁ) and connects it to God’s name (the Merciful), hence
it lets us know that the cosmos is under the providence of a divine name which
obliges humans to be god-fearing. In their deceit they said: “Do not abandon your
gods, do not abandon Wadd, SuwÁÝ, YaghÙth, YaÝÙq and Nasr” (QurÞÁn 71:23).
If they renounced their gods, they would not know the Real in the measure of
their renouncement, for the Real is reflected in every worshiped god, whether one
knows or does not know (this fact).
Concerning the MuÎammadans (QurÞÁn 17:23 says): “God decreed (qaÃÁ) that
you should worship none but Him,” meaning He ordered (Îakama).24 The knower is
aware of the object of worship and the form through which it was made manifest for
the purpose of being worshiped. He also knows that separation and multiplicity (of
the parts of this object) are like parts in the sensible form and like spiritual faculties
in the spiritual form, hence in every object of worship it is God who is worshiped.25
The inferior person is he who imagines (the existence of) divinity in these objects.
If he had not imagined this, he would not have worshiped stone or other things.
For this reason, God said (to MuÎammad): “Say (to the idolaters) ‘name them’
(the idols)” (QurÞÁn 13:33). If they had named them, they would have named them
stones, trees and stars. If they had been asked: “Whom did you worship?” They
would have said: “A god.” They would not have said God (allÁh) or the god. The
superior person does not imagine, but says that this is a divine manifestation which
one needs to exalt, and he does not confine himself (to the worship of a specific
object). The inferior person who uses his imagination says: “We only worship them

23 Noah’s call was a deception, because he called them to believe in the transcendent God
while omitting God’s immanent aspect.
24 Believing in the human being’s free will, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ cannot ascribe to God
predetermination, which denies giving reward or punishment.
25 Since all things in the cosmos are God’s manifestations, whether they are parts or
wholes, when one worships a part of an object or a whole, one actually worships God.

The essence of Noah 41
because they bring us nearer to God” (QurÞÁn 39:3, trans. AH). The superior person,
the knower, says: “Your God is one, so submit yourselves only to Him” wherever
He is manifest “and give good news to the humble” (al-mukhbitÐn, literally: those
who make themselves low. QurÞÁn 22:34), whose fire of nature was extinguished
and they say “a god” and not “a nature.”
“They have led many astray” (QurÞÁn 71:24, trans. AH), meaning they have
confused them regarding the counting of the One through aspects and attributions.
“Do not increase the going astray of those who do evil” (al-ÛÁlimÐn)26 (ibid.) (73)
to their souls. “The elect” (QurÞÁn 38:47) “who inherited the Scripture” (QurÞÁn
42:14) are the first of the three (groups).27 He gives this group precedence over the
moderate and the foremost. (By those who go astray mentioned above) he means
the perplexity of the MuÎammadan (who says:) Increase my perplexity regarding
You!28 “Whenever it (the lightning) flashes on them, they walk on, and when
darkness falls around, them they stand still” (QurÞÁn 2:20, trans. AH).
The perplexed person circles (the Pole) and his circular motion (continues)
around the Pole without interruption,29 while the individual who takes the long
course inclines away from (the circle), distancing himself from the target, seeking
only the state in which he exists and imagining his aim. (He imagines) the points
of beginning and end of his way and that which is in between.30 There is no
beginning point for the human being who takes the circular course; he should
not go out at a certain place nor direct himself to a final point. He possesses
the complete existence and is given all the comprehensive words31 and wisdoms
(Îikam).
“Because of their steps of going beyond”32 (khaÔÐÞÁtihim, literally: their sins,
QurÞÁn 71:25), which caused them to go beyond, they were drowned in the seas
26 This appellation is positive, for by it Ibn al-ÝArabÐ is referring to those who wrong their
appetite souls and practice asceticism, thus reaching the highest rank of Sufism. Hence,
such people are preferred to the moderate and the foremost. Affifi, I I, p. 40.
27 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ alludes to QurÞÁn 35:32: “We gave the Scripture as a heritage to Our
chosen servants: some of them wronged themselves (AH: their own souls), some stayed
between (right and wrong), and some, by God’s permission (AH: leave), were foremost
in good deeds. That is the greatest favor” (based on AH’s trans.).
28 This sentence is a paraphrase of QurÞÁn 20:114 which reads: “Increase my knowledge”
(zidnÐ Ýilman). Our author is saying that the measure of perplexity concerning God
depends on the measure of our knowledge of Him. Perplexity is defined as drowning
in the sea of knowledge, which is the final aim of the mystic. SuÝÁd al-ÍakÐm,
pp. 358–363. See below, pp. 199–200 of the Arabic text.
29 The picture Ibn al-ÝArabÐ draws here is a circle, which corresponds to the whole of
existence. At the center of the circle is the Pole or the Reality of MuÎammad, which
represents the aggregation of all the phenomena of the cosmos. The perplexed person
sees the Pole from every point of the circumference of the circle.
30 The second person seems to regard the world of phenomena as finite, hence his course
is from the beginning to the ending point, while the knower, the perplexed, is aware of
the infinite character of the world.
31 See note 18 above.
32 Here the author plays with the root of khaÔÐÞÁtihim, kh.Ô.Þ, and replaces it with the root
kh.Ô.w in the first form (khaÔÁ), meaning to walk, to go.

42 The essence of Noah
of the knowledge of God, which means perplexity. “And they were made to enter
a Fire” (ibid.), meaning according to the MuÎammadans the same as drowning.
“When the seas boil over” (sujjirat, QuÞÁn 81:6). When you set an oven on fire
(you say): “The oven was set on fire (sajjarat).”
“Except for God, they found none to help them” (QurÞÁn 71:25), for God was
their (only) source of help,33 and they were annihilated in Him forever. If He had
taken them (from the bottom of the sea of knowledge) to the shore of nature (the
world of the phenomena), He would have brought them down from this lofty
rank, even if the whole cosmos belongs to God (li-allÁh), (exists) through God
(bi-allÁh), and moreover the whole is God (al-kull huwa allÁh).34
“(And) Noah said: ‘My Lord’” (rabbÐ – ibid., 26). He did not say “My God”
(ilÁhÐ), for Lord has (the attribute of) stability, while God has (the attribute of)
many names, because “Every day He does something (different)” (QurÞÁn 55:29).
By Lord, Noah means the stability in variation (thubÙt al-talwÐn),35 for the only
real existence belongs to Him. (Noah said to God): “Do not leave one of the
unbelievers on earth” (QurÞÁn 71:26), meaning that he calls (on God) to make
them dwell in its bottom.36 The MuÎammadan says: “If you drop a rope, it will
fall upon God”37 (which means that) “Everything in the heavens and on earth
belongs to Him” (QurÞÁn 2:116, trans. AH). When you are buried in it, you are in
it and it is your place (Ûarfuka). (“From the earth we created you), into it We shall
return you, and from it We shall raise you a second time” (QurÞÁn 20:55, trans.
AH), because of the variety of aspects (involved in returning and raising). (“Do
not leave) one of those who conceal38 (kÁfirÐn) (on earth)” (QurÞÁn 71:26) who
“covered their heads with their garments and thrust their fingers into their ears”39
in order to find cover, because he called (74) them to cover (ghafara) them, for
covering (ghafr) means concealing (satr).
(He points out in this verse) “one” (QurÞÁn 71:26) to indicate that just as the
calling is general so is the benefit.
“If you leave them” (QurÞÁn 71:27), meaning if you call them and leave
them, “they will lead Your servants astray” (ibid.), meaning they will confound
(yuÎayyirÙhum) them and make them go out from servanthood to the mysteries
of Lordship existing in them. Consequently, they will regard themselves as
lords after they regarded themselves as servants; hence, they are servants and
lords (at the same time). “They will not beget” (ibid.), meaning they will not

33 The text has “helpers” (anÒÁr).
34 If the whole is God, there is no higher or lower place or idea.
35 This phrase means that there are various stable names of God, whereas the name God
(allÁh) denotes the endless changes of all things in the cosmos. Each name is actually a
lord (rabb). Affifi, I I, p. 42.
36 To be on earth means to consider only the external phenomena, while to be in the
bottom of the earth means to see the inner aspects of existence.
37 TirmidhÐ, V:58 (3298).
38 They are those who conceal the Real by worshiping idols.
39 Our author changed the order of QurÞÁn 71:7.

The essence of Noah 43
produce and manifest except “only one who breaks” (ibid.), meaning one who
manifests that which was concealed, (and only) “one who conceals,”41 meaning
concealed that which was manifest after its being manifested. They will manifest
what was concealed, then conceal what was manifested after its manifestation.
As a result, the beholder will be bewildered and not know the aim of the one
who manifests in his manifestation, or the aim of the one who conceals in his
concealment, nor that person (carrying out the two actions), who is one and the
same. “My Lord, (ighfir) me” (QurÞÁn 71:28), meaning conceal me and do it for
my sake, so that (one) will not know my (true) value (qadr) and station, just as
one does not know Your value in Your QurÞanic statement “They did not assess
God’s true value” (6:91). (And conceal) “My parents” (QurÞÁn 71:28), (that is) the
intellect and the nature who produced me, “and whoever enters my house” (ibid.),
meaning my heart, “believing” (ibid.), (that is) saying that the divine messages in
it are true and that they derive from themselves (souls). (And conceal) “the male
believers” from the intellect “and the female believers” from the souls. “And do
not increase those who are obscure (ÛÁlimÐn)” (ibid.). (This meaning) derives from
the word “darkness” (ÛulumÁt). They are the people of the hidden world who are
concealed behind dark veils.42 (Do not increase them) “But destruction (tabÁr),”
(ibid.), meaning annihilation (in God) so that they will not be aware of their souls
because they will see the face of the Real. (The following verse was directed) to
the MuÎammadans: “Everything perishes except for His face” (QurÞÁn 28:88).
TabÁr means annihilation. Whoever wishes to know the mysteries of Noah must
ascend to the sphere of Noah (the sun). This issue is treated in my al-tanazzulÁt
al-mawÒiliyya43 (The Mosul Revelations). God speaks the Truth.
40

40 This is the first meaning of fajara, from which the active participle (fÁjir, wrong doer)
derives.
41 Again, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ exploits the first meaning of kafara (he concealed), neglecting the
usual meaning of kaffÁr (unbeliever).
42 p. 23.
43 MajmÙÝat rasÁÞil ibn ÝarabÐ, Beirut 2000, Vol. I I.

4

The bezel of the wisdom of
holiness1 exists in the
essence of Enoch2

(75) (The term) elevation (Ýuluww) has two meanings: elevation with respect to
physical place and elevation with respect to status. The elevation of place (is
attested in QurÞÁn 19:57), “We raised him to a high place.” The highest place is the
place around which the Spheres revolve. This is the Sphere of the Sun, the place
of the spirituality of Enoch. Seven Spheres are situated below the Sphere of Enoch
and seven others above it, and his Sphere is the fifteenth. The Spheres above him
are those of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the Mansions, the Constellations (al-aÔlas),3 the
Footstool, and the Throne. The Spheres below him are those of Venus, Mercury,
the Moon, Ether, Air, Water, Earth. Because (the Sphere of the Sun) is the pivot
of (all) the Spheres, it is an elevated place.4
As for the elevated status, it belongs to us, the MuÎammadans. God said: “You are
the elevated, and God is with you” (QurÞÁn 47:35) in this elevation; He is far above
physical place but not above status.5 When the souls of those of us who acted were
afraid (of God’s proximity to the human being), He said (following “God is with
you”): “God will not decrease the reward for your actions” (ibid.). That is because an
action requires place, while knowledge requires status. Hence, God conjoins the two
elevations, the elevation of place through action and of status through knowledge.
Then, in order to place Himself far above the human being, He said: “Praise the name
of your Lord, the Most High” (QurÞÁn 87:1) to negate any idea of partnership.6
1 Like Íikma subÙÎiyya (ch. 3), Íikma qudÙsiyya designates God’s transcendence.
However, whereas the first phrase denotes God’s transcendence which is expressed
in lacking of a copartner and not suffering damage, the second phrase means God’s
detachment from all kinds of possible things. Affifi, I I, p. 46.
2 For IdrÐs, see QurÞÁn 19:56–57, 21:85, 86. G. Vajda, “IdrÐs,” E I2. As in other chapters,
in this chapter IdrÐs is not a historical person, but a spirit which resides in the sphere of
the sun. Affifi, I I, p. 45. See below, ch. 22.
3 The Sphere of burÙj, which is placed after al-aÔlas, is identical to the Sphere of al-aÔlas
and hence redundant.
4 As is well known, this is not the usual description of the Spheres by the philosophers
or the astronomers, but a strange amalgamation of astronomical, philosophical and
QurÞÁnic elements. Affifi, I I, 48.
5 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to say that since the human being reflects God, he shares with Him
the attribute of elevation.
6 In keeping with his doctrine of conjoining of contraries, our author says that God is
both with the humans and is not with them, just as He is both the external and the internal, the first and the last, and so on.

The essence of Enoch 45
Among the most wonderful things is that the human being, I mean the perfect
human being, is the most elevated existent. Elevation is attached to him only through
his relationship to a place, or to a grade, that is, status. His elevation does not derive
from his essence (li-dhÁtihi). He is elevated because of the elevation of place and
grade. Elevation derives from both (place and grade). For example, the elevation of
place (76) (is attested in QurÞÁn 20:5), “The Merciful sat Himself upon the Throne,”
which is the highest place. (Concerning) the elevation of status (God said): “Everything
perishes except for His face” (QurÞÁn 28:88) and “All things return to Him” (QurÞÁn
11:123) (and) “Is there a god with God?” (QurÞÁn 27:60). When God said: “We raised
him to an elevated (Ýaliyyan) place” (QurÞÁn 19:57), He made Ýaliyyan an adjective of
a place. (And when He said): “When your Lord said to the angels, ‘I am appointing
a vicegerent on earth’” (QurÞÁn 2:30), He meant the elevation of status. And He said
regarding the angels: “Are you (the Devil) proud or are you among the elevated?”
(QurÞÁn 38:75), thus He ascribed elevation to the angels. If elevation were ascribed
to them because of their being angels, then all angels would be elevated. Since God
does not generalize, although all the angels share the definition of angels, we know
that, according to God, this is an elevation of status. Likewise, if the elevation of the
vicegerents (Caliphs) among people were an essential attribute, every human being
would share this (attribute). However, since He does not generalize, we know that this
elevation derives from status.
The Elevated (al-Ýaliyy) is one of His Most Beautiful Names. (However), elevated above whom, when only He exists? Thus, He is the Elevated by virtue of His
Essence.7 From where did He take (this elevation),8 when only He exists? Thus,
again, His elevation is by virtue of His Essence. With respect to existence, He is the
Essence of the existents. What we call contingent beings (muÎdathÁt)9 are elevated
by virtue of themselves, because they are (actually) His (manifestation), for He is
not elevated in a relative (but in an essential) way. That is because the fixed entities
(al-aÝyÁn al-thÁbita), which never exist in a concrete form or (even) smell the odor
of existence, remain in their state (of absence) despite the multiplicity of the existent
forms.10 There exists One Essence from which all the concrete things can be gathered and which permeates them all. The existence of multiplicity (of things) derives
from God’s names, which are solely nonexistent relationships (and not concrete
entities).11 There is only the Ýayn, which is the Essence (of God). He is the Elevated
by virtue of His Essence (li-nafsihi),12 not by virtue of any relationship. From this

7 Unlike the human being, whose essence does not elevate him.
8 SharÎ, p. 77.
9 These are things that are brought into being in time.
10 The fixed entities are manifestations of God, and the concrete existents are in turn
manifestations of the fixed entities, hence the concrete existents are elevated by virtue
of themselves.
11 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ accepts the MuÝtazilite doctrine that God’s attributes are not entities existing in God’s essence. M. Takeshita, “An Analysis of Ibn ÝArabÐ’s InshÁÞ al-DawÁÞir
with Particular Reference to the Doctrine of the Third Entity,” Journal of Near Eastern
Studies 41, 4 (1982), p. 249.
12 To express the notion of essence, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses the words Ýayn, dhÁt and nafs. One
should emphasize that for our author the Essence is devoid of any characteristic and
hence ineffable. However, he is not consistent in this assertion, for in FutÙÎÁt, Vol. VI I,

46 The essence of Enoch
point of view, there is no relative elevation in this world; however, the aspects of
existence have different grades. Relative elevation exists in the Unique Essence
when it is considered (manifesting) many aspects. For this reason, we say regarding
Him that He is not He and you are not you.13
Al-KharrÁz14 (77), who is one of the Real’s aspects and one of His tongues,
refers to God’s Self saying that God can be known only through His combination
of opposites which determine His (nature).15 “He is the First and the Last, the
Manifest and the Hidden” (QurÞÁn 57:3). He is the Essence (Ýayn) of the manifest
things and the Essence of the hidden things when they are manifest.16 Only He
sees Himself, and nothing is hidden from Him. He is both Manifest and Hidden
by virtue of17 His Essence (li-nafsihi). He, AbÙ SaÝÐd al-KharrÁz, and other created
beings are called in this manner (of combination of the manifest and the hidden).
The hidden says “no” when the manifest says “I am (the manifest),” and when
the hidden says “I (am the hidden),” the manifest says “no.” (This situation) refers
to each opposite (which negates the other), while the speaker and the listener are
one and the same. The Prophet says: “What they told themselves,”18 (meaning)
they are the tellers, the listeners and those who know what was told. The essence
is one, while the aspects are many. There is no way to escape this knowledge, for
every person knows this of himself, and this is the form of the Real.19
(Without counting) things are not in order. (Hence) numbers appear through
(adding) “one” (wÁÎid) to each number in a known arrangement. The “one”
brings the number into existence, and the “one” divides the number.20 The number appears only through that which is countable (maÝdÙd).21 The countable can be
either absent or existent: a thing may be absent with respect to the senses, but existent with respect to the intellect. In sum, there must be a number and that which is
countable, just as there must be “one” which creates the number and the number is
increased by it. Each grade of number is a single reality, such as nine or ten, down

p. 13 (the beginning of ch. 406), he says that contrary to the attributes All-Mighty, the
Creator, etc., the attributes of “being in no need and glory belongs to the Essence” (alghinÁ wa’l-Ýizza li’l-dhÁt).
13 God as considered in terms of Essence is not God as considered in terms of attributes.
14 Died 899. On Al-KharrÁz as seen by Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, see my Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis,
pp. 63–67.
15 One may judge God’s activity only through being aware of His being the conjoining of
opposites. Cf. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, KitÁb al-tajalliyÁt, RasÁÝil, I I, p. 40.
16 That is because God’s existence pervades all existents, both the manifest and the hidden; in other words, there is no difference in His relationship to the existents.
17 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ here uses two particles li and Ýan to denote “by virtue of.”
18 Or “what their souls told.” BukhÁrÐ, I I:15.
19 Just as God is one entity, but has many attributes, so the human being shares this
principle.
20 Read wa-faÒÒala al-wÁÎid al-Ýadad. He means to say that the number is the combination
of many ones.
21 Read bi’l-maÝdÙd, in keeping with SharÎ, p. 80, meaning that not all things are
countable.

The essence of Enoch 47
to the lowest number and up to the highest infinitely. These numbers are not a sum
(of particulars), but rather they are called a collection of ones (jamÝ al-ÁÎÁd).22
(78) That is because the number two and the number three are unique realities, and so on, even if they (the numbers that follow) are combined from ones.
However, the essences (of each number) differ from each other. The combination
(of ones) characterizes all numbers; the combination speaks of them (ones) and
through them determines23 (their place). In this speech (of the combination) there
are twenty grades24 which are combined from ones. You can continue to affirm the
reality of the number which you negate, because of its essence.25
Whoever knows that which we have established regarding the numbers,
namely, that their negation is their very affirmation, knows that the transcendent
Real is the same as the immanent created thing, even though the created differs
from the Creator. The statements that the Creator is like the created and the created is like the Creator refer to One Essence (Ýayn wÁÎida).26 All this derives
from One Essence. Furthermore, it is (simultaneously) One Essence and many
essences. (“When the boy was old enough to work with his father, IbrÁhÐm said:
‘My son, I have seen myself sacrificing you in a dream.) What do you think?’ He
said: ‘Father, do as you are commanded . . . ’” (QurÞÁn 37:102 trans. AH). And the
son is identical to his father. Thus, he (IbrÁhÐm) saw that he would sacrifice only
himself. He ransomed him “with a mighty sacrifice” (ibid.: 107),27 so that what
had appeared in a human form appeared as a ram. (Furthermore), he who was the
essence of a father appeared in the form of a boy, nay, as a real boy.28
“He created from Àdam his mate” (QurÞÁn 4:1), so (Àdam) married only himself. Hence, from Àdam (came forth) his mate and child, (however, although they
are three) in number, they are one in essence.
What is nature and what emerges from it? We observe that nature does not diminish, because of that which comes forth from it, nor increase because of that which
does not come forth. Nature is only that which appears from it, (however) nature
does not constitute the essence of the manifest things, for many forms characterize
it. (For example), there exists a thing which is cold and dry and another hot and dry.
Their common denominator is dryness, but they are different regarding temperature.
What joins them is nature, nay, it is the natural essence. Thus, the world of nature
can be seen as many forms in one mirror, nay, a single form in many mirrors.29

22 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ reiterates the notion that an entity is one from one point of view and
many from another. Thus, opposites exist in one and the same entity.
23 Read yaqÙlu and yaÎkumu, respectively. SharÎ, pp. 80f.
24 They are: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, and 1000.
25 The essence of a number is its being composed of ones.
26 This phrase can also be rendered “One Entity.” SDG, p. 72.
27 The QurÞÁn reads: “We ransomed him” (fadaynÁhu).
28 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ speaks of three forms of one entity.
29 Again, all depends on the observer’s point of view. From one point of view, nature
serves as a mirror of all things, meaning that all things are reflected in nature, or nature
embraces all things; but from another point of view, nature pervades all things, meaning
it is an essential element of all things or it is reflected in everything.

48 The essence of Enoch
(This can bring about) perplexity because of the differences in perspective.
However, whoever knows what we have said does not become perplexed. If (79)
his knowledge increases, it is only through the aspect of the substrate (Îukm almaÎall), because the substrate is the basis of the fixed entity.30 In the substrates,
God’s manifestations and all their aspects are diversified, and the substrate can
receive every aspect. One can judge God’s manifestation only through the substrate in which He is manifested. And this is the only (explanation of the structure
of the world).
The Real from one aspect is creation, so think about (it)/but from another
aspect He is not, so take (it) into consideration;
Whoever knows what I have said, his insight will not leave (him)/and only
whoever perceives knows this;
The essence, whether combination or separation is one/yet (either way) it is
multiplicity, not remaining or leaving.
The Elevated by virtue of Himself is He who possesses perfection through which
He encompasses all the existents and nonexistent relationships in such a way that
no trait of them escapes Him, whether (these) traits are praiseworthy or blameworthy from the point of view of custom, intellect or religion. This applies only to
the name God (AllÁh). As for other names (of the Divine), they are either God’s
manifestations (majlan)31 or a form in a manifestation. If they are manifestations,
there necessarily exists a priority among them,32 and if it is a form in a manifestation, then this form is the essential perfection, because it is the essence of what
is manifest in a certain entity.33 That which pertains to the name AllÁh pertains
to this form.34 We do not say that the names are He, nor are they other than He.35
In his book KhalÝ (al-naÝlayn), AbÙ al-QÁsim ibn QasÐ36 points to this (principle), saying that every divine name is designated by all the divine names
and depicted by them. That is because every name indicates both the Essence
and the unique aspect toward which it is directed, and this name seeks for this
aspect.37 From the point of view of its indication of the Essence, it possesses all
the names, while from the point of view of its indication of its unique aspect,

30 Al-maÎall means the thing in which the fixed entity, such as an idea, is embodied. The
diversity of God’s manifestations is revealed through these substrates.
31 For this word, see SuÝÁd al-ÍakÐm, p. 268.
32 For example, God’s mercy overcomes His anger.
33 Possibly by this form Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means the Perfect Human Being.
34 All God’s names are included in the name AllÁh, so this form (the Perfect Human
Being) contains all God’s names.
35 See ch. 2, n. 19.
36 Died 1151. A. Faure, “Ibn QasÐ,” E I2. Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis,
pp. 145–150.
37 According to al-ÍallÁj, each of God’s attributes includes all the other attributes.
Takeshita, p. 20.

The essence of Enoch 49
it is distinguished from others, for example, the Lord, the Creator, the Former
(muÒawwir), and so on. Thus, from the perspective of the Essence, the name and
the named are identical, (80) while from the perspective of the meaning to which
the name is directed they are different.
If you understand that the Elevated is that which we have mentioned, you know
that (His) elevation is neither of place nor of position. That is, because the elevation of position pertains only to leaders, such as sultans, governors, ministers,
judges and every holder of office whether they are qualified for this office or not.
Elevation by virtue of attributes is not like this, for the one who holds the office of
a governor may have dominion over the most knowledgeable person, even if the
former is the most ignorant person. The governor is elevated in position, because
of his office, and not because of his own attributes. If the governor is dismissed
from his office, his high standing will disappear, while the knowledgeable person
does not lose his high standing.

5

The bezel of the wisdom of
excessive love exists in the
essence of Abraham

(80) Abraham is called al-khalÐl1 because he pervades and encompasses all the
(attributes) through which the Divine Essence is described.2 A poet said: “You
(God) permeated (takhalalta) me just as the spirit permeated my body3/because of
this permeation he (Abraham) was named al-khalÐl.”
It is just as the color permeates the colored; in such a way the accident
(ÝaraÃ) pervades the substrate. It is not the relationship between a place and
that which is placed on it.4 Or Abraham was so called because the Real permeates his form. Every aspect (Îukm) (of permeation) is valid, for every aspect
has its place through which it is manifest and beyond which it is not manifest.
Do you not understand that the Real is manifest through the attributes of the
created things, (including) attributes of deficiency and blame, and He informs
this about Himself? Do you not understand that the created being is manifest
through the Real’s attributes from first to last, all of which are appropriate to it,
just as the attributes of the created things (81) are appropriate to the Real? (The
words) “Praise belongs to God” (QurÝÁn 1:1) (mean) that the effects of praise,
whether they relate to the praiser or the one praised, go back to God. “And all
things return to Him” (QurÞÁn 11:123) (means) that He embraces (in Himself)
the blameworthy and the praiseworthy and that there is no (other) alternative –
only the blamed and the praised.5
Know that a thing permeates another only when it is immersed in the latter
(maÎmÙl fÐhi).6 That which permeates (another is called) the active participle (ism
al-fÁÝil) and it is veiled by that which is permeated, the passive participle (ism
1 This word means “the friend of God”; however, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ understands this name in
a different way.
2 From this point of view Abraham is also the Perfect Human Being, in that all the divine
attributes exist in him. Affifi, I I, p. 57.
3 SharÎ, p. 85.
4 In the last possibility we are speaking about two separate entities, the place and the
thing which is put on it, but, contrary to the sample of color, the thing placed does not
become a part of the place.
5 According to the QurÞÁn’s commentators, this verse conveys the idea that God knows all
the human beings’ acts and He will reward them or punish them in the Hereafter for their
deeds. See, for example, Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr al-qurÞÁn al-ÝaÛÐm, Vol. I I I, p. 588.
6 In logic maÎmÙl signifies the predicate. Ibn SÐnÁ, Al-ShifÁÞ, index.

The essence of Abraham

51

al-mafÝÙl).7 The passive participle is manifest and the active participle is hidden
and concealed. The latter is nourishment for the former, like water permeating a
piece of wool and thus making it grow and expand. If the Real is the manifest,
then the created (human being) is hidden in Him, and as a result the created
(embraces) all the names of the Real, His hearing, seeing, all His relationships
and perceptions. If the created is the manifest, the Real is concealed and hidden in
him; the Real, then, is the hearing of the created, his seeing, hand, foot and all his
faculties, as referred to in the correct tradition.8
Moreover, if these relationships were removed from the Essence, it would
not be Divinity (ilÁh).9 Our (fixed) entities (aÝyÁnunÁ) bring into being these
relationships; because God exists in us (maÞlÙhiyatunÁ),10 we make Him God.
Consequently, He is not known till we know Him (as God). He (MuÎammad)
said: “Whoever knows himself knows his Lord.”11 And he (MuÎammad) best
knows God. Some scholars, including AbÙ ÍÁmid (al-GhazÁlÐ, d. 1111), claimed
that God can be known without observing the cosmos, which is a fault.12 Indeed,
an eternal essence can be known; however, that this entity is god (ilÁh)13 can be
known only after gaining knowledge of the objects dependent on this entity (almaÞlÙh). These objects are the indication (dalÐl) of this entity.
Then, after that, in a second state, revelation grants you (the knowledge) that the
Real Himself is the very indication of Himself and His Divinity, that the cosmos
is nothing but His self-disclosure in the forms of the fixed entities (aÝyÁn thÁbita)
whose existence is impossible without Him, and that He is manifest through various
forms according to the realities of these entities and their states. This (is known)
after we know (82) that He is our god. Then comes the final revelation through
which our forms are disclosed in Him; some of us are disclosed to each other in the
Real, and some of us know each other and are different from each other. Some of
us know that God knows us through us, and some others do not know that in this
Presence (ÎaÃra – God) there is knowledge (produced) by us. “I seek refuge in God,
lest I be one of the ignorant” (QurÞÁn 2:67). Only through these two revelations14
does God determine (our states) through us, nay, rather we determine (our states)
through us, yet in Him. For this reason God said: “God has the conclusive argument” (QurÞÁn 6:149). (God means the conclusive argument) against the veiled, for

7 These two grammatical terms can also be rendered the “agent” and “object” of an act,
respectively.
8 BukhÁrÐ, LXXXI:38 (6502). See ch. 1, n. 81, above.
9 Here the Essence means God with respect to His names and attributes, and not God’s
pure Essence, which is ineffable.
10 QayÒrÐ, p. 526.
11 Ch. 3, n. 4.
12 This strange note of the Greatest Master is to the best of my knowledge mistaken.
Al-GhazÁlÐ, IÎyÁÞ, Vol. IV, Book 9 (KitÁb al-tafakkur).
13 By god Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means an entity which has relationships with the cosmos that it
created.
14 The first revelation conveys the idea that God is reflected in the cosmos, and the second
that the cosmos is reflected in Him.

52 The essence of Abraham
they said to the Real: “Why have You done things to us which did not coincide with
our aims?”15 He made their affair difficult for them.16 The gnostics disclosed this
matter and knew that the Real has not done to them what they claimed He did, and
that this grave thing derived from them, for He only taught them their own states,
hence their argument was refuted and God’s conclusive argument remained (valid).
If you ask what can we learn from His saying: “If He had willed, He would
have guided all of you” (ibid.), we shall say: “In the phrase ‘if He had willed’ the
word “if” indicates an impossibility because of another impossibility17 (imtinÁÝ
li-imtinÁÝ), for God only wills the thing as it really is.18 According to reason, the
possible thing in definition can receive a trait or its opposite;19 however, what
determines which trait of the two reasonable possible traits will exist depends on
what was already established in the fixed entity. The meaning of “He would have
guided you” is “He would have explained to you” (your hidden state). God does
not open the insight of every possible individual to perceive things as they really
are. Among people there are knowers and ignoramuses. God does not will and He
will not will, hence He cannot guide them all. Likewise, (if we say) “if He wills,”
(we can ask) does He will that which cannot be? His will has a single connection,
which constitutes a relationship to knowledge which in turn is connected to a
known object, and the known object (83) is you and your states. Knowledge has
no effect on the object of knowledge, but rather the object of knowledge affects
knowledge and gives to knowledge from itself its true state.
The Divine Address comes only in accordance with the agreement of those
addressed and with what rational observation conveys. It does not come in accordance with unveiling. For this reason, believers are many, and gnostics, the people
of unveiling, are few. “There are none of us, but have a known place” (QurÞÁn
37:164), meaning through the personality you have in your fixed entity you will
appear in (concrete existence), on condition that your existence will be affirmed. If
it is affirmed that existence belongs to the Real, not to you, then you are undoubtedly determined in the existence of the Real. If it is affirmed that you are existent,
then you are undoubtedly determined as a real existent. If the Real determines (your
existence), He should only pour existence upon you, and as a result, you determine
yourself.20 Hence, you should praise or blame only yourself. What remains for the

15 The text has “their aims,” which does not fit the meaning of the sentence.
16 I follow here Austin’s translation, although he regards this sentence as a QurÞÁnic verse,
but it is a paraphrase of QurÞÁn 68:42 which reads: “On the Day when matters become
dire.” According to the translator Abdel Haleem, the sentence literally means when a
shin is bared.
17 This is a hypothetical clause which indicates that there is no possibility of the existence
of the conditioned instance.
18 If a human being is not to be guided according to his fixed entity and God knows
this state, He cannot guide this human being. Thus, God is prevented from performing
universal guidance because of His knowledge.
19 A tree, for example, can be existent or nonexistent.
20 The human personality and traits are determined by the fixed entities, the ideas which
reside in God’s thought. When God bestows on these entities existence, they become

The essence of Abraham

53

Real is only the praise of pouring forth existence, because this belongs to Him, not
to you. You supply the Real (literally: feed Him) with determinations, while He
supplies you with existence. What is allocated to Him is allocated to you. Thus, all
things (literally: the affair, al-amr) derive from Him to you, and from you to Him.
However, you are called obliged (mukallaf), and He obliges you only through your
saying to Him “oblige me through your true state.” Hence He is not obliged.21
He praises me and I praise Him/He worships me and I worship Him
In (my) state (of existence) I affirm Him/but regarding the (fixed) entities I
deny Him
He knows me and I do not/and I know Him and witness Him
How can He be independent while/I help Him and make Him happy22
For this reason, the Real created me/for I make Him know and thus bring Him
into existence23
A tradition24 tells us this/and in me His aim is realized
(84) Since al-KhalÐl attained this grade, because of which he was called alKhalÐl, he established hospitality as a rule, and Ibn Masarra25 put him with MÐkÁÞÐl
(as sponsors) of the means of subsistence. By the means of subsistence people
are fed. When the means of subsistence permeate the one who is fed in such a
way that every part of the fed person is permeated, food spreads in all the parts of
the fed person. (However, regarding God) there are no parts (in Him), hence He
necessarily permeates all the Divine Stations which are called names, so that His
Essence is manifest through them.
We belong to Him as signs in us/show this, but we (also) belong to ourselves
He has only my being (to manifest Himself)/for we belong to Him just as we
belong to ourselves
I have two aspects, He and I/but He has no “I” through me26
In me He is manifest/and we are for Him as vessels
“God speaks the truth and guides to the right path” (QurÞÁn 33:4).

existents in the concrete world. Thus, in the phase of giving existence, the structure of
the human being was already determined and cannot change. It is as if the human being
determines his own structure, while actually God determines it in His thought.
21 The human being is obliged through the hidden principles imprinted in his fixed entity.
Here arises a theological problem of God’s being obliged to act according to a previous
plan. Although Ibn al-ÝArabÐ states that God is not obliged, He is obliged by His own
determinations.
22 God sees His attributes only in creation, thus He is dependent on the cosmos.
23 God receives knowledge from the human being who reflects His attributes, and so in
this respect the human bestows existence on God.
24 According to al-KÁshÁnÐ (p. 199), the tradition is: “They have represented me (as a
figure standing) before their eyes” (qad maththalÙnÐ bayna aÝyunihim). Trans. by Affifi,
Mystical Philosophy, p. 13, n. 1.
25 On MuÎammad ibn ÝAbdallÁh ibn Masarra al-JabalÐ, see my Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the
Sufis, pp. 97–102.
26 The human being has two aspects: first, his existence through God and his being a
reflection of God, and second, his being himself with respect to other human beings.
Dagli, p. 65, n. 34.

6

The bezel of the wisdom of reality1
exists in the essence of Isaac

The ransom of a prophet is the slaughter of an animal for sacrifice/What is the cry
of man in comparison to the voice of a ram?
God the Mighty made the animal mighty2 taking care/of us or of it – I do not
know by what standard3
No doubt (other) sacrificial animals are highly valuable/but they are less valuable than the sacrifice of a ram
I wish I knew how a single small ram replaced/the vicegerent of the Merciful
Do you not know that all things4 were arranged/in fulfillment of profit and in
decreasing loss?
(85) There is no creation higher than the inanimate5 and after it/the plant, in
certain measures and patterns
And after the plant come the possessors of senses and all know/their creator
through unveiling or rational demonstration
As for the one called Àdam he is/restricted by intellect, thinking and the necklace of faith (ÐmÁn)
Sahl,6 who was a verifier like us, said the same thing (about Àdam)/for we and
they have reached the level of witnessing (iÎsÁn)7
Whoever witnesses that which I have witnessed/will say the same I have said
both secretly and openly

1 Wisdom of Reality (Îikma Îakkiyya) represents Isaac’s request from his father to
transform the latter’s dream into reality.
2 QurÞÁn 37:107.
3 The author does not know by which standard God decides to change the sacrificial
victim, and as a result, he does not know the object of God’s care.
4 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ is going to explain the order of all things in nature.
5 The principle Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses here is that the lower the thing is in the domain of
concrete existence, the higher it is in the domain of servanthood. Hence, the inanimate
thing is the highest entity regarding servanthood.
6 Sahl al-TustarÐ, died 896. Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 53–62.
7 Very probably Ibn al-ÝArabÐ regards iÎsÁn as higher than ÐmÁn, according to QurÞÁn
5:93. Al-KÁshÁnÐ, p. 208. Since the definition of iÎsÁn is “worship God as if you see
Him” (FuÒÙs, p. 123; SPK, p. 401, n. 24), the commentators of the FuÒÙs extended this
meaning to include witnessing. Al-KÁshÁnÐ, p. 208.

The essence of Isaac 55
Do not pay attention to a view contrary to our view/or sow seeds in blind soil8
They are the deaf and the dumb9 whom/the infallible (MuÎÁmmad) brought to
our notice in the text of the QurÞÁn
Know, may God bestow on us and on you revelation, that IbrÁhÐm al-KhalÐl
said to his son: “My son, I have seen myself sacrificing you in a dream” (QurÞÁn
37:102). The dream is on the plane of imagination, and so he did not interpret the
dream. A ram in the form of Abraham’s son appeared in the dream, and Abraham
believed that what he saw in the dream was true. His Lord ransomed Abraham’s
son from the false imagination of his father by the great sacrifice,10 which means
the interpretation of his dream in the eyes of God, while he (Abraham) was
unaware.
The disclosure of a form on the plane of imagination requires another science
(Ýilm)11 through which one can perceive what God means by this form. Do you not
consider what God’s Messenger said to AbÙ Bakr on his interpretation of a dream:
“You were right in part but also partly wrong”?12 AbÙ Bakr asked MuÎammad
to tell him where he was right and where he was wrong, but the Prophet did not
answer. God said to Abraham when He called him: “O Abraham, you believed
that the dream is true” (ibid. 105). He did not say to him you believed that he is
your son in the dream, because Abraham did not interpret the dream, but accepted
the manifest form of what he saw.13 However, dreams (86) require interpretation.
For this reason, the King of Egypt (al-ÝazÐz: literally: the Powerful) said (addressing his courtiers): “If you can interpret (taÝburÙn) the dream” (QurÞÁn 12:43). The
meaning of interpretation (taÝbÐr) is to pass from the form one sees to something
else. The cows were (symbols) of years of barrenness and plenty.
If Abraham had been right in understanding his dream, he would have slaughtered
his son. However, he truly saw his son (in the dream), whereas in God’s eyes it was
the Great Sacrifice in the form of his son. God ransomed him because of Abraham’s
thought; in God’s eyes it was not a real ransom (the ransom was the ram). His sense
perception produced the sacrifice, while his imagination produced his son. If he had
seen the ram in his imagination, he would have interpreted it as his son or something
else. Then God said: “Indeed, this is a clear test” (QurÞÁn 37:106), that is, a clear and
manifest trial of knowledge: would he know what the interpretation of the dream
required or not? He knew that imagination required interpretation. However, he
did not take into consideration what this realm of dreams implied. For this reason,
he regarded the dream as true, just as did TaqÐ ibn Mukhallad,14 the imam and the
author of a Musnad. He heard in a tradition which he approved that the Prophet said:
8 Do not teach those who have not the disposition of learning. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 208.
9 QurÞÁn 8:22–23.
10 QurÞÁn 37:107.
11 This is the science of interpretation of dreams (taÝbÐr al-ruÞyÁ).
12 For the dream, see KÁshÁnÐ, pp. 209f.
13 Abraham saw in the dream that he would sacrifice his son. However, he should have
interpreted this vision to know the truth, but he did not do so. Therefore, he understood
he had to sacrifice his son.
14 An Andalusian traditionist (d. 276/889).

56 The essence of Isaac
“Whoever sees me in sleep has seen me in waking, for the Devil cannot assimilate
my form.”15 In this dream TaqÐ ibn Mukhallad saw the Prophet, who gave him milk
to drink. TaqÐ ibn Mukhallad regarded the dream as true; he drank and then vomited
the milk. Had he interpreted the dream, this milk would have been knowledge. God
deprived him much knowledge according to the measure of his drinking. Do you not
see that (when) the Messenger of God was given a cup of milk in a dream he said:
“I drank the milk until I was completely satiated (literally: until satiety came out of
my fingernails), and then gave the remainder to ÝUmar”?16 The Prophet was asked:
“What is your interpretation, O God’s Messenger?” He said: “Knowledge.” He did
not leave it as milk, (that is) in the (87) form of what he saw, because he knew it was
a dream that required interpretation.
It is well known that the form of the Prophet, which was seen by the sense (of
sight), is buried in al-MadÐna, and that the form of his spirit and his rational soul
(laÔÐfa)17 has not been seen by anyone through (the form) of anyone else or through
(the form) of oneself. Each spirit must be regarded as such. The spirit of the Prophet
appears to one in a dream in the form of his body when he died, without the body being
damaged at all. It is MuÎammad who is seen through his spirit in a bodily form which
resembles his buried form. The Devil cannot assume the form of MuÎammad’s body,
for God protects the one who sees him. For this reason, whoever sees MuÎammad
in this form will learn from him all that he orders or prohibits, or tells him, just as he
could learn from the Prophet in this world the laws in keeping with the sayings which
point to these laws, namely, (laws written) in texts, through plain or general meanings
or through whatever form. If he (the Prophet) gives him something, this thing may be
interpreted. If, (however), knowledge through the senses equals knowledge through
the imagination, this dream does not need interpretation.18 Through and on the basis of
this criterion Abraham and TaqÐ ibn Mukhallad dealt with their dreams.
Since the dream has two aspects,19 and since God has taught us what He did regarding Abraham and what He said to him – because this is the manner befitting the grade
of prophecy – we know (the following): In our vision of the Real in a form which
the rational argument rejects, we should interpret this form in a way appropriate to
religion, (that is), in terms of who the seer is, or the place where the Real was seen, or
both. If rational argument does not reject (the form we saw), we shall leave this form
as it was seen, in the same form as we shall see the Real in the world to come.20

15 Muslim, XLI I:12 (2266).
16 Ibn Íanbal, I I:83, 154.
17 Al-JurjÁnÐ, KitÁb al-taÝrÐfÁt, pp. 202, 289.
18 According to this criterion, Abraham’s conduct is right, because the form he saw in his
dream, that is, in his imagination, was Isaac, and his perception of Isaac in his dream
matches his perception of him through the sense of sight in the concrete existence,
therefore he did not interpret his dream.
19 That is, the sensual and the imaginal perceptions.
20 This system of interpreting QurÞÁnic verses whose literal meaning cannot be accepted
by reason is reminiscent of al-AshÝarÐ’s way to deal with such verses. Al-AshÝarÐ,
Al-IbÁna Ýan uÒÙl al-diyÁna, DÁr al-ÓibÁÝa al-MunÐriyya, Cairo n.d., p. 13 (the chapter
on the seeing of God).

The essence of Isaac 57
(88) The One, the Merciful, has in every domain21/hidden and manifest forms
If you say this is the Real, you are right/and if you say something else you are
interpreting
His status is not determined in one domain to exclude another/but He unveils
Himself to creation through His Reality
When He discloses Himself to the sight, the intellect/refutes (His appearance)
through a persistent proof
He is accepted in the domain of the intellect/in imagination, and in true sight
AbÙ YazÐd said concerning this station: If the Throne and that which it contains – multiplied a hundred millions times – were (to dwell) in one of the corners
of the gnostic’s heart, he would not feel them.22 This is the ability of AbÙ YazÐd
in the world of bodies. Moreover, I say that if the infinite existence was assessed
as finite with the Essence which brought it into existence (and these found their
abode) in one of the corners of the gnostic’s heart, he would not perceive them in
his knowledge. Hence, it is proved that the heart contains the Real, and notwithstanding, it is not shown as satiated. If it were filled, said AbÙ YazÐd, it would be
satiated. We note this station, saying:
O He who creates things in Himself/You encompass what you create
You create the infinite being within You/even as You are the Limited and the Vast
If the creation of God were in my heart/its luminous dawn would not appear (there)
Whoever comprises the Real, cannot be confined/to (comprise) creation; What
is your opinion O Listener
Through the power of fancy every human being creates in his faculty of imagination that which has existence only in this faculty.23 This is the general matter.
The gnostic creates through spiritual aspiration (himma)24 that which has existence outside the substrate of his spiritual aspiration; however, this aspiration does
not cease to preserve its object. Its preservation, that is, the preservation of that
which it created, does not weary this faculty.25 When the gnostic does not pay
attention (89) to the preservation of this created entity, it disappears, unless the
gnostic masters all his domains26 (ÎaÃarÁt) and does not become heedless at all,
because he witnesses at least one domain. When the gnostic through his spiritual
aspiration creates, possessing this mastership, that which he created, this creation
21 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses this word (mawÔin) to denote “domain.” Thus, there exists the domain
of reason, the domain of imagination, the domain of this world, etc. I prefer to translate
mawÔin as “domain” (in SDG, p. 46, it is homestead), because it has the double meaning
of spiritual and physical spheres.
22 Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 46f.
23 This sentence is awkward in Arabic. Using two terms (wahm and khayÁl), Ibn al-ÝArabÐ
repeats the power of imagination twice without any need. He seems to say that the
human being creates in his imagination, or using it, forms which are appropriate only to
this faculty.
24 See above, p. 14, n. 4.
25 QurÞÁn 2:255.
26 Possibly the author means domains or presences such as the senses, the intellect and so
on. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 216. SharÎ, p. 102. ÍaÃra is a divine or cosmological reality, hence also
God’s names and their ramifications are realities. MuÝjam, pp. 323–327.

58 The essence of Isaac
appears in his form in every domain; the forms become preserved by each other.
As a result, when the gnostic does not pay attention to a certain domain, or to
some domains, while witnessing one of the domains and preserving in it the form
of his creation, all the forms are preserved through his preservation of this single
form in the domain which he heeds. That is because heedlessness is never absolute, neither regarding all the domains, nor regarding a single domain.
Here I have revealed a mystery which the people of God have always jealously concealed, because this mystery refutes their claim that they are the Real.
However, the Real is always attentive, while the servant does not escape inattentiveness to something. From the point of view of preserving what he created, the
gnostic may say: “I am the Real” (anÁ al-Îaqq).27 However, his preservation of
his creation is not like God’s, and we have already clarified the difference. The
servant is different from the Real, given his heedlessness of a form and its domain.
He must be distinct from the Real, notwithstanding his continuing preservation of
all the forms through the preservation of one form in the domain to which he pays
heed. This is preservation through a guaranty,28 while God’s preservation of what
He created is not like this, for it is a preservation of each form specifically.
As I have been told, no one has written ever before on this question in a book,
neither I nor others, except in this book, hence it (the question) is extraordinary
and unique. Consequently, beware of being inattentive to this question, for the
remaining domain, which still you dwell within, with the form, is like the Book in
which God said: “We have left nothing out unwritten in the Book” (QurÞÁn 6:38),
for the Book comprises the past and future events. Only he who has the faculty
of combination (qurÞÁn) (all the presences)29 in his soul knows what we have said
(90), for whoever fears God, “God will give him the faculty of separation” (furqÁn
between the Real and the creation).30 This is similar to what we have pointed out
regarding this question of the device through which the servant is distinct from the
Lord. This faculty of separation is the loftiest faculty of separation.
At one time the servant is a lord without a doubt/and at another he is really a
servant without a lie
If he is a servant, he encompasses the Real/and if he is a lord, he is in a poor state
Through his being a servant, he beholds the essence of his self/and with no
doubt hopes overflow from him
Through his being a lord, he beholds the whole of creation/making demands on
him through the domain of Ownership and Kingdom
Because of his essence he cannot answer their demands/for this reason you see
some gnostics weeping
So be a servant of a lord and not a lord of his servant/lest you fall, melting in
the Fire.
27 This is the famous saying of al-ÍallÁj. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ remains faithful to his principle
that the human being resembles God in certain aspects.
28 That is, the preservation of one form in a single domain guarantees the preservation in
all other domains.
29 This is the perfect human being. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 218.
30 KÁshÁnÐ, p. 218.

7

The bezel of the wisdom of
loftiness1 exists in the essence
of Ishmael

Know that the (entity) called (musammÁ) God is one with respect to essence and
all with respect to names. Each existent has from God only a single lord, and it
is inconceivable for it to have all the lords.2 As for God’s Unity (aÎadiyya), no
single entity enters it, for one cannot call part of it a thing and another a thing, for
it does not admit division.3 However, His Unity is the totality of His attributes in
potentiality.
The happy person is the one whose Lord is pleased with him,4 and there is
none but that who is pleasing in the eyes of his Lord, because Lordship applies to
everyone, hence the Lord finds everyone pleasing, and so everyone is happy.5 For
this reason Sahl6 said: Lordship has a mystery – and it is you, ergo Sahl’s saying
refers to every entity – if it had disappeared, (91) the Lordship would also have
been cancelled. The words “if it had disappeared” signify the impossibility of the
impossibility (imtinÁÝ al-imtinÁÝ),7 for the condition will not appear and hence the
Lordship will not be annulled, because an entity is existent only through its lord.
Since an entity is always existent, its Lordship will never be cancelled.
Every pleasing thing is beloved, and all that the beloved person does is beloved.
All is pleasing, for any entity does not act at all, but God alone acts in it. Any
entity is safe from ascription of an act to it, hence it is pleased with that which
appears in it and from it, that is, God’s acts. These acts are pleasing, for every doer

1 According to al-QaysarÐ, this wisdom is ascribed to Ishmael, because God’s name the
Loftiest, or the Most High (al-ÝalÐ), is manifest in him. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,”
p. 14.
2 Since each existent is the embodiment of a fixed entity, which in turn is a form of a
specific name, the existent is a servant of a specific name.
3 God’s Essence is not divided into attributes which are different from each other. Here
God’s unity stands for the unity in respect to His Essence. See n. 13 below.
4 In these words QurÞÁn 19:55 refers specifically to Ishmael.
5 Every individual is under the control of a divine name which serves as his lord. SPK,
p. 55.
6 Ch. 6, n. 6, above.
7 This conditional sentence means that because the occurrence of the condition is
impossible, the conditioned thing cannot take place. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ immediately explains
this notion. See ch. 5, n. 17, above.

60 The essence of Ishmael
or maker is pleased with his acts, and if He carries out his acts perfectly, it will
be appropriate to say of Him: “He gave everything its (measure of) creation then
guided (it)” (QurÞÁn 20:50),8 meaning God clarified that He gave everything that
which fits it without decrease or increase.9
Since Ishmael discovered what we have mentioned, he was pleasing to God.10
In like manner, every existent is pleasing to his lord. If every existent is pleasing
to his lord, as we have explained, it is not necessary that it be pleasing to a lord
of another servant, for he took the lordship only from one lord, not from many.11
What was established for him from all the lords is only that which fits him, and
this (what is suited to him) is his lord. No one takes from God (something) which
relates to His Unity (aÎadiyya).12 For this reason, the People of God were prevented from the manifestation of God’s Unity. That is because if you look at
Him through Him, it is He who looks at Himself, and He always looks at Himself
through Himself. And if you look at Him through yourself, His Unity disappears
through yourself. (And), if you look at Him through Himself and through yourself, Unity also disappears. For the pronoun tÁÞ in naÛartahu (you look) is not the
essence of that which you look at (Ýayn al-manÛÙr), hence there is necessarily a
relationship which requires two entities, the one who looks (nÁÛir) and the one
who is looked at (manÛÙr). Consequently, Unity disappears, even if (God) sees
Himself through Himself. It is well known that in this description He is both the
observer and the observed.13
The pleasing person will be absolutely pleasing only when all things through
which he is manifest originate (92) in the action of the one who is pleased with
him. Ishmael excels others, for the Real qualified him as pleasing to Him. In like
manner it is said to every tranquil soul, “Return to your Lord” (QurÞÁn 89:28). God
ordered the soul to return only to its Lord who called it and it knows Him from
other lords as “pleased and pleasing” (ibid.). (And God said to the soul) “Enter
among My servants” (ibid., 29), because they possess this station. Every servant
among those mentioned here knows his lord, confining himself to this knowledge
without looking at the lord of another, notwithstanding the Unity of the Essence.
This is necessarily so. “And enter into My Garden” (jannatÐ)14 (ibid., 30) which
is My place of concealment. My place of concealment is only You, and You

8 This verse is the basis of the theory taÎqÐq, that is, one’s realization that every entity is
formed and acts according to the appropriate manner which was decreed by God in its
fixed entity (Ýayn thÁbita). SDG, p. 96.
9 One should note that according to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ also the feeling of being satisfied with
God’s acts comes from God, otherwise Ibn al-ÝArabÐ would have stated that perceptions
and feelings belong to the human being alone.
10 QurÞÁn 19:55.
11 Read: mÁ akhadha al-rubÙbiyya illÁ min wÁÎid lÁ min kull.
12 For this term, see the title of ch. 10.
13 When we speak of God’s Unity, we cannot deal with it in terms of duality, even if this
duality exists in God’s Essence. His Unity excludes any form of duality.
14 The verb janna means “he covered or concealed,” hence janna may be rendered cover,
veil, or place of concealment.

The essence of Ishmael 61
conceal me through Your Essence. I am known only through You, just as You are
not (manifest) only through me. Whoever knows You knows me, and I am not
known through (another), (just as) You are not known through (another, but through
me). When you enter into His place of concealment, you enter into yourself, then
you know yourself with another knowledge which is different from the knowledge
of yourself when you know your Lord through your knowledge of yourself. As a
result, you possess two kinds of knowledge: knowledge of Him through yourself,
and knowledge of Him through yourself, with respect to Him, not to you.15
You are the servant and you are the lord/of the one you are his servant
You are the lord and you are the servant/of the one who possesses your covenant in His address (to you)16
Every contract to which one is committed/can be dissolved by someone else17
God is pleased with his servants and they are pleasing. They are pleased with
Him and He is pleasing. The two presences (servanthood and lordship) face each
other like similar things, because there is no distinction between the two kinds.
(However), similar things are opposites, for the two similar things do not join.18
There is only the one which is distinct and the one which is similar. (Actually),
there is neither a similar thing in existence, nor an opposite thing, for existence is
one reality (ÎaqÐqa wÁÎida), and a thing does not oppose itself.
(93)
Only the Real remains, no other being/there is no connected thing, and there is
no separated thing19
The seeing of the eyes proves this and I do not see/when I see but His Essence
“This is for one who fears his Lord” (QurÞÁn 98:8), lest he will be Him, because
he knows the distinction (between the servant and the lord). What proves this
to us is the fact that (some people) are ignorant of things (aÝyÁn) in existence
which the knower shows them. There is a distinction between servants and there
is a distinction between lords. If there had been no distinction, a certain divine
name would have been interpreted according to all its aspects in the same manner as another name is interpreted. The name the Strengthener (al-muÝizz) is not
interpreted in the same manner as the Debaser (al-mudhill), and so on. However,
from the point of view of the Unity they are the same. As you say, every name is

15 The first kind of knowledge reveals divine traits in one’s soul through rational
examination of the soul, while the second makes one find God in his soul. The second
kind derives from unveiling which occurs in one’s soul, and not from investigation.
Affifi, I I, pp. 91f.
16 This is an allusion to QurÞÁn 7:172, in which all the human generations affirmed God’s
Lordship.
17 That is because each creed expresses one’s speculation and investigation, and it is not
characterized by an absolute truth. Hence, it can be replaced by another creed.
18 Here I changed the order of the sentence to make it coherent. According to the Greatest
Master, things are similar to each other from certain points of view and opposite to
each other from other points of view. However, with respect to the absolute unity of
existence, there is no difference between the things.
19 All is one unity.

62 The essence of Ishmael
a proof of the Essence and of its reality with respect to its ipseity, for the named
(al-musammÁ) is one and the Strengthener is the Debaser with respect to the
named. However, the Strengthener is not the Debaser with respect to their own
entities and realities, for our understanding of each of them is different.
Do not contemplate (only) the Real/(so that) you divest Him of creation
Do not contemplate (only) creation/(so that) you clothe it (in all things) except
the Real
Make Him incomparable and comparable/and place yourself in the domain of
truth
If you will, be in a state of joining20/or in a state of separation
Then, if all21 is revealed to you/you will gain the greatest success
You will not pass away (in creation) nor remain (in the Real)/and you will not
make others either pass away or remain
Revelation is not bestowed on you/and you do not grant revelation to others22
Praise (for the people is carried out by God) through faithfulness to the promise (Òidq al-waÝd) and not through faithfulness to the threat. The Divine Presence
requires commendable praise through God’s Essence. The Essence is praised
through faithfulness to the promise and not through faithfulness to the threat,
moreover, through overlooking (one’s sins).23 “Do not think (94) that God will
break His promise to His Messengers” (QurÞÁn 14:47). He does not say “His
threat,” but rather “We shall overlook their sins” (QurÞÁn 46:16), although He
made a threat regarding sins. He praised Ishmael, because he was faithful to his
promise (ÒÁdiq al-waÝd).24 Regarding the Real (in his praising of Ishmael), possibility disappears, because possibility requires a preponderant (murajjiÎ).25
Only the one who is faithful to his promise remains/while the Real’s threat has
no established essence
Even if they enter the abode of suffering/they have delight therein (and) pure
happiness
There is happiness in the eternal gardens, for the matter is one26/(only) when
God is revealed there is a difference
Suffering (ÝadhÁb) is so called because of its sweetness (ÝudhÙba)/this is like a
shell, and the shell protects (what is inside).

20 Joining of transcendence and immanence.
21 Both the transcendent and the immanent aspects.
22 If the existence is one, it follows that revelation exists within everyone. Hence,
revelation is not bestowed on anyone, nor given to anyone. Bursevi, Vol. I I, p. 581.
23 QurÞÁn 46:16.
24 QurÞÁn 19:54.
25 To decide between possible alternatives, one needs a preponderant which overwhelms
all other alternatives, leaving only one choice that seems the best. Consequently, when
a person carries out his promise, God is obliged to praise him.
26 By this he means that all the phenomena are one, hence there is no difference from this
point of view between Paradise and Hell.

8

The bezel of the wisdom of
spirituality1 exists in the
essence of Jacob

(94) Religion is divided into two kinds: a. Religion according to God and according to whom the Real taught and those who taught others what the Real taught
them; and b. Religion according to the created beings, which God acknowledges.
God’s religion is the one which God chose and granted it the highest degree
above the human religion. God said: “Abraham ordered his sons (to submit to
God), and so did Jacob, saying: ‘My sons, God has chosen for you the religion
(al-dÐn), so do not die except in a state of submission to God (muslimÙn)” (QurÞÁn
2:132), meaning obeying Him. (The word) al-dÐn is marked with the definite particle (alif and lÁm) to designate a specific religion, hence this is a known religion
(which is shown) in God’s saying: “The religion according to God is Islam” (QurÞÁn
3:19), meaning submission. Religion expresses your submission. That which comes
from God is the Law to which you submit. Religion means submission and the rule
(al-nÁmÙs) is the Law (al-sharÝ) which God promulgated. Whoever is qualified as
yielding to God’s laws is the one who carries out the orders of the religion and
maintains them, as one who performs the prayer.
The servant is one who maintains religion and the Real promulgates the laws.
Hence, submission is the essence of your act, and religion (95) comes out of your
act. You will not be happy except by way of that which comes from yourself. Just
as your acts affirm (athbata) your happiness, so His acts, which are you and the
created beings, affirm the Divine Names. Because of His effects (in the cosmos),
He is called God (ilÁh), and because of your effects (in yourself), you are called
happy. When you observe (the commandments of) religion and obey His laws, He
makes you equal to His rank. If God wills, I shall expound further on this issue in
a beneficial way after explaining religion in the eyes of the created beings which
God acknowledges.
Religion as a whole belongs to God and comes (with respect to implementation) from you, not from Him, except with respect to its origin.2 God said: “They
invented monasticism” (QurÞÁn 57:27). (Their invention) refers to the wise laws;
1 In keeping with al-QÙnawÐ’s and KÁshÁnÐ’s commentaries, I prefer Îikma rÙÎiyya to
Îikma rawÎiyya (wisdom of ease), although the latter possibility has a basis in QurÞÁn
12:87. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” pp. 17f.
2 That is because God is the origin of all things.

64 The essence of Jacob
however, these were not brought to the people by the known Messenger through
God in the customary way (that is, through prophecy). But as wisdom and plain
interest in (these laws) coincide with Divine Judgment regarding the aim of Divine
Law, God approved of (these human laws) just as He did of His Laws, (although)
“We (God) did not prescribe (these laws) for them” (QurÞÁn 57:27).3
Since4 God opened the door of His Providence and Mercy between Him and
their hearts of which they were unaware, He established in their hearts the exaltation of the laws they had promulgated – through which they sought God’s satisfaction. They did so not in the usual and known prophetic way of divine teaching.
Hence God said: “They did not keep their laws” (QurÞÁn, ibid.), meaning those who
established the laws which I (God) affirmed, “in a proper way, only to seek God’s
satisfaction” (QurÞÁn, ibid.). So they thought. “We gave those who believed,” in
these laws, “among them their reward, (however) many of them” (QurÞÁn, ibid.),
meaning of those for whom this worship was established, “are sinners” (QurÞÁn,
ibid.), meaning they did not submit to these laws and did not keep them.
Whoever does not obey these laws, his legislator will not comply with what
pleases him. However, the matter necessitates obedience, meaning the one under
obligation (mukallaf) is either obedient through acceptance of the laws, or a transgressor. There is no need to talk about the one who obeys and accepts the laws,
because this is obvious. As for the transgressor, his transgression which was determined for him by God requests either one of two things: disregard and forgiveness or rebuke (96) for what he did. One of these options should apply, because
essentially the matter requires one of the two. Anyhow, it is correct (to say that)
the Real submits to the servant’s acts and state. It is the state which affects (God’s
reaction). From this (it is evident) that religion means requital (jazÁÞ), meaning
compensation for that which makes one happy or unhappy. As for that which
makes one happy, God said: “God is pleased with them, and they with Him”
(QurÞÁn 5:119, trans. AH). This is a compensation that makes one happy. As for
that which makes one unhappy, God said: “Whoever among you who does wrong,
we shall make him taste a severe punishment” (QurÞÁn 25:19). This is a compensation that does not make one happy. “We shall disregard their evil deeds”
(QurÞÁn 46:16) is (also) redress. Hence, it is correct (to say) that religion is compensation. That is because religion is islÁm and islÁm is essentially submission;
God submits to what makes one happy or unhappy, which means compensation.
This is the external aspect in this issue.
As for its mystery and internal aspect, it manifests itself in the mirror of
the Real’s existence; the possible things receive from the Real only that which
their essences give them in each state. For each state has a form. Their forms
differ according to the differences in their states. Hence, the manifestation differs because of the difference in the state, and the effect on the servant occurs
3 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to speak of laws promulgated by people before revelation.
Rationalist as well as orthodox thinkers advanced this notion. Kevin A. Reinhart,
Before Revelation: The Boundaries of Muslim Moral Thought, New York 1995.
4 Read lammÁ. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 236.

The essence of Jacob 65
in accordance with what characterizes him. No one bestows on him good or evil
except himself; only he bestows on his essence favors and sufferings. He should
chastise and praise only himself. “To God belongs the conclusive argument”
(QurÞÁn 6:149) in his knowledge of them, for knowledge follows the object of
knowledge.5 In an issue like this, the mystery that lies behind it is (the notion) that
the possible things in principle are nonexistent. There is no existence but the existence of the Real (which is disclosed) through the forms of the states in which the
possible things appear in themselves and in their (fixed) essences. Consequently,
you know whoever experiences pleasure and whoever experiences pain and what
follows (yaÝqubu) each state, because of which it is called following (ÝuqÙba)
and consequence (ÝiqÁb).6 (This idea of following) is allowable in relation to
both good and evil; however, convention calls the good – reward, and the evil –
punishment. Because of this procedure religion may be called or explained as
what returns (ÝÁda, usually: custom), for that which his state requires and seeks
returns to him (ÝÁda Ýalayhi). Hence, religion is that which returns.7 The poet said:
“As your religion with Umm al-Íuwayrith before” (97), meaning your custom.
The rational meaning of ÝÁda is the return of the thing itself to its (previous)
state. However, this is not the case here, for ÝÁda means repetition. But ÝÁda is an
intelligible reality, and resemblance in forms exists. That is, because we know that
Zayd is the same as ÝAmr with respect to humanity (insÁniyya), but humanity does
not repeat itself, for if it does, it will be multiplied; however, humanity is one reality that does not repeat itself. (Also) we know that Zayd is not the same as ÝAmr in
terms of individual identity (shakhsiyya), for Zayd as an individual is not the same
as ÝAmr, though we certainly know that the existence of individuality is shared
by both. Through sense perception resemblance repeats itself; however, through
true judgment resemblance does not repeat itself. From one point of view there is
a repetition and from another there is not. In like manner, in one respect there is a
reward, and in another there is not; that is because reward is a possible state. The
scholars probing this issue did not pay attention to it; that is, they paid no attention
to its explanation, not that they did not know it, because it belongs to the mystery
of predetermination which governs the created beings.
Know that just as it is said of a physician that he is the servant of nature, so
the Messengers and the Heirs are the servants of the Divine Command in general, and actually they are the servants of the states of the possible things.8 Their
service is part of their states which have been established by their fixed entities.
Consider what a marvelous thing this is! However, the servant, of whom we are
5 SDG, p. 186.
6 From the perspective of the Real, that which follows the states is called following or
consequence. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ immediately explains that in this world that which follows
the states is called either reward or punishment. This is a revolutionary idea, according
to which, with respect to the Existence, good and evil play no role.
7 One’s states cause the human being to perform acts repeatedly, and this characterizes
religion.
8 For the term amr (command), its role in the cosmological and terrestrial domains and
its IsmÁÝÐlÐ origin, see Ebstein, “The Word of God,” pp. 44–50.

66 The essence of Jacob
talking here, is restricted regarding saying and state by his lord’s rules. It is correct
to say that the physician is a servant of nature, only if he helps nature. That is because
nature put in the body of the ill person a unique temperament (mizÁj) because of which
he is called an ill person. If the physician were to help nature through his service, he
would also increase the measure of illness (98). He prevents nature (from worsening
the illness) only in order to seek health – and health also belongs to nature – through
introducing another temperament that opposes the present temperament. Hence, the
physician is not a servant of nature (regarding all aspects); he only serves it through
curing the ill person and changing his temperament by using nature itself. Regarding
nature, he exerts efforts by using a particular, not a general aspect, because generality
is not correct in such an issue. Hence, the physician is servant/not servant of nature,
just as messengers and heirs are regarding the servitude of the Real.
In determining the states of those who are under obligation (mukallafÐn), the
Real acts through two aspects: The servant acts in accordance with the requirements of the Real’s will, and His will in turn is connected to what the Real’s
knowledge requires, and the Real’s knowledge is connected to what the object of
knowledge bestows on Him, that is, its essence, which appears only in its form.9
The Messenger and the Heir are servants of the divine command by way of
the will (irÁda);10 however, they are not servants of the will. He (the Messenger)
refutes the divine command by way of the divine command seeking for the happiness of the person under obligation. If he were the servant of the divine will, he
would not advise (people), or would advise (people) only through the divine will.
The Messenger, the Heir, is the physician of the souls for the world to come. He
obeys God’s command when He commands him. He may observe His command
and will and sees that God’s command opposes His will, (knowing) that all things
occur according to His will, and for this reason the command stands. If He wills
the fulfillment of the command, it will be fulfilled, and if He does not will the
fulfillment of what He commands, the person under obligation will not carry out
the command, and this is called transgression and sin.
The messenger is a transmitter (of God’s commands and sayings). For this reason he (MuÎammad) said: “HÙd and its sisters made me anxious” (literally: made
my hair white),11 because they (these sÙras) contain God’s saying: “So keep to
9 God’s knowledge is determined by the essence of the thing which is its fixed entity (Ýayn
thÁbita). Thus, God is compelled to act in keeping with His knowledge, and has no free
choice. SDG, pp. 186f. This is the logical conclusion of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s ideas, although
he says that free choice and compulsion do not apply to God. Our author seems to be
inconsistent in his thought, because one cannot describe a series of cause-effect, that
is, will, knowledge, the fixed entity, and then deny the consequence of one’s thought,
claiming that this procedure is irrelevant. Moreover, he asserts that God’s choice is
expressed in bestowing existence on the fixed entities. Thus, God has some kind of free
choice. As in other issues in Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s teachings, God has and does not have free
choice. Ibid. Another point worth noting is the absence of discussion in Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s
doctrine on when and how God produces the fixed entities.
10 IrÁda is God’s power to bring into existence potential existents. Affifi, Mystical
Philosophy, p. 160.
11 TirmidhÐ, 3297. Dagli, p. 93, n. 30.

The essence of Jacob 67
the right course, as you have been commanded” (QurÞÁn 11:112, trans. AH). (99)
The words “as you have been commanded” made him anxious, because he did not
know whether the command fitted His will and hence would be implemented, or
opposed His Will, and hence would not be implemented. No one knows the way
of the will (Îukm al-irÁda), until the object of the will occurs, except one to whom
God has revealed his insight, and as a result he perceives the possible things as
they really are in their states as fixed entities and thereupon he judges according
to his insight. This may happen to a very few individuals in times of seclusion.
(Consequently), the Prophet said: “I do not know what will be done with me or
you” (QurÞÁn 46:9, trans. AH). He (the Prophet) explicitly said of the veil (existing between God and the humans). The aim (of this verse) is to inform that the
Prophet had knowledge only of some things, not all things.

9

The bezel of the wisdom of light1
exists in the essence of Joseph

(99) The light of this bright wisdom spreads over the presence of Imagination,
which is the first principle of Divine Revelation among the people under God’s
Providence (fÐ ahl al-ÝinÁya).2 ÝÀÞisha said: “The first revelation to the Messenger
of God, may God bless him and give him peace, was a true dream. Each of his
dreams was clear like the breaking dawn, no obscurity therein.”3 Her knowledge
stops here. The period (of these revelations) continued six months, then the angel
came to him. She did not know that the Messenger of God said: “People are
asleep, and when they die, they awake up.”4 Everything one sees while awake5 is
like this, even if the states (of sleep and wakefulness) are different. She spoke of
six months; however, his whole life in this world should be gauged in this manner, that is, as a dream within a dream (manÁm fÐ manÁm).6 All things of this kind
belong to the world of imagination (ÝÁlam al-khayÁl), and for this reason they are
interpreted, meaning a thing that is essentially in a certain form appears in another
form. (100) Hence, the interpreter (ÝÁbir),7 if he is correct, passes from the form
seen by the sleeper to the true (meaningful) form it is. This is like the appearance of
knowledge in the form of milk.8 In his interpretation, the Prophet passed from the
1 This chapter is so called because Joseph was connected with dreams and their
interpretations, and the world of dreams, the world of imagination, is part of the spiritual
side of the cosmos. Spirits have the power of unveiling and hence are characterized
by light, whereas the concrete world, by darkness. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,”
pp. 18–20; Idem, “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Summary,” pp. 20f.
2 In simple words, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ wants to say that revelation, which is symbolized by
light, reaches humans through the imagination, that is, in their dreams.
3 BukhÁrÐ 1:3 (3).
4 This tradition does not appear in the great collections of traditions, but it is frequently
cited by Sufi authors. Dagli, p. 95, n. 4; SPK, p. 396.
5 I used KÁshÁnÐ’s reading (p. 246), which seems appropriate to the context, because what
we call the concrete world is also unreal. Our text has fÐ ÎÁl al-nawm (while asleep). Cf.
SharÎ, p. 122.
6 That is because life is unreal, it is imagination, and when one dreams, his dream is
within a dream.
7 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses the active participle of the first form (Ýabara) to denote
“interpreter.” Generally one uses the word muÝabbir, the active participle of the second
form, which has the same meaning.
8 For the interpretation of milk, see ch. 6, p. 56.

The essence of Joseph 69
form of milk to the form of knowledge, explaining that the form of milk is attributed to the form of knowledge.
When the Prophet received revelation, he was detached from ordinary sensory
perception and was covered by a dress, being unaware of his company. After he
was freed from (the state of inspiration), he was restored (to his previous state).
His perception occurs only in the presence of imagination; however, he was not
said to be asleep. In like manner, the angel (JibrÐl) appeared to him in the form
of a man, and this (appearance) derived from the presence of imagination, for he
was not a man but an angel, who assumed the form of a human. The observer, the
gnostic, interpreted this appearance until he reached the real form, saying: “This
is JibrÐl, who came to you to teach you your religion.”9 Then he (the gnostic) said:
“Bring this man back to me.” He called him a man, due to the form in which he
appeared to them. Then he said: “This is JibrÐl,” realizing the origin of this imagined man. He was right in both statements: the first based on his sense of sight and
the second on (the real knowledge) that he was JibrÐl without doubt.10
Joseph said: “I saw (in my dream) eleven stars and the sun and the moon, I
saw them prostrating before me” (QurÞÁn 12:4). He saw his brothers in the form
of stars and his father and stepmother in the form of the sun and the moon. This
(seeing) was from Joseph’s viewpoint. However, if it (the scene) were seen from
the viewpoint of those in it, then the appearance of his brothers in the form of
stars and the appearance of his father and stepmother in the form of the sun and
the moon would be very pleasing to them. Since (his brothers) did not know what
Joseph had seen, the latter’s perception was preserved in his imagination. When
Joseph told him his dream, Jacob was aware (of the danger) and said: “Do not tell
your dream to your brothers, lest they plot against you” (ibid., 5). Then he pardoned (101) his sons of this plot and ascribed it to the Devil, who is the essence of
plotting, and said: “The Devil is a clear enemy of the humans” (ibid.); that is, (his)
enmity is manifest. After that Joseph finally said: “This is the interpretation of my
earlier dream. God made it true” (ibid., 100), meaning that God made it manifest
to the senses, after it had been in imaginative form. The Prophet MuÎammad said:
“People are asleep,” and Joseph’s saying “God made it true” is like (the state) of
one who sees in his sleep that he wakes up from a dream and then interprets it.
He does not know that he is still asleep, but when he wakes up, he says: “I saw
this, and I saw myself apparently waking up and I interpreted the dream.” This is
Joseph’s experience. Think about the difference between MuÎÁmmad’s perception and Joseph’s when the latter said at last: “This is the interpretation of my
earlier dream. God made it true.” This is sensory perception which could not be
otherwise. That is because imagination conveys only the objects of senses, and
no other objects. Consider how exalted the knowledge of MuÎammad’s heirs is. I
shall expand my sayings concerning this matter using Joseph’s words (uttered in
the spirit of) MuÎammad, so that you may know, if God wills.
9 Muslim, 1:1 (5).
10 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ discusses the beginning of revelation in al-TirmidhÐ’s question number 25
(FutÙÎÁt, Vol. I I I, pp. 88f, ch. 73) and in ch. 188 (FutÙÎÁt, Vol. IV, pp. 7f).

70 The essence of Joseph
Know that which is said about “other than the Real” or that which is called the
cosmos relates to the Real as the shadow relates to a person. The cosmos is God’s
shadow. This relationship is the same as the Existence is to the cosmos, for the shadow
undoubtedly exists in the senses. However, there must be a substrate in which the
shadow appears. Even if you assumed the absence of such a substrate, the shadow
would still be intelligible but not existent in the senses, and the shadow would be
potentially in the essence of the thing which casts the shadow. The substrate of the
appearance of this divine shadow, called the cosmos, is the (fixed) entities of (102) the
possible things (aÝyÁn al-mumkinÁt) over which the shadow spreads out. Thus, from
the extension of this shadow, one can perceive the measure of the existence of this
Essence. It is by virtue of His name Light perception occurs, and this shadow spreads
out over the fixed entities of the possible things in the form of unknown mystery.11
Do you not see that shadows incline to the black color, thus pointing to their
hiddenness because of the remoteness between them and the things that cast them?
Even if an object is white, its shadow will be black. Do you not see the mountains
that are distant from the observer appear to be black, but actually they might be
of another color? Is there a cause of this but distance? The same is true as regards
the blueness of the sky. This is what the effect of distance produces in the sense
(of sight) with regard to non-luminous bodies. In like manner, the fixed entities of
the possible things (aÝyÁn al-mumkinÁt) are non-luminous, because they are nonexistent, even if they are described as fixed. However, they are not described as
existent, for existence is light. Furthermore, distance causes the luminous bodies
to appear small, thus this is another effect of distance. The sense (of sight) perceives them as small, but they are actually bigger than what is seen. As we know
by proof, the sun is one hundred sixty times the size of the earth; however, by the
sense of sight it appears no larger than a shield. This is also the effect of distance.
One knows of the cosmos (only) by the measure of what one knows of shadows.
Similarly, the Real is not known just as the object which causes the appearance
of the shadow is not known. He is known from the point of view of His shadow
but not from the point of view of the essence of the producer of the shadow.
For this reason, we say that the Real is known from one aspect and not known
from another. “Do you not see how your Lord lengthens the shadow; if He had
willed, He would have made it rest” (QurÞÁn 25:45), meaning the shadow exists in
Him potentially. We say12 that the Real cannot reveal Himself (mÁ kÁna al-Îaqq
li-yatajallÁ) to the possible things until (103) He makes the shadow appear, and
the shadow (before its appearance) is like the possible things that do not have yet
concrete existence. Then “We made the sun a sign for Him”13 (QurÞÁn, ibid.), (this

11 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to say that God’s Light illuminates the fixed entities, and as a result
of this illumination shadows appear. As our author said before, these shadows are the
possible things in the concrete world.
12 The text has “He says” (yaqÙlu), which does not seem logical, albeit KÁshÁnÐ (p. 254)
ascribes the verb to God.
13 According to the usual commentaries, the sun is the sign for the shadow. However, in
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ it serves as a sign for God, who is light.

The essence of Joseph 71
sign) is the name of the Real, that is, the Light mentioned above, and the sense
(of sight) witnesses it, for shadows exist in concrete form only when light exists.
“Thereafter We seize it to Ourselves, drawing it gently” (QurÞÁn 25:46, trans.
Arberry). He seizes it (the shadow) to Himself only because it is His shadow,
from Him it appears and to Him all things return,14 for the shadow is He, and no
other. All we perceive is the existence of the Real in the concrete possible things.
Regarding the ipseity (huwiyya)15 of the Real, (we can only speak of) His existence, (whereas) regarding the variety of forms in Him, He is the concrete possible
things. Just as the name shadow does not disappear from Him because of the variety of forms, so the name the cosmos does not disappear because of the variety of
forms or any other name except for the Real. With respect to His Unity (aÎadiyya)
as a shadow, He is the Real, because He is the Unique, the One, and with respect
to the multiplicity of forms, He is the cosmos. Hence (you should) understand and
ascertain what I have elucidated for you.
If the matter is as I have pointed out to you, then the cosmos is an illusion, having no real existence. This is the meaning of imagination. You imagine that the
cosmos is something separate, existing by virtue of itself (qÁÞim bi-nafsihi) and
unconnected to the Real, but actually this is not so.
Do you not see it (the shadow) by your sense of sight as connected to the
object from which it extends? It is inconceivable that the shadow should be
separated from this connection, because it is inconceivable that a thing should
be separated from its essence. As a result, you should know your essence, who
you are, what your ipseity is, and what your relationship to the Real is. (Also you
should know) through which thing you are real and through which thing you are
the cosmos, the other, and the unlike, and words like these. In this matter scholars
excel one another, and therefore try to better each other in knowledge (fa-ÝÁlim
wa-aÝlam)16 and to know (more)!
The Real in relation to a specific shadow (may it be) small or big, pure or
purest, is like a light in relation to a glass that comes between the light and the
beholder; the light takes the color of the glass, while at the same time it has no
color. In this manner you are made to see the Real through giving (you) similes
(104) of your reality (which proceeds) from your Lord. If you say the light is green
because of the greenness of the glass, you are right, as your sense (of sight) bears
witness. And if you say the light is not green and has no color, because you use a
logical proof, you are right, as your witness is based on sound, rational speculation
(al-naÛar al-ÝaqlÐ al-ÒaÎÐÎ). This is a light which extends from a shadow, which is
a concrete glass, and this is a luminous shadow because of its purity.17
14 QurÞÁn 11:123.
15 Huwiyya can also be rendered as He-ness or Essence. It signifies that which is unknown
regarding God. SPK, p. 394, n. 15.
16 Lane, An Arabic English Lexicon, s.v.
17 Here also the light is God’s Essence and the glass represents the world. The different
colors seen are produced by the light which passes through the glass. Affifi, I I, pp. 111f.
Just as in the previous simile, the shadows, which are produced by the light that is cast
on the world, are the possible things in the world, so are the different colors.

72 The essence of Joseph
Likewise, (regarding) whoever among us who assumes his reality (mutaÎaqqiq) through the Real, the form of the Real appears in him more intensively than
it appears in others. The Real becomes the hearing, the sight, and all the faculties
and organs of some among us through signs which religion conveys about the
Real. Despite this,18 the essence of the shadow exists, for the pronoun “his” (in
his hearing – samÝuhu) refers back to the Real as a shadow, and other servants (of
God) do not gain such a position.19 The relationship of such a servant to the existence of the Real is closer than the relationship of other servants to this (existence).
If the matter is as we have established, know that you are imagination and all
that you perceive; that is, for example, your statement about imagination that “I
am not” (imagination) is imagination. All existence is imagination within imagination. The only true existence is God, especially as regards His Essence and
Reality, and not as regards His names, because His names have two meanings, the
first is His Essence, the Essence of the named (God), and the second is that which
the name indicates, that is, what distinguishes a name from another. There is a
great difference between the Forgiving on the one hand and the Manifest and the
Hidden on the other, the same with regard to the First and the Last. This becomes
clear to you through (the notion that) each name is identical to another in essence
and through (the notion that) each name differs from another. With respect to the
Essence, each name is the Real, and with respect to the otherness, it is the imagined Real (al-Îaqq al-mutakhayyal) which concerns us.
Glory be to Him who has no sign pointing to Him but Himself and whose being
is proved only through His Essence. Only that to which God’s Unity points exists
in the cosmos, and only multiplicity points to that which exists in the imagination.
Whoever adheres to multiplicity stays with the cosmos, the divine names, and the
names of the cosmos. And whoever adheres to God’s Unity stays with the Real
with respect to His Essence, which dispenses with all things (ÝÁlamÐn). If God’s
Essence dispenses with all things, this is (105) the Essence’s dispensing with the
names connected to it, because just as the names point to the Essence, so they
point to other named entities which are ascertained by their effects. “Say, this is
God (allÁh), He is one” (QurÞÁn 112:1) with respect to His Essence, “God who is
sought by all” (al-Òamad, ibid., 2) with respect to our reliance on Him, “He did not
beget” (ibid., 3) with respect to His Ipseity and to us, “and He was not begotten”
(ibid.) “and has no equal” (ibid., 4), also with respect to His Ipseity and to us. This
is His qualification, and He singled out His Essence saying, “God is one,” and the
multiplicity appeared through His qualities which are known to us. We beget and
are begotten and rely on Him, and we are equal one to another. This Unique Entity
is free of these qualities and dispenses with them just as He dispenses with us. The
Real has no lineage except (that which is said) in this sÙra, the sÙra of purification
18 Despite the fact that the tradition (See p. 24 above) speaks of God, it refers to the
shadow.
19 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to say that these shadows, hearing, sight, etc., are produced in the
human being when God’s light illuminates His attributes of the All-Hearing and the
All-Seeing, thus producing shadows of these attributes in the human being.

The essence of Joseph 73
from multiplicity (ikhlÁÒ); for this purpose it was revealed.20 God’s Unity with
respect to the divine names which require us (our existence) is the Unity of many
(aÎadiyyat al-kathra), and God’s unity with respect to His dispensing with us and
with the names is the Unity of the Essence (aÎadiyyat al-Ýayn). The name One
applies to both kinds of unity. Know this!
The Real brought the shadows into existence and made them prostrate and cast
themselves to the right and to the left, only to (serve) as signs for you, indicating
your existence and His.21 That way you can know yourself and your relationship
to Him and His relationship to you. Also (God brought the shadows into existence) to let you know from where or from what divine reality all that is other than
the Real is described through absolute need for God and through relative need
for each other, and to let you know from where or from what reality the Real
is described as one who dispenses with people and with all things, whereas the
(things in the) cosmos sometimes need others with respect to their essence and
sometimes not. (All things in) the cosmos essentially need causes. The greatest
cause for them is the Real, whose causality is embodied in the divine names which
all things need. The divine names mean each name which the things are in need
of (106), that is, things of the cosmos or the Essence of the Real, which is God, no
other. For this reason God said: “People, you are needful of God, and God does
not need you, He is the Praised” (QurÞÁn 35:15). It is well known that we need
each other. Hence, our names are His, for without doubt we need Him. Actually,
our essences are His shadow, and nothing else. He is at the same time our ipseity
and not our ipseity. We have paved the way for you, so contemplate!

20 This chapter of the QurÞÁn denies of God any connection to the cosmos.
21 This is a paraphrase of QurÞÁn 16:48.

10 The bezel of the wisdom of unity1
exists in the essence of HÙd

(106) The Straight Path2 belongs to God/It is universally manifest not hidden
His Essence exists in young and old people/in the ignorant and in the knower
For this reason, His Mercy encompasses/everything3 be it despicable or exalted
“There is no creature (dabba) which He does not seize its forelock.4 Verily,
my Lord acts according to a straight path” (QurÞÁn 11:56). Every moving creature walks according to God’s Straight Path. Those (who walk according to the
Straight Path) are not the object of God’s anger in this respect, nor do they go
astray.5 Just as going astray is accidental, so is the divine wrath, and (all things) go
back to God’s Mercy which encompasses everything and precedes (His Wrath).6
All things other than God are creatures, because they possess a spirit.7 There is
nothing that moves by virtue of itself, but everything moves by virtue of another.
Each thing moves according to God’s Straight Path, which serves as a path only
by walking according to it (literally: on it).
If creation submits to you/the Real submits to you
And if the Real submits to you/creation may not follow (Him in submission)
Hence, ascertain what we say concerning Him/for all my saying is true
(107) There is no existent that you see in the cosmos/which does not speak
Nor is there a creation seen by the eyes/but its essence is the Real
The Real is deposited in creation/for this reason, the forms of creation are His.
1 Unity (aÎadiyya) denotes God as an entity which cannot accept manyness. It is the pure
one, the ineffable Essence. Yahya, “Theophanies and Lights,” pp. 35f. However, Ibn
al-ÝArabi, as we have seen partly, distinguishes between God’s Unity, which designates
His transcendence and God with respect to His attributes and names. In this chapter he
discusses the third kind of God’s Unity, that is, the divine acts, which are the outcome
of the second kind of unity.
2 Al-ÑirÁÔ al-mustaqÐm appears for the first time in QurÞÁn 1:6.
3 A paraphrase of QurÞÁn7:156.
4 By this phrase the author means that God directs every creature.
5 A paraphrase of QurÞÁn 1:7.
6 A paraphrase of BukhÁrÐ 7553 which reads “My Mercy precedes My Wrath” (sabaqat
raÎmatÐ ghadabÐ).
7 According to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, everything in the cosmos has a spirit, including inanimate
things, because they are manifestations of God’s names and as such partake in God’s
life. SDG, pp. 81–86. SPK, p. 302.

The essence of HÙd 75
Know that the divine experiential sciences (al-ÝulÙm al-ilÁhiyya al-dhawqiyya)
which the People of God experience are different by virtue of the difference of the
faculties from which these experiences derive, although they go back to one Essence.8
That is because God says: “I have been his hearing by which he hears, his seeing by
which he sees, his hand by which he seizes, and his foot by which he walks.”9 God
points out that His Essence (huwiyya) is the essence of the human being’s organs,
which is the essence of the servant. However, the essence is one, while the organs
are many. Each organ possesses an experiential science peculiar to that organ. Each
science originates in one essence, but differs in accordance with a specific organ. This
is like water, which possesses one essence, but differs in taste according to its place.
Some water is sweet and fresh and some is salty and bitter;10 however, it is water in all
its states and its essence does not change, even if its tastes vary.
This wisdom pertains to the science of “feet,” for as God says concerning the
nourishment of those who uphold His scriptures: “And from below” (literally:
from beneath their feet – QurÞÁn 5:66).11 For the way, which is the (Straight)
Path, means something to be traveled along and walked on, and walking is done
only on foot. This witnessing (shuhÙd) concerning the seizing of the forelocks by
the one who is on the Straight Path (God) produces only this particular kind of
experiential sciences. “And We12 shall drive the sinners” (QurÞÁn 19:86), those
who deserve the station to which He will drive them by the wind, which pushes
them from behind. He will destroy them by this wind, because of (the sins) of
their souls. He will seize their forelocks, while the wind is driving them – what
drives them is their desires to which they cling – to the Hell, which is the distance
(between them and God) imagined by them.
(108) Since He drives them to this place, they attain the essence of nearness
to Him, for the distance disappears, and the term Hell no longer applies to them.
They attain the grace of nearness, because being sinners they deserve it.13 He does
not give them this pleasurable experiential station as a gift. They take it, only
because they deserve it owing to their acts. In carrying out their acts they are on
the Lord’s Straight Path, for their forelocks are at the hands of the one who has
this attribute (of seizing forelocks). They do not walk by themselves but under
compulsion until they reach the essence of nearness to Him. “We are nearer to him
(to a dying person) than you, but you (his relatives) do not know” (literally: do

8 God has all kinds of experiences which He bestows on people, each in keeping with the
predisposition of the individual.
9 See above p. 24.
10 Cf. QurÞÁn 35:12.
11 QurÞÁn 5:66 reads: “If they had upheld the Torah and the Gospel and what was sent
down to them from their Lord, they would have been given abundance from above and
from below: some of them are on the right course, but many of them – how evil is what
they do!” (trans. AH).
12 The text in Affifi’s edition reads: wa-yasÙqu (he drives), which seems to be an error. In
KÁshÁnÐ’s and SharÎ’s text, the word nasÙqÙ appears as in the QurÞÁn.
13 The paradox here is that even the evildoers, who suffer in Hell, come near to God.
SharÎ, pp. 138f.

76

The essence of HÙd

not see; QurÞÁn 56:85). Only the dying person knows, for the veil is removed, and
“his knowledge (literally: his sight) is sharp” (QurÞÁn 50:22).14 The QurÞÁn does
not single out one dying person from another; that is, it does not single out a happy
(saÝÐd) from an unhappy (shaqÐ) person with respect to nearness (to God). “We are
nearer to him than his jugular vein” (QurÞÁn 50:16). The QurÞÁn does not single
out one person from another. The divine nearness to the human being is not hidden in the divine message. Nothing is closer to the human being than his organs
and faculties, and the human being constitutes only his organs and faculties, for
he is an attested reality (Îaqq mashhÙd) in an imagined creation. The believers
and people of unveiling and finding (ahl al-kashf wa’l-wujÙd) hold that creation
is intelligible and the Real is sensible and perceivable; (however), others except
these two groups hold that the Real is intelligible and creation is perceivable. The
latter are like salty and bitter water, while the former are like sweet and pleasant
water, tasty to drink.
People are divided into two groups: a. those who walk on a way they know
and whose aim they cognize, and this way is with respect to them a straight path;
and b. those who walk on a way they do not know and whose aim is not cognized
by them. This way is the same as that known to the first group. The knower calls
God out of knowledge (ÝalÁ baÒÐra),15 while the one who does not know calls God
out of uncritical belief (taqlÐd) (109) and ignorance. This is a specific knowledge
which comes from the lowest of the low (asfal sÁfilÐn),16 for the feet are the lowest parts of the human being, and lower still is the way beneath the feet. Whoever
knows that the Real is the essence of the way, truly knows reality, for in Him you
walk and travel, because there is no known object but He. He is both the essence
of existence and the walker and the traveler. There is no knower but He, and who
are you? Know your reality and your way, for reality became clear to you through
the tongue of the Transmitter (turjumÁn),17 if you understand. He is the true (Îaqq)
tongue, and only the one whose understanding is true understands Him, for the
Real (al-Îaqq) has many relations and various aspects.
Do you not think of ÝÀd, the people of HÙd, and how “they said: ‘This cloud
will give us rain’” (QurÞÁn 46:24. trans. AH)? They think well of the Lord, Who
appears as the human being thinks of Him. The Real made them turn away from
this saying and informed them of something more complete and exalted concerning nearness (to Him). For, when He gave them rain, which is the share of the
earth, and watered the seed, they attained the fruit of this rain only after a long
time. Therefore He said to them: “No indeed! It is what you wanted to hasten: a
(hurricane) wind bearing a painful punishment” (ibid., trans. AH). He made the
wind (rÐÎ) an allusion of the comfort (rÁÎa) which is therein, for through this wind

14 The whole verse reads: “You paid no attention to this (Day); but today we have removed
your veil and your sight is sharp.” By Day the QurÞÁn means the Resurrection.
15 For this phrase, see QurÞÁn 12:108.
16 This idiom appears in QurÞÁn 95:5.
17 The Transmitter is MuÎammad. See pp. 15, 22, 66.

The essence of HÙd 77
He released them (arÁÎahum)18 from the darkness of their bodies (literally: temples hayÁkil), from the rough roads and from the deep darkness. In this wind there
is ÝadhÁb, that is, something they find sweet when they taste it, although it causes
them pain, because they are unaccustomed to it. The punishment touched them
and was nearer to them than anything they had imagined. By God’s command the
wind destroyed everything and “in the morning there was nothing to see except
their (ruined) dwellings” (ibid., 25., trans. AH), which are their dead bodies in
which their essential spirits lived. The firm and special relationship (between the
spirits and their bodies) disappeared and the life characteristic of the bodies (without spirits) remained in their bodies, that is, the Real made the skin, hands, feet,
tips of the lashes, and the thighs to express (themselves).19 The divine text attests
to all this.20
However, God describes Himself as Other (or Jealous),21 and because of His
otherness (jealousy) He “forbade (110) disgraceful deeds (or excesses fawÁÎish)”
(QurÞÁn 7:33). FaÎsh is only what is manifest. As for the faÎsh of the unmanifest,
it is possessed by the one for whom it is manifest.22 Hence, God forbade excesses,
that is, prevented people from knowing the reality which we mentioned, meaning
that He is the Essence of things. He concealed the reality through His otherness
(ghayra), which stems from (the word) other (ghayr). Actually, He is identical to
you (wa-huwa anta). The other says that hearing belongs only to Zayd, whereas
the gnostic says that hearing is the Essence of the Real and so are other faculties
and organs.23 Not everyone knows the Real; people surpass each other, and their
ranks are different, so it becomes clear who is most excellent (fÁÃil) and who is
excellent (mafÃÙl).24
Know that when the Real made me see and witness his human messengers
and prophets themselves, from Adam to MuÎammad, in a location of witnessing
(mashhad) where I was placed in Cordova in the year 586 (AH), no one in this
group spoke to me except HÙd. He informed me of the reason for their assembly.
I saw him as a big man in relation to other men, handsome, who conversed in
a subtle way, one who knows and reveals things. My proof of his (faculty) of
revealing is his saying: “There is no creature (dabba) which He does not seize its
forelock. Verily, my Lord acts according to a straight path” (QurÞÁn 11:56).

18 RÐÎ, rÁÎa, and arÁÎa originate in the root r.w.Î.
19 Even the inanimate body has a certain kind of life.
20 See QurÞÁn 41:20, 21.
21 He is jealous of His existence, claiming that only He really exists.
22 The notion that excesses whether manifest or unmanifest refer to the same object is
based on the verse noted above.
23 The other, who regards himself as different from God, ascribes Zayd’s hearing to Zayd
himself, ignoring the truth, known by the gnostic, that Zayd’s hearing is identical to
God’s Essence. Here the author alludes to the tradition of the supererogatory works. See
above p. 24.
24 MafÃÙl is exactly one-who-is-known-to-be-excelled by others. These two terms are
usually employed in discussions on the Imamate. B. Abrahamov, “Al-¬Ásim ibn
IbrÁhÐm’s Theory of the Imamate,” Arabica 34 (1987), p. 89.

78

The essence of HÙd

What good news for people is better than this? God bestowed on us His favor
when he brought HÙd’s statement in the QurÞÁn. MuÎammad, who embraced everything, completed HÙd’s saying by telling us about the Real who is the essence of
(our) hearing and seeing, and of (our) hands, feet, and tongue, meaning He is the
essence of our senses. The spiritual faculties are nearer (to the human being) than
the senses, therefore God contented Himself with the more distant faculties that
can be defined, rather than the nearer faculties that cannot be defined. The Real
transmitted (tarjama)25 HÙd’s statement as good tidings to us, and God’s messenger transmitted from God HÙd’s statement also as good tidings. Thus, knowledge became perfect in the hearts of those who received it. “Only the unbelievers
(or those who conceal – al-kÁfirÙn)26 deny Our signs” (QurÞÁn 29:47). That is
because they concealed the signs, even if they knew them, out of envy, rivalry,27
and injustice (Ûulm). We consider what comes to us from God concerning God in
a QurÞÁnic verse or in another kind of transmission which He delivered for us only
in terms of limitation, whether limited by transcendence (tanzÐh) or any other kind
of characterization.
(111) The first limitation is the Cloud (ÝamÁÞ) which has no air above or beneath
it.28 The Real came to be in it before He created the creation. Then He said that
He “Sat Himself upon the Throne” (QurÞÁn 7:54, trans. Arberry), which is also a
limitation. He then said that He descends to the lower heaven, which is yet another
limitation.29 He also said that He is in the heaven and on the earth,30 and that He is
with us wherever we are,31 until He informed us that He is our essence.32 We are
limited; therefore, He can describe Himself only in terms of limitation. And His
saying “There is nothing like Him (ka-mithlihi)” (QurÞÁn 42:11) is also a limitation, if we regard the kÁf as redundant and not descriptive. That which is distinguished from the limited thing is itself limited, because of its being distinct from
the limited thing. Being free of limitation is limitation, and one who understands
(knows that) the free (the unlimited) thing is limited by its freedom. If we regard
kÁf as a particle for description, we limit Him.33 If we understand by “There is
nothing like Him” the denial of comparison (of God to others), we verify the true
sense and the correct information that He is the essence of things, and the things
25 For this verb as designating transmission, see above, pp. 15, 22, 66, 76.
26 For kafara in the meaning of “he concealed,” see above, p. 42f.
27 Read munÁfasa instead of nafÁsa.
28 This sentence is based on a ÎadÐth (TirmidhÐ, 3109) translated in SPK (p. 125) as
follows: The Prophet was asked: “Where (ayn) did your Lord come to be (kÁn) before
He created the creatures (al-khalq)?” He replied: “He came to be in a cloud, neither
above which nor below which was any air (hawÁÞ).” For more references to this
tradition, see SPK, p. 397, n. 1.
29 For a detailed discussion of this tradition (BukhÁrÐ, 1145), see Ibn Taymiyya, SharÎ
ÎadÐth al-nuzÙl, ed. MuÎammad ÝAbd al-RaÎmÁn al-KhamÐs, Al-RiyÁÃ 1993.
30 Cf. QurÞÁn 43:84.
31 Cf. QurÞÁn 57:4.
32 He might refer here to the tradition of the supererogatory acts. See above, p. 24.
33 Ka-mithilih is identical to mithl mithlihi, meaning that there is nothing like His image;
that is, He has an image, but this image is different from other images.

The essence of HÙd 79
are limited, even if their limitations are different. He is limited by the limitation
of every limited thing. A thing is limited only by the limitation of the Real. He
permeates that which is called the created and the produced things, and were it not
the case, existence would not come to be. He is the Essence of existence and He is
“the preserver of everything” (QurÞÁn 11:57, 34:21) by His Essence; the preservation of everything “does not weary Him” (QurÞÁn 2:255). His preservation of all
things means His preservation of His form lest the thing assume a different form,
which is inconceivable. He is both witness and witnessed. The cosmos is His
form, and He is the spirit of the cosmos and directs it, and He is the Great Man
(Macrocosm).
He is all being/and the one by whose
Being I came to be/therefore I say He feeds
My existence is His nourishment/and we assume His form
In Him and from Him, if you observe from a certain aspect/we seek refuge.34
(112) Because of this anxiety (karb), He sighed, and His breath was attributed
to the Merciful, for He had mercy on that which the divine relations require, that
is, bringing the forms of the cosmos into existence. These forms are both the
manifest and the unmanifest aspects of the Real, because He is both the Manifest
and the Unmanifest (the Hidden). He is the First, because He existed without the
forms, and He is the Last, because He was the Essence of things when they came
to be. The Last is the essence of the Manifest, and the Unmanifest is the essence
of the First.35 And “He knows all things absolutely” (QurÞÁn 57:3), for He knows
Himself. Since He brought the forms into existence in the Breath and the rule of
the relations (between the Real and the cosmos), that is, the Names, was manifest,
the divine relationship to the cosmos was established, and all things were attributed to Him. He (MuÎammad) said: “This day I lowered your pedigree and raised
my pedigree”;36 that is, I took from you your attribution to yourselves and turned
your attribution to Me.
Where are the God-fearing (muttaqÙn), that is, those who took their God as
protection (wiqÁya)?37 God was their manifest aspect, that is, the Essence of their
manifest forms. The God-fearing person is the greatest, the most deserving (of
this name), and the strongest in the eyes of all people. The God-fearing is the one
who makes himself a protection for God through his form, because the Essence
of the Real is the faculties of the servant. He made the one called the servant as a
protection for the one called the Real on the basis of witness, so that the knower is
distinguished from the ignorant. “Say, are those who know equal to those who do
not know? Only the intelligent remember” (QurÞÁn 39:9). The intelligent are those

34 Existence is compared here to nourishment which comes from God. With respect to the
notion that God is the Essence of all things, when one asks for refuge in God, one is
actually asking for refuge from Him.
35 In view of the cosmos He is the Manifest; however, without the cosmos, He is the
Unmanifest.
36 I could not find the source of this statement.
37 MuttaqÙn and wiqÁya derive from the same root, w.q.y.

80

The essence of HÙd

who contemplate the core of the thing, which is what is sought (in order to know
the thing). The negligent cannot overcome the diligent; likewise, the hireling cannot be compared with the servant. If the Real is a protection for the servant38 from
one aspect, and vice versa from another, then say of Being what you will: if you
want, say it is the creation, and if you want, say it is the Real, and if you want,
say it is the Real and the creation, and if you want, say there is neither real nor
creation from every aspect, and if you want, you will hold perplexity in this matter. By establishing levels (of being), that which you seek becomes clear. If (the
messengers) had not defined existence, they would not have conveyed the transformation of the Real into forms, nor would they have described Him as removing
the forms from Himself.
(113) The eye looks only at Him/and one judges only Him
We (belong) to Him, (live) by Him and under His rule/and in every state we
are in His presence
As a consequence, He is unknown and known, indescribable and describable.
Whoever sees the Real from His standpoint (minhu), in Him (fÐhi) and through
Him (bi-Ýaynihi), is a knower (ÝÁrif). Whoever sees the Real from His standpoint,
in Him, but through his own eyes, does not know.39 And whoever does not see the
Real from His standpoint, nor in Him, expecting to see Him through his own eyes,
is ignorant. To sum up, each individual must have a belief (iÝtiqÁd) regarding his
Lord through which he turns to Him and seeks Him. If the Real reveals Himself to
him within this belief, he acknowledges Him. But if He reveals Himself in another
belief, then he is denying Him, seeking refuge against Him, and behaving badly
toward Him, while simultaneously thinking that he is behaving properly. Such a
believer only believes in a god which he created in himself, for a god of beliefs
is created (in thought). Such believers see only themselves and what they create
in themselves.
Observe! The levels of people regarding the knowledge of God are the same
levels concerning the seeing of God in the Resurrection. I have informed you
of the reason which entails this. Beware of limiting yourself by a specific belief
(Ýaqd)40 and disbelieving in everything else lest you miss much good; moreover,
you will miss knowing of things as they really are.41 Be in yourself primal matter, receptive to all forms of belief, for God is too vast and great to be confined
by one belief rather than another.42 For this reason, He said: “Wherever you turn
there is the face of God” (QurÞÁn 2:115); He did not mention one place rather than
another. He mentioned that there is the face of God, and the face of a thing is its
essence (ÎaqÐqa, or reality). By this He turned the attention of the gnostics’ hearts
lest events of this world should distract them from applying their minds to (God’s

38 The text has li-l-Îaqq, which is an error.
39 When the human being sees God with God’s seeing, he is a gnostic. This idea is based
on the tradition of the supererogatory works mentioned above. See p. 24 above.
40 Literally: knot.
41 The knowledge of things as they really are is the aim of the philosophers.
42 Chittick, Imaginal Worlds, p. 176.

The essence of HÙd 81
omnipresence), for the servant does not know in which breath he will be taken
(die); he may be taken at a time of inattentiveness, and thus will be unequal to the
one taken at a time of attentiveness.
Also, the perfect servant (114), notwithstanding his knowledge (of God’s
omnipresence), must, from the standpoint of the external form and the limited
state, turn his face in prayer toward the Holy Mosque and believe that God is there
at prayer time. This is one of the levels (of the presence) of the Real’s face, which
derives from “Wherever you turn there is the face of God” (ibid.). The direction
toward the Holy Mosque is part of (this verse), and in this direction God’s face
exists. However, do not say that He is only here, but adhere to the two notions you
perceived, these being, embrace the rule of directing your face toward the Holy
Mosque and abide by the rule of not limiting God’s presence to specific buildings,
which are only some of the many directions to which one can turn.
Through God it became clear to you that He is in every direction wherever
one’s belief is. Hence everyone is right (in his belief), and whoever is right is
rewarded, and whoever receives reward is happy, and God is pleased with the
happy individual, even if he is unhappy for some time in the world to come. For
even the people of Providence43 are sick and suffer pain in this world, although
we know that they are the happy persons among the people of the Real. Among
God’s servants are those who will suffer pain in the next world in an abode called
Hell (jahannam).44 Despite this, none of the people of knowledge, those who were
made to reveal things as they really are, will say with certainty that the happy
persons will not enjoy a specific delight in this abode, either by freeing them from
pains, and thus their delight will be relief from pain, or they will enjoy a separate45
and additional delight as the delight of the people of Paradise in Paradise. And
God knows best.

43 That is, those whom God takes care of.
44 I cannot be sure of what or who Ibn al-ÝArabÐ is hinting at by telling us that some of
God’s servants will suffer in the world to come. Is he saying pain will follow them for
their sins?
45 This is a delight which is not connected to the relief of pain.

11 The bezel of the wisdom of opening1
exists in the essence of ÑÁliÎ

(115) Among His signs are the (riders) on mounts/because of the variety of paths
Some adhere to the true course/and others travel (as in) the desert without aim
The former are eyewitnesses/while the latter go astray
Both receive from God/revelations of mysteries from every side2
Know, may God grant you success, that in their essences all things are built
on unevenness, which begins with number three and beyond that.3 The first uneven number is three. From the divine presence the cosmos came into existence.
Therefore, God said: “When We will a thing (to be), We only say to it ‘be’ and it
comes into being” (QurÞÁn 16:40). This is an essence, which possesses will and
speech. If this essence and its will, which constitutes a specific turning toward a
thing aiming at making it exist, and the saying “be” in this process did not exist,
the thing would not exist. Also the tripartite unevenness appears in this thing.
With respect to the thing itself, its existence and description as an existent are
valid because of three (elements): its quality of being a thing (shayÞiyya), its (quality of) hearing (samÁÝ), and its (quality of) obedience to the originator’s command.
Compare the first three with the last three: The fixed entity of the thing in its state
of absence corresponds to the Essence of its bringer into existence; the hearing of
this entity, to the will of its originator; and, its obedience to the command of its
originator, to the latter’s saying “be,” and so brings it into existence. Bringing into
being is ascribed to the thing, for if it had no power of bringing into being, when
hearing this saying, it would not come into being. On hearing the command, only
the essence of the thing brings it into existence, after its non-existence. Thus, the
Real affirms that (116) bringing into being pertains to the thing itself and not to
the Real, while the Real in this (process) only commands.4 He so informs about
1 Opening is equivalent to unveiling or to all kinds of God’s self-manifestation. Chittick,
“Chapter Headings,” pp. 21f; SPK, pp. 222–224.
2 The riders here are individuals who travel in the ways of life. Some of them know their
way and others go astray. Both groups receive signs from God, which can teach them
about Him and the cosmos.
3 “One” is not considered a number; hence, the first uneven number is three.
4 According to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, the thing exists in the state of a fixed entity, which can be
embodied and becomes a concrete object at God’s command. In fact, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ
interprets this verse in a plain manner, because the QurÞÁn speaks of a thing’s existence

The essence of ÒÁliÎ 83
Himself in his saying: “When We will a thing (to be), We only say to it ‘be’ and
it comes into being” (ibid.). He (the Real) attributes the bringing into being to the
thing itself as a result of God’s command, and He speaks the truth. In principle,
it is reasonable, just as the one feared and obeyed orders his servant to stand, and
he stands in submission to his master’s command. The master only orders the
servant to stand; however, standing is the outcome of the servant’s activity, and
not the master’s.5 Thus, bringing into being rests on the tripartite principle – three
elements from both sides, from the Real and from creation.
Also, the tripartite principle permeates the origination of notions by way of
logical proofs. A proof should be composed of three (parts) in accordance with a
specific order and condition(s). Only in this way is a result reached. The contemplator (nÁÛir) composes his proof of two premises, each containing two parts,6 so
that there are four parts. One of these four parts is repeated in the two premises so
as to link the first premise to the second, like in a marriage;7 hence, there are three
(different) parts, because of the repetition of one part.
When this procedure takes place in accordance with the specific aspect, that is,
the connection of the first premise with the second through the repetition of one
part, thus validating the tripartite structure, one arrives at the conclusion (literally:
what one seeks, al-maÔlÙb). (As a) specific condition, the predicate of the first
premise must be more general than its subject or equal to it.8 In this case the conclusion will be valid, otherwise it is invalid. Such faulty procedure can be found in
the world. For example, the ascription of one’s acts to oneself without connecting
them to God, or attributing the bringing into being, of which we speak, to God
alone, while the Real attributes it only to the thing to which God says “be.”
For example, if we wish to prove that the existence of the world is caused,
we shall say everything that comes into being (ÎÁdith) has a cause (sabab), thus
we have the thing that comes into being and the cause.9 Then we say (117) in the
second premise: the world comes into being, so “comes into being” is repeated
in both premises. The conclusion is that the world has a cause. The cause, which

5
6
7
8

9

before its concrete existence; the command is turned to a thing, which means that it has
some kind of existence. This plain meaning supports Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s theory of the fixed
entities.
This is not a very accurate example, because the servant exists concretely, while things
only exist in the Real’s thought as fixed entities. However, it does bear witness to the
aspect of the obedience to the command which inheres in the servant.
For example, the two parts are the subject and predicate.
Probably in this context he means the connection between male and female, who have
something in common.
I follow here the examples given in Affifi’s commentary (p. 136): 1. Every animal is a
body; 2. The human being is an animal; 3. Therefore, the human being is a body. In this
example the predicate (body) is more general than its subject (every animal), because a
body may also refer to inanimate things. In the second example the predicate is equal to
the subject: 1. Every animal is sensitive; 2. The human being is an animal; 3. Therefore,
the human being is sensitive.
This is the first premise in which “everything that comes into being” is the subject and
“cause” is the predicate.

84

The essence of ÒÁliÎ

appears in the first premise, is reiterated in the conclusion. The specific aspect is
the repetition of “comes into being,” while the specific condition is the generality
of the predicate, for it makes that which comes into being exist.10 Regarding the
coming of the world into being from God, the predicate is general. We affirm that
everything that comes into being (subject) has a cause (predicate), whether this
cause is equal to or more general than its subject. In both cases the conclusion is
valid. Thus, also in the origination of ideas through proofs the tripartite principle
is manifest.
Hence, the foundation of Being is tripartite in principle. For this reason, God
manifested the wisdom of ÑÁliÎ in postponing the punishment of his people for
three days as a true threat,11 which finally became real, and this is the cry by
which God destroyed them, “so that they fell down in their homes” (QurÞÁn 7:78,
11:67). On the first of the three days their faces became yellow, on the second
red, and on the third black.12 When the third day passed, their predisposition was
appropriate, and then decay appeared in them, and this appearance was called
destruction. The yellowing of the faces of the miserable parallels the shining of
the faces of the happy, as in his saying “On that Day some faces will be shining (musfira)” (QurÞÁn 80:38). (The word musfira) originates in sufÙr, meaning
manifestation (ÛuhÙr). (This sign) corresponds to the yellowing of the faces of
the people of ÑÁliÎ on the first day in which the sign of their misery appeared.
Likewise, in parallel to the redness that appeared in their faces, God said of the
happy “laughing” (ibid., 39), for laughter causes redness of the face, and for
the happy it is the redness of the cheeks. And finally, as a counterpart to the
transformation of the skins of the miserable to black, God said “rejoicing” (ibid.,
mustabshira), meaning the impact (118) of joyfulness on their skins as blackness
had impact on the skins of the miserable. For this reason, He applied the word
“tidings” (bushrÁ) to both parties; that is, what He said to them affected their skin
(bashara),13 and His words caused their skin to color in a way which described
their faces differently than before. Regarding the happy, He said: “Their Lord
gives them glad tidings of His mercy and pleasure” (QurÞÁn 9:21), while regarding the miserable, He said: “Give them tidings of a painful punishment” (QurÞÁn
3:21). The two kinds of announcements influenced the souls of both groups and
in turn the color of their skins.
That which was manifest in their outward appearance derived from the notion
already established in their souls. Nothing affected them but themselves, just as
their origination derived from themselves. “God possesses the conclusive argument” (QurÞÁn 6:149).
Whoever understands this wisdom, establishing it in his soul as witness,
releases himself from dependence on others and knows that the good and evil that

10 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses the term Ýilla in two meanings: a predicate and a cause.
11 QurÞÁn 11:65,
12 Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr al-qurÞÁn al-ÝaÛÐm, Beirut 1970, Vol. I I I, p. 192 (QurÞÁn 7:73–78).
13 BushrÁ and bashara have the same root, b.sh.r.

The essence of ÒÁliÎ 85
befall him come only from himself.14 By good I mean what fits his aims and tallies with his nature and temperament, and by evil I mean the opposite. Whoever
witnesses this (wisdom) ascribes all excuses to the existents themselves, even if
they make no excuse, knowing that all that befalls one derives from oneself, for
as we have mentioned before, knowledge follows the known object. Thus, he says
to himself when something that does not fit his aim befalls him: “Your hands did
it and your mouth breathed.” And God speaks the truth and guides (people) to the
(right) way (QurÞÁn 33:4).

14 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ ignores the self-contradiction in his thought, because in the last analysis
God alone establishes the fixed entities that determine the physical and the spiritual
constitution of the human being. Thus, actually the human being is not responsible for
what suits his constitution, because the latter was already established by God.

12 The bezel of the wisdom of the heart1
exists in the essence of ShuÝayb

(119) Know that the heart – I mean the heart of the knower of God (the gnostic –
ÝÁrif) – derives from God’s Mercy, but is more encompassing (awsaÞ) than Mercy,
because the heart encompasses the Real, while His Mercy does not.2 Most scholars3 hold this notion, pointing out that the Real has mercy on (people), but is not
the object of mercy.
As for the elite, they point out that God describes Himself as breath (nafas), a
word derived from exhalation (tanfÐs). (Also they state) that the divine names are
identical to the entity named, that is, God. These names require the realities they
bestow, and the realities which they require are none but the cosmos. Divinity
(ulÙhiyya) requires worshipers, while Lordship (rubÙbiyya) requires servanthood,
because the essence of both Divinity and Lordship depends on worshipers and servanthood for its concrete and assumed existence. However, the Real with respect
to His Essence (dhÁt) needs nothing, (whereas in contrast) to Lordship this notion
(the Essence) does not apply. Thus, the matter remains (as something) between
what Lordship requires and what the Essence deserves, that is, its dispensing with
the cosmos.
Truly, Lordship is identical with the Essence. However, because things contradict each other by virtue of their relationships, the Real describes Himself in a tradition as the one who has mercy on His servants. The first breath which came forth
from Lordship is related to (the name) the Merciful (al-raÎmÁn), which brought
the cosmos into existence, the cosmos that Lordship in its reality and all the divine
names require. Regarding this aspect, it is proved that His Mercy encompasses

1 ShuÝayb means “branching out,” and this meaning is connected to the human heart.
First, the human heart’s many functions affect every part of the body, and second, the
heart is capable of changing and adopting various ideas. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,”
p. 23. Idem, “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Summary,” p. 25f. By the human heart, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ does not
mean a bodily organ, but rather a spiritual organ possessing mystical awareness. Izutsu,
Creation, p. 161.
2 The Real (al-Îaqq) denotes God in respect to His names and attributes, therefore His
Mercy pertains to the Real. From the standpoint of the Essence, His Mercy does not
encompass the Real. See below, n. 4.
3 See KÁshÁnÐ, p. 300.

The essence of ShuÝayb 87
everything, including the Real,4 and His Mercy is broader than the heart or similar
to it in broadness. (Here) the discussion of mercy and the heart finishes.
Also, you should know, as (120) stated in the ÑaÎÐÎ,5 the Real changes His
forms when He reveals Himself. Also, when the heart encompasses Him, it does
not encompass anything else with Him, and it is as if the Real filled the heart. This
means that when the heart looks at the Real when the latter reveals Himself to it,
it cannot look at other things. The gnostic’s heart is related to broadness, as AbÙ
YazÐd al-BisÔÁmÐ said: “Were the Throne and that which it contains multiplied one
hundred million times and placed in the corner of the gnostic’s heart, he would not
feel it.”6 Likewise al-Junayd said: “When the coming into being is linked to the eternal, no sign of it will remain.”7 How can a heart which contains the Eternal feel the
existence of the coming into being?8 If the forms of the Real’s self-manifestation
are diversified, the heart necessarily becomes wide or narrow in keeping with the
form of the divine self-manifestation, for the heart can contain only the form in
which the self-manifestation takes place. That is because the heart relates to the
gnostic or the perfect human being as the bezel of the ring relates to the seal (the
stone); the seal does not exceed the bezel, but it fits its measure and form, be it circular, square, hexagonal, octagonal, or any other form. This runs contrary to what
the Sufis (al-ÔÁÞifa) said, viz., that the Real manifests Himself according to the
measure of the servant’s predisposition. This is not true, for the servant manifests
himself to the Real in accordance with the form the Real manifests Himself to the
servant. To explain this issue, God has two ways of self-manifestation: concealed
(ghayb) and unconcealed (shahÁda). The concealed self-manifestation bestows the
heart with predisposition. This is the essential self-manifestation whose essence
is concealed; it is the ipseity which the Real deserves saying of Himself, “He”
(huwa). The term “He” belongs to Him always and forever.
When the heart possesses this predisposition, the unconcealed self-manifestation appears (121) in the sensible world and the heart sees the Real in the form
mentioned above. The Real bestows on the heart its predisposition, as said: “(Our
Lord) bestowed on everything (the form of) its creation” (QurÞÁn 20:50). Then He
removed the veil between Him and His servant, and he saw Him in the form of his
belief, which is the essence of his belief. Both the heart and the eye always witness only the form of belief vis-à-vis the Real. Thus, the heart contains the Real of
the belief, and the Real manifests Himself to the heart and hence the heart knows
Him. The eye sees only the Real of the belief. Quite evidently there are various

4 From the standpoint of the divine names, the Real too is given mercy by the essential
mercy. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 302.
5 The collection of traditions by al-BukhÁrÐ or Muslim.
6 FutÙÎÁt, Vol. I I I, pp. 540 (with a slight difference). Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and
the Sufis, pp. 46f. Very probably the Greatest Master speaks of the Perfect Human
Being who encompasses the Real’s attributes and hence everything. Izutsu, Creation,
pp. 162f. See p. 57 above
7 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, KitÁb al-bÁÞ, in MajmÙÝa, Vol. I, p. 463; idem, The TarjumÁn al-ashwÁq,
p. 90, n. 19; idem, al-TadbÐrÁt al-ilÁhiyya, p. 114, line 3.
8 Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 82f.

88 The essence of ShuÝayb
beliefs that whosoever restricts Him to his belief denies Him in other beliefs,
affirming His self-manifestation in the belief to which he restricts Him.9 Whoever
considers the Real without restriction does not deny Him, affirming Him in every
form He manifests Himself and devoting himself to the endless forms in which He
is manifest, for the forms of His self-manifestation have no end.
The same applies to the knowledge of God; no limit stops the knower at a
certain point (in this knowledge), but (on the contrary), he is always a knower
seeking to increase the knowledge of Him. “O my Lord, increase my knowledge”
(QurÞÁn 20:114); the matter has no end, from both sides.10
This is so when you say the Real and creation. However, if you consider His
saying “I am his foot with which he walks, his hand with which he seizes and
his tongue with which he speaks,” and other faculties and substrates, that is, the
organs, in which they are located, you will not separate (the Real from creation)
and you will say all things are the Real or creation. But, this is creation from one
standpoint and the Real from another, yet the Essence is one. The form of selfmanifestation is identical to the form of the one who receives this self-manifestation;
hence, one is at the same time that which is manifested and that for which manifestation is performed. Look how wonderful is God regarding His ipseity and His
relationship with the cosmos within the realities of His most beautiful names.
(122) Who is there and what is there/the “who” and the “what” are the same
Whoever generalizes Him, particularizes Him/and whoever particularizes
Him, generalizes Him
There is no essence but His/the light of His Essence is darkness
Whoever disregards this/will suffer anxiety
Only a servant who is anxious/knows what we said
“Surely in that there is a reminder for whoever has a heart (qalb)” (QurÞÁn
50:37), because he changes (taqallubihi)11 himself by way of various forms and
attributes. God did not say “for whoever has an intellect,” because the intellect
(Ýaql) means a limit and it restricts the matter to a single trait, and the reality denies
restriction in the cosmos. It is not a reminder to those who possess intellect, that
is, the people of beliefs (aÒÎÁb al-iÝtiqÁdÁt) who accuse each other of unbelief and
curse each other and “no one helps them” (QurÞÁn 3:22, 91). That is because the
god of one believer has no authority over the god of another believer. One who
adheres to a belief defends his belief, that is, what he believes regarding his god,
and another believer will not help him, and for this reason he has no impact on
his rival. Likewise, the rival receives no help from the god of his belief (because)

9 Takeshita, p. 117.
10 The matter has no end because the self-manifestations of the Real are endless; hence,
seeking knowledge of them has no end. Sells (“Garden,” p. 300) points out the double
function of this verse in this context: a. true knowledge always changes and increases;
and b. the repetition of the words “increase my knowledge” may release the Sufi from
being bound by his intellect.
11 The noun qalb and the verb taqallaba derive from the root q.l.b, which connotes change
and transformation. SPK, p. 106. Izutsu, Creation, pp. 163f.

The essence of ShuÝayb 89
“no one helps them” (ibid.). The Real denies the gods of beliefs the ability to help
each believer separately; those who are helped are all the people, who are also the
helpers.
In the eyes of the knower (or gnostic – ÝÁrif), the Real is the known
(al-maÝrÙf) which is never denied. The people of the known (ahl al-maÝrÙf)12 in
this world are the people of the known in the next world. For this reason, God says
“for whoever has a heart” (QurÞÁn 50:37), because he knows the change of the
Real in forms by his own change in shapes.13 Through his self, he knows God’s
self, and his self is not different from the Real’s ipseity. No thing of the Being,
at present or in the future, is other than the Real’s ipseity, but it is the essence of
His ipseity. (One who knows the Real through his self) is the knower (123), who
cognizes and affirms this form; however, this one is neither the knower nor the
one who cognizes; he is denied in this different form.14 This is the portion of whoever knows the Real through His self-manifestation and in witnessing the very
combination (of all things), and (this is proved) through His words “for whoever
has a heart” (QurÞÁn, ibid.) (meaning that the Real has) different forms when He
changes (things).
As for the people of belief, they are those who blindly followed (qalladÙ) the
reports of the prophets and the messengers regarding the Real. They are not those
who blindly follow the people of contemplation (aÒÎÁb al-afkÁr) who interpret the
reports (using rational) proofs. By those who blindly follow the messengers, God
means (those who) “listen attentively” (QurÞÁn, ibid.), because the divine reports
were given by the prophets. “Whoever listens attentively” means a witness who
calls attention to the presence of imagination and its use. Concerning good deeds
(iÎsÁn), the Prophet said: “You should worship God as if you see Him,”15 and God
is present in the direction of the one who prays, therefore the latter is a witness.
One who blindly follows a man of contemplation and is limited by him is not the
same as one who listens attentively, for the latter should be a witness of what we
have mentioned. When he is not a witness of what we have mentioned, he is not
the one meant in this verse. Those are the people about whom God said: “When
those who have been followed disown their followers” (QurÞÁn 2:166, trans. AH).
However, the messengers did not disown their followers. Hence, O my friend (yÁ
waliyya),16 verify what I have introduced to you in this wisdom of the heart.
As for the ascription of this wisdom to ShuÝayb, it is because this name contains
the (notion) of branching off (tashaÝÝub), meaning that its (wisdom’s) branches are
not limited, for each belief is a branch of wisdom, and wisdom is the totality of
12 It seems that this term is equivalent to ahl allÁh, the people of God, who are the best
mystics.
13 Izutsu, Creation, p. 165.
14 Because the forms are always changing, one cannot ascribe to the knower residence in
one station (maqÁm), and not in another. Hence, the true knower is in a station of no
station (maqÁm lÁ maqÁm). SPK, p. 376.
15 BukhÁrÐ, I I: 37 (50).
16 According to one of the manuscripts (Affifi, p. 123, n. 6), the letters y.a.w.l.y can be
corrected to create the word taÞwÐl.

90 The essence of ShuÝayb
all its branches, that is, the beliefs. When the veil is disclosed,17 (this wisdom)
will be manifested to everyone according to his belief. It might be manifested
contrary to one’s belief regarding God’s judgment. (This is proved by the following) verse: “(On the Day of Resurrection) God will show them what they did not
take into consideration” (QurÞÁn 39:47). Most cases (of not taking into consideration) pertain to God’s judgment. For example, the MuÝtazilite holds that God will
implement His threat on the transgressor (al-ÝÁÒÐ) if he dies without repentance.18
When he dies (124) and God has mercy on him, (it becomes evident) that God’s
providence has already established that the sinner will not be punished. (Thus),
the MuÝtazilite found God to be Forgiving and Merciful, and so God showed him
that which he did not take into consideration.
As for God’s ipseity, some people are absolutely certain that God is such and
such; however, when the veil is disclosed, they see that the form of their belief
is true and they believe in it. (In such a case) the knot (Ýuqda of belief) is untied,
and beliefs disappear and turn into knowledge which derives from revelation
(mushÁhada).19 After one’s sight is sharpened, its weakness does not recur. As
a result, God appears in the sight of some servants in various forms of self-manifestation contrary to their beliefs, because His self-manifestations do not repeat
themselves. They regard the appearance of His ipseity as true, (because) “God
will show them what they did not take into consideration” (QurÞÁn, ibid.) before
the removal of the veil.
We have mentioned the form of ascension after death (in the gradations) of the
divine knowledge in our Book of Revelations (KitÁb al-tajalliyÁt),20 wherein we
noted the Sufis we met in visions and the things they did not know of which we
informed them regarding this issue.21 One of the marvelous things concerning the
ascension is that the Sufi is always ascending without being aware of his ascension,
because of the subtlety and thinness of the veil and the likeness of the forms, as God
said: “They were supplied with something like it” (QurÞÁn 2:25, following AH).
One form is not the same as another, for the knower is aware of the fact that
they (the forms) are similar, (not identical), to each other, (and hence) different (from each other). He who verifies (ÒÁÎib al-taÎqÐq the divine realities)
sees multiplicity in the One, just as he knows that the divine names, although
their realities are many and different, apply to only one essence. With respect to
reason, there is multiplicity; however, it applies to one essence. Thus, in selfmanifestation, multiplicity is witnessed in one essence, just as Prime Matter
(hayÙlÁ) exists22 in everything, and Prime Matter, though having many and various forms, (125) is actually reduced to a single substance (jawhar).

17 In the world to come, one will be able to see the truth.
18 Abrahamov, Al-¬Ásim ibn IbrÁhÐm, pp. 48f, n. 290.
19 Literally: seeing.
20 In RasÁÞil ibn al-ÝarabÐ, Haydarabad 1942, no. 23.
21 See, for example, Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, p. 61.
22 Or Prime Matter “is found” (read tÙjadu [Affifi, I, p. 124, n. 6] instead of tÙÞkhadhu of
the text).

The essence of ShuÝayb 91
Thus, whoever knows himself (or his soul) through this knowledge knows his
Lord, because He created him in His image;23 moreover, he is the very ipseity and
reality of God. For this reason, none of the scholars have arrived at the knowledge
of the self (soul) and its reality except for the metaphysicians among the messengers and the Sufis.
As for the people of contemplation and discursive thinking among the
ancients and the speculative theologians (mutakallimÙn), in their discussion
of the self (soul) and its essence, none of them have achieved its reality; discursive discussion never provides this knowledge. Whoever seeks knowledge
of the self (soul) through discursive discussion overvalues this device and
uses it not in its proper place.24 Undoubtedly, they are among “those whose
efforts were in vain in this world, while they thought that they were doing
well” (QurÞÁn 18:104). Whoever seeks this knowledge through an improper
way will not arrive at its reality.
How beautiful is God’s saying regarding the cosmos and its (perpetual)
changes, because of His breaths “in a new creation” (QurÞÁn 50:15), in a single
essence. He said (this) about a single group, nay, about most people: “No, they
doubt a new creation” (ibid.).25 They do not know of the renewal of the cosmos’s
creation due to God’s breaths. However, the AshÝarites arrived at the notion of the
perpetual creation of some existents, that is, the accidents (aÝrÁÃ), and the Sophists
(al-ÎisbÁniyya)26 thought that the whole cosmos is created perpetually. All the
people of contemplation regarded them as ignorant.
However, both groups erred. In spite of the Sophists’ belief that the whole cosmos is always changing, their error lies in not ascribing these changes to a single
essence which brings the cosmos into existence and in not making the cosmos
intelligible through God. Had they held this notion, they would have attained the
rank of realization of the truth. As for the AshÝarites, they did not know that the
whole cosmos is an aggregation of accidents and that it is changing all the time,
for accidents do not endure two instants.27 This appears in (their) definition of
things, for when they define a thing it becomes manifest that it has accidents,28
23 See p. 37, n. 4 above; Sell, Mystical Languages, p. 245, n. 9; Masataka Takeshita, “The
Homo Imago Dei Motif and the Anthropocentric Metaphysics of Ibn ÝArabÐ in InshÁÞ
al-DawÁÞir, Orient 18(1982):111–128.
24 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses an idiom which reads: “whoever regards the swollen as fat
and exhales toward a thing which is not kindled” (istasmana dhÁ waram, wa-nafakha
fÐ ghayr Ãaram) (in order to intensify the fire), which means he makes an error in
judgment and uses an improper device.
25 T. Izutsu, “The Concept of Perpetual Creation in Islamic Mysticism and Zen Buddhism,”
in Izutsu, Creation, pp. 141–173.
26 KÁshÁnÐ, p. 316. The Sophists were so called because ÎisbÁn means conjecture. J. van
Ess, “Skepticism in Islamic Religious Thought,” Al-Abhath 21 (1968), p. 1.
27 Contrary to the AshÝarites, who believed that only the accidents are always changing
(al-BÁqillÁnÐ, KitÁb al-tamhÐd, pp. 15–21), Ibn al-ÝArabÐ held that the whole cosmos is
always in a state of fluctuation, not only the accidents, but also the atoms.
28 In the AshÝarite view, everything is composed of atoms (jawhar, pl. jawÁhir) and
accidents. The atoms are indivisible particles which do not differ from each other; they

92 The essence of ShuÝayb
(126) and that these accidents, which are mentioned in the definition, serve as the
essence of the atom and its reality. Every atom exists by virtue of itself (qÁÞim
bi-nafsihi). From the standpoint of its being an accident, a thing does not exist
by virtue of itself. From the aggregation of that which does not exist by virtue of
itself (accidents) comes that which does exist by virtue of itself.29 For example,
the atom, which exists by virtue of its essence, is defined as having the property of
occupying one place (taÎayyuz)30 and as having the property of being a substrate
for accidents, (and these two properties are) essential to its definition. No doubt,
receivability (qabÙl) is an accident, because it exists only in a recipient (qÁbil), for
it does not exist by virtue of itself, and this property is an essential (element) of
the atom. (Likewise) occupying one place is an accident that exists only in some
place, hence it does not exist by virtue of itself. Occupying one place and receivability are not something added to the essence of the defined atom, for essential
definitions are the essence of the defined thing and its ipseity. Thus, that which
does not remain for two instants becomes that which does remain for two instants
and more, and that which does not exist by virtue of itself comes to be that which
does exist by virtue of itself. They (the AshÝarites) were not aware of their state,
(for) they “doubt a new creation” (QurÞÁn, ibid.).31
As for the people of unveiling, they believe that God reveals Himself in every
breath and never repeats his self-manifestation. They (also) believe from witnessing that every self-manifestation bestows a new creation and removes a preceding creation. Its removal is the essence of annihilation (fanÁÞ) in the passing
self-manifestation and subsistence (baqÁÞ) in the bestowal of the following selfmanifestation. So understand!

are the stable element of everything, while the accidents are the changing elements of
all bodies, such as color, states of aggregation, heat or coldness, etc. See the preceding
reference. For atomism in the KalÁm, see Pines, Atomism, pp. 1–41.
29 The combination (ijtimÁÝ) of accidents is itself an accident. Thus, that which does not
exist by virtue of itself causes the existence of that which exists by virtue of itself.
30 Pines, Atomism, p. 12.
31 Because the atom possesses the properties of an accident, it is really an accident which
always changes. Thus, the whole cosmos changes, not only the accidents. Cf. Izutsu,
Creation, pp. 168–171. Here Iztusu misses the core of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s speculative
argumentation, omitting the discussion of the atoms’ traits and speaking instead of
substances.

13 The bezel of the wisdom of spiritual
power1 exists in the essence of Lot

(126) Al-malk means power (shidda) and al-malÐk is the powerful (shadÐd). When
you powerfully knead a lump of dough (shaddadta al-ÝajÐn), you say malaktu alajÐn. (The poet) Qays ibn al-ÍaÔÐm2 says, describing a stab:
I seized (so) powerfully the place of the wound by the palm of my hand and
widened (anhartu) it/so that one standing in front of the wound could see that
which is behind (the wounded),
(127) meaning I seized so powerfully (the place) of the stab. This is what God
said about Lot: (Lot said) “If only I had the power to stop you or sought shelter
in a strong support” (rukn shadÐd) (QurÞÁn 11:80, trans. AH). God’s messenger
said: “May God have mercy upon my brother, (because) he sought shelter in a
strong support.”3 The Prophet called (our) attention to the fact that Lot was with
God, because God is Powerful. By “a strong support” Lot means (his) tribe, and
by “if only I had the power” he means will (or aspiration, himma) which pertains
especially to humans. God’s messenger said “since that time,” meaning from that
time when Lot said “or sought shelter in a strong support,” God sent a prophet
only when he was protected by his tribe. This was the case of AbÙ ÓÁlib (who
sheltered) God’s messenger (MuÎammad). Lot said, “If only I had the power,”
because he heard God saying, “It is God who created you of weakness” (QurÞÁn
30:54), as an essential trait, “then, after weakness, he gave them strength” (ibid.).
The strength occurred (ÝaraÃat) through giving, hence it is an accidental strength
(quwwa ÝaraÃiyya), “then after strength He gave weakness and white hair” (ibid.).
God’s giving is associated with white hair, while weakness means returning to the
fundamental trait of his creation which is expressed in His words, “created you
of weakness” (ibid.). Thus, He returned humans to the first state of their creation,
as He said: “then…God will return (some of you) to the most despicable state of
life, so that after having knowledge they will know nothing” (QurÞÁn 16:70). He
pointed out that humans are brought back to the state of the first weakness; hence,
as regards weakness, an old man is like a child.
1 Íikma Malkiyya. Lot could not overcome his corrupted people, because he was weak,
hence he turned to God seeking His help against them. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,”
p. 23.
2 A very important poet of Yathrib (al-MadÐna). See on him E I2.
3 BukhÁrÐ, LX:11 (3372).

94 The essence of Lot
No prophet has been sent before he has reached the age of forty, at which time
one begins to decline and weaken. For this reason, Lot said: “If only I had the
power,” (meaning that this situation) requires effective will. If you ask: “What
prevents him from having an effective will, which exists in the followers who
travel on the way and the messengers are most worthy of it?” We shall answer:
“You are right, but you lack another knowledge, because knowledge does not
leave to the will (128) the power to act freely (taÒarruf).” Whenever knowledge
increases, the power to act freely decreases, because of the will.
Two aspects explain this: The first is one’s firm awareness of the station of servanthood (ÝubÙdiyya) and his consideration of the root of his natural creation, and
the second is the unity of the one who acts freely and the one freely acted upon.
He (the prophet) did not know to whom he should direct his will, and this prevented him from exercising it. In this state (mashhad), he saw that his opponent
did not deviate from his reality and the state of his fixed entity and absence. That
which appears in existence was only that which exists as an absent fixed entity.
(His opponent) neither exceeded his reality nor infringed on his way. Designating
this way, “opposition” is only accidental matter, which the veil over human eyes
makes appear, as God said about them: “…but most of them do not know.4 They
know the manifest side of life in this world, but are heedless of the next” (QurÞÁn
30:6–7). This emerges from the word hearts (qulÙb)5 in their saying, “Our hearts
are covered” (QurÞÁn 2:88), meaning (our hearts) are in wrapping, that is, cover
which prevents (literally: conceals) them from perceiving things as they really are.
This and similar (situations) hinder the knower from acting freely.
Shaykh AbÙ ÝAbdallah ibn QÁÞid asked Shaykh AbÙ al-SuÝÙd ibn al-Shibl:6
“Why do you not act freely?” AbÙ al-SuÝÙd answered: “I leave God to act freely
for me as He wills.” By this he means what God said commanding MuÎammad:
“Make Him your agent (wakÐl)” (QurÞÁn 73:9). The agent is the one who acts
freely. Moreover, MuÎammad heard God saying: “Spend from what We gave you
as substitutes” (QurÞÁn 57:7). AbÙ al-SuÝÙd and the gnostics knew that that which
was in his hand did not belong to him and that he is just a substitute. Then the Real
actually said to him: “Make Me an agent of the matter over which I made you a
substitute and granted you mastery.” AbÙ al-SuÝÙd obeyed God and made Him
an agent. How (129) can a will, by which one acts freely, remain for the one who
witnesses this matter, while the will acts only through the combination of all one’s
powers (jamÝiyya),7 and no room is left for anything else? The knowledge (of this
matter) makes him aloof from this jamÝiyya. Thus, the knower whose knowledge
is perfect appears as totally incapable and weak.

4 The beginning of the verse reads: “It is God’s promise. God does not break His promise.”
Thus, the ignorance of people refers to God’s promise; however, Ibn al-ÝArabi transfers,
as he often does, the subject matter so that it fits his aim.
5 Read qulÙb instead of maqlÙb, which has no meaning here.
6 Ibn al-Shibl was ÝAbd al-QÁdir al-JÐlÁnÐ’s (d. 1166) famous disciple. Abrahamov, Ibn
al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 152–155.
7 SPK, pp. 135, 239.

The essence of Lot 95
One of the Substitutes (abdÁl) said to Shaykh ÝAbd al-RazzÁq:9 “After greeting
AbÙ Madyan ask him why nothing is difficult for us, while things are difficult for you,
notwithstanding, we desire your station and you do not desire ours?” This was the situation of AbÙ Madyan, who had attained this station and others, whereas we are more
complete in weakness and incapability than him. Nevertheless, this Substitute said to
him what he said. This story refers to the same matter (with which we are dealing).
Regarding this station, MuÎammad said about God’s order to him to (act): “I do
not know what will be done with me or you; I follow only what is revealed to me”
(QurÞÁn 46:9, trans. AH). The Messenger should act according to what is revealed
to him; he has nothing else. If it was revealed to him with certainty to act, he acted,
and if he was prevented from acting, he abstained from acting. If he was given the
choice (to act or not), he chose not to act, unless his knowledge was defective (and
he chose to act). AbÙ al-SuÝÙd said to those who believed in him: “Fifteen years
ago, God gave me (the ability) to act freely, but I did not act, because of a display of
affectedness.” This is arrogance (idlÁl). As for ourselves, we did not act not because
of a display of affectedness, which means to prefer acting, but because of perfect
knowledge, for knowledge does not require an act through choice. When the knower
acts freely in the world by his will, his act derives from a divine command and compulsion, not from choice. No doubt, the position of the prophetic mission (risÁla)
requires (the ability of the prophet) to act freely so that his mission will be accepted
and that what appears in him will affirm his mission in the eyes of his community
and his people in order that God’s religion will be made manifest. The case of the
saint (walÐ) is different. Notwithstanding, the messenger does not require (the ability to act freely) manifestly, because the messenger (130) has compassion for his
people and he does not want to exaggerate in manifesting the (divine) argument
against them,10 for (the appearance of this argument) might cause their destruction,
and he wants their subsistence.
The messenger also knew that if a miracle (al-amr al-muÝjiz)11 appears to the
community, some will believe when seeing the miracle; others, aware of its veracity, will nevertheless deny it in disbelief out of evilness, arrogance and envy; and
still others ascribe it to magic and delusion.12 Since the messengers perceived
8

8 A substitute is a saint who replaces the Pole (qutb) when the latter leaves a certain
place. God preserves the seven climes through the seven substitutes. Chodkiewicz, Seal
of the Saints, ch. 7.
9 One of AbÙ Madyan’s (d. 1198) disciples. Sufis of Andalusia, p. 101.
10 QurÞÁn 6:149. The QurÞÁn tells us in several places that disputations took place between
God and certain peoples. In these disputations the conclusive argument belonged to
God.
11 A miracle in Arabic is called muÝjiza, from the verb aÝjaza, meaning he caused someone
to be unable to imitate the occurrence of the miraculous event. Al-BaghdÁdÐ, UÒÙl
al-dÐn, p. 170.
12 For such accusations in Islamic literature, see Abrahamov, “The BarÁhima’s Enigma –
A Search for a New Solution,” Die Welt des Orients 18 (1987), p. 83. Sarah Stroumsa,
Freethinkers of Medieval Islam – Ibn al-RÁwandÐ, AbÙ Bakr al-RÁzÐ and Their Impact
on Islamic Thought, Leiden 1999, pp. 83–86.

96

The essence of Lot

that the believers are only those in whose hearts God aroused the light of belief,
and that when a person does not contemplate through this light called belief, a
miracle is of no benefit to him, they refused to require miracles, because their
effect neither embraces these (people) who see them nor does it enter their hearts.
Regarding the most perfect of all messengers and the wisest and most righteous
of all creatures, God said: “You will not guide whom you want to guide, but God
will guide whom He wants” (QurÞÁn 28:56).
If the will (himma) necessarily13 had affected (its object), then none would
have been more perfect, elevated and stronger than God’s Messenger regarding
this power. In fact, the Messenger’s will did not influence his uncle, AbÙ ÓÁlib, to
become a Muslim and the above-mentioned verse was sent down regarding him.
For this reason, God said referring to MuÎammad that he should only convey (the
divine message to the people): “It is not incumbent on you to guide them, but God
will guide whom He wants” (QurÞÁn 2:272). And He adds in sÙrat al-qaÒaÒ (28):
“And He knows best those who are rightly guided” (QurÞÁn 28:56). By “by those
who are rightly guided,” He means those who made Him know their being guided
in the state of their absence through their fixed entities.14 God affirmed that knowledge follows the thing known (al-maÝlÙm). Whoever is a believer in his state of
being a fixed entity and in his state of absence appears as a believer in the state of
his concrete existence. God knows the future position of the believer, and for this
reason He said: “And He knows best those who are rightly guided” (ibid.). Since
He said this, He also said: “My statement cannot be changed” (QurÞÁn 50:29),
because My statement follows exactly My knowledge of My creatures – “And I
do not wrong My servants” (ibid.), meaning I do not predetermine their unbelief,
thus making them unhappy, then require them to do what they are incapable of
doing. But I do treat them only in keeping with Our knowledge of them, and We
know them only through what they give us, that is, their exact essence. If there is
any wrongness, (it derives from them) and they are the wrongdoers. For this reason, God said: “But (131) they wronged themselves” (QurÞÁn 2:57). Hence, God
did not wrong them. In like manner, We said to them only what Our essence gave
Us to say to them. And Our essence is too known to Us in its exact state to say this
and not that. We say only what We know to say. We have the privilege to say, and
they have the privilege to obey or not upon hearing (Our words).15

13 The author means without the intervention of God.
14 Does God not know the way of guidance without the fixed entities? Such a formulation
of his thought makes Ibn al-ÝArabÐ believe in the independence of the fixed entities,
as if they were produced without God’s power. This notion is mentioned in the end of
ch. 5 (p. 83 of the Arabic text). However, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to state there and here
that God’s will is established in accordance with the fixed entities, which were already
produced in God’s thought.
15 Strangely enough, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ gives the human the choice to act or not, and this
capacity to choose contradicts what he said previously about the decree of the fixed
entities. Also, the Greatest Master contradicts himself when saying that he knows how
God’s essence acts, whereas he states many times that God’s essence cannot be known.

The essence of Lot 97
Everything is from Us and from them/learning of this is from Us and from
them
If they are not from Us/We no doubt are from them
So realize, O my friend, this wisdom of spiritual power that exists in the essence
of Lot, for it is the core of knowledge.
The mystery is now manifest to you/and the matter is evident
That which is called uneven/is included in the even16

16 In this image, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to say that just as the uneven is included in the even,
so vice versa, meaning just as God is within us, we are within God.

14 The bezel of the wisdom of
predetermination1 exists in the
essence of Ezra

(131) Know that the decree (qaÃÁÞ) is God’s judgment of things established by
His knowledge of and about them. God’s knowledge concerning things is in
keeping with what the objects of knowledge give, that is, their exact essences.2
Determination (qadar)3 means appointing the time for the exact states of things
without any addition (to them). The decreeing of things is established by the
essences of things. This is the very mystery of determination “for whoever has a
heart, for whoever listens and bears witness” (QurÞÁn 50:37) “and to God belongs
the conclusive argument” (QurÞÁn 6:149). That is because the judge (ÎÁkim) actually follows the essence of the issue he judges and its requirements, and the one
who is judged judges the judge in complying with the former’s essence. Thus,
every judge is equal to the one who is judged through and in which he judges,
whoever the judge (132) may be. Hence, be aware of this issue, for determination
is unknown only because of its intense manifestation; it is unknown, and hence
people seek it and persist in their seeking.
Know that God’s messengers, in their capacity as messengers and not as saints
and gnostics, occupy the same levels as their communities. The knowledge with
which they have been sent corresponds to the needs of their community, no more
and no less. Now, the communities excel (tafÁÃala) each other, some are greater
than others. Hence, the messengers excel regarding their knowledge of the message according to the level of their communities, as God said: “We preferred
some of these messengers to others” (QurÞÁn 2:253). Similarly, the messengers,
as regards their knowledge of the sciences and rules which derives from their
essences, also differ in excellence from each other in keeping with their predispositions, as God said: “We preferred some prophets to others” (QurÞÁn 17:55).
God said concerning creatures: “God preferred some of you to others regarding

1 Íikma qadariyya.
2 The notion that knowledge follows the object of knowledge is here reiterated. See the
preceding chapter and ch. 5.
3 Generally in Islamic theology qaÃÁÞ means predetermination, while a qadar decree
appoints time. L. Gardet, “al-¬aÃÁÞ wa’l-¬adar,” E I2. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ adopts in principle
this division ascribing predestination to the fixed entities in God’s thought, and the
decree in time to the concretization of the fixed entities in a certain time. Chittick,
“Chapter Headings,” pp. 23f.

The essence of Ezra 99
sustenance” (QurÞÁn 16:71). Sustenance is divided into spiritual like kinds of
knowledge and sensual like foods. The Real sends down sustenance only in keeping with a “known measure,” (QurÞÁn 15:21) that is, deservingness required by
the creatures, for God “gives everything (its measure) of creation” (QurÞÁn 20:50),
“and He sends down (things) in the measure He wills” (QurÞÁn 42:27). He only
wills what He knows and judges, and as we said above, His knowledge follows
the known object.
The appointment of time belongs to the known thing, and also the decree,
knowledge, desire and will follow the determination (qadar).4 The mystery of
determination is one of the loftiest kinds of knowledge, and God causes only those
who are particularized by perfect knowledge to understand it. Knowledge of the
mystery of determination brings about both absolute repose and painful suffering
for the knower. Thus, it causes two contradictory effects. Through this mystery
God describes Himself as Wrathful and Content, and through it the divine names
oppose each other. Its reality (the reality of this mystery) judges both the absolute
existence and the limited existence, and nothing is more perfect (133), stronger,
greater than it, because of its general determination and its judgment of the contingent appearances and the essences of things.5
Since the prophets learn their knowledge only from specific divine revelations,
their hearts are bereft of rational contemplation, because they know the intellect’s
inadequacy with respect to the rational perception of things as they really are. In
like manner, divine communication is unable to perceive what can be perceived
only by mystical experience. Consequently, perfect knowledge remains only
within the confines of divine self-manifestation and in the Real’s removing of the
veils covering the hearts and eyes so that they are able to perceive things, eternal
and contingent, nonexistent and existent, impossible, necessary and possible, as
they really are in their essences.
Since Ezra sought the unique way, he was rebuked, as it was related in a tradition.6 Had he sought revelation as we mentioned, maybe he would not have been
rebuked regarding this matter. The proof of his heart’s inadequacy is the question asked in one event: “How will God revive (this town) after its destruction?”
(QurÞÁn 2:259) We think that in this verse Ezra resembles Abraham, who said:
“My Lord, show me how you revive the dead” (QurÞÁn 2:260). This (question)
requires an actual response which the Real made manifest in the QurÞÁn, saying
“God made him die for hundred years then revived him” (ibid., 259) and: “Look at
the bones, how we revive them then cover them with flesh” (ibid.). He really saw
how bodies grow, thus God showed him the modality (kayfiyya) (through which
bodies are restored to life).

4 The last sentence shows that essentially no difference obtains between qaÃÁÞ and qadar
in that both decisions follow the known thing. The only difference is the time element,
which the author ascribes to qadar in the beginning of this chapter but confuses in the
last sentence with qaÃÁÞ.
5 KÁshÁnÐ, p. 337.
6 See this tradition below.

100 The essence of Ezra
Then he asked about God’s predetermination, which can be perceived only
through revelation of things in their state of fixed entity, (that is), of nonexistence.
Ezra was not given this (knowledge), for it belongs only to divine perception, and
only God knows it, because this knowledge is the first keys, I mean, “the hidden
keys which none knows but He” (QurÞÁn 6:59). God informs only those of His
servants He wills about some of these things.
(134) Know that these are called keys only in the state of opening (fatÎ); the
state of opening is the state of linking the act of bringing into being and the things
brought into being, or if you wish, say the state of the connecting of God’s power
(qudra) to the object of this power (maqdÙr). Only God has experience (dhawq)7
of this act. Regarding this (the acts of connection), no manifestation or revelation occurs, because power and (the ability) to act belong to God alone, for he
possesses the absolute existence which cannot be limited. Since we are aware of
God’s rebuking Ezra for his request concerning predetermination, we know that
he asked for knowledge of predetermination and the power connected to the object
of power. Only the one who has absolute existence can require this knowledge and
power. Ezra asked for something the existence of which cannot be experienced by
humans, for the modalities (of creation) are perceived only through experience.
As for the tradition we related, that is, what God revealed to Ezra to the effect
that “if you do not stop, I will erase your name from the register of prophecy,”8
meaning I will remove from you (My) way of giving information and give you
(the knowledge of things) through manifestation. (Now) manifestation occurs
only in keeping with your predisposition, through which experiential perception
takes place, hence you will know that your perception mirrors your predisposition. Then you contemplate the thing you sought, and if not seeing it, you know
that the predisposition you sought is lost and that ability is one of the qualities of
the divine essence. You know that God gives everything (its measure) of creation,
and He withheld from you this unique predisposition; it is not your (measure) of
creation. If it had been your (measure) of creation, the Real, who said that “He
gives everything (its measure) of creation” (QurÞÁn 20:50), would have given you
this (predisposition). In this case, you yourself should abstain from making this
request, to avoid the need of a divine prohibition. This was God’s providence for
Ezra; some people know it and others do not.9
Know that Sainthood (walÁya)10 is (like) the all-encompassing general sphere
(al-falak al-muÎÐÔ);11 for this reason it never stops and has (the function) of general
prophecy (al-inbÁÞ al-ÝÁmm). However, the prophecy of legislation (nubuwwat
7 By “God has experience…” Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to express the idea that only God can
handle this act in the proper manner, that is, knowing all its modalities.
8 IbrÁhÐm ibn MuÎammad al-ÍalabÐ, NiÝmat al-dharÐÝa fÐ nuÒrat al-sharÐÝa, DÁr al-MasÐr,
al-RiyÁÃ 1998, p. 113.
9 This paragraph exemplifies Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s way of writing in the present volume, which
is full of repetitive explanations.
10 WalÁya can be also rendered as Friendship or Nearness to God.
11 Very probably, our author uses this astronomical term to denote both the steadfastness
and the exaltedness of walÁya.

The essence of Ezra 101
al-tashrÐÝ) and mission (risÁla) came to an end. It ended with MuÎammad, (135)
for no prophet has come after him, that is, a lawgiver or a person for whom a
law is established, and no messenger, who is a lawgiver.12 This report (about the
difference between a prophet or messenger who is a lawgiver and God’s saint
[walÐ]) was a mortal blow to God’s saints, because it involves the end of perfect
and complete servanthood (which is enjoyed only by prophets). However, (on
the other hand) the specific names “prophet” and “messenger” do not apply to
God, because the servant does not want to share a name with his Lord.13 Hence,
God is not called by “prophet” or “messenger,” but is named “friend” (saint) and
described by that name, hence He said: “God is the friend (walÐ) of the believers” (QurÞÁn 2:257) and “He is the Friend, the Praiseworthy” (QurÞÁn 42:28).
This name (walÐ) never ends and is applied to God’s servants in this world and
the world to come. Because of the end of prophecy and mission, no name has
remained which is specifically applied to the servant and not to God.
However, God still assists (laÔafa) His servants by leaving to them general
prophecy (al-nubuwwa al-ÝÁmma) in which there is no legislation. Yet, He has left
to them legislation through independent judgment (ijtihÁd) with the aim of establishing rules. He has bequeathed their scholars the power of legislation, saying
“The scholars are the heirs of the prophets.”14 In this there is an inheritance only
of the scholars’ independent making of laws. If you observe a prophet speaking on
matters not including legislation, he speaks in his capacity as a saint and a gnostic.
For this reason, his position as a scholar is more complete and perfect than that of
a messenger or legislator. If you hear one of the people of God saying or transmitting to you (the notion) that sainthood is higher than prophecy, he adds nothing
to what we have said. Or if he says that the saint is above the prophet and the
messenger, he means by this (the qualities) of one person, that is, the Messenger
(MuÎammad) as a saint, is more complete than that of a prophet messenger. This
does not mean that the saint who follows the Prophet is higher than the Prophet,
for the follower never attains the rank of the one he follows in the way in which
he follows him, because if he had attained his rank, he would not have been his
follower. So understand (this)!
The (position) of the messenger and the lawgiving prophet derives from sainthood (walÁya) and knowledge. Do you not see that God ordered the Prophet to
seek increase in knowledge and not in anything else, hence he said, ordering him,
“and say, O my Lord (136) increase my knowledge!” (QurÞÁn 20:114) That is
because you know that the law means the obligation (taklÐf) to perform specific
acts and the prohibition to perform others, and the place of this obligation is this

12 Yohanan Friedmann, “Finality of Prophethood in SunnÐ Islam,” Jerusalem Studies
in Arabic and Islam 7(1986):177–215; Uri Rubin, “The Seal of the Prophets and the
Finality of Prophecy – On the Interpretation of the QurÞÁnic SÙrat al-AÎzÁb (33),”
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 164(1)(2014):65–96.
13 Here one has the impression that the human being establishes the names, while actually
the source of these names is the QurÞÁn.
14 BukharÐ I I I:10 (67).

102 The essence of Ezra
world which will come to an end. However, sainthood is not like an obligation,
because if it had been terminated, it would have been terminated because of
itself,15 just as the mission ended because of itself. Had sainthood been terminated
because of itself, its name would not have remained. But the name “saint” remains
God’s name, and this name is assimilated and realized by His servants and is
associated with them.
This is his saying to Ezra: If you do not stop to ask about the essence of predetermination, I will erase your name from the register of prophecy. Then the issue
(of predetermination) will reach you through revelation and self-manifestation;
the name “messenger” and “prophet” applied to you will disappear, but sainthood
will remain. However, since the circumstances demonstrate that God’s address to
him took the form of a threat, he knew, whenever these circumstances were connected to a divine address, that this was a threat to deprive him of some specific
characteristics of sainthood in this world, for prophecy and mission are some traits
of sainthood among others. Then he knew that he was superior to the saint who
was deprived of legislative prophecy and mission.
However, another possible state that prophecy requires and that is connected
to a saint proves this trait is a promise and not a threat. This is because his request
is acceptable, for the prophet is a unique saint. By (observing) circumstances, the
saint knows it is inconceivable that the prophet who shares in sainthood should do
anythihg he knows God does not will or (try) to do anything that is impossible. If
these circumstances affect one whom they affect in a stable condition, the divine
address for him “I will erase your name from the register of prophecy” is a threat.
This statement becomes a report that points to the sublimity of a remaining position. This position is for the prophets and messengers in the world (137) to come,
which is not a place where laws are observed by the people who enter Paradise or
those come to Hell.
We have limited (our discussion) to going into the two abodes, Paradise and
Hell, for in the Day of Resurrection God gives laws to people who lived between
two eras of prophets, to young children and the insane.16 They will be gathered
in one place to do justice, to punish the wrongdoers and to reward the people of
Paradise.
When they are gathered in one place secluded from the others, God will send
to them a prophet, who is the best individual among them, and this prophet will
bring a fire and it will be presented to them on this day, and he will say: “I am the
messenger of the Real to you.” Some of them will believe in him and some will
not. And he will say to them: “Enter into this fire with your souls, and whoever
obeys me will be saved and enter Paradise, and whoever disobeys me and offends
my command will perish and be among the people of Hell.” (It will happen actually): Whoever among them obeys the prophet and throws himself into the fire
15 Obligation will come to an end, because of the termination of the world, which will
make obligation needless, not because of an inherent cause.
16 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ conveys the traditions that deal with these kinds of people before
their going into Paradise and Hell, because in both abodes no law is implemented.

The essence of Ezra 103
will be happy and be rewarded for his acts; he will find this fire cool and peaceful.
Whoever disobeys him deserves punishment and will enter into the fire and dwell
therein because of his disobedient deeds, so that God will do justice to his servants. This corresponds to God’s words, “On the Day when matters become dire”
(QurÞÁn 68:42, trans. AH), that is, a grave affair of the events of the Hereafter,
and “they will be called to prostrate themselves” (ibid.), which means obligation
and legislation. Among them are those who are able (to prostrate themselves) and
those who are not. God said regarding the latter: “they will be called to prostrate
themselves, but they will not be able to do so” (ibid.), just as some servants, like
AbÙ Jahl17 and others, could not obey God’s command in this world. This is the
measure of legislation, which will be left in the world to come on the Day of
Resurrection, before the entry into Paradise and Hell. For this reason we have
limited our discussion. Praise be to God.

17 AbÙ Jahl was one of the staunch enemies of the Prophet in Mecca. See QurÞÁn 96:6, 7,
and their commentaries.

15 The bezel of the prophetic wisdom1
exists in the essence of Jesus

(138) From the water of Maryam or from the breath of JibrÐl/in the form of a
human being produced of clay
The spirit came into being in an essence untainted/of the Nature which is called
sijjÐn2
For this reason, his stay (in heaven) lasted by decree for a long time/more than
a thousand years
It was a spirit of God not from another, hence/he revived the dead and produced birds out of clay
Till his association with His Lord/through which he influenced the high and the
low (people) became valid
God purified his body and cleansed/his spirit and made him like Himself in (his
power) of creation3
Know that one of the traits of the spirits is that everything they tread on becomes
alive and life permeates throughout it. For this reason, al-SÁmirÐ,4 knowing this
affair, took a portion of sand from the messenger’s tracks, who was JibrÐl, that is,
the Spirit. Since al-SÁmirÐ realized it was JibrÐl, he knew that life permeated everything JibrÐl trod on. Hence, he took a portion of sand from the tracks of the messenger,5
either with his hands (qabÃa) or with his two fingers (qabÒa), that is, a handful or with
the tips of his fingers.6 He threw the sand at the calf and the calf lowed, for the voice
of the cow is lowing. Had he established (the idol) in some other form, the form established would have made the appropriate sound, such as the grumbling of camels, the
bleating of lambs and sheep, and the speaking of human beings.
1 According to al-QaysarÐ and al-KÁshÁnÐ, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ ascribes prophecy to Jesus,
because his prophecy is eternal. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” p. 25.
2 A unique word in the QurÞÁn, which mainly designates a heavenly book or the lowest
place on earth in which the Devil and his followers reside. E I2.
3 Because like God, Jesus created birds out of clay.
4 There is a discussion in QurÞÁn exegesis on the essence of this figure. See, for example,
Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr, Vol. IV, p. 534 (on QurÞÁn 20:95); Al-RÁzÐ, MafÁtÐÎ al-ghayb, part 22,
p. 101 (on QurÞÁn 20:85).
5 QurÞÁn 20:96,
6 Wehr’s dictionary defines qabÒa as follows: “as much as may be taken between the
finger and the thumb, a pinch.”

The essence of Jesus 105
This measure of life which permeates things is called divine nature (lÁhÙt), and
human nature (nÁsÙt) is the substrate in which this spirit dwells. NÁsÙt is called
spirit, because of that which inheres in it. When the trustworthy spirit (al-rÙÎ alamÐn – QurÞÁn 26:193), JibrÐl, took on the shape of a perfect human being before
Maryam (139), she imagined that he was a man who wanted to lie with her, hence
she sought refuge in God with all her heart, so that God would save her from this
person, because she knew that this was prohibited. As a result, she experienced the
complete presence of God, which is the essential spirit (al-rÙÎ al-maÝnawÐ). Had
JibrÐl blown his breath into her when she was in this state, Jesus would have been
born such that none would have tolerated him, because of his ill-temperedness
which derived from his mother’s state. When he (JibrÐl) said to her, “I am but a
messenger of your Lord” and I came “to grant to you a pure son” (QurÞÁn 19:19),
she was relieved of her depression and was delighted. At that very moment he
blew Jesus into her.
JibrÐl was transmitting God’s word to Maryam just as a messenger transmits God’s word to his community. These are God’s words: “( Jesus, the son of
Maryam, was God’s messenger) and His word which He conveyed to Maryam
and a spirit from Him” (QurÞÁn 4:171). Thus, a desire arose in Maryam. As a
result, the body of Jesus was created from the real water of Maryam and the
imaginary water of JibrÐl,7 which pervaded the moisture of his breath, because
the breath of an animate being contains humidity, an element of water in it. The
body of Jesus was composed of imagined and real water, and he appeared in
the form of a human being because of his mother and because of JibrÐl’s taking
the form of a human being. (All this happened) to make the creation of this human
species occur in the usual way.8
Jesus appeared as one who revived the dead, because he was a divine spirit. In
this act, revivification belonged to God and the breath to Jesus, just as the breath
belongs to JibrÐl and the essence of creation (literally: the word) to God. Hence his
revivification of the dead was real with respect to his breath, just as he appeared out
of the form of his mother. His revivification was also assumed as his own act, but
actually it was God’s act. Thus, in his reality in which he was created, he combined
(the real and the imagined aspects), as we said, he was created of imagined and
real water. Consequently, revivification is ascribed to him in a real manner in one
respect, and in an imagined manner (140) in another. It was said about Him that
in a real manner “he revives the dead” (QurÞÁn 42:9) and in an imagined manner:
“You breathed into it (the clay) and it became a bird by God’s permission” (QurÞÁn

7 QurÞÁn 86:6–7.
8 I do not know for certain what Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means when he says “this human species.”
Possibly he means that Jesus was born like all human beings. However, Maryam’s
conception was extraordinary, and regarding this, it is inconceivable to state that it was
the usual way. Thus, only the birth was as usual; however, our author does not speak
here in an exact manner. On Jesus’ spirit see Souad Hakim, “The Spirit and the Son of
the Spirit,” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ‘Arabi Society 31(2002):1–29.

106 The essence of Jesus
5:110).9 The phrase “by God’s permission” is connected to “it became,” not to “you
breathed.”10 It is also possible that the agent who is Jesus breathed into the clay, and
as a result the clay became a corporeal, sentient form. In like manner (we should
deal with) “he cured the blind and the leprous” (ibid.) and all that is ascribed to him
and to God’s permission in the phrases “by My permission” or “by God’s permission.” If “by God’s permission” is connected with breathing, then he who breathes
has permission to breathe, and the bird becomes alive through the one who breathes
with God’s permission. If the breather does so without God’s permission, (even)
then the creation of the bird derives from His permission. In such a case, the agent
exists in the word yakÙnu (it will be). If this occurrence did not involve imagination
and reality (simultaneously), this form would not have these two aspects. However,
this matter involves two aspects, because the creation of Jesus involved both.
Jesus sprang from humility to such an extent that his community was ordered
“to pay the poll-tax with their own hands (Ýan yadin)11 being humiliated” (QurÞÁn
9:29), and also if one of them (the Christians) is struck on his cheek he should
turn the other cheek toward the one who struck him and not try to overcome his
assailant or seek vengeance. This trait of Jesus was inherited from his mother,
because the woman is lower and humbler (than the man), for she is under his
authority formally and sensually. Jesus’ power to revive and heal derived from
JibrÐl’s breath when the latter took a human form. Thus, Jesus revived the dead
when he was in a human form. If JibrÐl had not come12 in the form of a human,
but rather in another genus of the genera, whether animal, plant, or mineral, Jesus
would have revived (the dead) only after assimilating this genus and appearing in
it. Likewise, had JibrÐl come in his luminous form, which is devoid of terrestrial
genera and elements, because he does not go beyond his nature, (141) Jesus would
have revived the dead only by appearing in this luminous natural form, not in an
elemental form, still retaining the human form he received from his mother.
When he was reviving the dead, it was said about him: “he/not he.” Looking at
him induced perplexity, just as the intelligent person became perplexed when contemplating Jesus, because the former saw a human being resurrecting the dead,
humans not animals, which is a divine trait. (Hence), the seer became perplexed,
for he saw a human form that possesses a divine faculty.
Thus, some people believed in incarnation (ÎulÙl) and (thought) that he was
God, because he revived the dead. For this reason, concealment (kufr)13 was attributed to them, because they concealed God, who revived the dead employing Jesus’
human form. Hence, God said: “Those who said that God was al-masÐÎ (Messiah),

9 The accurate citation is “by My permission.” “By God’s permission” appears in a
parallel verse told by Jesus himself (QurÞÁn 3:49).
10 In this case the agent of creation is God and not Jesus.
11 I translate this phrase on the basis of Uri Rubin’s translation of the QurÞÁn into Hebrew
(Tel Aviv 2005).
12 Read wa-law lam (KÁshÁnÐ, p. 358) instead of wa-lam in Affifi’s edition, which seems
to be a misprint.
13 For the meaning of kufr as concealment, see the third chapter on Noah.

The essence of Jesus 107
the son of Maryam, are concealers” (QurÞÁn 5:17, 72). In their complete saying
they combined error and concealment; they did not err, because they said “he is
God,” or because of their words, “he is the son of Maryam,” but because they
ascribed to God, (who in their view) was responsible for the revivification of the
dead, a human mortal form, when they said, “the son of Maryam,” and no doubt
he was the son of Maryam. However, the listener imagined that they attributed
divinity to a human form, and made divinity the essence of this form, but this they
did not do. (Instead) from the beginning, they included God’s essence in the form
of a human who is the son of Maryam. Hence, they distinguished between the
form and its appearance (literally: its aspect); they did not identify the form with
its very appearance, like JibrÐl who took the form of a human and did not breathe
(into Maryam), then he breathed. Thus, the breathing is distinguished from the
form. Although the breathing issued from the form, the form might remain without breathing, for breathing is not essential to the definition of the form.
For this reason, debate arose among the people of religious communities regarding (142) the nature of Jesus. Some argued from the viewpoint of his mortal human
form and said that he was the son of Maryam. On the basis of his apparent human
form, others argued that he was related to JibrÐl. Referring to his resurrection of
the dead, still others argued that he was related to God’s spirit; that is, through his
breath, he brought the dead back to life. Sometimes people imagined that God was
in him, sometimes that the angel was in him, and other times that mortality and
humanity were in him. Thus, each thinker regarded Jesus according to the form that
prevails in him (the thinker). Consequently, Jesus was God’s word, God’s spirit,
God’s servant, and these appellations concerning his sentient form are not related to
others, but every person is related to his real father, and not to the one who breathed
his spirit into the human form. Because when God shaped the human body, as He
said, “When I shaped him” (QurÞÁn 15:29), it was God who breathed into him his
spirit, ascribing the spirit in the human being and his essence to Him. The case of
Jesus is different, for the shaping of his body and his human form was included in
the spiritual breath, and other humans were not shaped like him.
All existents are God’s words, which will never be exhausted,14 because they
derive from the word “be,” and “be” is God’s word.15 Can the word “be” be
ascribed to God, to his ipseity, so that its essence cannot be known? Or does God
descend to the form of him who says “be,” so that the word “be” serves as the
reality of this form to which He descends and in which He manifests Himself?
Some gnostics adhered to the first view and some to the second, and some others became perplexed not knowing (the solution). This issue can be known only
through experience, as when AbÙ YazÐd (al-BisÔÁmÐ) breathed into the ant he had
killed, restoring it to life. In this moment he knew the One who breathes, and then
he breathed. In (this matter) he was like Jesus.16
14 Cf. QurÞÁn 18:109: “If the whole ocean were ink for writing the words of my Lord, it
would run dry before those words were exhausted…” (trans. AH).
15 Every existent is created by God’s word “be” (kun). See QurÞÁn 2:117, 16:40.
16 Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 48f.

108 The essence of Jesus
As for spiritual revivification through knowledge, that is, the divine, eternal,
elevated, and luminous life, (143) God said: “Whoever was dead and We restored
him to life and established for him light by which he walks among people” (QurÞÁn
6:122). Everyone who restores life to a dead soul by the life of knowledge regarding a specific issue connected with the knowledge of God brings him to life, so
that he has a light by which he “walks among people,” that is, among his likeness
in form.
Had he and us not been/what exists would not have been
We are really servants/and God is our master
We are His essence, know (this)!/when you say “a human being”
Do not be concealed by human being/for He gave you a proof
If you are real and created17/you will be merciful through God
If you feed His creation through Him18/you will (cause people to) rest and
receive good nourishment19
We give Him what is manifested/in us through Him and He gives us
The whole matter is divided/between Him and us
Whoever knows through my heart revives this matter/when He revives us
We are in Him as beings/essences and pieces of time
(Whereas) He is not permanent in us/but He gives us life
The proof of what we have said regarding the spiritual breath which joins the mortal human form is that the Real qualifies Himself by the merciful breath (al-nafas
al-raÎmÁnÐ),20 and that which is qualified by a quality should follow this quality and
all that this quality requires. You know that the one who breathes (follows) what the
breath (144) requires. For this reason, the divine breath receives the forms of the cosmos. It serves as a material substance for the forms and it is nature itself.
The elements are one of the natural forms as that which is above them and that
which derives from them, the latter being the elevated spirits placed above the
seven heavens. As for the spirits of the seven heavens and their essences, they
are elemental, because they emerge from the smoke21 that is generated from the
elements. Also the angels who are generated from each heaven are elemental,
while those who are above them are natural. For this reason, God described them,
the heavenly group, as rivals,22 because nature is self-contradictory, and the selfcontradiction which exists in the divine names, that is, the relationships, derives
from the breath. Do you not see how the Essence which is beyond this aspect (of
self-contradiction) does not need the created beings? For this reason, the cosmos
emerged in the form of its originator, that is, the divine breath.

17 If you are real in essence and created in form, you will be merciful.
18 You should feed your soul with God’s spirit.
19 QurÞÁn 56:88.
20 The concrete, external forms of the cosmos reflect the name the All-Merciful, whose
breath serves as the prime matter of the cosmos. When God speaks, He breathes out,
and His words become the existents in the cosmos. SPK, pp. 19, 34, 127.
21 The identification of the heaven with smoke appears in QurÞÁn 41:11.
22 QurÞÁn 38:69.

The essence of Jesus 109
When it is hot, it rises, and when it is cold and humid, it falls, for precipitation
belongs to coldness and humidity, and when it is dry, it is stable without trembling. Precipitation drives from coldness and humidity. Do you not see how the
physician who wants to give a patient a remedy to drink (first) looks at the sedimentation in his urine? When he sees that it is precipitating, he knows that the illness has completely matured and gives him medication to drink in order to hasten
his cure. The urine precipitates only because of its natural humidity and coldness.
God kneaded the clay of the human being with his two hands. Though both
are right hands, they confront each other, yet the difference between them is quite
evident, even if they are only two, I mean two hands, because that which affects
nature is only that which fits her, and nature is self-contradictory. He brought
two hands (to create the human being). Since He brought him into existence with
two hands, which are ascribed to Him (al-yadayni al-muÃÁfayni),23 He called him
bashar, because of His direct connection (mubÁshara) (to the creation) fitting this
(honorable) act. God did so because (145) of his concern for this human species,
and He said to the one (the Devil) who declined prostration before Adam: “What
prevented you from prostrating before him whom I created with My own hands,
do you deem yourself greater” (QurÞÁn 38:75) than one who was like you, that is,
(composed of) of elements? “Or are you loftier” (QurÞÁn ibid.), than the elements?
(In fact) you are not so.
By “loftier” He means one who in his luminous form makes himself loftier than
the elemental (beings), even if one is a natural entity. The human being is superior
to other elemental species only because of his being created directly (bashar) of
clay by God. He is superior to all entities created of elements (but) without direct
connection (mubÁshara). His rank is above the terrestrial and celestial angels;
however, according to the divine statement, the higher angels are better than the
human species.
Whoever wishes to know the divine breath should know the cosmos, for whoever knows himself (or his soul) knows his Lord,24 who is manifested in the cosmos. This means that the cosmos manifests itself in the breath of the Merciful
who gives vent to the divine names which feel distressed because their effects are
not manifested. Hence, God bestows favor on Himself by that which He brought
into existence with His breath, for the first effect of His breath was in this divine
domain (janÁb),25 and afterward the effects of the divine breath do not cease
descending (in the cosmos hierarchy) by the divine encompassing release till the
last existent thing.

23 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ does not express reservations concerning this anthropomorphic picture
of the creation of the human being. However, the fact that he uses the verb aÃÁfa (he
ascribed) to designate the connection between God and His hands points to some kind
of reservation; that is, God does not have hands, but as they are ascribed to him in the
QurÞÁn, one cannot escape describing Him by this word.
24 For this dictum, see ch. 3, n. 4.
25 Very probably by this effect the author means the appearance of the divine names and
attributes. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 373.

110 The essence of Jesus
All things are latent in the essence of the breath/as is light in the essence of
dawn
And knowledge through proof is/like daybreak for the sleeper
Because he (the sleeper) sees what I said/(that is) a dream which shows the
breath
My words relieve him of every anxiety/when he recites (sÙrat) Ýabasa26
God manifests Himself to him/who comes seeking burning coal
He (Moses) considered it fire, but it was light/to kings and nightfarers27
(146) If you understand my words/you will know that you are needy
Had he (Moses) sought something else (not fire)/he would have seen the Real
in it, and God does not change His way (of self-manifestation)
As for the essence of Jesus (we say) that when the Real placed Himself in the
station of “until we know” (QurÞÁn 47:31),28 and (in fact) He knew, He asked
Jesus about what was ascribed to him, was it true or not, notwithstanding His
foreknowledge of this ascription’s occurrence or nonoccurrence. Thus, God said
to him: “Did you say to the people take me and my mother as two gods rather
than God?” (QurÞÁn 5:116) Out of courtesy, one should answer the questioner.
Since He manifested Himself to Jesus in this station and form, wisdom required
an answer that distinguishes the essence of many, and he said giving precedence
to God’s transcendence: “May You be exalted” (subÎÁnaka, QurÞÁn ibid.),
Then turning directly to God, he used the word “You” (and he added) “I am not
allowed,” with respect to myself in comparison to You, “to say what I have not
the right to say,” that is, what my identity and essence require. “If I had said such
a thing, You would have known it” (ibid.), for you are the speaker, and whoever
says something knows what he says, and you are the tongue by which I speak,
as God’s messenger informs us about his Lord in the divine tradition: “I am his
tongue by which he speaks.”29 He made His essence similar to the tongue of the
speaker, ascribing speech to His servant.
Then the righteous servant completed his answer, saying, “You know what
is in myself” (my soul – ibid.), for the speaker is the Real, “while I do not know
what” (ibid.) it contains.30 He denied knowledge of Jesus’ essence, with respect
to his essence, not referring to his being a speaker and a producer of effects.
“Indeed, You are” (innaka anta, ibid.). He says these words (“You are”), (using

26 ÝAbasa means “he frowned” (QurÞÁn 80:1). This chapter of the QurÞÁn deals mainly with
the Resurrection.
27 That is, to the elite and the common people.
28 This verse speaks of God’s trial of the people in order to know their characteristics.
However, God knows from eternity these traits, but he wishes to know them from
terrestrial phenomena, that is, to know people from their own acts and not from His
eternal knowledge. As usual, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ exploits complete verses and phrases of
verses, taking them out of their context for his own objectives.
29 BukhÁrÐ, LXXXI:38 (6502). Ch. 1, n. 81.
30 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ changes the verse, which reads in the original: “While I do not know what
Your soul contains” or “what is in Yourself” (nafsika).

The essence of Jesus 111
the pronouns) of separation and support (al-faÒl wa’l-ÝimÁd),31 to emphasize and
confirm his message, because only God knows absolutely the hidden things
(ÝallÁm al-ghuyÙb – ibid.).
(In his answer) he separated and joined together, unified and multiplied, broadened and narrowed, then he said, completing the answer: “I did not say to them
but what you commanded me to say” (ibid., 117). First, he denied that he had said,
and then he spoke in the affirmative (147) out of courtesy to the questioner. Had
he not acted in this manner, he would have been described as lacking in knowledge of the realities, which was far from his conduct. For this reason, he said:
“but what you commanded me to say” (ibid.), (which means) You are the speaker
through my tongue, and You are my tongue.
(Now), think how subtle and precise is the following spiritual and divine message: (Jesus said) “Worship God”! (ibid.). He introduced the name God (allÁh),
because the worshipers differ in their religious observances and because of the
variety of religions; he did not particularize a name, but rather introduced the
name which embraces all (religions). Then he said: “My Lord and your Lord”
(ibid.). It is well known that one’s relationship with a certain existent lord differs
from one’s relationship with another. For this reason, when he said, “my Lord
and your Lord,” he distinguished between two appellations; the first applies to the
speaker and the second to the addressee. (He said), “but what you commanded me
to say” (ibid.), thus he affirmed himself as one who is commanded, which meant
his being only a worshiper, for the one commanded is supposed to obey, even if
he does not.
Since the command descends according to the law of ranks, everyone who
appears in a certain rank is characterized by the reality that this rank grants. The
rank of the commanded possesses a law which appears in every commanded
person, just as the rank of the commander possesses a law which is manifested
in every commander. The Real says: “Observe the prayer” (QurÞÁn 2:43), for He
is the commander, while the obliged person (mukallaf)32 is the commanded.33 And
the servant says: “O my Lord, forgive me” (QurÞÁn 7:151, 38:35, 71:28), for he is
the commander, and the Real is the commanded. What the Real requires from the
servant by His command is the same as what the servant requires from the Real
by his command. For this reason, every request is necessarily complied with, even
if its compliance is postponed, just as some people who are obliged to observe a
prayer time postpone their prayer, and when possible pray at another time. Thus,
compliance with the request is necessary if only by intention.
Then he (Jesus) said: “I was (a witness) over them” (QurÞÁn 5:117), and he
did not say over me with them, as he said, “my Lord and your Lord” (ibid.),
“(I was) a witness during my stay among them” (ibid.), because prophets are (148)
31 W. Wright, A Grammar of the Arabic Language, Cambridge 1967, I I, p. 259.
32 This term can also be translated as “one who is charged with responsibilities.” Izutsu,
p. 171.
33 I read wa’l-mukallaf (huwa) al-maÞmÙr instead of al-mukallaf al-maÞmÙr in the text,
because of the structure of the following sentence.

112 The essence of Jesus
witnesses over their communities so long as they stay in them. “When You took
my soul” (ibid.), meaning when You raised me to Yourself,34 concealing them
from me and me from them, “You were the watcher over them” (ibid.) not in my
matter but in theirs, for You were their sight, which required observation.
The person’s witnessing of himself is like the Real’s witnessing of him. (Jesus)
made Him a watcher through this name (al-raqÐb), because He described himself
as a witness. Wishing to distinguish between himself and his Lord, he would be
known as (a witness), because of his being a servant, and the Real is the Real,
because He is his Lord. He called himself a witness and the Real the Watcher,
giving precedence to his people over himself and saying: “Over them (I was) a
witness during my stay among them” (Ýalayhim shahÐdan), while postponing their
appearance in relation to the Real, saying, “You were the Watcher over them”
(ibid.), because the Lord merits precedence in rank.
Then he let (us) know that the Real, the Watcher, bears the name which Jesus
attributed to himself, that is, the Witness, in his words “a witness over them”
(ibid.). And he said: “You are Witness of everything” (ibid., wa-anta ÝalÁ kull
shayÞ shahÐd); the word “every” (kull) denotes generality, while “thing” denotes
the most undefined word. He introduced the name “witness,” because He is the
Witness of every witnessed thing in keeping with what this witnessed thing
requires. He pointed out that the Real is the Witness of Jesus’ people, saying,
“over them (I was) a witness during my stay among them” (ibid.). This is the witness of the Real as embodied in Jesus’ matter, just as it was proved that He was
his tongue, hearing and seeing.
Then Jesus expressed a phrase referring to himself and another referring to
MuÎammad. As for the phrase that belonged to Jesus, it was Jesus speaking God’s
message about him in His book, and as for MuÎammad’s phrase, it reached him in
a certain place, and he uttered it repeatedly without turning to another phrase until
dawn’s first light. “If you punish them, (it is) because they are Your servants, and
if You forgive them, (it is) because You are the All-mighty, the All-Wise” (ibid.,
118). Both the word “they” and the word “he” are third-person pronouns35 (149), as
he said: “They were the ones who disbelieved” (QurÞÁn 48:25, AH), using the thirdperson pronoun (the pronoun of the concealed), for hiddenness concealed them from
what is meant by the witnessed one who is present (al-mashhÙd al-ÎÁÃir).36 And
he said, “If you punish them” (ibid.) with the third-person pronoun, which is the
very veil that conceals them from the Real. He reminded them of God before they
will be present (on the Day of Resurrection), and when they will be in attendance
before Him, the leaven will dominate the dough and will make the dough like itself.
“Because they are Your servants,” (he said), particularizing his form of address (in
the second-person pronoun) because of their state of unity with God.
No humiliation is greater than that of servants, because they are incapable of acting
freely, for they submit to the will of their master, who has no partner in the dominion
34 Cf. QurÞÁn 3:55.
35 Literally: pronoun of the hidden or the concealed (ÃamÐr al-ghÁÞib).
36 Meaning: Jesus.

The essence of Jesus 113
over them. That is because he said: “Your servants.” Hence, he singled them out. By
punishment he meant their humiliation, and no people were humiliated more than
they, because they were servants. Their essences required their being humiliated,
hence You did not demean them any less than is required by their essences.
“If You forgive (taghfir) them” means if You conceal them from being punished
as they deserve, because of their transgression; that is, You prepared a cover for them
to conceal them from punishment and shield them from it.37 “Because You are the
All-Mighty” (the All-Mighty – al-ÝazÐz) means the one whose protection is unassailable (al-manÐÝ al-ÎimÁ).38 When the Real gives this name to one of His servants, He
is called the Strengthener (al-muÝizz), and the one who is given this name is called
mighty (al-ÝazÐz). The one whose protection is unassailable is kept from the harm of
punishment and suffering intended by God as the Punisher and Afflicter. He presented
the pronoun of separation and support (al-faÒl wa’l-ÝimÁd)39 to emphasize his message
and as a safeguard of the coherence of his verse: “You are the Knower of the hidden
things” and “You are the Watcher over them.” Likewise he said: “Because You are
the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.” (In this verse) Jesus asked God, beseeching Him in his
request all nightlong until daybreak for an answer. Had he heard an answer after the
first question he would not have repeated (his request). The Real detailed the reasons
for their punishment and Jesus responded (150) each time repeating this verse (ibid.,
118). Had he considered God’s presentation preferable, he would have invoked God
against them, not for them. Jesus put before God what they deserved, that is, submission to God and their exposing to His forgiveness.
It is related that when the Real loves the voice of his servant invoking Him, He
postpones His response to him until the servant repeats his request out of His love
for him and not out of His turning away from him. For this reason, he indicates the
name “the All-Wise,” because he who is wise puts things in their proper places and
does not allow them to deviate from what their realities require through their attributes. Thus, the wise is he who knows well the order of things. Jesus repeated this
verse, because he possessed great knowledge of God. Whoever recites (the QurÞÁn)
should recite it in this manner, otherwise silence is more appropriate for him.
If God guides a servant to speak of something, He guides him only because He
wishes to respond to him and satisfy his need. Hence, let no one think that what
one is directed to comes late. Let him rather persist like the Messenger’s persistence in his repetition of this verse in all his states, so that he may hear with his
ears or with his inner hearing (samÝ), in whatever way you want, or in whatever
way God may make him40 hear His response. If God rewards you with a request
of the tongue, He will make you hear with your ear, and if He rewards you with a
spiritual request, He will make you hear with your inner hearing.

37 For the verb ghafara in the meaning of “he concealed,” see the beginning of p. 74 of the
Arabic text.
38 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses here improper annexation (iÃÁfa ghayr ÎaqÐqÐyya). Wright, Grammar,
I I, p. 64.
39 See n. 31 above.
40 The text has “make you hear” (asmaÝaka).

16 The bezel of the wisdom of mercy1
exists in the essence of Solomon

(151) “It” (QurÞÁn 27:30), meaning the letter, “is from Solomon” (ibid.), “and it
is” (ibid.), that is, its contents are (written) “in the name of God, the All-Merciful
and the All-Compassionate” (ibid.). Some people learned the precedence of
Solomon’s name over God’s name, but (this conclusion) is wrong. What is said
concerning this precedence is improper with respect to Solomon’s knowledge of
God. How could their utterances be appropriate, for as BilqÐs2 said about this: “A
honorable letter has been delivered to me” (ibid. 29), that is, one honoring her?
Possibly what stirred them to speak as they did was the incident in which Chosroes
tore up the Prophet’s letter. However, he did not tear it up until he had read it and
knew its contents. So too would BilqÐs have done, had she not been guided as she
was, and the letter would not have been protected from being burned, whether its
honorable sender’s name had been given precedence over God’s (name) or not.
Solomon introduced two kinds of mercy: the mercy of favor (raÎmat alimtinÁn) and the mercy of obligation (raÎmat al-wujÙb), which correspond to the
All-Merciful (al-raÎmÁn) and the All-Compassionate (al-raÎÐm), respectively.
As the All-Merciful He bestows His favors freely, and as the All-Compassionate
He is obliged to give favors. This obligation derives from His bestowal; the AllCompassionate is included in the All-Merciful. That is because God decreed on
Himself mercy3 for (the benefit of) the servant, because the Real mentions the
acts carried out by the servant for which he deserves mercy. Mercy is incumbent
on God, and He ordained it for Himself, I mean the mercy of obligation. Servants
who belong to this kind (of people who carry out acts and deserve mercy) know
the identity of the one who carries out their acts.
Human acts are divided among eight organs. The Real informed us that He
is the essence of every organ, hence the agent of human acts is solely the Real,

1 Solomon is associated with Mercy, because in his letter to Queen BilqÐs he mentioned
God the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate. QurÞÁn 27:29–30. See below.
2 This is the name of the Queen of Sheba in the QurÞÁn. At first Ibn al-ÝArabÐ thought
that she was born to a father of the demons (abÙhÁ min al-jinn) and to a human mother
(ummuhÁ min al-ins), then he changed his mind and denied his first view of her.
Al-MuÝjam, pp. 215.
3 QurÞÁn 6:54.

The essence of Solomon 115
while the form (of the act) (152) belongs to the servant.4 The essence is contained
in him (the servant), that is, only His name, because He is the essence of what is
manifested. (Because God is manifested in things) He is called Creation (khalq)
and because of Him the names The Manifest and the Last belong to the servant,
given that he was nonexistent then existent. And because the manifestation of the
servant and his acts depend on Him, he bears the names The Hidden and The First.
Thus, when you see creation, you see the First and the Last, the Manifest and the
Hidden.
This knowledge5 was not concealed from Solomon, but rather it was part of the
dominion (he enjoyed over things) which was appropriate to none after him, that is,
the manifestation of his dominion in the sensuous world. MuÎammad was given the
same trait Solomon received, but he did not manifest it. God gave MuÎammad the
power to overcome a demon which came to him in the night to kill him. He planned to
seize and tie it to one of the mosque’s columns until morning so that the children of alMadÐna could play with it.6 He (MuÎammad) mentioned Solomon’s request, but God
thwarted it. Although MuÎammad was granted power, he did not manifest it, while
Solomon did. Solomon (asked God to grant him) a dominion (mulk),7 not absolute
dominion, hence we know that he wished to possess some dominion. We are aware
that other people shared with him each part of the dominion granted to him by God,
but he was particularized by joining all these parts together and by the report about
the manifested demon. Thus, he was particularized by the aggregation of all parts of
dominion and by its manifestation. Had MuÎammad not spoken in the tradition that
“God enabled me to (overcome the demon),” we would have said that since he did not
wish to seize it, God reminded him of Solomon’s request. That way he might know
that God had not granted him power to seize it. Thus, God denied him (his request).
Since he said, “God enabled me to (overcome the demon),” we know that God granted
him the power to act freely. And God reminded him and he remembered Solomon’s
request, (thus) teaching himself how to behave. As a result, we learn in general that no
other human being after Solomon was bequeathed with manifestation of this power.
Regarding this issue, our aim is only to discuss it, calling attention to the two
kinds of mercy Solomon mentioned whose names in Arabic are al-raÎmÁn alraÎÐm (the All-Merciful, the All-Compassionate). God restricts (153) the mercy
of obligation and derestricts the mercy of favor, in His saying, “My mercy encompasses all things” (QurÞÁn 7:156), even the divine names, that is, the realities of
relationships. He bestows favors on the divine names through us. Thus, we are the
result of the mercy of favor through the divine names and the lordly relationships.
4 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ uses the word “agent” (ÝÁmil) to indicate that the Real is the
cause of the occurrence of the act but not of its characteristics. This is reminiscent of
al-GhazÁlÐ’s theory of causality as elaborated in his non-philosophical works. According
to this theory, God’s power makes the series of causes and effects move. Abrahamov,
“Al-GhazÁlÐ’s Theory of Causality.”
5 Solomon was aware of the idea that God is the agent of his acts and that he is a
manifestation of Him.
6 BukhÁrÐ, VI I I:75 (3423).
7 QurÞÁn 38:35.

116 The essence of Solomon
Then he obliged Himself to bestow favors through our self-manifestation and he
made us know that He is our essence so we may know that He obliged Himself to
bestow favors only for Himself. Consequently, mercy does not exceed Him, for
on whom would He bestow favors were none to exist other than He?
However, we should not ignore the difference between entities, for people
excel one another in knowledge, so it is said that this person is more learned than
another, although the Essence (of all things) is one. This means that the attribute
of knowledge overcomes the attribute of will (irÁda), just as the attribute of will
overcomes the attribute of power, and this is the hierarchy of the divine attributes.8
Likewise, the divine hearing and seeing (are arranged). All the divine names are
graded in a hierarchy. In the same manner creation is arranged according to a
hierarchy; for example, we say that one individual is more knowledgeable than
another, although the Essence is one. Just as you give precedence to a certain
divine name and you call and depict it by all the names, the manifested creation
has all the attributes of that with which it is compared. Thus, every part of the
cosmos contains all its parts; that is, every part is the substrate of the realities of
the whole cosmos. Hence, our saying that Zayd is inferior to ÝAmr in knowledge
does not infringe (the idea) that the Real’s Essence is the essence of both. Equally,
just as ÝAmr’s essence is more perfect and knowing than Zayd’s, the divine names
excel each other, yet they are none other than the Real.
As a knowing God is more general than God who wills or is All-Mighty, His
Essence, (nevertheless), does not change and He is as He is. As a result, you, my
friend, cannot know Him and be ignorant of Him or affirm Him and deny Him in one
aspect, unless you affirm Him by the aspect He affirms Himself and deny Him by
the aspect He denies Himself. (This is) like the verse combining denial and affirmation with respect to Him when (154) God says: “There is nothing like Him” (QurÞÁn
42:11), by which He denies, and “He is the All-Hearing and All-Seeing,” by which He
affirms. He affirms (Himself) through an attribute which includes every creature that
hears and sees. In this world a creature can exist that is concealed from the perception
of some people, but it will be made manifest to all people in the world to come, which
is the abode of living just like this world. In the latter, the living essence is concealed
from some servants, so that particularization and difference concerning (the perception) of the realities of the cosmos are manifested (only to some people). The Real is
more manifested in him who possesses a general perception than in him who does not
possess such a perception. Do not be veiled (from the truth) through the hierarchy of
things and say that the statement that the Real is the Essence of creation9 is false, after
I have shown you the hierarchy of the divine names whose identity with the Real you
do not doubt, for He is named by them, and this is God.

8 Possibly Ibn al-ÝArabÐ follows here al-GhazÁlÐ’s scheme of God’s attributes according to
which knowledge raises will and will raises power. Abrahamov, “Al-GhazÁlÐ’s Theory
of Causality,” p. 83; IÎyÁÞ, Vol. IV, pp. 249f (ch. bayÁn ÎaqÐqat al-tawÎÐd alladhÐ huwa
aÒl al-tawakkul).
9 The text has “creation is the essence of the Real” (al-khalq huwiyyat al-Îaqq), which
seems to me incorrect and should be replaced by the transposed subject and predicate.

The essence of Solomon 117
Moreover, how could Solomon give precedence to his name over God’s
name,10 as they claimed, despite his being a part of the whole creation which the
attribute of mercy brought into existence? He should have placed the All-Merciful
and the All-Compassionate first so that the dependence of the object of mercy on
the Real would be right. Making that which deserves the place of the last be the
first and vice versa is the reverse of realities.
Because of her wisdom and elevation, BilqÐs did not mention the one who sent
the letter to her. She did so to teach her followers that she was aware of things whose
ways they did not know. This is a part of the divine direction regarding kingdom,
for if the people of the state do not know the way reports reach the king, they will
be afraid to act freely. Only when they know they are protected from danger of the
ruler discovering their deeds will they act freely. If they knew for certain who delivers reports to their king, they would blandish him and bribe him liberally in order
to do as they want, knowing that their deeds will not reach the king’s notice. BilqÐs
merely said: “(A honorable letter) has been delivered to me,” without naming the
sender, because that was her policy, by which she kept the people of her kingdom
and its elevated leaders cautious of her. (155) Thus, she earned the right to be superior to them.
As for the superiority of the human knower over the demonic knower regarding the knowledge of the mysteries of action and the special nature of things, it
is known through the aspect of time, for a twinkling of the eye of the beholder11
is quicker than one’s rising from one’s seat, because the movement of a glance
in the perception of its object is more rapid than the motion of the body. That is,
because the duration of the movement of a glance is the same as the (duration of
the) perception of the object of sight, notwithstanding the distance between the
beholder and the object. (For example), the duration of opening the eye equals
the duration of the eye’s perception of the fixed stars, and closing the eye equals
the ceasing of perception. Rising from one’s seat is not as quick.
Asaf ibn Berechya12 was faster than the demons, for his speech and action
occurred in the same instant. As a result, in this moment, Solomon saw with his
own eyes BilqÐs’ throne established before him, lest he should imagine that he
perceived the throne in its place without its being moved (from its place). In our
view, because of the simultaneous occurrence (of speech and the establishment
of the throne), no movement (of the throne from its original place to Solomon’s
palace) happened. Instead, (the throne in its original place) entered a state of nonexistence and was brought back into existence (in Solomon’s palace) with the
awareness of none, except the one who knew God’s saying: “No indeed, they are
perplexed regarding a new creation” (QurÞÁn 50:15). They immediately saw what
they were looking at.
10 QurÞÁn 27:30.
11 Cf. QurÞÁn 27:40.
12 Muslim tradition identifies “the one who has some knowledge of the Scripture” (QurÞÁn
27:40) with Asaf ibn Berechya, who was a Levite, a poet, and one of Solomon’s
secretaries. Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr, Vol. V, pp. 235f. Chronicles, I, 6:24. Cf. Izutsu, pp. 210f.

118 The essence of Solomon
If the case is as we pointed out, then the time of its absence, I mean the absence
of the throne from its place, is the time of its existence with Solomon, because of
the repetition of creation by means of (God’s) breaths.
One has no knowledge of this measure (of repetition of creation). Moreover,
no one is aware that in himself with each breath one becomes nonexistent then
(thumma) existent again. Do not say that the word “then” (thumma) requires a
lapse of time – this is not correct. According to the Arabs, this word requires only
(156) the precedence of a cause (to its effect) in specific circumstances, as the
poet said: “Just as (you) throw the lance, then it trembles.”13 No doubt, the instant
of throwing is the same instant it trembles. (The poet) uses the word “then,”
(although) no lapse of time occurs (between the throwing and the trembling). In
like manner, the repetition of creation by breaths takes place; the moment of a
thing’s nonexistence is the same moment of the existence of its like, as with the
repetition of the creation of accidents in the AshÝarite theory.14
The existence of BilqÐs’ throne (in Solomon’s palace) is a (most) difficult matter, but only for one who does not know what we mentioned earlier regarding
this story. Asaf’s advantage in this matter was only (his responsibility for) the
occurrence of recreation in Solomon’s court. Whoever understands what we have
said (knows) that the throne traveled no distance, that no land was contracted for
it, and that it did not break through the earth. This act was carried out by one of
Solomon’s followers, so that Solomon would greatly (impress) those present (in
his court), that is, BilqÐs and her entourage.
The reason for this (event) is that Solomon was God’s gift to David, as the
QurÞÁnic verse states: “We gave (wahabnÁ) David Solomon” (QurÞÁn 38:30).
A gift (hibba) is one’s bestowal of favor (inÝÁm), not because of an agreement
or deservingness. This gift is a lavish favor, a strong argument, and a devastating blow.15 As for Solomon’s knowledge, God said: “We made him understand
the case”16 (QurÞÁn 21:79), although Solomon’s judgment contradicts David’s.
However, God “granted both of them judgment and knowledge” (ibid.). God
made David acquire his knowledge from Him, while Solomon’s knowledge on
this matter came to him directly from God, for (actually) God was the judge.
Solomon served as a transmitter of truth in an assembly of sincerity (maqÝad

13 This is a fragment of a line of poetry written by AbÙ DÁwÙd ibn al-ÍajjÁj. Affifi, I I,
p. 215.
14 The text here has the word dalÐl, which literally means proof or sign. The AshÝarites hold
the recreation of the accidents, and in this manner Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s idea is reminiscent of
theirs.
15 The last two phrases are directed toward BilqÐs’ followers, who were confronted with
the power of Solomon.
16 According to the Tradition, the case to which the QurÞÁn alludes is David’s trial of a
shepherd whose flock of sheep entered a field and ruined its harvest. David judged
that the flock should be transferred to the owner of the field to be his possession, while
Solomon opined that the shepherd should repair the damage and until he does so, the
owner of the land will enjoy the milk and the wool of the sheep. Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr, Vol.
V, p. 576.

The essence of Solomon 119
Òidq).17 This issue resembles the case of an independent legist (mujtahid)18 who
reaches the correct legal decision, which God would have arrived at, had He taken
it upon Himself, or the case of one who judges in accordance with the revelation
to God’s Messenger. In both cases the judge receives two rewards, while one who
makes incorrect decision receives one reward, because, notwithstanding his fault,
he uses knowledge and judgment. The MuÎammadan community was given the
rank of judgment of both Solomon and David. How excellent a community it is!
(157) Although BilqÐs knew the great distance (between her palace and
Solomon’s) and the impossibility, in her view, of the throne’s movement in so
short a time, when she saw her throne, she said: “It looks like it” (QurÞÁn 27:42,
AH). She believed in what we have mentioned, that is, recreation by similars. It
is it – the idea you are the same in the time of recreation as you were before is
correct.
Solomon’s perfect knowledge (is shown) in the QurÞÁn’s notice regarding
his palace. “(Then) it was said to her: ‘Enter the palace’” (ibid., 44). The palace
was perfectly paved with smooth glass. “When she saw it, she thought it was a
deep pool of water, and bared her legs” (ibid., AH) to prevent the water from
reaching her dress. Solomon informed her that the throne which she saw is like
this water. This is the utmost degree of justice, for he told her that she was
right in saying “It looks like it” (ibid., 42). Then she said: “O my Lord, I have
wronged myself, and I submitted myself with Solomon” (ibid., 44), that is, like
Solomon, “to God, the Lord of all beings” (ÝÁlamÐn)19 (ibid.). She did not submit
to Solomon, but rather to God, the Lord of all beings, because Solomon was one
of the beings. In her submission, she did not bind herself (to Solomon), just as
the messengers do not bind themselves (to people) in their belief in God, contrary to Pharaoh, who said: “The Lord of Moses and Aaron” (QurÞÁn 7:122).20
Even if Pharaoh’s submission was somewhat similar to that expressed by BilqÐs,
he was too weak (to submit to God); BilqÐs was more learned in her submission to God. Pharaoh was subject to the (event)21 of this time when he said: “I
believe in what the Children of Israel believe.”22 He singled out (his belief),
because he saw the sorcerers saying concerning their belief in God: “The Lord
of Moses and Aaron” (QurÞÁn 7:122). BilqÐs’ submission (islÁm) was identical to Solomon’s, for she said, “with Solomon “ (QurÞÁn 27:44), then followed
him in such a way that she believed in all Solomon’s creeds, just as we walk

17 For this phrase, see QurÞÁn 54:55.
18 This is a legist who formulates his legal decisions using the four roots of law (QurÞÁn,
Sunna, IjmÁÝ, and QiyÁs) without blindly following human authorities or books.
19 For ÝÁlamÐn see p. 37, n. 7 above.
20 Strangely enough, in the QurÞÁn, Pharaoh’s sorcerers said this as written in verses 121–
122: “The sorcerers fell to their knees and said: ‘We believe in the Lord of all beings,
the Lord of Moses and Aaron.’” See also QurÞÁn 26:47–48.
21 He said this when he was drowning with his troops.
22 This is a paraphrase of QurÞÁn 10:90, which reads: “I believe there is no God except the
One the Children of Israel believe in.”

120 The essence of Solomon
on God’s Straight Path (al-ÒirÁÔ al-mustaqÐm),23 because our forelocks are in
His grasp. It is inconceivable that we should leave Him. We are with Him by
being contained (in Him),24 and He is with us, as it is clearly announced: “He is
with you wherever you are” (QurÞÁn 57:4). We are with Him, because He seizes
our forelocks (158), and He is with Himself wherever He leads us on His Path.
Everything in the cosmos is on the Straight Path, which was established (for it)
by His Lord. This is what BilqÐs learned from Solomon and then said: “to God,
the Lord of all beings” (QurÞÁn 27:44). She did not single out one being to the
exclusion of others.
As for the faculty of subjugation by which Solomon was distinguished and
excelled others, and through which God granted him dominion which “no one else
after him would achieve” (QurÞÁn 38:35), it derived from Solomon’s command.
God said: “We subjected to his power the wind, which blows at his command”
(QurÞÁn 38:36). The fact that the wind is subjected to a human is not the issue here,
for God’s words include all of us, excluding none: “He subjects for you all that
which is in the heavens and the earth” (QurÞÁn 45:13). God mentioned the subjugation of the winds, the stars, and other things; however, this subjugation is not at
our command, but at God’s command. If you consider (the matter), He singled out
Solomon, (granting him) only the power of command, with neither the faculty of
concentration (jamÝiyya) nor of spiritual aspiration (himma). We say this, because
we know that the terrestrial bodies are affected by the souls’ spiritual aspirations if
the latter are placed in the station of concentration.25 We have examined this in the
Way.26 However, Solomon had only to utter the command to any entity he wanted
to subject without spiritual aspiration or concentration.
Know, may God inspire us and you by His spirit, that if such a gift is bestowed on
a servant, whoever he is, this does not diminish his dominion in the next world and
nor does it harm his credit, though Solomon asked this from his Lord. Experience
of the Way requires that God should give him in advance what He preserves for
others in the world to come, and if God wishes, He will settle Solomon’s account
in the next world. God said to him, “This is Our gift” (QurÞÁn 38:39), and he said,
neither to you nor to others, “so bestow” (ibid.), that is, give “or withhold without
settling an account” (ibid.). We know from experiencing the Way that Solomon’s
request of this (faculty) derived from God’s command. If a request occurs at the
divine command, the one who requests receives complete reward for his request.
If the Lord wills, He fulfills the servant’s need regarding what he asked of Him,
and if He wills (159), He withholds (His response). That is because the servant

23 For this term, see the beginning of ch. 10.
24 Bi’l-taÃmÐn. KÁshÁnÐ (p. 398) deduces this understanding from the word Ãimna,
meaning in, within. Also, this phrase may express the idea that our existence in Him
is concealed, that is, not written or articulated outwardly, while His staying with us is
manifested in the QurÞÁn.
25 That the soul affects the body is an idea developed by Ibn SÐnÁ. KitÁb al-najÁt,
pp. 196–205.
26 See pp. 127f of the Arabic text above.

The essence of Solomon 121
carried out what God obliged him; to wit, he obeyed his Lord’s command concerning his request. Had his request come from himself and not as a reaction to his
Lord’s command, He would have settled his account with him. This (procedure)
pervades all that is requested of God, as He said to His Prophet MuÎammad: “Say:
‘O my Lord, increase my knowledge’” (QurÝÁn 20:114). Hence, he obeyed his
Lord’s command, asking increase in knowledge to such an extent that when he
was given milk, he interpreted it as knowledge, just as he interpreted his dream in
which he saw himself receiving a cup of milk, which he drank, and the remainder
he gave to ÝUmar ibn al-KhaÔÔÁb. They (his followers) asked him: “What is your
interpretation of the milk?” He answered: “It is knowledge.”27 In like manner,
when he was made to travel (usriya bihi) by night,28 an angel brought him a vessel
of milk and another of wine, and MuÎammad drank the milk. Then the angel said
to him: You did the right thing according to your inborn trait (fiÔra); may God do
the right thing by you for your community. Thus, when milk appears in a dream,
it is an image of knowledge, which takes the form of milk, just as JibrÐl took the
form of an ordinary human being before Maryam. For when MuÎammad said:
“People are sleeping, and when they die, they wake up,”29 he was calling attention
to all that the human being sees in his life in this world as being like the dream of
a sleeper, (that is), imagination which should be interpreted.
Being is only imagination/(but) in truth it is (also) reality
Whoever understands this/attains the mysteries of the Way
Thus, when milk was given to MuÎammad, he used to say: “God bless us by
it and give us increase of it,” because he saw the milk as an image of knowledge,
and he was commanded to ask for an increase in knowledge. (However) when
he was given something other than milk, he used to say: “God bless us by it and
feed us by something better than this.”30 God will not settle His account with him
whom God gives what He gives by a request done at a divine command, because
of this request in the Hereafter. (But) whoever is given something by God because
of his request made without God’s command, it is for God to decide, as He wishes,
whether to settle his account (160) or not. I hope God will not settle His account
especially concerning knowledge, for His command to His Prophet to ask increase
in knowledge is the same command to his community. That is because God said:
“God’s Messenger was a good model for you” (QurÞÁn 33:21). What better model
is there for one who learns from God? If we called attention to Solomon’s station
in its completeness, you would see something that would frighten you to know
thoroughly, for most scholars of this Way did not know Solomon’s state and position, and the matter is not as they maintained.

27 Ibn Íanbal, I I: 83, 154; BukhÁrÐ, I, 27 (82).
28 QurÞÁn 17:1.
29 This dictum of the Prophet does not appear in the canonical collections of the Íadith
but in QurÞÁn commentaries and Sufi works. See, for example, TafsÐr al-TustarÐ to
QurÞÁn 16:97.
30 AbÙ DÁwÙd, XXV:21 (3730).

17 The bezel of the wisdom of existence
exists in the essence of David

(160) Know that since prophecy, I mean legislative prophecy (nubuwwat al-tashrÐÝ),
and messengerhood (risÁla) are special divine (gifts), they are not acquired absolutely. God’s gifts of this kind to them are not rewards for which they are asked
to give (something in exchange). He gives them (gifts) through bestowing favors.
God said: “And We gave him Isaac and Jacob” (QurÞÁn 6:84), that is, to Abraham,
the friend (of God). And about Job, God said: “We gave him his family and their
like with them” (QurÞÁn 38:43). And regarding Moses, He said: “Out of our Mercy
We gave him his brother Aaron as a prophet” (QurÞÁn 19:53), and other (verses)
like that. What bestowed favors on them at the beginning is the same (entity) that
bestowed favors on them in all or most of their states, and it is only His name the
Bestower (al-wahhÁb).
And He said concerning David: “We bestowed our favor on him” (QurÞÁn
34:10) without connecting this favor to a reward He would ask in return from
David, and without informing him that He gave the aforementioned favor as a
reward. When God asked thanks for this act, He asked it from David’s family;
He did not mention David, so that his family would thank Him for the favor He
bestowed on David. Regarding David, it was a gift of favor and beneficence,
while regarding his family, it was not so, because He asked them to respond and
said: “Thank God, family of David, for few of My servants are thankful” (QurÞÁn
34:13). If the prophets (161) thanked God for the favors He bestowed on them,
they did so not because God asked them to thank Him, but out of their own choice,
just as God’s Messenger stood thanking Him, until his legs became swollen, for
He forgave him his earlier and later sins.1 When someone said (something) to him
concerning his behavior, he said: “Shall I not be a thankful person?”2 God said
about Noah: “Indeed, he was a thankful servant” (QurÞÁn 17:3), because few of
God’s servants are so.
The first favor God bestowed on David was His giving him a name composed
of disconnected letters, dÁl, alif, and wÁw. Thus, He severed his connections from
the world, informing us about him purely by his name. However, God named (His

1 QurÞÁn 48:2.
2 BukhÁrÐ, XIX:6 (1130).

The essence of David 123
Prophet) MuÎammad by using both connected and disconnected letters in order
on the one hand to connect MuÎammad to Him and on the other to separate him
from the world. Hence, in his name, He combined the two states of MuÎammad,
while these two states were internally expressed in David without God’s establishing them in his name. This, that is, calling attention to his two states, was
MuÎammad’s special trait which David lacked. (And so) his personality (literally:
his matter) became perfect in all aspects, just as it is in his name AÎmad.3 This
derives from God’s wisdom. Then He said, regarding David and His bestowing
on him favors, that the mountains and the birds reverberated the praise of (God)
with David’s praising, so that their praises joined his.4 God granted him power
and described him by it, and granted him wisdom and decisive resolution (faÒl alkhiÔÁb).5 Then He (granted) him the greatest favor and nearness to Us6 and stated
specifically that the vicegerency belonged to him alone. God did not do this for
any other human being, even if there were vicegerents among them. He said: “O
David, We appointed you a vicegerent in the earth, so judge justly between people
and do not follow your own will” (QurÞÁn 38:26), that is, what comes to your mind
when you judge without taking into account My inspiration, “lest this may lead you
astray from (162) God’s path” (ibid.), that is, the way revealed to My messengers.
Then God treated David tenderly, saying: “Those who stray from God’s path will
be severely punished, because they forgot the Day of Reckoning” (ibid.). He did not
say to him: “If you stray from My path, you will be severely punished.”
If you say: “The vicegerency of Àdam was also appointed (in the QurÞÁn),” we
shall answer: “Àdam’s appointment is not similar to David’s, (because God only)
said (it) to the angels: ‘I am appointing a vicegerent in the earth’ (QurÞÁn 2:30),
and He did not say: “I am appointing Àdam a vicegerent in the earth.” Even if He
had said so, it would not have been like His saying “We appointed you a vicegerent,” regarding David, because the latter statement is definite and the former is
not. The mention of Àdam after that in the story does not indicate that he was the
vicegerent whom God appointed. Hence, pay attention to God’s reports of His
servants.
Likewise, regarding Abraham, the Friend, (God said): “I am appointing you a
leader (imÁm) of people” (QurÞÁn 2:124), and He did not say “vicegerent,” even if
we know that leadership (imÁma) here means vicegerency (khilÁfa). These (two
concepts) are not the same, because He did not mention its (the leadership’s) most
specific name, which is vicegerency.7 Regarding David, there is an additional
element of particularization, because He appointed him a vicegerent of judgment
that originates only from God, for He said to him: “Judge justly between people” (QurÞÁn 38:26). However, Àdam’s vicegerency was likely not of this degree.

3 QurÞÁn 61:6.
4 This is an allusion to QurÞÁn 21:79, 38:18–19.
5 QurÞÁn 38:20.
6 Ibid., 25.
7 On the use of these two terms in Islamic theology, see my “Al-¬Ásim Ibn IbrÁhÐm’s
Theory of the Imamat,” Arabica 34(1987):80–105.

124 The essence of David
Rather it was the replacement of whoever lived in the earth before his time, not
that he was a vicegerent of God among His creatures with divine judgment over
them. Even if he actually was God’s vicegerent, we are only talking about his
appointment and its manifest form.
God has in the earth vicegerents who are the messengers. At present, vicegerency derives from the messengers and not from God. They judge only according
to what the Messenger promulgated to them and do not violate his rules. However,
here is a subtle issue, which only people like us know, that is, learning the judgments in keeping with the Messenger’s legal way.
The Messenger’s vicegerent is the one who learns judgments from the transmitted traditions (from the Messenger) (163), or by applying the method of
personal efforts (ijtihÁd), (the authority of) which is also transmitted from the
Messenger. Among us are some who learn from God, hence they are God’s vicegerents through the same criterion, and the content (of the rules) they receive is
the same as that which the Messenger received from God. Thus, seen outwardly,
they are followed by others, because they do not contradict the Messenger’s judgment, like Jesus when he will come down and judge and like MuÎammad in God’s
saying: “Those are the people whom God has guided, so follow their guidance”
(QurÞÁn 6:90). Concerning what he knows about the way of learning, the follower
is distinguished and successful, and he is like the Prophet, who followed the messengers who preceded him. So we follow him, because he established the rule
of following the preceding messengers, and not because of the rules of the messengers who preceded him. In like manner, the vicegerent’s learning from God is
the same as the Messenger’s learning from God. Speaking from the perspective of
revelation, he is God’s vicegerent, and with respect to the outward realm, he is the
Messenger’s vicegerent. For this reason, the Messenger died without appointing a
vicegerent. He did not appoint a vicegerent, knowing that in his community was
one who would take the vicegerency from his Lord. Thus, he would be a vicegerent of God accepting the existing laws. Since MuÎammad knew of this (notion),
he did not prevent its application. Among His creatures, God has vicegerents who
took from the Messenger and the messengers the authority that the messengers
had taken (from God). The vicegerents know the preceding Messenger’s superiority, because the Messenger received increase (in knowledge), while the vicegerent
does not receive such an increase, which he would have received, had he had been
a messenger. The vicegerent gives only knowledge and judgments which were
specifically given to the Messenger. Hence, outwardly, contrary to the Messenger,
he follows the latter and does not oppose him.
Do you not see Jesus’ (conduct)? The Jews thought well of Jesus when he did
not promulgate laws which Moses had not promulgated; as we have said concerning the vicegerency today in relation to the Messenger, they believed in him and
confirmed (his position as vicegerent) (164). However, when he added (a new)
judgment or abrogated a judgment brought by Moses, because Jesus was a messenger, they did not tolerate this, for he opposed their belief in Moses. The Jews
did not know the matter as it was and wished to kill Jesus. Of what happened
to him, God informs us in His Noble Book about him and them. Since he was a

The essence of David 125
messenger, he was allowed to change8 (his religion), either by omission (naqÒ) of
an existing rule or by adding a new one. However, without a doubt, omission of a
rule implies adding a new rule.
The vicegerency today does not have the same status as it once had; it omits
or adds rules which were promulgated by personal efforts (ijtihÁd), (but) not (the
kind of) rules promulgated by MuÎammad. Sometimes a vicegerent seems to
contradict a legal tradition, and as a result, one imagines that this contradiction
derives from ijtihÁd, but this is not the case; rather, this tradition was not affirmed
for this leader through revelation from the Prophet, and if it were affirmed, he
would judge according to this rule. If the way this tradition was transmitted is
from one honest person to another, such a person is not immune from fancy or
transmission according to the meaning.9 Such a thing might occur today to a vicegerent, as it occurred to Jesus, for when he will descend, he will cancel many rules
promulgated through ijtihÁd and through this cancellation he will make clear the
truth established by MuÎammad’s laws, especially when the rules of religious
leaders concerning an event contradict each other. We know for certain that if a
revelation descended concerning an event it would guide to one solution, and this
solution constitutes the divine law. In other cases, even if the Real affirms (a solution), it is a law which is affirmed to remove difficulty from this community and
to spread (divine) laws in it.
As for MuÎammad’s saying, “if two persons are acknowledged as vicegerents,
kill the last of them,”10 it applies to an external vicegerency which can be removed
by sword. (165) Even if both agree, one must be killed, contrary to the spiritual
vicegerency in which killing is forbidden.11 Killing (of one vicegerent) takes place
only in the external vicegerency. However, even if such a vicegerent does not have
the position of the spiritual vicegerent, he is still the vicegerent of God’s Messenger,
if he behaves justly. The principle (of establishing one ruler) is a fundamental and it
resembles the assumption of the existence of two gods (as God said): “If there had
been in them (the heaven and the earth) gods except God, they would have been
ruined”12 (QurÞÁn 21:22), even if they agree. However, we know by supposition that
if two gods disagreed, the one whose judgment would be carried out is truly God,
and the other whose judgment cannot be carried out is not God. Hence, we know
that each judgment which is carried out in the world today is God’s judgment, even
if it opposes the external established judgment which is called law (sharÝ). No judgment except God’s is workable, because the order which takes place in the world

8 The text has ziyÁda (addition), which seems to me inappropriate.
9 Does Ibn al-ÝArabÐ mean by this phrase that the transmitter changes the content of the
tradition according to his own understanding and not according to what was transmitted
to him?
10 Muslim, XV, 61 (1853).
11 Literally: in which there is no killing.
12 This verse serves Muslim theologians, both rationalists and traditionalists, to corroborate
the argument from assumed mutual prevention. Abrahamov, al-¬Ásim Ibn IbrÁhÐm,
p. 190, n. 89.

126 The essence of David
complies with divine will (al-mashÐÞa al-ilÁhiyya),13 not with established law, even
if its establishment derives from God’s will. For this reason, the establishment of
a judgment takes place in a particular way, for the will is concerned only with the
establishment, not with the fulfillment of the judgment.
The rule of the will is great, hence AbÙ ÓÁlib (al-MakkÐ)14 named it the Throne
of the Essence, because it is the Essence which requires judgment. Everything in
existence occurs or not only through God’s will, for if God’s command is disobeyed – called here a transgression (maÝÒiya) – it is not God’s creative command
(al-amr al-takwÐnÐ) (which is disobeyed) but rather a command addressed to people indirectly (through angels or prophets). No one can disobey in all one’s actions
the command of the divine will. If there is disobedience, it is of the indirect command. So, understand it! The will of God only applies to the bringing of the action
into existence and not to its agent, hence it is inconceivable that it would not
exist.15 However, in this specific substrate (the human being), sometimes this
action constitutes a transgression of God’s command and other times acceptance
of and obedience to God’s command. (166) Praise or blame follows in accordance with what happens. Since the matter in itself is as we have established, all
people achieve happiness of different kinds. God expresses this station (saying)
that “Mercy encompasses everything”16 and that it precedes divine Wrath.17 That
which precedes is the first, and when the judgment of the latter follows, the first
(that is, Mercy) judges it, because it precedes Wrath.18 This is the meaning of “His
Mercy precedes His Wrath,” in order that the first will judge that which comes
later, for the aim is Mercy and everything is going toward Mercy. The human
being comes necessarily to Mercy leaving Wrath, and Mercy judges everyone
who comes to it according to his state.
Whoever understands will witness what we say/if he does not, he will learn
from us
There is nothing except what we have stated, so rely/on it and be in the same
state as we are
13 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ distinguishes between essential divine free will (mashÐÞa), which
establishes every occurrence in the cosmos and cannot be rejected by human beings,
and God’s desire (irÁda), which human beings can obey or disobey. Austin, p. 141.
SPK, p. 389, n. 8.
14 AbÙ ÓÁlib al-MakkÐ (d. 996) is the author of the mystical treatise QÙt al-qulÙb, which
exerted much influence on the teachings of al-GhazÁlÐ.
15 This idea that God creates the human act but not its modality is reminiscent of an
interpretation of al-AshÝarÐ’s theory of acquisition (kasb), according to which it is the
human being which assigns to the act its moral value. For example, if one enters a house
and takes money from it, his act will be lawful if he enters his own house, but unlawful
in case it is not his house. So the act itself is an objective entity which can be applied
to different situations. Abrahamov, “A Re-Examination of al-AshÝarÐ’s Theory of Kasb
according to K. al-lumaÝ, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1989):210–221.
16 QurÞÁn 7:156.
17 BukhÁrÐ, LIV:416 (7554).
18 This explanation seems awkward, because Ibn al-ÝArabÐ does not explain why that
which comes first overcomes the latter.

The essence of David 127
What we have told you comes from Him to us/and what we have given to you
comes from us to you
As for the “softening of iron,”19 (it is said) that hardened hearts20 are softened
by rebuke and threat as fire softens iron. However, the difficult thing is hearts that
are harder than stone,21 for fire breaks and calcifies the stone but does not soften
it. God softened iron for him so that he could make shields, and (in this act) He
called his attention to (the notion) that what attacks you, that is, spears, swords,
knives, and arrowheads, are made of the iron from which you make shields. So
you protect yourself from iron with iron. The MuÎammadan religion sets forth
(the rule): “I seek refuge from You in You.”22 So understand! Thus, this is the
spirit of softening iron, for God is both the Avenger and the All-Compassionate,
and He gives us success.

19 “We softened iron for him” (David – QurÞÁn 34:10).
20 QurÞÁn 39:22.
21 Cf. QurÞÁn 2:74.
22 Cf. QurÞÁn 19:18.

18 The bezel of the wisdom of breath1
exists in the essence of Jonah

(167) Know that this human formation in its totality, (that is), spirit, body, and
soul, was created by God in His image. Only God, who created this structure, can
be responsible for its disintegration, whether by His hand or by His command,
which is always the case.2 Whoever engages in the disintegration of the human
structure without receiving God’s command wrongs himself, transgresses God’s
law regarding the human being, and strives to ruin whom God orders to protect
his life. Know that feeling pity for God’s servants and caring for them are more
deserving than jealousy of God.3
David wanted to build the Holy House and built it several times.4 However,
each time he completed the building, it was ruined. He complained of this to God,
who revealed to him: “My House will not be built by one who has shed blood.”
Then David said: “O my Lord, was this act (of shedding blood) not carried out for
Your sake?” God said: “Indeed, but were they not My servants?” David said: “O
my Lord, appoint for its building one of my family.” Then God revealed to him:
“Your son Solomon will build it.”
The aim of this story is to preserve this human formation and (to show) that its
keeping up is better than its destruction. Do you not see that God imposed poll tax
and peace on the enemy of the religion in order to spare human life and said: “If
they incline toward peace, incline to it yourself and trust in God” (QurÞÁn 8:61)?
Do you not see that the Law enjoins the avenger of blood, who is obliged to retaliate, to take ransom, or to forgive? But if the killer refuses, the avenger is allowed

1 Al-QÙnawÐ and following him al-QaysarÐ reads here Îikma nafsiyya (the wisdom of
the soul) instead of Îikma nafasiyya (the wisdom of the breath), claiming that the soul,
as that which connects body and spirit, or the divine (barzakh, isthmus), is like Jonah,
who cries out to God from the belly of the fish, just as the soul turns to God. Chittick,
“Chapter Headings,” p. 31.
2 The last phrase stands between “by His hand” and “by His command.” It cannot refer
to both phrases, because of the alternative nature of the text, and because God creates
by the command “be”; hence, I prefer to attach “which is always the case” to “by His
command.” This disorderly construction often characterizes the writing of our author.
3 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ refers here to killing people on account of religious motives, such as the
killing of pagans.
4 I did not find the source of this information.

The essence of Jonah 129
to execute him. God’s decision may be seen in the following case: When the
avengers of blood are a group and one of them is pleased with blood money or forgives the killer, while the rest only desire to kill him, the Law takes into consideration the one who forgives and his opinion preponderates the opinion of the others
who do not forgive, and the wrongdoer will not be executed (168) as a retaliation.
Do you not see the Prophet saying of the owner of the thong: “If the avenger of
blood kills him, he will be like him”?5 Do you not see Him saying: “Requital of an
evil deed is an evil deed like it” (QurÞÁn 42:40)? Thus, God made the punishment
an evil deed, meaning that this act (of punishment) is wrong, notwithstanding
its being lawful. “However, whoever forgives and makes peace (between people) will receive his reward from God” (QurÞÁn, ibid.), because he was created
in God’s image. Whoever forgives and does not kill receives reward from God,
who created him in His image, because he is most deserving the reward, for God
created him for this purpose. God is manifested through the external name (al-ism
al-ÛÁhir), only through the human being’s existence. Thus, whoever preserves his
own existence preserves the Real.
The human being is not blamable because of his essence, but because of his
action, and his action is not him, and we are speaking of his essence. Every action
belongs to God, notwithstanding human acts are blameworthy and praiseworthy.
God detests blame for the sake of blame. There is nothing blameworthy except
that which religion considers so, for the religious blame derives from a rationale
(Îikma) known to God or to one God makes know, just as He enacted retribution for
the benefit of preserving humanity and deterring one who transgresses God’s laws.
“In retribution there is life for you, O you wise people” (QurÞÁn 2:179). These are
people who know things as they really are (ahl lubb al-shayÞ)6 and find the mystery
of the divine and wise laws. If you know that God preserves this human formation
and its persistence, you are most entitled to preserve it, for in that you attain felicity
(saÝÁda); as long as the human being is alive, it is hoped that he will attain the trait
of perfection for which he was created. Whoever makes efforts to destroy a human
being makes efforts to prevent him from reaching the aim for which he was created.
How good is what God’s Messenger said: “Do I not tell you that which is better
and more excellent for you than meeting your enemies and killing them and being
killed by them? This is the remembrance of God.”7 That is because only the one
who remembers God, a remembrance required of him, knows the value of this
human formation, for God is the companion of the one who remembers Him, and
the one who remembers witnesses (the existence) of the companion. When the
one who remembers does not witness the Real, who is his companion, (169) he
does not remember, for the remembrance of God permeates the whole structure of
the servant, not only his tongue by which he remembers Him. That is because in
5 A person was found killed, and his thong was taken by the killer, who was identified by
a relative of the dead person. When the relative wanted to execute the killer, the Prophet
said this sentence. Muslim, XXVI I I:32 (1680).
6 Literally: the people of the core of things.
7 NasÁÞÐ, XXV:24. TafsÐr al-BaghawÐ to QurÞÁn 29:41.

130 The essence of Jonah
this time, the Real will be specifically the companion only of the tongue, and the
tongue will see Him through that which it sees, not through that which the human
beings see Him, that is, the sense of sight. Understand this mystery regarding the
remembrance of the neglectful (ghÁfilÐn), for the part of the neglectful person
which remembers God is present with God, and the remembered is his companion, because He sees him. The neglectful person with respect to his negligence
does not remember, hence (God) is not the companion of the neglectful person.
The human being is (composed) of many parts and his essence is not one,
while the Essence of the Real is one, but He is many through His names, just as the
human being is many through his parts, and the remembrance derived from one part
does not necessarily entail the remembrance of another part. Thus, the Real is the
companion of the remembering part, while other parts are described as neglectful
of remembering. There is necessarily a part in the human being through which he
remembers, and the Real is the companion of that part, while the Real takes care of
the other parts. The Real does not take upon Himself the destruction of this (human)
formation through what is called death. Death is not annihilation (iÝdÁm), but only
the separation (of the parts), meaning that the Real takes the human being to Himself
(as God said:) “To Him all things go back” (QurÞÁn 11:123).
When the Real takes the human being to Himself, He makes for him a composite formation, different from his present composite body, one appropriate for the
kind of abode to which He transfers him.8 This is an abode of eternal life, because
of its temperance (li-wujÙd al-iÝtidÁl).9 Hence, the human being will never die,
meaning, his parts will never be separated.
As for the people of the Fire, they finally attain felicity, but in Hell, for the
form of the Fire will become necessarily cool and safe for those who dwell in
it at the end of their punishment period. This is their felicity. The felicity of the
people of the Fire after exhausting the (sufferings) they deserve is like the felicity
of God’s friend (Abraham) when he was thrown into the fire. He suffered, because
he saw it, and he knew from his past knowledge (170) that fire causes injury and
pain to creatures which come near it. He did not know God’s intention: what the
fire was meant to impart to him. However, after experiencing these sufferings, he
found the fire cool and safe,10 though he still witnessed the color (of its flames
flashing back at) him, for it was fire in the people’s eyes.
One thing may appear in different forms in the eyes of the beholders. And so
it is with the divine self-manifestation. If you wish, you can say that God manifests Himself like this thing, and if you wish, you can say that the cosmos is
8 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems here to make a concession to the philosophers who claim that the
physical phenomena of the next world mentioned in the QurÞÁn are just metaphors
illustrating to the common people what they will encounter in the world to come. It is
reminiscent of the view that in the world to come God will create a sixth sense by which
people will be able to see Him. Abrahamov, Anthropomorphism, pp. 17f, 130f.
9 In ancient times and the Middle Ages, medicine held the concept that temperance of the
essential parts of the body guarantees its health. Often Ibn al-ÝArabÐ employs the theory
of temperance. SPK, pp. 140, 351. See ch. 19, p. 133, n. 8, below.
10 QurÞÁn 21:69.

The essence of Jonah 131
observed like the Real in His self-manifestation. In the eyes of the beholder, the
cosmos takes on different forms accordant with the beholder’s temperament, or
his temperament differs with the various forms of the self-manifestation. All this
is allowable concerning the realities (of the cosmos).
If a dead or killed person, whoever he may be, had died or had been killed and
had not returned to God, then God would not have decreed the death of anyone
or judged his killing. However, all is in God’s grasp, for with respect to Him, no
loss has occurred. He established killing as a law and decreed death, for He knows
that his servant will not pass away, because he returns to Him as He said: “To
Him all things go back” (QurÞÁn 11:123), which means that He acts freely (with
everything). Everything which comes out of Him is His Essence; moreover, His
Ipseity is the essence of everything, and He gives everything its manifestation, as
He said, “To Him all things go back” (ibid.).11

11 Loyal to his idea that the cosmos reflects God’s names, our author cannot hold the
passing away of human beings. Hence, after their death, they continue to live in a
different form.

19 The bezel of the wisdom of the
unseen1 exists in the essence of Job

(170) Know that the mystery of life permeates through water, since it is the root
of the elements2 and foundations (ÝanÁÒir, arkÁn). For this reason God makes “of
water every living thing” (QurÞÁn 21:30). Everything in the cosmos is living, for
everything celebrates God’s praise;3 however, we can understand this celebration
only through divine unveiling (kashf ilÁhÐ). Only a living being can praise. Hence
everything is living. And the root of everything is water.
Do you not see the Throne, how it rests on the water,4 because (171) it was
composed of water; it floats on the water, and the water preserves it from beneath.
Likewise, God created the human being as a servant and (then) he became haughty
and wished to excel Him, but God, notwithstanding, preserved him from beneath,
taking into account the seeming loftiness of the servant who is ignorant of himself.
This is (illustrated in MuÎammad’s tradition): “If you let a rope fall down, it will
fall on God.”5 God alluded to His being both below and above in His saying: “They
fear their Lord above them” (QurÞÁn 16:50, trans. AH), and in His saying: “He is the
High Master over His servants” (QurÞÁn 6:18, 61). Thus, God possesses the high and
the low positions.6 For this reason, the six directions7 are manifested only through
the human being, who (was created) in the image of the Merciful.
There is no sustainer but God. He said regarding a group of people: “If they
carried out (the precepts) of the Torah and the Gospel” (QurÞÁn 5:66), then He said
in an indefinite and general manner: “and what was sent down for them from their
Lord” (ibid.). In this last sentence He included every law which was sent down to
people through a messenger or inspired human beings. (“If they carried out . . . ”),
“they would eat from above” (ibid.), because He sustains from above, as is ascribed
1 According to al-JandÐ, al-KÁshÁnÐ, and al-QaysarÐ, all Job’s states derived from the
Unseen. Al-QÙnawÐ opines that Job had a special connection with the Unseen which
enabled him to patiently endure his sufferings. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” pp. 32f.
2 The four elements.
3 Cf. QurÞÁn17:44.
4 Cf. QurÞÁn 11:7.
5 TirmidhÐ, V:58 (3298).
6 The tradition quoted above indicates His low position, and the two verses His high
position. Affifi, I I, p. 235.
7 North, south, east, west, up, down.

The essence of Job 133
to Him, “and from beneath their feet” (ibid.), and sustaining from beneath is (also)
ascribed to Him by the medium of His Messenger who transmitted from Him.
If the Throne were not on the water, its existence would not be preserved, for
the existence of the living is preserved through life. Do you not see that when the
living dies a normal death, the parts of his formation are resolved and his faculties
disappear from his unique bodily structure?
God said to Job: “Stamp your foot! This is a place to wash” (QurÞÁn 38:42), meaning water, “cool” (ibid.), because of the extreme heat caused by his pain. Therefore,
God calmed him with cool water. For this reason, (the core) of medicine is to decrease
that which is increased and to increase that which is decreased, with the aim of achieving temperance,8 which can be attained only approximately. We say “can be attained
only approximately,” that is, temperance, because the (divine) realities and witnesses9
are eternally responsible for creation along with the (divine) breaths. Creation derives
from an inclination in nature called deviation or decomposition. Regarding God, it is
called will (172), which is an inclination toward a specific object of the will, and not to
another. Temperance shows that all things are equal, but this is not the case in reality.
Hence, we avoid (the use of) the rule of temperance.10
In the divine prophetic knowledge, the Real is described as content, angry, and
(other) attributes. However, contentment nullifies anger and anger nullifies contentment, while temperance means the equality of anger and contentment. One who is
angry with someone cannot be content with him at the same time, and vice versa.
Such a person is characterized by one of the two traits (anger or contentment), which
is an inclination. This statement is aimed at those who claim that God has not ceased
to be angry at the people of the Fire. Consequently, they (the people of the Fire) do
not enjoy God’s contentment. Thus, our aim is valid. However, if the situation is as
we have said, that is, the suffering of the people of the Fire is finally removed, even
if they remain in the Fire, this is contentment, for God’s anger disappears, because
of the disappearance of suffering. That is because the essence of suffering is the
essence of angry, if you understand. The one who is angry suffers, hence he tries
to take revenge on the object of his anger by causing him suffering in order to gain
relief by his act, and as a result his suffering passes to the object of his anger.
If you separate the Real from the cosmos, He is highly exalted above this quality according to this definition.11 If, however, the Real is the Essence of the world,
all the laws emerge from Him and in Him, which is (attested) in his saying: “All
things return to Him” (QurÞÁn 11:123) in reality and in revelation, and “hence,
worship Him and trust Him” (ibid.), while He is veiled and hidden from you. This
8 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ refers to the theory of the balance of the temperaments which
prevailed in the medicine of the ancient times and the Middle Ages. F. Sanagustin,
“MizÁdj,” E I2.
9 Possibly, here the realities and the witnesses stand for the fixed entities and the divine
attributes, respectively.
10 He means to say that this rule cannot explain the existence and nature of God.
11 The author seems to say that God cannot be described as being angry like the human
being. Speaking here of the aloofness of God from the cosmos means that in terrestrial
language we consider God as avenger.

134 The essence of Job
is because there cannot be a world more wonderful than the present world (laysa
fi’l-imkÁn abdaÝ min hÁdha al-ÝÁlam),12 for it is in the image of the Merciful. God
brought the world into existence; that is, His existence is manifested by the manifestation of the world, just as the human being is manifested by the existence of
his natural form. We are His external form, while His Ipseity is the spirit which
governs the form.13 This governing is only in Him, just as it is from Him, for He
is the First in essence, and the Last in form.
(173) He is the External through the changing of determinations (of things) and
states, and He is the Internal through His governing (of the world), and He is the
Knower of everything.14 He is Witness to everything (QurÞÁn 58:6, 85:9), knowing
by witnessing and not by reflection. Such is true knowledge gained from mystical
experience,15 not by reflection, which amounts to guessing and conjecture, that in
no way is knowledge.
Let us return to Job. He was given water to drink to remove the pain of his
thirst, caused by the weariness and suffering inflicted upon him by the Devil.16
(The weariness and suffering are metaphors) indicating remoteness from the perception of the realities as they really are. Through this perception he (Job) is near
God. Everything witnessed is near to the eye, even if the object is far away. That
is, sighting (something) makes contact with it, therefore by way of vision it is witness. If he could not see the object, he would not witness it, or the object would
make contact with his eyesight in a certain way. This is the closeness between
eyesight and its object. For this reason, Job alluded to affliction and attributed it to
the Devil. Notwithstanding the nearness of affliction, he said: “He who is far away
from me, but his judgment of me is near.” Thus, you know that remoteness and
closeness are relative values; they are relationships with no essential existence;
however, they establish the remote and the close things.
Know that God’s mystery exists in Job, of whom He made a lesson for us and a
written book about him which this MuÎammadan community reads in order to know its
content and to attach itself to its subject in honor of him.17 God praised Job for his forbearance (Òabr), notwithstanding Job’s invocation to remove the injury from him. Thus,
we know that when a servant invokes God to remove injury from him, this does not
impair his forbearance and his excellence as a servant, for as God said, he “always turns
to God” (QurÞÁn 38:44), meaning, he directs himself to God, and not to causes. Concerning the removal of injury, the Real acts through a cause, because the servant relies
on causes, for the causes which remove something are many, while the Causer is one
12 The source of this statement is al-GhazÁlÐ, whose wording is somewhat different:
“There cannot be a more wonderful entity than this” (laysa fÐ’l-imkÁn abdaÝ mimmÁ
kÁna). For the lengthy discussions in Islamic theology on al-GhazÁlÐ’s dictum, see Eric
L. Ormsby, Theodicy in Islamic Thought: The Dispute over Al-GhazÁlÐ’s “Best of All
Possible Worlds,” Princeton 1984.
13 For God as governing the world, see QurÞÁn 10:3, 31.
14 For the First, the Last, the External, the Internal, and the Knower, see QurÞÁn 57:3.
15 Literally: taste, dhawq, pl. adhwÁq).
16 “Bring to mind Our servant Job who cried to his Lord, ‘Satan has afflicted me with
weariness and suffering’” (QurÞÁn 38:41, trans. AH).
17 Possibly Ibn al-ÝArabÐ refers to QurÞÁn 38:41–44, in which Job is mentioned, because in
Islamic culture there is no specific book on him.

The essence of Job 135
entity. The turning of the servant to the single entity which removes injury by a cause is
better than turning to a specific cause, which might not coincide with God’s knowledge
of that cause. Consequently, the servant might say, “God does not (174) answer me,”
though he does not invoke God, but turns to a specific cause which neither the period nor
the moment requires. Because Job was a prophet, he acted according to God’s wisdom,
because he knew that for the Sufis (ÔÁÞifa) forbearance means restraining the soul from
complaining; however, this is not our definition of forbearance.
The (true) definition is only restraining the soul from complaining to an entity other
than God, not to God. The Sufis confined their approach to the idea that the one who
complains impairs his contentment with God’s decree (al-riÃÁ bi’l-qaÃÁÞ). However,
this is not so, because contentment with God’s decree is not impaired by complaining to God or to another entity; however, what is impaired is the contentment with the
thing decreed (al-maqÃÐ). We have not been addressed of the contentment with the thing
decreed, because the injury lies in the thing decreed, not in the decree itself. Job knew
that in restraining the soul from complaining to God to remove injury there is a resistance to God’s compulsion, which amounts to ignorance of the person who does so. That
is because (it is) God who puts him to test by causing him pain, hence he should invoke
God to remove the painful thing. Moreover, in view of the verifier (al-muÎaqqiq), the
one who suffers pain should beseech God and ask Him to remove his pain. For according to the gnostic, the one who experiences unveiling, the elimination of pain derives
from God, because He describes Himself as “hurt” and said: “Those who hurt God and
His Messenger” (QurÞÁn 33:57). What hurt is greater than to test you when you are
heedless of Him or of a divine station you do not know, so that you will turn to Him
complaining and He, as a result, will remove your hurt? Then, your need of Him, which
is your reality, becomes true, and the hurt of the Real is removed by your beseeching
Him, when he removes it from you, because you are His external form.
This resembles (what happened to) one of the gnostics who suffered hunger
and wept, and one of those who has no mystical experience censured him. The
gnostic’s response was: “He (God) made me hungry only to cause my weeping,”
meaning, He put me to test with suffering so that I would beseech Him to take
away my suffering. “This in no way impairs my being forbearing.” Thus, we
know that forbearance is only restraining the soul from complaining to an entity
other than God. By “other than God” I mean a specific aspect of God. God (allÁh)
established the Real (175) as a specific aspect of Himself called the aspect of
Ipseity. So one should invoke Him using this aspect to alleviate an affliction and
not to use other aspects called causes, which are identical to Him only with respect
to particularizing God’s aspects. When the gnostic beseeches His Ipseity in order
to cure him of his affliction, he does not prevent himself from knowing that all
causes constitute His essence and that each (cause) is a different aspect of Him.
This is a way to which only the Courteous18 among God’s servants cling. Those
are the reliable servants who keep God’s secrets, for God has reliable servants;
only He knows who they are and they know each other. We have counseled you,
so act accordingly, and ask Him!
18 God’s courtesy (adab) is the rules He promulgated to people, and those who cling to
them are called udabÁÞ. SPK, p. 175.

20 The bezel of the wisdom of the
majesty1 exists in the essence of John

(175) This is the wisdom of priority regarding names, for God named him YaÎyÁ
(he will live), meaning that the memory of Zakariah2 will live through him. “We
have chosen this name for no one before him” (QurÞÁn 19:7). God joined the
attribute which existed in the deceased, who left a son through whom his memory will live on, and the name He gave to the son. He named (Zakariah’s son)
YaÎyÁ, and the name of the father will live on like experiential knowledge (alÝilm al-dhawqÐ).3 Hence, Àdam’s memory lived on in Seth, and Noah’s in Shem
(SÁm), and this goes on with all the prophets. However, before John, God did
not connect anyone’s proper name with the attribute; however, he did so out of
concern for Zakariah. This is because he said (to God): “Grant me from Yourself
a successor” (QurÞÁn 19:5), positing the Real before mentioning his son, just as
Àsiya (Pharaoh’s wife) gave precedence to the Neighbor (God) before the house
(Paradise), saying: “(My Lord, build for me) a house near You in Paradise”
(QurÞÁn 66:11).
God honored him by fulfilling his need and naming his son with this attribute,
so that his name would be a reminder to what His prophet Zakariah asked Him;
that is, because Zakariah preferred the continued remembrance of God in his offspring, for the son is the mystery of his father. Hence, Zakariah said: “who will
be my heir and be an heir of Jacob’s family” (QurÞÁn 19:6). Regarding them, what
is inherited is only the station of the remembrance and invocation of God. Then
He announced to him the peace which He bestowed on him the day (176) he was
born, the day of his death, and the day he will be raised again to life.4 God brought
the attribute of life, which is his name, and informed Zakariah of granting peace
to his son, and God’s statement is true and certain.

1 As a person who inclined to sorrow and weeping, John represents some of the traits
which pertain to God’s majesty (jalÁl) as against His beauty (jamÁl), which contains,
inter alia, gentleness and compassion. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” p. 33.
2 Zakariah was John’s father. QurÞÁn 19:7.
3 By this comparison Ibn al-ÝArabÐ very probably means that just as experiential
knowledge lives in one’s memory after the termination of the experience, so the
memory of Zakariah will last.
4 QurÞÁn 19:15.

The essence of John 137
If the saying of the Spirit (Jesus), “Peace was on me the day I was born, and
will be the day I will die and the day I will be raised again to life” (QurÞÁn 19:33),
was the most perfect regarding unity, then the present saying (concerning John)
was the most perfect regarding both unity and belief and foremost for nullifying
incorrect interpretations. What was miraculous about Jesus was that he spoke (in
the cradle),5 for his intellect was perfect and enabled him to speak at the time God
made him speak. The one who is able to speak, being in some state or another,
does not necessarily speak the truth, contrary to the one who is the object of God’s
witness, like John. Considering this aspect, the peace God granted John is more
valuable for reversing obscurity regarding God’s providence than the peace Jesus
granted himself, even though the circumstances in his case prove his proximity to
God and his truth, for he spoke in the cradle in order to free his mother from the
guilt (of fornication). This was one witness (of her innocence), and the other is
the dry trunk of a palm tree which dropped fresh fruit without being fertilized by
the male,6 just as Mary (Maryam) gave birth to Jesus without a male and normal
sexual intercourse.
If a prophet said, “My sign and miracle is that this wall will speak,” and the
wall says: “You are a liar, you are not God’s messenger,” the sign would be verified and it confirms his being God’s messenger, and no attention should be paid
to whatever the wall said.7 Since there is a possibility of such an interpretation
regarding Jesus’ speech in the cradle as a result of his mother’s allusion to it, the
peace granted by God to John is more elevated in this respect.8 The proof that he
(Jesus) is God’s servant is based on what was said about him being God’s son.
Those who believed in his prophecy knew that he was God’s servant only through
the proof of his speech. What remains is the increase of possible interpretations
based on rational considerations; however, only the future will show his truth
concerning all that he said in the cradle. Then, what we have alluded to will be
ascertained.

5
6
7
8

QurÞÁn 19:29.
Ibid., 19:23, 25.
The miracle is the wall’s speech and not the content of it.
God’s saying is more elevated than the miracle performed by Jesus in the cradle.

21 The bezel of the wisdom of the
dominion1 exists in the essence of
Zakariah

(177) Know that God’s Mercy encompasses everything2 that relates to existence
and rule3 and that the existence of His Wrath derives from His Mercy with His
Wrath. His Mercy precedes His Wrath, meaning that the relation of Mercy to
Him precedes the relation of Wrath to Him.4 Since every essence has an existence
which it seeks from God, His Mercy encompasses every essence, for with the
Mercy by which He is Merciful He fulfills the essence’s request to have existence
and then brings it into existence. For this reason we said that God’s Mercy encompasses everything with respect to existence and rule.
The divine names belong to the (genus of) things and they derive from one
essence. The first thing God’s Mercy encompassed was the thingness (shayÞiyya)
of the essence which brought into existence Mercy through Mercy.5 The first thing
Mercy encompassed was itself, then its thingness, to which we have alluded, then
the thingness of every existent which is brought into existence unendingly with
respect to this world and the next, accidents and atoms (jawhar wa-ÝaraÃ), composed and simple things. No consideration is given to attaining an aim or concord
in nature, but all the fitting and unfitting things are embraced in God’s Mercy with
respect to (their) existence.
We have mentioned in The Meccan Revelation (al-FutÙÎÁt al-makkiyya)
that only the nonexistent exerts influence, not the existent, and if the existent exerts influence, it is as if it is nonexistent.6 This is a strange knowledge
and a rare issue known only to the people of imagination through experience
(dhawq). As for those not influenced by imagination, they are far removed
from this issue.
1 God gave Zakariah power, which affects his aspirations. Hence, this chapter is entitled
according to Zakariah’s unique characteristic. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” pp. 33f.
2 QurÞÁn 7:156. See ch. 16.
3 God not only brings things into existence, but also has dominion over them, in that He
compels them to behave in specific ways.
4 First of all, He should be qualified by Mercy, and then by Wrath.
5 Mercy as an existent has an essence which brings it into existence, and this existence
must be created by Mercy itself, but with respect to essence and not to activity.
6 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ refers here to the act of the spirit and imagination which exerts influence on
the coming of things into existence. FutÙÎÁt, Vol. I, pp. 141f (ch. 2, the last paragraph).

The essence of Zakariah 139
God’s Mercy permeates (all) beings/existing in essences and entities
The position of Mercy is the highest if you know/through the evidence of discursive reasoning
(178) Everything mentioned by Mercy is happy, and there is nothing that is not
mentioned by Mercy. The Mercy’s mention of things amounts to bringing them
into existence. Every existent is the object of Mercy. O God’s friend, do not be
veiled from perceiving what we have said because you have considered the afflictions people suffer and because you believe the torments of the next world will not
cease to plague those people.
First you should know Mercy alone is bringing into existence, in general, for
through Mercy torments are brought into existence. Also, Mercy exerts influence in two ways. Its first effect is on the essence, meaning it brings every
existent essence into existence, without any regard for a specific aim or absence
thereof, or for suitability or lacks of it, because it only heeds the essence of
every existent before its existence. Moreover, it concerns itself with the thing
(purely) as a fixed entity (Ýayn thÁbita). For this reason, it sees the god created
in beliefs as one of the fixed entities, and hence has mercy7 on it through bringing it into existence. Because of this, we said that the god created in beliefs is
the first thing on which mercy is bestowed after Mercy bestows mercy on Itself,
(when we refer to) its connection to the bringing of existents into existence.
Another effect Mercy has is initiated by request. The veiled ones ask the Real
to have mercy on them in their belief, while the people of revelation ask God’s
mercy to exist in them, and request it by God’s name, saying: “O God, have
mercy on us” (QurÞÁn 23:109). The mercy that is shown to them is only the
existence of mercy in them, which is the dominating principle (Îukm) that exists
in them, for the dominating principle is actually the accident that exists in the
substrate (al-maÝnÁ al-qÁÞim bi’l-maÎall). This accident is that which actually
has mercy on them, for God has no mercy on His servants for whom He feels
concern, only through (His attribute of) Mercy. When mercy exists in them they
experientially find its dominating principle. When Mercy remembers a person,
it has mercy on him. The active participle is both raÎÐm and rÁÎim. The dominating principle is not described as created, because it is an accident required by
the essence (of Mercy).
The states (aÎwÁl)8 are neither existent nor nonexistent; that is, they have no
concrete essence in existence, because they are relationships. (179) Concerning
the dominating principle, they are not nonexistent, because the one possesses
knowledge is called “the knower,” which is a state. And a knower is an essence
qualified by knowledge, yet the state of knowledge neither constitutes the essence
of the knower nor the essence of knowledge. There is only knowledge and an
essence in which knowledge exists. Being a knower means a state of essence that
7 Mercy with an uppercase letter indicates God’s attribute, while the lowercase points to
the action of this attribute, or the accident.
8 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ here employs two terms to designate first the accident (maÝnÁ, pl. maÝÁnin)
and second the result of the accident (ÎÁl, pl. aÎwÁl).

140 The essence of Zakariah
is qualified by the accident (of knowledge). The relationship between knowledge
and its substrate is termed the knower.
Actually, Mercy is attributed to the Merciful, which means that Mercy entails
the dominating principle and shows mercy. Whoever brings mercy into existence
in the recipient does not do so to show mercy, but rather to bring it into existence to
cause the recipient to have mercy.9 God is not a substrate of accidents (ÎawÁdith),
hence He is not a substrate in which mercy is brought into existence. However, He
is the Merciful, and He is worthy of this quality only because Mercy exists in Him.
Consequently, it is confirmed that He is identified with Mercy Itself.10
Whoever does not experience (literally: taste – dhÁqa) this issue and has no
part in it does not venture to say that God is identical with Mercy or with any
other attribute, but he may say that He is neither this attribute nor other than it.11
In his view, the Real’s attributes are neither Himself nor other than Himself, for he
cannot deny them or make them identical with His essence.12 He inclines toward
this expression, which is good; however, another expression is a more appropriate
response to the question and may remove obstacles. This is the view which denies
the realities of the attributes as existents in the essence of the qualified entity (the
Real). They (the attributes) are only relationships and attributions between the
qualified entity and their intelligible essences.
Even though Mercy is comprehensive, it differs relative to each divine name.13
For this reason, God is requested to show His Mercy to people through every name.
Hence, God’s Mercy and the pronoun connected with it14 encompass everything.
Mercy has many branches, owing to the multiplicity of the divine names. However,
when God is asked to have mercy on someone through a specific name, Mercy is
not comprehensive regarding that name or another. Even regarding the name the
Avenger, one who seeks revenge is allowed to say: “O Avenger, have Mercy on
me.” That is because these names refer to the Essence indicated, but through their
real expressions they point (180) to different meanings.15 By these names that exist
in Mercy, one invokes (God) in their reference to the Essence which is indicated by
9 God wants people to be merciful, hence He brings Mercy into existence in them. Affifi,
I, p. 179, n. 3.
10 Since God is not a body, He cannot be the recipient of accidents, and the only possibility
to affirm His being the Merciful is to state that He and Mercy are one entity, just as His
other attributes are related to Him. In holding this view, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ seems to have
adopted AbÙ al-Hudhayl al-ÝAllÁf’s (d. between 840 and 850) solution to the problem
of God’s attributes. According to AbÙ al-Hudhayl, the attributes are none but God.
The attributes do not constitute separate spiritual entities within God, but are identified
with His essence. Thus, God is Merciful by virtue of Mercy, which is Himself. H.A.
Wolfson, The Philosophy of the Kalam, Cambridge, MA 1970, pp. 225–232.
11 Strangely enough, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ ignores the fact mentioned in the preceding note. Did
he not know that this is a MuÝtazilite approach acquired by the use of reason?
12 This is the view of Ibn KullÁb on God’s attributes. J. van Ess, “Ibn KullÁb,” E I2. See
p. 309, n. 19 above.
13 Mercy acts through giving sustenance, through bestowing knowledge, etc. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 454.
14 By this the author means My Mercy (raÎmatÐ). QurÞÁn 7:156.
15 One turns to God’s essence, but in its capacity as Sustainer, Avenger, etc.

The essence of Zakariah 141
a specific name and no other; one does not invoke the name which is different from
other names (but God’s Essence). (With respect to) its indicating of the Essence, a
name does not differ from another, but it is distinct from another through its own
characteristic, because it is a reality distinct from other names through its essence
irrespective of any acceptable name referring to it, even though all the names are
directed to show one Essence. There is no controversy that each name has its own
rule which no other name possesses. This should be taken into account, just as one
should take into account the notion that each name points to the indicated Essence.
For this reason, AbÙ al-QÁsim ibn QasÐ16 said regarding the divine names that each
separate name is named by all the other names; if you give a name priority by mentioning it, you depict it by all the names, because it points to one essence, even if
there are many names for this essence and their realities are numerous.
Mercy can reach people in two ways. (The first is) the way of necessity, as He
said: “I shall decree it for those who fear (God) and give alms” (QurÞÁn 7:156),
and (Mercy also includes) the theoretical and practical attributes by which He
restricts them. The second way in which Mercy can reach people is by divine
grace, which is not a reaction to the human being’s act, and this is his saying: “My
Mercy encompasses everything” (ibid.).17 To this second way of Mercy refers the
verse “so that God may forgive you your earlier and later sins” (QurÞÁn 48:2) and
the tradition “Do all you wish, for God has already forgiven you.”18 So know this!

16 He died in 1151. Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 145–150.
17 This statement in QurÞÁn 7:156 immediately follows the first statement and can be
interpreted to mean that this first Mercy is the same Mercy that is given to the Godfearing. However, loyal to his doctrine, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ distinguishes between two kinds
of Mercy. See ch. 16 above.
18 Ibn Íanbal, I I: 492.

22 The bezel of the wisdom of the
intimacy1 exists in the essence
of Elias

(181) EliÁs is IdrÐs. He was a prophet before Noah, and God raised him “to a high
position” (QurÞÁn 19:57).2 He dwells in the heart of the celestial spheres, that is,
the sphere of the sun. Afterward, he was sent to a town named Baalbek; Baal
is the name of an idol, and Bek is the ruler of this town. This idol called Baal
was characterized as a ruler. EliÁs, who is IdrÐs, had a vision of the mountain
named LubnÁn, from lubÁna, meaning a need, which was split open to reveal a
fiery horse, all of whose organs were made of fire. When EliÁs saw the horse, he
mounted it and consequently passion left him, and he became an intellect without
passion and with no connection to the intentions of the (lower) soul. In him the
Real was transcendent, and hence he knew half the knowledge of God, for when
the intellect learns the sciences governed only by speculation, it knows God only
as transcendent, not as immanent. (But) when God gives the human being knowledge through revelation, his knowledge of God becomes perfect, thus he regards
God as transcendent in one way and immanent in another and sees the permeation
of the Real in natural and elemental forms, so that he sees the Real’s Essence in
their (the forms) essences.
This is the perfect knowledge which was brought by the religions God sent
down, and through this knowledge all (kinds of) imagination have dominion over
(human beings). For this reason, the power of imagination is stronger in this world
than the power of the intellect, for whatever the intelligent person attains through
his intellect, he is not free of the power of imagination over his objects of intellection. Imagination is the greatest power in this perfect human form, and the
revealed religions brought it. The religions made God transcendent and immanent, likening Him (shabbaha) in His transcendence (tanzÐh) through imagination
and making Him transcendent (nazzaha) in His immanence (tashbÐh) through the
intellect. Each is connected with the other, so that (182) transcendence cannot be
free of immanence, and vice versa. God said: “There is nothing like Him” (QurÞÁn
42:11), thus making Himself transcendent and immanent, and “He is the AllHearing and the All-Seeing” (ibid., trans. AH), thus making Himself immanent.

1 Intimacy is ascribed to Elias, because he became intimate with both angels and human
beings. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” p. 34.
2 See ch. 4 above.

The essence of Elias 143
This is the greatest verse of transcendence ever sent down, even though it is not
free of immanence because of the letter kÁf (like).3 He is therefore the greatest
knower of Himself, and He expressed Himself only in the way we mentioned.
Also He said: “Your Lord, the Lord of Might, is exalted above their description
(of Him)” (QurÞÁn 37:180). They describe God in terms of their rational perception. God placed Himself above their (perception) of His transcendence, because
they limit Him by that transcendence, for their intellect is unable to perceive the
(true) transcendence.
Then all religions brought (notions) dominated by imagination. They did not
free the Real from any attribute through which He manifests Himself. All religions
said and brought the same (ideas concerning God). The religious communities act
accordingly and, as a result, God bestowed on them His self-manifestation, hence
they adhered to God’s messengers as God’s inheritors, imitating what He said:
“God knows best where to place His message” (QurÞÁn 6:124, trans. AH). (The
word) “God” in “God knows best” has two aspects: First, it is a predicate of God’s
messengers,4 and second, it is a subject of “knows best where to place His message.” The two aspects are true regarding God; therefore, we hold immanence in
transcendence and vice versa.
After establishing this issue, we drop the veils and lower the curtains over
the eyes of the critic and the believer, even though both are among the forms in
which the Real manifests Himself. However, we are ordered to cover (their eyes),
so that the differences in the predispositions of the forms may be manifested and
so that (we may know) that the one who manifests Himself does so according to
the predisposition of a certain form; its reality and inherent traits are necessarily
attributed to Him. For example, one sees the Real in his sleep and does not deny
his vision; this is undoubtedly the Real Himself. As a result, the inherent traits of
this form and its realities through which the Real manifests Himself in sleep are
attached (to this vision). After one wakes up, one can pass from that which one
sees in sleep to something else which, according to the intellect, requires transcendence. If the person who interprets his vision possesses unveiling (kashf) and
belief (ÐmÁn), he does not pass from the vision to transcendence alone, but gives
both transcendence and the form appearing in sleep (= immanence) that which
they deserve. (183) For God is actually an expression (to be interpreted) by one
who understands allusions.
The spirit of this wisdom and its frame (faÒÒ – literally: bezel) lies in the division into that which affects (muÞaththir) and that which is affected (muÞaththar).

3 The exact translation of ka-mithlihi (like Him) is “like (ka) his simile,” which means
that God has simile, consequently He is not transcendent but immanent, although His
simile is not like other similes. Hence, even the first part of the verse implies both
transcendence and immanence. See pp. 38, 78 above.
4 In the verse indicated, the phrase “God’s messengers” precedes the word “God,” and
thus God becomes the predicate of God’s messengers. This signifies the identification
of the messengers with God, an indication of immanence, whereas the second aspect
indicates a distance between God and His messengers.

144 The essence of Elias
These are two expressions, the first of which in every respect, in every state,
and in every realm is God, and the second in every respect, in every state, and in
every realm is the world. When this wisdom comes to you, attach everything to its
appropriate source, for that which comes to you is necessarily and always a branch
stemming from a root, just as the Divine Love derives from the human being’s
supererogatory acts. This is an affect (sign – athar) between that which affects and
that which is affected, just as the Real is His servant’s hearing, seeing, and power,
which derive from this love. This is an established affect which cannot be denied,
because religion proves it, if you are a believer. As for a sane individual, he is
either one who experienced divine self-manifestation in a natural manifestation
and knows what we are talking about, or a Muslim believer who trusts that which
is documented in the ÑaÎÐÎ.5 The imagination dominates necessarily the person
who seeks that which the Real brought in this form, because he believes in it. As
for the person who is not a believer, he governs his imagination through imagination, rationally thinking that he ascribes to God that which self-manifestation
gives him in his vision, while his imaginings in this case do not leave him, for he
is unaware of his negligence of himself. Concerning this, God said: “If you call on
Me, I will answer you” (QurÞÁn 40:60).6 God said: “If My servants ask you about
Me, I am near. I will answer the one who calls Me, when one does so” (QurÞÁn
2:186), for He does not answer, unless there is one who calls Him, even though
the one who calls and the one who answers are the same.
There is no controversy concerning the variety of forms. No doubt, they are
twofold. All these forms are like Zayd’s organs; it is known that Zayd is one individual reality, (however) his hand is other than the forms of his leg, head, eye, and
eyebrow. He is many and one (at the same time), (184) many in forms and one in
essence, just as the human being is no doubt one in essence. ÝAmr is undoubtedly
distinct from Zayd, KhÁlid, and JaÝfar, and the individuals of this single essence
(humankind) are infinite in existence. Even though the human being is one in
essence, he has many forms and (his essence exists in many) individuals.7
If you are a believer, you know for certain that God will manifest Himself on
the Day of Resurrection in a specific form and will be known, then change His
form and will be not known, then once again change his form and will be known;
it is He, not other than He, who manifests Himself in every form. It is known that
each form is distinct from another; it is as if the Single Essence is reflected in a
mirror, and when the beholder looks at the mirror and sees the form of his God
in belief, he knows and confirms it. If it happens that he sees the form of another

5 This term refers to the two collections of the traditions, al-BukhÁrÐ’s and Muslim’s, and
indicates their reliability. Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ alludes to the tradition of the supererogatory
works mentioned above.
6 Our author wishes to say that one should call on God and not be satisfied with his own
intellect, which is deluded by his imagination. One believes that one rationally reasons,
but actually is misled by fancies. Hence, one needs God’s help.
7 For a possible influence of al-GhazÁlÐ on the Greatest Master in this issue of the one and
the many, see Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 121–124.

The essence of Elias 145
God in belief, he will not know Him, just as one sees in the mirror his form and
the form of another person. The mirror is a single essence, yet the beholder sees
many forms in the mirror, which (itself) has no comprehensive form, though the
mirror affects the forms in one aspect and not in another. It affects the forms
through the reflection of different measures, such as smallness, largeness, tallness,
and broadness, which go back to the mirror. The changes that take place in mirrors derive from their different measures. If you look, for example, at one mirror
among these, you do not look at all of them, just as you look at God with respect
to His Essence, because He does not need anything. (And if) you look at Him with
respect to His names, it is as if you are looking at many mirrors. If your soul looks
at a divine name, its reality appears in you. This is the idea, if you understand.
Do not worry and do not be afraid, because God loves bravery even in killing
a snake, and the snake is only your soul. The snake is a snake because of itself in
form and in reality. And a thing is not killed on its own. Even if you destroy the
form in your sense perception, (185) its definition preserves it and the imagination does not remove it. If this is the case, then the essences are safe, strong, and
protected (from damage), for you cannot destroy the definitions (of the essences).
What strength is better than this? You can imagine that you killed (someone);
however, through imagination and intellectual perception his form remains with
its definition.8 The proof of this (is): “You (MuÎammad) did not throw when
you threw, but God threw” (QurÞÁn 8:17). The eye of the beholder saw only
MuÎammad’s form, and the sense of sight affirmed it throwing. First, God denied
the act of throwing, then He affirmed it (“when you threw”), and finally corrected
(the first phrase) by saying that it is God who threw in MuÎammad’s form.9 One
must believe in this. Consider this effective factor through which God appeared
in the form of MuÎammad. God Himself, not one of us, informed His servants of
this. His message is true, and belief in it is obligatory, whether you perceive the
knowledge (in the message) or not, be you a learned person or Muslim believer.
What proves the weakness of intellectual speculation is the judgment of the
intellect that a cause cannot be an effect of the thing for which it serves as a
cause. This is clearly the judgment of the intellect. However, in the science of
self-manifestation, a cause can be the effect of the thing for which it is a cause.
The judgment of the intellect is right,10 but its speculation must be revisited. The
aim of this reconsideration is to say the following: After it was established that the
Essence is one in many, then with respect to its being a cause of a certain effect in
a certain form, it cannot be an effect of its effect in the state of its being a cause,
but its aspect (of being a cause) changes when it moves in the forms, so that it

8 When one destroys a thing, one destroys its sensual existence; however, one cannot
destroy a species, for example humankind, or the imaginable form of a thing.
9 In theological debates the verse cited serves to prove God’s predetermination. See, for
example, al-RÁzÐ, MafÁtÐÎ al-ghayb, part 15, p. 139.
10 With respect to the intellect, the procedure that a cause has an effect is correct. The
question arises whether this procedure is suitable for explaining the phenomena in the
cosmos.

146 The essence of Elias
becomes an effect of its effect, so that its effect becomes a cause to it (the effect).11
If one reconsiders things as they really are and does not stop at his rational thinking, one attains this aim. If such is the case regarding causality, what do you think
about expanding rational speculation into other difficult realms?12
The messengers are the most intelligent people, and the message they brought
(186) stemmed from the Divine Presence (al-janÁb al-ilÁhÐ).13 They affirmed
what the intellect affirmed and added what the intellect alone cannot perceive
and what the intellect considers immediately as absurdity but acknowledges (it
as true) after God’s self-manifestation. When a person is alone, by himself, he is
perplexed regarding what he has seen; if he is a servant of his Lord, he ascribes
his intellect to Him, and if he is a servant of his own speculation, he ascribes
the Real to the rule of the intellect. This is so only as long as he remains in this
world, being veiled from the next world while in this life, for the gnostics outwardly appear here as if they were in the form of this world, because they are
dominated by the rules of this world; however, no doubt, God transforms their
outward appearance into the inward appearance of the next world. In their outward form they are known (really) only to those to whom God has revealed their
insight so that they can perceive (the true nature of the gnostics). The gnostics
are only those people who know the divine self-manifestation, because they
possess the form of the next world. They are gathered (Îashr) in this world for
the Last Judgment and resurrected in their tombs, and they see what you cannot see, and witness what you cannot witness, because of God’s Providence for
some of His servants.
Whoever wishes to find this wisdom of Elias (who was) IdrÐs, whom God twice
brought into being – first, because he was a prophet before Noah, and then was
raised up to heaven and then descended as a messenger, thus God joined for him
the two positions (prophethood and mission) – must give up the domination of his
intellect in favor of his desire. Then he will be a pure animal so that he can discover what every animal discovers, except the jinn and mankind (al-thaqalÁni),14
and so will realize his animality. Elias possessed two signs, the first being this
discovery; he could see the one tormented in the grave and the one who was
delighted therein, and he could see the dead alive, the dumb speaking, and the

11 Let us try to explain the last sentence. Since the cosmos is the reflection of God’s
Essence, which means that it exists in every form, and since the Essence is the cause
of the cosmos, one can state that the Essence is both a cause and an effect. Also, with
respect to a certain form, which contains as noted the essence, it is both a cause and
an effect. Moreover, one can state that an effect, that is, a certain form, may produce
another effect, thus being an effect of its effect.
12 If rational speculation fails in the basic principle of causality, which is the cornerstone
of every investigation, how much more so when it is applied to other problematic
issues. It is worth noting that Aristotle at the very beginning of his Metaphysics points
out the importance of causation in science.
13 Chittick translates this phrase as the Divine Side. SPK, p. 39.
14 Literally: the two heavy ones. QurÞÁn 55:31. Here Ibn al-ArabÐ expresses the idea that
in order to receive revelation one must relinquish all his knowledge.

The essence of Elias 147
sitting walking. The second sign is dumbness, for if he wished to speak of what he
saw, he would be unable to do so; consequently, he would realize his animality.15
A student among us experienced such a revelation, but he did not become
dumb, and so did not realize his animality. (But) when God placed me in this
station, I fully realized my animality; I saw (things) and wished to speak (187) of
what I had witnessed, but I could not, so there was no differentiating between me
and the dumb, who cannot speak.
When an individual (like Elias) realizes what we have mentioned, he will be
transformed into a state of pure intellect in an unnatural material, witness things
that are the sources of the manifest natural forms, and know with intuitive knowledge (Ýilm dhawqÐ) from where this rule of the natural forms is manifested. If he
experiences a revelation (which communicates to him) that nature is the same as
the Breath of the Merciful, he will be given great benefit. If he is confined to what
we have mentioned, this measure will suffice him to know what dominates his
intellect. Then he will join the gnostics and know intuitively (the verse): “It was
not you who killed them but God” (QurÞÁn 8:17, trans. AH); only the iron and
the striker and He who is behind these forms killed them. The killing and the
throwing occurred by the joining of these elements, and in seeing things in their
roots and forms, he thus completes his knowledge.16 If he witness the Breath (of
the Merciful), he is both complete and perfect (in his knowledge), because he
sees only God as the essence of what he sees, thus identifying the seer and the
object of seeing. This measure (of explanation) is enough, and God guides us
to the right way.

15 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ argues that al-GhazÁlÐ could not attain unveiling because he failed to erase
from his heart the sciences he had learned. Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis,
pp. 131–133.
16 Meaning that his knowledge has all the elements needed, that is, the roots and the
forms.

23 The bezel of the wisdom of virtue1
exists in the essence of LuqmÁn

(187) If God wills Himself to desire sustenance/then all of Being is His food
If He wills us to desire sustenance/He is the food as He wills
His will is His desire, then adhere to it/He wills it, and it is the object of his will
He desires both increase and decrease/and what He wills is the object of His
will
This is the difference between them, then realize (it)/from another perspective,
their essence is the same2
(188) God said: “We gave LuqmÁn wisdom” (QurÞÁn 31:12), “and whoever is
given wisdom, is given much good” (QurÞÁn 2:269). Thus, in the QurÞÁn, (that is),
through God’s witness, LuqmÁn possessed much good. Wisdom may be spoken
or unspoken, as LuqmÁn said to his son: “My son, if even the weight of a mustard
seed were hidden in a rock or anywhere in the heavens or earth, God would bring
it (to light)” (QurÞÁn 31:16). This is wisdom that is spoken, an act of God which
He transmitted and affirmed in His Book; it is not ascribed to the one who utters it.
However, unspoken wisdom is known by its circumstantial connections, for God
neither spoke of the one to whom this seed was brought nor mentioned him, and
LuqmÁn did not say to his son that God would bring it to him or to someone else.
God spoke of this bringing in general, and placed the thing brought either in the
heavens or on earth to call the thinker’s attention to God’s saying, “He is God in
the heavens and the earth” (QurÞÁn 6:3).
Through the spoken and the unspoken (content), LuqmÁn draws attention to
(the idea) that the Real is the Essence of every known thing, for the known is more
general than the thing, because (the Real) is most indefinite of all. Then he completed and exhausted the wisdom so that the cosmos (nashÞa) will be perfected
by it and said: “God is the All-Subtle (laÔÐf)” (QurÞÁn 31:16). Owing to His grace
1 God gave LuqmÁn wisdom (QurÞÁn 31:12), and the QurÞÁn (2:269) connects wisdom
with doing good or virtue. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” pp. 34f. All traditional scholars,
except for ÝIkrima, regard LuqmÁn as a sage and not as a prophet. Notwithstanding, he
appears in most books of QiÒaÒ al-anbiyÁÞ (Stories of the Prophets). E I2.
2 It seems that mashÐÞa (will) is the essential will which cannot be changed, while irÁda
(desire) is usually embodied in God’s prescriptions, which may be obeyed or not. See
ch. 11 above. Here one cannot differentiate between the two terms.

The essence of LuqmÁn 149
(luÔf) and subtlety (laÔÁfa), regarding the thing that is so named and so defined, He
is its essence, so that of this thing it is said about it only what its name indicates
through agreement and usage. Thus, one speaks of the heaven, the earth, the rock,
the tree, the animal, the angel, the sustenance, and the food.
The essence of everything and in everything is one, just as the AshÝarites said
that the whole world takes the form of one substance, which is the core of our
view, that the essence is one.3 Then the AshÝarites said that each thing varies by
its accidents. This is also our view that things are different and multiply through
forms and relationships, so that they are distinct from each other, and so one may
say this thing is different from that thing with respect to its form or accident or
temperament. You may say whatever you wish. Yet this is the same thing as that
with respect to its substance; for this reason, (189) the same substance exists in
each form and temperament. However, we say that substance is in fact the Real.
But the speculative thinker (mutakallim) assumes that what is named substance,
even though it is real, is not identified with the essence of the Real of which the
people of revelation and self-manifestation speak. This is the wisdom of His being
the All-Subtle (laÔÐf).
Then he (LuqmÁn) described (God) as the All-Knowing (khabÐr), meaning
knowing through experience (ikhtibÁr, or putting something to the test). As
He said: “We shall test you in order to know” (QurÞÁn 47:31); and this (then)
is knowledge through experience (Ýilm al-adhwÁq). In spite of His knowledge
of things as they really are, God made Himself acquire knowledge. We are
incapable of denying what the Real determined about Himself, for He distinguished between experiential knowledge and unrestricted knowledge, because
the former is limited by the (human) faculties. He said of Himself that He is the
essence of His servant’s faculties when he said: “I am his hearing,”4 which is
one of the servant’s faculties, as well as His seeing, and His tongue, foot, and
hand, which are the servant’s organs. In His definition (of the human being),
He did not limit Himself to the faculties alone, but also mentioned the human
organs, for the servant is nothing but organs and faculties. Thus, the essence of
what is named “the servant” is the Real. This does not imply the identification of
the servant with the master, because the relationships (between the servant and
God’s names) are differentiated on account of themselves, while the essence
to which they refer is not differentiated, because in all relationships only His
Essence exists. This one essence (alone) combines all relationships, references,
and attributes.
Part of LuqmÁn’s complete wisdom in instructing his son is these two divine
names which he brought forth in this verse, the All-Subtle and the All-Knowing,
by which he named God. However, had LuqmÁn placed the two names in being,
that is in existence, saying, “God is (kÁna) (the All-Subtle, the All-Knowing),”

3 See p. 92, n. 28 above.
4 For this tradition, see ch. 1, n. 81.

150 The essence of LuqmÁn
his wisdom would have been more complete and deeper.5 God related LuqmÁn’s
utterance exactly as he said it, without adding anything to it, even though (190)
the words “God is the All-Subtle, the All-Knowing” were God’s words, for God
knew that LuqmÁn would have completed his utterance with these words, had he
concluded what he was saying.
As for His saying, “if even the weight of a mustard seed” (QurÞÁn 31:16) for
whom it is food, (the weight of a mustard seed) is only the atom, mentioned in
His verses: “Whoever has done a speck’s weight of good, will see it, and whoever
has done a speck’s weight of evil, will see it” (QurÞÁn 99:7–8, trans. on the basis
of AH). (Whoever eats this speck) is the smallest feeder, for the master seed is
the smallest (speck of) food. If there had been a smaller particle, God would have
produced it, as His verse says, “God does not shy away from giving an example
of a gnat or something higher” (QurÞÁn 2:26). Now, since He knew that nothing is
smaller than a gnat, He said, “or something higher,” meaning concerning smallness. This is God’s saying here and also in QurÞÁn 99. Know this, for we know that
God does not restrict Himself to the weight of a speck, while there is something
smaller than that, because He brought it forth for the purpose of exaggeration, and
God knows best.
As for his forming a diminutive of his son’s name (bunayya), it is a diminutive
of mercy. Because of his mercy, he advised his son that if he acts properly, he will
gain happiness. The wisdom of his advice lies in forbidding him from “attributing
associates to God, for attributing associates to Him is a great evil” (QurÞan 31:13).
This evil refers to God’s state of unity, because it describes Him as divided (into
parts), while He is one Essence, and this is the utmost ignorance, because His
Essence is His only associate.
The reason for this is that the person who does not possess the knowledge of
things as they really are and of their reality does not know that when the Essence
appears to him in different forms, this difference goes back to one essence, hence
he makes each form an associate of the essence, and each form becomes a part of
this essence. However, it is well known regarding an associate that what distinguishes it from that with which it is an associate is not the essence of another associate, because the other is distinguished by something else. (191) Consequently,
really there is no associate, because among the things of which we say they are
associates, each associate has a distinguishing element of its own. The reason for
this (view) is general association. Even if it is general, the ability of each associate
to freely act cancels its generality. “Say: ‘Call on God, or call on the Merciful’”
(QurÞÁn 17:110).6 This is the spirit of the subject (here discussed).

5 Probably by the addition of this verb, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ intends to say that God always, in
the past, present, and future, knows and puts humans to the test, and that these traits are
components of His fixed relationships with the cosmos. KÁshÁnÐ, p. 482.
6 According to this verse, there is no difference between God’s names, because they are
related to one essence.

24 The bezel of the wisdom of
leadership1 exists in the essence
of Aaron

(191) Know that Aaron’s existence stemmed from the presence of divine Mercy
(raÎamÙt),2 because God said: “We have bestowed on him,” that is, on Moses,
“out of Our Mercy, his brother Aaron as a prophet” (QurÞÁn 19:53). His prophethood derived from the presence of divine Mercy, because he was older than Moses,
nevertheless Moses was greater than him in prophethood. Since Aaron’s prophethood derived from the presence of divine Mercy, he said to his brother Moses, “O
son of my mother” (QurÞÁn 20:94), calling on him by his mother, not by his father,
because mercy is more fitted to the mother than to the father. Had the mother not
possessed mercy, she would not have had the forbearance to rear children.
Then he (Aaron) said: “Do not seize my beard, nor my head (ibid.), and do not
make my enemies gloat over me” (QurÞÁn 7:150). All this is a breath of Mercy’s
breaths. The reason for this was that Moses did not look carefully at the tablets he
threw down from his hands. Had he looked carefully at the tablets, he would have
found in them guidance and mercy. Guidance is an explanation of the event that
made Moses angry and of which Aaron was guiltless. Aaron found mercy in his
brother’s (behavior), because Moses did not seize Aaron’s beard before the eyes
of his people, taking into consideration his brother’s older age. Aaron felt pity for
Moses, because Aaron’s prophethood derived from God’s Mercy, and only mercy
derives from His Mercy.
Thereafter Aaron said to Moses, “I was afraid you would say, ‘You have
caused division among the children of Israel’” (QurÞÁn 20:94, trans. AH), thus
making me the cause of their division, (192) for the worship of the calf divided
them. Some of them worshiped the calf, following the SÁmirÐ3 and imitating him,
while some others abstained from worshipping it until Moses’ return so that they
could ask him about it. Aaron was afraid that Moses would attribute this sin to
him. However, Moses knew the matter better than Aaron, because he knew of that
which the people of the calf worshiped, and he also knew that God had decreed to
worship only Him, and what God ordains will surely happen. Moses reproached
1 Leadership (imÁma) is ascribed to Aaron, because he was appointed as a leader both by
God and by his brother Moses. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” p. 35.
2 This term is built on the pattern of jabarÙt and malakÙt.
3 See p. 104, n. 4 above.

152 The essence of Aaron
his brother Aaron, because he denied that God’s essence permeates everything.4
That is because the gnostic sees the Real in everything; moreover, he regards Him
as the essence of everything. Thus, Moses taught Aaron by granting him knowledge, even though Aaron was older than him.
For this reason, since Aaron said to Moses what he said, the latter returned to the
SÁmirÐ, saying to him, “What was the matter with you, O SÁmirÐ?” (ibid., 95); that is,
what did you make when you turned to the specific form of the calf? You made this
form using the ornaments of the people until you deceived them because you took
their property. Jesus (explained this phenomenon), saying: “O Children of Israel, the
heart of every human being lies in the place of his property, thus, if you place your
property in the heaven, your hearts will be there” (Matthew 6:21). Property (mÁl) is so
called, because essentially the heart inclines (tamÐlu) to it through worship.5 This is the
greatest aim admired by the heart, because of its desire for it.
Forms do not last, and the form of the calf would necessarily have perished, had not
Moses hurried to burn it. His fervor overcame his nature and he burned the calf and
scattered its ashes upon the sea. Thereafter, he said to the SÁmirÐ: “Look at your god”
(QurÞÁn 20:97). He called it a “god” in the manner of calling attention in order to teach,
because he knew that the calf is one of God’s manifestations. (He said), “I will surely
burn it” (lauÎariqannahu – ibid.).6 (Moses said this) because the animality of the human
being can act freely over the animality of the animal, for God subjects animals to the
human being (193), especially regarding a thing which is not an animal, which is more
subject to the human being, because the inanimate things have no will and are controlled
by that which acts freely over them without their being able to resist.
As for the animal, it possesses will and aim, and it can refuse to do some
acts, and if it is able to manifest such a behavior, it can show defiant attitude
toward what the human being wants from it. If the animal does not have the power
(to resist), or if the (human wish) coincides with the aim of the animal, it obeys
submissively to the human will. In like manner, the human being obeys a command, by which God raises him above others, because he hopes to attain some
profit from his obedience. The profit is sometimes called reward, as He says: “We
have raised some of them above others in rank, so that some may subject others”
(QurÞÁn 43:32, based on AH). Only because of his animality, not because of his
humanity, is a human being subjugated to another human being, for the two similar persons are contraries (regarding humanity).7 Whoever is higher than another
in rank, because of property or honor, subjugates another by his humanity, and the
latter is a subject of him by his fear or greed arising from his animality, not from
4 This sentence is translated in the light of the following one.
5 The noun mÁl derives from the root m.w.l., while the verb tamÐlu stems from m.y.l. As
usual, this does not prevent Ibn al-ÝArabÐ from connecting their meanings. See above, ch.
3, n. 20.
6 The text has lanuÎarikannahu (We will surely burn it).
7 Here we see once again one of the basic elements of Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s doctrine, that is, the
consideration of a matter from two or more points of view. One can consider a human
being from the point of view of his animality, that is, for example, his lower soul, and
also from the point of view of his humanity, that is, his intellect and ethical behavior.

The essence of Aaron 153
his humanity. A person does not subjugate another who is like him. Do you not
see animals stirring up each other because they are similar and the similar animals
oppose each other? For this reason He said: “We have raised some of them above
others in rank” (ibid.), and the one who subjugates differs in rank from the subjugated. Hence, subjugation occurs as a result of difference in rank.
Subjugation falls into two categories. First is the subjugation emanating from
the subjugator’s will to overcome the subjugated person, as the master subjugates the slave, even though both are human beings, and the ruler of his subjects,
even though they are similar (in humanity) – (in both cases), subjugation occurs
because of rank. The second is the subjugation deriving from circumstances, as
when the subjects subjugate the ruler who takes care of them by defending them,
fighting against (194) their enemies and safeguarding their property and souls.
(In) all these acts the subjects subjugate the ruler because of their state, and this
category is actually called the subjugation of rank, because the rank of the ruler
determines this. Some kings work (only) in their own interests, while others know
their role (literally: matter) and their rank of subjugation by their subjects. They
(also) know the value and rights of their subjects. God rewards these (kings) as
He rewards scholars who know things as they really are, and it is God’s obligation
to reward such people, because He takes care of His servants. In fact, the whole
cosmos subjugates the One that cannot be called subjugated (God), (as) He said:
“Every day He takes care of something” (QurÞÁn 55:29).
Aaron could not deter the people from worshiping the calf and overcoming it
as Moses did, because of God’s wisdom which manifests itself in existence so
that He should be worshipped in every form. When this form disappeared afterward, it disappeared only after it had been mixed with Divinity in the eyes of its
worshipper. For this reason, every kind of thing is worshipped either as divine
or as a subjugator. The intelligent person necessarily knows this. Nothing in the
cosmos is worshiped unless its worshipper ascribes to it high value and elevated
degree. For this reason the Real is called, for our sake, “The Elevated in degrees”
(QurÞÁn 40:15). He did not say “The Elevated in degree,” for He multiplied the
degrees in one essence. Thus, He decreed that only He should be worshiped in
many various degrees, and that each degree embodies God’s self-manifestation
in which He is worshiped. The greatest and loftiest of the degrees in which He is
worshiped is passion, as He said: “Have you seen him who has taken his passion
to be his god?” (QurÞÁn 45:23). It (passion) is the greatest object of worship, for
only thanks to it everything can be worshiped, and it is worshiped only through its
essence. Regarding this I say:
The essence of passion is that passion causes passion/had passion not been in
the heart, passion would have not been worshiped
(195) Do you not see how perfect God’s knowledge of things is, and how He
completed (our knowledge) concerning him who worshiped his passion and took
it to be his god, and said: “God led him astray (aÃallahu) knowingly” (ibid.),
and going astray (ÃalÁla) is confusion? That is because he (the Prophet) saw this
person worshiping only his passion by obeying it. His passion ordered him to
worship objects, so that even his worshiping God also derived from his passion,

154 The essence of Aaron
because had passion – which is will caused by love – not arisen in him regarding
this sacred presence, he would neither have worshiped God nor preferred Him to
other (objects). Likewise, whoever worships one of the forms of the world and
takes it to be a god does not do this but through passion. The worshiper is always
under the rule of his passion.
Also he sees that worshipers have different objects of worship, and one worshiper declares another who worships some other object to be an unbeliever.
Whoever pays a little attention (to this phenomenon) is confused by the unity of
passion, moreover its oneness, for it is the same phenomenon in each servant. For
this reason, “God led him astray” (ibid.), that is, confused him, “knowing” (ibid.)
that every worshiper venerates only his passion, making him a servant, whether
he meets unexpectedly a religion or not.
The perfect knower (gnostic) is whoever regards every object of worship as a
manifestation of God in which He is worshiped. For this reason, they all call every
object of worship god (ilÁh), although its specific name might be stone, tree, animal, human being, star, or angel. This is the particular name of each god. Divinity
causes the worshiper to imagine that this is the object (literally: level – martaba)
of his worship, while truly it is the manifestation of the Real in the perception of
the worshiper who devotes himself to this object in its specific manifestation.
For this reason, some knowers expressed an ignorant view: “We only worship them because they bring us closer to God” (QurÞÁn 39:3, AH), although they
called them gods when they said: “Did he make the gods one god? This is an
astonishing thing” (QurÞÁn 38:5). They did not deny one god, but were astonished
at this, (196) for they stuck to the multiplicity of forms and the relationship of
divinity to them.8 Then the Messenger came and called them to one God, who can
be known but not witnessed by them. However, they affirmed Him and believed
in Him, saying: “We only worship them because they bring us closer to God”
(QurÞÁn 39:3, AH), for they knew those forms are made of stone. For this reason,
they were refuted by His saying: “Say (to those who ascribe partners to God),
name them” (QurÞÁn 13:33). However, they named them only because they knew
these names have a reality.
As for those who knew things as they really are, they made known their
denial of the forms which were worshiped, because their degree of knowledge
taught them to be subject to the rule of the messenger through which they were
called believers, instead of being subject to the rule of time. The polytheists are
worshipers of time (ÝubbÁd al-waqt),9 although they knew they did not worship
the forms themselves, but only God in these forms, because they knew the rule
of self-manifestation exists in the idols. The denier, who did not know the selfmanifestation, was not aware of this (phenomenon), (while) the perfect knower,
8 The Arabs in the JÁhiliyya believed in one highest God, but associated him with three
goddesses (allÁt, manÁt, al-ÝuzzÁ) who served as intercessors between god and the human
beings. T. Fahd, “Ñanam,” E I2.
9 By this appellation, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ probably means those who do not know the essence of
things, but only their external appearances in time.

The essence of Aaron 155
that is, the prophet, messenger, and inheritor (of prophet and messenger), concealed it from the people.
God ordered the people to leave these forms, for the messenger of the time left
them, so that they would follow him, desiring God’s love, by His saying: “If you
love God, follow me, then God will love you” (QurÞÁn 3:31). He called for God,
who is aspired to and generally known, but not witnessed, (for) “Glances do not
perceive Him” (QurÞÁn 6:103), but “He perceives the glances” (ibid.), because of
His subtlety and the permeation of the things themselves. Glances do not perceive
Him, just as they do not perceive the human beings’ spirits which direct the bodies
and their external forms. “And He is the All-Subtle and All-Knowing (of experience)” (ibid.). Experience means tasting, and tasting is the self-manifestation
that exists in forms. Both they and He are necessary, and the one who sees Him
through one’s passion necessarily worships Him, if you understand, “and it is
incumbent on God to show the right way” (QurÞÁn 16:9).

25 The bezel of the wisdom of
exaltation exists in the essence of
Moses1

(197) The wisdom of (Pharaoh’s) slaying the boys was destined to support Moses
through the life of every slain boy, who was killed as if he were Moses. (In this
act), there was no ignorance, for the life of every slain boy was necessarily returned
to Moses. Each life was pure, because its inborn trait (fiÔra) of the primordial covenant of balÁ2 was unimpaired by selfish aims. Moses was the combination of
the lives of all the boys who were killed as if each one was Moses, hence, every
spiritual predisposition of each slain boy inhered in Moses. God particularized
Moses in an unprecedented manner, for he possessed many kinds of wisdom. I
shall present successively, if God wills, some of these in this chapter in measure
of the occurrence of the divine instruction (amr ilÁhÐ)3 in my thought.
The above notion was the first thing I was told (shÙfihtu bihi)4 in this chapter.
When Moses was born, he was the sum of many spirits and active powers, because
the small part (of the human being) acts on the large part. Do you not see how the
infant, with his special trait, acts on the adult so that the latter comes down from his
leading position and plays with the infant, rocking him and appearing before the
infant as his equal in understanding? Thus, the adult becomes subject to the infant
without being aware of it. Also, the child occupies the adult with his rearing, protection, looking after his interests, and making his life easy, so that he will not be
anxious. All this pertains to the ways the younger acts on the older, because of the
power of the child’s state, for the child has been recently acquainted with his Lord,
for he is closer to his birth (198), while the older is more distant from this acquaintance. Thus, whoever is nearer to God subordinates the one more distant from Him,
just as by virtue of their closeness to the king, his highest officials subordinate those
1 For a partial discussion of this chapter, see Ronald L. Nettler, “Ibn ÝArabi and the QurÞan:
Some Passages Concerning MÙsa in the FusÙs al-hikam,” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn
ÝArabi Society 20(1996):53–66.
2 QurÞÁn 7:172.
3 Since Ibn al-ÝArabÐ was inspired to write this book and its content was dictated to him,
it is advisable here to render amr as instruction, that is, what God taught him, and not a
command.
4 The verb shÁfaha means to speak mouth to mouth (face to face), and one can deduce
from the use of this verb the notion of direct revelation to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ who only
transmitted what he was told.

The essence of Moses 157
more remote from him. God’s Messenger used to bare himself to the rain uncovering his head so that the rain touched him; then he said the reason is that the rain
recently had contact with God. Think of the Prophet’s knowledge of God – how
exalted, high, and clear it is. The rain subjugates the best people, because of its proximity to its Lord; it was like a messenger who sends down inspiration to the Prophet
calling him directly by his essence, and the Prophet bared himself to him to receive
what he brought from the Lord. Had the Prophet not received a divine benefit from
the touch of the rain, he would not have exposed himself to it.5 Thus, this is the message of the water from which God made every living thing,6 so understand!
As for the wisdom of putting him (Moses) in the ark (tÁbÙt) and throwing him
into the river,7 (its meaning is the following): The ark alludes to his humanity,
while the river is the symbol of the knowledge he attained through his body. Only
via the body, composed of the four elements, can the human soul be supplied with
the faculties of reasoning, sensation, and imagination. When the soul resides in
the body and is ordered to act on and direct the body, God makes these faculties
tools through which one can fulfill what God wants from him in directing his
humanity (tÁbÙt) in which God’s presence (sakÐna) inheres.8 He was cast into the
river in order to attain different kinds of knowledge through these faculties. God
taught him that even though the spirit which directs him is his ruler, the spirit
directs him through these faculties. God made these faculties, which reside in
humanity (expressed through the tÁbÙt), associate the human being through allusions and kinds of wisdom.
In like manner, God directs the cosmos; He allows it to direct itself by itself or by
its form,9 just as the existence of the child depends on his father’s bringing him into
existence (ÐjÁd al-wÁlid), the effects on their causes, the conditioned things on their
conditions, the objects of knowledge on knowledge,10 the notions that are proved on
their proofs, and the unquestionable notions (199) on their truths. All these things pertain to the cosmos and this is God’s direction of it; He let it direct itself by itself. As for
our saying “by its form,” meaning the form of the cosmos, I mean the Most Beautiful
Names and the highest attributes through which God is named and described. We find
the meaning and the spirit of each of His names by which He is named in the cosmos.
Thus, He directs the cosmos only through its form.
For this reason, He said regarding the creation of Àdam, who is the model
(namÙdhaj)11 that includes the qualities of the divine Presence, that is, the Essence,
5 Cf. Muslim, IX:13 (898).
6 Cf. for example, QurÞÁn 21:30: “We made every living thing from the water” (trans.
AH). Ebstein and Sviri, p. 250.
7 Cf. QurÞÁn 20:39. In this verse the word yamm (literally: sea) appears.
8 On the notion that the sakÐna resides in the tÁbÙt, see QurÞÁn 2:248.
9 According to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, everything is directed by the rules inherent in it and by
God’s names.
10 Read here al-maÝlÙmÁt ÝalÁ ÝulÙmihÁ instead of al-maÝlÙlÁt ÝalÁ ÝilalihÁ (effects on their
causes), which repeats what was already said.
11 For the use of this word instead of the word barnÁmaj (plan) in Affifi’s text, see
KÁshÁnÐ, pp. 506f.

158 The essence of Moses
the attributes and acts: “God created Àdam in His image.”12 His image is only the
divine Presence. In this noble archetype, which is the Perfect Human Being, He
brought into existence all the divine names and the realities that are brought forth
from him in the macro-cosmos outside him. God made him (Àdam) the spirit of
the cosmos and subordinated to him the high and the low things, because of his
perfect form. Just as everything in the cosmos praises Him,13 so everything in the
cosmos is subordinated to this human being, because of the reality of his form.
God said: “He has subjugated all that is in the heavens and the earth as a present
for you” (QurÞÁn 45:13). Thus, everything in the world is subject to the human
being; the one who knows this is the perfect human being, while the human being
who is like an animal does not know it.
Putting Moses in the ark and casting the ark into the river was an external form
of destruction; however, from an inward perspective, it saved him from being
killed. He lived just as the souls live because of knowledge, (escaping) the death
of ignorance as God said: “Or whoever was a dead person” (QurÞÁn 6:122), meaning because of ignorance, and “We restored him to life” (ibid.), meaning because
of knowledge, and “We gave him light by which he can walk among people”
(ibid.), meaning guidance (light), “Is this person like one who walks in darkness”
(ibid.), meaning going astray, “unable to escape it” (ibid.), meaning that he can
never be rightly guided, for going astray is inherent in his soul, and there is no
other aim which can make him act otherwise.
Guidance means that the human being (200) is led to perplexity (Îayra),14 so
that he knows that (divine) matter involves perplexity, and perplexity is anxiety
and motion, and motion is life. Hence, there is neither rest nor death; there is only
existence and (therefore) no nonexistence. In like manner God said, regarding the
water by which the earth lives and moves: “It (the earth) quakes” (QurÞÁn 22:5), and
concerning the earth’s pregnancy, He said: “(The earth) swells” (ibid.), and as for its
giving birth, He said: “It brings forth every joyous pair” (ibid.). This means that the
earth gives birth only to that which is like it, that is, natural like it. Pairing (zawjiyya,
shafÝiyya) is the basis of what the earth gives birth and what appears from it.
Likewise, the existence of the Real (is attested) through the multiplicity of
the cosmic phenomena and His many names, and the form of the world requires
the realities of the divine names. Through the cosmic phenomena and their creator, the Unity of Manyness (aÎadiyyat al-kathra) is proved. (The Real) is One in
His entity with respect to His Essence, just as the substance (jawhar) of primary
matter is one with respect to its essence and many with respect to all the forms
which appear through it and for which it serves as their substrate. Similarly, the
Real is many, because of the forms of His self-manifestation; however, He is the
manifestation of the cosmic forms, notwithstanding His intelligible Unity. Think
how good is this divine instruction through which God particularizes whomsoever
among His people He wishes him to learn (this idea).
12 BukhÁrÐ, LXXIX: 1 (6227). See ch. 12, n. 23.
13 Cf. QurÞÁn 17:44.
14 See ch. 3, n. 28, above.

The essence of Moses 159
Since Pharaoh’s family found him in the river by the tree, Pharaoh called him
MÙsÁ (Moses). In Coptic mÙ means water, and sÁ is a tree, thus he called him after
the place where he found him, for the ark stopped at the tree in the river. Pharaoh
wanted to kill him, but his wife – who was inspired by a divine speech (201) and
whom God created for perfection, as the Prophet said about her when he acknowledged her and Maryam, the daughter of ÝImrÁn, as possessing perfection which
(usually) pertains to males – said to her husband regarding Moses that he “is a
delight for me and you” (QurÞÁn 28:9). Thus, she was delighted by him through
her perfection which was granted to her, as we said, and he (Moses) was a delight
for Pharaoh through the belief God granted him as he was drowning.
God made him die when he was pure, immaculate, and free of evilness, because
He put him to death being a believer before he acquired any sin. (Acceptance of)
Islam erases what (one did) before.16 God made it a sign of his providence for
whomsoever He wishes, so that no one despairs of God’s Mercy, “for only unbelievers despair of God’s Mercy” (QurÞÁn 12:87). If Pharaoh had been one of those
who despair, he would not have hastened to believe in God.
As Pharaoh’s wife said, Moses was a “delight for me and you . . . maybe he
will benefit us” (QurÞÁn 28:9). So it happened, for God benefited both of them
through Moses even though they did not know that he was the prophet who would
be responsible for the destruction of Pharaoh’s kingdom and people. When God
protected him from Pharaoh, “the heart of Moses’ mother became empty” (ibid.,
10) of the anxiety which had affected her. Then God prevented him from being
suckled until he was brought to his mother’s breast, and she suckled him and so
God made her pleasure in him complete.
In like manner, God taught (humanity) the religions, as He said: “We have
made a law (shirÝatan) and a path (minhÁjan) for each of you” (QurÞÁn 5:48),
meaning a way (ÔarÐq). MinhÁjan means that from this way (minhÁ) each one
came (jÁÞa).17 This statement makes an allusion to the sources (aÒl, literally: root)
from which it came. This source (religion) is his sustenance, just as the branch of
a tree is nourished only from its root.
What is prohibited in one law may be permitted in another, that is, with respect
to the form. I mean (202) my saying that this is permitted.18 Essentially, a thing
is not the same as it was, because everything is created anew, and there is no
repetition (in creation). We have (already) called your attention to this (notion).19
15

15 The QurÞÁn (28:9) speaks of Pharaoh’s wife, as it is written here below.
16 According to a doctrine of muwÁfÁt, the status of one’s belief or unbelief is established
before one’s death. The human being, who becomes a believer before his death, is
considered a believer throughout his whole life. For a thorough discussion of this
doctrine, see Etan Kohlberg, “MuwÁfÁt Doctrines in Muslim Theology,” Studia
Islamica 57(1983):47–66.
17 The author divides the word minhÁjan into two words: minhÁ (from it, from the way)
and jÁÞa (each one came).
18 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means that a thing is not permitted or forbidden by virtue of itself, but by
God’s command. Thus, things have no intrinsic nature.
19 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ here adopts the AshÝarite doctrine of continuous creation. See pp. 91f.

160 The essence of Moses
God refers to this (notion) regarding Moses when He forbade employing a wet
nurse,20 because his mother was really the woman who suckled him, not the
woman who bore him. The mother, who bore him, did this as one who receives a
trust; the child was produced in her and nourished by her menstrual blood. She did
not will this, so that she was not indebted to him, for he was nourished, and if he
were not nourished by what nourished him and the menstrual blood did not come
from her, this would destroy her or make her ill. Hence, the mother was indebted
to the fetus, because it was nourished by this blood and it protected her from
injury, which she would experience, if this blood did not come from her and if her
fetus was not nourished by it. The wet nurse is different, because by her suckling
the child, the aim is to give him life and preserve it. God gave this advantage to
Moses’ mother, and no other woman enjoyed this advantage except his mother,
so that she would be delighted in rearing him and seeing him grow at her bosom,
“that she might not grieve” (QurÞÁn 28:13).
God rescued him from the anxiety of the ark, and Moses broke the darkness of
nature because God granted him divine knowledge even if he did not go beyond
of it (nature). God subjected him to trials,21 that is, put him to the test in many circumstances, so that he would realize patience in himself when God tempted him.
The first trial God subjected him to was killing the Egyptian, for God inspired
him to do this and made it fit his innermost part (his soul), even though Moses
was unaware of this. However, he did not care to kill the Egyptian and did not
wait to receive God’s order to kill him, for the prophet is inwardly protected and
is unaware (of it), until he prophesies, that is, is informed by God. For this reason,
al-KhiÃr showed him the killing of the youth,22 which Moses disowned, forgetting
his killing of the Egyptian.
Then, al-KhiÃr said to Moses: “I did it not of my own bidding” (QurÞÁn 18:82,
trans. Arberry), calling Moses’ attention to his (al-KhiÃr’s) degree before he was
informed that he was protected regarding this very event, even though he was
not aware of this protection. Also he (al-KhiÃr) showed him making a hole in the
vessel (and as a result its sinking), which outwardly was its destruction, while
inwardly it was saved from being plundered. Al-KhiÃr made this (event) (203)
correspond to Moses’ ark, which was in the river. Outwardly it signified destruction, while inwardly deliverance. His mother did it, looking at Pharaoh out of fearing his violence, because he could slaughter him in order to cause her harm.23 She
did it with the help of God’s inspiration, without having been aware of it. She felt
in herself a desire to suckle him; however, when she feared for his safety, she cast
him into the river, for the proverb says: “If the eye does not see, the heart does not
grieve.” She did not fear for him because of what she saw, or grieve for him upon
looking at him. Probably she thought that God would restore him to her because
she had a good opinion of Him. She lived with this thought in herself, as hope,
20 QurÞÁn 28:12.
21 QurÞÁn 20:40.
22 QurÞÁn 18:74.
23 Read Ãayran (al-KÁshÁnÐ and al-QayÒarÐ).

The essence of Moses 161
fear, and despair were blended (in such a situation). For this reason, when she was
inspired, she said: “Perhaps this is the messenger who will destroy Pharaoh and
his people.” She lived enjoying this fancy, and with respect to her, this assumption
essentially amounted to knowledge.
Then, Moses was sought (by the Egyptians) and he came out of the city, escaping
from (his persecutors), outwardly out of fear, but inwardly for love of deliverance.
That is because movement is always caused by love, and the one who looks at
movement is prevented from seeing this cause, for (he has in his mind) other causes,
that are not (the real cause). This can be explained by the fact that the origin (of all
things) is the movement of the cosmos from nonexistence, in which it resides, to
existence. For this reason, it is said that the whole cosmos derives from movement
after its being at rest.24 Movement, which is the existence of the cosmos, derives
from love. God’s Messenger called (our) attention to this, saying: “I was a hidden
and unknown treasure and (therefore) I loved (or wanted) to be known.”25 Had this
love not existed, the cosmos itself would not have appeared. Its movement from
nonexistence to existence derives from love which brings it into existence, and the
cosmos too loves to see itself in concrete existence, as it saw itself in a hidden fixed
state (thubÙt). Hence, in every respect its movement from fixed nonexistence to
existence derives from the love of both the Real and the cosmos, because (204) perfection is loved by virtue of itself (al-kamÁl maÎbÙb li-dhÁtihi).26 And His knowledge of Himself with respect to His ability to dispense with (all) things belongs to
Him (alone) by virtue of His essence (huwa lahu bi-dhÁtihi). What remains is only
to complete the degree of knowledge through the knowledge of what comes into
being (al-Ýilm al-ÎÁdith) based on the concrete entities, the entities of the world,
when they exist (literally: are found – wujidat). The form of perfection is manifest
through the knowledge of things that come into being and knowledge of the eternal
things; the degree of knowledge becomes perfect through both aspects. The degrees
of existence are perfected similarly, for existence is divided into the eternal and
noneternal; the latter is what comes into being. The eternal is the existence of the
Real by virtue of Himself, and the non-eternal is the existence of the Real in the
form of the concrete (thÁbit) world. The non-eternal is called coming into being
(ÎudÙth), because parts of it appear to others, and appear in the form of the world.
Thus, existence becomes perfect, and the movement of the world derives from love
of perfection, so understand!
Do you not see how He relieves the constriction of the divine names27 from the
nonexistent manifestation of their effects in what is called the world? God loves

24 Very probably by this phrase (at rest), Ibn al-ÝArabÐ means the state of the cosmos as a
thought God had before His self-manifestation took place.
25 The present tradition was considered spurious by the experts of ÍadÐth; hence, Ibn
al-ÝArabÐ ascribed its authenticity to unveiling. SPK, p. 391, n. 14.
26 This notion is reminiscent of al-GhazÁlÐ’s theory of love in which the love of a thing
because of its perfection is the most important cause of love. Abrahamov, Divine Love,
pp. 46–50.
27 Cf. FutÙÎÁt, Vol. IV, p. 174. SPK, p. 130.

162 The essence of Moses
ease, and He reaches it only through the existence of the forms, the highest and the
lowest. Thus, it is proved that movement derives from love, and there is no movement in Being except that which stems from love.28 Among the learned people some
know this and some others are veiled from knowing it, because they consider the
proximate cause which dominates their soul and makes them decide according to it.
Moses’ fear because he killed the Egyptian was evident. (At the same time)
this fear implied the will (love) of deliverance from being killed. (Outwardly)
he escaped because he feared; however, inwardly he escaped because he willed
(loved) to be rescued from Pharaoh and what he would do to him.29 (The QurÞÁn)
mentions the evident and proximate cause, which was (in relation to the real
cause), as the form of the body is to the human being. And the will (love) to be
rescued was implicit in him, just as the spirit which directs the body is implicit in
the body.
When the prophets turn to the people, they use external and general expressions
and base their address on the understanding of the knower and the listener.30 The
messengers take into account only the common people, because they know the
degree of their understanding, as the Prophet called attention to (205) this degree
in the chapter of gifts and said: “I will give a gift to a man, even though another
gift is dearer to me, for fear that God will throw him into the Fire.”31 Thus, he took
into consideration the low-minded who are driven by greed and natural desires.
Thus, the knowledge the prophets brought was covered with a garment
(khilÝa)32 fitted to the lowest understanding, so that whoever cannot penetrate this
cover would say how good is this garment and regard it as the last aim. However,
the one who possesses subtle understanding and who dives to reach the pearls of
wisdom, which he deserves to find, says: “This is a garment given by the king.”
Thereafter, he examines the value of this garment and its kind among other garments. He then realizes the value of the one on whom it was bestowed and finds
a knowledge which others cannot attain, because they do not know the value of
this garment.
Since the prophets, messengers, and (their) heirs knew that in the world and
among peoples of the world there are such persons, they intended to express (their
messages) in an outward understandable manner, one which both the common and
the elite share. The elite person understands what the common people understand

28 For love as a cause of motion, see Aristotle, Physics, I, 192a. Very probably this notion
goes back to Plato, Symposium, pp. 186–189. Abrahamov, Divine Love, p. 4.
29 “So Moses left the city, fearful and wary, and prayed, ‘My Lord, save me from people
who do wrong’” (QurÞÁn 28:21).
30 Here Ibn al-ÝArabÐ follows the philosophers who claim that the QurÞÁn expresses itself
in a style which can be understood by the common people. Consequently, part of
the QurÞÁn, for example the descriptions of Paradise and Hell, should be interpreted
metaphorically. Walbridge, God and Logic, p. 80.
31 BukhÁrÐ, I I, 19 (27).
32 The literal meaning of this word is “robe of honor.” However, by this metaphor, our
author means the outward cover of the prophets’ statements that only the subtle scholar
may penetrate.

The essence of Moses 163
and more, thus he is rightly called one of the elite and through this additional
understanding he distinguishes himself from the common people. For this reason,
those who transmit knowledge are satisfied (with this state of affairs). This is the
wisdom in Moses’ saying: “I escaped from you out of fear” (QurÞÁn 26:21); he did
not say I fled from you out of love of safety and well-being.
Thereafter, he came to Madyan and found two maidens and “he watered (their
flocks)” (QurÞÁn 28:24) without (asking) payment, “then he turned to the shadow”
(ibid.) of God and said: “My Lord, I need the good You sent down to me” (ibid.).
Thus, he made his act of watering the same as the good God sent to him, and
described himself as one in want of God regarding the good that is with Him.
Al-KhiÃr wished to build a wall without (asking) payment, and Moses reproved
him for that.33 (As a response) al-KhiÃr reminded him that he watered the flocks
without asking payment and other things he did not mention, until MuÎammad
wished that Moses would have been silent and not raised objections, so that God
could tell him of Moses’ and al-KhiÃr’s affair. (206) Hence, MuÎammad would
know through God’s story the place to which Moses was led without his being
aware of this. Had Moses known (the role of al-KhiÃr), he would not have disapproved of al-KhiÃr’s deeds. God made al-KhiÃr’s deeds true in the eyes of Moses,
purified him, and led him to the right way. Notwithstanding, Moses ignored alKhiÃr’s purification and the condition the latter had laid down so that Moses
could follow him.34 This (story) will shed God’s Mercy on us, if we forget God’s
(hidden aims).35 Had Moses known (the hidden meanings of al-KhiÃr’s acts), alKhiÃr would not have said to him “(How could you have patience in) matters
beyond your knowledge” (QurÞÁn 18:68, trans. AH.)? By this al-KhiÃr meant: I
attained knowledge through mystical experience (literally: taste – dhawq), which
you (Moses) could not attain, just as you possessed knowledge which I could not
attain. Thus, al-KhiÃr was just to Moses.
As for the wisdom in al-KhiÃr’s separation from Moses, it is (reasoned) in
God’s saying: “Accept whatever the Messenger gives you, and abstain from whatever he forbids you” (QurÞÁn 59:7, trans. AH). Those who know God and the value
of the Message and the Messenger stop at these words. Since al-KhiÃr knew that
Moses was God’s messenger, he began to watch Moses’ sayings, so that he might
behave with good manners toward the messenger as he deserved. Then Moses
said to him: “From now on, if I ask you something, do not follow me” (QurÞÁn
18:76). Thus, he forbade al-KhiÃr to be in his company. When Moses reacted to
al-KhiÃr’s act the third time, al-KhiÃr said: “This is the separation between me
and you” (ibid., 78). Moses did not say to him do not act, nor did he ask al-KhiÃr
to stay in his company, because he knew the value of his position, which told him

33 QurÞÁn 18:77.
34 Al-KhiÃr stipulated that Moses would not ask him about his acts until he would inform
him. QurÞÁn 18:70.
35 The author seems to say that whenever a human being does not understand God’s acts,
he should remind himself of the story about Moses, who did not realize the wisdom in
al-KhiÃr’s acts until he was informed.

164 The essence of Moses
to forbid al-KhiÃr’s company. Moses remained silent, and the separation took
place.
Look at the perfection of the knowledge of these two persons. Moses maintained divine good manners and al-KhiÃr was just to Moses in acknowledging
before Moses the (following): “I possessed knowledge which God taught me and
you did not know, and you possessed knowledge which God taught you and I did
not know.” This announcement of al-KhiÃr regarding Moses constituted a remedy for the injury he caused Moses when he said: “How could you have patience
about matters beyond your knowledge” (QurÞÁn 18:68, trans. AH)? Al-KhiÃr said
this though he knew the lofty position Moses held because of his mission and that
he (al-KhiÃr) lacked such a position. This became manifest in the MuÎammadan
community in the tradition of the pollination of the palm trees, concerning which
MuÎammad told to his Companions: “You know best the interests of your worldly
affairs.”36 No doubt, the knowledge of a thing is better than ignorance of it. For
this reason, God praises Himself that “He (207) absolutely knows everything”
(QurÞÁn 29:62). Thus, MuÎammad admitted to his Companions that they are more
cognizant of the worldly affairs than he, because he possessed no experience in
these matters, for these things require experience and practice, and he did not find
time to learn them, because he was engaged with more important things. In sum,
I have called your attention to this important behavior which will benefit you if
you use it.
God’s saying: “My Lord bestowed on me authority (Îukm)” (QurÞÁn 26:21)
means the vicegerency (khilÁfa), “and made me one of the messengers” (ibid.)
means the mission (risÁla), for not every messenger is a vicegerent. Because the
vicegerent fights with the sword, dismisses and appoints (officials), whereas the
messenger is different, for he must transmit the message with which he is sent. If
he fights for the message and protects it with the sword, he is (then) both a vicegerent and a messenger. Thus, just as not every prophet is a messenger,37 so not
every messenger is a vicegerent; that is, (not every messenger) is given kingship
and the ability to handle it.
As for the rationale of Pharaoh’s question regarding the divine essence,38 it
did not arise from ignorance, but from seeking information (ikhtibÁr), so that he
could consider Moses’ answer in the light of the latter’s claim for God’s mission.
Pharaoh knew the messengers’ degree of knowledge and he sought to prove by
Moses’ answer the truth of his claim. Pharaoh asked a question to let those present
know – without being aware of (the nature of his question), as he was aware of
it – (that Moses was ignorant). When Moses answered him as a learned person
answers, Pharaoh showed, because he wished to preserve his position, that Moses
had not answered him properly, so that those present came to know, because of
their weak understanding that Pharaoh knew more than Moses. For this reason,
36 See p. 31 above.
37 For a theological and philological discussion of this point, see al-BaghdÁdÐ, UÒÙl al-dÐn,
pp. 153f.
38 “Pharaoh said: ‘What is the Lord of all things?’” (rabb al-ÝÁlamÐn). QurÞÁn 26:23.

The essence of Moses 165
since Moses answered what he did not need to answer – and outwardly it was not
the answer to the question he was asked, and Pharaoh knew that he (Moses) would
answer as he did – Pharaoh said to Moses’ companions: “Your messenger who
was sent to you is mad” (QurÞÁn 26:27); that is, the knowledge I asked him about
is concealed from him, for it is absolutely inconceivable that he should know. The
question was legitimate, for asking (208) what-a-thing-is (mÁhiyya) is a question
about the essence of what is sought, which must characterize the thing itself and
no other. As for those who made definitions composed of genus and differentia
(jins wa-faÒl),39 (this procedure) applies to all things that are characterized by
equivocality (ishtirÁk). However, (God) who has no genus must have a specific
essence not shared by others. Thus, the question is legitimate according to the
people of truth, correct knowledge, and sound intellect, and Moses’ answer to it
is the only correct answer.
Here is a great mystery, for Moses actually answered one who had asked for an
essential definition, and for this reason, he (Moses) made the essential definition
his reference to the forms of the world through which God manifests Himself, or
the forms of the world in which He is manifest. One can understand his answer to
the question “’What is the Lord of all things?’” (rabb al-ÝÁlamÐn) (QurÞÁn 26:23),
as if Moses said: “The one in which the high forms of the world are manifest,
that is, the heaven, and the low (forms), that is, the earth, “if you know for certain” (ibid.), or He manifests Himself through them. When Pharaoh said to his
companions “he is mad” (ibid., 27), as we said above, Moses added (a phrase)
to his explanation, so that Pharaoh would know Moses’ rank in divine knowledge, because Moses knew that Pharaoh would realize this. Thus, Moses said:
“The Lord of the east and the west” (ibid., 28), conveying (the idea) of what is
manifested and what is concealed,40 that is, the outward (ÛÁhir) and the inward
(bÁÔin), and “what is between them” (ibid.), and this is His saying, “(He) absolutely knows everything” (QurÞÁn 29:62). “If you understand (taÝqilÙn)” (QurÞÁn
26:28), meaning if you are people who limit (aÒÎÁb taqyÐd), because the intellect
(Ýaql) limits (yuqayyidu). Thus, the first answer (QurÞÁn 26:24) is for the people
who know for certain, that is, the people of unveiling (kashf) and finding (wujÙd).
He (Moses) said to him (Pharaoh): “If you know for certain” (ibid.), that is, (you)
the people of unveiling and finding, for I have informed you of what you knew
for certain in your witnessing and finding. If you do not belong to this kind, (that
is), if you are people of limit, restriction, and restraint, I shall respond with the
second answer. Also (you should know) that the Real (that you know) is according
39 “For Aristotle, a definition is ‘an account which signifies what it is to be for something’
(logos ho to ti ên einai sêmainei). The phrase ‘what it is to be’ and its variants are crucial:
giving a definition is saying, of some existent thing, what it is, not simply specifying
the meaning of a word.” Robin Smith, “Aristotle’s Logic,” Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-logic/#Def. Each definition is
composed of genus and differentia. For example, the definition of the term “human
being” is an animal (genus), whose differentia is having the ability to reason.
40 The east is the direction of sunrise, hence it is the manifest thing, and the west is the
direction of sunset, hence it is the concealed thing.

166 The essence of Moses
to the proofs of your intellect. Moses brought these two aspects to light so that
Pharaoh would know Moses’ excellence and truthfulness. Moses knew that
Pharaoh had known this, (209) or would know this, because Pharaoh asked about
the essence, and he knew that his question was not based on the way of the ancient
sages to ask “what,” hence Moses answered as he did. Had he known something
different, he would have regarded the question as an error. Since Moses identified
the entity about which Pharaoh asked with the world, Pharaoh addressed him as
he did, while the people (who were present) did not realize it.
Pharaoh said to Moses: “If you take a god other than me, I will place you
among the prisoners (masjÙnÐn)” (QurÞÁn 26:29). Now, the letter sÐn in al-sijn
(prison) is one of the redundant letters,41 (hence) the meaning is “I shall conceal
you,” for you answered me in a manner that helped me express such a saying. If
you say to me: “O Pharaoh, by threatening me, you act unknowingly, because the
Essence is one, and how can you separate it?” I (Pharaoh) will say: “The ranks
in existence separate the Essence, while the Essence, in principle, is not separated nor divided.” “My rank” (Pharaoh continues), “is in actuality to dominate
you, while I and you (are the same) through the Essence, but different in rank (in
concrete existence).” When Moses understood Pharaoh’s statement, he referred
to what Pharaoh deserved, saying to him that he could not carry out (his threat).
However, Pharaoh’s rank attested to his ability to do this and to affect (Moses’
state), for concerning Pharaoh’s rank, the Real is the outward form that can dominate the rank of the form of Moses’ appearance in this session.
Moses said, showing Pharaoh what can prevent him from attacking Moses:
“Even if I show you something manifest?” (ibid., 30), to which Pharaoh could
only say to Moses: “Bring it then, if you are truthful” (ibid., 31). (Pharaoh said
this) for fear of appearing unjust and consequently one to be doubted in the eyes of
his people, who were weak-minded. Pharaoh made those people unsteady,42 and
as a result they obeyed him “because they were wrongdoers” (QurÞÁn 43:54); that
is, through using their sane intellect, they did not deny Pharaoh’s claim,43 which
was expressed in clear and intelligible language, (210) for the intellect cannot go
beyond its limit. However, one who possesses unveiling and certainty can exceed
this limit. For this reason, Moses answered in a way which could be accepted
by both one who knows for certain and another who knows by using his intellect. “Then, he (Moses) cast his rod” (ibid., 32). This was the form of Pharaoh’s
transgression which was expressed in his refusal to respond to Moses’ claim “and
behold, it became a clearly seen snake” (ibid.), that is, a manifest snake. Thus,

41 In this case, the letters which remain are j.n., and if one adds, as Ibn al-ÝArabÐ did,
another n, one gets the verb janna, which means “he concealed.” KÁshÁnÐ, p. 523. For
kinds of etymology adduced by medieval Muslim scholars, see Ignatz Goldziher, On
the History of Grammar among the Arabs – An Essay in Literary History, trans and ed.
Kinga Dévényi and Tomas Ivanyi, Amsterdam 1994, ch. 5. I am grateful to Dr. Almog
Kasher, who supplied me with this reference.
42 This rendering is based on Arberry’s translation of QurÞÁn 43:54.
43 Pharaoh claimed that he is a god.

The essence of Moses 167
the disobedience, that is, the evil deed, became obedience, that is, good deed, as
He said: “God will change their evil deeds into good deeds” (QurÞÁn 25:70), that
is, regarding his judgment.44 Here the judgment appeared as a particular entity in
one substance (jawhar), that is, the rod, which is (also) the snake and the manifest
snake. As a snake, Moses’ rod swallowed up the snakes, and as a rod, it swallowed
up the rods. Thus, Moses’ argument overcame Pharaoh’s arguments in the form
of rods, snakes, and ropes (Îabl, pl. ÎibÁl), and the magicians had ropes,45 which
Moses did not have. Al-Îabl means (also) a small hill (tall ÒaghÐr);46 that is, their
abilities in relation to Moses’ abilities are like small hills to lofty mountains.
When the magicians saw that, they realized Moses’ degree of knowledge and
that what they saw could not derive from human capability. Even if it was in the
power of a human being, it would only be one who is distinguished in his unquestionable knowledge and who is free of imagination and obscurity. Consequently,
they believed in the Lord of all creatures, the Lord of Moses and Aaron, that is, the
Lord Moses and Aaron called upon, because they understood that the people knew
that Moses did not call upon Pharaoh. Since Pharaoh was the ruler of his time
and the vicegerent wielding the sword, even if he deviated from the conventional
laws, he said: “I am your loftiest Lord” (QurÞÁn 79:24); that is, even if all are lords
in some respect, I am higher than them, because, taking into account the external
aspect, I was given dominion over you. Because the magicians realized truth in his
words, they did not contradict him, and indeed agreed with him and said: “You can
judge only the life of this world, (211) so judge as (you wish)” (QurÞÁn 20:72),47
for the state is yours. For this reason, his statement “I am your loftiest Lord” is
true. Even though he was identified with the Real, the form was Pharaoh’s. He cut
off hands and feet and crucified (people)48 through a true essence in false form in
order to attain the ranks which are only attainable through such acts.
That is because in no way can causes be canceled, for the fixed entities (aÝyÁn
thÁbita) require them. The fixed entities appear in existence in the same form as
their existence in their state of fixity, for God’s words (kalimÁt) cannot be changed
(tabdÐl).49 God’s words are nothing but the entities of the existents; because of their
permanence one ascribes them to eternity, and because of their (concrete) existence and appearance one ascribes to them coming into being (ÎudÙth). As you can

44 The rod (ÝaÒÁ) stands for Pharaoh’s transgression (ÝiÒyÁn) and the snake (Îayya) for his
obedience. Ibn al-ÝArabÐ exploits the same root Ý.Ò.y on which ÝaÒÁ and ÝiÒyÁn are built
in order to connect the two words. He also claims that the Îayya derives from ÎayÁt
(life) which, in turn, signifies knowledge which brings about obedience. One’s act has
no moral value without God’s judgment, which permits or forbids. Hence, Pharaoh’s
act can change from transgression into obedience. Affifi, I I, p. 313.
45 QurÞÁn 26:44.
46 Lane, Arabic-English Lexicon, Vol. I, p. 505.
47 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ reversed the position of the two phrases of the verse which begins with
“judge whatever . . . ”
48 QurÞÁn 26:49.
49 The last phrase is based on QurÞÁn 6:115: “No one can change (lÁ mubaddila) His
words” (trans. AH). See also QurÞÁn 10:64.

168 The essence of Moses
say, a person or a guest appeared in our (house) today; however, it does not follow from his appearance that he had no existence before his appearance (ÎudÙth).
For this reason, that is, the appearance of His words notwithstanding their eternity, God said in His venerable speech: “(Whenever) a new (muÎdath) reminder
comes to them from their Lord, they listen to it while they play” (QurÞÁn 21:2).
“(Whenever) a new reminder comes to them from the Merciful, they deviate from
it” (QurÞÁn 26:5). And the Merciful comes only with mercy, and whoever deviates
from God’s Mercy may meet punishment, which derives from absence of mercy.
As for His saying, “When they saw our injury (punishment), their belief would
not benefit them, this was always God’s way of treating His servants” (QurÞÁn
40:85), “except for the people of Jonah” (QurÞan 10:98). Because of the exception
expressed in the second verse, the first verse does not prove that their belief will
not benefit them in the next world. God wished to say that this exception does not
absolve them of blame in this world, and for this reason Pharaoh was blamed, notwithstanding the existence of belief in him. This would have been correct, had he
been certain of his death in this moment. The situation proves that he was not sure
of his death, because he saw the believers walking on the dry land which became
manifest, because Moses struck the sea with his rod. Because Pharaoh believed,
he was not certain of his destruction, contrary (212) to the dying person, so that
one cannot combine the two cases (of Pharaoh and the dying person).
Pharaoh believed in what the Children of Israel believed, that is, the indubitable belief in deliverance. Of that which did take place he was certain; however,
not in the manner he wanted. God saved his soul from the punishment of the next
world, and (also) saved his body, as He said: “Today we shall save only your
corpse as a sign to all posterity” (QurÞÁn 10:92, trans. AH), because had his form
(corpse) disappeared, perhaps people would have said that he became hidden.50
He appeared as a dead person, in the usual form, so that people would know that
it was he. Thus, his deliverance combines both the tangible and spiritual aspects.
Whoever deserves the punishment of the Hereafter does not believe in it, even
though every sign comes to him,51 “until they see the painful punishment” (QurÞÁn
10:97), that is, until they taste the punishment of the next world. Pharaoh did not
belong to this kind of people. This is the plain meaning (ÛÁhir) the QurÞan conveys
(to us). After that, we shall say further that God decides in this matter, because the
common people had no doubt regarding his suffering (in the Hereafter); however,
they had no text to support their claim in this issue. As for his family, their judgment is different, but here is not the place to discuss it.
Also, you should know that God does not cause persons who are dying to
expire unless they believe and trust in the divine messages. For this reason, sudden death and killing an inadvertent person are detested. Sudden death is defined
as (a state in which) the internal breath comes out, while the external breath does
not enter. This is sudden death, which is not the state of the dying person. It is like
50 Very probably Ibn al-ÝArabÐ had in mind the ShiÝite concept of the occultation of the
twelfth imam.
51 This phrase is based on QurÞÁn 10:96.

The essence of Moses 169
killing a heedless person by striking his neck from behind, while he is unaware.
Thus, such a person dies in a state of either belief or unbelief. For this reason,
the Prophet said: “He will be gathered in the state in which he dies,”52 just as he
will die in the state of (either belief or unbelief). However, the dying person is a
witness (of God’s messages), hence he believes as we have said, and he dies only
in-the-state-in-which-he-is (ÝalÁ mÁ kÁna Ýalayhi), for the verb kÁna as a word
designating existence entails time only when it is connected with circumstances.
Hence, one should differentiate between the dying unbeliever and the unbeliever
who is killed while being inadvertent or one who died suddenly, as we have said
in the definition of sudden death.
As for the wisdom of God’s self-manifestation and (His) speech (213) in the
form of fire, it (happened) because Moses willed it. God manifested Himself in
keeping with Moses’ wish, so that he would accept the revelation and not deviate from it. Had He revealed Himself in a form different from Moses’ desire, he
would have deviated from God, because his interest was concentrated on a specific demand. Had he deviated, his act would have been fruitless and God would
have turned away from him. However, he was the chosen and the favorite person.
Because of that, God manifested Himself to him in keeping with his request, while
he was unaware of this.
He saw this as the core of his need, like the fire of Moses/while it was God,
and he did not know.

52 I could not find the source of this tradition. See n. 16 above.

26 The bezel of the wisdom of
recourse1 exists in the essence
of KhÁlid

(213) As for KhÁlid ibn SinÁn’s2 wisdom, he manifested in his mission the prophecy of the Isthmus (al-nubuwwa al-barzakhiyya).3 He claimed he wanted to
inform (the people) of what exists in the Isthmus (barzakh) only after (his) death.
Hence, he commanded that his tomb be uncovered in order to ask him. He related
that things in the Isthmus are managed as life is in this world. Through this one can
know that all that which the messengers have related in the present world is true.
KhÁlid intended that all the people would believe in the messages of the messengers so that mercy would apply to all. He had the honor to be a prophet before
MuÎammad, and therefore he knew that God sent MuÎammad as a mercy to all
the creatures. KhÁlid himself was not a messenger, hence he wished to attain a
good deal of the mercy which existed in MuÎammad’s mission. KhÁlid was not
ordered to inform people, but he desired to achieve this in the Isthmus, so that
he would be the most knowledgeable person regarding mankind. (But) KhÁlid’s
people did not carry out his order.4 MuÎammad did not describe KhÁlid’s people
as getting lost (ÃÁÝa), but as a people who destroyed their prophet, because they
did not fulfill his wish.
Did God give him a reward for his desire? There is no doubt and no controversy that KhÁlid deserved to be rewarded for his desire; however, there is doubt
and controversy regarding the reward which is demanded; does the reward for a

1 The wisdom of recourse (Îikma Òamadiyya) pertains to KhÁlid because, since his people
opposed him, he asked them to have recourse to his grave one year after his passing
away. Chittick, “Chapter Headings,” p. 36.
2 For this prophet, who lived one generation before MuÎammad, see ch. 2, Pellat, E I2.
3 “A barzakh is something that separates (fÁÒil) two other things while never going to
one side (mutaÔarrif), as, for example, the line that separates shadow from sunlight.
God says: ‘He let forth the two seas that meet together, between them a barzakh they do
not overpass’ (Koran 55:19); in other words, the one sea does not mix with the other.”
FutÙÎÁt, Vol. I, p. 459. Trans. SPK, pp. 117f.
4 According to al-KÁshÁnÐ (pp. 534f), KhÁlid saved his people from a fire that could
have destroyed them. He went into a cave in order to extinguish the source of the fire.
He asked his people on entering to call him after three days, so that he would not die
after leaving the cave. But becoming impatient, they called him after two days, and this
caused his death.

The essence of KhÁlid 171
realized desire equal the reward for an unrealized (214) desire? In many instances
the Law supports this equation. For example, one who comes to pray with a
congregation, but the congregation does not attend, deserves a reward as if one
attended the prayer. In like manner, one who wishes to do good deeds as rich people do, although one is poor, deserves their reward. However, does the equation
apply to their intentions or to their acts, for the rich people combine intention and
act? The Prophet did not determine either giving reward for both, or for one of the
two. On the face of it (al-ÛÁhir), intention and act are not equal. For this reason,
KhÁlid ibn SinÁn demanded (to carry out) the act of transmission of messages,5 so
that the position of joining the two activities (intention and act) would prove true
for him and he would achieve the two rewards. And God knows best.

5 As MuÎammad did.

27 The bezel of the wisdom of
uniqueness1 exists in the essence of
MuÎammad

(214) His wisdom is unique, because he is the most perfect existent in mankind.
For this reason, creation begins and ends with him.2 He was a prophet when Àdam
was between water and clay.3 Also in his essential structure he is the Seal of the
Prophets (khÁtam al-nabiyyÐn).
The first of the uneven numbers is three,4 and that which becomes greater than
this first derives from it. He was the greatest proof of his Lord, for he was given
all the words, that is, the things named by Àdam.5 In his triplicity, he resembled
this proof, which was a proof of himself. Since his essence was in keeping with
the first uneven number, because his structure was based on three parts, he said
in the chapter of love, which is the root of existents: “Three things have been
made beloved to me in your world.” (He said this) because of the triplicity in him,
then he mentioned “women and perfume,” and “the delight he was given in the
prayer.”6 First he mentioned women and then prayer, because, (215) in the root of
the appearance of her entity, the woman is a part of the man.
The human being’s knowledge of himself (soul) precedes his knowledge of
his Lord, because his knowledge of his Lord results from his knowledge of himself. For this reason, MuÎammad said: “Whoever knows himself (soul) knows his
Lord.”7 If you wish, you may hold the impossibility of knowing (God) and the
inability to reach this knowledge, and if you wish, you may hold the provability of this knowledge. According to the first (interpretation of the tradition) you
cannot know yourself (soul), hence, you cannot know your Lord; and according

1 MuÎammad is unique because he was the first human being in which God’s Essence
was reified and because all God’s self-manifestations exist in him. Chittick, “Chapter
Headings,” p. 37; idem, “Summary,” p. 40.
2 No doubt Ibn al-ÝArabÐ here speaks of MuÎammad as possessing the walÁya which, in
our author’s view, will not end. Thus, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ contradicts himself. Affifi (Vol. I I,
p. 322) tries to solve this self-contradiction by saying that Ibn al-ÝArabÐ intends to say
that existence began with MuÎammad and the mission (risÁla) ended with him.
3 BukhÁrÐ, LXXVI I I:119.
4 Affifi, I, p. 115; SPK, p. 360. See p. 82, n. 3 above.
5 QurÞÁn 2:31.
6 NasÁÞÐ, XXXVI:1 (3939).
7 See ch. 3, n. 4.

The essence of MuÎammad 173
to the second, you can know yourself (soul), hence, you can know your Lord.
MuÎammad was the clearest proof of his Lord, for every part of the cosmos is a
proof of its root, which is God, so understand!
Women were made beloved to MuÎammad and he yearned for them, because
this (behavior) pertains to the yearning of the whole for its part. Through this
(behavior) MuÎammad made clear what God had ingrained in him, as God said
regarding the essential human structure: “I breathed my spirit into him” (QurÞÁn
15:29, trans. AH, and 38:72). Then God described Himself as most longing to
meet humans and He said to those who longed for Him: “O DÁwÙd, I am most
longing for them,”8 meaning for those who long for Him. This is a unique meeting, for He said in the tradition concerning the Antichrist (al-DajjÁl): “None of
you will see his Lord, until he dies.”9 One necessarily longs for someone whose
description is such. The Real longs for those who are near to Him, although He
sees them; however, he wishes them to see Him, but their state precludes this (possibility). His statement resembles (“We shall test you) until We know” (QurÞÁn
47:31), even though He knew (them).
He (God) longs for this unique trait (to meet humans), which takes place only
after death, and through this trait He causes them to be cured of their longing for
Him.10 As God said in the tradition of hesitation, which is relevant to this issue:
“I do not hesitate in whatever I do as much as I hesitate in causing the death of
my believing servant, who hates death as much as I hate to injure him; however,
he necessarily will meet Me.”11 He informed him of good tidings, and did not say
to him that death is necessary, so that He would not grieve him by mentioning of
death. (216) Since humans do not meet the Real until after they die, as the Prophet
said: “None of you will see his Lord, until he dies,” God said: “He necessarily will
meet Me.” The Real’s longing for the existence of this relationship (is expressed
in the following poem):
The beloved yearns to see me/and I yearn for him very much
Souls are impassioned (but) the human rejects the decree (of death)/I complain, moaning, and so does He
Since the Real has made it clear that He breathed His spirit into humans, He longs
only for Himself. Do you not see that the Real created him in His image,12 because
he stems from His spirit? Since his structure is composed of the four elements in
his body, which are called the humors, there comes into being out of His breath a

8 I do not know the source of this saying.
9 Muslim, LI I:95 (169).
10 On the one hand, people wish to meet God, but on the other, they are afraid of meeting
Him, because this involves death, and death causes their longing, which is like an
illness, to be cured.
11 BukhÁrÐ, LXXXI:38 (6502).
12 See ch. 25, n. 12.

174 The essence of MuÎammad
burning, despite the moisture in his body,13 and as a result of which, the spirit of
the human being became fire, because of his structure. For this reason, God only
spoke to Moses only in the form of fire and placed his need in it.14 Had his structure not been natural,15 his spirit would have been of light. He called this act blowing, alluding to its derivation from the Merciful’s breath, because by this breath,
which is blowing, his essence appears, and because of the predisposition of the
one blown into, the burning is fire, not light. The breath of the Merciful, through
which human is human, is hidden in (the part of his structure).
From Àdam, God produced a figure in his image and called it woman, who
appeared in his image, so that he yearned for her as a thing yearns for itself, and
she yearned for him as a thing yearns for its source. Thus, women were made
beloved to man, because God loved whomever He created in His image. Then He
caused the angels that were made of light to prostrate themselves before Àdam,
notwithstanding their great value and position and their high natural structure.16
Because (God and humans share the same form), an affinity (munÁsaba) binds
them together, for form causes the greatest, the most exalted and perfect affinity.17
Form (causes the creation of) pair; that is, it doubles the existence of the Real,
just as through her existence, the woman doubles the man, thus producing a pair.
Thus, a triad appears, (that is), the Real, the man, and the woman.
The man yearns for His Lord, who is his source, just as the woman yearns for
him. His Lord made women beloved (217) to man, just as God loves whomever is
made in His image. One feels love only for the entity which is the source of one’s
being, that is, the Real.18 For this reason, he (the Prophet) said: “Women have
been made beloved to me” (Îubbiba), and not “I loved” from himself, because
his love was connected to his Lord, in whose image he was created, even in his
love for his wife, for he loved her through God’s love for him, assimilating the
divine love. Since a man loves a woman, he seeks union with her, which is the
most profound union possible. And in the form of the elemental structure (of
humans), there is no stronger union than sexual intercourse. For this reason, passion permeates all parts of the human. This permeation explains the command to
perform major ablution, which encompasses all the human parts, just as a man is
absorbed in a woman when passion takes place. (Another reason for major ablution) is God’s jealousy of His servant lest he be delighted in other than Him, so He

13 Notwithstanding the word bi-mÁ (through which or by which), this is the only correct
translation of the phrase bi-mÁ fÐ jasadihi min al-ruÔÙba, because fire cannot derive
from humidity or through it. Possibly something is incorrect in the text.
14 See ch. 25.
15 Read law-lÁ (Affifi, I, p. 216, n. 4), which seems logical.
16 QurÞÁn 2:34.
17 In al-GhazÁlÐ, affinity is one of the causes of love between the Divine and the human
being. Both thinkers use in this context the same terms and tradition. Abrahamov,
Divine Love, pp. 56–58.
18 The notion that God is beloved because He gives humans existence occurs in the
FutÙÎÁt as one of the causes of love. Very probably Ibn al-ÝArabÐ follows parts of
al-GhazÁlÐ’s theory of love. Abrahamov, “Ibn al-ÝArabÐ on Divine Love,” pp. 14f.

The essence of MuÎammad 175
purifies him with major ablution in order to cause him to turn to God in the entity
(woman) in which he is absorbed, for the woman reflects God.
When man witnesses the Real in a woman, it is a witness of passivity, and
if he witnesses Him in himself, from the point of view of the appearance of the
woman from him, it is a witness of activity.19 However, when he witnesses the
Real in himself without considering the form that comes from Him, his witness
is of God’s passivity without any mediator (such as a divine name). His witness
of the Real in the woman is the most complete and perfect, because he witnesses
the Real with respect to His being both passive and active,20 and with respect to
Himself, He is uniquely passive.
For this reason, the Prophet loved women, because of the perfect witness of
God in them, for the Real is never witnessed without materials,21 because in His
Essence, He does not need the creatures. If witness of God’s Essence is impossible, and witness of Him occurs only through material, then the witness of the
Real in women is the greatest and the most perfect witness. The strongest union
is sexual intercourse, which resembles God’s turning to the one whom He created
in His image in order to make him his vicegerent, so that He might see Himself
(218) in him.
God made him, shaped his form, and blew His spirit into him, which is His
breath, thus, externally his form attests to creation and internally to the truth (reality). For this reason, God describes the spirit as directing this (human) structure,
because through it He “directs everything from the heaven” (QurÞÁn 32:5), which
is the height “to the earth” (ibid.), which is the lowest level, because it (the earth)
is the lowest of all the elements.
He called them (the women) nisÁÞ, a plural form which has no singular form
deriving from the plural. Because of this MuÎammad said: “Three things have
been made beloved to me in your world, women . . . ” He did not say “woman,”
taking into account the fact that they were brought into existence after Àdam,
for the word nusÞa22 means postponement, (as) God said: “The month postponed
(al-nasÐÞ) is only an increase of unbelief” (QurÞÁn 9:37). Selling by postponement
(nasÐÞÁ) means delay of payment. For this reason, he mentioned “women.” He
loved them only because of their being the (lowest) degree and of their being a
substrate of passivity. MuÎammad was related to women as the Real is to nature.
The Real reveals in nature the forms of the world through His will, which turns to

19 According to Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s logic, one can also see in man the two aspects of passivity
and activity. Because God created man, he symbolizes the active aspect, and because
man is a servant, he represents passivity.
20 That is because from one point of view the woman is passive, as she was created from
the man, but from another she is active, because God created her. Alternatively, in the
course of sexual relations, man is considered active and woman passive.
21 One can learn of God only through His connections to the world, because in Himself He
is ineffable.
22 Ibn al-ÝArabÐ derives the word nisÁÞ (women) from the root n.s.Þ.; however, the origin of
nisÁÞ is n.s.w. As we know, such changes do not bother our author.

176 The essence of MuÎammad
the things (al-tawajjuh al-irÁdÐ),23 and divine command, which amounts to sexual
intercourse in the world of the elemental forms, to aspiration (himma) in the world
of the luminous spirits and to the arrangement of premises (muqaddimÁt) in the
world of ideas in order to arrive at conclusions.24 Each of these aspects (is symbolized) by the first and singular sexual union.
Whoever loves women by this definition, (his) love is divine. And whoever
loves them in particular because of natural desire lacks the knowledge of this
desire. Thus, (his love) is form without spirit, and even though that form essentially possesses spirit, it is not attested (as existent) for one who approaches his
wife, or any other woman, only for the sake of pleasure, while he himself does not
know to whom he approaches.25 Thus, he does not know from himself (to whom
he approaches), just as another person does not know this, unless he names with
his own tongue (his aim), so that one can know it. Someone said:
“People rightly said of me that I am a lover/however, they do not know whom
I love.”
(219) Likewise, this person loved pleasure and loved the substrate in which it
resides, that is, the woman; however, he missed the spirit of the issue. If he knew
this, he would know the object of his delight and whoever delights in him, and (as
a result) he would be the perfect individual.
Just as the rank of the woman is lower than the man’s, as God said, “The rank
of men is higher than that of women” (QurÞÁn 2:228), so the rank of the human
who was created in God’s image is lower than that of He who produced him in
His image, notwithstanding his being in His image. Because of His rank which
distinguishes God from the human, He does not need the cosmos and He is the
true Agent, while the human is a second-rank agent. The human does not have the
priority of the Real. The (fixed) entities (aÝyÁn) are distinguished by a hierarchy,
and God gives each that which it deserves and each gnostic his due.26 For this
reason, MuÎammad’s love for women derived from divine love, (because) God
“gave everything its (form of) creation (khalqahu)” (QurÞÁn 20:50), which is the
same as what everything deserves (Îaqq). God gave him only what he deserved in
keeping with the essence to which he was entitled. The Prophet gave precedence
to women (in this tradition), because they are the substrate of passivity, just as
nature precedes that which derives its existence from it through a form. Actually,
nature is the Breath of the Merciful, for the forms of the higher and lower world
are revealed in nature, because the blowing (of God’s Breath) permeates the hylic
substance (al-jawhar al-hayÙlÁnÐ), particularly in the world of bodies. As for the
permeation of God’s Breath through the existence of the luminous spirits, this is
another kind of permeation.
Also, in this tradition, MuÎammad advanced the feminine form above the masculine one, because he was concerned for women’s well-being. Hence, he said
23 The text has al-idÁrÐ, which is clearly a misprint.
24 Cf. above, pp. 116f of the Arabic text.
25 He does not know the real aim of his love.
26 For this notion, see ch. 10 above.

The essence of MuÎammad 177
thalÁth (three in the feminine gender) and not thalÁtha in the masculine, although
he mentioned perfume, which is masculine. The Arabs used the masculine gender over the feminine and said (for example), “the FÁÔimas and Zayd went out”
(kharajÙ – third-person masculine plural) and not kharajna (third-person feminine
plural). Thus, they made the masculine gender, though Zayd was only one person (Zayd), overcome the feminine, though the FÁÔimas were a group (FÁÔimas).
MuÎammad was an Arab (and so he adopted the linguistic norms of the Arabs).
However, he took into consideration (220) the notion of God’s intention to make
women beloved to him, (although) he did not choose this love. God taught him
what he did not know and bestowed on him abundant grace (faÃl aÛÐm).27 He made
the feminine gender overcome the masculine by saying thalÁth (three in feminine
gender) without the addition of hÁÞ (which makes the word masculine).28 How
cognizant was the Messenger of the realities (ÎaqÁÞiq) and how great his attention
to what each thing deserves.
Also, the Prophet placed the third and final beloved thing in the feminine gender (ÒalÁt, prayer), just like the first beloved thing, and inserted between them a
masculine word (ÔÐb, perfume). He began with women and ended with prayer,
both being feminine, while the word between them, perfume, is identical to
man’s status in existence, for man is placed between God’s Essence (dhÁt – feminine), from which he stemmed, and woman, who stemmed from him. Also, he is
between two feminine forms, the dhÁt whose gender is feminine in language and
woman which is feminine in its real (natural) meaning. In like manner, women are
in reality (nature) feminine, while prayer is not really a feminine entity (except in
language). Perfume, masculine in gender, is inserted between them as Àdam was
between God’s Essence, from which he was brought into existence, and ÍawÁÞ,
whose existence stemmed from him. If you wish, you can say (regarding God)
that both His attribute (Òifa) (of creation) and (the attribute) of ability (qudra) (to
create) are also feminine in gender. Whichever system of thought you wish (to
follow), you will find the prevalence of the feminine gender even among the sages
who adhered to the theory of causality (aÒÎÁb al-Ýilla) and made the Real the cause
(Ýilla) of the existence of the world. ÝIlla itself is feminine. The reason for placing
perfume after women is because of the smells of generation in women, for the best
perfume is embracing the beloved, as they said in the famous proverb.29
Since MuÎammad was originally created as a servant, he never aspired to leadership, but was always prostrating and standing before God in a passive way, until
God produced from him what He produced. He gave him the rank of action in the
domain of breaths and good perfumes. Thus, He made perfume beloved to him,
and for this reason placed perfume after women. He took into account the Real’s
degrees in His saying: “He is Elevated in degrees, Possessor of the Throne” (QurÞÁn
27 That God possesses great or infinite grace is frequently mentioned in the QurÞÁn, for
example 2:105, 3:74, 174, 57:21, 29, 62:4.
28 This is an example of the many redundant sentences and phrases which fill the FuÒÙÒ
and give the impression that originally the book began as a series of lectures.
29 I have not found this proverb.

178 The essence of MuÎammad
40:15), because He is established on the Throne through His name, the Merciful.
Thus, Divine Mercy reaches everything encompassed by the Throne, as attested
in His saying, “My Mercy encompasses everything” (QurÞÁn 7:156). (221) The
Throne embraces all things and the One established on it is the Merciful. Through
His Reality Mercy permeates the world, as we have frequently explained in this
book and in the Meccan Revelation (sic! Al-FutÙÎ al-makkÐ).30 God placed the
perfume in the conjugal union referring to ÝÀÞisha’s innocence and said: “Corrupt
women are for corrupt men, and corrupt men are for corrupt women; good women
are for good men, and good men are for good women. The good are innocent of
what has been said against them” (QurÞÁn 24:26).31 God made their odors good
(sweet-smelling), because speech derives from breath, which is the essence of the
odor. Thus, breath proceeds from (the mouth) as good or bad (sweet or disgusting),
according to the way it is expressed in speech. With respect to its being originally
divine, breath is all sweet-smelling and good; however, with respect to praise and
condemnation, it is good and evil. On the badness of garlic, MuÎammad said:
“It is a bush whose odor I detest,”32 and he did not say, “I detest it,” because one
does not detest the substance (Ýayn) of a thing, but rather that which stems from
it. Abhorrence of odors is based on custom, natural antipathy (Ýadam mulÁÞamat
ÔabÝ),33 an aim (to be achieved), law, and lack of the perfection of (the human
body) which one seeks. There are no other causes of disgust but those we have
mentioned.
Now, since the matter is divided into evil and good, as we have said, God caused
MuÎammad to love good, not evil. He described the angels as those who suffer bad
odors, because rottenness resides in the elemental structure (of humans), for the
human is created of “dried clay formed from dark mud” (QurÞÁn 15:26, AH); that is,
his odors (always) change.34 Thus, the angels are disgusted by humans, because of
their nature. Similarly, the dung beetle is harmed by the odor of the rose. Whereas
(for us) its smell is good, for the dung beetle it is not so. Whoever possesses such
a temperament (characterized metaphorically by bad odor) in essence and form,
when he hears the truth it hurts him, (however) he rejoices in falsehood, as God
said: “Those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in God” (QurÞÁn 29:52). He
described them through loss (khusrÁn) and said: “Those are losers” (khÁsirÙn, ibid.),
those who “lost their souls” (themselves, QurÞÁn 6:12 and passim), for whoever does
not perceive the difference between good (222) and evil has no perception.
God made His Messenger love only the good in everything, and everything is
good. Can one imagine or not that there exists in the world a temperament (of an
entity) which finds only good and not evil in everything? We said that no such

30 FutÙÎÁt, Vol. IV, pp. 29f (ch. 198).
31 Here, as in other places, the author plays with the double meaning of khabÐth (corrupt
and malodorous) and Ôayyib (good and sweet-smelling), in order to interweave this
verse into the context of the discussion on perfume.
32 Muslim, V:76 (565).
33 This is al-QayÒarÐ’s reading.
34 In reality this means that humans vacillate between good and evil deeds.

The essence of MuÎammad 179
entity exists, for we do not find such a phenomenon (seeing only good) in the
source from which the world stemmed, that is, the Real; we find Him abhorring
and loving, and the evil is that which is abhorred and the good is that which is
loved. The world was created in God’s image, and the human was created in two
images (the Real and the world), hence, no human temperament perceives only
one of the two aspects (good and evil). Thus, any human temperament can perceive the difference between the good and the evil, and to know by experience that
a thing is evil and without experience (that is, by reason) that it is good, so that his
(rational) perception of the good in a thing diverts him from (seeing) its evilness.
This is conceivable. However, the removal of evilness from the world, that is,
from being, is inconceivable. God’s Mercy applies to both the good and the evil.
With respect to itself, the evil is good and vice versa. Regarding a certain human
temperament, a good thing may be evil from a certain standpoint and vice versa.
As for the third (part of the tradition) through which unevenness (the odd number) was completed, it is prayer. He (MuÎammad) said: “I was given delight in
prayer,” for prayer bears witness, because it is a secret conversation between God
and his servant, as God said: “If you remember Me, I will remember you” (QurÞÁn
2:152). Prayer is worship which is divided between God and His servant; half
belongs to God and half to His servant, as it is related in the sound tradition about
God, who said: “I have divided the prayer into two parts; half belongs to Me and
half to My servant, and My servant will receive what he asks for.”35 The servant
says: “In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful” (QurÞÁn 1:1), and
God says: “My servant remembers Me.” The servant says: “Praise be to God, the
Lord of the created beings” (ibid., 2). God says: “My servant praises Me.” The
servant says: “The Compassionate, the Merciful” (ibid., 3). God says: “My servant extols Me.” The servant says: “The King on the Day of Judgment” (ibid., 4).
God says: “My servant exalts Me (and) entrusts Me with (his affairs).” Thus, the
whole of this half (of sÙrat al-fÁtiÎa) belongs exclusively to God.36
Then the servant says: “It is You we worship; it is you (223) we ask for help”
(ibid., 5). God says: “This is between Me and My servant, and My servant will
receive what he asks for.” Thus, God produces participation (between Him and
His servant) in this verse. The servant says: “Guide us to the straight way (ibid.,
6), the way of those on whom You bestow favors, those who bring upon themselves no anger and who do not deviate from the right way” (ibid., 7). God says:
“These (last three verses)37 belong to My servant, and he will receive what he asks
for.” These (last three verses) are particularized to God’s servant, just as the first
(three verses) are particularized to Him. From this (division of the verses), we
know the obligation to recite: “Praise be to God, the Lord of the creatures” (ibid.,
1 or 2). Whoever does not recite it does not perform the prayer which is divided
between God and His servant.
35 Muslim IV:38 (395). The citations below are taken from this tradition.
36 The first sÙra of the QurÞÁn has six verses without accounting the “In the name . . . ,”
which is usually considered the first verse.
37 The text has hÁÞulÁÞi (sic!) instead of hÁdhihi.

180 The essence of MuÎammad
Since prayer is a secret conversation, it is remembrance, and whoever remembers the Real sits with (jÁlasa) Him, and the Real sits with him, for in the divine
tradition God truly said: “I am the companion (jalÐs – I sit with) of him who remembers Me.”38 Now, whoever has the ability to see and sits with the one whom he
remembers sees his companion. This is witness and seeing. If he is incapable of
seeing, he does not see his companion. As a result, one who prays knows his rank
(in prayer), whether he sees the Real with this seeing or not. If he does not see Him,
he should worship Him through belief as if he sees Him, imagines Him in his qibla39
and performs his secret conversation with him, listening to God’s response.
If he is an imÁm (a prayer leader) for his own people and for the angels who
pray with him – for everyone who prays is no doubt an imÁm – for the angels
pray behind one who prays alone, as stated in a tradition,40 he attains the level of
the messengers in their prayer, that is, to be (one of) God’s vicegerents. When he
says: “God hears the one who praises Him,” he is informing himself and those
behind him that God has heard him, and then the angels and those who are present say: “Our Lord, praise belongs to You.” That is because God says through the
tongue of His servant: “God hears the one who praises Him.”
Thus, consider the lofty rank of the prayer and the place to which it brings its
performer. Whoever does not attain the degree of seeing in prayer will not reach
its aim and will find no delight in it, for he does not see the One with whom he
converses secretly. If he does not hear what the Real transmits to him in prayer, he
does not belong to those who listen (to God). And whoever is not present in prayer
with God, (224) neither hearing and nor seeing Him, is not praying at all and is
not one of those who listen and witness. So long as prayer continues, there is no
other kind of worship which can prevent one from carrying out other obligations.
The invocation of God is the strongest part in prayer, because prayer includes
both words and acts – we have mentioned the description of the perfect human in
performing the prayer in the Meccan Revelations (al-futÙÎÁt al-makkiyya) – for
God says: “The prayer prevents from carrying out outrageous and evil deeds”
(QurÞÁn 29:45). This is because the Law forbids one who performs the prayer to
engage in any other acts so long as the prayer lasts. “The remembrance of God is
greater” (ibid.), that is, in prayer, viz., God’s remembrance of His servant when
He responds to his request. The servant’s praise of God is greater than his remembrance of Him, because majesty belongs to God.41 For this reason, God said: “God
knows what you do” (ibid.), and He said: “or whoever listens and is a witness”
(QurÞÁn 50:37). He listens to God’s remembrance of him in prayer.
Moreover, since existence derives from rational movement which transforms
the cosmos from nonexistence into existence, prayer comprises the three kinds of
movement: vertical movement, which corresponds to standing in prayer; horizontal movement, which corresponds to bowing in prayer; and downward movement,
38 Muslim, XVI I I:2.
39 This is the direction to the KaÝba in Mecca toward which the Muslim prays.
40 BukhÁrÐ, IX:16 (659).
41 QurÞÁn 45:37.

The essence of MuÎammad 181
which corresponds to prostration. The movement of the human is vertical, that of the
animal is horizontal, and that of plants is downward, while the inanimate thing has
no essential movement, for when a stone moves, another thing causes it to move.
As for his saying, “my delight was made to be in prayer,” he does not ascribe
this making to himself, for God’s self-manifestation to the one who prays derives
from God and not from the one who performs the prayer. That is because had he
not mentioned this description of himself (as being delighted), God would have
ordered him to pray without His being manifested to him. Since he received this
delight as a favor, the vision of God was also a favor. He said: “my delight (qurrat
ÝaynÐ) was made to be in prayer,” and (this delight) is only the vision of the beloved
(225), through which the eye of the lover becomes settled (taqarru bihÁ Ýayn almuÎibb), from the word istiqrÁr (come to rest), for the eye comes to rest when it
sees the beloved and does not look at some other thing, whether sensual or not.42
For this reason, when praying one is forbidden to turn around in prayer, because
this turning around is something the Devil steals from the servant’s prayer, thus
preventing him from seeing his beloved. Moreover, if (God) had been indeed the
Beloved of the one who turns around, he would have turned in his prayer only
toward the qibla. Every human knows himself, (that is), whether he is in this state
or another in this specific worship, for “truly, man is a clear witness against himself, despite all the excuses he may put forward” (QurÞÁn 75:14–15). One knows
to distinguish between falsehood and truth in himself, because he knows his state,
for it derives from his feeling (dhawq) of himself.
In addition, prayer has another part, for God commanded us to pray to Him and
informed us that He prays for us. Thus, prayer is from us and from Him. If it is God
who prays, He prays only through His name the Last (al-Àkhir), because He comes
after the creation of the servant. It is the Real which the servant creates in his heart,
whether through rational consideration or through following others (taqlÐd). This is a
god of belief (al-ilÁh al-muÝtaqad). This god takes different forms in keeping with the
predisposition which resides in a certain substrate (that is, place, society, etc.), as alJunayd, when asked about gnosis and the gnostic, said: “the color of the water is like
the color of the vessel in which it resides.”43 This is an answer which hits the target,
speaking of the matter as it really is. Thus, this is God who prays for us. When we
pray, we bear the name the Last, for in this station we, as we have mentioned, are in
the position of those who have this name, thus, in His eyes we are in keeping with our
position, and He looks at us only in the form which we have brought, because the one
who prays falls behind the one who arrives first in the race.44
God’s saying, “Each knows his prayer and exaltation” (QurÞÁn 24:41) means
his degree of being late in worshiping his Lord and his exaltation of God’s

42 Affifi, I, p. 225, n. 1.
43 Abrahamov, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, pp. 76f.
44 Since prayer is also one of God’s self-manifestations, it is this self-manifestation which
comes first from the divine perspective and the one who prays falls behind; that is, he
performs what God has already established. One of the meanings of the verb ÒallÁ is “to
be the second in the race.”

182 The essence of MuÎammad
transcendence which derives from his predisposition. Everything without exception exalts the praise of its Lord, the most forbearing (226), the most forgiving.45
For this reason, one cannot understand46 in detail, one by one, the exaltation of the
world. Another understanding of the verse “everything without exception exalts
the praise of its Lord” (biÎamdihi, QurÞÁn 17:44) is possible; the pronoun hi in
biÎamdihi may refer to the praise spoken of each thing, just as we say concerning
the human’s belief, one praises the god of his belief and connects himself to him.
(In like manner), the act one performs returns to oneself, thus one praises only
oneself, for whoever praises the act undoubtedly praises only the agent of the act,
because the perfection or imperfection of the act returns to its agent. Similarly, the
god of belief is the product (maÒnÙÝ) of one’s thought; it is one’s production (ÒanÝ).
One’s praise of that which one believes amounts to one’s praise of oneself. For
this reason, one dispraises the beliefs of others, and if one were just, one would
not be able to do this. However, this believer, who worships his specific object,
is no doubt ignorant of this (the truth), because he opposes the beliefs of others
in their gods. That is because had he known al-Junayd’s saying, “the color of the
water is the color of its vessel,” he would have approved of the belief of everyone
and known God in every form and every belief. Such a person supposes (ÛÁnn),
but does not know (ÝÁlim). For this reason, God said (in a tradition): “I am as my
servant supposes Me to be” (anÁ Ýinda Ûann ÝabdÐ bÐ);47 that is, I manifest myself to
him only in the form of his belief; if he wishes, he will make (my self-manifestation)
unlimited, and if he wishes, he will make it limited, for the God of beliefs is limited, and (hence) He is the God whom His servant holds in his heart, because the
unlimited God cannot be comprised by anything, for He is the essence of things
and of Himself. One cannot say that either God comprises Himself, or not, so
understand! “God speaks the truth and guides to the right way” (QurÞÁn 33:4).

45 This is a paraphrase of QurÞÁn 17:44.
46 lÁ yufqahu occurs on the basis of the preceding QurÞÁnic verse, which reads “you do not
understand their praise” (lÁ tafqahÙna tasbÐÎahum).
47 BukhÁrÐ, 97:15 (7405); Affifi, I, p. 33.

References

Abrahamov, B., “Abandoning the Station (tark al-maqÁm), as Reflecting Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s
Principle of Relativity,” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ÝArabÐ Society 47(2010):23–46.
———, Anthropomorphism & Interpretation of the QurÞÁn in the Theology of al-QÁsim
ibn IbrÁhÐm, KitÁb al-Mustarshid, Leiden 1996.
———, Divine Love in Islamic Mysticism, The Teachings of al-GhazÁlÐ and al-DabbÁgh,
London and New York 2003.
———, “Al-GhazÁlÐ’s Theory of Causality,” Studia Islamica 67(1988):75–98.
———, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Sufis, Oxford 2014.
———, “Ibn al-ÝArabÐ’s Attitude toward al-GhazÁlÐ,” in Avicenna and His Legacy, ed.
Y. Tzvi Langermann, Turnhout, Belgium 2009, 101–115.
———, Islamic Theology – Traditionalism and Rationalism, Edinburgh 1998.
———, “Al-¬Ásim Ibn IbrÁhÐm’s Theory of the Imamate,” Arabica 34(1987):80–105.
———, Al-¬Ásim ibn IbrÁhÐm – Al-¬Ásim ibn IbrÁhÐm on the Proof of God’s Existence,
KitÁb al-DalÐl al-KabÐr, Leiden 1990.
———, “A Re-examination of al-AshÝarÐ’s Theory of Kasb according to K. al-lumaÝ,”
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1989):210–221.
———, “Signs,” Encyclopaedia of the QurÞÁn, ed. J. D. McAuliffe, Leiden 2006, Vol. V,
2–11.
———, “The BarÁhima’s Enigma—A Search for a New Solution,” Die Welt des Orients
18(1987):72–91.
AbÙ al-BarakÁt al-BaghdÁdÐ, Al-KitÁb al-muÝtabar fÐ’l-Îikma al-ilÁhiyya, Haydarabad
1939.
Addas, C., Quest for the Red Sulphur, The Life of Ibn ÝArabÐ, trans. from the French by
P. Kingsley, London 2000.
Affifi, A.E., The Mystical Philosophy of Muhyid DÐn-Ibnul ÝArabÐ, Cambridge 1939.
Affifi – Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, FuÒÙÒ – FuÒÙÒ al-Îikam, ed. AbÙ al-ÝalÁÞ ÝAffifi, Cairo 1946.
AH – (M. A. S. Abdel Haleem) (trans.), The QurÞÁn, Oxford 2010.
Al-ÀjurrÐ, Al-SharÐÝa, ed. MuÎammad ÍÁmid al-FiqÐ, Beirut 1983.
Almond, I., Sufism and Deconstruction: A Comparative Study of Derrida and Ibn ÝArabi,
London and New York 2004.
Altmann, A., “The Delphic Maxim in Medieval Islam and Judaism,” in Altmann, Studies
in Religious Philosophy and Mysticism, New York 1969, 1–40.
Al-ÀmidÐ (d. 1233), GhÁyat al-marÁm fÐ Ýilm al-kalÁm, ed. Íasan MaÎmÙd ÝAbd al-LaÔÐf,
Cairo 1971.
Armstrong D. M., Universals: An Opinionated Introduction, Boulder, CO 1989.
Al-AshÝarÐ, Al-IbÁna Ýan uÒÙl al-diyÁna, IdÁrat al-ÓibÁÝa al-MunÐriyya, Cairo n.d.

184 References
Austin, R.W. J., Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, The Bezels of Wisdom, New York, Ramsey and Toronto 1980.
Al-BaghdÁdÐ, UÒÙl al-dÐn, Beirut 1981 (rep. of Istanbul 1928).
Al-BÁqillÁnÐ, KitÁb al-tamhÐd, ed. R. J. McCarthy, Beirut 1957.
Bar-Asher, M. M., “Muslim Views Regarding the Translation of the QurÞÁn” (Hebrew), in
On Translating the QurÞÁn, ed. Yohanan Friedmann, Jerusalem 2012, 24f.
Bursevi – Ismail Hakki Bursevi’s Translation of and Commentary on Fusus al-Hikam by
Muhyiddin ibn ÝArabi, rendered into English by Bulent Rauf, Oxford 2002 (2nd ed.).
Chittick, W. C., “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Own Summary of the FusÙs – ‘The Imprint of the Bezels of
the Wisdom,’” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ÝArabi Society 1 (1982), 1–44.
———, “Chapter Headings” – “The Chapter Headings of the FusÙs,” Journal of Muhyiddin
ibn ÝArabÐ Society 2(1984):1–42.
———, “The Perfect Man As the Prototype of the Self in the Sufism of JÁmi,” Studia
Islamica 47(1979):135–157.
———, Imaginal Worlds – Imaginal Worlds, Ibn al-ÝArabÐ and the Problem of Religious
Diversity, New York 1994.
Chodkiewicz, M., Seal of the Saints, Prophethood and Sainthood in the Doctrine of Ibn
ÝArabÐ, trans. from the French (1986) by Liadain Sherrard, Cambridge 1993.
Clark, J. and Hirtenstein, S., “Establishing Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Heritage,” Journal of the Muhyiddin
Ibn ÝArabi Society 52(2012):1–32.
Coates, P., Ibn ÝArabi and Modern Thought – The History of Taking Metaphysics Seriously,
Oxford 2002.
Culme-Seymour, A., (trans. of Titus Bruckhardt’s French trans. of parts of the FuÒÙÒ into
English), The Wisdom of the Prophets, Aldsworth, UK 1975.
Dagli, C. K., Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, The Ringstones of Wisdom (FuÒÙÒ al-Îikam), translation, introduction, and glosses, Chicago 2004.
EI2 – The Encyclopedia of Islam, online ed., Leiden.
Ebstein, M., “The Word of God and the Divine Will: IsmÁÝÐlÐ Traces in AndalusÐ
Mysticism,” Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam 38(2011):1–67.
van Ess, J., “Skepticism in Islamic Religious Thought,” Al-Abhath 21(1968):1–18.
Yohanan Friedmann, “Finality of Prophethood in SunnÐ Islam,” Jerusalem Studies in
Arabic and Islam 7(1986):177–215.
Al-GhazÁlÐ, IÎyÁ ÝulÙm al-dÐn, Al-Maktaba al-TijÁriyya al-KubrÁ, Cairo n.d.
Al-GhazÁlÐ, MishkÁt al-anwÁr, The Niche of Lights: A Parallel English-Arabic text, translated, introduced, and annotated by David Buchman, Provo, Utah 1998.
Gilis, C. A. (trans.), Le Livre des chatons des sagesses, Beirut 1997.
Goldziher, I., On the History of Grammar among the Arabs – An Essay in Literary History,
trans. and ed. Kinga Dévényi and Tomas Ivanyi, Amsterdam 1994.
Graham, T., “AbÙ SaÝÐd ibn AbÐ al-Khayr and the School of KhurasÁn,” in The Heritage of
Sufism, ed. L. Lewisohn, Oxford 1999, Vol. I, 96–106.
Guillaume, A., Life of Muhammad, Oxford 1955.
Heer, N., “AbÙ ÍÁmid al-GhazÁlÐ’s Esoteric Exegesis of the Koran,” in The Heritage of
Sufism, ed. L. Lewisohn, Oxford 1999, Vol. I, 235–257.
al-ÍakÐm, S., Al-MuÝjam al-ÒÙfÐ, al-Îikma fÐ ÎudÙd al-kalima, Beirut 1981.
Hakim, S., “The Spirit and the Son of the Spirit,” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ‘Arabi
Society 31(2002):1–29.
Hirtenstein, S., The Unlimited Mercifier – The Spiritual Life and Thought of Ibn ÝArabÐ,
Oxford 1999.
Ibn ÝArabÐ, M., Divine Sayings, 101 ÍadÐth QudsÐ, MishkÁt al-anwÁr, trans. Stephen
Hirtenstein and Martin Notcutt, Oxford 2008 (first published 2004).
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, Al-FutÙÎÁt al-makkiyya, DÁr al-Kutub al-Ilmiyya, Beirut 1999.

References 185
———, MajmÙÝa – MajmÙÝat rasÁÞil ibn al-ÝarabÐ, Beirut 2000.
———, RasÁÞil – RasÁÞil ibn al-ÝarabÐ, Haydarabad 1948.
———, Al-TadbÐrÁt al-ilÁhiyya fÐ iÒlÁÎ al-mamlaka al-insÁniyya, in Kleinere Schriften des
Ibn al-ÝArabÐ, ed. H. S. Nyberg, trans. T. S. al-Jerrahi al-Halveti, Divine Governance of
the Human Kingdom, Louisville 1997.
———, The TarjumÁn al-ashwÁq, ed. and annotated translation by R.A. Nicholson, with
new preface by M. Lings, London 1978 (rep. from the 1911 edition).
Ibn KathÐr, TafsÐr al-qurÞÁn al-ÝaÛÐm, Beirut 1970.
Ibn SÐnÁ, Al-ShifÁÞ: al-IlÁhiyyÁt, trans. M. E. Marmura, Utah 2005.
———, KitÁb al-najÁt, ed. Majid Fakhri, Beirut 1985.
IbrÁhÐm ibn MuÎammad al-ÍalabÐ, NiÝmat al-dharÐÝa fÐ nuÒrat al-sharÐÝa, DÁr al-MasÐr,
al-RiyÁÃ 1998.
Izutsu, I., Sufism and Taoism, A Comparative Study of Key Philosophical Concepts,
Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London 1983.
———, “The Concept of Perpetual Creation in Islamic Mysticism and Zen Buddhism,”
in Creation and the Timeless Order of Things, Essays in Islamic Mystical Philosophy,
Ashland, Oregon 1994, 141–173.
Ibn Taymiyya, SharÎ ÎadÐth al-nuzÙl, ed. MuÎammad ÝAbd al-RaÎmÁn al-KhamÐs,
Al-RiyÁÃ 1993.
MuÞayyid al-DÐn al-JandÐ, SharÎ fuÒÙÒ al-Îikam, Qom 2002.
Al-JurjÁnÐ, KitÁb al-taÝrÐfÁt, ed. Gustave Flügel, Beirut 1978 (rep. of Leipzig 1845).
KÁshÁnÐ – KamÁl al-DÐn ÝAbd al-RazzÁq al-KÁshÁnÐ, SharÎ fuÒÙÒ al-Îikam, Tehran 2004.
Knysh, A. D., Ibn ÝArabÐ in the Later Islamic Tradition: The Making of a Polemical Image
in Medieval Islam, New York 1999.
Kohlberg, E., “MuwÁfÁt Doctrines in Muslim Theology,” Studia Islamica 57(1983):
47–66.
Al-LÁlakÁÞÐ, AbÙ al-QÁsim Hibat AllÁh ibn al-Íasan, SharÎ uÒÙl iÝtiqÁd ahl al-sunna
wa’l-jamÁÝa min al-kitÁb wa’l-sunna wa-ijmÁÝ al-ÒaÎÁba wa’l-tÁbiÝÐn min baÝdihim, ed.
AÎmad SaÝd ÍamdÁn, Makka AH 1402 (AD 1981).
Lane, E. W., An Arabic English Lexicon. http://www.tyndalearchive.com/TABS/Lane/
index.htm.
McAuley, D. E., Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Mystical Poetics, Oxford 2012.
Morris, J. W., “Ibn ÝArabÐ and His Interpreters, Part I: Recent French Translations,”
Journal of the American Oriental Society 106(3)(1986):539–551; “Part II: Influences
and Interpretations,” 106(4)(1986):733–756, 107(1)(1987):101–119.
Al-MuÝjam – See SuÝÁd al-ÍakÐm.
Nettler, R. L., “Ibn ÝArabi and the QurÞan: Some Passages Concerning MÙsa in the FusÙs
al-hikam,” Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ÝArabi Society 20(1996):53–66.
Ormsby, E. L., Theodicy in Islamic Thought: The Dispute over Al-GhazÁlÐ’s “Best of All
Possible Worlds,” Princeton 1984.
Pickthall, M. M., The Meaning of the Glorious Koran, An Explanatory Translation by
Mohammed Marmaduke Pickthall, New York 1953.
Pines, S., Studies in Islamic Atomism, trans. from German (Berlin 1936) by M. Schwarz,
ed. T. Langermann, Jerusalem 1997.
al-QayÒarÐ, D., SharÎ fuÒÙÒ al-Îikam, ed. Àyat AllÁh Íasan Zadeh al-ÀmulÐ, Qom 1962.
Radtke, B. and O’Kane, J., The Concept of Sainthood in Early Islamic Mysticism, Two
Works by Al-ÍakÐm Al-TirmidhÐ, Richmond Surrey 1996.
Al-RÁzÐ, Fakhr al-DÐn, MafÁtÐÎ al-ghayb (al-tafsÐr al-kabÐr), DÁr IÎyÁÞ al-TurÁth al-ÝArabÐ,
Beirut, n.d.
———, SharÎ asmÁÞ allÁh al-ÎusnÁ, ed. Taha ÝAbd al-RaÞuf SaÝd, Beirut 1990.

186 References
Reinhart, K. A., Before Revelation: The Boundaries of Muslim Moral Thought, New York
1995.
Rubin, U., “The Seal of the Prophets and the Finality of Prophecy – On the Interpretation
of the QurÞÁnic SÙrat al-AÎzÁb (33),” Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft 164(1)(2014):65–96.
Sells, M. A., “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Garden among the Flames: A Reevaluation,” History of
Religions 23(4)(1984):287–315 (Mystical Languages, ch. 4).
———, “Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Polished Mirror: Perspective Shift and Meaning Event,” Studia
Islamica 67(1988):121–149 (Mystical Languages, ch. 3).
———, Mystical Languages of Unsaying, Chicago and London 1994.
SharÎ – MuÒÔafÁ ibn SulaymÁn BÁlÐ ZÁdeh al-RÙmÐ al-ÍanafÐ, SharÎ fuÒÙÒ al-Îikam li-ibn
ÝarabÐ, Beirut 2002.
SDG – Chittick, W. C., The Self-Disclosure of God, New York 1998.
SPK – Chittick, W. C., The Sufi Path of Knowledge, New York 1989.
Stroumsa, S., Freethinkers of Medieval Islam – Ibn al-RÁwandÐ, AbÙ Bakr al-RÁzÐ and
Their Impact on Islamic Thought, Leiden 1999.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-logic/#Def.
Takeshita, M., Ibn ÝArabÐ’s Theory of the Perfect Man and Its Place in the History of
Islamic Thought, Tokyo 1987.
———, “An Analysis of Ibn ÝArabÐ’s InshÁÞ al-DawÁÞir with Particular Reference to the
Doctrine of the Third Entity,” Journal of Near Eastern Studies 41(4)(1982):243–260.
———, “The Homo Imago Dei Motif and the Anthropocentric Metaphysics of Ibn ÝArabÐ
in InshÁÞ al-DawÁÞir, Orient 18(1982):111–128.
———, “The Theory of the Perfect Man in Ibn ÝArabÐ’s FuÒÙÒ al-Íikam,” Orient
19(1983):87–102.
ÝAisha ÝAbd al-Rahman at-Tarjumana (trans.), The Seals of Wisdom, Norwich, UK 1980.
Walbridge, J., God and Logic in Islam, The Caliphate of Reason, Cambridge 2011.
Wolfson, H. A., The Philosophy of the Kalam, Cambridge, MA 1976.
Wright, W., A Grammar of the Arabic Language, Cambridge 1967.
Yahya, O., “Theophanies and Lights in the Thought of Ibn ÝArabi,” Journal of the
Muhyiddin Ibn ÝArabi Society 9(1991):35–44.
Yaman, H., Prophetic Niche in the Virtuous City: The Concept of Íikmah in Early Islamic
Thought, Leiden and Boston 2011.

Index of QurÞÁnic Verses

1:1 50, 179
2:16 39
2:20 41
2:25 90
2:26 150
2:30 19, 45, 123
2:43 111
2:57 96
2:67 51
2:88 94
2:116 42
2:124 123
2:132 63
2:152 179
2:166 89
2:179 129
2:186 144
2:215 80
2:228 176
2:253 98
2:255 79
2:257 101
2:259 99
2:269 148
2:266 99
2:272 96
3:10
3:19
3:21
3:22
3:31
3:49
3:91

38
63
84
88
155
106
88

4:1 25, 47
4:171 105
5:17 72, 107
5:48 159
5:66 132
5:110 106
5:116 110
5:117 111
5:119 64
6:3 148
6:38 58
6:59 100
6:84 122
6:90 124
6:122 108, 158
6:124 143
6:149 51, 65, 84, 98
7:33 77
7:54 78
7:78 84
7:122 119
7:150 151
7:151 111
7:156 115, 141, 178
8:17 145, 147
8:61 128
9:21 84
9:29 106
9:37 175

188

Index of QurÞÁnic Verses

10:92
10:97
10:98

168
168
168

11:12 50
11:56 74, 76
11:57 79
11:80 93
11:112 67
11:123 45, 130, 131, 133
12:4 69
12:43 55
12:87 159
12:108 40
13:33

40, 154

14:47

62

15:21
15:26
15:29

99
178
107, 173

16:18
16:40
16:50
16:70
16:71

61, 132
82
132
93
99

17:2 40
17:3 122
17:23 40
17:55 98
17:110 150
18:68 163, 164
18:76 163
18:82 160
18:104 91
19:6 136
19:7 136
19:19 105
19:53 122, 137, 151
19:57 45, 142
19:85 40
19:86 75
20:50
20:55

33, 60, 87, 99, 100, 176
42

20:72 167
20:94 151
20:97 152
20:114 88, 101, 121
21:2 168
21:22 125
21:30 132
21:79 118
22:5

158

23:109

139

24:26
24:41

178
181

25:19
25:40
25:45
25:70

64
71
70
167

26:5 168
26:21 163, 164
26:23 165
26:24 165
26:27 165
26:28 165
26:29 165
27:30
27:40
27:42
27:44
27:60

114
117
69
120
45

28:9 159
28:13 160
28:21 162
28:24 163
28:56 96
28:88 43, 45
29:45
29:47
29:52
29:62

180
78
178
164, 165

30:6-7 94
30:54 93

Index of QurÞÁnic Verses 189
31:12
31:13
31:16

148
150
148, 150

42:27 99
42:28 101
42:40 129

32:5

175

43:32 152
43:54 166

33:4 53, 85, 182
33:21 121
33:57 135
34:10
34:13
34:21

122
122
79

35:15

73

37:102
37:106
37:167
37:180

47, 55
55
52
143

38:5 154
38:26 123
38:30 118
38:35 111, 120
38:36 120
38:39 120
38:41 134
38:42 133
38:43 122
38:44 134
38:47 41
38:75 24, 45, 109
39:3 41,154
39:9 79
39:47 90
40:15
40:24
40:60
40:85

153, 178
76
28, 144
168

41:53

37

42:9 105
42:11 4, 38, 78, 116, 142
42:14 41
42:20 15

45:13 120, 158
45:23 153
46:9 67, 95
46:16 62, 64
47:31 29, 110, 149, 173
47:35 44
48:2 141
48:25 112
50:15
50:16
50:22
50:29
50:37

91, 92, 117
76
76
96
88, 89, 98, 180

55:29 42, 153
57:3 46, 79
57:4 120
57:7 40, 94
57:27 63, 164
58:6 134
59:7 163
66:11 136
68:42 103
71:5-6 38, 39
71:7 79
71:10 38
71:11 39
71:20 42
71:22 40
71:23 40
71:24 41
71:25 42

190

Index of QurÞÁnic Verses

71:26
71:28

42
43, 111

73:9

94

85:9

134

87:1

44

89:28

60

98:8

61

99:78

150

112:1

72

75:14-15 181
79:24

167

80:1 110
80:38 84

General Index

ÝAbd al-RazzÁq 95
AbÙ ÝAbdallÁh ibn al-QÁÞid, 94
AbÙ al-BarakÁt al-BaghdÁdÐ 21n
AbÙ DÁwÙd 121n
AbÙ DÁwÙd ibn al-ÍajjÁj 118n
AbÙ al-Hudhyal al-ÝAllÁf 6, 140n
AbÙ Madyan 95
AbÙ al-SuÝÙd ibn al-Shibl 94
AbÙ ÓÁlib al-MakkÐ 126
AbÙ YazÐ dal-BisÔÁmÐ 57, 87, 107
accidents 91, 92, 118, 138, 139, 140, 149
ÝÁda 65
Addas, C. 1, 32n
ÝadhÁb 62, 77
Affifi, A. E. 5, 6n, 13n, 14n, 16n, 17n,
36n, 38n, 41n, 42n, 44n, 50n, 53n,
61n, 71, 75n, 83n, 89n, 90n, 132n,
140n, 157n, 166n, 172n, 174n, 181n,
182n
aÎadiyya 59, 60, 71, 73, 74, 158
ahl allÁh 15, 16, 29, 89n,
Al-ÀjurrÐ 32n
ÝÁlamÐn 37n, 72, 119n
Almond, I. 1n
Altmann, A. 37n
ÝamÁÞ 78
Al-ÀmidÐ 21
amr 17n, 53, 65, 95, 126, 156
al-amr al-takwÐnÐ 126
aql 9, 18, 71, 88, 165
ÝaraÃ (pl. aÝrÁÃ. See also accident) 50, 91,
138, 149
Arberry. A. J. 25
ÝÁrif (see also gnostic) 9, 80, 86, 89
Aristotle 20n, 146n, 162n, 165n
Asaf ibn Berechya 117

Al-AshÝarÐ 56n, 126
AshÝarites 91
Àsiya 136
atom 7, 91n, 92, 138, 149, 150
Austin, R.W.J. 2n, 3, 4n, 15n, 52n,
126n
Ýayn (substance) 178
Ýayn thÁbita (see also fixed entity) 10, 19n,
45, 51, 60, 139, 167
badal 95
Al-BaghdÁdÐ 95n, 164n
BÁlÐ ZÁdeh MusÔafÁ ibn SulaymÁn 5
baqÁÞ 92
Al-BÁqillÁnÐ 91n
Bar Asher, M. 5n
bÁÔin 13, 165
Al-Bosnawi ÝAbdallÁh Effendi 2n
Bosworth, C. E. 34n
Buchman, D. 23
BukhÁrÐ 51n, 68n, 74n, 78n, 89n, 93n,
100n 101n, 110n, 115n, 121n, 126n,
144n, 157n, 162n, 172n, 173n, 180n,
182n
Burckhardt, T. 2n
Bursevi IsmÁÝÐl ÍakkÐ 2n, 62n
China 35
Chinese 35
Chittick, W. C. 1, 3, 9n, 16n, 18n, 19n,
36n, 63n, 68n, 80n, 82n, 86n, 93n, 98n,
128n, 132n, 136n, 138n, 142n, 146n,
148n, 151n, 170n, 172n
Chodkiewicz, M. 12n, 31n, 95n
Clark, J. 1n, 2n
Coates, P. 1n, 2n

192 General Index
Dagli, C. K. 2n, 53n, 66n, 68n
dhÁt (essence) 6, 86, 161, 177
dhawq (see also experience) 23, 100, 134n,
138, 181
dÐn 63
Elqayam, A. 28
van Ess, J. 91n
experience 23, 27, 29n, 99, 100, 107, 134,
135, 138, 140, 163
Fahd, T. 154n
faÎsh 77, 82, 83, 85n, 100, 167, 176
al-falak al-muÎÐÔ 100
fanÁÞ 92
faÒl 165
faÒÒ (pl. fuÒÙÒ) 3, 4
fayÃ 17
fikra 18n
fiÔra 156
fixed entity 10, 29, 48, 52, 53, 59n, 60, 66,
70, 82, 94, 96, 100, 139
ghayr 77
Al-GhazÁlÐ 15n, 16n, 18n, 25n, 51, 126n,
134n, 144n, 161n
gnostic 9, 11, 18n, 34, 52, 57, 58, 69, 77,
80, 86, 87, 89, 94, 98, 101,
107, 135, 146, 147, 152, 154, 176, 181
Goldziher, I.166n
Graham, T. 15n
Guillaume, A. 31n
ÎÁdith 21, 22, 83
ÎaÃra 57n
Hafizovic, R. 2n
SuÝÁd al-ÍakÐm 16n, 41n, 48n
ÎÁl 139
Al-ÍallÁj 48n, 58n
Al-Jerrahi al-Halveti, T. B. 23n
ÎaqÐqa 7, 33, 61, 80
Îayra 11
hayÙlÁ (see also prime matter) 8, 90
Heer, N. 4n
Îikma 14, 93
Îikma qudÙsiyya 44
Îikma subÙÎiyya 36, 44
himma 14n, 28, 57, 93, 96, 120, 176
Hirtenstein, S. 1n, 2n, 29n

ÎisbÁn 91n
ÎisbÁniyya (the Sophists) 91
Huart, Cl. 34n
ÎudÙth 161, 167, 168
ÎulÙl 106
huwiyya (see also ipseity) 36, 71, 75
Ibn Íanbal 56n, 121n, 141n
Ibn KathÐr 31n, 37n, 50n, 84n, 104n, 117n,
118n
Ibn Masarra 53
Ibn QasÐ 48, 141
Ibn SÐnÁ 21, 50n
Ibn Taymiyya 78n
idlÁl (arrogance) 95
iÎsÁn 54, 89
ijtihÁd 101, 124, 125
ÝIkrima 148n
Ýilla 84n, 177
imkÁn 35
imÁma 123
ÐmÁn 54, 143
ipseity 62, 71, 73, 87, 88, 90, 91, 92, 107,
131, 134
irÁda 66n, 67, 72, 116, 126n, 148n
ishtirÁk 165
iÝtiqÁd 11, 80, 88
Izutsu, T. 5, 6n, 7n, 8n, 9n, 10n, 11n, 88n,
89n, 91n, 92n, 117n
JÁhiliyya 154n
jamÝiyya 17, 94, 120
JandÐ 14n, 16n, 132n
jawhar 92, 138, 149, 158, 167
al-jawhar al-hayÙlÁnÐ 176
JibrÐl 69
ÝAbd al-QÁdir al-JÐlÁnÐ 144
jins 165
Al-Junayd 15n, 87, 181, 182
kamÁl 161n
Kasher, A. 166n
kashf (unveiling) 18, 34, 76, 132,
143, 165
Al-KÁshÁnÐ 5, 19n, 53n, 54n, 55n, 57n,
58n, 63n, 64n, 68n, 70, 75n, 86n, 87n,
91n, 94n, 104n, 106n, 109n, 120n, 132n,
140n, 150n, 157n, 160n, 170n
khalÐfa (see also vicegerent) 18

General Index 193
al-khÁlÐl 50
Al-KharrÁz 46
khÁtam al-awliyÁÞ 31n
khÁtam al-nabiyyÐn 172n
khilÁfa 123, 164
khuÒÙÒ 36n
Knysh, A. 2n
Kohlberg, E. 159n
kufr 106
lÁhÙt 105
Al-LÁlakÁÞÐ 29n
Lane, E. 167n
Lewisohn, L. 4n
luÔf 149
maÎall 48
maÞlÙh 51
maÝnÁ (accident) 139
maqÁm 89n
mashhad (location of witnessing) 77
mashÐÞa 126
mashrab (mystical inclination) 29
al-masÐÎ 106
McAuley, D. E. 15n
mizÁj (temperament) 66
Morris, J. 1n, 2n, 6n
muÎaqqiq 35
muÎdath 20, 21, 22, 45
muÝjiza 95n
mukallaf 51, 64, 66, 111n
mumkin 70
munÁsaba 174
muqaddimÁt 176
murajjiÎ 62
mushÁhada 90
Muslim 56n, 69n, 125n, 129n, 144n, 157n,
173n, 178n, 179n, 180n
Al-NabulusÐ 19n
nafas 86, 108
naÝÐm (felicity) 130
NasÁÞÐ 129n, 172n
nafth (expiration) 27
nÁsÙt 105
Nettler, R. L. 156n
nubuwwa ÝÁma 101
nubuwwat al-tashrÐÝ 100, 122
Nyberg, H. S. 23n

Ormsby, E. L. 135n
Paradise 136
Ch. Pellat 170n
Pharaoh 119, 136
Pickthall, M. M. 5n
Pines, S. 42n
qaÃÁÞ 98
qadar 98, 99
qadÐm 20
qÁÞim bi-nafsihi 71, 92
qalb 88
Qays ibn ÍÁtim 93
Al-QaysarÐ 51n, 104n, 128n, 132n, 160n,
178n
qibla 180, 181
Al-QunawÐ 63n, 128n, 132n
quÔb 93n
Radtke and O’Kane 12n
raÎamÙt 151
al-raÎÐm 114, 115
al-raÎmÁn 86, 114, 115
raÎmat imtinÁn 114
raÎmat wujÙb 114
Bullent Rauf 2n
Fakhr al-DÐn al-RÁzÐ 8n, 33n,
104n, 145n
Reinhart, K. A. 64n
risÁla 122
Rubin, U. 106n
rubÙbiyya 86
saÝÁda 129
sabab 83
saÝÐd 76
Al-SÁmirÐ 104, 151, 152
Sanagustin, F. 133n
Sells. M. 1n, 5n, 13n, 16n, 17n, 19n, 88n
shaqÐ 76
sharÝ 125
shayÞiyya 82, 138
shuhÙd 75
Stroumsa, S. 95n
taÝbÐr al-ruÞyÁ 55n
tÁbÙt 157
taÎayyuz 92

194 General Index
taÎqÐq 60n, 90
Takeshita, M. 18n, 19n, 45n, 48n, 87n, 91n
taklÐf 101
tanzÐh 36n, 142
TaqÐ ibn Mukhallad 55
taqlÐd 76, 181
tarÁjim (prophets) 22
Al-Tarjumana 2n
tashbÐh 142
temperance 130, 133
Al-ÍakÐm al-TirmidhÐ 12, 40, 69n, 78
TirmidhÐ (collection of traditions) 42n,
66n, 78n, 132
Sahl al-TustarÐ 54, 60
Twinch, C. 2n
ÝubÙdiyya 86, 94
ÝulÙm ilÁhiyya dhawqiyya 75
Ýuluww 44
ÝUmar ibn al-KhaÔÔÁb 56, 121

ÝumÙm 36n
umÙr kulliyya (universals) 20
ÝuqÙba 65
vicegerent 18, 20, 23, 24, 45, 55, 123, 124,
125, 164, 167, 175, 180
al-wahhÁb 122
waÎdat al-wujÙd 6
walÁya 31n, 32, 100, 101, 172n
Walbridge, J. 16n, 162n
walÐ 32, 95, 101
Wolfson, H. A. 30n, 140n
Wright, W. 111n, 113n
wujÙd 30, 76, 165
wujÙd ÝaynÐ (concrete existence) 20
Yaman, H. 14n
ÛÁhir 13, 165, 168, 171
ÛÁlimÙn 41, 43

