Strange sightings have been reported in the sky throughout history. After the Second World War, however, the appearance of flying saucers, UFOs or UAPs (unidentified anomalous phenomena) – or whatever one wants to call them – became prominent in culture, and recently this phenomenon has gained more public exposure and sparked intense interest – constituting an important cornerstone for our current zeitgeist. Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Carl Jung had studied this phenomenon for more than a decade until his death in 1961. He writes: “From the very beginning the UFO reports interested me as being, very possibly, symbolical rumours, and since 1947 I have collected all the books I could get hold of on the subject.” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies Table of contents Introduction UFOs as Visionary Rumours and Collective Visions UFOs as Collective Distress and Mass Hysteria UFOs as Saviour Myth UFOs as Living Myth Folklore and UFOs Collective Dream Messengers of Deception Religion and UFOs Ontological Shock and the Absurd Psychic Aspects of UFOs Unus Mundus: Psyche and Matter Crop Circles and Archetypal Feminine The Physical Existence of UFOs The Case of Orfeo UFOs: The Age of Aquarius Conclusion Recommended Reading Subscribe to our newsletter Introduction While Jung was unable to form a definite opinion concerning the physical nature of UFOs, the evidence available to him was convincing enough to arouse a continuous and fervent interest. He wrote down his thoughts in Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies , which is part of the Collected Works, vol. 10: Civilisation in Transition . His views on UFOs, however, have commonly been misinterpreted – even by the press during his time. Jung makes it clear that he is focused on the psychic aspect of UFOs as a modern myth , that is to say, as a narrative from the collective unconscious that expresses a fundamental human experience, providing insight into our inherited patterns of behaviour or archetypes and the nature of human existence. Jung could not commit himself on the question of the physical reality or unreality of them, since he did not possess sufficient evidence either for or against. His position can be summarised in the following sentence: “Something is seen, but it isn’t known what.” Something material could be seen, or something psychic could be seen. Both are realities, but of different kinds. Jung himself had never seen a UFO but knew four people who had or said they did. Jung did not know whether the entities controlling these crafts were extraterrestrial or not, as some reports show these objects rising out of the sea – it may well be that they are not from outer space, but have rather been among us for millennia. Thus, it is more appropriate to call these beings non-human intelligences (NHIs), in which we may include aliens, angels, demons, elemental beings, etc. Perhaps the aliens seen in the UFOs are forms of technologies artificially created by higher beings whose form we cannot comprehend or perceive. Jung does not reduce the UFO phenomenon to purely psychological grounds, for a large number of observations point to a natural phenomenon or even a physical one (anti-gravity field, signs of intelligent guidance, radar signals, etc). But since he could not contribute to their physical reality, he dealt almost exclusively with their psychic aspect. Jung’s field of interest is the human reaction to the phenomena , an effort to understand the complex working of our interior life, as this is revealed through the UFO phenomenon. UFOs as Visionary Rumours and Collective Visions Contrary to the ordinary rumours which are told all over the world, Jung described UFOs as visionary rumours , as they are expressed in visions, or perhaps owed their existence to visions in the first place and are now kept alive by them. Thus, they are closely akin to collective visions, such as the so-called Miracle of the Sun in Fátima, Portugal which occurred in 1917. After a day of heavy rain, the clouds parted and revealed the sun, which started spinning, dancing or zigzagging across the sky, it also emitted radiant colours. Others describe seeing not the sun but instead a “disc of dull silver” or “wheel of fire” which did not hurt the eyes when stared at. Individual descriptions vary in detail and emphasis, some people reported seeing nothing out of the ordinary. At one point, there was a cry of anguish from the crowd as the sun appeared to rapidly descend towards the earth, people were terrified as they thought the sun was going to fall upon them. They started praying and confessing their sins, when at last the sun stopped moving. Around 30,000 to 100,000 people witnessed this phenomenon, which lasted approximately ten minutes. After the event, the ground and the clothing of those present were reported to have dried completely. There are cases of collective visions where one or more persons see something that others cannot see. That is not to say that they are hallucinations, but rather, for some reason, these visions only appear in the consciousness of certain people, whilst they remain invisible to others. Jung experienced this in a spiritualistic séance where four of the five people present saw an object like a moon floating above the abdomen of the medium. They showed Jung, the firth person present, exactly where it was, and it was absolutely incomprehensible to them that he could see nothing of the sort. Even people who are entirely of “sound mind” and in full possession of their senses can sometimes see things that “do not exist”. In addition, things can be seen by many people independently of one another, or even simultaneously, which are not of a physical nature, but a psychic one. All of these factors must be considered with regards to UFOs. UFOs as Collective Distress and Mass Hysteria Though visionary rumours may be caused or accompanied by all manner of outward circumstances, they are based essentially on an omnipresent emotional foundation, a psychological situation common to all mankind (the collective unconscious). The basis for this kind of rumour is an emotional tension having its cause in a situation of collective distress or danger, or in a vital psychic need – shedding light on the psychic compensation of the collective fear weighing on our hearts. There’s a personal unconscious which is concerned with our own problems and complexes, but also a collective unconscious that concerns the whole human race. When the world is divided, it brings about confusion, aimlessness, and disorientation, as well as a meaning crisis. This “ mass hysteria ” arising from common causes, can affect vast groups of people, who are under tension from the same archetypal pressure, which is of tremendous intensity. Should something extraordinary or impressive then occur in the outside world, be it a human personality, a thing, or an idea, the unconscious content can project itself upon it, thereby investing the projection carrier (which acts like a hook on which the projection hangs) with numinous and mythical powers. Thanks to this, the projection carrier has a highly suggestive effect and grows into a saviour myth whose basic features have been repeated countless times in history. UFOs as Saviour Myth In an interview, Jung was asked if our preoccupation with psychology and UFOs can be traced back to a decline of the belief in God, as though this left a void which the unconscious had to fill. He stated: “In our world miracles do not happen anymore, and we feel that something simply must happen which will provide an answer or show a way out. So now these UFOs are appearing in the skies. Although they have always been observed they didn’t signify anything. Now, suddenly, they seem to portend something because that something has been projected on them—a hope, an expectation… it is of course the expectation of a saviour. But that is only one aspect. There is another aspect, a mythological one. The UFO can be a ship of death, which means that ships of death are coming to fetch the living or bring souls. Either those souls will fall into birth, or many people are going to die and will be fetched by fleets of these ships of death. These are important archetypal ideas, because they can also be predictions. If an atomic war were to break out, an infinite multitude of souls would be carried away from the earth.” C.G. Jung Speaking: Interviews and Encounters When we are threatened with disaster, and mysterious vehicles start appearing in the skies, we unconsciously project on them the figure of a saviour. We assume that these beings of superior intelligence are peaceful, and have come to save us – even though they might not do so. Thus, they gain an almost messianic or godlike status. In the case of ancient mythology, gods are men, plus have more intelligence, power, or authority. Each god represents an archetypal image. It seems that, as Heidegger declared, “only a God can save us.” For Jung, it is thus no surprise that sightings of UFOs were reported much more frequently after the Second World War and the threat of totalitarianism and nuclear annihilation – the inner expectations of the people (the desire for a saviour symbolised by the UFOs) appeared in the outer world in a non-causal but meaningful way, a phenomenon Jung calls synchronicity. Because of our modern rationalism, we interpreted such visions of longing and deliverance not as heavenly, other-worldly angels, but mechanical, other-worldly spaceships, or “technological angels.” UFOs as Living Myth The UFO has the value of a living symbol, that is, a dynamic factor which, because of the general ignorance and lack of understanding, has to confine itself to producing a visionary rumour. The fact that there is a numinous quality about all archetypal images is responsible not only for the spread of the visionary rumour but also for its persistence. One thing is certain, UFOs have become a living myth for modern man, and Jung states that we have the golden opportunity of seeing how a legend is formed , and how in a difficult and dark time for humanity a miraculous tale grows up of an attempted intervention by superior or “heavenly” beings. If they are a case of psychological projection, there must be a psychic cause for it. One can hardly suppose that anything of such worldwide incidence is purely fortuitous and of no importance whatever. The cause must strike at the roots of our existence if it is to explain such an extraordinary phenomenon as the UFOs. Though UFOs were popularised towards the end of the Second World War, the phenomenon itself was known long before. There are countless reports in literature. Jung spares himself from this task and gives us two examples. The first one is the Basel broadsheet of August 7, 1566 in which it is reported that at the time of sunrise, “many large black globes were seen in the air, moving before the sun with great speed, and turning against each other as if fighting. Some of them became red and fiery and afterwards faded and went out.” The second example is the Nuremberg Broadsheet of April 14, 1561 where numerous people saw a frightful spectacle at sunrise, in which “globes” of blood-red, bluish or black colour or “plates” in large numbers appeared near the sun, along with crosses and large tubes. They all began to fight one another, and this went on for about an hour. They then all fell down to the earth. Underneath the globes was a long object, “shaped like a great black spear.” Naturally this “spectacle” was interpreted as a divine warning. These tubes are analogous to the cylindrical objects in UFO reports known as the “mother-ships” which are said to carry the smaller lens-shaped UFOs for long distances. Folklore and UFOs As we have mentioned, strange objects in the skies have been witnessed for thousands of years. In his book, Passport to Magonia , Jacques Vallée, who could be dubbed the father of the modern study of UFOs, argues that similar patterns could be observed in folklore, religious tradition, and modern UFO events . A constant feature of one class of legends involving supernatural creatures is that the beings come to our world to steal our products, our animals, and even human beings. As well as their “sample-gathering” behaviour and their request for terrestrial products. There are also alleged miraculous cures after people describe having a religious experience. Similarly, people encountering UFOs find that they are suddenly cured of their wounds, and chronic illnesses. Vallée challenges the so-called extraterrestrial hypothesis, and the view that UFOs are scientific devices having nothing to do with the mystico-religious context of medieval apparitions. He suggests that similar phenomena have always occurred in human history, and proposes the psychosocial hypothesis , in which psychological and social factors are indispensable for explaining the UFO phenomenon. To study the recurring themes and motifs, he presents a comprehensive catalogue detailing all the pertinent facts of some 900 sightings of UFOs from 1868 to 1968. It is important to note the continuum of beliefs which leads directly from primitive magic, through mystical experience, the fairy-faith, and religion, to modern UFOs. The mechanisms that have generated these various beliefs are identical. Their human context and their effect on humans are constant. It has little to do with the problem of knowing whether UFOs are physical objects or not. There are many old reports of witnesses describing seeing various objects in the sky across the world, which include: strange flying machines before the invention of flight, multiple suns and moons, discs, cigar-shaped objects, crosses, spheres of fire, wheels, flying earthenware, etc. At this time, people unconsciously projected these aerial phenomena as portents or omens , or that God wanted to induce people to amend their lives and make penance. In fact, panics, riots and disruptive social movements were often linked to celestial apparitions. What matters here is the link between certain unusual phenomena—observed or imagined—and the alteration of the witnesses’ behaviour. For Vallée, folklore is indispensable for understanding the phenomenon of visitation, from the very earliest days to the present. His book aims to document a recurrent myth, namely, the myth of contact between mankind and an intelligent race endowed with apparently supernatural powers. He writes: “Of considerable interest to the psychologist is the fact that the entities are endowed with the same fugitiveness and behave with the same ignorance of logical or physical laws as the reflection of a dream, the monsters of our nightmares… if a superior race does in fact generate what we are now observing as the UFO phenomenon, is it not precisely with the purpose of changing the course of human destiny by presenting us with evidence of our limitations in the technical, as well as the mental, realm? … Children of the Unknown – if they are not real, should we see these rumours as a sign that something in the human imagination has changed, bringing into a new light uncharted areas of our “collective unconscious?” … In any case, it is important to understand what need these images fulfill, why this knowledge is both so exciting and so distressing to us.” Jacques Vallée, Passport to Magonia Collective Dream It is interesting that Vallée compares the UFO phenomenon with a dream. When we are confronted with a mystery, either individually or collectively, our reaction tells us a great deal about ourselves. And all we can ever read into anything is ourselves. Our responses are like a Rorschach test. In the case of UFOs, the phenomenon becomes a kind of collective dream , not merely a personal dream, but an archetypal dream that reveals the needs of humanity’s inner life. This dream, like any other dream, is capable of analysis, and in the analysis of it, we gain far more insight into ourselves, life, nature, and being – than we gain by attempting to solve the actual mystery of these phenomena. Messengers of Deception Vallée observes that the UFO sightings have a chameleon-like character: the shapes of the objects, the appearances of their occupants, their reported statements, vary as a function of the cultural environment into which they are projected. This makes the study of such objects infinitely broader than the simple investigation of a new phenomenon: for if the appearance and behaviour of the objects are functions of our interpretation at any particular time in the development of our culture, then what chances can we have of ever knowing the truth? Human actions are based on imagination, belief, and faith, not on objective observation. And to control human imagination is to shape mankind’s collective destiny, provided the source of this control is not identifiable by the public. During 1896 and 1897, an airship with beings was seen throughout the United States by multiple witnesses. The airship, though it was believable to the witnesses of 1897, is no longer credible to us. UFOs appear to keep pace with human technology. In fact, one of these beings told a witness, “Soon the invention will be given to the public.” Perhaps the airship, like the fairy tricks, the flying saucers, was a lie, so well engineered that its image in human consciousness could sink very deep indeed and then be forgotten. In his book, Messengers of Deception , Vallée states that UFOs could be physical devices used to affect human consciousness. Their purpose may be to achieve social changes on this planet, through a belief system that uses systematic manipulation of witnesses and contactees. The witnesses of the airship, far from witnessing by chance the manoeuvres of interplanetary visitors, may have been deliberately exposed to a scene designed to be recorded by them and transmitted to us. Religion and UFOs In her book, American Cosmic: UFOs, Religion, Technology , Diana Pasulka suggests that UFO experiences are similar to religious experiences reported throughout history. As such, they are modern vehicles for spiritual experiences. She writes: “Nobody wants to be known as the person who has seen a UFO, so, if they see something anomalous, they usually choose the least unlikely explanation and leave it at that. The same is true of religious experiences. People who have reported experiences that are ultimately deemed religious have at first been confused by what they see or hear. It is not immediately clear to them that they are having a religious experience.” Diana Pasulka, American Cosmic: UFOs, Religion, Technology Ontological Shock and the Absurd In many cases, such experiences can cause ontological shock , a profound disruption in one’s understanding of existence. Nevertheless, since they are impossible to verify objectively, one fears public ridicule, ostracisation, or the loss of one’s job or credibility. It may change one’s life and being inwardly, but outwardly everything goes on as before, one still needs to attend to one’s duties and obligations, which seem to be prosaic. The contrast between an extraordinary event and ordinary everyday life creates a sense of the absurd , which can be profoundly alienating. It is perhaps best depicted in Kafka’s novella The Metamorphosis , where the protagonist wakes up transformed into a giant insect and is preoccupied with ordinary concerns such as being late for work. Psychic Aspects of UFOs Whether the UFOs have a physical reality or not, they are in any case psychic realities. Even if there is nothing physically tangible about these phenomena, the rumour of the existence of such objects is an incontestable fact. Whether the rumour corresponds to a physical reality or not makes little difference to Jung, as a psychologist. For him the interesting thing is to know why the human mind creates such products, because that throws particular light on the activity of our unconscious. So, what are the psychic aspects of the UFOs? What as a rule is seen is a body of round shape, disk-like or spherical, glowing or shining fierily in different colours, or more seldom, a cigar-shaped or cylindrical figure of various sizes. The round bodies in particular are figures such as the unconscious produces in dreams, visions, etc. Jung writes: “In this case they are to be regarded as symbols representing, in visual form, some thought that was not thought consciously, but is merely potentially present in the unconscious in invisible form and attains visibility only through the process of becoming conscious. The visible form, however, expresses the meaning of the unconscious content only approximately. In practice the meaning has to be completed by amplificatory interpretation.” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies The figures in visionary rumours can be subjected to the same principle of dream interpretation. Namely, by means of amplification, that is, using mythological, historical, and cultural parallels in order to “amplify” the symbols present in the unconscious. UFOs express the symbol of totality represented by the mandala . In so far as the mandala encompasses, protects, and defends the psychic totality against outside influences and seeks to unite the inner opposites, it is at the same time a distinct individuation symbol. The soul too is supposed to have the form of a sphere, on the analogy of Plato’s world-soul. This symbol leads us to the heavenly spheres, to Plato’s “supra-celestial place” where the “Ideas” of all things are stored up. The alchemists called it a rotundum , which expresses the totality of the individual. Jung defines it as the archetype of the Self , that is, the totality composed of the conscious and the unconscious. Jung, in fact, had a dream of a UFO which he associates with the problem of the Self. He writes: “In one dream, which I had in October 1958, I caught sight from my house of two lens-shaped metallically gleaming disks… They were two UFOs… Then another body came flying directly toward me. It was a perfectly circular lens… At a distance of four to five hundred yards it stood still for a moment, and then flew off. Immediately afterward, another came speeding through the air: a lens with a metallic extension which led to a box – a magic lantern. At a distance of sixty or seventy yards it stood still in the air, pointing straight at me. I awoke with a feeling of astonishment. Still half in the dream, the thought passed through my head: “ We always think that the UFOs are projections of ours. Now it turns out that we are their projections . I am projected by the magic lantern as C.G. Jung. But who manipulates the apparatus?”” Carl Jung: Memories, Dreams, Reflections Jung compares this dream to another similar one in which he entered a chapel and saw a yogi in lotus posture, in deep meditation. When he looked at him more closely, he realised that he had his face. He became frightened and awoke with the thought: “Aha, so he is the one who is meditating me. He has a dream, and I am it.” He knew that when he awakened, he would no longer be. Jung’s Self retires into meditation and meditates his earthly form: it assumes human shape in order to enter three-dimensional existence, and by greater awareness can take a further step toward realisation. The figure of the yogi represents Jung’s unconscious prenatal wholeness. Like the magic lantern, the yogi’s meditation “projects” his empirical reality. Since UFOs have become for many people a symbol of the Self, a redemptive or destructive manifestation of the divine, either the salvation or destruction of our planet is expected from them. Circular symbols have played an important role in every age, which are not only soul symbols but God-images. As the old saying goes, “God is a sphere whose centre is everywhere and the circumference nowhere.” The chief role of the archetype of the Self or God-image is in uniting apparently irreconcilable opposites and is therefore best suited to compensate the split-mindedness of our age. It brings order and regulation to chaotic states. Undeterred by rationalistic criticism, the unconscious thrusts itself to the forefront in the form of a symbolic rumour, accompanied and reinforced by the appropriate visions, and thus activates an archetype that has always expressed order, deliverance, salvation, and wholeness. It is characteristic of our time that the archetype, in contrast to its previous manifestations, should now take on the form of an object, a technological construction, in order to avoid the odiousness of mythological personification. From the psychological point of view, the plurality of UFOs would correspond to the projection of a plurality of human individuals , the spherical symbol indicating that the content of the projection is not the actual people themselves, but rather their ideal psychic totality . Jung writes: “The plurality of UFOs, then, is a projection of a number of psychic images of wholeness which appear in the sky because on the one hand they represent archetypes charged with energy and on the other hand are not recognised as psychic factors. The reason for this is that our present-day consciousness possesses no conceptual categories by means of which it could apprehend the nature of psychic totality… Moreover, it is so trained that it must think of such images not as forms inherent in the psyche, but as existing somewhere in extra-psychic, metaphysical space, or else as historical facts. When, therefore, the archetype receives from the conditions of the time and from the general psychic situation an additional charge of energy, it cannot, for the reasons I have described, be integrated directly into consciousness, but is forced to manifest itself indirectly in the form of spontaneous projections. The projected image then appears as an ostensibly physical fact independent of the individual psyche and its nature. In other words, the rounded wholeness of the mandala becomes a space ship controlled by an intelligent being .” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies The message which the UFO brings is a time problem that concerns us all. The signs appear in the heavens so that everyone shall see them. They bid each one of us to remember our soul and our own wholeness. Unus Mundus: Psyche and Matter The opposition between the physical world and the spiritual or “higher” world is not absolute; the two are only relatively incommensurable, for the bridge between them is not entirely lacking. That there is something beyond the borderline, beyond the frontiers of knowledge, is shown by what Jung calls the psychoid – a term that refers to the irrepresentable nature of all archetypes, which do not fully belong in the psyche, nor in matter, but rather transcends both and yet provides a bridge to them as the unifying element. This connection is most clear, according to Jung, in the archetype of number , which this side of the border are quantities but on the other side are autonomous psychic entities, capable of making qualitative statements which manifest themselves in a priori patterns of order. This brings us a little nearer to understanding the mystery of psychophysical parallelism, for we now know that a factor exists which mediates between the apparent incommensurability of body and psyche, giving matter a kind of “psychic” faculty and the psyche a kind of “materiality”, by means of which the one can work on the other. For Jung, both views, the materialistic as well as the spiritualistic, are metaphysical prejudices. It accords better with experience to suppose that living matter has a psychic aspect, and the psyche a physical aspect. If we give due consideration to the facts of parapsychology, then the hypothesis of the psychic aspect must be extended beyond the sphere of biochemical processes to matter in general. In that case all reality would be grounded on an as yet unknown substrate possessing material and at the same time psychic qualities (the unus mundus or “one world”). The acausal correspondences between mutually independent psychic and physical events, in other words, synchronistic phenomena, and in particular extrasensory perception, would then become more understandable. Crop Circles and Archetypal Feminine Another important phenomenon that is typically associated with UFOs are crop circles, which have appeared relatively recent in history. In his book, Crop Circles, Jung, and the Reemergence of the Archetypal Feminine , Gary S. Bobroff analyses the psychological meaning behind crop circles. We typically categorise phenomena because it offers the illusion of understanding and thus reduces anxiety. In the Middle Ages, crop circles inspired fear and were seen as Witches’ rings or as being reaped by a “Mowing Devil”. In the Enlightenment period they emphasised the possibility of natural causation of the phenomenon by weather or wind. And in the contemporary period, the predominant response is that it is a hoax, and to dismiss it altogether. Generally speaking, our theories that we have about the new and unknown say more about us than they do about the phenomena . We live in a time where we are disconnected from the body, from nature, and from the unconscious. Instead, we have become too focused on rationalism, literalism and materialism. We do not want to remain content with the mystery, but want to know everything there is about it. By cutting off a part of who we are, the psyche seeks to restore our balance. In other words, we have lost our relationship with the archetypal feminine – which crop circles exemplify as they are formed in the grain. Grain has been a part of our diet since prehistoric times, and flourished in the agricultural revolution. It corresponds to the archetypal concept of life, death, and rebirth. Cultures around the world that have produced crops have worshipped the divinities whom they believed protected and sustained their crops, providing abundance and nourishment – which Bobroff states has been predominantly directed in goddesses of life and vegetation. He writes: “As early farmers planted and waited, watching for their seeds to grow, and as they watched and saw their bellies grow fat with children, they felt the source of life inside themselves and knew the association between the land’s fertility and their own. And, as they, in their natural love for their children, nourished and cared for them, so too did they see, in the endless generosity of Nature, an expression of its love for us.” Gary S. Bobroff: Crop Circles, Jung, and the Reemergence of the Archetypal Feminine Modern culture no longer gives thanks for what we receive from the earth; no longer do we see something divine our daily bread, and lost to us is the miracle of life, the miracle of our own life. In other words, we live in a world where the consciousness of the Feminine has gone underground, and whatever remains unconscious, behaves in neurotic ways. The mystery of the female body is the mystery of birth, which is also the mystery of the unmanifest becoming manifest in the whole world of nature, and the mystery of life itself. It is in this way that the archetype of the Feminine exists within us, it is the most potent association to the symbol of grain in our psyche, and the possibility of “dead” matter giving birth to the new. In Latin, mother is “mater”, which is related to the word “materia” or “matter”. Thus, as a “mother” is the source which gives material shape to her children, so too does matter constitute the building blocks from which all materials in the physical world arise. The mother is the matrix or womb from which things originate. Our separation from the archetypal feminine is expressed compulsively and unconsciously as one-sided materialism, a shadow expression of the feminine. The circle, on the other hand, is a symbol of the Self. It expresses the totality of the psyche in all its aspects including the relationship between humanity and the whole of nature. Visually, the emergence of the crop circle phenomenon from the initial circular form seen throughout history around the world into the diverse concentric complexity of the mandala mirrors the form of the Self archetype’s evolution in the psyche. The depth of the mystery that we witness in crop circles, UFOs, etc., does not lie in our ability to construct complex theories about it; its mystery is present simply in its existence. This encounter with the “Other” has occurred since time immemorial. The Physical Existence of UFOs Jung was aware that we could not remain satisfied with just the psychological explanation of UFOs – as he says that these have not only been seen visually but have also been picked up on the radar screen and have left traces on the photographic plate (which preceded photographic film). He writes: “It boils down to nothing less than this: that either psychic projections throw back a radar echo, or else the appearance of real objects affords an opportunity for mythological projections. Here I must remark that even if the UFOs are physically real, the corresponding psychic projections are not actually caused, but are only occasioned, by them. Mythical statements of this kind have always occurred, whether UFOs exist or not. These statements depend in the first place on the peculiar nature of the psychic background, the collective unconscious, and for this reason have always been projected in some form. At various times all sorts of other projections have appeared in the heavens beside the saucers… The alternative hypothesis that UFOs are something psychic that is endowed with physical properties seem even less probable, for where should such a thing come from? If weightlessness is a hard proposition to swallow, then the notion of a materialised psychism opens a bottomless void under our feet.” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies For Jung, there is also a third possibility: that UFOs are real material phenomena of an unknown nature, either coming from outer space or have always been on earth. The Case of Orfeo After Jung completed his manuscript, a book fell into his hands which captured his attention, and which he included in the epilogue. It is The Secret of the Saucers by Orfeo M. Angelucci published in 1955. Orfeo was an Italian mechanic working in the United States. Jung describes his book as a naïve production which for that very reason reveals all the more clearly the unconscious background of the UFO phenomenon and therefore comes like a gift to the psychologist . After his encounter with NHIs, Orfeo made his living by preaching the gospel revealed to him by them. His career as a prophet began with the sighting of a supposedly authentic UFO on August 4, 1946. At night, he felt unwell and had a “prickling” sensation in the upper half of his body. As he was driving home in his car, he saw a faintly red-glowing, oval-shaped object hovering over the horizon, which nobody else seemed to see. Suddenly it shot upwards with great speed but before it vanished, it released two balls of green fire from which he heard a voice say: “Don’t be afraid, Orfeo, we are friends!” As he got out of the car, he watched the two “pulsating” disks hovering a short distance in front of him. The voice explained to him that he was in direct communication with “friends from another world.” They asked him to drink from a crystal cup which he described as “the most delicious beverage I had ever tasted.” He felt refreshed and strengthened. Suddenly the area between the twin disks began to glow with a soft green light which gradually formed into a three-dimensional screen. In it there appeared a man and a woman, “being the ultimate of perfection.” They had large shining eyes and seemed strangely familiar to him. It seemed to him that he was in telepathic communication with them. Then the voice said: “We see the individuals of Earth as each one really is, Orfeo, and not as perceived by the limited senses of man. The people of your planet have been under observation for centuries, but have only recently been re-surveyed. Every point of progress in your society is registered with us. We know you as you do not know yourselves . Every man, woman, and child is recorded in vital statistics by means of our recording crystal disks. Each of you is infinitely more important to us than to your fellow Earthlings because you are not aware of the true mystery of your being… We feel a deep sense of brotherhood toward Earth’s inhabitants because of an ancient kinship of our planet with Earth. In you we can look far back in time and recreate certain aspects of our former world. With deep compassion and understanding we have watched your world going through its ‘growing pains.’ We ask that you look upon us simply as older brothers.” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies Orfeo was also informed that as “etheric” entities they needed the UFOs only in order to manifest themselves materially to man. The heavenly visitors were harmless and filled with the best intentions. “Cosmic law” forbade spectacular landings on earth. The earth was at present threatened by greater dangers than was realised. After these revelations Orfeo felt exalted and strengthened. It was, as he states, “as though momentarily I had transcended mortality, and was somehow related to these superior beings.” When the lights disappeared, it seemed to him that the everyday world had lost its reality and became an abode of shadows. At another time, Orfeo was feeling unwell and had a dulling of consciousness he had noted on that other occasion. Jung describes this as the awareness of an abaissement du niveau mental (lowering of the mental level), a state which is a very important precondition for the occurrence of spontaneous psychic phenomena. Suddenly, he saw a luminous object which visibly increased in solidity, as if its vibrational frequency were lowered (just as the blades of a propeller are invisible at high speeds, but visible at low speeds). He saw a doorway leading into a brightly lit interior and he stepped inside. The walls were made of some “ethereal mother-of-pearl stuff”. Facing him was a comfortable reclining chair consisting of the same translucent, shimmering substance. He sat down and it was as if the chair moulded itself to the shape of his body of its own accord. The UFO carried him away and he saw the earth. Orfeo wept with emotion and the voice said: “Weep Orfeo… we weep with you for earth and her children. For all its apparent beauty earth is a purgatorial world among the planets evolving intelligent life. Hate, selfishness, and cruelty rise from many parts of it like a dark mist.” The voice informed him that every being on earth was divinely created. Orfeo had spiritual gifts, and that was why the higher beings could enter into communication with him. The voice entertained him with more explanations concerning the attitude of the higher beings to mankind: “Man had not kept pace morally and psychologically with his technological development, and therefore the inhabitants of other planets were trying to instil into the earth dwellers a better understanding of their present predicament and to help them particularly in the art of healing. They also wanted to put Orfeo right about Jesus Christ. Jesus, so they said, was called allegorically the son of God. In reality he was the “Lord of the Flame”, “an infinite entity of the Sun”, and not of earthly origin. “As the Sun spirit who sacrificed Himself for the children of woe he has become a part of the oversoul of mankind and the world spirit. In this he differs from all other cosmic teachers.” Everyone on earth has a “spiritual, unknown self which transcends the material world and consciousness and dwells eternally outside of the Time dimension in spiritual perfection within the unity of the oversoul.” The sole purpose of human existence on earth is to attain reunion with the “immortal consciousness ” … Orfeo felt like a “crawling worm – unclean, filled with error and sin. He wept… to the accompaniment of the appropriate music. The voice spoke and said: “Beloved friend of Earth, we baptise you now in the true light of the worlds eternal.” A white flash of lightning blazed forth: his life lay clear before his eyes, and the remembrance of all his previous existences came back to him. He understood “the mystery of life.” He thought he was going to die, for he knew that at this moment he was wafted into “eternity, into a timeless sea of bliss.”” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies After this illuminative experience, Orfeo came to himself again. He noticed that he had an inflamed circle with a dot in the middle on his chest. Psychologically, this is the symbol of the Self, of absolute wholeness, or in religious language, God. The centre is frequently symbolised by an eye: the ever-open eye of the fish in alchemy (the fish is also a symbol for Christ and the age of Pisces). UFOs: The Age of Aquarius For Jung, the UFO phenomenon is part of the new approaching astrological age, the age of Aquarius, estimated to fall between AD 2000 and 2200. In Western astrology, the completion of a full cycle of the sun through the zodiac, called a Great Year, takes approximately 26,000 years. An astrological age, or “Platonic month”, is one twelfth of a Great Year, corresponding with the one zodiacal sign, therefore lasting approximately 2200 years. Every age has left a secret to be discovered. Jung writes: “These rumours [UFOs] … seem to me so significant that I feel myself compelled… to sound a note of warning… they are manifestations of psychic changes which always appear at the end of one Platonic month and at the beginning of another. Apparently, they are changes in the constellation of psychic dominants of the archetypes, or “gods” as they used to be called, which bring about, or accompany, long-lasting transformations of the collective psyche. This transformation started in the historical era and left its traces first in the passing of the aeon of Taurus into that of Aries, and then of Aries into Pisces, whose beginning coincides with the rise of Christianity. We are now nearing that great change which may be expected when the spring-point enters Aquarius. It would be frivolous of me to try to conceal from the reader that such reflections are not only exceedingly unpopular but even come perilously close to those turbid fantasies which becloud the minds of world-reformers and other interpreters of “signs and portents.” But I must take this risk, even if it means putting my hard-won reputation for truthfulness, reliability and capacity for scientific judgment in jeopardy. I can assure my readers that I do not do this with a light heart.” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies In an interview conducted two years before his death, Jung stated: “What comes next? Aquarius, the Water-pourer… In our era the fish is the content [Pisces]; with the Water-pourer, he becomes the container. It’s a very strange symbol. I don’t dare to interpret it. So far as one can tell, it is the image of a great man approaching.” C.G. Jung Speaking: Interviews and Encounters Pisces has water as an element, Aquarius, on the other hand, despite alluding to water, is classified as an air sign. The atmospheric mystery, the mystery of air, must become increasingly psychologically dominant for a period of more than 2,000 years to come . In his lecture on Jung’s flying saucer book, Manly P. Hall states that the “water of life” of Aquarius is an etheric, electric or magnetic substance moving in the air. It is fluidic in nature, but energising in quality. It represents the transmission of waves and energy in space. On this basis, we are dealing with an air sign with a curiously fluid symbol almost resembling water. We may refer to Genesis where it is written, “And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament.” The waters above the firmament have a relationship to this symbol. Therefore, the phenomenon of the UFOs – which interestingly have been described as being both in air and under water – have become more important for humankind as we are nearing the Aquarian Age. The circular form of the UFOs is also the circle of the zodiac, the wheel of life which depicts the astrological ages in which humanity eternally moves around – circumambulating the circle through the aeons – which is also the Self. As T.S. Eliot wrote, “And the end of all our exploring, will be to arrive where we started, and know the place for the first time.” This mysterious cyclic symbol is related to the creation of the wheel, which led to transportation, the ability to move from one place to another, an appropriate symbol of motion and progress. Conclusion On his final thoughts on the subject of UFOs, Jung writes: “Unfortunately, after more than ten years’ study of the problem I have not managed to collect a sufficient number of observations from which more reliable conclusions could be drawn. I must therefore content myself with having sketched out a few lines for future research.” Carl Jung, Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies And finally, Jung writes: “Two or three more centuries will go by before the new era I spoke of [the Age of Aquarius] in connection with the flying saucers. A lot will still have to happen to mankind. Many things will have to change before the new style comes to birth, the new formula for the realisation of humanity.” C.G. Jung Speaking: Interviews and Encounters The UFO phenomenon is a crisis in the Platonic month, a crisis in which human beings, moving from one pattern of archetypal symbolism to another, are confronted with an entirely new way of life – and this confusion is solved by the ageless and perennial task of individuation, the integration of the two parts of our nature, the conscious and the unconscious, which aligns us to the Self, establishing our interior totality. Recommended Reading 🎧 Prefer Audiobooks? Get a 30-day Audible Plus FREE trial As an Amazon Associate, I earn a small commission from qualifying purchases at no additional cost to you. Thank you for your support . Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe to our newsletter * indicates required First Name Last Name Email Address * The Psychology of UFOs Strange sightings have been reported in the sky throughout history. After the Second World War, however, the appearance of UFOs became prominent in culture. Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Carl Jung studied the UFO phenomenon for more than a decade until his death in 1961, and saw them as a living myth for modern man, stating that we have the golden opportunity of seeing how a legend is formed, and how in a difficult and dark time for humanity a miraculous tale grows up of an attempted intervention by superior or “heavenly” beings. Join our beloved community and enjoy exclusive benefits! Become a Patron Buy Official Merch Spring Artwork used in the video Liked it? Take a second to support Eternalised on Patreon! Related Related Posts: The Inner Work Archive Essays in Psychology, Spirituality & Philosophy Favourite Quotes (Patrons Only) Artwork in videos (Patrons Only)