Dark Energy: Light and Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/lightfield.html

"Dark Energy" and the "Accelerating Universe": Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?
John A. Gowan
(revised July, 2014)
home page
Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
Light is "Non-Local"
E = mcc
The Accelerating Universe
Time
Links
Abstract
Light traveling freely in space does not produce a gravitational field - contrary to most
"establishment" thinking. Because the "Interval" of light = zero, light has no specific
location in spacetime (light is "non-local"), and hence cannot provide a center for such a
field. Since an uncentered gravitational field violates energy (and symmetry) conservation
(including the "Equivalence Principle"), light moving freely in vacuum cannot and does
not produce a gravitational field. This result is important for theories attempting to unify
gravity with the other forces.
Introduction
The "Interval" of light = zero. This is Einstein's most important formulation of light's "non-local"
symmetric energy state. The "Interval" is a quantity of spacetime, a measure of 4-dimensional
distance, invariant for all observers, regardless of their relative or accelerated motion. The function of
the Interval is to protect causality in the plastic dimensionality of Einstein's relativity theories. Light
has no Interval because light has no x (length in the direction of motion) or t (time) dimension.
Having no Interval, light's position in 4-dimensional spacetime cannot be specified. Having no
distance or time parameters, and yet having intrinsic motion, light has, in effect, forever to go
nowhere - within its own reference frame (spacetime). From this results the notion of light's "infinite"
velocity and the symmetric distribution of light's energy throughout spacetime - everywhere,
simultaneously.
Light is "Non-local"
Massless light is non-local, a-temporal, and a-causal. Light has no associated gravitational field
because it has no "Interval" and hence no "location". Being non-local, light cannot provide a center
for a gravitational field, and an uncentered gravitational field constitutes a violation of energy
conservation (because it would produce "net" energy, a net motion and acceleration in spacetime of
the gravitational source). Consequently, freely moving light cannot and does not produce a
1 of 6

7/7/14 9:56 AM

Dark Energy: Light and Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/lightfield.html

gravitational field. Light's "zero Interval" is precisely the symmetry condition necessary to prevent the
formation of an explicit time dimension and its associated gravitational field. "Velocity c" could
hardly function as the entropic, metric, and symmetry gauge of spacetime if light itself were plagued
by a metric-warping "location" charge and gravitational field (which moreover would have to vary
with the energy content of individual photons). Light has no time dimension nor the gravitational field
which could produce one. (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
This is the basic conservation reason why the intrinsic motion of light - whatever its actual numerical
value - must be the "velocity of non-locality", gauging the symmetric energy state and entropy drive
of free electromagnetic energy, the gauge of metric symmetry and the equivalence between space and
time, effectively an infinite velocity within its own spatial reference frame and conservation domain.
Otherwise light would have a gravitational "location" charge, a time dimension, and a gravitational
field, and spacetime would immediately collapse into a black hole. If light produced a gravitational
field, the Universe would have been "still born" as a black hole; instead of a "Big Bang", there would
have been a "Big Crunch". The only reason the Universe unfolds from its initial singularity is that
almost all of its energy is in the form of light (because of matter-antimatter annihilations) which
produces no gravity, but instead blasts apart the small residue of matter forming our material Cosmos.
One of gravity's major conservation roles is to produce the time dimension of bound energy. (See:
"The Conversion of Space to Time".) Since light has no time dimension and no bound energy, light
has no need of a gravitational field. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravity.")
The fact that the scientific "establishment" believes that freely moving light in vacuum (spacetime)
produces a gravitational field, continues to be a major conceptual roadblock in the ongoing effort to
unify gravitation with the other forces. This is also a crucial point of difference between my theory of
gravity's origin and "establishment" physics. Of course, when captured by the electron shell of an
atom (for example), light loses its intrinsic motion and symmetric non-local energy state, and in this
bound condition its energy contributes to the atom's overall gravitational field. But it is no longer light
or free energy, it is bound energy with a specifiable location - the atom's center of mass. (See:
"Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
E = mcc (Einstein); E = hv (Planck); hv = mcc (DeBroglie)
The problem seems to begin with Einstein's E = mcc; from this justly famous equation it seems
everyone assumed, including Einstein, that light has mass and so produces a gravitational field. But
light obviously does not have mass, it has momentum and energy (E = hv), which is equivalent to
mass (hv = mcc), but is not mass itself. ("Mass" is the source of inertial resistance or gravitational
"weight" (or gravitational field energy) of any energy form.) Light is manifestly different from
bowling balls: light has intrinsic motion c, light is two-dimensional, light has a zero Interval; bowling
balls have a time dimension and are four-dimensional with a positive Interval. And the fact that light
is "bent" by a gravitational field does not mean it produces a gravitational field. Light follows the
geodesic paths of spacetime, and is a co-mover with spacetime, like every other form of energy which
moves in spacetime. But light itself does not "warp" spacetime nor produce a gravitational field; light
is the primordial symmetric state of electromagnetic energy, a symmetric energy vibration of the
metric structure of spacetime. Gravitational fields and the time dimension they produce are only
associated with secondary, massive, asymmetric forms of energy derived from light ("ponderable"
atomic matter).

2 of 6

7/7/14 9:56 AM

Dark Energy: Light and Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/lightfield.html

"Velocity c" is the "gauge" (regulator) of metric symmetry, of Einstein's "Interval", of causality, of
light's non-local symmetric energy state, and of light's entropy drive, in addition to gauging the
magnitude of electric charge, and the energetic equivalence between mass and free energy. "Velocity
c" is an effectively infinite velocity because of these metric/entropic gauge functions, which protect
energy conservation and causality. If you still think light and bowling balls are the same because E =
mcc, then try bouncing actual bowling balls back and forth between two mirrors at "velocity c", as
light does so easily with their images. To miss this point is to miss the opportunity to unify gravity
with the other forces through the symmetry principles of Noether's Theorem. "Velocity c" is the gauge
of a non-local symmetry condition characterizing the equitable distribution of light's energy
throughout spacetime: the charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light - including the "location"
charge of gravity, whose active principle is time. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
Einstein distinguished between the gravitational energy of free space, which he seems to treat as a
metric stress tensor producing a gravitational field whether located inside or outside a planet ("gravity
gravitates"), and a free electromagnetic field, which he apparently classifies as another form of matter
or bound energy. This latter I believe is a mistake (even Einstein made them occasionally): free
electromagnetic energy must be gravitationally distinguished from bound electromagnetic energy.
Unlike gravitation, the free electromagnetic field does not cause a metric stress in spacetime (does not
"warp" or "curve" spacetime), and so should not be treated under the same rules and assumptions as
the spatial energy ("self energy") of the free gravitational field: even if "gravity gravitates" (which I
also doubt), light does not. (See Einstein's discussion on page 143, section 14, in the Dover paperback
"The Principle of Relativity", 1952.)
In the gravitational case, how could one experimentally distinguish "gravity gravitates" from "gravity
does not gravitate"? The hypothesis "gravity gravitates" is not falsifiable, as it contains a circular
argument.
In the "Tetrahedron Model" (as advocated on this website), a gravitational field is the spatial
consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. Furthermore, time is the active principle of gravity's
"location" charge. A "graviton" is a quantum unit of time or temporal entropy. But none of these
considerations apply to light, which, according to Einstein, has no time dimension. In the
"Tetrahedron Model", light is the archetypical example of a perfectly symmetric energy form; light
does not and cannot produce a gravitational field.
That free electromagnetic energy (light) moving in vacuum at velocity c does not produce a
gravitational field is absolutely crucial to understanding the theory presented on this website (the
"Tetrahedron Model") concerning the role of gravity and its unification with the other forces. While I
defer to Einstein's authority in almost every other matter, here I (reluctantly) part from the scientific
hero of my youth - or at least with the "establishment's" interpretation of his thinking on this point.
(See: "The 'Tetrahedron Model' vs the 'Standard Model': A Comparison".)
The Accelerating Universe
Clearly, testing this difference between the theories will be difficult because of the extreme weakness
of gravity and the fact that the test must be conducted on light in free flight. Nevertheless,
observational evidence in favor of this idea already exists in the recently discovered "acceleration" of

3 of 6

7/7/14 9:56 AM

Dark Energy: Light and Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/lightfield.html

the Cosmos. See the paragraphs below, copied (with minor changes) from "A Spacetime Map of the
Universe":
Because the Universe is constantly converting its original mass into light (via nuclear
fusion/fission, supernovas, quasars), but no known process adds to the original mass (no
new baryons are ever created), we expect the total gravitational field of the Universe to
decrease with time (since light (free electromagnetic energy) produces no gravitational
field). Hence a small "acceleration" of the Cosmic expansion (actually a small reduction
in the rate of gravitational deceleration) is to be expected from this mass/gravity loss.
However, if the early Universe converted mass to light at a much higher rate than today
(vigorous star formation, galaxy mergers, quasar and black hole formation), a significant
reduction to the total gravitational field during that era could result. Black holes, for
example, can convert a significant percentage of a particle's rest mass into free energy as
it falls toward the "event horizon".
It has been objected that the conversion of bound to free energy in stars is not sufficient to
account for the recently observed "acceleration" of the Cosmos. However, if the
conversion of bound to free energy also occurs in the "dark matter" presumed to be five
times more abundant than the visible matter of the stars, then such mass conversions,
driven by the conservation of the symmetry of free energy, whether that energy is "dark"
or "light" (as demanded by "Noether's theorem"), might well be sufficient to account for
the observed reduction in the gravitational deceleration. Finally, the existence and decay
(including "oscillation") of a fourth, heavy "leptoquark" neutrino might even account for
the reduced deceleration within the boundaries of "ordinary" matter.
The "acceleration" (or reduced deceleration) of the expansion of the Cosmos is caused by the
expansive entropic property (intrinsic dimensional motion) of light, combined with a reduction of the
total gravitational energy of the Cosmos. This expansive combination is the "dark energy" or
"cosmological constant" producing the observed acceleration (which should have been anticipated if
we had realized that light does not produce a gravitational field). In any case, it seems obvious that
this "cosmic acceleration" constitutes the observational evidence that light, traveling freely in
spacetime at velocity c, does not and cannot produce a gravitational field.
Time
(added Feb., 2014)
It should be noted that I treat the gravitational "location" charge like other charges, in the sense that
antimatter carries the same charge but with an opposite sign. Hence particle-antiparticle pairs will
cancel each other's "location" charges, just as they do all other charges. My expectation is that the
antimatter gravitational "location" charge nevertheless is universally attractive with respect to bound
energy of any type, in the same manner as our familiar matter gravitational charge (since space is
perfectly symmetric with respect to "anti-space"), but differs in the one-way (asymmetric) "direction"
of antimatter time. We are familiar with our own one-way time asymmetry - in the anti-universe, I
expect this same one-way causal temporal flow to occur, but in a "direction" opposite to our own. By
this I do not mean causality is violated in the anti-world (which would also violate energy
conservation), I simply mean the one-way direction of time is opposite our own, much like "east vs
west", but expressed within the temporal rather than spatial parameter. We have a related example of

4 of 6

7/7/14 9:56 AM

Dark Energy: Light and Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/lightfield.html

such an effect in the "handedness" or "parity" of our neutrinos - all matter neutrinos are left-handed,
all antimatter neutrinos are right handed, distinguishing the information content of matter vs
antimatter.
Wheeler and Feynman raised similar speculations regarding the time travel of antimatter, but later
abandoned them, evidently due to causality concerns. However, I think the causality violations can be
avoided if a purely "directional" reversal of time flow is postulated, that is, a reversal (like parity) that
does not have causal consequences violating energy conservation.
Nevertheless, two oppositely directed time flows cannot coexist within the same reference frame,
hence accounting for the immediate and violent annihilation of matter vs antimatter (the head-on
collision of two universes time-traveling in opposite directions). This may be the actual mechanism
producing the attraction between opposite electric charges - whereas the principle involved is the
conservation of light's non-local symmetric energy state (returning bound energy to light via particleantiparticle annihilation reactions).
Accordingly, in the "Spacetime Map of the Universe", we would diagram the anti-universe with the
spatial axis increasing upwards, as before, but with time increasing toward the right, rather than the
left, as in the original diagram. That is, the universe and anti-universe would occupy opposite (leftright) quadrants in the upper half of the figure.
Links:
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Cosmology
Section V: Introduction to Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (text - updated copy)
Gravity Diagrams

5 of 6

7/7/14 9:56 AM

Dark Energy: Light and Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/lightfield.html

A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric

6 of 6

7/7/14 9:56 AM

