A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory
John A. Gowan
(Revised June 2014)
Homepage
What we see is not Nature, but Nature exposed to our method of questioning - W. C. Heisenberg

Table of Contents:

Abstract
Introduction
The Tetrahedron Model
The Conservation and Invariance of Charge
Symmetry-Breaking
Charge Now – Pay Later
Causality
Gravity and Time
Summary
Symmetry Debts of the Four forces
Links

Abstract
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory as presented in these pages is summarized below:
"Noether's Theorem" states that in a multicomponent field such as the electromagnetic field (or
the metric field of spacetime), symmetries are associated with conservation laws and vice versa. In
matter, light's (broken) symmetries are conserved by charge and spin; in spacetime, light's symmetries
are protected by inertial forces, and conserved (when broken) by gravitational forces. All forms of
energy originate as light; matter carries charges which are the symmetry/entropy debts of the light
which created it. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. Charges produce forces which
act to return the material system to its original symmetric state, paying matter's symmetry/entropy
debts. Payment is exampled by any spontaneous interaction producing net free energy, including:
1 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

chemical reactions and matter-antimatter annihilation reactions (electromagnetic force); radioactivity,
fusion, particle and proton decay (weak and strong nuclear forces); the nucleosynthetic pathway of
stars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes (gravitational force). Identifying the broken
symmetries of light associated with each of the 4 charges and forces of physics is the first step toward
a conceptual unification.
The conservation of energy, symmetry, entropy, and causality, plus the requirement of primordial
symmetry-breaking followed by the maintenance of charge invariance (including the phenomena of
“local gauge symmetry”), are all key conceptual elements in the formulation of a Unified Field
Theory.
See: the "Tetrahedron Model" (simple version) (diagram)
The Tetrahedron Model (complete version) (diagram)
Introduction
Our universe consists of a mixture of free and bound electromagnetic energy (light and matter), set
in gravitational spacetime, governed and regulated by various conservation laws and forces which
determine both its origin and destiny. This paper is an abbreviated discussion of our physical system,
its evolution and laws, and how they are integrated into what is known as the Unified Field Theory.
This paper is not intended to stand alone. For an in-depth discussion of the many concepts surveyed in
this article, the reader must see the supporting papers referenced on my website. I am trying to reach a
qualitative conceptual unification only (not a quantitative mathematical unification), and I will
employ an evolutionary and a General Systems approach to the subject. I am generally more
interested in why the universe is as we find it, in terms of conservation laws, rather than the
mathematical details (the how) of its working – both because others are (much!) better than I at the
math, and these days it is mostly the why which remains mysterious. Of course, as we will see, the
why and the how are usually intertwined.
Any manifest universe must be capable of symmetry-breaking plus complete self-conservation –
that is, able to escape its symmetric beginning, but also able to recycle itself, returning to its origin
under its own power, initiative, and self-contained conservation principles – as a boomerang returns to
the hand that throws it. Thus we find that matter is actually a bound form of light, enabling the
material universe - which originates as light - to return to light (free vs bound electromagnetic
energy). This is also why the four forces – which constitute a final pathway for matter back to light –
must also be the initial pathway which leads from light to matter. (See: “The Higgs Boson and the
Evolutionary Eras of the Cosmos”.)
The Tetrahedron Model
The Four Conservation Principles governing the transformation of light into matter and vice versa
(See: “The Tetrahedron Model”):
1) Energy Conservation: conservation of raw energy. Energy may be transformed but neither created
nor destroyed. In the “Big Bang” the raw energy of light (free electromagnetic energy) is transformed
to the raw energy of matter and kinetic energy (“mass” -- bound electromagnetic energy): hv = mcc
(DeBroglie’s equation).
2) Entropy: c, G, T – intrinsic motion of light, gravity, and time. The dimensions are energy

2 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

conservation domains created by the primordial entropy drives (intrinsic motions) of free and bound
electromagnetic energy. The intrinsic motion of light creates, expands, and cools space; the intrinsic
motion of time creates, expands, and dilutes history, and decays matter; gravity mediates between the
entropic domains of space and history, creating time from space (as on earth) and vice versa (as in the
stars). Entropy is the principle that allows us to use and transform energy without violating energy
conservation. The intrinsic motions of light and time are metrically equivalent “infinite” velocities
(primordial entropy drives) protecting energy conservation. (See: “Spatial vs Temporal Entropy”.)
3) Symmetry Conservation (and symmetry-breaking): Noether’s Theorem. The charges of matter are
the symmetry debts of light. Symmetric light produces asymmetric matter (through primordial
symmetry-breaking weak force processes which separate matter from antimatter). In consequence of
symmetry-breaking, matter bears charges (symmetry debts) which cause forces (forces represent the
demand for payment of the symmetry debts); forces act to return matter to light, paying matter’s
symmetry debts, as required by Noether’s Theorem. One charge exists for each force, including
gravity (“location” charge). The symmetry of light is conserved no less than the raw energy of light.
Charge and symmetry conservation allow the transformation of energy into “information” – just as
entropy allows the transformation of energy into “work”. (See: “Symmetry Principles of the Unified
Field Theory”.)
4) Causality-Information: Law of cause and effect – “karma”, history, historic spacetime. Atoms,
matter, mass. Free electromagnetic energy is transformed into bound electromagnetic energy: E = hv;
E = mcc; hv = mcc (Planck; Einstein; DeBroglie). Matter is local, causal, temporal and massive,
bearing charges, information, producing a gravitational field proportional to its bound energy (Gm),
and moving with an intrinsic (entropic) historical motion T (time) (see: “The Time Train”). Light is
non-local, acausal, atemporal, and massless, bearing no charges or information, producing no
gravitational field, and moving with an intrinsic (entropic) spatial motion c (“velocity of light”).
History is the temporal analog of space. From information, charge, and energy, matter evolves life
through time, an inevitable chemical reaction guided by the 4x3 fractal algorithm of the Cosmos (See:
“Nature’s Fractal Pathway”). The role of charge and information is to guide the return of matter to
light, and to produce life, the energy form by which the universe knows and experiences itself, and
eventually fulfills its creative potential. (See: “The Human Connection”.)
The Conservation and Invariance of Charge
The transformation of light to matter and back again (symmetry breaking and symmetry
restoration) must satisfy specific conservation regulations or principles, including - (in our case but
not generally) – “life friendly” physical constants (the low value of G in our cosmos would be an
example), which allow (among other things) the slow return of the material system to light, providing
time for the evolution of life. The extended time interval between the initiation and destruction of our
universe requires compensating or “holding” actions by the return forces which maintain the material
system in a state of perpetual readiness to return to light (ready to pay or redeem upon demand the
symmetry debt of light as carried by matter), and this despite being embedded in a hostile, temporal
environment. Examples of obstacles to conservation in our material world include: an environment
of relative rather than absolute motion; a metric dominated by G rather than c; massive rather than
massless forms of energy; fractional rather than unitary charges (quarks); particles with differing
identities (“flavors”) (leptons, baryons) rather than “anonymous” identical particles (photons). In sum:
temporal, local, causal, massive, and charged particles producing gravitational fields, relative
motions, with diverse “flavors” or identities (quarks and leptons) rather than atemporal, non-local,

3 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

acausal, massless, uncharged anonymous particles producing no gravitational fields and having
intrinsic absolute motion (photons).
In addition to actually paying the symmetry debts represented by charge, the 4 forces of physics
also conspire to maintain the invariance of charge and other conserved parameters despite the
imperfections of the material environment (the “holding actions” mentioned above), and in this role
are designated “local gauge symmetry” forces. (See: “Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and the
Tetrahedron Model”: Part 1.) It will be appreciated that the maintenance of charge invariance is a
necessary corollary of charge conservation, and that this is not a trivial matter in our imperfect world
of matter, time, gravitation, relative motion, and entropic expansion. Thus, in the electromagnetic
force we find magnetism, which rises and falls with the increase or decrease of the relative motion of
electrically charged particles, maintaining thereby the invariance of electric charge. The relative
motion of material objects in spacetime likewise produces “Lorentz Invariance”, the co-varying
effects of time and space described by Einstein’s Special Relativity, which operate to protect causality,
velocity c, and the invariance of the “Interval”.
Time itself is an alternative form of entropy drive produced by gravity (via the annihilation of
space), to compensate for matter’s lack of intrinsic spatial motion and the loss of light’s non-local
distributional symmetry in immobile, massive particles. Because the energy content of massive
particles varies with their velocity, the relative motion of massive particles would be impossible
without a time dimension to accommodate such variable energy accounts. The historical domain
likewise exists to accommodate the causal relations of matter, as also necessitated by energy
conservation.
Symmetry-Breaking
The primordial requirement of symmetry-breaking (the escape of matter from light and
annihilating particle-antiparticle pairs) followed by charge conservation has left an indelible impress
upon the composition and character of the atomic system, including charge quantization, the
fractional charges of the quarks, and the division of atomic matter into mass-carrying quarks (nuclear
material) and charge-carrying electrons and neutrinos (hadrons vs leptons). The three-family
structure of the quark and lepton fields may be a further example.
The neutrino is an alternative form of “identity” charge produced by the weak force to compensate
for the loss of the photon’s symmetric “anonymity” by the individually distinguishable spectrum of
massive elementary particles. (See: “The Particle Table”.) The alternative identity charges of the
neutrinos (including their “handedness”) are crucially necessary to allow “Big Bang” symmetrybreaking and the escape of the material system of quarks and electrons from the otherwise mutual
destruction of annihilating matter-antimatter particle pairs. The leptonic families in general act as
alternative charge carriers for the electric and identity charges of the mass-carrying quarks (or for
each other) - the proton/electron pair, and the electron/electron neutrino pair are examples. (See:
“Identity Charge and the Weak Force”.) The entire elaborate mechanism of the weak force (including
the Higgs boson and the massive IVBs) is dedicated to the production of invariant, single elementary
particles in any time or place - particles which can swap places (if necessary) with those created
during the “Big Bang”. (See: “The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs”.)
The gluon field of the strong force is required to maintain the wholeness of quantum charge units
despite the fractional charges borne by quarks. (See: “The Strong Force: Two Expressions”.) The

4 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

quark fractional charges are in turn necessary to the initial symmetry-breaking of the primordial
particle-antiparticle pairs (since they allow electrically neutral quark combinations). The asymmetric
production of matter from light during the Big Bang is thought to originate with the (unexplained)
asymmetric decay of leptoquark-antileptoquark pairs, resulting in a tiny residue of matter. (See:
“Material Expressions of Local Gauge Symmetry: Parts 2, 3, 4”.) (See also: “The Origin of Matter
and Information”.) It has been suggested that the three-family structure of the quark and lepton fields
may be necessary to the primordial asymmetry between matter and antimatter. (See: Frank Close:
Antimatter, 2009, Oxford Univ. Press.)
Charge Now – Pay Later
The material system is conserved in spite of its imperfection; charge conservation and charge
invariance assure that the symmetry debt of light will be paid in full, eventually, at some future time.
The grandest expression of cosmic dedication to charge and symmetry conservation is the
gravitational creation of time from space, for without the time dimension charge conservation for the
future payment of symmetry debts would have no meaning. Our cosmos is a “buy-now, pay later”
system of charge conservation and symmetry debts which runs on the credit card of gravity. The
entropy-interest on the symmetry debt of matter is paid by gravitation; gravity creates time from
space, decelerating the cosmic expansion in consequence. Hence the entropy-energy to produce
matter’s time dimension and the expansion of history is withdrawn from the expansion of space,
which in turn is driven by the intrinsic (entropic) motion of light. It is therefore the expansive entropic
energy of light’s spatial dimension which ultimately pays for the expansive entropic energy of
matter’s historical dimension, just as the raw energy of light pays for the raw energy of mass (hv =
mcc). (The recently observed “acceleration” of the universal spatial expansion is caused by the
relaxation of the global gravitational field, as mass is converted to light by various astrophysical
processes – which may include the decay of “dark matter”.) (See: “A Spacetime Map of the
Universe”.) “Every jot and tittle of the law will be fulfilled’; and “Not a sparrow falls but the Father
knows” (an intuitive expression of the operation of conservation law, anciently recognized).
Causality: Time Sequence and Energy Conservation – Metrics and Gauges
In the “Tetrahedron Model” we attempt to characterize reality in its most essential features – much
as the Greeks did with their “four elements” – except the present effort is in a “scientific” or rational
mode. The “trinity” of conservation laws which apply to the transformation of light (free
electromagnetic energy) into matter (bound electromagnetic energy) are conventional “Standard
Model” or “textbook” principles: 1) the Conservation of Energy (1st law of thermodynamics); 2)
Entropy (2nd law of thermodynamics); 3) the Conservation of Symmetry (Noether’s Theorem). Our
4th and final choice is our general characterization of matter, the product of the transformation of free
electromagnetic energy to a bound, atomic form. Two possibilities suggest themselves for
conservation laws or principles which are uniquely associated with or characterize matter: 1)
Causality (law of cause and effect – causes must precede effects and every effect must have a cause);
and 2) Information (which also is associated with a conservation law in quantum mechanics to the
effect that information cannot be destroyed) (see Leonard Susskind’s book: The Black Hole War,
2008, Little, Brown and Co.). Of these two I have chosen causality, because causality implies
information but the reverse in not true, at least to my thinking; therefore, the causal law is the stronger
and more encompassing principle. Not that we can do without information – we must have it as a
corollary of causality. We cannot have a causal law unless we also have the information which
5 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

identifies both the cause and the effect (in Quantum Mechanics part of this information may be hidden
or “unavailable” in “complementary” dyads such as position/momentum or energy/time). Therefore,
when we characterize matter with causality we will sometimes specifically append information (as
Causality-Information), but we will always imply that causality carries with it the associated concept
of information. Information becomes a primary conceptual principle in biological systems: biology is
the information pathway whereby the Cosmos achieves self-awareness and explores its creative
potential. (See: “The Information Pathway”.)
Gravity and Time
Causality implies the existence of a temporal metric which orders the linear sequence of events, but
this metric must be created with matter since the time dimension does not exist for non-local light.
Time and place go together, and the task of creating a time dimension from matter falls to gravity. All
massive energy forms must produce a gravitational field because gravity is how matter produces its
time dimension. (All bound energy forms carry the gravitational “location” charge (Gm), which is the
symmetry debt of the non-local distribution of light’s energy – a spatial distribution symmetry
obviously broken by immobile matter. Light’s non-local symmetric energy state is gauged by “c”, and
matter’s gravitational “location” charge is gauged by “G”.) Gravity produces time by the annihilation
of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. Time itself is the active
principle of the gravitational “location” charge. (See: “The Conversion of Space to Time”.)
Time is necessary for bound energy for numerous reasons of energy conservation. The energy
content of matter varies with its relative motion and this requires a time dimension for accounting
purposes. Causality also is required by energy conservation: causes must precede effects or there will
be no source of energy to produce the effect. The time dimension of bound energy is also the entropy
drive of bound energy – converted by gravity from the entropy drive of free energy (the intrinsic
motion of light). The intrinsic motion of matter’s time dimension is the entropy drive of matter and
expansive history, the gravitationally converted and conserved intrinsic motion of light (the entropy
drive of expansive space). Gravity is the force which mediates between these two universal,
primordial entropy drives, one spatial for free electromagnetic energy, and one temporal for bound
electromagnetic energy. (See: “A Description of Gravitation”.) Gravity is weak because it creates only
enough time to satisfy the entropic drive of matter’s ephemeral “present moment” – not matter’s
associated historical domain. (See: “Proton Decay and the Heat Death of the Cosmos”.)
The gravitational, temporal metric of matter is superimposed upon the spatial metric of light,
producing a composite metric of spacetime which governs our compound world of light and matter.
(The “metric” is the measured relationship between the spatial and temporal dimensions. In our
electromagnetic system of spacetime, as gauged (regulated) by “velocity c”, one second of temporal
duration is metrically equivalent to 300,000 kilometers of distance.) The spatial universe expands
more slowly due to the presence of matter and its associated gravitational field – historic spacetime
expands more slowly than pure space, while a gravitational version of “Lorentz Invariance” protects
the local value of velocity c, causality, and the “Interval”. Clocks run slow and meter sticks shrink in a
gravitational field; there is also a gravitational Doppler effect. However, in free fall or orbit, clocks
and meter sticks are unaffected. Measurements of velocity c at any given location within a
gravitational field (or elsewhere) always give the same invariant value, because local clocks and
meter sticks are affected in such a (covariant) way as to maintain the invariance of c and safeguard the

6 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

“Interval” and the principle of causality (and hence also energy conservation). There can only be a
single metric and hence a single value of c (the metric gauge) at a single location in spacetime.
Comparative “vertical” measurements, however, (higher and lower in the gravitational field) will
reveal differences in the metric scale, due to the varying strength of the gravitational field. The
gravitational flow can be thought of as a response by spacetime to this “warped” metric in the
direction of “cheaper” energy (due to the slower clock). From another perspective that amounts to the
same thing, I prefer to think of the gravitational flow as caused or induced by the intrinsic motion of
time: a gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. (See: “The
Conversion of Space to Time”.)
In weak fields (as on planet Earth), gravity only pays the entropy "interest" on the symmetry debt
carried by matter, converting space to time, providing an alternative entropic dimension in which
charge conservation can be expressed (entropy debts, like energy debts, must always be paid
immediately). In stronger fields, gravity also pays the "principal" of matter's symmetry debt,
converting mass to light, as in our Sun (partially), and in Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes (completely) (symmetry debts can be paid at any future time – unlike energy or entropy debts).
The second reaction reverses the effect of the first. (See: “Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics”.)
(See also: “Extending Einstein’s Equivalence Principle”.)

Summary
Many if not most of the known characteristics of the forces can be derived from the various
conservation and other requirements which must be met by any universal material system which
successfully manifests (can break symmetry initially, but nevertheless observes conservation and
eventually returns to its origin). The ultimate unity of the forces subsists in the fact that matter is a
bound state of transformed and conserved light, and all matter’s charges – and hence their associated
forces – are symmetry debts of light awaiting payment through time. Understanding the nature of the
symmetry debt of each charge and how it may be repaid is a major step toward comprehending the
Unified Field Theory. (See: “Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory”; see also: “Currents
of Symmetry and Entropy”; see also: “The Tetrahedrom Model in the Context of a Complete
Conservation Cycle”.)
The Unified field Theory can be approached or modeled in many ways. Below I list a “cascade” of
effects beginning with the birth of the universe in the “Big Bang” and continuing to the eventual
repayment of all symmetry and entropy debts by the actions of the four forces (matter-antimatter
annihilation, proton decay, and Hawking’s “quantum radiance” of black holes). (See: “Table of the
Higgs Cascade”; and “The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs”.)
1) “Life-friendly” physical constants (c, G, e, h, etc.) – acquired from the Multiverse as a random
sample of infinite possibilities (“Anthropic Principle”). Requirement of zero net energy and charge
and complete conservation capability in order to manifest. (Seen as matter-antimatter particle pairs
and free vs bound electromagnetic energy (hv = mcc)). Negative energy supplied by gravitation and
antimatter (in particle-antiparticle pairs). Matter’s negative gravitational energy is equal to its positive
rest-mass energy.
2) Requirement for symmetry-breaking of primordial particle-antiparticle pairs. Seen as fractional
charges of quarks (to provide electrically neutral nuclear combinations), and as alternative charge
carriers to circumvent antimatter charge partners. (Leptons, “handed” neutrinos; the proton/electron

7 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

combination, etc.). Seen also as the weak force asymmetry in decays of electrically neutral
leptoquark-antileptoquark pairs (producing a net residue of matter). Perhaps seen also in the threefamily structure of elementary particle fields thought necessary to produce the primordial matterantimatter asymmetry. (See: “The Origin of Matter and Information”.)
3) Requirement to conserve the raw energy, symmetry, and entropy of light in matter (seen as mass,
charge, time). Noether’s Theorem. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. Symmetry
debts may be held in time for future payment (charge conservation); energy and entropy debts must be
paid immediately (mass/momentum/time equivalent energy and dimensionality). Gravity is both a
symmetry and an entropy debt of light, creating matter’s time dimension by the annihilation of space
(hence conserving light’s entropy drive), and conserving light’s symmetry by the conversion of bound
to free energy (many astrophysical processes).
4) Requirement to maintain charge invariance and protect the original value of symmetry debts
(through time, despite entropy and relative motion). Seen in Quantum Mechanics as quantized,
conserved, invariant charges which allow exact replication and hence conservation (via the principle
of charge conservation). Weak force production of single, invariant elementary particles via massive
IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons) which recreate “Big Bang” force unity symmetry states (all
electrons (and any other elementary particles) must be identical to all others of their kind, including
those created eons ago in the “Big Bang”). Elementary particles are always created from particleantiparticle pairs, which exist as potential forms of bound electromagnetic energy in the “vacuum” or
spacetime metric – this is the necessary basis of their uniformity. Whereas the electromagnetic force
only creates particle-antiparticle pairs, the weak force only creates single particles, which is why it
must reproduce the initial environmental conditions of the Big Bang via the Higgs boson (scalar) and
the massive IVBs (transformation mechanism). Other “local gauge symmetry” forces (“holding”
forces) include: time and magnetism (energy and charge conservation for relative motion); quark
confinement to whole quantum unit charges; “Lorentz Invariance” for massive objects in relative
motion and in gravitational fields (clocks run slow and meter sticks shrink – protecting causality,
velocity c, and the “Interval”). (See: “Local vs Global Gauge Symmetry in the Tetrahedron Model:
Part 1”; and Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetry: Parts 2, 3, 4”.)
5) Evolutionary and life forces – information and fractal algorithm; origin of life via universal 4x3
fractal algorithm; purpose of life: the universe becomes self-aware and explores itself, including its
creative potential, which expands through life, evolution, and humanity. (See: “Darwin, Newton, and
the Origin of Life”.)
6) Requirement to pay symmetry debts – the four forces are demands for payment of matter’s
symmetry debts. Matter-antimatter annihilation; fusion/fission; proton decay; Hawking’s “quantum
radiance”. The Sun is a local, partial example of this spontaneous process. Gravity creates time from
space and vice versa (in the conversion of mass to light); gravity is a symmetry and an entropy debt of
light’s non-local symmetric energy state. (The intrinsic motion of light (entropy drive) and the
“non-local” distributional symmetry of light are both gauged (regulated) by “velocity c”. Light has no
spacetime location; light’s “Interval” = zero). Gravity’s “location” charge (of which time is the active
principle) conserves both light’s entropy drive and light’s non-local distributional symmetry: light’s
entropy drive is conserved immediately (as time), and light’s non-local distributional symmetry is
conserved eventually (through the conversion of mass to light in stars and via Hawking’s “quantum
radiance” of black holes). (See: “The Double Conservation Role of Gravity”.) The dimensions of
spacetime are conservation domains for free and bound electromagnetic energy, produced by the
intrinsic (entropic) motions of light, time, and gravity. Time is gravity’s gift to matter and the

8 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

Universe. Gravity is matter’s memory it once was light.
Symmetry Debts of the 4 Forces (and repayment modes)
Light creates matter which bears charges. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
Charges produce forces which are demands for payment of the symmetry debt.
(See: ”Table of the 4 Forces” (short form)) (See: “Table of the Four Forces” (long form))
1) Electromagnetic Force: Electric Charge. Photons. The symmetry debt of "absent antimatter" (the
"Great Asymmetry") - the broken matter-antimatter symmetry of the primordial universe giving rise
to our "matter-only" cosmos. Associated with this "matter-only" asymmetry are many others, notably
including the dimensional asymmetry of time: the 2-D symmetric dimensionality of light vs 4-D
asymmetric dimensionality (time) of matter. Light is a two-dimensional transverse wave. Repayment
of the "absent antimatter" symmetry debt is via exothermic chemical reactions (partly) and matterantimatter annihilations (completely). Matter and antimatter will always annihilate each other given
any opportunity, and matter forever seeks antimatter via the long-range electric force. (Suppression of
the time dimension, and suppression of the spontaneous manifestation of matter via annihilation of
“virtual” particle-antiparticle pairs.) (“Velocity c” is the universal gauge of electromagnetic energy
regulating the spatial metric, the entropy drive of light, the non-local distributional symmetry of
light’s energy, the “Interval”, causality, the equivalence of free and bound electromagnetic energy, the
value of electric charge, etc.)
2) Strong Force: Color Charge. Gluons. Fractional vs whole quantum charge units. Quark fractional
charges vs leptonic (elementary) whole unit charges. Quark confinement (to whole charge units) via
the gluon field. Repayment via the nucleosynthetic pathway (fusion) and proton decay. (Suppression
of free-roaming fractional charges which could not be annihilated or otherwise balanced by the whole
charge units of leptonic alternative charge carriers.)
3) Weak force: “Identity” Charge (AKA “flavor” or “number” charge). Distinguishable identity of
elementary massive leptonic particles (including leptoquarks) vs anonymity of massless identical
photons. (Neutrinos are “bare” identity charges.) Repayment via radioactivity (fission), particle and
proton decay, and via contributions to the nucleosynthetic pathway. Initial creation of matter in “Big
Bang”; subsequent creation of (single) invariant elementary particles; weak “identity” charge
indicates appropriate antimatter partners for swift annihilation reactions (left vs right-handed
neutrinos and “number” charges). (Suppression of non-conservable or non-uniform elementary
particles and reactions; distinguishes matter vs antimatter via neutrino “handedness”.)
4) Gravitational Force: “Location” Charge. Non-local (“global”) distributional symmetry of photon’s
energy (due to intrinsic spatial motion c) vs asymmetric (“local”) distribution of mass energy in
particles (which lack any intrinsic spatial motion). Due to the lack of a time dimension and a spatial
dimension (in the direction of propagation), the photon has forever to go nowhere. Furthermore, due
to the lack of two dimensions, the photon’s location in either 3 or 4 dimensions cannot be specified
(light is a 2-dimensional transverse wave; light’s intrinsic motion “sweeps out” a 3rd spatial
dimension). The photon’s energy (in its own reference frame) is therefore distributed symmetrically
everywhere simultaneously in space. Massive particles break this symmetry because they lack
intrinsic spatial motion of any kind and their location in space and spacetime can therefore be
specified – breaking the distributional symmetry of the photon’s energy and giving rise to the
gravitational “location” charge carried by every massive particle and energy form (Gm). (The active
principle of the gravitational charge is time.) (See: “Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory:

9 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

Part 1 and Part 2”.) Repayment via the gravitational conversion of mass to light as in the stars,
supernovas, and quasars (partially), and via Hawking’s “quantum radiance” of black holes
(completely). (Suppression of “wormholes”, causality violations, and connections to other universes via the “event horizon” and the central “singularity” of black holes.)
The four forces can be related (in a general sense and with some overlap) to the four conservation
principles of the “Tetrahedron Model” as follows:
1) Energy Conservation – light, free electromagnetic energy: Electromagnetic Force;
2) Entropy – c, G, T (intrinsic motions of light, gravity, time – space, spacetime, history):
Gravitational Force;
3) Symmetry Conservation – charge, charge conservation, and symmetry-breaking: Weak Force;
4) Causality-Information – nuclear matter, mass, bound electromagnetic energy: Strong Force.
The four forces help the system manifest through the Higgs Cascade in the form of “unified-force
symmetric energy states” which provide stages, stepping stones, or energy plateaus (symmetry
domains) in which precisely replicable transformations (from greater to lesser unified-force symmetry
states) can occur, allowing the next lower symmetric force domain to manifest in a reproducible,
conservable form (four stages: TOE (all forces unified; fermions and bosons unified); GUT (strong
and electroweak forces unified; quarks and leptons unified); EW (electroweak unification; quark
families unified; lepton families unified); EM (electromagnetic ground state; electric and magnetic
forces unified). (See: “Table of the Higgs Cascade”.) Once the ground state is reached, the same four
forces begin the slow but sure process of symmetry debt payment, as outlined above. While this
restoration of symmetry is going on, there is plenty of time and energy available for the evolution of
life and the self-awareness and self-exploration of the cosmos, including new creative modes. The
same information (charge) that conserves and restores symmetry is used to create life, following the
4x3 fractal information pathway. Human spirituality (including ethics) and creativity (including
aesthetics) are our most highly evolved capacities; human appetites and destructiveness our least.
(See: “The Fractal Organization of Nature”.)
Finally, we ask why the universe bothers to exist at all? Speaking philosophically, it’s just that
existence is so much more interesting than non-existence. The “Trinity” gets bored of its own
perfection. And with so much creative energy in play, spontaneous symmetry-breaking from the
Multiverse is bound to occur (“eternal inflation?”). We are the means whereby the universe
experiences and looks at itself; it is therefore no wonder that we often see an image of ourselves
looking back.
Links:
Homepage
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"

10 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs")
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric
(4-D) Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force

11 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/uftcourse.html

Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions
The Particle Table
http://www.johnagowan.org/uftcourse.htm

12 of 12

6/6/14 7:17 AM

