Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

SPATIAL VS TEMPORAL ENTROPY
(revised Oct, 2012)
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
Part I: Pure and Mixed Forms of Entropy
Spatial Entropy
Historical Entropy
Gravitational Entropy
Spatio-Temporal Entropy
Thermal or "Work" Entropy
Primordial Entropy Drives of Light, Time, and Gravity
PartII: Spatial, Historical, and Spatial-Temporal Mixed Entropy
Time's Arrow
Information
The 3rd Law of Thermodynamics
The Conservation of Entropy and Symmetry
Black Holes
Time, Gravitation, and Causality
Why There Are Three Spatial Dimensions
Readings
Links
Abstract
3-dimensional space is the entropic domain of light (free electromagnetic radiation); four-dimensional
historic spacetime is the entropic domain of matter (bound electromagnetic radiation); gravity
converts space into time and vice versa, creating and destroying spacetime. Because entropy is an
adjunct of energy conservation, and matter is derived from (and returns to ) light, we find that the
mysterious "intrinsic motions" of light, time, and gravity are connected in a conservation loop.
The subject of entropy can be dauntingly technical in its full thermodynamic formality. However, we
are primarily interested in three simple, fundamental, and typically overlooked examples of entropy in
its most common, primordial, and significant form: 1) the dimensional spatial expression of entropy as
observed in the cosmological expansion and cooling of space; 2) the dimensional temporal expression
of entropy as observed in the cosmological expansion, decay, and causal dilution of history; 3) the
continuous formation of spacetime by the negentropic action of gravitation. These dimensional or
entropic conservation domains are created by the primordial entropy drives of free electromagnetic
1 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

energy (light's intrinsic motion), and bound electromagnetic energy (mass/matter - the historical
entropy drive of time's intrinsic motion).
Gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. Gravity is the neg-entropic face of
matter's pos-entropic historical entropy drive. Gravity creates time by the annihilation of space and the
extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue, creating spacetime, the compound entropic
domain of free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy. Time, in turn, creates gravity as it rushes
into history, pulling space after it. Time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge. (See:
"Entropy, Gravity, and Thermodynamics".) Time and gravity induce each other, analogously to an
electric and magnetic field, but of course via a very different mechanism (see: "The Conversion of
Space to Time"). Spacetime is a rather complex entropic domain - space and history are linked by
negentropic gravity which converts either into the other. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of
Gravitation".) The expansion of history is at the expense of the expansion of space; the rate of
expansion of historic spacetime is reduced compared to the rate of expansion of pure space. Gravity is
the "go-between", conversion force, or "gauge" of equity/proportionality between the spatial and
historical entropy drives of free and bound electromagnetic energy. (See: "A Description of
Gravitation".)
Introduction
Unless the context indicates otherwise, when I refer to "entropy" in these papers (especially in such
phrases as "light and the drive of spatial entropy" or "matter and the drive of historical entropy"), I am
referring to entropy in its most primordial or pure form, as the intrinsic motion of light "gauged" or
regulated by "velocity c" (in the case of "spatial entropy"), or as the intrinsic motion of time, "velocity
T" (in the case of historical or "temporal entropy"). These two entropy functions are inextricably
linked through the spacetime metric (also gauged by the electromagnetic constant "c"): one second of
temporal duration is metrically equivalent to 300,000 kilometers of linear space; and through
Einstein's "Interval"; and through the formulation "frequency multiplied by wavelength = c". Finally,
they are also linked through the gravitational conversion of space to time, and the converse, the
transformation of bound to free energy (as in the stars). (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
Part I: Pure and Mixed Forms of Entropy
Entropy exists in several related forms in nature, all with the same purpose, to prevent violations of
energy conservation. In these papers, I distinguish between:
1) Primary or spatial entropy, the entropy of expanding and cooling space, the entropy of free
electromagnetic energy, radiation, or light, whose "drive" or essential motivating dynamic is the
intrinsic motion of light, as "gauged" or regulated by the electromagnetic constant, "velocity c". (We
are accustomed to think of space as static and time as dynamic, because of our own inertial stasis and
the effects of scale, but space is just as dynamic as time in the entropic sense, constantly expanding
and cooling due to its energy content and its entropy drive, the intrinsic motion of light. The
expansion is actually visible through our great telescopes as the "red shift" of distant galaxies).
2) Secondary or temporal/historical entropy, the entropy of expanding and aging history, the entropy
of bound electromagnetic energy, mass, or matter, whose "drive" is the intrinsic motion of time

2 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

("velocity T"), also "gauged" or regulated by velocity c. Time is defined as the duration (measured by
a clock) required for light to travel a given distance (measured by a meter stick) in vacuum. As
Einstein has demonstrated, space and time are not independent variables, nor are their primordial
entropic drives. Space is ultimately related to the wavelength of light, and time to the frequency of
light, such that frequency multiplied by wavelength = "velocity c" (an invariant, the universal
electromagnetic constant).
One can circumvent any circularity in measuring space by time by resorting to the independent
variable "number", and (choosing a convenient "gauge" or standard frequency), count a fixed number
of oscillations of light to measure a standard duration. A standard distance is then given by the space
traversed by these same oscillations - since "c" is invariant. Time is derived from space by the
gravitational annihilation of space, and/or the quantum mechanical collapse of an electromagnetic
wave. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
3) Gravitational entropy, a negative form of entropy, converting and hence conserving one primordial
entropy form to the other in either direction (space to time or vice versa): driven by the intrinsic
motion of matter's gravitational field, as gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G".
Gravitation is the conversion force between the primordial drives of spatial and temporal entropy.
Matter's gravitational field is in turn the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of matter's time
dimension: time and gravity induce each other much as electric and magnetic fields induce each other.
Gravity is therefore related to c through time and entropy; hence all intrinsic (dimensional and
entropic) motions are ultimately derived from or related to "c". Whereas "c" is the gauge of the metric
relation between space, time, and free energy (light), "G" is the gauge of the entropic relation between
space, time, and bound energy (mass).
Time or temporal entropy can be regarded as a "local" form of entropy drive, derived from the
"global" entropy drive of light (by the gravitational annihilation of space and the extraction of a
temporal residue). Spacetime is a "tale of two metrics": the action of gravitation converts a global
metric of space, light, and absolute motion gauged by "c", to a local metric of time, history, matter,
and relative motion gauged by a combination of "c" and "G". Time is the local compensating
component of the gravitational field vector (spacetime) - the local gauge symmetry "current" protecting the invariance of the "Interval", causality, and "velocity c" ("Lorentz Invariance" of Special
and General Relativity). Because time and space are co-varying parameters, energy conservation is
accomplished despite the variable and relative motions of matter, and despite variations in the strength
of the local gravitational field. In this regard, time is the functional analog of the magnetic component
of the electromagnetic field (which protects the invariance of electric charge in relative motion). We
may also think of time as an alternative entropy-carrying dimension for space, necessary for the
transformation of light to matter, analogously to the role of the leptons and mesons in the material
realm, which function as alternative charge-carrying particles for baryons. (See: "Global vs Local
Gauge Symmetry and Gravitation".)
4) Spatio-temporal entropy, a tertiary form of combined entropy ("ordinary" or "textbook" entropy),
resulting from the mixture of the primary, secondary, and gravitational forms (generally producing
matter in relative motion), conceived and formulated in two distinct treatments:
a) The familiar thermal entropy (S) of "work", due to Carnot (1824) and Clausius (1850),

3 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

manifesting as "heat" (Q) divided by absolute temperature (T): dS = dQ/T (the entropy
associated with molecular motion and kinetic energy);
b) The statistical or probabilistic interpretation of entropy due to Boltzmann (S = K ln
W), where K = Boltzmann's constant (an energy measure per degree of absolute
temperature), and ln W is the natural logarithm (ln) of a probability expression (W). In
Boltzmann's conception (1870s), entropy manifests as the most probable, most
symmetric, or most random molecular state (the entropy of probability with respect to the
distribution of molecules and their kinetic energy, temperature, or state of excitation).
Claude Shannon's communication entropy (1948) follows the formalism of Boltzmann's
model.
The equivalence between the thermal and the probabilistic formulations of "standard"
entropy is complete and can be expressed by the equation: dQ/T = K ln W. In other
words, probability (at least at the molecular level) is a force in nature which can be
expressed in the energetic terms of heat or calories, and therefore "work" and entropy.
Gravity converts space and the primordial drive of spatial entropy (the intrinsic motion of light) to
time and the primordial drive of historical entropy (the intrinsic motion of time). When free energy is
converted to bound energy, a portion of the entropy-energy driving the spatial expansion of the
Universe is gravitationally converted to the entropy-energy driving the historical expansion of the
Universe; in the process, space is gravitationally annihilated, decelerating the spatial expansion
accordingly. (See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
The gravitational conversion of space to time is physically demonstrated by black holes, and
mathematically suggested not only by Einstein's gravitational equations representing the distortion of
spacetime, but also by the Bekenstein-Hawking theory relating the surface area of a black hole to its
entropy content. The "surface" of a black hole is a time surface, a boundary of pure temporal entropy,
where space is completely converted to time by gravity. (See: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the
'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
Thermal or "Work" Entropy
Thermal or "work" entropy, as generally defined, is the energy in an isolated system which on
principle cannot be transformed to work. Entropy characterizes the degradation or randomization of
energy inherent in the operation of any engine or process of energy transformation, typically
manifesting as "heat loss": the same energy cannot be used twice to produce the same net work. These
ideas imply the conservation of energy and the impossibility of a perpetual motion machine. As
Carnot pointed out, if all the energy of a system could be transformed to work, then the cycle could be
reversed through mechanical linkage to a duplicate system, converting all the work back to energy,
thus realizing the possibility of a perpetual motion machine - a violation of energy conservation. We
therefore come to the realization that entropy is a principle safeguarding energy conservation. Entropy
prevents the abuse of energy while allowing its use and transformation; without the principle of
entropy, energy conservation would prevent any use of energy at all.
So essential is the connection between entropy and energy conservation that entropy is an embedded

4 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

physical characteristic of energy ("primordial" forms of entropy as gauged by c, T, and G - see above).
Entropy is fundamentally expressed as the intrinsic motion "c" of free energy (the velocity of light primary form), and as the intrinsic motion "T" of bound energy's historic dimension (the metric
equivalent of velocity c - secondary form). These two "primordial" expressions of entropy are
connected by gravitation, which converts one into the other, sometimes performing both conversions
simultaneously, as in the solar conversion of space to time and mass to light. The intrinsic motions c,
T, and G are all primordial physical expressions of entropy embedded in various forms of free and
bound electromagnetic energy.
It is because of their conservation functions as entropy "drives" that both the intrinsic motions of light
and time have the appearance of "infinite" velocities. These "infinite" velocities are necessary
attributes of these entropy drives, protecting their respective conservation domains (space, history)
from violations of energy conservation or causality (via super-luminal space ship or time machine),
ensuring the irretrievable loss of radiant energy and the "present moment" to an expanding universe of
space and/or history. Gravity also seals the borders of spacetime via the "event horizon" and central
"singularity" of black holes, preventing conservation breaches (in either direction) via "wormholes".
Hence the entropy drives which create the dimensional conservation domains of spacetime also close
the borders of their domains to protect them against conservation violations - as we should expect.
Black holes, in fact, illustrate the case in which the primordial entropy drives of intrinsic motion c and
T do not exist, both extinguished and replaced by a wholly gravitational metric. Change cannot occur
within the black hole except by gravitational action, including (possibly) the conversion of baryons to
light via "proton decay" at the central singularity; and the direct conversion of gravitational energy to
radiant energy at the event horizon, producing "Hawking Radiation".
Fundamentally, entropy is and must be an intrinsic, inherent attribute characterizing free or bound
energy. Ordinary, "textbook" or "spatio-temporal" entropy is a mixture of the two primordial forms:
molecules in relative motion in time and space. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model.")
In general, the capacity for work of any (isolated) system must decrease over time, although the rate at
which this incapacitation occurs depends heavily upon the state of the energy in the system, especially
whether the energy is free or bound. So long as energy remains in the form of free energy (light), its
entropy drive, velocity c, naturally causes a very rapid vitiation of its potential for work. It is therefore
of cardinal importance (from the point of view of the "Anthropic Principle") that at the beginning of
the Universe some free energy is converted (via an unknown mechanism involving weak force
symmetry-breaking) to the bound form of matter. In thermodynamic terms, we can think of the
creation of matter as the "work done" at the beginning of the Universe: never again would the
Universe attain a sufficient temperature and energy density to create matter. The creation of matter
from light qualifies as "work" in that it is an "uphill" process, since light is a symmetric energy form,
and matter is a derivative, asymmetric energy form. We can think of gravitation as both an entropy
and a symmetry debt consequent upon this conversion of light to matter (see: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravitation"). The magnitude of G reflects the small energy difference between
the symmetric entropy drive (S) of free energy (the intrinsic motion of light, gauged by "velocity c")
and the asymmetric entropy drive (T) of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of matter's time
dimension, "velocity T"):
S - T = -G

5 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

This is equivalent to the small energetic difference between implicit (S) and explicit (T) time (see:
"The Conversion of Space to Time", and "Gravity Diagram No. 2").
The deceleration of the cosmic spatial expansion reflects the gravitational conversion of space and
light's symmetric spatial entropy drive to time and matter's asymmetric historical entropy drive - the
gravitational conversion of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos to the historical expansion of the
Cosmos (the gravitational creation of historic spacetime). The Cosmic spatial deceleration therefore
debits the expansive entropy-energy of light to fund the historical dimension of matter. This
deceleration is moderated as gravity reconverts matter to light (as in the stars), because light produces
no gravitational field in free flight. The gravitational conversion of space and the drive of spatial
entropy (light's intrinsic motion: S) to time and the drive of historic entropy (time's intrinsic motion:
T) can be represented symbolically by a "concept equation" as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
I enclose (S) and (T) in parentheses to indicate they are something more than simple quantities: they
represent the primordial entropy drives or intrinsic motions of light and time. Of course I imply that
the equivalent of these simple-minded "concept equations" must in some fashion occur in the
quantitative formalism of Einstein's gravitational field equations; it is the transformation of space into
time that creates his famous "warped" or "curved" spacetime.
The gravitational symmetry debt of the Universe is due to the reduced distributional symmetry of
"local" bound energy (matter) as compared to "non-local" free energy (light). This debt is paid
generally (along with all others) by the gravitational conversion of matter back to light, as in stars,
quasars, and by Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. The charges of matter are the
symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem) - including the gravitational "location" charge, whose
active principle is time. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
Primordial Entropy Drives of Light, Time, and Gravity
The primordial entropy drive of bound energy (matter) is the intrinsic motion of time, "velocity T".
Unlike light and light's entropic dimensional conservation domain (space), matter does not fill its
entropic dimensional conservation domain (historic spacetime), nor expand as the Cosmos ages; it is
not matter that moves, but matter's time dimension. (See: "The Time Train".) Matter exists always on
the tangential cusp of historic spacetime in the "Universal Present Moment" (see: "A Spacetime Map
of the Universe"). The energy potential of atoms can therefore last without attenuation for many
thousands of eons - the half-life of proton decay is so great it still has not been measured.
The intrinsic motion of the time dimension is the primordial entropy drive of material systems,
replacing the intrinsic motion of light from which it is derived (by the gravitational or quantummechanical annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue,
converting implicit to explicit time). Among time's other functions (such as the establishment of
causality, protection of the "Interval" and historical connectivity, and the accommodation and
continuous updating of the energy accounts of matter in relative motion), time safeguards symmetry
conservation via charge conservation. Time provides the dimensional arena (history) in which charge
conservation has extended meaning and can fulfill its deferred conservation function at some future
6 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

but indefinite date. (See: The Conversion of Space to Time".) This is yet another connection between
entropy and symmetry. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
The weakness of gravity is due both to the small energy difference between implicit and explicit time,
as noted above, and to the tangential connection between matter and its historical conservation
domain (historic spacetime) - experienced by us as the transient "present moment". This tangential
connection reflects the fact that it is matter's time dimension that has intrinsic, entropic motion, and
not matter itself. The separation between matter and its historical conservation domain (in contrast to
the intimate relationship between light and space) is the root cause of human anxiety regarding our
fleeting experience of life, but is necessary to protect the energy of atoms from the vitiating action of
temporal entropy (aging). In consequence of this protection, atoms retain the full value of their energy
content and charge magnitudes until their energy and symmetry debts are paid in full - either
gravitationally by Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes, or electromagnetically by matterantimatter annihilation, or by the strong and weak nuclear forces through "proton decay".
Bound energy is simply stored in the "eternal present moment" of the time dimension, without spatial
attenuation, under guarantee of charge conservation, which promises to release the energy upon
contact with the appropriate anticharge (antimatter). Gravity pays the storage fee or entropy-interest
on this symmetry debt by creating the time dimension from the entropy-energy of free energy and
space, decelerating the expansion of the Cosmos in consequence. On the local scale, "work" and its
associated spatio-temporal entropy in the Universe today is typically achieved by releasing energy
from a "cold" stored temporal mode to a "hot" free spatial mode (as in the burning of chemical or
nuclear fuels).
Hence by shifting from a primary "hot" free energy conservation system of spatial entropy involving
immediate raw energy conservation through spatial expansion and cooling at "velocity c", to a
secondary, alternative "cold" bound energy conservation system of temporal entropy, involving
time-deferred charge conservation and a moving time dimension to which matter is only tangentially
connected, the Universe finds a method of storing and releasing its energy slowly, allowing itself time
to do the work of evolving life, consciousness, intelligence, and self-awareness.
Part II: Spatial, Historical, and Spatio-Temporal Mixed Entropy
Readers will naturally wish to know if the views of entropy put forward in these papers are
compatible with the standard version of the subject. It is my firm belief that they are; the expanding
(and cooling) spatial universe and the expanding (and aging) historical universe are both perfectly
"legitimate" expressions of entropy on the macroscopic scale. The negative entropic character of
gravitation is likewise well known. I am simply focusing on the underlying ("primordial") origins of
the entropy drive as found in the "intrinsic motions" of light, time, and gravity (the primordial entropy
drives of free energy, bound energy, and the gravitational conversion force acting between them),
while the "textbooks" typically emphasize "spatio-temporal" or "work" entropy, that is, the mixture of
the three forms which characterize the very complex world of our daily material experience.
Ordinary "textbook" entropy ("spatio-temporal", thermodynamic, or "work" entropy) is a mixture of
the spatial entropy drive of free energy (the intrinsic motion of light, as gauged by "velocity c"), and
the historical entropy drive of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time, "velocity T") - matter set in

7 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

motion by free energy: free energy captured by matter and the mixture expressed through the
momentum, kinetic energy, temperature, causal history, and the relative motion of atoms and
macroscopic masses. Hence different rules apply to the entropy relations of matter-in-motion than to
free light, namely the typical thermodynamic rules of ordinary material systems ("heat", equilibrium,
probability, random distributions, etc.). However, the underlying entropic drives remain the same - the
effectively "infinite" velocities of light and time, which insure the one-way increase in entropy,
manifest as the expansion, cooling, aging and decay of the spatial and historical Cosmos. Negentropic
physical processes typically involve gravity: gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion
of time. Entropy continues to increase despite the negative spatial entropy drive of gravitation; gravity
simply converts the primordial form of entropy drive from its spatial free energy expression (the
intrinsic motion of light) to its historical bound energy expression (the intrinsic motion of time) and
vice versa - the latter in stars, quasars, and via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. (See:
"Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
Every and any process that converts free to bound energy produces a corresponding increment in the
gravitational field associated with its material system, and a proportional deceleration of cosmic
spatial expansion due to the actual loss (by gravitational annihilation) of space and the concomitant
conversion of the spatial entropy drive to time. Conversely, every and any process that converts bound
to free energy produces a corresponding reduction in the gravitational field associated with its material
system, and a proportional acceleration of cosmic spatial expansion. Hence there are no processes and
systems, whether "pure" light or compounded light and matter, that operate independently of the
primordial entropic drives and domains of c, G, and T. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Time's Arrow
Irreversibility ("time's arrow") - is due to the "local" character of matter (as compared to the
"non-local" character of light). Matter needs a time dimension to establish causality and maintain
causal linkages (for reasons of energy conservation), as well as to provide its entropy drive and
balance its energy accounts. Matter's variable velocity in spacetime means its energy content
(momentum, kinetic energy) also varies as a function of velocity (distance/time), and relative to the
motions of other masses. Light does not need time for the same reasons, because light's intrinsic
motion provides its own entropy drive: light's motion is invariant and absolute rather than variable
and relative. Finally, light is "non-local", hence does not need causal linkages. Because light is
everywhere simultaneously, and has no time dimension, causality is irrelevant in light's own reference
frame. Light is non-local, atemporal, and acausal; matter is local, temporal, and causal. Causality and
the increase of historical entropy (aging) in the service of energy conservation are the sources of
temporal irreversibility in material (massive) systems of every scale, and both are rationales for
gravitation. The one-way character of time's intrinsic motion is also the cause of gravity's one-way
spatial collapse: gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time.
Information
Does the combined form of spatio-temporal entropy produce physical dimensions as does the intrinsic
motion of the "primordial" pure forms? Historical spacetime is the product of the intrinsic motions of
light, gravity, and time, not the direct product of spatio-temporal entropy. However, spatio-temporal
entropy produces (with the necessary help of gravity and evolution) the negentropic information

8 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

domain of biology, which can readily be argued is a dimension in its own right, especially at the level
of the abstract information systems of advanced human societies (the arts, sciences, technology,
culture), or indeed, of human thought itself (imagination). If we grant that information (including life)
is a type of dimension, then spatio-temporal entropy indeed produces a dimension, as do the other
three entropy forms (space, history, historical spacetime). Shannon's communication entropy (1948)
would appear to be a related mixed form of spatio-temporal entropy unique to the information
dimension. The information dimension is physically related to historic spacetime; both are required by
the causal nature of matter. Historic spacetime is the conservation domain of information and matter's
"causal matrix" (the source of consequential repercussions or "karma"). Nuclear, chemical, and
biological evolution and the forward march of "progress" and complexity may be the evidence of a
one-way entropic drive in the information domain, perhaps involving a 4x3 fractal algorithm. (See:
The Information Pathway".)
The 3rd Law of Thermodynamics
The third law of thermodynamics (due to Nernst, 1905) states that the entropy of every system is zero
at absolute temperature zero (Kelvin scale). This makes sense in that if a system contains no energy
then it also contains no entropy. However, Einstein tells us that even the coldest atom contains
rest-mass energy, and hence there should be some form of entropy to accommodate this "bare"
rest-mass energy. This of course is the primordial temporal and gravitational entropy we have
discussed above, so the third law is not applicable to primordial entropy drives and systems, but only
to mixed systems of spatio-temporal entropy (atoms in relative motion).
We can visualize a material system (atoms) which at absolute zero has only temporal entropy (gravity
and the passage of time), patiently awaiting an interaction with light (free energy). As soon as the
temperature is raised above absolute zero by the entrance into the material system of free energy, the
atoms/masses begin to move, free energy becomes bound as momentum and kinetic energy, and we
enter the complex realm of compounded spatio-temporal entropy (dS = dQ/T) with its parameters of
heat, work, equilibrium states, probability distributions, etc. However, even at absolute zero, matter
retains its full temporal entropy - time and gravity flow regardless of temperature, and likewise
radioactivity and proton decay, also expressions of temporal aging or entropic decay in stationary
matter, are unaffected by low temperatures. Causality and velocity c also have no dependence on
temperature: we see that the primordial entropic drives of time and space are quite unaffected by the
third law.
The entropy formula above (dS = dQ/T) says that the variation in entropy (dS) of a material system
(for example, a liter of water), varies with its "heat" or thermal energy content (dQ) divided by its
absolute temperature (T) (Kelvin scale). The formula thus provides a measure of the concentration
and intensity of thermal energy in a system, the system's "potency", its "capacity for work". Note
however that the formula addresses only the internal entropy of one part of a much larger system,
ignoring the source of heat, interactions with the environment, gravity, the temporal evolution of the
system, radioactivity, the rest mass energy contained in the atoms themselves (E = mcc), etc. To
present a really complete picture, the formula would have to be set within its entire cosmic context,
including the background temperature of spacetime, the age of the Universe, whether the Cosmos is
expanding or contracting, a gravitational environment, the radioactive context, etc.

9 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

The net contribution of the primordial drive of spatial or light entropy to spatio-temporal entropy is
irreversible heat loss, radiation, thermal energy and the motion of massive atoms, molecules, and
macroscopic objects (kinetic energy, momentum), excited energy states, the temperature-dependent
thermodynamic entropy representations of Carnot and Clausius. The net contribution of the primordial
drive of pure temporal or material entropy to spatio-temporal entropy is the irreversible loss of
opportunity and the fleeting "present moment", causality, probability, including the half-life of
radioactive forms and proton decay, and the time-dependent entropy representations of Boltzmann and
Shannon. Because gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time, gravity is a
spatial form of time, a precursor to and motivator for historical entropy. The negative entropy drive of
gravitation transforms space to time, the temporal entropy drive of history.
In biology, the temporal connection becomes negentropic through evolution (natural selection
operating on genetic variation). Gravitation is the connection (conversion force) between the
primordial drives of spatial and historical entropy - (intrinsic motions c, G, T) - becoming the
dominant expression of negative spatial entropy in the macroscopic phenomena of spacetime, the
combined dimensional conservation/entropy domain of free and bound electromagnetic energy, as
welded together by gravity. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model"; see also: "Darwin, Newton, and the
Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Universe".)
The Conservation of Entropy and Symmetry
Entropy is not conserved in the same sense as energy; total energy is a constant, but total entropy
always increases. For example, the spatial and/or historical universe constantly expands. Entropy is
conserved in the sense that it never decreases in an isolated system; primordial forms of entropy are
converted from spatial to metrically equivalent temporal expressions (and vice versa) by both gravity
and quantum mechanical mechanisms. Entropy is a quality or characteristic of energy, and is itself a
form of energy, as we see most directly in gravitation or its inverse, the expansion of the Cosmos.
What is conserved in entropy's primordial forms is the intrinsic motions, c or T; one is converted into
the other by gravitation (or by quantum mechanics, as during the absorption and emission of a photon
by the electron shell of an atom - see: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) In other words, the role of
entropy itself is continuous, whether manifest as the intrinsic motion of light (the entropy drive of free
energy, creating space) or the intrinsic motion of time (the entropy drive of bound energy, creating
history). Neither c nor T has any dependence upon the quantity of energy it is associated with, nor has
G, the universal gravitational constant, the gauge of the gravitational force converting c into T and
vice versa. The magnitude of G measures the small energy difference between the symmetric entropy
drive of free energy (S) (the intrinsic motion of light, as gauged by "velocity c") and the asymmetric
entropy drive of bound energy (T) (the intrinsic motion of matter's time dimension, "velocity T"):
S - T = -G.
Entropy is conserved not only because it is an embedded characteristic of energy, but also because of
its close association with the symmetry of energy, which is strictly conserved in accordance with
"Noether's Theorem": the electromagnetic constant "c" gauges the "non-local" distributional
symmetry of light (vanishing time and distance), the entropy drive of light (light's intrinsic motion),
and the inertial (dimensional) symmetry of the spatial metric.

10 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

"Noether's Theorem" requires that the symmetry of free energy (light) be conserved: the charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light. Light's metric symmetry is expressed through light's
"non-local" character and intrinsic motion, as gauged by c, and is actively protected by the inertial and
gravitational forces of spacetime (including "Lorentz Invariance" of Special and General Relativity the covariance of space and time). It is essentially this non-local symmetric energy state of light that
the gravitational "location" charge conserves. Light has no time dimension, nor spatial extension in
the direction of its propagation; light is a 2-dimensional transverse wave, and in consequence of its
lack of both a spatial and a temporal dimension, light is everywhere simultaneously within its spatial
domain. This "non-local" attribute is necessary to accommodate the entropic role of the
electromagnetic constant "c" and its function as the gauge of spacetime's metric symmetry, which
must operate regardless of the size or expansion rate of the Cosmos. Hence both roles require, for
their effective functioning, light's "infinite" velocity.
Gravitation is the symmetry and entropy-conserving force responding to the breaking of massless
light's non-local spatial symmetry when light is converted to immobile, massive matter, acquiring a
specifiable location in spacetime. Matter's spacetime position (including the magnitude and intensity
of the distributional symmetry violation represented by immobile matter's undistributed "local" energy
concentration) - is forcefully identified by gravitation, which moreover creates matter's time
dimension by the consumption and conversion of space to its metric equivalent, time. (The
gravitational charge is "location" and time is its active principle - combining in one charge the entropy
and distributional symmetry debts of immobile, "local" matter. Time and gravitation induce each other
endlessly. See: "A Description of Gravity".)
Entropy falls under the umbrella of Noether's conservation theorem because the electromagnetic
constant "c" gauges both the entropy drive and the metric symmetry of free energy, and when gravity
conserves one it conserves the other by default. This dual role of gravity has always been the most
mystifying of its attributes, but it originates in the dual role of c and the gravitational conservation of
light's "non-local" distributional symmetry via time and the "location" charge, as required by
Noether's theorem. The gravitational conversion of bound to free energy in stars, quasars, and by
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes fulfills the conservation role of gravitation with respect
to both light's entropy drive and "non-local" symmetric energy state. In such conversions we see the
intrinsic motion of time, acting through gravity, also driving toward symmetry conservation. Time,
whether in its implicit form as the cause of light's intrinsic motion ("frequency"), or in its explicit
form as matter's historical entropy drive, or as the active principle of gravitation's "location" charge, is
the great agent of entropy and physical "prime mover" of change in the Cosmos. (See: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravity" and "A Rationale for Gravitation".)
Black Holes
So long as we consider only the combined form of spatio-temporal entropy, and restrict our analysis to
relative descriptions of local, incomplete systems, we don't find a firm basis for entropy's
conservation: spatio-temporal entropy may equal zero (at "equilibrium" or "absolute zero"), or even
be reversed (by "work"). Stasis or reversal is impossible for the pure entropic forms in complete
system descriptions: light and time are always moving forward, creating space and/or history, or being
converted into one another. The black hole is an apparent exception to this rule, but only because
gravitation takes over the protective role of the "infinite" velocities of c and T. In the black hole,

11 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

gravitation accelerates spacetime to velocity c, stopping both clocks and light, sealing the borders of
the spacetime metric (as in the "event horizon" and central "singularity") against leaks or intrusions by
"wormholes". In the black hole, gravitation is the only remaining form of primordial entropy drive, so
change can only proceed via the gravitational force. As Hawking has shown, however, even black
holes actively convert gravitational entropy to spatial entropy, eventually evaporating the entire
asymmetric mass of the hole to light, via the mechanism of "quantum radiance", operating just at the
boundary between the gravitational and electromagnetic domains, in complete satisfaction of
Noether's Theorem of symmetry conservation. Entropy is conserved and always increases, in one
form or another, in complete system descriptions.
The connection between entropy and symmetry is not difficult to see: at any given temperature,
entropy is an expression of the symmetry (randomness) of energy distribution, which is completely
realized only by the "non-local" character of light. This is why both entropy and symmetry can be
driven/gauged with the same universal electromagnetic constant "c", and why both can be conserved
by the same gravitational conversion of mass to light. The conservation of the symmetry of entropy as
well as the symmetry of energy drives the evaporation of black holes via Hawking's "quantum
radiance", surely the ultimate expression of the connection between symmetry and entropy, realized
via the gravitational enforcement of Noether's theorem. In the end, even the symmetry of entropy is
conserved: temporal entropy, being one-way, has less symmetry than spatial entropy, which is
"all-ways".
Black holes, and the Bekenstein-Hawking theorem relating the surface area of the "event horizon" of a
black hole to the entropy of the hole, constitute the physical and theoretical demonstration of the
gravitational conversion of space and the drive of spatial entropy, to time and the drive of historical
entropy. The event horizon of a black hole is a time surface, where time stands still because it is being
replaced by the gravitational flow of space as fast as it moves into history (g = c). Seconds are
stretched out to infinity, so co-varying space must completely vanish. Clocks stop and meter sticks
shrink to nothing, the same metric condition established by "velocity c" in the electromagnetic metric
- but in the black hole, this inertial state is established by gravity as the temporal metric completely
overtakes the spatial metric, including all its conservation functions.
Just as we can envision the mass of a rock as an asymmetric expression of light's energy transformed
to matter and brought to rest, so we can envision the surface area of a black hole as an asymmetric
expression of light's entropy transformed to time and brought to rest. The surface area of a black hole
is a "rock" formed of time, light's transformed and conserved entropy. As for the symmetric spatial
form of light's expansive entropy drive or intrinsic motion, this is also visible (in large telescopes) as
the cosmological "redshift" of distant galaxies and the expanding universe.
The black hole is the limit of gravitational strength, the end-point of temporal entropy, where all the
spatial entropy drive of light has been converted to the historical entropy drive of time - the complete
triumph of the gravitational temporal metric over the electromagnetic spatial metric, and of the forces
of matter and darkness over the forces of space and light. But can the pendulum swing back? Even in
this ultimate physical dungeon, there glimmers a ray of hope, for Noether's Theorem reminds us that
symmetry must be conserved, even the symmetry of entropy, and that the all-way spatial entropy drive
of light has greater symmetry than the one-way historical entropy drive of matter. Therefore, if
Noether's Theorem is to be strictly observed, there must be a pathway or mechanism by which light

12 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

can escape from the black hole prison, and indeed we find Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes demonstrating just this point. The great significance of Hawking's discovery is precisely that it
proves the strict observance of Noether's Theorem, and tells us the ultimate conservation role and goal
of both time and gravitation - the complete conversion of bound to free electromagnetic energy in the
service of symmetry conservation.
The Causal Significance of the Connection Between Time and Gravitation
The physical connection between entropy and symmetry through the electromagnetic constant c (the
gauge of light's intrinsic motion and expansive, "non-local" free energy) results in the conservation
connection between temporal-historical entropy, symmetry, and gravitation. Gravity conserves both
light's entropy drive and light's non-local symmetric energy state via the "location" charge (whose
active principle is time), through the conversion of bound to free energy in stars, quasars, and via
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
We might think that gravitation is too universal and important a force to be connected to entropy, even
though this connection runs through the universal symmetry conservation principle announced in
Noether's Theorem. Perhaps this is because we are used to thinking of (spatio-temporal) entropy as a
matter of small importance in our daily lives, a matter of "waste heat" and disorder, whereas in
physical fact the primordial drives of entropy are forces of the utmost universality and consequence.
We must remember that entropy drives the spatial expansion of the Universe (the intrinsic motion of
light) and the temporal expansion of history (the intrinsic motion of time). Gravity is producing the
time dimension (entropy drive) of matter; the dimension of time and history is just as important to the
material Cosmos as space is to the Universe of light. Finally, gravity produces spacetime, the joint
dimensional entropy/conservation domain of free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy. There
is nothing trivial about entropy in any of its forms. Entropy creates the dimensions of spacetime and
allows us to use and transform energy.
There is furthermore the fundamental issue of temporal causality (law of cause and effect). The
historic domain created by time and gravity (historic spacetime) contains all the causal linkages that
lead up to, define, maintain, and uphold the "Universal Present Moment" of the material universe.
Without the durable reality of the historic past, the effect of this causal matrix, which culminates in
the present moment, would cease to manifest. My present life is connected by an unbroken causal
chain (actually, a very robust expanding matrix or interconnected web) to the moment of my birth; if
this matrix were broken, my present life and experience would cease to exist. Today exists because
yesterday remains real. And by extension, my present life depends absolutely on the unbroken causal
matrix of "yesterdays" that stretches back to the origin of the Universe in the Big Bang. All material
events in the Cosmos are necessarily connected by a causal web from that primal initiating moment
forward. This thoroughgoing connectivity is the essence of the meaning of the word "Universe". We
can actually see this connection through our great telescopes in the images in spacetime of galaxies as
they existed billions of years ago - their history affects us still, and in fact is still there (in part) for us
to see (see: A Spacetime Map of the Universe). Our past is part of some other observer's "present
moment", and vice versa. The homogeneity of the "cosmic microwave background" (to within a few
parts in a hundred thousand), is the physical evidence for the thoroughgoing connectivity of the
Universe from its very inception to the present day.

13 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

The significance of temporal entropy, time, and the historic domain of spacetime is that it establishes
and maintains the causal, historic connectivity of the material Universe, upholding the reality of the
Universal Present Moment. Light is connected by space; matter is connected by history; all are
connected by gravity. This is the other (non-mechanical) rationale for associating temporal/historical
entropy with a universal, unquenchable, and inescapable force such as gravitation. We are all
immortal in the domain of historic spacetime.
Why Are There Three Spatial Dimensions?
(added Aug., 2013)
Fundamentally, the dimensionality of spacetime is a matter of energy conservation: three dimensions
are sufficient to establish an entropic domain in which the basic thermodynamic requirements
necessary to conserve the energy of free forms of electromagnetic energy (light, EM radiation, etc.)
are present; likewise, four dimensions are necessary to meet the conservation requirements of bound
forms of electromagnetic energy (mass/matter).
Light is a 2-D transverse wave, with no time dimension and no space dimension in the direction of
motion (clocks stop and meter sticks shrink to nothing at velocity c - as per Einstein). Light requires
two dimensions to accommodate its alternating electric and magnetic fields, which induce each other
at right angles. The energy of light is encoded in its frequency (E = hv) with its implied (but
suppressed) time dimension. The intrinsic motion of light ("velocity c") "sweeps out" a third spatial
dimension, creating, expanding, and cooling a 3-D spatial volume. The energy component of light is
therefore 2-dimensional, while the entropy component corresponds to the 3rd spatial dimension. The
entropy "drive" of light (free electromagnetic radiation) is the "intrinsic motion" of light, as gauged by
the universal electromagnetic constant "c".
We see that three dimensions are sufficient for 2-D light to establish an entropy domain for its own
conservation needs, and therefore light has no need to explore additional dimensional possibilities.
Similarly, in the case of 3-D bound energy forms of electromagnetic energy (massive atomic "solids"),
one further dimension (time) must be added to establish the entropy domain for matter (history), in
which the "intrinsic motion" of time produces aging and decay (since atoms have no spatial form of
intrinsic motion they must resort to time - which also suggests that the 3rd spatial dimension is the
only possible higher-dimensional entropic option for light - if it is to remain in its free form). Gravity
combines these two electromagnetic entropy domains into our familiar spacetime, the composite
entropy domain of our universe of free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy. (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time" .)
In the "black hole", the electromagnetic metric of light and space (as gauged by the universal
electromagnetic constant "c") is completely overwhelmed and replaced by the gravitational metric of
matter and time (as gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G"). The energy of the black hole
is encoded in its mass (hv = mcc), while the entropy is encoded in the two-dimensional "event
horizon" (as per Bekenstein and Hawking - see: Scientific American Aug. 2003 pp. 58 - 65.) The
entropy drive of matter and the black hole is the "intrinsic motion" of matter's time dimension, which
creates the spatial flow of matter's gravitational field. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence
of the intrinsic motion of time. The expansion of the black hole's "event horizon" is required (when
energy is added to the hole) since the gravitational intensity and material density of the hole is already

14 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

at a maximum (g = c); therefore the only way to increase the gravitational flow (which is necessary to
increase the temporal entropy encoding for the added energy) is to increase the size of the gravitating
mass, in other words, increase the boundary or surface area of the event horizon, which is the only
part of the hole in active/actual contact with the outside spatial universe. If the black hole has a
3-dimensional "volume" at all, it is permanently hidden behind the event horizon, which is in fact a
temporal entropy surface (see: "A Description of Gravity"). Hence the extreme temporal/gravitational
/material metric suppresses space just as the extreme spatial/electromagnetic/light metric suppresses
time.
Information is encoded in our ordinary universe in all four dimensions. Information requires the
one-way 4th dimension (time) for its entropy drive and for its historical conservation domain, due to
the causal characteristic of information. Because the black hole either destroys, suppresses, or hides
both the third and 4th dimensions, (time stands still at the event horizon and meter sticks shrink to
nothing), the black hole contains almost no information, or as John Wheeler says: "A black hole has
no hair". Information may live forever in the historical domain, but not in the black hole. Hawking
should have stuck to his guns. (See: Leonard Susskind: "The Black Hole War"; Back Bay Books,
Little, Brown and Co., 2008.)
The energy and entropy of information are encoded in the black hole's mass and the surface area of its
event horizon. The causal component of information ceases to form new linkages upon entering the
black hole and inside the event horizon distinguishable atoms are converted to "anonymous" photons.
Causal linkages created by information outside the black hole, however, continue to propagate forever
in historic spacetime. Entangled elements swallowed by the black hole are moot, since they remain
hidden forever, suspended or "frozen" in time at the event horizon.
Information is one-way (asymmetric) due to causality, as well as due to the absence of antimatter
("anti-information");
Gravity is one-way and asymmetric;
Time is one-way and asymmetric;
Entropy is one-way and asymmetric;
Matter is asymmetric - due to its time dimension, gravitational field, lack of intrinsic motion, mass,
and lack of an antimatter complement.

The black hole is the extreme case of the gravitational metric, as gauged by the universal gravitational
constant "G". The black hole is the ultimate contrast to a universe of light with no matter at all, the
extreme case of the electromagnetic metric, as gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c".
In the light universe, all forms of energy move at velocity "c', time does not exist, nor does space (in
the direction of a photon's motion). In the black hole also, all forms of energy move at velocity c, and
space and time are absent. In this comparison, we see "velocity c" acting in both cases as the "gauge"
of a symmetric energy state - specifically, a state of non-locality either outside or inside the black
hole. In the light universe, photons and their energy content are distributed equitably everywhere,
simultaneously - since there is no time parameter and no distance parameter (clocks stop and meter
sticks shrink to nothing in the direction of motion at "velocity c"). This same "non-local" symmetric
state with regard to the distribution of energy is achieved by the black hole within the boundary of its

15 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

"event horizon" - again because all forms of energy move at velocity c, time has stopped and space
has vanished, due to the action of a gravitational field whose strength is locally equivalent to the
electromagnetic constant "c" (g = c). Clocks stop and meter sticks shrink to nothing at the "event
horizon" of a black hole.
This discussion suggests that the conservation role of gravity is to pay the "location" symmetry debt
of matter. The "location" symmetry debt/charge arises in consideration of the spatially undistributed
(hence asymmetric) local concentration of immobile bound energy (matter), VS the spatially
symmetric "non-local" distribution of light's energy (due to light's intrinsic motion "c"). Because
matter is originally formed from light (bound electromagnetic energy is originally formed from free
electromagnetic energy), matter carries a gravitational "location" charge, among other symmetry debts
in the form of charges and spin, due to matter's formation from all-symmetric light. (See: "Symmetry
Principles of the Unified Field Theory".) The gravitational "location" charge is unique in that it
represents an entropy debt as well as a symmetry debt. Because the intrinsic motion of light is both
the entropy drive of light and the cause of light's non-local distributional symmetry, the gravitational
"location" charge must conserve both functions if it conserves either one. (See: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravitation".) Gravity pays matter's "location" symmetry debt by creating black
holes, in which "Hawking Radiation" converts (eventually) the entire bound energy (mass) of the
black hole back to free energy (light).
Along the gravitational pathway leading to the creation of black holes, bound energy is also converted
to free energy via the nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, and by the even more efficient conversion of
gravitational energy and mass to light in other astrophysical processes such as supernovas and
quasars. But once the black hole condition is reached, conversions of bound to free energy (in any
appreciable quantity) essentially stop (so far as we know), if only because gravity prevents the escape
of any light produced by such processes, should any occur. In the event horizon, gravity creates a
temporal metric for matter which is the symmetric equivalent of the spatial metric of light - a metric
in which all forms of energy move with intrinsic motion c. What happens in the interior of the black
hole is moot, since we can never know. I suspect, however, that proton decay occurs at the singularity,
and hence the black hole is filled only with light - another way in which the gravitational "location"
symmetry debt is paid, also solving the problem of the infinite compressibility of matter. But nothing
else matters once the event horizon is formed (at g = c); a symmetric temporal metric has been
constructed in which all energy forms travel at c, and it would appear that no further conservation
concerns need be addressed. But is this really the final word?
What then of "Hawking Radiation"? We note, of course, that Hawking radiation is pitifully small for
any large hole, and tellingly, it gets smaller as the hole grows larger, not an encouraging sign for the
cause of symmetry conservation at least via this route, since the natural tendency of the black hole is
to forever increase in size, which means this symmetry conservation pathway is asymptotically
suppressed in the natural course of events. However, if the interior of the black hole is indeed filled
only with light, then some photons may escape the event horizon by quantum mechanical "tunneling",
and this process might increase with the size of the hole, counteracting the decrease in Hawking
radiation. Whatever the case, the amount of time available for this process (in a universe that does not
collapse) is essentially unlimited (assuming that other, unknown cosmological processes do not
intervene), so in the end the hole will completely evaporate its mass to light: bound, asymmetric

16 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

electromagnetic energy returns to free, symmetric electromagnetic energy. One rationale for this
scenario is that the temporal entropic metric of the black hole event horizon is less symmetric (being
one-way) than the "all-way" spatial entropic metric of light, driving the eventual and final conversion
of mass to light in complete satisfaction of Noether's Theorem. Nevertheless, the time required for this
conversion to go to completion is so immense that it suggests Natural Law is in fact rather
comfortable with this arrangement - the temporal metric of the black hole is stable, leaving little to be
desired either inside or outside the event horizon in terms of conservation issues. This is another
reason for suspecting that the interior of the black hole is filled with nothing but light, rather like a
superconducting medium in which photons have become heavy.
All this notwithstanding, a major conservation issue remains unresolved, as attested by the continuing
presence in the surrounding universe of the black hole's powerful gravitational field, even after the
event horizon has formed. So long as this field is present, the symmetry debt it encodes and represents
remains unpaid. One reason that gravity keeps working even after the formation of the event horizon
is that matter's entropy debt must keep being paid until matter's symmetry debt is completely paid,
and as far as the outside universe is concerned, the black hole still represents a grossly asymmetric
concentration of undistributed, immobile mass-energy, a severe affront to symmetry conservation in
terms of the equitable dispersion of energy throughout space - as was originally the case for the light
from which the black hole's matter was produced. The gravitational entropy debt of matter can be
thought of as an "interest" payment on matter's symmetry debt - just as on planet Earth, the interest
has to be paid until the symmetry debt is retired. But the Earth's gravitational field is too weak to
convert mass to light, so it never "pays down" the principle on its symmetry debt - that is, despite the
continuous working of Earth's gravitational field, it never gets weaker because it never converts any of
Earth's mass to light. In our Sun, however, we see gravity actually "paying down" the symmetry debt
of the Sun's mass by converting some of the Sun's bound energy to light, and hence reducing the Sun's
total mass and its associated gravitational field. Gravity will vanish completely when its symmetry
debt is well and truly paid, like any other charge (see: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?").
So the black hole's gravitational field keeps working until the mass energy of the hole - whose entropy
is represented by the surface area of the event horizon - completely evaporates away.
Since it is the surface area of the event horizon which is in contact with the outside universe, it is the
surface area which generates the gravitational field. Hence the connection between time, gravity, and
entropy is especially evident in this example. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time (see: "The Conversion of Space to Time"). (See Also: The Destruction of
Information.)

Further Readings:
Peter Atkins. 2007. Four Laws That Drive the Universe. Oxford University Press.
Bekenstein, J. D. Information in the Holographic Universe. Scientific American, August 2003,
pages 58-65.
Enrico Fermi. 1936. Thermodynamics. Dover Publications, Inc.
Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose. 1996. The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton
University Press.

17 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

Spatial vs Temporal Entropy

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/stored.html

Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers. 1984. Order out of Chaos. Bantam Books.
P. A. Schilpp, ed. 1959. Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist. Harper Torchbooks.
Hideki Yukawa. 1973. Creativity and Intuition. Kodansha International Ltd.
Shannon, C. E. and W. Weaver. 1949. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Univ. of
Illinois Press.
Links:
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

18 of 18

4/29/16 10:06 AM

