A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

A Description of Gravitation
(revised June, 2014)
John A. Gowan
home page
A Gravitational Field is the Spatial Consequence of the Intrinsic Motion of Time
(I recommend the reader consult the "preface" or "guide" to this paper, which may be found at "About
the Papers: An Introduction" (section II); also: " Section 7: An Introduction to Entropy").
Table of Contents
PART I
Abstract
The Origin of Gravitation
Non-Local Light
Noether's Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Two Entropy Drives?
The Conversion of Space to Time
PART II
The Universal Gravitational Constant G
Einstein's Equivalence Principle
The Attractive Principle of Gravitation
The Mechanism of Gravitation
PART III
The Conservation Roles of Gravitation
Black Holes
Charge Invariance
Buy Now, Pay Later
Summary
Philosophical Connections
Links and References
PART I
Note to Readers Concerning "Entropy":
See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy"

1 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

ABSTRACT
The rationale for gravity begins with the creation of the Cosmos - the negative energy of gravity is
necessary to balance the positive energy of the "Big Bang", so that the "Creation Event" requires zero
net energy. In a similar fashion, antimatter is also required to balance the charges of matter so that
creation occurs from a state of zero net charge. Beginning in such a state of complete neutrality
(perhaps as a giant quantum fluctuation of the vacuum, an "inflationary bubble", or by Divine Fiat),
the Universe must subsequently evolve into a state of complete conservation. Details of the "Creation
Event" are necessarily speculative.
The gravitational rationale extends beyond the Creation Event to the creation of matter's time
dimension and the conservation of the entropy drive and symmetric energy state of free
electromagnetic energy (light). These secondary conservation roles (which manifest as the
gravitational conversion of space to time, the gravitational conversion of bound to free energy via the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars and supernovas, the conversion of in-falling matter's potential
gravitational energy to light in quasars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes), are natural
consequences of the mode of action of gravity's primary role, which is the creation of negative energy
and a negative entropy drive via the contraction, heating, and destruction of space (creating time), in
contradistinction to the creation, expansion, and cooling of space by the positive energy and entropy
drive of light.
Both roles hinge upon the gravitational conservation of light's "non-local" distributional symmetry,
yet they work in essentially opposite directions. The non-local symmetric energy state of light is a
consequence of light's intrinsic motion, "velocity c", which gauges both the distributional symmetry
and the symmetric, "all-way" spatial entropy drive of free energy. In these conservation roles gravity,
like inertia and charge, enforces the conservation of free energy's symmetric energy state, as required
by "Noether's Theorem". (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
The Origin of Gravitation
Gravity is a conservation force which arises in response (as required by Noether's Theorem - see
below) to losses or deficits in two intertwined "gauge" (regulatory) functions of light's dimensional
and symmetric energy state: 1) the symmetric "all-way" entropy drive of space and free energy,
producing the expansion and cooling of space; 2) the "non-local" distributional and metric symmetry
of light, vanishing time, mass, gravity, and charge. Both phenomena are the product of light's
"intrinsic motion", as gauged by "velocity c". The universal gravitational constant G is an entropy
conversion gauge, determining how much space must be annihilated and converted to time (per given
mass) to provide matter with its requisite historical entropy drive, as locally gauged by "velocity T".
The intrinsic motion of time is the entropy drive of bound energy and creates the historic conservation
domain of information and matter's "causal matrix". (Time is also ultimately gauged by c, since
"velocity T" is defined as the duration (measured by a clock) required for light to travel a given
distance (measured by a meter stick). G is therefore related to c through their entropic roles and their
common factor, time.) Time is a local entropy drive required by bound energy for numerous
conservation reasons consequent upon matter's lack of absolute motion (velocity "c"), including the
conservation of energy and causality. (See: "Global-Local Gauge Symmetry in the 'Tetrahedron
Model'".)

2 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

Secondary Gravitational Conservation Roles:
1) Entropy conservation role: creating matter's time dimension via the annihilation of
space, extracting a metrically equivalent temporal residue. The intrinsic motion of time is
the entropy drive of bound energy. The intrinsic motion of time creates history, the
conservation domain of matter's causal information field, web, or "matrix" (historic
spacetime).
The gravitational conversion of space to time:
a) conserves/converts the spatial entropy drive of free energy (the intrinsic
motion of light), to the metrically equivalent historical entropy drive of
bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time);
b) creates the temporal, causal linkages of matter;
c) creates, through time's intrinsic motion, historic spacetime, the joint
dimensional conservation domain of free and bound electromagnetic energy.
History is the necessary conservation domain of matter's causal information
field.
d) converts the expansion of space to the expansion of history (historic
spacetime).
2) Symmetry conservation role: conserving the "non-local" metric and distributional
symmetry of free energy (light) via the gravitational conversion of bound to free energy
in stars, supernovas, quasars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes - in
effect, reversing the role and reaction in 1). Gravity's symmetry conservation role
ultimately wins the contest with gravity's entropy conservation role via Hawking's
"quantum radiance", and the complete gravitational conversion of mass to light.
The sign of G reflects the small energetic difference between the symmetric spatial entropy drive (S)
of free energy (the intrinsic motion of light as gauged by "velocity c"), and the asymmetric historical
entropy drive (T) of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time as locally gauged by "velocity T"):
S - T = -G.
Equivalently, -G reflects the energetic difference between implicit and explicit time. (See: "Gravity
Diagram No. 2" and "The Conversion of Space to Time").
It takes energy to create one-way temporal entropy from "all-way" spatial entropy, because an
asymmetric, one-way temporal order must be imposed upon the symmetric, random spatial expansion.
This entropy-energy cost of time and history is the origin of the "negative energy" characteristic of
gravity and the negative sign of "-G".
The intrinsic motion of light produces space and the expansion and cooling of space; hence the
intrinsic motion of light is the entropy drive of free energy. Space is the conservation domain of light
(free electromagnetic energy) created by light's entropy drive. Light requires one dimension each for
its electric and magnetic fields, and a third for its entropy drive (forward motion, spatial expansion).
Hence space is the entropic conservation domain of light. It is the function of entropy (in its
primordial form and role as intrinsic dimensional motion - gauged by "c", "T", "G") - to create

3 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

dimensional conservation domains (space and history) for free and bound forms of electromagnetic
energy. In these domains, entropy's energy source (light or matter) can exist and be transformed, used,
but nevertheless conserved. Change is allowed, but within a larger conserved framework which
includes entropy and dimensionality (3-D and 4-D): this is the relationship between the 1st and 2nd
laws of thermodynamics. Because the entropy drive and "non-local" symmetric energy state of light
are both gauged by "c" (both are consequences of light's intrinsic motion), Noether's theorem will
automatically require the conservation of light's entropy drive in any transformation in which light's
non-local symmetry must be conserved - as in the conversion of free to bound energy, and/or the
creation of matter. Conserving either the entropy drive or the non-local distributional symmetry of
light conserves both linked functions by default. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of
Gravitation".)
One of gravity's several roles, as mentioned above, is to conserve the spatial entropy drive of light
(the intrinsic motion of light) by transforming it into the historical entropy drive of matter (the
intrinsic motion of time). (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".) Time is created by gravity via the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue, resulting in the
deceleration of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos. Because the spatial expansion is driven by the
intrinsic motion of light, it is the spatial entropy drive (S), which ultimately funds the historical
entropy drive (T):
-Gm(S) = (T)m
This conservation circuit between the entropy drives of the long-range force pair (gravitation and the
electromagnetic force) may be expressed by a (quasi-mathematical) symbolic "concept equation":
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0.
The conversion of mass to light by our Sun represents the closure of this same conservation circuit:
(see: "Currents of Entropy and Symmetry"). The solar radiance announces that gravity, at last, has
achieved its symmetry conservation goal.
Because I assume the general validity of Einstein's gravitational equations (excepting his
"cosmological constant" and the case of light in free space), it follows that I assume
Einstein's formulation of the gravitational "warpage" of spacetime must be a
mathematical description of the conversion of space to time (his "covariance" of space
and time). For example, when Einstein tells us that meter sticks shrink and clocks run
slow in a gravitational field, I assume that the missing space reappears as the extra time,
such that the metric total remains constant - as is indeed the case in Einstein's formulation
of the spacetime "Interval". Hence the actual mathematics behind my grossly simplified
"concept equation" has already been done. (See also the paper "The "Higgs" Boson and
the Spacetime Metric".)
Light Is Non-Local, A-temporal, and A-causal
"Velocity c" is the gauge of both the spatial entropy drive and the "non-local" distributional and metric
symmetry of light (free electromagnetic energy). "Non-locality" is due to the fact, discovered by
Einstein, that light has no time dimension and no spatial dimension in the direction of its motion. In

4 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

Einstein's mathematical formulation of this symmetry, the "Interval" of light = zero. (The "Interval" is
an invariant measure of distance (between two "events") in 4-D spacetime, necessary to conserve
causality. Two people shaking hands is an example of one "event" taking place at a specific place and
time.)
Due to relative motion and the finite speed of light, some observers of a given pair of events will see
them separated by more space, while others will see them separated by more time, and moving
observers will generally not be able to agree on precisely when the events occurred. However,
regardless of the observer's motions (including accelerated motions), if their 4-D coordinate data are
entered into Einstein's mathematical formula, they will all find the same "Interval". It is the crucial
function of Einstein's "Interval" to rescue causality from the shifting perspectives of Einstein's
relativistic spacetime - which is why the concept and invariance of the "Interval" is so important. [3].
(See: "The Paradox of the Traveling Twins".)
Light is a 2-dimensional transverse wave whose intrinsic motion "sweeps out" a third spatial
dimension. Lacking both a time dimension and one spatial dimension (in its direction of propagation),
light's position in 3-dimensional space or 4-dimensional spacetime cannot be specified. Since both
time and distance are meaningless to light, and yet light has intrinsic motion, light has in effect an
infinite amount of time to go nowhere. Hence in its own reference frame (moving freely in spacetime
(vacuum) at velocity c), light must be considered to be everywhere simultaneously. From this results
the "non-local" character of light, light's zero "Interval", and the distributional and metric symmetry of
light's energy - everywhere simultaneously.
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light, and light's "non-local" metric and distributional
symmetry is conserved through the "location" charge of gravitation, of which time is the active
principle. The time charge and the gravitational field it induces identify energetically the specifiable
(and hence asymmetric) coordinate position of immobile, undistributed mass-energy in 4-D
spacetime, including the quantity and density of matter's distributional symmetry violation. Einstein's
"Interval" of mass is always greater than zero, due to the presence of time and a third spatial
dimension. The time charge breaks the metric symmetry condition of light's "zero Interval", while
time's one-way intrinsic motion establishes the gravitational symmetry/entropy debt of bound energy.
Gravity creates time via the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent
temporal residue; in turn, the intrinsic motion of time (into history) pulls space along behind, creating
the spatial flow of gravity, until the spatial dimensions annihilate each other at the center of mass
("center of gravity"). Time and gravity induce each other endlessly, analogously to the components of
an electromagnetic field. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of
time. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Noether's Theorem
"Noether's Theorem" (Emmy Noether, 1918) states that in a continuous and multicomponent field
(such as the electromagnetic field, or the metric field of spacetime), where one finds a symmetry, one
will find an associated conservation law, and vice versa. Noether's Theorem is saying that in the
conversion of light to matter, not only must the raw energy of light be conserved (as in the mass and
momentum of particles), but the symmetry of light must also be conserved - not only the quantity but
the quality of energy must be conserved. The theorem does not say exactly how this must be done, but

5 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

in nature the matter-antimatter symmetry of light's particle form is conserved through the charges (and
spin) of matter - charge conservation = symmetry conservation. The non-local distributional and
metric symmetry of light's spatial or wave form is conserved through inertial and gravitational forces.
(Quantum mechanical "spin" seems to be an (wholly conserved) intermediate or mixed state of charge
and inertial force. In neutrinos, spin-handedness (left vs right) functions like an ordinary charge to
distinguish neutrinos (left) from anti-neutrinos (right).) The dual character of light's particle vs wave
form seems ultimately derived from light's dual energetic parameters: frequency and wavelength.
(Frequency multiplied by wavelength = c.)
I think of Noether's theorem as the "Truth and Beauty" theorem, in reference to Keat's great poetic
intuition:
"... Beauty is truth, truth beauty, - that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know"
("Ode on a Grecian Urn": John Keats, 1819)
in which Beauty corresponds to Symmetry and Truth corresponds to Conservation.
The two common examples of Noether's Theorem enforced in Nature - charge (and spin) conservation
among the particles, and inertial and gravitational forces in the spacetime metric - are the more
enlightening because the former is an example of symmetry conservation and debt repayment deferred
indefinitely through time, while inertia is an example of raw energy conservation in which the debt
must be paid immediately. Furthermore, in the case of inertial forces, we see the implication that
gravitation will also fall under the conservation mantle of Noether's Theorem, via Einstein's
"Equivalence Principle". This indication is borne out and verified by the discovery that gravitation is
indeed a symmetry debt of light, responding to and conserving the symmetry of light's "non-local"
spatial distribution, a symmetry broken by the immobile concentrations of mass energy represented by
matter (E = mcc). Because gravity bears both an entropy and a symmetry debt of light, its
conservation role is carried out in two stages: 1) The immediate conservation of light's entropy by the
creation of time (at any field strength, great or small); 2) The eventual conservation of light's
symmetry by the conversion of bound to free energy (at high field strengths, as in our Sun and the
stars). (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
Noether's theorem tells us why all the forces of nature are busy converting matter to light: matter was
created from light in the "Big Bang", but since light has greater symmetry than matter, it is to
conserve light's (lost) symmetry that all the charges and forces of matter work to accomplish the
return of bound energy to its original symmetric state. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts
of light. These charges produce forces which act to return the system of matter to light (free energy).
Our Sun is the archetypical example of gravitational symmetry conservation in nature.
Two Entropy Drives?
How can matter have 2 entropy drives - one positive (time) and one negative (gravity)? This is
possible because matter's negative entropy is expressed spatially (the intrinsic motion of gravitation),
while its positive entropy is expressed historically (the intrinsic motion of time). These two entropy
drives exist simultaneously in matter due to the gravitational conversion of space and the drive of
spatial entropy (the intrinsic motion of light) into time and the drive of historical entropy (the intrinsic
6 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

motion of time). This possibility also exists because space and time are at right angles to each other.
(Negative spatial entropy is at right angles to positive temporal entropy.)
Primordial entropy-energy, the energy of intrinsic dimensional motion, creates the dimensional
conservation domains of free and bound electromagnetic energy (space, history). The intrinsic motion
of light, as globally gauged by "velocity c", creates space; the intrinsic motion of time, as locally
gauged by "velocity T", creates the historic conservation domain of information and matter's "causal
matrix"; the intrinsic motion of gravity, as globally gauged by "velocity G", creates historic spacetime,
the joint dimensional conservation domain of free and bound electromagnetic energy. (See: "Spatial
vs Temporal Entropy".) (See also: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
Gravity's negative spatial entropy drive is associated with a symmetry debt - light's lost "non-local"
metric and distributional symmetry - as reflected by the "location" charge of gravitation (Gm), which
in the aggregate records the spacetime position, quantity, and density of immobile matter's energy
concentrations. Matter's positive historical entropy drive is associated with an entropy debt (light's lost
intrinsic motion c, the entropy drive of free energy), which gravity's "location" charge replaces with
time, the entropy drive of matter. Time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge.
In our Sun (for example), both reactions go on simultaneously: gravity creates the Sun's time
dimension by annihilating space, and yet creates new space by converting mass to light, a conversion
which actually reverses the metric effect of the first reaction, and reduces the Sun's gravitational field
as it reduces the Sun's mass. These reactions do interfere with each other to some extent, resulting in a
standoff between the gravitational force of compression and the radiative force of expansion - a
seesaw battle between the symmetry and entropy conservation roles of gravitation whose final
resolution (in favor of symmetry) is expressed through Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes.
We need the concept of matter's entropy debt to explain gravity's insatiable, dimensional, universal,
one-way character (at all field strengths), and the concept of matter's symmetry debt to explain
gravity's "location" charge, the fact that gravity identifies the spacetime position, magnitude, and
density of massive objects, and (at high field strengths) acts to convert mass to light (as in the stars).
We also need the concept of gravity's symmetry debt to help unify gravity with the other forces of
physics under the conservation umbrella of Noether's Theorem: the charges of matter are the
symmetry debts of light. Finally, we note that gravity (partially) repays the "location" symmetry debt
of light by converting bound to free energy in stars, supernovas, and quasars, and completely restores
light's symmetry through Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. These conversions, of course,
simultaneously repay light's entropy debt, restoring the spatial entropy drive (intrinsic motion) of
light.
The Conversion of Space to Time
Let us consider in general terms the gravitational transformation of space to time (see Fig. 1 "The
Gravity Diagram"). The gravitational annihilation of space is our common experience of gravitational
force - space accelerating through us on its way to Earth's center. This we designate as the negative
spatial entropy drive of gravity, because space is collapsing and warming, rather than expanding and
cooling, as when driven by light. -Gm is the neg-entropic energy and -G is the universal gauge of the
strength of the gravitational force. "G" determines (per given mass) how much space and spatial

7 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

entropy drive is required to produce matter's time dimension and historic entropy drive. Within this
collapsing space resides a metrically equivalent, but implicit, component of time. This temporal
entropy component is not lost when gravity annihilates space, but is revealed as matter's explicit time
dimension. Space is consumed by gravity, leaving behind a metrically equivalent temporal residue,
producing matter's temporal entropy drive and the historic conservation domain of information and
matter's "causal matrix" (historic spacetime), the joint dimensional conservation domain of free and
bound energy. Gravity simply converts the implicit time of space to the explicit time of history. The
cost of this transformation (per given mass) in terms of entropy energy is -Gm.
The continuing reality of "yesterday" and matter's historic "causal matrix" is absolutely necessary to
uphold the reality of today and the "Universal Present Moment" of bound energy and human
experience. This is (one of several) rationales for gravitation and the long-range character of its force.
(See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".) We are all immortal in history. (See: "A Rationale for
Gravity".)
-Gm is the negative entropy-energy required to produce m's time dimension from space. -Gm tells us
how much gravitational entropy-energy is required to produce m's time dimension - in the metrically
equivalent terms of the space which must be annihilated to create time. Hence the gravitational field
energy of planet Earth is the entropy-energy required to produce Earth's time dimension - entropyenergy which is gravitationally subtracted from the spatial expansion of the Cosmos (by the actual
conversion of space into time).
The dimensional structure of the Cosmos is established by the entropic "intrinsic" motions of light,
time, and gravity. Hence it is the 2nd law of thermodynamics (entropy) which provides the spacetime
foundation for the 1st (conservation of energy).
The intrinsic motion of free energy is the expansive principle of the spatial Universe, but it is time
itself, implicitly present as the "frequency" component of the electromagnetic wave, which causes the
spatial or "wavelength" component of the wave to move: wavelength "flees" the asymmetric temporal
potential embedded in its own nature. This flight by "wavelength" from "frequency" at velocity c
suppresses the explicit appearance of time, hence maintaining metric symmetry. Thus we come back
to a combination of entropy and metric symmetry conservation, both in the service of energy
conservation, as the ultimate principles causing the intrinsic motion of light. Time, whether implicit in
light or explicit in matter, is the entropic driver of the Cosmos. (See: "The Conversion of Space to
Time".)
PART II
The Universal Gravitational Constant G
gravity is a metric form of (negative) entropy, creating time by annihilating space
(See also: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation")
The metric equivalency between space, time, and light is "gauged" (magnitude/relationship is
established) by the universal electromagnetic constant "c". The entropic equivalency between space,
time, and mass is gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G". (Alternatively stated: the
energetic difference between the primordial entropy drives of space and history - the intrinsic motion
of light vs the intrinsic motion of time - is gauged by Newton's constant G.) Time, the historical
8 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

entropy drive of matter, is provided by the gravitational annihilation of space, extracting a metrically
equivalent temporal residue from the collapsed space. G is related to c through time and entropy. -G
reflects the small energy difference between the symmetric spatial entropy drive (S) of free energy
(the intrinsic motion of light), and the asymmetric historical entropy drive (T) of bound energy (the
intrinsic motion of time):
S - T = -G.
Equivalently, -G reflects the small energy difference between implicit (S) and explicit (T) time.
Gravity is a metric form of (negative) entropy. (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
"Big G" is the universal gravitational constant, familiar to us through Newton's famous formula for
the gravitational force acting between two bodies: F = GMm/rr, where Mm is the mass of the
respective bodies, and r is the distance between their centers. G is a never-varying constant of force. I
think of it as the gauge or determinant of the entropic relationship between mass, time, and space gauging the energetic magnitude, in terms of an equivalent amount of spatial entropy-energy, of m's
time dimension. It takes entropy-energy to create the time dimension of m, and G is the gauge
constant that determines how much space and spatial entropy will be required (must be
annihilated/transformed) to produce m's time dimension - per given mass (conceptually: Gm ---> Tm).
Because gravity creates matter's historical entropy drive by the annihilation and transformation of
space, a "falling force" is created around a massive body by the accelerated motion of space (as time
pulls space into history) at the "center of mass"; this force diminishes with the square of the object's
distance for simple reasons of spherical geometry and total energy conservation. For example, if the
total gravitational energy is to remain the same at any distance from the mass center, then its local
intensity per standard unit of surface area (square meter) on any concentric spherical surface must
diminish as the square of distance from that center - simply because the surface area over which the
total force must be distributed increases as the square of that distance. The same force law holds for
electric charge (Coulomb's law) and the dimming of stellar luminosities, for the same simple reasons.
Newton's difficulty proving this inverse square law was due to general ignorance (or lack of
acceptance) of the energy conservation principle in his time. Einstein's modification of Newton's law
was due to his realization that the appropriate geometry was 4-dimensional (including time) rather
than 3-dimensional. Einstein represented the gravitational force with Riemann's tensor geometry as a
metric "warping" or "curving" force ("four 3rd-order equations" - the changing rate of acceleration in
x, y, z, t).
"Little g" ("surface gravity" or the "local" force of gravity) can take any value up to g = c. If the Earth
were to shrink to the size at which it becomes a black hole (about the size of a ping-pong ball!), it is
"little g", Earth's surface gravity, the local intensity of Earth's field, which changes in the process. "Big
G" would be unaffected; the Moon's orbit, for example, would not change, since none of the three
parameters of Newton's equation, G, m, or r, are changed by shrinking Earth (at least not from the
Moon's perspective). The density of m changes, and that affects little g because r shrinks, but only
from the perspective of Earth's (unfortunate) surface dwellers.
Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
"Little g" is the local intensity of the gravitational field; for example, it measures the force or "weight"
9 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

we feel standing on Earth's surface. Little g is much less on the surface of the moon, but "big G" is the
same everywhere. "Little g" is also equivalent to the "g" forces of acceleration experienced in sudden
starts, stops, and sharp turns (Einstein's "Principle of Equivalence" of gravitational and accelerated
reference frames). The equivalence holds because as we stand on the surface of the Earth, space
accelerates through us toward Earth's center, while in the reciprocal situation (through the appropriate
application of energy, as in a rocket ship), we accelerate through space. "g" forces vanish in "free fall"
(or orbit) because we become co-movers with the field. Similarly, acceleration forces vanish when we
"turn off the engines" of a rocket ship and coast freely in space with the metric's inertial field. An
earlier version of the equivalence principle, attributed to Newton, noted only the unexplained equality
between inertial mass and gravitational weight, which was invoked to explain the curious fact earlier
discovered by Galileo that all things fall with the same acceleration (because their "inertial" resistance
to acceleration is exactly balanced by the attractive force of their gravitational mass/"weight"). It is
readily seen that Einstein's equivalence principle includes and explains its predecessor. (For more on
this topic see: "Extending Einstein's Equivalence Principle".)
The Attractive Principle of Gravitation
In Newton's gravitational equation (F = GMm/rr) each mass is presumed to attract the other (along a
straight line connecting their centers) with a force proportional to its mass (Gm). What the attractive
principle was Newton refused to speculate. Einstein thought the attractive principle was a distortion of
the spacetime metric, proportional to the total energy of a body, including any associated fields.
However, why such a distortion should (must) exist was not explained. In the theory presented here, I
assume Einstein's geometric formulation of the spacetime "warpage" is correct, but with the
understanding that it represents not a static field, but the actual accelerated motion of spacetime. This
assumption is allowed within the framework of Einstein's equations due to his own "Principle of
Equivalence" of the forces of gravity and acceleration, and it reproduces all the usual gravitational
phenomena. (However, there is a small physical difference (with major conceptual implications)
between my theory and Einstein's regarding the gravitational field produced (or not) by light freely
moving in vacuum. See: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field"?)
The advantage of a moving (rather than a static) field interpretation of gravity is that the dynamic
view allows us to discover (at least) two conservation reasons for the existence of the gravitational
force: 1) the creation of the historical entropy drive of matter (the intrinsic motion of time), via the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue, including the
creation of the joint dimensional conservation domain of free and bound electromagnetic energy
(historic spacetime); 2) the conservation of light's dimensionally and distributionally symmetric
"non-local" energy state, via the gravitational conversion of bound to free energy (as in stars).
Furthermore, the dynamic view allows us to postulate a simple attractive principle, namely the infall
of spacetime to a center of mass, the infall due to the unbreakable connection between space and time.
It is the intrinsic motion of time at the center of mass, at "right angles" to all three spatial dimensions,
which pulls space after it as time moves into history, creating the accelerated, convergent infall of
space that we recognize as a gravitational field. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time.
Space and time are a dimensional entropic pair which cannot be completely separated, much like the
electric and magnetic field of light. Indeed, these dualities are related phenomenal expressions of free

10 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

and bound forms of electromagnetic energy.
In the dynamic view, the attractive principle is actually the intrinsic motion of time itself, which pulls
space after it as time moves into history, because energy conservation will not allow these
dimensional forms to be separated; they are the "faces" of a single electromagnetic entropy "coin".
The "entropic charge" of time (by "entropic charge" I mean a symmetry debt with intrinsic
dimensional motion), which is implicit in free energy or light (for example, implicit in the "frequency"
component of the wave), becomes explicit when free energy collapses to a bound (stationary) form
(such as a massive particle). In such a collapse, light loses its symmetric and intrinsic state of motion,
as gauged by "velocity c". The entropic time charge "picks up" the lost intrinsic motion or spatial
entropic drive of light, and conserves it as the intrinsic motion of matter's historic entropy drive, time.
(See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".) (Note: The energy of the (collapsed/transformed) light is conserved
as the mass/momentum of the particle; the symmetry of light is conserved as charge; the entropy of
light is conserved as time/gravity) - all transformed/alternative conservation parameters consequent
upon the transformation of free electromagnetic energy to bound electromagnetic energy.)
The intrinsic motion of time is directed one-way at "right angles" to all three spatial dimensions, and
its motion into history drags space after it, as the connection between space and time cannot be
broken. 3-D space is forced to collapse to a point at the center of mass, squeezing into the
zero-dimensional (point-like) beginning of the 1-D historical time line. The symmetric spatial
dimensions self-annihilate at the point-like center, leaving a metrically equivalent but asymmetric
("one-way") temporal residue. The explicit-implicit states of the entropic gauges of space and time are
reversed by the spatial annihilation (see the "Gravity Diagrams"). This renews the always-moving
time charge at the center of mass, which again moves down the time line into history (the one-way
dimensional motion of a point charge creates a line), pulling space after it, and so on forever. Time
continuously renews itself via the extraction of new temporal residues from the space annihilated by
time's own intrinsic motion - a self-feeding cycle producing an enduring gravitational field, matter's
temporal entropy drive, and an historical conservation domain for bound energy and matter's causal
information field.
The spherical symmetry of the gravitational field is due to the fact that all the spatial dimensions are
equivalently connected to the time dimension; this allows the spherically opposing spatial dimensions
(+x, -x, etc.) to match up exactly at the center of mass where they self-annihilate "cleanly", leaving a
metrically equivalent temporal residue. The self-annihilation of space reveals its implicit temporal
component, which cannot self-annihilate because time being "one-way" asymmetric, there is + t but
no -t. Gravity's accelerated motion is due to the constant application of a force, the constant intrinsic
motion of time. Time's one-way motion is necessary for the protection of causality and the continuous
updating of matter's raw energy accounts, especially those due to matter's relative motion.
The point-like center of mass, which is just the beginning of the time line seen "end on" (because time
is at right angles to all three spatial dimensions), is the germ of what, in extreme circumstances of
density and gravity, will grow into the surface area or "event horizon" of a black hole.
Hence the spatial motion due to gravity is the consequence of the intrinsic motion of time; the
convergent, accelerated flow of space is the principle of gravitational attraction; this spatial collapse

11 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

continuously feeds the time line which forever pulls more space after it. The conservation of energy,
entropy, symmetry, and causality requires the time dimension for matter; gravity creates time (and
spacetime) by producing time from space. The annihilation of space decelerates the spatial expansion
of the Cosmos; therefore, matter's time dimension or historical entropy drive is ultimately funded by
light's intrinsic motion or spatial entropy drive. The entropy drive expressed as free energy's spatial
expansion (S) is gravitationally converted to the entropy drive expressed as bound energy's historical
expansion (T), a transformation which (as we have seen above), may be symbolically represented by a
(quasi-mathematical) "concept equation" as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
(See: "Currents of Symmetry and Entropy".)
The Mechanism of Gravitation
Gravitation is both a symmetry debt and an entropy debt of light, unique among the charges and their
forces. This double conservation role is reflected in two different mechanisms, both of which convert
space to time, one at the microscopic quantum level of charge - the entropy debt, involving time,
causality, and energy conservation, and one at the macroscopic level of gravitational force - the
symmetry debt, involving mass, "location" charge, and symmetry conservation. (See: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
The collapse of an electromagnetic wave confers a quantized time charge on a massive particle. This
time charge is derived from the collapsed spatial component or spatial equivalent of the wave,
similarly to the process of the gravitational extraction of time from space. This is the "primary" or
quantum mechanical process of producing the entropy debt or time charge. We can visualize this as a
switching or flipping of the "wavelength" or spatial aspect of light or the moving electromagnetic
wave, to the "frequency" or temporal aspect of the particle or stationary wave (see: "Gravity Figure
No. 2"). This is just the change from implicit to explicit time, as time is always present as the implicit
or hidden driver of light's intrinsic motion (see: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) Once this time
charge is gauged and placed, the "secondary" or symmetry aspect of gravitation comes into play: this
is the cyclic, continuous flow of space as it is pulled toward the center of mass by the intrinsic motion
of time marching into history, producing the macroscopic gravitational field (see fig. "Gravity"). The
continuous secondary process simply copies or reproduces the time charge set and gauged by the
one-time primary process. We can visualize this secondary process as the actual symmetric flow and
annihilation of the spatial dimensions, leaving in their place a metrically equivalent uncanceled time
residue whose intrinsic motion into history - at right angles to all three spatial dimensions - pulls
space after it, producing the continuous spatial collapse that is a gravitational field (see fig. "gravity
1").
Finally, we can visualize the ephemeral nature of the time charge as a manifestation of its actual
motion from the spatial dimensions, where it is initiated, to the historic causal domain, where only
information can follow. It is the intrinsic motion of the time charge which "pulls" space after it and
produces the gravitational flow. Hence a gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic
motion of time. The collapse of space leaves a metrically equivalent temporal residue whose intrinsic

12 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

motion pulls more space after it, in an endlessly repeating cycle. The intrinsic motions of gravitation
and time continuously induce each other, much as the oscillations of an electric and magnetic field
induce each other. In both cases, the motion of a current, either moving space or moving electrically
charged particles, produces a field at right angles to the current flow (time or a magnetic field).
Conversely, a moving time or magnetic field produces a spatial (gravitational) or electric current. This
is the analogy between electromagnetism and gravitation which so intrigued Einstein.
The two mechanisms are distinct but linked, and both are part of the gravitational conversion of space
to time, connecting the quantum-mechanical aspect of gravitational charge (the entropy debt) to the
macroscopic aspect of gravitational flow (the symmetry debt). Both are linked by time, their common
gauge c, and Noether's Theorem requiring the conservation of light's "non-local" symmetry. The
gravitational charge, "location", is unique among charges in that its active principle is time. The
gravitational charge is an "entropic" charge, a charge with intrinsic dimensional motion. It is the
temporal, entropic nature of the gravitational charge which connects the microscopic quantum
mechanical (charge-frequency-particle-entropy) and the macroscopic dimensional (locationtime-mass-symmetry) aspects of gravity. In turn, the double nature of the gravitational charge gives
gravity a double conservation role, on the one hand conserving the spatial entropy drive of free energy
(the intrinsic motion of light) by converting space to the historical entropy drive of bound energy (the
intrinsic motion of time), and on the other hand conserving the non-local distributional and metric
symmetry of light's energy by converting bound to free energy (as in stars, supernovas, quasars, and
finally and completely, via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes). This duality extends
backward in a conservation chain to the dual role of velocity c, which gauges both the "non-local"
distributional/metric symmetry and the spatial entropy drive of light. Gravity must conserve both
effects of light's intrinsic motion if it conserves either one - as "Noether's Theorem" requires. (see: "
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation").
The "graviton" or field vector of the gravitational charge is a quantum unit of temporal entropy (or
negative spatial entropy), the "flipped" or transformed entropy drive or intrinsic motion of the photon
- implicit spatial time transformed to explicit historical time. (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
PART III
The Conservation Roles of Gravitation
The conservation roles of gravitation include:
1) Energy: A) Providing sufficient negative energy to balance the positive energy of the
"Creation Event" or "Big Bang"; B) the creation of the "local" metric of historic
spacetime, the joint dimensional conservation domain of light and matter (by creating
time from its metric equivalent, space).
2) Entropy: the conservation/transformation of free energy's spatial entropy drive - by
converting light's intrinsic motion to time's intrinsic motion (the historic entropy drive of
bound energy). (Gravity collapses space and extracts a metrically equivalent temporal
residue.)
3) Causality: creating the causal (temporal, historical) linkages of matter and hence also
protecting energy conservation; time is required to accommodate/regulate the energy and

13 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

causality accounts of matter's relative rather than absolute motion.
4) Symmetry: the payment of light's "non-local" distributional/metric symmetry debt
(including light's spatial entropy debt) by converting bound energy to free energy - as in
stars, supernovas, quasars, and ultimately and entirely, Hawking's "quantum radiance" of
black holes. Matter carries the debt in the form of "location" charge (Gm), but the source
of the debt is the broken "non-local" symmetric energy state of light (consequent upon the
transformation of light to bound energy forms).
The energy conservation role of gravity is to create a local, temporal metric of variable strength
(depending upon the magnitude and density of mass and the distance to its center), which can
conserve energy in a mixed system of free and bound energy. This gravity accomplishes by converting
the absolute global metric of light and space (as gauged by the electromagnetic constant c), into the
relative, local metric of matter and historic spacetime (as gauged by the universal gravitational
constant G). Time provides the entropic drive of matter's historical dimension, the causal linkages of
matter, balances the energy budget of matter in relative motion, and accommodates the flexible metric
of Special and General Relativity, as well as maintaining the invariance of matter's positive "Interval"
("Lorentz Invariance"). This satisfies the 1st and 2nd laws of thermodynamics and matter's causality
relations. A financial metaphor is perhaps usefully applied to the discussion of gravity's energy
conservation role: In producing matter's time dimension, gravity only pays the "interest" on matter's
symmetry debt, since the gravitational field is unaffected thereby (as on planet earth); in converting
bound to free energy gravity pays off the "principle" of matter's symmetry debt, since the gravitational
field is reduced as mass is reduced (as in the Sun and stars). The gravitational field vanishes when
mass vanishes, indicating the final retirement of the symmetry debt (as in the total evaporation of
"black holes" via Hawking's "quantum radiance").
The symmetry conservation role of gravity is to conserve the non-local distributional/metric
symmetry of light (in satisfaction of Noether's Theorem), by converting bound to free energy in stars
and supernovas via the nucleosynthetic pathway, in quasars via the direct conversion of gravitational
potential energy to light, and in black holes via proton decay (?) and Hawking's "quantum radiance".
Gravity has a double conservation role because gravity conserves all metric symmetries associated
with velocity c, including the symmetric "non-local" spatial distribution of light's energy, and the
symmetric ("all-way") spatial entropy drive of free energy (the intrinsic motion of light). (See: "The
Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
Gravity performs the first (entropic) conservation role (creating the time dimension of matter) for all
bound energy forms regardless of size, and the second (symmetry) conservation role (converting
bound to free energy) for all sufficiently large accumulations of matter (stars, supernovas, quasars,
and black holes).
The full conservation role of gravitation is complex on the one hand, in that (in today's universe)
gravitation has two primary conservation roles, one involving light's spatial entropy drive (light's
intrinsic motion), and another involving an aspect of light's symmetric energy state (light's
"non-locality"). "Non-locality" produces a complete distributional symmetry of light's energy within
light's spatial conservation domain - the spatial Cosmos. On the other hand, gravitation's conservation
role is simplified because both light's spatial entropy drive and non-local symmetric energy state are
consequences of the "intrinsic motion" of light, producing light's a-temporal, a-causal, and "non-local"

14 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

character. The gravitational restoration of bound to free energy in stellar processes, quasars, and the
"quantum radiance" of black holes pays both the symmetry and the entropy debts of light,
simultaneously. (See: "Currents of Entropy and Symmetry".)
Time and its asymmetric intrinsic motion is the pivotal feature of the entire process, providing both
the active principle of gravity's "location" charge, and producing matter's positive entropy drive,
including the historic conservation domain of matter's causal information field. Finally, time is also
the implicit or "hidden" driver of light's intrinsic motion. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of
Gravitation".)
Black Holes
A black hole is the 4th dimension made visible.
In the limiting case of a "black hole", the gravitational conversion of space to time becomes
physically expressed in the surface area of the hole's "event horizon", according to the BekensteinHawking theorem, which relates the surface area of a black hole to the entropy of its mass. (See:
Jacob D. Bekenstein Information in the Holographic Universe Scientific American Vol. 289#2 Aug.
2003 P. 58-65.) We understand the necessity of the relationship because increasing the area of the
event horizon surface is the only way to increase the time/entropy domain of the black hole for any
additional mass inputs - this because further acceleration of the gravitational field is forbidden beyond
the already realized limit of velocity c. (Similarly, if the flow of water through a pipe is already at
some theoretical maximum pressure and velocity, the volume of flow can be increased only by
enlarging the cross-sectional area of the pipe.) The "event horizon" of a black hole is a time-entropy
surface which displaces space somewhat (not exactly) as a ship displaces water.
Matter, and matter's associated charges, exist only in the present moment of time, and do not
participate in the entropic expansion of historic spacetime. The charges of matter, as well as the
energy content of matter, are therefore protected from spatial entropic enervation or dilution. Small
(non-radioactive) atoms simply do not age, and charge magnitudes in all cases are invariant through
time. Charge quantization also plays a significant role in the "non-aging" of matter; atoms cannot
disintegrate by continuous degrees, but only in discreet quantum units: proton decay can go forward
only if all the proton's conserved charges are actually annihilated. Nevertheless, when gravity
becomes strong, we begin to see the temporal entropic erosion of matter's bound energy (but not
matter's charge) in stars, and when gravity reaches black hole strength (g = c), the complete
destruction of (charge-neutral) matter via temporal entropy becomes possible (Hawking's "quantum
radiance").
At the black hole surface, clocks stop and meter sticks shrink to nothing, the same metric condition as
originally seen for light at velocity c: in the triumph of the temporal over the spatial metric, matter
returns to intrinsic motion c via gravity, rather than as light via the electromagnetic force.
Furthermore, when g = c, matter's bound energy is subject to the same entropic vitiation as light's free
energy, and proton decay is probably commonplace inside black holes, in which case a black hole is
simply gravitationally bound light, solving the problem of the infinite compression of matter. In any
case, we see the complete conversion of matter to light via Hawking's "quantum radiance". It thus
becomes evident that the real purpose of gravity's single-minded insistence upon pushing the temporal

15 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

metric to the black hole limit is actually to restore light's original symmetry by means of force
pathways alternative to the electromagnetic annihilation of matter vs antimatter (weak/strong force
"proton decay", gravitational "quantum radiance").
It is to be noted that although in our frame of reference (as "outside" observers) the evaporation of a
black hole is very slow, within the black hole's reference frame, because its clock is stopped, the
evaporation takes place essentially instantaneously - that is, explosively, irrespective of the hole's size.
(This relativistic phenomenon is related (as the opposite perspective) to that in which a (theoretical)
observer inside the black hole sees the entire history of the "outside" universe in the instant before he
is converted to photons - or otherwise destroyed - by the singularity.) The temporal order/metric of the
universe is real only for those whose clock is actually running. This understanding confirms the
symmetry-conserving role of gravitation, the black hole, and Hawking's "quantum radiance".
From another perspective, the black hole offers an alternative temporal/gravitational metric which is
the polar opposite of the spatial electromagnetic metric. In both cases, in their pure or extreme forms,
energy within either metric moves at "velocity c". "The extremes meet", showing there is a negative
as well as a positive way to conserve symmetry and satisfy Noether's theorem. Hence we can view
gravity's relentless pursuit of the black hole as either a quest to achieve the conversion of mass to light
through Hawking radiation, or alternatively, to establish its own version of a symmetric energy state, a
metric in which even massive objects move with "intrinsic motion c", and/or baryons decay to light.
The event horizon of the black hole is the physical demonstration of the gravitational conversion of
space and the drive of spatial entropy to time and the drive of historical entropy - complete with the
mathematical formalism of the Bekenstein-Hawking Theorem. Just as a rock is the visible evidence of
light's energy bound in an asymmetric stationary mode - light's energy transformed to atomic matter,
chemically bound, and brought to rest (hv = mcc) - so the event horizon of a black hole is the visible
evidence of light's entropy drive in an asymmetric stationary mode - light's intrinsic motion
transformed to one-way time, gravitationally bound, and brought to rest. A black hole is time made
visible:
-Gm(S) = (T)m.
If Earth's gravity or temporal entropic drive were the full equivalent in strength to light's spatial
entropic drive, then Earth would be a "black hole". In other words, the "black hole" condition is just
that in which g = c. If the mass of the Earth were compressed to the condition of g = c or a "black
hole", the Earth's event horizon would be about the size of a ping-pong ball! The surface area of this
ball = the pure time dimension or temporal entropy of the Earth's entire "rest mass", as translated into
equivalent spatial entropy terms (g = c), allowing us to quantify time by measuring the surface area of
the space it displaces. This illustrates dramatically just how small the temporal entropy component of
bound energy really is. The gravity we feel on Earth's surface is the spatial pull caused by the intrinsic
motion of that same time dimension, in effect, the tiny (theoretical) "black hole" at the gravitational
center of the Earth, but the surface of that "ping-pong ball", in terms of its gravitational force, is
diluted over the surface of the entire Earth. (See: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death'
of the Cosmos.")
Gravity is weak because matter is connected to its historical conservation domain only tangentially

16 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

via the "universal present moment". The tiny size of the (theoretical) black hole at the center of the
Earth represents this tangential contact point for the entire mass of our planet, in which spatial and
temporal entropy are fully equivalent (g=c). Gravity creates only enough temporal entropy (for any
given mass) to establish this tangential contact point, whose size is to be compared to the whole of
historical spacetime, the "bulk" remainder of matter's entropic conservation domain or "causal
matrix". This notion accords with the observation of P. A. M. Dirac that the ratio of the strength of the
electromagnetic force to the gravitational force is the same as the ratio of the radius of the Cosmos to
the radius of an electron - in which the electron represents the physical size of the "tangential" point of
contact between matter and historic spacetime. (See: " A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
At the "event horizon" of a black hole, both clocks and light come to a halt, as the
electromagnetic metric is completely replaced by the gravitational metric. Within the
event horizon, all former functions of the electromagnetic metric are either defunct or
performed by the gravitational metric, including those of the the binding forces between
particles. The black hole is just that physical environment in which entropy, in its usual
electromagnetic expression, does not exist, and hence (at least for the outside observer)
no change is possible as we ordinarily experience it. But gravitation is also a form of
(negative) entropy, and indeed we find, just at the boundary between the electromagnetic
and gravitational domains, gravity operating in both its entropy and symmetry
conservation roles to convert the mass of the black hole entirely to light - via the
mechanism of "Hawking radiation". In Hawking's "quantum radiance", even the
"all-way" symmetry of light's entropy drive is conserved. This is the ultimate expression
of Noether's symmetry conservation theorem, the complete gravitational conversion of
bound to free energy, definitively revealing the final conservation rationale for
gravitation, and by extension, for time as well. (See: Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp.
536 - 547: special section on black holes.)
Black holes actually convert a relatively large percentage of the rest mass of in-falling matter into
light - as the brilliance of quasars demonstrates. This conversion of mass to light is considerably more
efficient than nucleosynthetic conversion in ordinary stars (up to 28% of the in-falling rest-mass
energy), and so forms a distinct, major conversion category at both the stellar and galactic structural
levels. (See: Caleb Scharf Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2012 p
76.) This is yet another stepping stone in the inexorable gravitational pathway leading toward total
mass conversion and complete symmetry conservation, culminating, as we have seen, in Hawking's
"quantum radiance". (See: "Nodes of the Gravitational Metric".)
Buy Now - Pay Later
Charge conservation acts as the "credit card" of the Cosmos - "buy now, pay later", with gravity
paying the entropy-interest on matter's symmetry debt by creating matter's time dimension via the
annihilation of space. The notion of charge conservation would be moot in the absence of time.
Gravity pays off the "principle" on matter's symmetry debt by the conversion of bound to free energy
in stars, supernovas, quasars, and finally and completely via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes - since the gravitational field is reduced as bound energy is reduced, and completely vanishes
when mass and its associated symmetry debt completely vanishes. It is interesting to note the
convergence of fundamental principles here: symmetry conservation thrust into the time dimension by

17 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

the mechanism of charge and charge conservation; the resulting necessity for the invariance of
matter's charges through time; the gravitational creation of time from space and the consequent
deceleration of the cosmic expansion; the ultimate gravitational repayment of symmetry debts with
the consequent "rebound" of cosmic expansion (as recently observed). Of course, Special Relativity
also tells us that matter cannot move with the metric equivalent of "velocity c", and that therefore the
time dimension must move instead, while matter remains stationary and rides the "time train". There
are multiple reasons for matter's isolation in the "universal present moment", illustrating the seamless
interweaving of all natural law, and raising again Einstein's question: is there any latitude in the
construction of our Universe? From the perspective of the "Anthropic Principle" (natural law and the
physical constants must allow human life), the answer is apparently "no".
The Ratio 1/4 x 10(42) (42 powers of ten)
(Why is Gravity so Weak?)
(See: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
Summary
(See also: "12 Summary Points Concerning Gravity"; and "About Gravity")
The problem to be solved by the material Universe is how to return to the original symmetry of light
in the absence of antimatter. The information carried by the charges of matter is just 1/2 of the original
information intended to solve this problem (the other half belonging to antimatter, now absent).
Nevertheless, the half carried by matter is still sufficient to do the job, but only if an additional
dimension or degree of freedom - time (and the gravitational field of matter required to produce it) - is
added to accommodate the much more complex pathway back to antimatter this reduced information
set now requires. (This alternative pathway requires the gravitational conversion of bound to free
energy rather than the electromagnetic annihilation of matter vs antimatter. Proton decay (via the
strong and weak nuclear forces) is another possible - but even more difficult - pathway.)
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem). Symmetry debts in the
form of charges are conserved through time, and may be paid at any future moment. Gravity pays the
entropy-"interest" on matter's symmetry debts by creating matter's time dimension via the annihilation
of space, decelerating the spatial expansion of the Universe in consequence. The tiny tangential
connection between historical "bulk" spacetime and the ephemeral, ever-moving "present moment"
accounts for the weakness of gravity.
While the slow liberation of free energy from the storehouse of bound energy is progressing (by
various astrophysical processes, and by radioactive, particle, and proton decay), there is plenty of time
and energy for the information systems of matter to become self-aware, explore their creative
potential, and experience and enjoy the glory and beauty of the Universe. Living, biological
information systems seem to be evolving toward a unity, beauty, and wholeness of their own, a fractal
expression of the unity, symmetry, and wholeness of the Cosmos of light from which they came - "as
above, so below". Life is a molecular conservation domain of information, combining the negative
entropy of Natural Selection with heritable genes. Life is a physically realized historical information
domain, a sort of molecular iteration of historical spacetime, carrying the condensed, coded, historical
information of its species and of life generally within DNA and a heritable genome. Humanity has

18 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

vastly extended the molecular information conservation domain of biology into the abstract realm of
memory, language, writing, libraries, museums, school systems, social systems, the arts and sciences,
technology, mathematics, computers, electronic language, etc. We have also actively participated in
the cosmic drive to liberate free energy from its bondage in matter - by harnessing chemical,
electrical, gravitational, and nuclear (fission/fusion) forces. (See: "Newton, Darwin, and the Origin
and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos".) (See also: "The Information Pathway" and "The Information
Ladder".)
Whether this curious result is due to the simple physics/chemistry of matter's relentless search for
antimatter, the elemental "memory" of a fractal, unifying algorithm, a Divine Plan, or some
combination of these or other forces, the Cosmos at large has awakened to itself through life. Our
self-consciousness is the self-consciousness of the Universe: "I and the Father are one". Earth's
biological information systems (and their products) are now beginning to reach out into our Solar
System, and (barring self-destruction) will continue evolving until they eventually encompass the
entire galaxy, or encounter a competing alien expansion. This is Chardin's "Omega Point", the
Cosmos evolving a universal, material Self, a Super Organism, a reflection in matter of its spiritual
organization, in which the Universe becomes cohesive, self-aware, and intelligent, with individuals
playing the role of biological cells, planets playing the role of individuals, and galaxies playing the
role of nations - a future already visualized in our science fiction. (See also: "Chardin: Prophet of the
Information Age"; "The Fractal Organization of Nature"; "de Broglie Matter Waves and the Evolution
of Consciousness".)
Philosophical Connections of the "Tetrahedron Model"
(See: Maudlin, Tim. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time 2012 Princeton Univ. Press.)
In a beautiful convergence between philosophical tradition (both ancient and modern) and the
gravitational physics of the "Tetrahedron Model", Tim Maudlin (see citation above) points out that
since empty 3-D space is perfectly symmetric, there is no point/place in it that can be preferred over
any other point/place. Hence God could not decide "where" to place the Creation. In the "Tetrahedron
Model", massless light can (therefore) only be symmetrically distributed throughout the spatial
domain, and simultaneously at that, since light and 3-D space both lack a time dimension. Hence light
and space are equivalently symmetric, and indeed, we think of light as creating space for its own
conservation needs. The intrinsic motion of light is the fundamental expression of entropy in free
electromagnetic energy, creating, expanding, and cooling the primary dimensional conservation
domain (space) of free electromagnetic energy (light). Light and space both lack a time dimension,
and hence both also lack a space-warping gravitational field. (See: "Does Light Produce a
Gravitational Field?") The electromagnetic constant "velocity c" also "gauges" (regulates) the metric
symmetry of light's spatial conservation arena. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field
Theory".)
Contrast this situation with that of massive forms of bound (rather than free) electromagnetic energy,
from atoms to galaxies, which all produce space-warping gravitational fields whose exact effect is to
identify in the undeniable energetic terms of metric-warping inertial force the precise spatial location
of the massive system's "center of mass/gravity". Since massive particles, completely lacking the
intrinsic spatial motions of massless light, cannot distribute themselves symmetrically within the
volume of 3-D space, some way of selecting/identifying a particular place within that spatial plenum

19 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

must be found. This is accomplished by time and the gravitational field of the particle(s), which
induce each other. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) The extra time dimension is added to
3-D space to break the spatial symmetry and identify a specific location within the spatial domain,
which becomes a 4-D spacetime continuum with an infinity of identifiable points due to the addition
of the extra time dimension. Time has "intrinsic" (entropic) motion, the analog of light's intrinsic
(entropic) motion, except in time's case it is one-way motion to provide completely distinguishable
points ("events") within an infinite and expanding historical spacetime. Because the entire universe
begins as a unit at "time zero" in the "Big Bang", the spacetime designations of gravity are historically
unique. History is the temporal analog of space, the conservation domain of matter's causal
information field. Light is connected through space, matter is connected through history, gravity
connects everything, converting space to time and vice versa. (See: "A Description of Gravity".)
There is a similarity in function between the color charges and gluon field of the strong force, and
time and the gravitons of gravity: both provide an extra dimension ("degree of freedom") in which to
separate and distinguish particles in what would otherwise be an overcrowded field of fermions. This
is another view of the connection between the spacetime and particle "metrics" of free and bound
forms of electromagnetic energy, and the activity of their field vectors as "currents of local gauge
symmetry".
Links:
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Unification
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
About Gravity
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?

20 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

A Description of Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gravity.html

Entropy
Section VII: Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Cosmology
Section V: Introduction to Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (text - updated copy)
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (updated pdf diagram)
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (original gif diagram)
The "Spacetime Map" as a Model of a 5-Dimensional Holographic Universe
Commentary on the Physical Parameters of the "Spacetime Map"
A Graph of the 14 Gyr Cosmos Expanding with and without Gravity
Table of Data Inputs to "13.7 Gyr Graph" of Cosmic Expansion
Dr. Richard D. Stafford's Spacetime Map (text)
Dr. Richard D. Stafford's Spacetime Map (diagram)
Gravity Diagrams
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model (complete version)
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric
home page
References:
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8),
2333-46.
Bekenstein, J. D. Information in the Holographic Universe. Scientific American,
Aug. 2003, 58-65.
Bohm, D. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. Routledge & Kegan Paul 1980, 224
+ xv pp.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and
Work. M. Dekker, New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in
Mathematical Physics 1975, 43 (3), 199-220.
Maudlin, Tim. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time 2012 Princeton Univ. Press.
Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2012
See: Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on black holes.

21 of 21

11/29/14 6:42 PM

