The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

THE HUMAN CONNECTION: Part I
(revised July, 2016)
JOHN A. GOWAN
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
Home Page I
Home Page II
Abstract
As Carl Sagan famously said, we are "star stuff" exploring the stars.
Life is the information pathway by which the universe achieves
consciousness and self-awareness, and begins to explore itself,
including evolving new (including abstract) modes of experience,
creativity, and beauty. In terms of creativity, humans represent a
fractal iteration of the creative energy of the Cosmos, as well as of its
evolutionary powers. Because the entire material universe devolves
from light, matter and life are a conserved form of the information
content latent in the energy of light, expressed primordially through
the broken symmetry of light - leading to our "matter-only" cosmos,
charge conservation, atoms, the Periodic Table, chemistry, biology,
and humanity. The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light
(Noether's Theorem), and through these charges the energy of light is
transformed into the information content of the world. Hence it is
ultimately through the connection between light and matter (atoms),
charge conservation and symmetry conservation, that humans retain
their connection to the primordial creative energies and information
content of the Universe (and the Multiverse). "We come trailing
clouds of glory..." (Wordsworth). As Tolstoy surmised, life is God in
the Universe.
Translations:
This paper has been translated into Ukrainian by Anna Matesh many thanks Anna! See: http://eustudiesweb.com/human-connection/
This paper has been translated into Russian by Akhmad Karimov.
Many thanks Akhmad! (https://sciencerise.com/human/)
1 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

See also Akhmad's personal blog: https://sciencerise.com
Table of Contents:
Part I
Abstract
Introduction
The Spiritual Connection
Death as Disconnection
Death as Connection
The Physical Separation of the "Self", Matter, and Historic Spacetime
The Psychic Connection
The "Pair-Bond" Connection
Connections Between Religion and Science
The Spacetime Connection
The Arts and Sciences as Connection
"Mind" as Cosmic Self-Awareness
A Hierarchy of Connection
Part II (Go to Part II)
Shaman-Priest-Magician and the Weak Force IVBs
The Fractal Connection
The Miracle of our Universe
Neutrino Identity Charge and the Human "Soul"
Synopsis of the Cosmic System
Information/Chardin
Why there is Something rather than Nothing
Introduction
We have reviewed the physical evidence for matter's connection to
spacetime and the universe (see: "Nature's Fractal Pathway"). We
found multiple linkages between spacetime and matter, of which the
most familiar are light, time, inertia, and gravitation. More esoteric
connections include the creation of particles from light and vice
versa, the particle-wave duality of energy, and the Dirac/Heisenberg
"virtual" particles of the vacuum. Finally, we saw that matter was an
inherent and indeed necessary property of the universe, contributing
negative energy through gravitation, and making up at least half of
2 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

the "Tetrahedron Model of Light and Conservation Law:
Conservation of Energy, Conservation of Symmetry, Entropy,
Causality. Below, we will consider some other specifically human
connections with the Cosmos. In general terms, the view presented
here is that life is the means by which the universe awakens to and
explores itself; humans are (locally) the most advanced expression of
this continuously evolving cosmic self-awareness and consciousness.
(See: "Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age".)
The Spiritual Connection
Evolution, through the development of our consciousness,
self-awareness, imagination, and abstracting intelligence, has
conferred upon humanity an unique awareness of our connection to
the Cosmos, which we call "spiritual" awareness and which, as social
animals, we symbolize and institutionalize as various forms of
"religion". "Spirit" subsists in the connections between things; human
spiritual awareness is our self-conscious connection to the Universe.
While it is undoubtedly true that other animals "feel" their
connections with the rest of nature, humans are probably unique in
their ability to abstract, symbolize, and objectify this feeling ("think"
their connection), often in this process actually losing the comfort of
the more basic intuitive feelings. We are certainly the only animal to
formally codify spiritual concepts and produce organized and
ritualized spiritual/religious practices, including priests, shamans, and
prophets, sacred texts, philosophies, cosmologies, social structures,
traditions, religious art, music, architecture, etc.
Human spirituality constitutes a further emergent property of the
connection between matter and the Universe, produced at the natural
organizational level of species and abstract consciousness. Here, too,
we find as we might expect, a reflection of the 4x3 universal fractal
form in our religions, mythologies, legends, and cosmologies. In its
emphasis upon "divinely ordained" religious law (God as
"Lawgiver"), human religion seems to reflect an intuitive awareness
of the highest form of connectivity in physics: the existence of, and
connections among, the conservation laws that govern all natural
3 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

interactions. Science is a rational, social expression of our awareness
of cosmic law and connection, also unique to humans. Conflict
between science and religion occurs when both lay claim to the same
set of cosmic laws and phenomena - as in the case of Darwinian
evolution vs "special creation".
The origins of human spirituality lie in our animal feelings of
connection, but are developed out of these through the abstracting
abilities of our minds into the elaborate religious forms we see today,
universally present in human society. The feeling of connection to
our fellow creatures, nature, and the Cosmos is the psychological and
emotional basis of mental health; insanity is the consequence of its
loss. Mental illness is the evolutionary price humans pay for their big
brains and their ability to abstract their feelings, for in this abstraction
process lies the risk the physical/intuitive contact with reality may be
lost. There is always a thin line between genius and insanity; it takes
a very healthy individual to survive the onslaught of genius, just as
only a very healthy animal can deal with abstraction at all. The
immense length of time it required for humans to evolve from
walking apes to modern Man is a testament to this difficulty, which
plagues us still in the precarious balance of our mental health.
Death as Disconnection
The psychological price of human awareness, self-consciousness, and
abstract thought is expressed in a single word: Death. When humans
began to have the ability to think about the meaning of death, of the
annihilation of the personal consciousness, identity, individuality, and
life experience of which they were just becoming aware, they stepped
over a gigantic threshold in psychological evolution, the mythical
"expulsion from the Garden". One can only suppose that their strong
evolutionary heritage of animal intuitive feelings of connection
carried them through this terrible time, and resulted in the first
religions, a means of social comfort and solace, celebrating their
connections with the "spirits" of the dead and with the "spirits" of
nature and the animals. Early forms of religion always emphasize
4 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

man's connection to nature and the animals; purely "spiritual",
abstract, intellectual, or "scientific" forms of religion come much
later, when the human psyche is more comfortable with its sense of
isolation. We would indeed wonder if any evolutionary form which
had no spiritual awareness or "religious" practice was fully "human"
(speaking here of species not individuals).
Death is the great test of our conviction about connectivity. If we
become too abstract, we tend to lose this conviction. In the end we
are all forced back to "feel" our way, through our physical and animal
connections, to the "brave new world", the "undiscovered country"
we all must enter. This is why our animal pets provide such comfort they don't have the "disconnection" problem. The whole intent of this
paper is to give some comfort to the rational, abstracting mind that
these intuitive feelings of connection are valid and can be trusted.
People everywhere need religion, otherwise people everywhere
wouldn't have invented it. Religion is what you get when an
intelligent, abstracting, creative mind confronts the annihilation of
death: mind finds a way out. The universe knows it is eternal, and we
(and all life) are part of the information domain of the universe which is the whole rationale for the existence of the cosmos. We
intuit our own immortality as part and parcel of the immortality of the
universe, and we formalize this intuitive knowledge through religion.
Death as Connection
Death became perceived as the great disconnection; life, in contrast,
was the experience of connection. This psychological crisis, created
by the abstract mind, was also bridged by the abstract mind through
the invention of "spirit", the connection that is immortal, that persists
after death, that is the abstraction of connection itself. In the
"spiritual" interpretation, death becomes not a loss of connection, but
a return to the pure realms of connection itself - life becomes in fact a
lesser expression because the body "contaminates" or interferes with
the essence of connection - spirit. This concept eventually took the
extreme form that life itself was to be less valued than spirit. This
5 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

view, widespread in the western religions of today, as well as those of
the past (the Aztecs and the Egyptians come to mind), had the
unfortunate result of separating humans further psychologically from
their true feelings of the connection to other living things, each other,
and ultimately, self-reflexively, themselves. Man's vaunted
spirituality became more real and valued than life itself; the
abstraction became of greater significance than the physical model,
and life was (and is) gladly sacrificed to spiritual or abstract "truths"
and conceptual "realities".
Scientific and evolutionary theory has been at pains to repair this gap,
demonstrating rationally our physical connection with nature and the
Cosmos as a whole. Our spiritual awareness grew out of our animal
feeling of connection with all things; ironically, religion has ended by
separating us from the rest of nature (as a unique species and
"creation"), asserting that we alone are truly connected spiritually to
the Cosmos and its Creator (only humans have "souls"). In fact, only
humans become disconnected from the Cosmos due to the abstracting
ability of our minds - the intellectual symbol (including words)
replacing the intuitive reality. Music is a universal, emotional
language addressing this problem.
The Separation of "Self", Matter, and Historic Spacetime
A fundamental physical cause for humanity's unease at the thought of
death is our feeling of separation from the rest of the Universe - our
awareness of "self" and personal identity necessarily means a
distinction between "me" and the environment. Matter, and all
massive entities such as ourselves, are in fact (as well as in thought)
separated from our true conservation domain, historic spacetime, the
conservation domain of matter's "causal information matrix".
Massive objects do not inhabit historic spacetime in the way light
inhabits its conservation domain, space: we live not in history, but
only in the "universal present moment". Time is connected to space
only tangentially, at right angles to all three spatial dimensions; that
tangential point of connection between space and time is the "present
moment" of our experience, our point-like "touch" upon expanding
6 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

history. Only information can pass from space into history, massive
objects such as ourselves cannot. There are several very good reasons
for this physical arrangement, beginning with the fact that matter
cannot travel at velocity c and hence cannot participate in the
entropic expansion of light's conservation domain, space. (See: " ".)
When light is converted to matter, or when any form of free
electromagnetic energy with "intrinsic motion c" is converted to
massive, immobile, bound forms of electromagnetic energy, the
symmetric (all-way) spatial entropy drive of light (the "intrinsic"
motion of light), is replaced by an alternative, asymmetric (one-way)
historical entropy drive, the "intrinsic motion" of matter's time
dimension. The historically expansive "march of time" is the metric
and entropic equivalent of the spatially expansive "march of space" seen as the "red shift" of distant galaxies). Time is an alternative,
asymmetric (one-way), causally connected (constrained) form of
space, providing the primordial entropy drive and historic
conservation domain of bound electromagnetic energy. Time is
derived from space by the gravitational annihilation of space,
exposing a metrically equivalent temporal residue. (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time".)
Light, space, and the spatial entropy drive of free energy (light's
intrinsic motion) are all bound up together. Because of this lack of
separation between the energy form (light), its conservation domain
(space), and its entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of light), the
energy of light is subject to extremely rapid vitiation via light's
spatial entropy drive, gauged by "velocity c". The energy of light is
dissipated rapidly as light expands and cools along with space, its
entropic conservation domain. Light creates its own (spatial) entropic
conservation domain by the action of its own intrinsic motion, that is,
light's embedded entropy drive. The conservation role of light's
embedded entropy drive is precisely to create a dimensional (spatial)
conservation domain in which light's energy can be transformed and
used, while simultaneously being conserved. But when light is
converted to matter and bound energy, a different form of entropy
drive must be found, since matter cannot travel at velocity c. Nature's
7 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

solution is to allow the energy form (matter) to remain stationary
("rest mass"), and allow matter's time dimension and entropic
conservation domain (historic spacetime) to move and expand
instead. (See: "Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics".)
Matter remains stationary in space and is only tangentially connected
to its entropic, historical conservation domain via the point-like
"touch" of the "present moment", while history expands, at right
angles to all three spatial dimensions, moving at the metric equivalent
of the entropic expansion of space, all gauged by the electromagnetic
constant "velocity c": "time flies" (see: "The Time Train").
Nevertheless, today is real only because yesterday remains real. Our
"yesterday" is some other observer's "today" and vice versa. We are
all immortal in historic spacetime. (See: "A Spacetime Map of the
Universe".) The tangential connection between matter and its
entropic conservation domain (historic spacetime) means that the
charges of atomic matter, and even (to some extent) its rest mass
energy, are protected from time's entropic dilution: "diamonds are
forever". Atoms simply do not age: the rest mass energy and, more
especially, the charge of an atom, is invariant through time. Atoms
can only be (completely) destroyed by black holes, "proton decay", or
antimatter annihilation. As guessed by Dirac, gravity is weak because
of this tiny tangential connection (the "present moment") between
matter and its historic, entropic conservation domain ("bulk" historic
spacetime, matter's causal information field or causal "matrix"). (See:
"Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
This is the basic physical reason why we feel separated from the
Universe - we are separated (connected principally by the "present
moment" and gravity - hence the importance of living "in the
moment", as stressed by Eastern religions). But this separation is only
partial and temporary, and exists for very good reasons, because it
allows us as individual, living "agents" personal freedom of action
and experience, while also guaranteeing that when it does come time
to redeem the symmetry and energy debts represented by atomic
charge and rest mass, they will be undiminished in magnitude by time
or use. Conservation will eventually be complete and in full measure.
8 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

Temporary separation is simply the only way the entropic
conservation domain of matter ("history") can function to allow a
"free will" personal, individual, physical experience and still
guarantee complete conservation "in the fullness of time" in the
parallel spatial domain of light. Gravity is actually our (and all of
matter's) physical connection to the greater Cosmos; so long as
gravity functions, you can have faith, and trust in the physical reality
and security of our connection to the immense double conservation
domain of historic spacetime that constitutes our remarkable
Universe. (See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
The Psychic Connection
Psychic phenomena of all kinds offer further examples of what we
suppose are uniquely human expressions of our connection to the
Universe. They are obviously related to spiritual connections in an
"antiestablishment" way, an "undernet" of intensely personal
experiences of connectivity. I have myself experienced them on at
least one memorable occasion; it was for me an experience of pure
connection, a "state" of knowledge, explicitly manifest in my own
mind in very concrete images. These personal experiences must
forever lie outside the range of scientific analysis, since the essence
of science is its repeatability on demand by other observers; no
personal experience of this kind can be repeated at will even by the
individual who reports it, much less by others. This says nothing
about their reality however, only that they are personal, subjective
experiences of connection, which by definition cannot be replicated,
and hence are not susceptible to "scientific" analysis or validation.
I have come to believe, as did my father (jcgbooks.html), that psychic
phenomena of many kinds (not all kinds) are real experiences of the
wholeness, integrity, connectivity, and conservation function of the
Cosmos. Genius lies in an exceptional quality of personal
connectivity; madness lies in either its absence or an overexposure.
Quantum physics is telling us there remain purely physical
phenomena of connectivity we do not yet understand; we may also be
sure there are corresponding emergent properties of our minds in
9 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

terms of connectivity ("metaphysical" phenomena) that we do not yet
understand. They may well be the harbinger of a new evolutionary
state of consciousness, a higher connectivity, attempting to break
through the barrier of mental instability into normal mental health, a
process we have been through before, long ago when our species
discovered death and the abstraction of spiritual connection, when we
were emerging from our animal ancestry in the Garden of Nature.
The "Pair-Bond" Connection
In biology the "pair-bond" is a common phenomenon. Many birds
(Canada geese, for example), pair-bond for life. We call it "falling in
love", and when it happens, you will realize it is a special condition
of great emotional power - it's what all the songs are about. The
experience seems to be a merger of identity with another person; thus
the bond is an "identity-bond". You feel as if part of your identity
now belongs to or resides in another person. Biologically, this is a
reflection of the plain fact that we are, each of us, individually
incomplete as organisms, since we obviously require a partner of the
opposite sex to reproduce. Another individual with a separate identity
is walking around somewhere with the other half of our reproductive
system, so when we find that individual it is only natural to feel that
our personal identity is suddenly enlarged, completed, and made
whole: we "fall in love". The experience can be quite overwhelming
and will convince you that you do in fact possess a (non-physical)
"soul", "essence" or "spiritual identity" which can be captured by
another person. "Love" is also useful biologically to keep parents
together during the difficult process of child-rearing. People generally
learn not to fool around with the pair-bond, as it is real, powerful, and
emotionally taxing, a bear trap waiting for the unwary. "Love" is
strictly a biological phenomenon existing in most "higher" animals
because, as organisms, they are almost all divided into two sexes.
Connections Between Religion and Science
The beautiful temple-shaped cone of the Deodar Cedar (a sacred tree
of the Middle East and India) presents us with a metaphorical
example of a fractal connection between the Divine act of creation
10 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

and human religious practice. Because this upright cone is roughly in
the shape of an ancient Eastern temple, we intuit the following
comparison: "Deep within the secret place of the Most High, the
celebrant combines sacred streams of information to create the
miracle of life." Within the cone, this information is in the form of
DNA; within the temple it takes the form of human language.
Conservation
The principle of Conservation is one of the major conceptual linkages
between religion and science; another is Causality or "Karma"; a
third is Energy, and a fourth is the Unity or wholeness of the
Universe; others include Symmetry (beauty), Entropy (evolution) and
Information (knowledge).
Conservation is the basic principle of science and indeed of religion
as well; neither could function without it. In science it refers to an
active quantity that remains unchanged (as in the total energy of a
closed system) despite the variety of transformations that quantity
may undergo (energy may not be created or destroyed, but only
transformed). In mathematics, it is familiar as the conservation of
number. In religion we find the notion of the conservation of the
individual soul, or personalized human "spirit", its immortal or
unchanging identity. Similarly, the notion of "heaven" corresponds to
a conservation domain of the spiritual realm (in which individual
souls may be "saved" or conserved - perhaps for transformation to
another life).
Energy
A second idea common to science and religion is energy. In both
cases energy is the prime mover or First Cause of the Universe,
physical or spiritual. No prior explanation for the existence of energy
can be given in either science or religion; energy cannot be derived
from any preexisting or more primitive source. What we can say
about the essence of energy is very limited: 1) it is the principle of
action, expressed through change, especially entropy; 2) it is the
cause of all reality, taking various forms (including information and
11 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

life); 3) it is absolutely conserved; 4) its source is unknown. Are
these terms religious or scientific? The case could be made for either
view.
Is energy created in the "Big Bang"? It is thought that the negative
energy/entropy of gravitation exactly balances the positive energy of
the "Creation Event", so that the Cosmos originates from a state of no
net energy (and, due to an equal measure of antimatter, from a state
of no net charge). There is a familiar resonance here with the
mythological division of the cosmos into light vs dark domains, the
Heavens ruled by the God of light, the Earth/darkness/matter ruled by
an evil god (the "devil").
Entropy
The principle of change inherent in energy is called "entropy" in
scientific (thermodynamic) terms. The Universe must expand or
contract, it cannot stand still; time and evolution march forever
onward. The intrinsic motions of light, time, and gravity are common
expressions of entropy (both positive and negative) in its primordial,
embedded mode. There are two forms of entropy, positive and
negative (entropy and negentropy). The intrinsic motions of light and
time are examples of positive entropy, respectively causing spatial
expansion and cooling (due to the intrinsic/entropic motion of light),
and aging, decay, and destruction (due to the intrinsic/entropic
motion of time). Gravitation and biological evolution are examples of
negative entropy, or negentropic processes, causing the gathering and
warming of matter and spacetime, and the progressive increase in the
complexity of biological information systems (life forms).
In spiritual terms, we recognize this constant progressive
(negentropic) motion as the never-ending evolution or "redemption"
of the spiritual nature of the World ("matter"). The traditional view of
constant spiritual struggle against a competing and equally constant
destructive force (sin/evil/the "devil") is the analog of the worldly
competition between the forces of negentropy (gravitation, life,
evolution) and positive entropy (death, decay, destruction). This
constant force for "good", "redemption", or evolutionary progress, we
associate in the (Christian) religious sense with the activity of the
12 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

"Holy Ghost". Christ's resurrection is the ultimate symbol of the
triumph of spirit over the entropy of the World - via the conservation
function of the Father. In physics, it is symmetry conservation in the
service of energy conservation which wins the battle over matter and
temporal entropy - the conversion of bound energy (mass) to free
energy (light) in stars, quasars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of
black holes being primary examples.
Symmetry
Another important characteristic of energy is expressed in "Noether's
Theorem": not only must energy's total amount (quantity) be
conserved, but energy's symmetry (quality) must also be conserved which is the reason for the existence of the conserved charges of
matter: charges are all symmetry debts of light, absolutely conserved
through time, patiently waiting to be repaid. "Noether's Theorem"
relates conservation and symmetry: where we find one, we find the
other. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
Noether's theorem is the mathematical, rational equivalent of Keat's
poetic intuition that "beauty is truth, truth beauty", where
conservation = truth, symmetry = beauty. In poetic terms, then, the
"beauty" of energy must also be conserved. Beauty in nature, or
rather our ability to recognize and appreciate beauty, is an emergent
expression of "Noether's Theorem" in biology at the human level of
consciousness. Ethics and morality are also emergent expressions of
this theorem: the "Golden Rule" is an excellent example of
symmetric behavior in human relations. Finally, beauty and our
aesthetic appreciation of it are our native, inborn guides to truth,
enlightenment, and "salvation" - spiritually, intuitively, socially, and
rationally. This is why the "arts" are such an important part of the
educational curriculum. Political analogs include the principles
"liberty, equality, fraternity", "all men are created equal", and "one
man, one vote". Finally, physical beauty has long served as a
significant reproductive and evolutionary guide/force in our species
and in many others - the "Birds of Paradise" offering a remarkable
example among the animals. Compare the female chimpanzee with
the female human: there is an obvious linkage here between beauty,
intelligence, and spiritual awareness, produced by the action of
13 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

sexual selection within our species. We have emerged from the apes
by following the pathway of beauty.
Karma and Information
A third link between science and religion is the notion of causality or
"karma", and the sequential linkage of cause and effect. The notion
extends to the proscription of action-at-a-distance; in physics there
must be an intervening field of particles, virtual if necessary, to
transmit a force - causality requires time, connection, and
information. In the case of light, gravitation, and inertia, spacetime
itself supplies the connecting field. The connectivity of all life is
demonstrated by the DNA "field"; the "particle" field extends this
principle to all matter; spacetime and gravitation are examples of
metric fields which bind together all forms of energy at the cosmic
scale. Matter-antimatter annihilation reactions demonstrate the
universal character of electromagnetic energy. In the temporal
domain, at astronomical scale, our "yesterday" is part of some other
observer's "today", and vice versa. Today is real only because
yesterday remains real: historic spacetime is the conservation domain
of matter's causal information field, network, or "matrix". Light is
connected by space, matter is connected by history; gravity connects
all, converting either into the other. The connectivity of the Cosmos
is complete in a physical sense. But this very connectivity is the
essence of spirit and causality, in both its religious and scientific
sense. ("Chaos" and quantum theory do not describe a lack of
connection, but only the lack of certain kinds of predictability
concerning these phenomena.) Information is a necessary adjunct of
Causality, and in its most primordial and biologically significant
form, it corresponds to the charges of matter. Information in the form
of charge (including gravitational charge) controls the fate of the
Cosmos, providing on the one hand a roadmap for the lawful return
of the material Cosmos to its symmetric origins in light, and on the
other, a pathway to life, consciousness, and the self-awareness of the
Universe. Gravity is matter's memory it once was light.
Monotheism and Genesis
A fourth link between science and religion is found in the notion of
14 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

the unity of the Cosmos. Theologically, this is expressed in the
concept of monotheism; scientifically, in Einstein's quest for a unified
field theory, or in the notion that all energy is electromagnetic in
origin. Both science and religion have produced cosmologies
describing the creation of the universe, and in several respects they
are strikingly similar.
Of particular interest, beyond its explicitly 4x3 (and 4x4) pattern, is
the evolutionary process described in western religious cosmology,
which proceeds from the "Creation Event" and a period of symmetry
or "golden age" (the Garden of Eden), to a fall from "grace" in both
Heaven and Earth. From thence there is the promise of redemption
and salvation, a life everlasting, and the return of the world and
humanity to the golden age of symmetry, connection, and grace in
which it began (in obedience to "God's Will" or "Divine Law").
This cosmology is strikingly similar to the scientific cosmology
which has been developed in the 20th century: he Cosmos begins as
light in a discreet event (the "Big Bang" - light being the most
symmetric state of free electromagnetic energy), subsequently
descending or "falling" into the asymmetry of particles and matter
(bound electromagnetic energy - "manifestation"), eventually
returning to its original unified and symmetric condition, with
particles giving up their individual identities as they are reconverted
to light (in obedience to "Noether's Theorem" or "Natural Law").
This story applies not only to the Cosmos as a whole, but to each
individual life and particle, again the fractal expression of a nested
pattern, great and small. (See also remarks above regarding the "good
God of light and Heaven" vs the "bad devil of darkness and Earth".)
(See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
The Spacetime Connection
The principle of Causality has a physical expression in historic
spacetime. For example, as we look out into space, we look ever
further back in time. With our telescopes, we can see galaxies as they
were billions of years ago, long before the Earth was formed.
Conversely, distant galaxies can see us in every stage of the Earth's
15 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

history. None of this information is ever lost (unless the Universe
collapses into a "Big Crunch"). For all observers, spacetime is
divided into 2 equal halves, one past and one future. It is the past half
of the universe that everyone can see, but everyone sees a different
past half (since no one, for one example, can see their own past). And
we see part of the future that other galaxies will only eventually see:
for example, we ourselves are now part of that future for distant
observers. Conversely again, they can see part of the future, already
formed, that we will someday see, but whose light has not yet
reached us. (Of course, nobody can see a future that is not yet
formed. A glance at my "Spacetime Map" will make all this clear.)
We are speaking of a past and future that is encoded in spacetime as
light and gravitation, and that can only be observed, not touched or
influenced. If there were a (very) large mirror in the Andromeda
galaxy, for example, we could look into it with our telescopes and see
Earth as it was about 5 million years ago. So in theory at least, it is
possible to see our own past, if only in a mirror. The point is,
spacetime does keep a record of everything that happens; we are
looking at it every time we see the stars. And it is real; if it were not,
we could not feel the Sun's heat, nor could the Earth respond to the
Sun's gravitational pull; both come to us from the "conserved past". A
little thought reveals the simple truth that the connection between
today and the day of our birth cannot be broken or we would instantly
cease to exist: yesterday, its influence and connection, are very real,
and this necessary causal connection extends from the present
moment and from every atom in our bodies all the way back to the
"Big Bang" itself. This causal connection extends to and embraces
every part of the Universe, either directly or indirectly - historic
spacetime is the causal matrix of matter and the conservation domain
of information - the "Akashic Record" of the ancients. The continuing
reality of yesterday as the cause of today is the factual basis for the
universal practice of ancestor veneration.
We have always been part of this Universe; we will always be part of
this Universe. Conservation is a demonstrated fact. Will our
individuality persist in any sense greater than that of a holographic
16 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

image in spacetime? I for one would certainly not enjoy being stuck
forever in this present life and experience. We all hope for a new and
better life and experience, for growth and evolution, if we hope at all.
Nevertheless, if the causal law is to be fulfilled, some personal
element must survive death - if only in the historical sense. But we
must be cautious in these assumptions - natural law may not respect
our human conception of justice - especially social justice. The
Universe brought us "here and now" without our personal concern or
consent; we can expect no less of the future. No amount of worry
brought us to our present life; no amount of worry will take us to the
next. Enjoy the experience we have while we are privileged to have
it. And love the Universe which creates and conserves us all; we are
its human opportunity to experience joy, love, pleasure, beauty,
understanding, self-awareness, and new modes of creativity. (See: "Is
There Life After Death?")
The conservation domain of Information, matter's "causal matrix", is
the domain of "history", the temporal analog of space, existing at
"right angles" to space. The fleeting image of history, moving at
velocity c, is briefly visible to us as we look outward to the stars
(similar to Moses' view of the "hinder parts" of God). Its reality
cannot be doubted, even though we cannot touch it. We are all
immortal in historic spacetime. (See: "The Time Train"; See also: "A
Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
Humans are the actual "time machine" of this universe. In our
imaginations, stories, histories, books, movies, cameras, etc., the past
lives again and the future is brought to life. If you doubt this, just see
"Jurassic Park" and the "Star Wars" movies. This is as close to time
travel as we are ever likely to get. The resurrection of the dinosaurs
by humanity is a testament to the utility of humans as historians of
the cosmos, helping the universe to recapture and understand its past,
just as our science fiction helps it to realize its future potential. Time
travel (in either direction) is real; it happens in our minds, and in
galaxies far, far away.
The Arts and Sciences as Connection
17 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

"Eureka" shouted Archimedes (c. 278 - 212 B.C.) according to the
legend, as he ran naked though the streets of Syracuse, having found
a nondestructive means of determining the purity of King Hiero's
golden crown. Perhaps the most famous "Aha!" in history, it is the
story of the formation of a rational connection to the world, for in his
bath, Archimedes had serendipitously realized the connected physical
principles of "density" and displacement buoyancy.
The arts and sciences are, like religion, uniquely human, and, like
religion, they have their source in the capacity of our minds for
abstraction. While Archimedes had discovered the solution to a
practical problem, the source of his overwhelming joy was the
rational connection he had made with the world, the discovery of an
abstract principle ("density"). Plato spoke of the world of "ideal
forms"; Euclid and Pythagorus discovered in geometry and
mathematics a practical, rational connection to this ideal realm
(including the seminal music/math connection). The Greek
philosophers, scientists, and mathematicians began the breakthrough
to our connection with Natural Law; they were the tool-makers of a
new age, the age of science. Theirs were not tools chipped from stone
or cast in bronze or iron; theirs were tools of the mind, in fact a new
language of abstraction, which opened the door to Plato's world of
ideal form. This was in effect the discovery of another "spiritual"
realm, not the realm of the gods, but the abstract, rational world of
Natural Law and mathematics, which led to the rise of science.
Science is our rational mode of connecting with the Universe;
mathematics is the abstract language of this mode of contact. Without
the development of this abstract language we could not have achieved
the rational connection. (Mathematics is powerful because it is the
symbolic representation - the abstract language - of the natural
conservation laws.) Mathematics is a symbolic system of
quantitatively conserved relationships, useful for abstractly
describing and modeling physical systems which also consist of
quantitatively conserved relationships. Through science we have
learned of our physical connections to the Cosmos, a story that is still
unfolding and without doubt, with many surprises and connections
still to be revealed.
18 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

Art is another uniquely human connection to the Cosmos, even more
ancient and universal than science. Whereas science is a rational
abstract mode of connection, art is an intuitive abstract mode of
connection. Both art and science have physical, external "outputs" as
intended consequences of their modes of connection; the truly
religious mode is nonphysical, completely mental or spiritual,
although it may have a behavioral output and social expression, and
hoped-for physical outcomes (for example, as a consequence of
prayer). Religion, art, and science are similar in their mutual concern
for ideal form. While science searches for natural law, art searches for
aesthetic law, and religion searches for spiritual law. Religion, art,
and science all have their respective formulas for successful contact all have courses of study, meditative practices, behavioral norms,
institutional settings, etc. All have enormous influence on human
social organization. Secular political systems establish social
behavioral laws and connect with religious systems in the search for
"moral" law.
Much of modern art may be seen as the attempt to isolate, identify, or
define the pure elements or principles of aesthetic law, to achieve an
abstract language of ideal form, color, and composition in much the
same way that mathematics has served science. Similarly, "scientific"
principles have been applied to the spiritual search for contact,
attempting to render this process more successful as well as practical
in its results. "Christian Science", "Scientology", and "TM" are
explicit examples of this approach, but practices such as rituals,
incantations, prescribed movements, mantras, meditations, chants,
and the development of arcane, mystic, and occult formulae, some
considered to be "black magic" and "witchcraft", can also be
considered attempts to deduce the essential elements of spiritual
contact and render them pragmatically and repeatably successful.
It seems likely that our great geniuses of art, science, and spirituality,
whether rational or intuitive, were all simply "better connected" than
the rest of us, both internally in their brains and externally, as if their
minds were both better receivers and "antennas" than those of
ordinary people, allowing them a contact with the cosmic order that
19 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

for most of us is either garbled, noisy, or feeble. Indeed, what is great
art, science, and spirituality, if not the product of an exceptional
quality of personal contact with the Cosmos, both locally and
globally?
Religion, art, and science have emerged as uniquely human
connections to the Cosmos, all products of our abstracting minds. All
have become powerful institutions because of our social nature,
which in itself is a mode of connection with each other, and through
each other, the World. The "divine right" of kings and the pageantry
of royalty have, since antiquity, been thoroughly conflated with
religion, attempting to make a fractal connection between the
governments of the heavenly and human realms.
"Mind" as Cosmic Self-Awareness
The four fundamental functions of biology and their relation to the
parameters of the Tetrahedron General Systems Model:
Metabolism - Energy
Reproduction - Symmetry
Perception - Causality-Information
Evolution - Entropy (positive and negative)
Light is the messenger of causality - as Einstein's Special Theory of
Relativity informs us, through the invariance of "velocity c" and the
"Interval". The interaction between an electron shell and light
constitutes perception in its most elementary form. Perception is a
basic property of the Causal-Information Realm, beginning with the
electrical character of matter and culminating in human
consciousness and "enlightenment". Mind and Consciousness is an
emergent phenomenon of life which has its physical origin in the
ability of the electron shell of an atom to absorb and emit light
(stimulus reception and response), and its biological origin in the
adaptive value of perception (finding food, mates, enemies). Whereas
plants (mostly) use light for energy, animals (mostly) use light for
information. Perception, in its higher expressions, is an intuitive
synthesis between information and causality. Causality implies
20 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

information, and perception is the business of (mentally) assigning
sensory information to appropriate causal sequences. Mind and
"cosmic self-awareness" is a "goal" of evolution to the same extent
that life is a goal of evolution; that is, the rationale for life is to
provide the Cosmos with self-awareness and a means to know and
experience itself. Life is the rationale for the Cosmos; consciousness
is the rationale for life; ever higher modes of consciousness (as in art,
science, philosophy) are a rationale for evolution. Life is the
inevitable emergent product of the 4x3 fractal hierarchy of
organization in the Information Realm. The development of the
fractal hierarchy and the evolution of life is driven by matter's
universal and eternal search for antimatter (via electromagnetism),
entropy, and the conservation of symmetry. See: "Nature's Fractal
Pathway".
Mind is the only "metaphysical" goal of the Universe - the
evolutionary achievement of human consciousness is a self-sufficient
goal of the Universe and evolution, requiring no further justification
or explanation, in spite of our confusion regarding life's rationale. We
are the Universe become self-aware; our awareness is the awareness
of the Cosmos. The aesthetic pleasure derived from experiencing the
beauty of the Universe is a sufficient justification and reward for
human consciousness; information and experience "live" forever in
the historic domain of spacetime. Just as the existence of light
requires no explanation because it is both completely conserved and
completely symmetric, so the experience of life requires no
explanation because it is the self-awareness of the Cosmos - an
obviously desirable condition for the energy content of the Universe.
Life experience is immaterial and eternal in its essence, with joy,
love, aesthetic and intellectual pleasure (through the experience of
beauty and truth), and spiritual pleasure through "enlightenment" (a
sort of universal perceptual resonance) as its highest goals. (See:
"Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age".) Life is the means by
which the universe experiences itself and achieves self-awareness.
Life is therefore an evolutionary goal and desideratum of the
Cosmos. What should we do? Appreciate, respect, and understand
life, ourselves, and the Cosmos; explore and become co-creators with
21 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

the Universe; develop new modes of creativity and discover and
produce new forms of beauty.
A Hierarchy of Connection
Let us review the physical nature of our connections to the Cosmos,
for they stand in a structural hierarchy, all related. First is the
elemental composition of our bodies, which unites us with all
material particles in the Universe - as Carl Sagan informed us, we are
made of "star stuff" formed in the "Big Bang", and subsequently
reworked in the heart of stars and exploding supernovas. With our
material nature we also share all the charges and forces which we
have elsewhere identified as the symmetry debts of light. All material
particles are essentially an asymmetric form of light (one-half of a
particle-antiparticle pair), just as time is an asymmetric form of
space, and gravity is an asymmetric form of spacetime; our common
origin in light is the most fundamental physical connection of all. The
charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. (See also: "A Short
Course in the Unified Field Theory".)
An especially important physical connection, which we have not
considered earlier, is the ability of electrically charged particles and
systems (atoms, molecules) to interact with and capture the energy of
light. Light is an electromagnetic wave and as such it can and does
interact with the electrically charged particles it has itself created. It
is of course this interaction which allows life to capture energy from
the Sun (photosynthesis), or indeed from any source which produces
free energy of biologically useful intensity. Spacetime is not only the
conservation domain of energy, but also the medium of energy
transport, transferal, and transformation, connecting as well as
enclosing and conserving all energy forms. (See also: "The Sun
Archetype".)
Second, we are united with all Earth life, through the common
heritage of DNA. Third, we are forced to interact with our
environment and all other life forms out of our common need for air,
food, water, shelter, etc. We are thoroughly connected with the
bacterial realm through the symbionts in our cells (mitochondria) as
22 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

well as those in our digestive tract. In fact, the whole of life works
together in a necessary global symbiosis and mutualism (plants
produce oxygen for animals, animals produce CO2 for plants, etc.).
Fourth, we are a pair-bonding and sexually divided species, required
to seek out and join with the opposite sex to reproduce. Finally, we
are social animals, out of the necessity for self-defense and common
survival. All these are modes of contact and connection with our
environment and the Cosmos, and most of these we share with the
other higher animals. Added to these we have our human specialties,
our reasoning, imaginative, and abstracting brains, our language, and
our clever hands. Language is the first abstraction of human
experience, the foundation for all the others. From this fertile mix of
ingredients, the most successful "adaptive syndrome" nature has ever
produced, arose modern humanity, whose emergent properties
include a variety of new connections to the Cosmos, chief among
them religion, art, and science. The joy of creativity is the joy of this
contact experience in any mode.
It seems especially significant that life arises as a consequence of the
energy produced during the cosmic process of symmetry
conservation/restoration - the Sun, of course, is a stellar stage in the
return of asymmetric matter (asymmetric due to the lack of
antimatter) to its symmetric state, light. We are emergent products of
symmetry restoration. Life is matter enlivened and enlightened by
light, the divine leavening which raises the dust of the Earth toward
Heaven. Life captures this energy only very temporarily; it is lightly
bound in the electron shells of our atoms and soon goes on its way
again. In the meantime, life and consciousness arise to participate
ever more fully in the mystery, beauty, majesty, and evolving fractal
Information dimension of the Cosmos.
"Hidden in the light..." a chapter heading in the Cosmos TV series
referring to the absorption and emission lines in light's spectrum
discovered by Joseph Fraunhofer. They correspond to the differences
in energy levels between electron shells in the various elements of the
Periodic Table. By comparison with laboratory reference specimens,
we can know what the stars are made of - an astonishing fact and
23 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

demonstration of the power of science and technology working
together. Not only are the rainbow and Fraunhofer's lines "hidden in
the light", but when we consider that the primordial high-energy light
of the "Big Bang" or "Creation Event" gave birth to all the particleantiparticle pairs of atomic matter that subsequently formed the entire
material component of our universe, we realize that everything,
including ourselves, was "hidden in the Light" from the beginning,
waiting only to be revealed through time and evolution. God, too, is
"hidden in the light": Energy, Conservation, Information, and the
Universal Creative Principle, awaiting the evolutionary awakening of
the living universe to itself and its own spiritual origin.
PS 9 Sept. 2019
Why there is something rather than nothing? We can explain the
mineral world without invoking God, but not the biological world especially humans and their religions. God is the creative
energy/information field in the universe/multiverse. (Fractals - man is
a fractal image of God; the simplest way to reproduce Himself is via
a fractal replication.) God is manifested in the Universe as the Life
Force (Tolstoy). Carbon is the bridge between the biotic and the
abiotic domain, via a 4x3 fractal algorithm. Information stored in the
Periodic Table of the Elements is organized into self-reproducing
units by carbon (DNA-RNA). Life advances via competition for
limiting resources to satisfy the reproductive drive of DNA-RNA
(Darwinian evolution beginning at the molecular level).
In its early stages, this competitive struggle for resources between
DNA molecules is like the much-anticipated "computer apocalypse",
in which the machines learn how to program and replicate
themselves, and there is a "run-away" creation event (actually
foretold in Genesis, when God expresses the fear that Adam and Eve,
having eaten the "forbidden fruit", have gained enough knowledge to
become like gods themselves, and therefore must be expelled from
the garden). The DNA fractal unit reproduces itself until, via
competition and Darwinian evolution, after billions of
years/generations, humans are created. Humans discover the
24 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

evolutionary mechanism and DNA molecule, and do indeed, just as
God had initially feared, take over the evolutionary process and
assume (some of) the creative powers of gods.
Humans create new plants, animals, discover solar fusion, the
Periodic Table, walk on the moon, contemplate "terra-forming" Mars,
and initiate interplanetary space travel. These naked apes are god-like
indeed! Humans create the arts and sciences, philosophy and religion.
We (through science) may be able to explain how the material world
of atoms, planets, and stars "boot-strapped" itself into existence, but
where did consciousness and the music of Beethoven, Mozart, and
Handel's "Messiah" come from? Whence the beauty of a moon-lit
night? Of majestic and beautiful Nature? This kind of emergent
information may, as Chardin thought, originate with light and the
atoms, but it is so astonishing, transcendent, ineffable, numinous, and
mysterious that most of us are satisfied to attribute it to the presence
of a creative, omnipotent, and omniscient "God" active in the
universe; most of us are satisfied to simply worship the mystery and
majesty of the cosmos. We need this ultimate enigma to give
significance to our lives and to our universe, and perhaps to our
personal identities.
Why is there something rather than nothing? Because God - whose
first attribute, whatever else He may be, is Creative
Energy/Information - has willed it so by his own nature ("I am that I
am"). Why is humanity created in the "image and likeness" of God?
Because the process of fractal creation/replication is the simplest and
most effective program that can be executed by a molecular
mechanism (DNA-RNA). (See: "The Information Ladder".) Why is
there "evil" in the world? Because our world, with all its
imperfections, is simply what molecular, Darwinian evolution could
create. It is up to us to carry it forward toward our own notion of
something better.
(See also: Jim Holt "Why Does the World Exist?" (Norton, 2012) for
extensive ruminations on this topic)

25 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

The fractal mode of creation also explains how it is that humans have
"spiritual" awareness and a religious culture - it is built into the
atoms from their (Divine) beginning. God cannot create anything that
is foreign to his own nature. Communication up and down the chain
of creation is by resonance among fractal forms - including music
and "good vibrations". What we can say regarding the actual nature
of God is very limited. Is God just a mysterious cosmic creative agent
of energy, information, and conservation law? If we take our cues
from natural science, then we can at least say among the most basic
attributes of God are energy, information, conservation, and
creativity. We envision God as the creator and conservator of our
universe (and the "multiverse", if it exists), all-powerful and
omniscient, immanent in his creation, the ultimate source of its
energy and information content. The "purpose" of the universe is
apparently to explore its own creative potential, experience and
understand itself through living systems and consciousness, and
perhaps to reproduce itself via fractal modes of replication.
If we take our cues from religious texts, we find that man is the
"image and likeness" of God - a normal fractal description. But
exactly what does this imply? Surely God is not just a "big man in the
sky"! This biblical description only provides us with a profound
question requiring interpretation.
"Natural law" is primarily associated with the conservation function,
including energy conservation, entropy, symmetry conservation,
charge and spin conservation, the "four forces" of physics, and many
other associated/adjunct conservation functions and "laws"
(momentum, etc.). The universe is strictly regulated in terms of its
energy content, including its dimensional metric of spacetime and
gravity. We seem to live in a universe based on electromagnetic
energy consisting of two interchangeable forms, "free" energy (light)
and "bound" energy (matter). The elementary particles of matter are
also strictly regulated, not only in their energetic relations (motion,
etc.), but also in terms of charges regulating their individual
conservation, of which the weak force "identity" charge is the most
26 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

critical.
The pivotal aspect of the "creation event", in which the free,
symmetric form of electromagnetic radiation (light) was converted
into the asymmetric, bound (or "manifest") form of atomic matter,
was the creation of partially charged quarks within primordial unitary
leptons, creating "leptoquarks". A leptoquark is a heavy, primordial
lepton which has been subdivided internally into three parts (the
"quarks"). Quarks are permanently bound internally into a heavy
particle called a "baryon", which became the foundation particle of
the atomic nucleus. The ability to form electrically neutral particles
(such as a neutron) is the most important attribute of the partial
charges of the quarks (quark partial charges may be either positive or
negative). Electrical neutrality allows the creation of our asymmetric
"matter-only" universe without violating any conservation laws; the
conservation laws are simply "put on hold" in the form of conserved
alternative charges, just as the free form of electromagnetic energy is
conserved in massive matter, to be returned to its original form (light)
at some future time. The Higgs boson provides an asymmetric but
charge-conserved pathway to manifestation, involving "alternative
charge carriers" and the "Intermediate Vector Bosons" of the weak
force, which finds time to act upon the long-lived electrically neutral
leptoquarks present during the "Big Bang". Heavy anti-leptoquark
neutrinos released during the "Big Bang" balance the "baryon number
charge" of the nucleons formed from these first asymmetric decays,
and are present today as the "dark matter" content of our universe.
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
Part II (Go to Part II)
Home Page I
Home Page II

27 of 28

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

The Human Connection: Physical and Metaphysical Connections to...

28 of 28

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/human.html

9/24/19, 8:03 PM

