The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

The Solar Archetype
(revised Dec., 2010)
John A. Gowan
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Sunlight celebrates the completion of a symmetry conservation cycle
Abstract
The primordial role of gravitation is to supply negative
energy during the "Creation Event", so that the Cosmos may
be born from a condition of zero net energy. All latter-day
gravitational conservation roles are derived from and reflect
this primordial energy-conserving role.
Gravity has two primary conservation roles in today's
universe: 1) entropy conservation (at all gravitational field
strengths), and 2) symmetry conservation (at high
gravitational field strengths). Entropy conservation is
accomplished by the gravitational annihilation of space,
exposing a metrically equivalent temporal residue. The
annihilation of space converts the expansive spatial entropy
drive of free energy (the intrinsic motion of light), to the
expansive historical entropy drive of bound energy (the
intrinsic motion of time). The implicit temporal drive of
spatial expansion (recognized as the time component of
"spacetime") is converted to (and conserved as) the explicit
temporal drive of history - via gravity. Symmetry
conservation is accomplished by the gravitational conversion
of bound to free energy (mass to light) in stars, and related
astrophysical processes, and ultimately and completely, via
1 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. Sunlight
indicates the completion of a symmetry conservation cycle:
light - matter - light, which begins with the conversion of
light to matter (free to bound electromagnetic energy) during
the "Big Bang", and ends with the gravitational conversion of
bound to free energy in stars.
Translations
This paper has been translated into Polish by Valeria
Aleksandrova. 5 Feb., 2015. Many thanks, Valeria! See:
http://www.autoersatzteile.de/blog/solar-archetyp.
This paper has been translated into Macedonian by Katerina
Nestiv. 26 May, 2016. Many thanks, Katerina! See:
http://sciencevobe.com/2016/05/26/the-solar-archetype/
This paper has been translated into Thai by Ashna Bhatt.
Many thanks, Ashna!
http://eduindexcode.com/the-solar-archetype/

Introduction
I have always regarded the Sun as (at least) semi-sacred. I have long
thought of the Sun and Earth as a male-female pair of godlike beings,
either one sterile in the absence of the other, but together having the
immense potential of producing a galaxy-colonizing life form: spacefaring humanity. (See: "The Human Connection".)
From the very beginning of my focused research (since my 40th year,
1977), I believed that the Sun physically embodied and held the key
to the unified field theory - that if we could understand the Sun, we
could understand the theory. This because the Sun converts matter to
light - returning matter full circle to its origins - and to understand
this process and the circle fully, means understanding both matter and
light fully, and physically that is all there is. Moreover, this is a
natural and spontaneous, not an artificial or forced, process. This is
Nature speaking in her own voice of the unity of matter and light.
2 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

Hence in the solar transformation we should be able to discover clues
to the unified field theory, the theory which unites free and bound
energy. The Sun is the unified field theory in action, the great
archetype and example which not only brings forth life on Earth, but
in humanity brings forth understanding as well. (See: "Currents of
Entropy and Symmetry".)
We should also note that the sun is taking the first step upward on the
"Information Ladder" - the conversion of hydrogen to helium, that
will eventually lead to the Periodic Table of elements (via supernovas
and even neutron star collisions), the creation of life, the evolution of
humanity, and recursively, to the fusion of hydrogen again, and a
pathway to self-awareness and self-comprehension for the universe.
So there is a deep double physical reason (beyond the many obvious
ones - heat, light, gravity, etc.) for celebrating our glorious Sun:
symmetry conservation and the initiation of the Information Pathway
leading eventually to humanity (at least locally).
The appearance of the hydrogen bomb on Earth is a sad signal that
the solar fusion process has been captured by the human mind in its
raw or primitive (and very inappropriate) form, meaning we now
have enough scientific knowledge to understand this final theory of
matter and light, Einstein's dream. The Sun indeed does hold the
secret of the theory, the meaning of light and matter, of time and
space, of gravity, charge, and force. We have only to think of these
energy forms in the appropriate terms of principle and natural law;
the Sun integrates all the natural forces, and the result of this
summation is light - the conversion of bound to free energy.
The Conversion of Bound Electromagnetic Energy to Free
Electromagnetic Energy
When left to themselves, the forces of nature spontaneously convert
matter to light. Stars like the Sun begin the job; Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes completes the transformation. Looking up at
the night sky, we see that the entire galaxy is busy at the same task.
And this is only the gravitational pathway - nucleosynthesis followed
by supernova and quasar phenomena, followed by "quantum
3 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

radiance".
Two other major pathways converting matter to light exist, matterantimatter annihilation via the electromagnetic force, and particle and
proton decay via the interaction of the strong and weak forces.
Almost all of the matter in the Universe has already been converted
to light via electromagnetic annihilation with antimatter in the first
moments of the Big Bang - only approximately one particle in ten
billion of the original amount of matter remains. (Matter/antimatter
annihilations continue today in the suppression of virtual particle
pairs by the electromagnetic force, a maintenance activity protecting
vacuum symmetry.) What we see today is just a minor "mopping up"
operation, conducted by the remaining forces along two fronts: the
"social" or gravitational tactic, the conversion of matter to light in
great masses (stars); and the "individual" tactic of particle and proton
decay involving the strong and weak forces. Between these four
pathways, not a single atom of matter will escape an eventual
transformation to light. But the Sun is the ancient, obvious, intuitive,
and archetypical example; the others we have only recently
discovered through the rational achievements of our science.
Noether's Theorem
When we ask why this should be, why is matter everywhere and by
every natural force being transformed to light, we are quickly led - by
the light of our modern scientific understanding - to a conceptual
formulation and understanding of the principles and conservation
laws that underlie and frame the unified field theory.
In the first place, we understand that matter is not only being
transformed to light, it is being returned to light, a crucial difference:
matter began as light in the "Big Bang", and the natural forces are
simply returning matter to its original and symmetric form. Again, we
ask why - why do they bother? Why not leave matter just as it is? The
reason is a conservation law discovered by Emmy Noether. The
universal return of matter to light is in obedience to a mathematically
formulated conservation law known as "Noether's Theorem". This
great theorem has become the basis of all formal (mathematical)
4 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

attempts to unify the forces (via "Group Theory").
Noether's Theorem will also serve as the major point of leverage in
our much more modest conceptual (non-mathematical) formulation
of the unified field theory, which nevertheless will be built strictly in
accordance with the conservation laws of standard physics. We will
arrive at our goal before the mathematicians simply because this is
the easier path. It is much like learning to talk before learning to read
or write. Talking is easier, and serves the purpose of communication,
but it is very limited in its powers compared to reading and writing.
In these papers we will have to be content to learn to talk only, and
leave the more difficult "reading and writing" to the mathematically
gifted among us. But in our talking we will nevertheless obey the
rules of grammar that are also observed by reading and writing - the
conservation laws of physics are the same - so that when the
mathematicians do arrive on the scene, we will already have laid
solid foundations within a common language and story.
"Noether's Theorem" states that in a multicomponent field, such as
the electromagnetic field (or the metric field of spacetime), where one
finds a symmetry one will find an associated conservation law, and
vice versa. Noether's Theorem is saying that in the conversion of light
to matter, not only must the raw energy of light be conserved in the
mass and momentum of particles, but the symmetry of light must also
be conserved - not only the quantity but the quality of energy must be
conserved. The theorem does not say exactly how this must be done,
but in practice the symmetry of light is conserved through the charges
of matter - charge conservation = symmetry conservation in a
temporal form - and the symmetry of the metric field of spacetime is
conserved through inertial and gravitational forces.
I think of Noether's Theorem (1918) as the "Truth and Beauty"
theorem, in reference to Keat's great poetic intuition ("Ode on a
Grecian Urn"; John Keats,1819):
"... Beauty is truth, truth beauty, - that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know"

5 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

in which Beauty corresponds to Symmetry and Truth corresponds to
Conservation. Keats did exactly what we are attempting to do in these
papers: achieve an intuitive understanding of natural law which is in
complete accordance with a formal theory yet to be realized. It is a
great example - among many others - of how the same truth can be
appropriately apprehended by both the intuitive and the rational
powers of the human mind. It is almost always true that the intuitive
understanding comes first - sometimes by thousands of years ("for
now, we see as through a glass darkly...").
Noether's theorem tells us why the forces of nature are busy
converting matter to light: matter was created from light in the "Big
Bang", but since light has greater symmetry than matter, it is to
conserve light's symmetry that all the charges and forces of matter
work to accomplish the return of bound energy to its former state of
greater symmetry. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of
light. These charges produce forces which act to pay the debt and
return the system of matter to its original symmetric form, light.
Unification
A program of unification is therefore clearly indicated by Noether's
Theorem: identify the (broken) symmetries of light carried,
represented, and conserved by the charges of matter. The nature of
the forces (and their actions) produced by these charges should offer
clues as to what these (broken) symmetries are. This will allow us to
refer all the charges and forces of matter (including gravity) to their
respective origins as specific symmetries of light, accomplishing our
conceptual unification. Matter is but an asymmetric form of light, just
as time is an asymmetric form of space, and gravity is an asymmetric
form of the inertial spacetime metric: the charges and forces of matter
act to return bound energy to its symmetric, original state of free
energy. In the papers linked below, and others on this website, we
will follow out this simple program of force unification, identifying
the broken symmetries of light represented by the conserved charges
of matter. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory"
(parts 1, 2, 3).
6 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

Related Papers:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of
Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of
Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of
Everything") - Part 3 (Summary)
Postscript: Transformation of Hydrogen to Helium in the Solar
Interior (Aug. 2019)
This process, first explained by Hans Bethe in 1937 (1967 Nobel
Prize), is the universal first step in nuclear transformations and
element-building in stars. Weak force IVBs ("W" IVBs) are required
to regulate and mediate the transformations, since in the process of
transforming protons to neutrons, new elementary particles (leptons)
must be created/destroyed and quarks must be transformed. The
massive "W" IVBs are only present in virtual form; the central solar
interior need only become hot enough to facilitate the production of
virtual "W" IVBs at a rate sufficient to supply a counter-pressure of
radiation from nuclear conversions, just enough to prevent
gravitational collapse. This dynamic tension between gravity and
light maintains a relatively constant rate of nuclear reaction (on
human time scales) in the solar core, to the great benefit of Earth's
biology. (See also: "The Information Pathway"). (Details of the
astrophysical creation of the various heavy elements of the Periodic
Table were worked out by Fred Hoyle and George Gamow; some of
the heaviest are evidently created only in collisions between neutron
stars.)
Now it is perfectly obvious that all atomic matter, and things made
from it (such as humans), ultimately derive from the asymmetric
processes of the "Big Bang" (which created hydrogen and helium),
and the subsequent creation of the heavier elements of the Periodic
Table as manufactured by stars and supernovas, etc. This is simply to
say that we come (physically) from the Multiverse through the portals
7 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

The Solar Archetype

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect13.html

of the "Big Bang" and stars via the mediating Higgs and IVBs as
nuclear matter (quarks) and leptonic alternative charge carriers
(electrons, neutrinos). The stars are gateways between us (our atomic
constituents) and our origin in the Multiverse. When Picasso saw the
famous cave paintings in France from 30+ millennia ago, he
exclaimed: "We have learned nothing!" Perhaps the same may be said
regarding the religion of our sun-worshiping ancestors.
Why is there something rather than nothing? Because the Creative
Spirit of God fills the "void". Creativity is the Divine characteristic
which answers this ancient philosophical question. Beginning with
quantum-mechanical particle-antiparticle pairs and the creation of
matter, this "creative drive" goes on to produce life, humanity (a
fractal image of itself?), our science, philosophy, and all the arts.
Links:
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

8 of 8

8/28/19, 10:33 AM

