An Introduction to the Papers
John A. Gowan
home page
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
Columns
Rows
The Unified Matrix
Connections Between the "Tetrahedron Model" and the "Standard Model"
Links and References
Abstract
Because the papers themselves can be difficult for the uninitiated, in spite of my efforts to
make them simple and clear, I have written a series of introductory papers designed as a
guide to assist the interested reader in working through them. I will try to bring out the
main points of the paper, its relation to the remaining body of work, and perhaps make a
few comments on its history and structure. There is almost no mathematics in these papers;
for the most part, the papers deal only with conservation principles, although of course I
make reference to the mathematical theories which provide the formal basis for the
conceptual synthesis of this work (Noether's theorem, Einstein's "Interval" and energy
relations, the 1st and 2nd laws of thermodynamics, etc.).
Section I: Unification Theory - "Scientific" Section
(revised Jan., 2012)
(See also: Section 9: "Symmetry: Noether's Theorem and Einstein's Interval"; Section 10:
"Conservation"; Section 13: "The Sun Archetype")
Paper:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Summary
Introduction
This is the "flagship" paper of the "scientific" unification section. It is one of my oldest papers and
consequently has been reworked many times. The first version was written about 1982. When I revise a
paper, I generally throw away the old version. Eventually, I often do not know either when the first
version of a paper was written, or what was in it. This is also one of the longest papers, as I try to say
something about everything. An earlier version of this paper was submitted to the Archives of Physics
on 4 July 2000 (and has been updated many times since).
The first thing to note about this paper is its peculiar organizational format; it is written in sections
which correspond to the rows and columns of a 4x4 table of "Forces and Energy States". Hence it is a
good idea to look at the table and actually print it out for ready reference while reading this paper. This
4x4 "matrix" or "tabular" form of the theory is its earliest form, and remains particularly useful for
organizing and sorting out the detail of the theory. In some ways it is like the Periodic Table of the
Elements in its organizing function, and like that classical table, the very act of organizing the data in a

nontrivial manner carries with it a certain degree of information and explanatory power. In this regard
it is important to note that the tabular sequence of horizontal forces and vertical energy states follows a
purposeful order.
Columns
The four forces of physics head the vertical columns of the table. The first force is the Electromagnetic
Force, the primary energy form and force of our Universe. In second place are the dimensional forces
of spacetime - Gravitation and Inertia. The logic here is that free electromagnetic energy (which I often
refer to as simply "light") actually creates spacetime (as an energy-conserving metric or regulatory
domain) by its intrinsic (entropic) motion. Moreover, as a matter of General Systems organizational
principle, I wish to keep the long-range "spacetime" force pair separate from the short-range "particle"
force pair. The third force is the strong force, the primary source of quarks and most massive forms of
bound energy. Here we envision the creation of symmetric pairs of particles and antiparticles by the
interaction of highly energetic light with the metric structure of spacetime (and all the other forces), in
the very early moments of the "Big Bang". The fourth force is the weak force, responsible for breaking
the symmetry of the particle-antiparticle pairs formed in column three, and by this action plunging the
Universe into the asymmetric state of matter, time, and charge we are all familiar with. (The actual
mechanism of particle formation and symmetry-breaking remains unknown, but possibly involves the
"Higgs" boson, "leptoquarks", and the "X" Intermediate Vector Boson.) (See: "The Particle Table";
and: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs"; and: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
Hence the columns of the table tell the story of creation in terms of the sequential action of the four
forces. These forces are moreover organized in two pairs: 1) the long-range or "spacetime forces",
electromagnetism and gravitation; 2) the short-range or "particle forces", the strong and weak forces of
atomic matter.
Rows
The four horizontal rows of the table are likewise ordered in a purposeful sequence, consisting of four
states of energy. The first row represents free energy (light) as expressed in the various modes of the 4
forces (see above). The second row is bound energy, "mass-matter", derived from the symmetrybreaking action of the weak force in cell 4 of row 1, again as expressed in various modes appropriate to
the 4 forces. Row 2 therefore represents the conservation of the raw energy of row 1 in terms of the
mass and momentum of particulate and atomic matter. Row 3 represents "charge"; these are the
charges appropriate to each of the 4 forces as carried by the massive particles of row 2. These charges
represent the symmetry debts of light, and are conservation consequences of the breaking of the
symmetric energy state of light by the weak force in row 1, a conservation required by "Noether's
Theorem". Hence row 3 represents symmetry conservation (via charge conservation and inertial forces)
while row 2 represents raw energy conservation (via mass and momentum). Row 4 represents the
"forces" generated by the charges of row 3 as they act to return the material system to its original
symmetric state of light, fulfilling Noether's symmetry conservation theorem (and hence "paying"
(discharging) the symmetry debts represented by their conserved charges). Row 4 therefore repeats row
1 (in terms of forces), but whereas in row 1 we see the forces in their creative modes (producing
matter), in row 4 we see the same forces in their destructive modes, annihilating and returning matter to
its original and more symmetric form, light. Hence the table represents a completed conservation
circle, beginning and ending with a perfectly symmetric energy form, light.
To reprise the vertical sequence of rows: symmetric light interacts with a spatial conservation metric
(of its own creation), producing symmetric particle-antiparticle pairs whose symmetry is broken by the
weak force during the early moments of the "Big Bang" (this is the original wave-particle duality of

light, expressing the potential of electromagnetic energy to exist in two related forms, light and matter,
or free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy: hv = mcc). These particles (quarks and leptons)
conserve the raw energy of light in their mass and momentum, and in addition bear conserved charges charges which generate forces acting to return the asymmetric material system to its original symmetric
immaterial state (light). The forces therefore exist to pay the symmetry debts of free energy represented
by the conserved charges of matter, in obedience to "Noether's Theorem": charge conservation =
symmetry conservation. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. The invariance of
charge, as required by charge and symmetry conservation, is the key to understanding the "local"
compensating activities of the forces ("local gauge symmetry currents") - magnetism, time, quark
confinement, IVB mass, etc.). The four final energy states are described in terms of the actions
(produced by the field vectors) of each of the 4 forces. In cybernetic terms, the rows are ordered as
"input" (energy, row 1), "thruput" (conservation of raw energy and symmetry, rows 2 and 3), and
"output" (system resolution and symmetry debt payments, row 4).
The Unified Matrix
The 4x4 matrix is a "well ordered" system (in the sense of ordered data sets such as the Periodic Table
of the Elements), which tells the story of the creation of matter horizontally, and the return of matter to
its symmetric origin in light, vertically. The matrix essentially plots the various symmetry debts of light
(horizontally) against the conservation modes of light (vertically) - it is a "light crystal" telling the story
of the devolution and evolution of free energy in the Cosmos. This is why the 4x4 matrix is such a
special and valuable form, why it is ordered in this particular way, and why it can give us so much
information.
The program of unification consists of the identification of light's symmetry debts as held by matter in
the form of conserved charges - one charge and symmetry debt corresponding to each of the four
forces. Each charge is identified in terms of a specific broken symmetry of light which it represents,
carries, and conserves. Unification subsists in tracing all the forces back to their common origin as
(broken) symmetries of light (including gravity).
The unification of the forces, however, is not the whole story of the Cosmos, nor indeed, of unification.
In addition to the four forces, there is a deeper layer of conservation law which regulates and
orchestrates the activity of the forces within an evolving universe. Four major conservation principles
and their corollaries relating the forces to each other and governing their activity are discussed in this
and other papers. These four principles are: 1) The Conservation of Energy; 2) The Conservation of
Symmetry; 3) Entropy; 4) Causality (the Law of Cause and Effect - "Karma"). The interrelationship of
these 4 conservation principles and corollaries constitutes a further expression of unification, at a level
of abstraction, generality, and significance anterior to the four forces, and is extensively discussed in
the section on the Tetrahedron Models of the conservation laws of energy. (See also: "The Tetrahedron
Model".)
Finally, any unification model must address the phenomenon of life and the evolution of information
systems. To this end the overall 4x4 form of the force unification table is specifically directed: this
form is part and parcel of the fractal series of forces and energy states which make up our Universe, as
discussed in the section on the "Fractal Organization of Nature". Hence the force unification table, by
virtue of its 4x4 fractal form, is embedded in the organizational structure and dynamic of the wider
Universe, indeed forming the base of the fractal series as the "prime iteration" and motivator of the
cosmic fractal algorithm, the fundamental note, frequency, or vibration of a resonant universal
harmonic, a distinction which confirms our expectation for the essential role of the Unified Field
Theory.

Connections Between the "Tetrahedron Model" and the "Standard Model"
I see now (after 34 years' work) that most of my effort toward unification has been concentrated on the
"rebound" or evolutionary phase of the Universe, as we find it today, driven by gravitation, entropy,
symmetry conservation, and biological evolution, simultaneously building complex structures while
returning asymmetric matter to its original symmetric state, light. Conversely, most of the effort of the
physics "establishment" toward unification has been concentrated on the "cascade" or devolutionary
phase of the Universe, the stepwise descent from the perfect symmetry of the Multiverse and Planck
scale unity, as the forces decoupled from one another in an entropy-driven rush toward our familiar
electromagnetic "ground" state. The electromagnetic "ground" state is the common domain from which
both unification efforts began, but I worked my way forward in time toward the ultimate macroscopic
symmetry of the "Big Crunch", while the "establishment" worked backward in time toward the ultimate
microscopic symmetry of the "Big Bang". My symmetries are (mostly) conceptual, involving the longrange forces and the macro-world, theirs are (mostly) mathematical, involving the short-range forces
and the micro-world. It is also true that "I saw the forest while they saw the trees", and that symmetries
(and therefore conservation laws) recognized from one perspective went unnoticed from the other. In
this exchange I had the advantage, since I read their work, but they did not read mine. Nevertheless, the
two systems are neatly joined by the synthetic power of General Systems, both expressed in a 4x3 and
4x4 matrix format. (See: The 'Tetrahedron Model' vs the 'Standard Model' of Physics: A Comparison".)
I explore the General System form of the micro-world, the "Big Bang", and the full energy spectrum of
the weak force in the "Higgs Cascade" papers. The macro-world is modeled in a General Systems
format in such papers as "The Information Pathway", "The Fractal Organization of Nature", and
"Nature's Fractal Pathway". Humanity's role in all this is considered in "The Human Connection". The
general principles of physical law which underlie all our unification models, whether conceptual,
mathematical, macro, or micro, are explored (also in a General Systems format) in the papers
"Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory" and "A Tetrahedron Model". The interaction
between "non-local" light and "local" matter is considered in the "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry"
series of papers, which also suggest connections between my work and "establishment" unification
models (through the common theme of charge invariance and "local gauge symmetry currents"). The
joining of both micro- and macro-unification models within a common General Systems 4x4 format
illustrates once again the synthetic power of General Systems, as well as the great value of looking at a
common problem from more than one perspective.
One must finally ask: Why bother with an "alternative" unified field theory? - why not simply let
"establishment science" figure it all out with their giant machines, government funding, complex math,
and thousands of professional scientists? Well, for one thing, despite all the heavy artillery, they
haven't yet managed to incorporate gravity into their synthesis, so there is a gap in either
understanding, method, or both needing to be filled; for another, the general public will never be able
to understand the final form of their heavy math synthesis, whereas anyone who can read English and
has a high-school understanding of general science and physics should be able to fully comprehend my
work. A third reason is that the "Standard Model" of the establishment has nothing whatsoever to say
about the human condition. In my own work, this glaring deficiency is addressed by an appeal to the
methods of General Systems, in which the unified field theory is embedded within the wider domain of
information, biology, and the fractal organization of Nature.
I should say at once, however, that we all owe "establishment" science and its practitioners and
mathematicians an enormous debt of gratitude for the work they have done to bring us to the current
pinnacle of understanding. Because of their great work, which properly began with Galileo, we are now
in a position to understand the unified field theory from the perspective of conservation law alone,
without having to understand the details of the math - just as the efforts of generations of automotive

engineers have enabled us to drive our cars without having to understand the details of how they
actually work. In an important sense, the hard work of the scientists has allowed us to return to a more
intuitive understanding of the Cosmos, but one achieved through the broad principles of conservation
law. Often enough, we find these same conservation principles have ancient analogs in the traditional
symbology of myth and religion.
I remain convinced that the Cosmos, despite its apparent complexity, is simply motivated and can be
simply explained, at least in its major features, in terms of a few conservation laws and adjunct
principles. It is therefore to the general public that this work is dedicated - that we may all share in a
better understanding of the beautiful and mysterious Universe we inhabit.
Links:
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Summary
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos

Nature's Fractal Pathway
The Information Pathway (text)
The Information Ladder (table)
The Human Connection
Symmetry: Noether's Theorem and Einstein's Interval
Conservation
The Sun Archetype
Simple Table of the Four Forces
4x3 Table of the Four Forces
The Tetrahedrom Model (diagram)
References
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. M. Dekker, New
York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
de Chardin, Pierre Teilhard: The Phenomenon of Man. French: Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1955; English:
Harper and Row, New York, 1959.
Close, Frank: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212, 1221-8 (Nobel
lecture).
Gowan, J. C. (Sr.) 1975. "Trance, Art, Creativity"
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos. A. A. Knoph, 2004, 569 + xii pp.
Gross, D. J. and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30: 1343.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed
Equations of Quark Theory."
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics 1975, 43
(3), 199-220.
Lederman, Leon with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Lederman, Leon and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Oerter, Robert: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin (Plume) 2006.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. Oxford University
Press, NY
Politzer, H. D.. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
Resnick, Robert: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Stewart, Ian. "Why Beauty is Truth". 2007, Basic Books
Trefil, James: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier) 1983.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.
home page

