Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

GRAVITY, ENTROPY, AND THERMODYNAMICS: PART I
(revised July, 2014)
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
E-mail: johngowan@earthlink.net (or) jag8@cornell.edu
Gravity is Matter's Memory it Once was Light
Table of Contents (part I)
Part I
Abstract
Introduction
Four Physical Principles
The Several Forms of Entropy
The Light Universe
Energy Conservation
Symmetry and the "Interval"
References
Links
Part II
(I recommend the reader consult the "preface" or "guide" to this paper, which may be found at "About the
Papers: An Introduction" (section 7); also "Section 2: An Introduction to Gravitation").
Part I
Go to Part II
Abstract
The intrinsic motions of light, time, and gravity are primordial forms ("drives") of entropy, causing: 1) the
creation, expansion, and cooling of space; 2) the creation, expansion, and aging of history; 3) the conversion
of either entropic domain into the other - space to time or the reverse (and both occur in our Sun). The
charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem), including the conserved "location"
charge of gravity, which encodes (in negentropic terms) the lost positive/spatial entropy drive of the free
energy (light) which was converted into the bound energy of matter. Alternatively stated: the gravitational
"location" charge (Gm) of bound energy is a symmetry debt recording the lost distributional symmetry of the
free energy (light) which created the matter, including spacetime location and total amount. Gravity is
matter's memory it once was light.
Gravity pays the entropy-"interest" on matter's symmetry debt by creating time from space - giving charge
conservation an extended, causal significance in the historic dimension. Light's spatial entropy drive and
expansion funds matter's historical entropy drive and expansion, via the gravitational conversion of space to
time: cosmic spatial expansion decelerates in consequence. Gravity pays the energy-"principal" of matter's
symmetry debt by the conversion of bound to free energy - via the nucleosynthetic pathway in stars and
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 1 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

supernovas, via the conversion of gravitational potential energy to radiation in quasars, and via Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes. The cosmic gravitational energy field is reduced as mass is converted to
light; cosmic spatial expansion accelerates in consequence."Dark Energy" is therefore simply the ongoing
reduction of the cosmic gravitational field as matter reverts to the light which created it.
In the mathematical terms of Evariste Galois' "Group Theory", the "Tetrahedron Model" is a
description of the symmetry group of light, including its destruction by asymmetric weak force
decays (producing our matter-only Cosmos), and its on-going restoration in obedience to
Noether's Theorem of symmetry conservation (as in the conversion of bound to free energy in
stars and other astrophysical processes).
Introduction
Gravitation produces a local, spacetime metric for massive matter (gauged by Newton's universal
gravitational constant "G"), imposed upon (and derived from) a global, spatial metric for massless light
(gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c"). The spacetime metric of gravitation - like the spatial
metric from which it is extracted - exists for several related conservation imperatives. In the gravitational
case, these imperatives include: 1) The conservation of energy (1st law of thermodynamics); 2) entropy (2nd
law of thermodynamics); 3) causality (the law of cause and effect); 4) the conservation of symmetry
(Noether's Theorem). In the material/gravitational universe, entropy, causality, and the conservation of
symmetry are necessary adjuncts to the conservation of energy. Entropy, causality, energy, and symmetry
conservation are all related through the universal electromagnetic gauge constant "c" and the intrinsic motion
of light. Among other functions, "velocity c" regulates or "gauges" the primordial spatial entropy drive of
light; the metric symmetry of space; Einstein's "Interval" and causality, including "Lorentz Invariance"; the
energetic relation between bound and free energy (mass vs light): E = mcc; and the symmetric "non-local"
distribution of light's energy throughout space. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
The rationale for gravity begins with the creation of the Cosmos - the negative energy of gravity is necessary
to balance the positive energy of the "Big Bang", so that the "Creation Event" requires zero net energy. This
is the time when gravity is joined with the other forces in equal strength, and bound energy (mass) is created
from free energy (light) and the structural metric of spacetime through the combined action of the four forces
of physics. Initially, bound energy is in the form of matter-antimatter pairs, so that creation is initiated from a
state of zero net charge as well as zero net energy. Beginning in such a state of complete neutrality (perhaps
as a giant quantum fluctuation of the vacuum, an "inflationary bubble", or by Divine Fiat), the Universe can
only subsequently evolve into a state of complete conservation. (While such a huge quantum fluctuation
might be unthinkable in our own universe, it might not be so unusual in the Multiverse - we simply don't
know. In any case, all "creation" scenarios are speculative, whether rationally or intuitively motivated.)
Following on from its primary role of providing negative energy during the "Big Bang", gravity plays (at
least) two further major conservation roles in the evolving universe: 1) the conversion of space to time (the
role we see on Earth); 2) the conversion of bound to free energy (in stars, supernovas, quasars, and via
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes). The first role conserves the entropy drive ("intrinsic motion")
of light (free electromagnetic energy); the second role conserves light's "non-local" distributional and metric
symmetry (obeying Noether's Theorem). These secondary conservation roles are natural consequences of the
mode of action of gravity's primary role, which is the creation of negative energy and entropy via the
contraction and destruction of space (creating time), in contradistinction to the expansion and creation of
space by the positive energy and entropy drive of light.
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 2 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

Gravity satisfies its energy, entropy, and causality conservation role immediately and directly, through the
creation of time - via the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue
(see: "The Conversion of Space to Time"). Time serves as the primordial entropy drive of bound energy, and
also protects Einstein's "Interval" (via "Lorentz invariance" and the covariance of time with space) conserving the principle of causality in material systems with relative rather than absolute motion. Time is
also necessary to accommodate the energy accounts of matter in relative motion. The intrinsic motion of time
produces history, the conservation domain of matter's causal information matrix, web, or network (historic
spacetime). The spherically symmetric gravitational field vanishes at its center, not only producing time by
the annihilation of space, but also ensuring that no net spatial motion accrues to the gravitating mass
(observing energy conservation). (See: "Global-Local Gauge Symmetry in Gravitation".)
Gravity satisfies its symmetry conservation role through the conversion of bound to free energy (in stars, for
example), but is in no hurry to do so. The symmetry debts of massive particles, which are generally held
through time in the form of conserved charges, may be paid or discharged on an indefinite schedule - unlike
energy conservation debts, which must be paid immediately (as in the inertial and entropic conservation
functions of gravitation). Gravitational symmetry debts are paid by the conversion of bound to free energy mass to light - in stars, supernovas, and quasars. The process goes to completion in Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes. This final and complete gravitational conversion of mass to light pays all matter's
energy, entropy, and symmetry debts simultaneously. Matter's gravitational field vanishes as matter itself
vanishes, providing the evidence that the symmetry debt represented and carried by matter's gravitational
charge and field has been fully repaid. (See: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?")
Inertial forces arise as metric symmetry debts which behave like raw energy debts, unlike the symmetry debts
of massive particles which are held through time in the form of charges. A fundamental difference therefore
characterizes spatial (inertial) vs temporal (material) symmetry debts. Gravitation bridges this distinction,
however, converting the spatial entropy drive of light (the intrinsic motion of light, which is wholly inertial in
character) to the historical entropy drive of matter (time's intrinsic motion, which is partly inertial and partly
charge-like in character (because time is an asymmetric, one-way, local, metric symmetry debt always
attached to some form of bound energy). The unfavorable conversion from symmetric space to asymmetric
time results in the negative sign of "G": (-Gm), and energy is immediately debited from the spatial expansion
of the Cosmos. Thus gravitation has both a spatial, inertial character as a symmetry debt, and a temporal,
charge character as an entropy debt. The gravitational "location" charge, whose active principle is time,
connects spatial with temporal metrics, symmetry conservation with entropy conservation, and gravity with
the other charges and forces of physics through "Noether's Theorem": the charges of matter are the symmetry
debts of light. Time is the entropic charge of the gravitational force. A gravitational field is the spatial
consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. Time and gravity induce each other in an endless entropic
conservation loop. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time"; see also: "The Double Conservation Role of
Gravitation".)
The gravitational symmetry debt is in response to the broken symmetry of light's "non-local" distribution in
space, when light is converted to any form of bound energy. The gravitational entropy debt is in response to
light's lost intrinsic motion, arising from the same cause and simultaneously with the symmetry debt. The
gravitational charge is designated "location"; time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge. Time's
intrinsic (entropic) historic motion replaces light's intrinsic (entropic) spatial motion; the time dimension
specifies the 4-dimensional location of immobile, undistributed matter, and as these charges are summed and
concentrated, the total amount and density of bound energy as well.
The ultimate purpose of a dimensional metric, whether spatial and global (as gauged by "c"), or temporal and
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 3 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

local (as gauged by "G"), is the conservation of energy. This role is fulfilled by gravitation through the
production of bound energy's time dimension via the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically
equivalent temporal residue. Gravity converts light's spatial metric and entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of
light) into matter's historical metric and entropy dive (the intrinsic motion of time). The simple entropic
expansion and cooling of space is gravitationally converted to the compound entropic expansion and aging of
historic spacetime.
Gravity (immediately) pays the entropy-"interest" on matter's symmetry debt by extracting time from space,
in consequence decelerating the cosmic spatial expansion (hence cosmic historical expansion is funded by
and replaces cosmic spatial expansion). Gravity (eventually) pays the energy-"principle" of matter's
symmetry debt by converting bound to free energy in stars, supernovas, quasars, and by Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes, actually reversing the contractile effect of its entropy conservation role and causing
an "acceleration" of the cosmic expansion (due to a reduction in the total gravitational energy of the cosmos)
- as recently observed. (See: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?"; and "Global-Local Gauge
Symmetries in Gravitation").
Four Physical Principles
In this paper I will examine the role of gravitation in the context of 4 physical principles (conservation laws
and their corollaries): energy conservation, entropy, causality, and symmetry conservation.
The first law of thermodynamics asserts the conservation of energy: in any isolated system, the total energy
remains the same, regardless of transformations. The second law of thermodynamics concerns entropy: in any
isolated system, the capacity for "work" by that system must decrease (or at the very least, not increase) over
time, as by expansion and/or cooling. (Historical expansion is also entropic due to aging, decay, and the
dilution of causal linkages.)
According to standard formulations of the subject, three conditions characterize the change of entropy within
an isolated system [1]:
1) the change in entropy depends only upon the difference between the initial and final states of the system;
2) in reversible systems the entropy change is zero;
3) in irreversible systems the entropy change is positive.
(See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
In addition to causality (the law of cause and effect) and the first and second thermodynamic laws, the
"Tetrahedron Model" requires a 4th conservation principle, the conservation of symmetry, which is not a
thermodynamic law, but is nevertheless related to causality and both the first and second laws in significant
ways. This principle of conservation was mathematically formulated (1918) by Emmy Noether and is known
as "Noether's Theorem". It states that in a continuous multicomponent field, such as the electromagnetic
energy field (or the metric field of spacetime), whenever we find a symmetry we will find an associated
conservation law, and vice versa: conservation laws have associated symmetries. Hence symmetry's
relationship to the first law of thermodynamics. I like to think of Noether's theorem as the "truth and beauty
theorem", for it is essentially a mathematical translation of Keats' profound poetic intuition (1819) that
"Beauty is truth, truth beauty...", where truth is conservation and beauty is symmetry [2].
Symmetry conservation is also related to the second law of thermodynamics because symmetric systems
generally have greater (positive) entropy than asymmetric systems; hence symmetry conservation drives
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 4 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

toward higher entropy states (random states are highly entropic, highly probable, and highly symmetric). This
is especially evident in the tendency of all forces to convert bound energy to free energy, as light has both the
greatest symmetry and the greatest positive entropy of any energy form. Stellar nucleosynthetic processes,
supernovas, quasars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes are specific examples of entropic
systems of lesser symmetry (matter and time) being spontaneously converted to entropic systems of greater
symmetry (light and space). The complete gravitational evaporation of black holes is the ultimate expression
of "Noether's Theorem", in which it is demonstrated that even the symmetry of entropy is conserved.
Symmetry conservation is most familiar to us in the guise of charge (and spin) conservation, since the
charges of matter are symmetry debts of light, debts incurred during the conversion of symmetric light to
asymmetric matter during the "Big Bang" (or in any subsequent process converting free to bound energy).
The "inertial" forces of the spacetime metric are another familiar example of Noether's theorem enforced in
Nature, and of the relation between symmetry and energy conservation. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the
Unified Field Theory".) The principles of entropy and symmetry conservation are also physically connected
by the phenomena of both light and gravitation. The electromagnetic constant c (the "velocity of light"), is the
"gauge" (regulator, scale factor) of both light's symmetric "non-local" energy state and light's entropy drive,
as light's intrinsic motion is an expression of both - creating, expanding, and cooling space on the one hand
(the entropy drive), while simultaneously suppressing the temporal dimension, maintaining metric symmetry,
and establishing the "non-local" distribution of light's energy throughout spacetime on the other hand (the
symmetry gauge). In turn, gravitation is both conserving light's entropy drive in the conversion of light's
expansive spatial domain to matter's expansive historical domain, and conserving light's "non-local"
symmetric energy state in the conversion of bound to free energy (as in stars, supernovas, quasars, and
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes).
Pure and Mixed Forms of Entropy
Spatial, "Thermal", or "Work" Entropy vs Temporal, "Cold", or "Stored" Entropy
See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".
Entropy exists in several forms in nature, always with the same purpose, to prevent violations of energy
conservation. Unless the context indicates otherwise, when I refer to "entropy" in these papers (especially in
such phrases as "space and the drive of spatial entropy" or "time and the drive of historical entropy"), I am
referring to entropy in its most primordial or pure form, as the "intrinsic motion" of light "gauged" or
regulated by "velocity c" (causing the expansion and cooling of space in the case of "spatial entropy"), or as
the "intrinsic motion" of time, gauged or regulated by "velocity T" (causing the expansion and dilution of
history or historic spacetime in the case of "temporal entropy"). "Velocity T" is itself gauged by "c": the
electromagnetic metric of empty spacetime is gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c", such that
one second of temporal duration is metrically equivalent to 300,000 kilometers of spatial distance
(approximately).
Thermal or "work" entropy, as generally defined, is the energy in an isolated system which on principle
cannot be transformed to work. Entropy characterizes the degradation of energy inherent in the operation of
any cyclic engine or process of energy transformation, typically manifest as "heat loss": the same energy
cannot be used twice to produce the same net work. These ideas imply the conservation of energy and the
impossibility of a "perpetual motion machine". Entropy is a corollary of - and a principle safeguarding energy conservation, allowing the transformation of energy. Entropy prevents the abuse of energy; without
the principle of entropy, energy conservation would prevent any use or transformation of energy at all.
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 5 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

"G" (the universal gravitational constant) gauges the strength of the connecting link or conversion factor
between the primordial forms or "drives" of spatial and temporal entropy: gravity converts space and the
embedded drive of spatial entropy (the intrinsic motion of light) to time and the embedded drive of historical
entropy (the intrinsic motion of time). Whereas the electromagnetic constant "c" is the gauge of the metric
relation between space, time, and free energy (light), the gravitational constant "G" is the gauge of the
entropic relation between space, time, and bound energy (mass). When free energy is converted to bound
energy, the entropy-energy driving the spatial expansion of the universe is gravitationally converted to the
entropy-energy driving the historical expansion of the universe; in the process, space is gravitationally
annihilated, decelerating the spatial expansion accordingly (and thereby providing the energy for the
historical expansion - which requires an extra dimension). (See: "A Description of Gravitation"; see also: "A
Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
So essential is the connection between entropy and energy conservation that entropy is an embedded physical
characteristic of energy ("primordial" entropy drives as gauged by c, T, and G). "Primordial" entropy drives
are expressed as the intrinsic motion "c" of free energy (the velocity of light - primary mode), and as the
intrinsic motion "T" of bound energy's time dimension (the metric equivalent of velocity c - secondary
mode). These two "primordial" entropy drives are connected by gravitation, which converts one into the other
(in either direction), sometimes performing both conversions simultaneously, as in the solar conversion of
space to time (entropy conservation), and mass to light (symmetry conservation). The intrinsic motions c, T,
and G are all physical expressions of entropy embedded in their energy forms (free and bound
electromagnetic energy).
The effectively "infinite" velocities of both light and time are necessary attributes of their role as the entropy
(and causality) drives of free and bound energy. These "infinite" velocities guarantee the increase of spatial
and historical entropy, while simultaneously preventing violations of energy conservation and/or causality via
fast spaceship or "time machine". Hence these intrinsic motions also effectively close and protect the borders
of the dimensional conservation domains they create (space, history). The dimensions of spacetime are
conservation domains created by the primordial entropy drives of electromagnetic energy - whether free
energy (light and space) or bound energy (matter and history). Similarly, gravitation closes the borders of its
composite spacetime domain via the "event horizon" and central "singularity" of black holes, likewise
preventing conservation violations (perhaps via intrusive "wormholes", or via the leakage of energy into or
from other dimensions or universes). In the black hole, gravity takes over the entropic functions of both c and
T - "freezing" light and time - just as gravity takes over the molecular and nuclear binding functions of
atomic matter. (Within the "event horizon", the gravitational metric of bound energy functionally and
completely replaces the electromagnetic metric of free energy, including causal and entropic relations.)
Proton decay (probably) takes place at the central singularity, and (if so) the black hole is filled with
gravitationally bound light, the extreme limit of the gravitational metric and the temporal entropy domain.
Inside the black hole, matter becomes co-extensive with its temporal domain, just as outside the black hole,
light is co-extensive with its spatial domain. We can therefore also expect that matter will become subject to
vitiating forces of temporal entropy inside the hole, just as light is subject to vitiating forces of spatial entropy
outside the hole. This expectation (among other considerations) leads us to expect that proton decay is
commonplace inside black holes.
"The extremes meet": the black hole is the extreme form of the gravitational/temporal metric of bound
electromagnetic energy, just as empty space is the extreme form of the electromagnetic/spatial metric of light.
But in both cases, all forms of energy move at "velocity c" within their respective metric domains (because in
the black hole g = c) - hence both represent actual symmetric energy states - one positive/spatial and one
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 6 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

negative/temporal. Which state is gravity actually driving toward? The black hole, or Hawking's quantum
radiance? (See: "Nodes of the Gravitational Metric".)
The gravitational conversion of space and the drive of spatial entropy to time and the drive of historical
entropy is physically demonstrated by black holes, and theoretically suggested by the Bekenstein-Hawking
formula relating the surface area of a black hole to its entropy content. (See: Jacob D. Bekenstein:
"Information in the Holographic Universe". Scientific American August 2003 p. 58-65.) (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time"; see also: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the
Cosmos".)
A Universe of Light
Consider the birth of a universe containing only light (free electromagnetic radiation) and no matter. Such a
universe will expand (and cool) at velocity c due to the intrinsic spatial motion of light. Why?
The expansion of the "light universe" is not driven by energy conservation, for at any given moment the total
energy of this light universe remains the same as it was at the beginning, the constant product of a declining
temperature but increasing volume. That is, the light universe does not need to expand in order to conserve
energy; energy conservation regulates the expansion but does not demand it. Apparently, the expansion of the
light universe is likewise not driven by the conservation of energetic symmetry - since a "hot" light universe
is just as symmetric as a "cool" light universe, so as in the case of the first law, symmetry conservation seems
to be only a regulator, not a driver, of this process (this appearance is deceptive, however - see below).
Finally, causality cannot drive the expansion, since light, having no time dimension, is completely a-causal.
In the light universe, energy conservation will regulate the constant product of temperature and volume by
linking the energetic and metric parameters of energy through the electromagnetic constant c (frequency
multiplied by wavelength = c). Energetic symmetry conservation (Noether's Theorem), also gauged by c, will
prevent the conversion of light and space to mass, time, charge, and gravitation. The spontaneous creation
and annihilation of virtual particle-antiparticle pairs in the vacuum is paradigmatic of symmetry conservation
by the electromagnetic force, preserving the: 1) energetic (massless and chargeless); 2) metric (timeless and
inertial); and 3) distributional (non-local and simultaneous) symmetry of free energy.
However, the second law of thermodynamics (entropy) demands the spatial expansion and is therefore the
thermodynamic driver of the process, since the second law requires that the capacity for work of this isolated
system of radiation must decline over time, requiring the light universe to cool, which it can only do by
expanding. Therefore, we see that entropy is the thermodynamic reason why the light universe must expand,
and why light must have an "intrinsic" (entropic) spatial motion. In addition, because "velocity c" gauges
both the entropy drive and the symmetric energy state of light, we see that symmetry conservation provides
half of the drive and rationale for light's intrinsic motion - free energy must move at velocity c if it is to
remain in its "non-local" symmetric energy state, vanishing time, mass, charge, and gravitation. Energetic
symmetry and entropy, in the case of light, are linked by "velocity c".
We can also see that the second law (and symmetry conservation) require a dimensional or metric structure
(space) in which to operate (expand). Hence we can attribute the dimensional parameters of our cosmic
system to symmetry conservation and the second law - the first law requires only that energy and its
dimensional expression (if it is to have one) be linked in such a way that conservation is achieved - as the
constant product of temperature and volume, for example, which of itself neither implies nor requires
expansion.

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 7 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

The function of the second law is to permit change. Without the second law the universe could not spend or
transform its energy capital - it could not act or evolve; it would be static rather than dynamic. Together, the
first and second laws allow change within a dimensional system which nevertheless conserves energy.
Symmetry conservation, which also regulates the metric parameters of the cosmic expansion, allows this
system of conserved change to take a decisive further step - the conversion of light to matter - through the
addition of a system of conserved charges, the symmetry debts of light. It is symmetry conservation that
translates energy into information (the charges of atomic matter), while entropy allows the system to change
and perform work. A third conservation parameter - raw energy conservation - regulates or "gauges" the
conversion of free to bound energy: E = hv (Planck); E = mcc (Einstein); hv = mcc (deBroglie). With bound
energy (mass, matter) comes gravitation, time, the law of cause and effect, and the causal information
"matrix" (web, network) of matter (historic spacetime).
Through a system of alternative charge carriers (leptons, neutrinos, and mesons), and through the asymmetric
interactions of the weak force "Intermediate Vector Bosons" ("IVBs"), the initial symmetric energy state of
light, its metric, and its particle-antiparticle form is broken, creating asymmetric matter. (See: "The Higgs
Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".) Finally, the gravitational charge of matter creates an alternative
dimensional entropy carrier - time - an additional 4th dimensional parameter in which charge conservation
and causal linkages can have extended significance, and in which the energy and entropy accounts of matter's
relative (rather than absolute) spatial motions can be accommodated. Gravitation pays the entropy "interest"
on bound energy's symmetry debt by producing matter's time dimension from the expansive energy or spatial
entropy drive of the universe (by the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent
temporal residue). Thus it is ultimately light's spatial entropy drive and expanding spatial domain which
provides the energy for matter's temporal entropy drive and expanding historical domain: gravity decelerates
the spatial expansion accordingly. A new, complex universe of light mixed with matter, negentropic and
causal, containing information in the primordial form of charge, begins its historic, evolutionary adventure as
it slowly awakens to itself while returning the "stored" energy of its asymmetric material component to
"working" and "useful" symmetric free energy. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".) During the
long "working life" of the Universe, gravity repays the energy-"principle" of matter's symmetry debt,
converting bound to free energy in stars, supernovas, quasars, and ultimately and completely, via Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes. Black hole "evaporation" represents the final fulfillment of Noether's
symmetry conservation theorem. As the mass of the Cosmos is converted to light, its associated gravitational
energy is accordingly reduced, and the cosmic expansion appears to "accelerate" - as recently observed.
Energy Conservation
The electromagnetic constant "c" gauges (regulates) both the entropy drive of light (light's intrinsic
dimensional motion), and the "non-local" distributional symmetry of light, including the metric symmetry of
spacetime. The metric is the measured relationship between the dimensions. We take for granted the fact that
(stationary) meter sticks do not vary in length, nor (stationary) clocks vary in rate, regardless of their
orientation or location in space or time (also assuming they co-exist in equivalent (or insignificant)
gravitational fields). Clocks and meter sticks in Hong Kong run at the same rate and have the same length as
clocks and meter sticks in New York, and could be freely exchanged (now or next year) without any
measurable difference. Furthermore, the relationship between the length of a meter stick and the rate at which
a clock runs is similarly invariant. This fixed, simple dimensional relationship is absolutely necessary for the
conservation of energy; without it, velocity, momentum, and energy of all descriptions would vary chaotically
from place to place, time to time, and according to orientation. Hence the stable metric displays a symmetry
(a sameness) with respect to location and orientation in space or time, and this inertial symmetry is a
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 8 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

manifestation of energy conservation - perhaps our most fundamental example of Noether's theorem and the
connection between symmetry and energy conservation. We become aware of the breaking or distortion of
this metric symmetry in the presence of gravitational fields or the inertial ("g") forces due to acceleration but these are both phenomena associated with time, relative motion, and the asymmetric realm of matter.
Similarly, distortions of the metric due to relative motion (as discovered by Einstein) are phenomena of
matter, necessary to conserve the causal relations of bound energy forms in relative (rather than absolute)
motion ("Lorentz Invariance" - the co-variance of space with time).
In the light universe, time, gravitation, charge, relative motion, and the inertial forces which attend massmatter do not exist. What inertial force does exist can be said to maintain the invariance of c, the metric
symmetry of space, and the non-local distributional symmetry of light. Without a metric, there would be no
structure to regulate the expansion of the universe such that its temperature and volume yield a constant
product over time, in satisfaction of the first law (energy conservation). "Velocity c" regulates ("gauges") the
metric such that one second of temporal duration is metrically equivalent to (approximately) 300,000
kilometers of linear space. In other words, the velocity of light is a natural expression of metric symmetry, the
inertial relationship between the three spatial dimensions, and between space and time. The magnitude of c
cannot vary or the first law cannot produce the constant product of volume and temperature in the expanding
universe. Without the regulating presence of the metric, every photon might have a unique velocity; "rogue"
or sourceless gravitational fields could arise, producing net energy; time and length scales would be
incoherent: energy conservation would be impossible. This is the world of "Alice in Wonderland" where
anything is possible but nothing makes sense.
Einstein discovered that light has no time dimension, that at velocity c the "clock stops" and space shrinks to
nothing in the direction of motion. Light is a 2-dimensional transverse electromagnetic wave whose intrinsic
motion sweeps out a third spatial dimension. Light requires one dimension each for its electric and magnetic
fields, and a third in the direction of propagation for its entropic expansion - space. The light universe does
not contain an explicit (local) time dimension, it is purely spatial, which makes sense in that being one-way,
time is an asymmetric dimension which would destroy the metric symmetry of light-space. The essential
meaning of the universal electromagnetic constant "c" is that c is the conservation/symmetry/entropy gauge
of the spatial metric, which functions to prevent the formation of asymmetric massive matter, charge, and the
one-way time dimension. The dimensional and energetic parameters of this electromagnetic conservation
domain are thoroughly linked such that the wavelength of light (its spatial expression) multiplied by the
frequency of light (its temporal expression) always equals the constant "c". Nevertheless, even in the light
universe, a "global" temporal dimension must be at least implicitly present to regulate the expansion and
cooling. Entropy (and energy conservation) require the presence of time, whether implicitly or explicitly
expressed. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Obviously, time is implicit in the "frequency" of light, but at "velocity c", time is prevented from becoming
explicit (conserving metric symmetry). The seed is present, but its growth is suppressed; indeed, time would
be required in its explicit and local aspect should light assume its asymmetric particle form and produce
matter. In fact, we need to discover the origin of the time dimension in light if we are to build a truly unified
theory of free plus bound electromagnetic energy and its compound dimensional conservation domain
(historic spacetime), a theory which traces the origin of all forces back to light. "Frequency" is this origin in
the case of time, as well as the origin of the bound energy content of matter - in the latter case when
combined with the dimensional/structural metric of space (as suggested by DeBroglie's equation: hv = mcc).
In turn (as we shall see below), time is the source of gravity. (See also: "The Higgs Boson vs the Spacetime
Metric".)
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 9 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

In the case of matter, local time is explicitly required by energy conservation to protect causality and to keep
the energy accounts of massive particles in relative motion (for example, the conservation of momentum, in
which the energy content of matter depends upon its variable and relative velocity, where velocity = distance
divided by time). Light does not explicitly require time for the same purpose, since light's absolute (nonrelative) velocity never varies: the energy content of light varies instead with its frequency (according to the
Einstein-Planck formula: E = hv). Finally, because massless light is "a-temporal" and "non-local", light is also
"a-causal". Massive bound energy, in contrast, is local, temporal, and causal. Einstein had to formulate the
dimensional flexibility of Special Relativity (slow clocks and shrinking meter sticks - the covariance of space
with time - "Lorentz Invariance") to rescue the principle of causality and the invariance of the "Interval" (an
invariant measure of distance in 4-D spacetime) from the relative motion of matter. The "absolute" and
invariant motion of light requires no such accommodation (light's "Interval" = zero).
It is the ever-present threat of time, implicit in the very nature of light as "frequency", which propels the
electromagnetic wave forward in space to protect its "non-local" distributional and metric symmetry. The
flight of space ("wavelength") from time ("frequency") produces the intrinsic (self-motivated) motion of
light, a symmetric spatial state of energy fleeing an asymmetric temporal state which is an internal potential
of its own nature (the proverbial "bur under the saddle"). Since the intrinsic motion of light (the "drive" of
spatial entropy) also produces the characteristic expansion and cooling of space, we see again that energy
conservation, symmetry, and entropy are all related and share a common factor, "c". Hence we say that both
metric symmetry conservation and entropy, in the service of energy conservation, are drivers of the spatial
expansion of the light universe, just as we say that (among other roles) "velocity c" is the gauge of light's
entropy drive and of light's "non-local" distributional symmetry. Time is both the implicit spatial entropy
drive of light and the explicit historical entropy drive of matter.
Our material universe comes into being through the intersection of a symmetric conservation domain (light,
space) with an asymmetric conservation domain (matter, history). The metric gauge c is a symmetry regulator
preventing the intersection of space and time, and thus preventing free electromagnetic energy (light) from
spontaneously manifesting as bound electromagnetic energy (matter). (See: "The Origin of Matter and
Information".) When these two domains do intersect (one is derived from the other), their interaction is
gauged by Newton's gravitational constant "-G".
Symmetry and the "Interval"
The "Interval" is Einstein's mathematical formulation of an invariant quantity of spacetime separating two
discrete events. Due to their relative motion and the finite speed of light, some observers of these events will
see them separated by more space, while others will see them separated by more time, and moving observers
will generally not be able to agree on precisely when the events occurred, or if they were simultaneous.
However, regardless of the observer's motions (including accelerated motions), if their observations are
entered into Einstein's mathematical formula, they will all find the same "Interval" ("Lorentz Invariance"). It
is the crucial function of Einstein's "Interval" to rescue causality from the plastic, co-varying dimensions of
Einstein's relativistic spacetime [3]. (See: "The Paradox of the Traveling Twins".)
Einstein realized that the Interval of light equals zero - which is his essential mathematical formulation of
light's "non-local" symmetric energy state and the fundamental role of "c" as a symmetry "gauge" and metric
regulator. Light's "zero Interval" means that light is "non-local" - its position in spacetime cannot be specified
- hence (in its own reference frame) light must be considered to be everywhere within its conservation
domain (space) simultaneously. The reason the Interval of light is zero is that light lacks both a time
dimension and one spatial dimension (in the direction of its forward motion). You cannot specify a location in
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 10 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

4-dimensional spacetime if you lack even one of the 4 necessary coordinates, much less two. Lacking both a
time and distance dimension, light has forever to go nowhere - which explains how light, in its own reference
frame, can have an effectively "infinite" velocity, and be everywhere simultaneously - the symmetric "nonlocal" state of free energy.
Of various symmetries associated with light's zero Interval or "non-local" energy state, two are of special
importance for our discussion of gravitation. The first is light's lack of an asymmetric time dimension,
resulting in the metric symmetry of space - there are no energetically preferred spatial dimensions in lightspace (compare this with the energetically favored direction "down" in the gravitational space of matter, or
the one-way "forward" direction of time). Secondly, because light is everywhere within its spatial domain
simultaneously, light's energy is distributed symmetrically throughout its conservation domain (compare this
with the lack of distributional symmetry in space of the highly concentrated and immobile "local" energy
state of atomic mass-matter or bound energy). Light itself does not produce a gravitational field - since light
is non-local, a gravitational field could not center itself upon any fixed position or specifiable location, and an
uncentered gravitational field is a violation of energy conservation (because such a field would produce net
energy). Furthermore, light has no time dimension, and hence has no need for a gravitational field to produce
one. (See: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?")
When light (free electromagnetic energy) is converted to matter (bound electromagnetic energy), these metric
and distributional symmetries (among others) are broken. In accordance with Noether's theorem, the broken
symmetries of light are conserved as time and the gravitational forces of spacetime (in the case of light's
broken entropic, metric, and non-local distributional symmetries), and as the various charges (and spin) of
matter (in the case of light's broken massless symmetry, producing massive particles). The principle of
symmetry conservation is therefore most familiar to us (after symmetry-breaking and the creation of matter)
through the principles of charge conservation, gravitation, the inertial "g" forces of acceleration, and time;
before symmetry-breaking and before the creation of matter, we see (in theory) symmetry-conserving
principles manifesting in light's intrinsic motion, metric symmetry, the inertial forces of space, and the
suppression (by the symmetry gauge "velocity c") of virtual particles, mass, charge, time, and gravity. It is the
broken "non-local" metric and distributional symmetries of light that give rise to the "location" charge of
gravitation, a charge whose active principle is time. The function of all conserved charges is to produce
forces which will (immediately or eventually) return the material asymmetric system to its original symmetric
state (light). Stars and quasars are prime examples of this ongoing process - both use the natural forces
generated by the charges of matter (which include gravity) to convert asymmetric mass back to symmetric
light. Stephen Hawking's "quantum radiance" takes this spontaneous, gravitationally driven process to
completion in "black holes", completely paying the symmetry and entropy debt of matter. (See: "Symmetry
Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
The role of symmetry conservation is twofold: 1) to prevent the devolution of the a-causal symmetric light
universe to a causal light-and-matter universe containing asymmetric mass, charge, time, and gravitation (this
preventive function of symmetry conservation is typically manifest through the role of electric charge in the
annihilation reactions of matter-antimatter particle pairs, whether virtual or real). 2) To conserve through time
(should the annihilation reactions mentioned above fail) the symmetry debts of light and space as the charges
(and spin) of matter (including the gravitational "location" charge), so this information may be used, through
the forces generated by those charges, to return matter to its original symmetric energy state (light). It is
thought that the symmetric state of our electromagnetic system was broken early in the "Big Bang" by
asymmetries inherent in weak force interactions between matter vs antimatter [4]. (See: "The Origin of
Matter and Information".)
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 11 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

The central problem to be solved by the manifest universe of matter is this: how to return to its original
symmetric energy state of light given the absence of antimatter? The information contained in the charges of
matter (the symmetry debts of light) is sufficient for the task (this is the ultimate rationale for information),
but requires an additional 4th, alternative, entropy-carrying dimension - time - in which to act. Time will be
supplied by gravity paying the entropy-"interest" on matter's symmetry debt with energy withdrawn from the
spatial expansion of the Cosmos. The slow return to its symmetric state of the great energy stored in matter
(E = mcc) provides both the time and free energy for biological systems such as ourselves to evolve and
meditate upon our origins - "we are star-stuff contemplating the stars" as Carl Sagan famously observed. Life
is the information pathway by which the Universe becomes self-aware and explores itself, evolving new
modes of creativity, new information pathways, and new forms of beauty. We are "the eyes and the ears" of
the Universe; we are the Universe in its conscious, sentient, and self-referent mode; and we are very much
created in the "image and likeness of" a fractal iteration of its information content.
Go to Part II
References
[1] Encyclopaedia Britannica 1968, 21, 1018.
[2] Noether, E. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. M.
Dekker, New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
[2a] John Keats. Ode on a Grecian Urn
[3] d'Abro, A. The Evolution of Scientific Thought from Newton to Einstein. Dover. 1950, 193-200.
[4] Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
[4a] Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212, 1221-8 (Nobel
lecture).
[5] Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics 1975,
43 (3), 199-220.
[6] Green, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
[7] Bohm, D. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. Routledge & Kegan Paul 1980, 224 + xv pp.
[8] Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
[9] Shannon, C. and W. Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana, University of
Illinois Press 1949
Further Readings:
Bekenstein, J. D. Information in the Holographic Universe. Scientific American, August 2003, pages
58-65.
Albert Einstein, H. A. Lorentz, et. al. (1923). The Principle of Relativity. Dover, 1952.
Enrico Fermi. 1936. Thermodynamics. Dover Publications, Inc.
Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose. 1996. The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton University Press.
Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers. 1984. Order out of Chaos. Bantam Books.
P. A. Schilpp, ed. 1959. Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist. Harper Torchbooks.
Ian Stewart. 2007. Why Beauty is Truth. Basic Books.
Hideki Yukawa. 1973. Creativity and Intuition. Kodansha International Ltd.
J. A. Wheeler. 1999. A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime. W. H Freeman ("Scientific American"
Library)
Maudlin, Tim. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time 2012 Princeton Univ. Press.
Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2012
See: Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on black holes.
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 12 of 13

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part I

8/19/16, 3:04 PM

Links
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/thermo.html

Page 13 of 13

