The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/conversion.html

The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity
(revised June, 2014)
John A. Gowan
home page
See also: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and Gravitation".
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Part I: The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity
Part II: The Gravitational Creation of Time from Space
Primordial Entropy Drives of Light, Time, and Gravity
Links
Abstract
Time and gravity induce each other in an endless entropic cycle. The gravitational collapse of space
produces a metrically equivalent temporal residue; the entropic march of this time residue into history
(at right angles to all three spatial dimensions) pulls space along with it. But space cannot travel down
the one-way and one-dimensional time line, self-annihilating at the point-like entrance to history,
leaving behind a metrically equivalent temporal residue - which continues the endless entropic cycle.
Gravity vanishes only when its associated mass vanishes, as in particle decays, matter-antimatter
annihilations, or the conversion of bound to free energy in stars and other astrophysical processes. A
gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time.
Part I: The Conversion of Space to Time
The collapse of a free electromagnetic wave (light) to a bound state of energy (a particle, an excited
electron shell, the momentum of matter, etc.), confers "mass" upon that bound energy state, and an
associated gravitational field (-Gm). This gravitational field is the consequence of the transformation
of the spatial component of the wave, with its expansive spatial entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of
light), to time and time's expansive historical entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of time). The intrinsic
motion of matter's gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of matter's time
dimension. Somewhat in the manner of the electric and magnetic components of an electromagnetic
wave, time and gravity induce each other endlessly. (See: "Introduction to Gravity".)
Examined at the microscopic level of quantum mechanics, the conversion of space to time involves
the simple "switch" of implicit time to explicit time, the switch of the "wavelength" or spatial
component of the electromagnetic wave to the "frequency" or temporal component of the wave. The
presence of both space and time are implied in the standard formulation of the velocity of light:
"wavelength" multiplied by "frequency" = "c". Even though light has no time dimension, the implicit
presence of time in the wave is clearly indicated by "frequency". Time is the implicit driver of the
intrinsic motion of light: the symmetric spatial or "wavelength" component of the wave "flees" the
asymmetric temporal or "frequency" component, which is, however, an embedded element of the
wave's own structure. Symmetry conservation (of the wave's "non-local" spatial component and of
metric space) is therefore the root cause of the intrinsic motion of light, which simultaneously serves
as the primordial entropy drive of free energy. Implicit time is thus the proverbial "bur under the

1 of 6

6/27/14 3:15 PM

The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/conversion.html

saddle" which causes the eternal and "intrinsic" (self-motivated) motion of light, the expansion and
cooling of spacetime, and produces the spatial entropy drive of free energy. This same temporal
element becomes explicit when light loses its intrinsic motion and becomes bound energy in a
stationary particle or similarly immobile energy form. (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
In bound energy, the roles of the spatial and temporal components of the electromagnetic wave are
reversed, as space is pulled by the intrinsic motion of time into the historic domain (at right angles to
all three spatial dimensions), creating the gravitational collapse of spacetime. This explicit temporal
component becomes the active principle of the "location" charge of gravitation, comprising in a single
charge entropy, causality, and symmetry debts of light consequent upon the conversion of massless
free energy's "non-local" symmetric energy state to the local, temporal, causal, and asymmetric energy
state of massive concentrations of bound energy. (Electric charge is the symmetry debt of absent
antimatter, whereas gravity is the symmetry debt of mass of any type - all bound energy forms.) So
long as light continues to move at velocity c, time remains suppressed to an implicit state, maintaining
both metric symmetry plus the "non-local" distributional symmetry of light's energy content
throughout space. The suppression of time is a major role of "velocity c" as the symmetry gauge of
the spatial metric. The intrinsic motion of light is caused in principle by the conservation of symmetry
and the principle of entropy, both in the service of energy conservation. Time, whether in its implicit
or explicit form, is the active agent or energy principle ("frequency") driving the primordial entropy
expression of the universe, whether as spatial expansion and cooling or as historical aging and causal
dilution. (See: "A Description of Gravity".)
Because one and the same temporal element causes (in its implicit state) the intrinsic motion of light
(the spatial entropy drive of free energy), and causes (in its explicit state) the intrinsic motion of time
(the historical entropy drive of bound energy), the conservation circuit between the primordial drives
of spatial and historical entropy as mediated by gravity is extremely simple and immediate (see:
"Currents of Entropy and Symmetry".) The gravitational transfer of the expansive energy of the
spatial Cosmos to the expansive energy of the historical Cosmos, with its consequent deceleration of
the universal spatial expansion, occurs locally and instantly with the "switch" of the temporal element
of an electromagnetic wave from an implicit to an explicit condition. This simple switch or "flip" of
the electromagnetic "entropy coin" is the whole difference between the positive spatial expansion or
entropy drive of the intrinsic motion of light, and the spatial contraction or negative entropy drive of
the intrinsic motion of gravity. The action of gravity reduces the spatial expansion of the Cosmos not
just because the spatially expansive entropy drive of light is transformed to an historically expansive
entropy drive of matter, but because gravity annihilates space while creating time.
The gravitational annihilation of space produces a metrically equivalent temporal residue which
becomes the entropy drive of bound energy, the intrinsic motion of time. Conversely, the gravitational
annihilation of mass (in stars, supernovas, quasars, and by Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes), converts the same temporal entropy drive back to light's intrinsic motion and the entropy drive
of space and free energy. The primordial entropy drives of free and bound electromagnetic energy the intrinsic motions of light and time (creating space and history) - are convertible in either direction
by gravity. This dynamic "trinity" of energy and entropy gauges - c, G, T - creates and regulates our
dimensional reality, and essentially rules the physical evolution of our Universe. (See: "The
Tetrahedron Model.")

2 of 6

6/27/14 3:15 PM

The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/conversion.html

It takes energy (entropy-energy: the energy of intrinsic dimensional motion) to produce either space
(S) or time (T), and -G reflects the energy required (per given mass) to transform (S) into (T). Using
the same symbols, the gravitational conversion of space and the primordial entropic drive of spatial
expansion (S), to metrically equivalent time and the primordial entropic drive of historical expansion
(T), can be represented in a (quasi-mathematical) "concept equation" as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
It takes energy to create the one-way temporal entropy drive from the "all-way" spatial entropy drive,
because an asymmetric, one-way time order must be imposed upon the symmetric, "all-way" spatial
expansion. This entropy-energy cost of time is the origin of the "negative energy" characteristic of
gravity and the negative sign of "-G". (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".) The
gravitational metric has a lower symmetry and a lower entropy than the purely spatial metric, so we
should expect a gravitational metric to evolve toward a purely spatial metric - as indeed we see
happening spontaneously in the stars and via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes.
It is ultimately the expansive energy of the spatial Universe that funds the expansive energy of the
historical Universe (historic spacetime). The spatial expansion is gravitationally decelerated
accordingly. Conversely, as matter is converted to light in stars (and other astrophysical and quantum
mechanical processes), the total mass and associated gravitational energy of the Cosmos is reduced,
and the Universe recovers a portion of its former rate of expansion, appearing to "accelerate"
(rebound) as it ages - as recently observed (because freely moving light does not produce a
gravitational field). (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
Part II: The Gravitational Creation of Time from Space
Gravity creates time by the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent
temporal residue. The entropic, expansive principle contained in space (which we do not directly
experience, but which is visible through large telescopes as the cosmological "red shift" of distant
galaxies), is due to the "intrinsic" motion of light, which is converted by gravity (via the annihilation
of space) into the entropic, expansive principle contained in history - which is due to the "intrinsic"
motion of matter's time dimension (which we do directly experience, as aging). Whereas the
electromagnetic constant "c" is the gauge (regulator) of the metric relationship between space, time,
and light, Newton's gravitational constant "G" is the gauge of the entropic relationship between space,
time, and mass. c determines how much space, per given time, light must traverse to maintain its
"non-local" symmetric energy state ("c" also gauges the entropic rate of spatial expansion); "G"
determines how much space, per given mass, must be annihilated to provide matter's temporal or
historical entropy drive: -Gm ---> Tm. Thus the spatial entropy drive is the ultimate source of the
historical entropy drive: implicit time is the source for explicit time. This intimate linkage,
"internally" within the spacetime metric, ensures that the energetic, entropic, and metric relations of
free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy are actually compatible and can interact with one
another, as they must coexist in a shared compound conservation domain: gravitational, historic
spacetime.
The intrinsic motion of light is the primordial entropy drive of free electromagnetic energy (light).

3 of 6

6/27/14 3:15 PM

The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/conversion.html

The intrinsic motion of time is the primordial entropy drive of bound electromagnetic energy (matter).
Gravity is the force that converts either entropy drive into the other, although on planet Earth we only
experience the gravitational conversion of space into time. In the Sun and stars, we also see the
reverse conversion going on simultaneously - as mass with its associated time dimension is converted
to light with its associated spatial dimension. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
The gravitational annihilation of space with the extraction of a temporal residue causes the
deceleration of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos. Thus matter's time and historical dimension is
created at the expense of (is funded by) light's spatial entropy drive and spatial conservation domain.
Gravitational energy and temporal entropy-energy are equivalent. -Gm, where m represents the mass
of the Earth, is the (negative) entropy-energy required to produce Earth's time dimension.
Gravitational energy is provided by the deceleration of cosmic spatial expansion - caused by the
gravitational consumption of space. Space (which contains implicit time) is the "fuel" the gravitational
engine "burns" to create matter's historical dimension. The expansion of matter's historical domain is
funded by the contraction of light's spatial domain. A compound conservation domain of historical
spacetime is formed by light, space, time, and gravity, in which the purely spatial expansion of the
Cosmos is reduced to accommodate the addition of a temporal dimension (at right angles to all three
spatial dimensions), and the coordinated expansion of historical spacetime. The addition of the 4th
temporal dimension is necessary to conserve matter's energy, entropy, and symmetry debts (mass,
time, charge), consequent upon the absence of antimatter annihilations, which would have returned
the entire asymmetric material cosmic system to its original state of symmetric light. (See: "The
Origin of Matter and Information".)
As we have seen, matter's temporal entropy drive is fully funded (and metrically equilibrated) by the
gravitational annihilation of space and the consequent deceleration of the cosmic expansion. Because
space and time are connected, the flight of time into history pulls more space into the point-like
beginning of the one-way, linear time line. At the center of mass, the symmetrically collapsing spatial
dimensions (time is connected equally to all three spatial dimensions) annihilate each other (+x
annihilates -x, +y annihilates -y, etc.), leaving an uncanceled temporal residue (because asymmetric
time exists only as +t). This self-feeding dimensional annihilation reaction continuously extracts
temporal quanta, and will maintain the entropic cycle forever, unless some symmetry-conserving
process converts mass back to light. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic
motion of time. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
The Entropy Drives of Light, Time, and Gravity
The reader may wonder how this theory translates into practice. Suppose I take a flashlight into a
closed room and turn it on. In so doing, I have caused the production of light from a chemical reaction
in the flashlight batteries. But surely (you say), I have not thereby influenced the expansion or
contraction of the Universe - the light cannot get out of the room! However, it is not true that the
physical consequence of converting bound chemical or electromagnetic energy (mass) to free
electromagnetic energy (light) - and vice versa - remains in the room, for the significant entropic
effect of this reaction is gravitational, and cares nothing for the walls of the room, but extends instead
to the limits of the Universe, traveling at "velocity c" as a non-local effect.
The conversion of bound chemical energy into light reduces the rest mass of the chemical batteries,

4 of 6

6/27/14 3:15 PM

The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/conversion.html

and so decreases the gravitational field associated with and proportional to the rest mass of the
flashlight (Gm). Conversely, the interaction of the light with the atoms and molecules of the room's
walls sets them vibrating, and this increase in bound energy causes an increase in the equivalent
mass-energy of the atoms and molecules, and so increases the gravitational field associated with and
proportional to the rest mass of the atoms (Gm). If all the batteries' chemical energy transformed to
light remains bound in the vibrating atoms of the walls, then the two effects will be equal and counter
each other, canceling in sum, but in either case these propagating gravitational effects certainly will
not be locally confined by walls of any kind.
Regarding the entropic expansion of space - is local space also expanding? Space is created by light's
intrinsic motion and hence always contains light's expansive, entropic energy principle. Because of
the presence of matter in the Cosmos, the expansion of space is coordinated with the expansion of
time (through the action of gravity), to produce the expansion of historic spacetime. Since we are
composed of matter rather than light, we experience only the temporal component of this expansion,
the intrinsic motion of time, the aging of history, and the local gravitational force converting space to
time. The spatial component of the expansion, however, is visible (in large telescopes), as the
"redshift" of distant galaxies. This is a reciprocal view, in which those distant galaxies also see us as
equally "redshifted". (See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".) Meanwhile, the cooling of space has
been measured (by radio telescope and satellite) as the 2.7 Kelvin "background radiation" remaining
from the (much hotter) era of the "Big Bang". Locally, the expansion and cooling of space is
overwhelmed by the influence (gravitational and thermal) of the large concentrations of matter in the
Earth, Sun, Solar System, and our Milky Way galaxy. Our experience of the universal expansion of
spacetime is therefore mostly through its temporal component: historical aging and the intrinsic
motion of time. Nevertheless, the expansion and cooling of space on a universal scale (the spatial
entropy drive) can be directly measured by our astronomical instruments as the "redshift" of distant
galaxies and the temperature of the "cosmic background radiation".
For a discussion of the several conservation roles of gravity (including entropy and symmetry) see:
"The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation" and: "A Rationale for Gravity". For a discussion of
the weakness of gravity (the tangential "hit" of the "present moment" upon bulk historical spacetime)
see: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".
I am not the only author who thinks the time dimension actually moves. For a mathematical
discussion of the moving time dimension according to Einstein's formulation of Special Relativity, see
Dr. Elliot McGucken's analysis in his "Moving Dimensions Theory"
(http://herosjourneyphysics.wordpress.com/three-foundational-papers-on-moving-dimensions-theorytime-as-an-emergent-phenomenon-traveling-back-to-the-heroic-age-of-physics-by-dr-elliotmcgucken/).
dx4/dt=ic represents the physically real reality of a fourth dimension expanding relative to the three
spatial dimensions. - Dr. Elliot McGucken
Links:
Unified Field Theory

5 of 6

6/27/14 3:15 PM

The Conversion of Space to Time by Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/conversion.html

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
About Gravity
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
A Spacetime Map of the Universe
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Gravity Diagrams
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric

6 of 6

6/27/14 3:15 PM

