higgstable.html

Unification Era

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

Symmetry
Group,
Higgs

Planck Era;
Higgs 3;
T.O.E.
All Forces
"Theory of
Unified;
Everything"
G2 (?)
(Gravity and
(Massive
Spacetime
Leptons and
Unified with Leptoquarks);
Light, Particles);
Gamow's
Creation of
"Ylem";
Massive
"Quark
Leptoquarks
Soup"

Field Vector
Temp/Time/GEV

Charge
Symmetry
Debt

Era Role

Graviton
(Gravitational
Force);
10(32) k;
10(-43) sec.
10(19) GEV;
(Rebound:
"Big Crunch")

"Location"
Negative
(gravitational Gravitational
charge);
Energy;
Negative
"Ylem";
Energy/Entropy;
Create
Total Energy/
Massive
Entropy = 0;
Leptons,
"Local" Mass Leptoquarks;
Distribution
Time;
Asymmetry
?Inflation?

Gluon
(Strong Force);
10(28) k;
10(-35) sec.
10(16) GEV;
(Rebound:
Supernova,
Black Hole)

Color
Charge;
Total
Color = 0;
Partial Charge
Asymmetry
of Quarks;
"Asymptotic
Freedom",
Quark
Confinement

Asymmetric
Decay of
Leptoquarks
Creates
Matter,
Hyperon
"Singlets",
Leptoquark
Neutrinos;
Dark
Matter (?)

Hyperon Era;
EW
"W" IVBs;
IVB
Electroweak
Higgs 1;
Transform
(Weak Force);
Union
Weak, EM
Hyperons;
10(15) k;
(Quarks Unified,
Forces
Create/Destroy/
10(-10) sec.
Leptons Unified);
Unified;
Transform
10(2) GEV;
Creation of
SU(2), SU(3)
Alternative
(Rebound:Stars,
Lepton/Meson
(Leptons,
Charge Carriers
White Dwarf,
Alternative
Quarks)
(leptons, mesons,
Neutron Star)
Charge
neutrinos)
Carriers

"Identity"
("Number")
Charge;
Total
"Number" = 0;
"Identity"
Asymmetry of
Leptons,
Baryons,
Fermions

Creates,
Destroys,
Transforms
Single
Leptons,
Neutrinos,
Quarks;
Transforms
Single
Baryons

Atomic Era
EM
Photons;
Photon
EM
"Ground
Create and
(Electromagnetic
Electromagnetic
State";
Transform EM
Force);
Unification;
Spacetime
Fields,
(currently)
Electric/Magnetic
Metric
Space and Time;
Temp. 2.7 K;
Fields Unified;
(Scaled by Create/Transform
Historic
Creation of
c, G);
Chemicals,
Spacetime;
Atoms,
U(1) (Phase)
Molecules,
13.7 Billion Yr.

Creates
Electric;
Spacetime,
Total Electric Information,
Charge = 0; Atoms, Life;
4th Dimension "c" Gauges
One-Way
Metric
Asymmetry
and
(Time)
Virtual

Leptoquark Era;
G.U.T.
"Grand Unified
Theory"
(Quarks Unified
with Leptons);
Asymmetric
Leptoquark
Decay;
Creation of
Matter,
Hyperons

1 of 9

IVBs
(Decay Path)

"Y" IVBs;
Create/Destroy
Charged
and
Neutral
Leptoquarks

"X" IVBs;
Higgs 2;
Transform/
Strong,
Destroy
EW Forces
Neutral
Unified;
Leptoquarks;
SU(5);
Create/Destroy
(Electrically Matter Hyperons;
Neutral
Matter/Antimatter
Leptoquarks
SymmetryOnly)
Breaking;
"Proton Decay"

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

Information,
Spacetime

(Light)
(Photons)

Information

10(-3) EV;
(Rebound:
Planets)

Particle
"Sea"

Higgs Table No. I: Unified Force Eras or Symmetric Energy Levels of the "Big Bang"
J. A. Gowan and A. T. Jaccaci (revised, Nov., 2012) http://www.johnagowan.org/index.html
"Multiverse": Non-dimensional "vacuum" source of undefined symmetric energy and creative potential
- produces our 4-D universe as a quantum fluctuation of no net energy or charge, conserving energy,
with "life-friendly" physical constants ("Anthropic Principle"). Balanced pos-neg (gravitational)
energy and matter-antimatter charge symmetry. (Cosmos, Multiverse united). "Big Bang": Cosmos
devolves from "Multiverse".
Information and Biological Eras evolve as ground state "rebounds" from entropy-driven "Higgs
cascade". Rebound is driven by symmetry conservation, negentropic gravity, and evolutionary forces,
creating planets, stars, black holes, galaxies, "Big Crunch", heavy elements, chemistry, information,
life, humanity. (See Also: "Table of the Unified-Force Eras of the Cosmos".)

THE HIGGS BOSON AND THE WEAK FORCE IVBS
(INTERMEDIATE VECTOR BOSONS): PART IV: TABLE OF
THE HIGGS CASCADE
JOHN A. GOWAN
Revised Nov., 2012
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Abstract
We explore the hypothesis that there are 3 "families" or energy levels
of the Higgs bosons and their associated Intermediate Vector Bosons
(IVBs), analogously to the three families or energy levels of the
quarks and leptons. With its origin in the "Multiverse", our Universe
apparently devolved (rapidly) downward in an asymmetric "Higgs
Cascade" to the electromagnetic ground state, and now evolves
(slowly) upward again in a "rebound" driven by negentropic gravity
and symmetry conservation (Noether's Theorem), back to the
Multiverse state (in a "Big Crunch" gravitational cosmic collapse) or
to a state of pure electromagnetic radiation (light). CERN announced
the discovery of a Higgs-like boson on 4 July, 2012 (energy level
2 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

~126 GEV).
Unification Eras (or Symmetric Energy States) of the "Big
Bang":
Force-Unity Eras: Multiverse Era
Multiverse Era: Non-dimensional, "vacuum" potential of
undefined creative energy, producing infinitely (?) many
energy-conserving Universes (with various and unique
physical constants) via quantum fluctuations of no net energy
or charge, one of which (constrained by the "Anthropic
Principle") becomes our own. Below, scalar Higgs particles,
"Standard Model" symmetry groups, transformative IVB
families, and field vectors of the four forces are listed for an
entropy driven decay "cascade" through 4 successively
diminishing levels of force unification. Major roles and
productions of the eras are suggested. Except for the final
EM "ground" state, unification eras correspond to a specific
temperature (absolute degrees Kelvin) and time period (after
"time zero") of the "Big Bang" decay sequence (For table
data see: Brian Greene: "The Fabric of the Cosmos", P. 270,
Knopf, 2004, and Frank Close: The New Cosmic Onion
Taylor and Francis, 2007, page 196. For symmetry
discussion, see : Ian Stewart, "Why Beauty is Truth", P.
239-73, Basic Books, 2007). For a discussion of the Higgs
boson, see: Sean Carroll: The Particle at the End of the
Universe, Dutton, 2012
Force-Unity Eras: Planck Era
3) Planck Era (quantum gravity era, primordial "Ylem" era).
Y+, Y-, Y (neutral) IVBs; Higgs 3 (or "Higgs y"), - TOE
unity (Theory of Everything): unified positive
electromagnetic and negative gravitational energy ("YinYang"). All forces unified. 10(32)k; 10(-43) sec. Unified
gravity, light, spacetime, and bound energy forms
(primordial, electrically charged leptons; charged leptoquarks
3 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

(a leptoquark is a trisected heavy lepton, the mass limit of the
leptonic spectrum). "Quark soup", "quantum gravity".
Negative gravitational energy exactly balances positive
electromagnetic energy. Matter-antimatter symmetry.
Primordial, massive, charged leptons are produced by the
combined action of all forces. "Y" IVBs transform
electrically charged leptoquarks into electrically neutral
leptoquarks, creating the possibility of matter-antimatter
symmetry-breaking. Neutral leptoquarks will decay further in
level 2 (Leptoquark Era). Matter-antimatter annihilations.
(Creation of primordial leptons, particle mass, and
leptoquarks; "Big Bang" Creation Event; separation of
Universe from Multiverse. Creation of bound
electromagnetic energy (massive particle-antiparticle pairs)
from free electromagnetic energy (light). Coding and
conservation of light's symmetry, energy, and entropy
parameters as the charges, spin, mass, and time of particles.
Rebound = "Big Crunch".)
Force-Unity Eras: Leptoquark Era
2) Leptoquark Era. X+, X-, X (neutral) IVBs; Higgs 2 (or
"Higgs x"), - GUT unity (Grand Unified Theory). Electrically
neutral leptoquarks only. Separation of the spacetime metric
(including gravity) from primordial leptoquarks, and the
beginning of the entropic expansion and cooling of the
Cosmos. This separation may correspond to the
"inflationary" era of Guth and Linde (?). Strong and
electroweak forces unified. Quarks and leptons combined but
with separate spacetime and gravity. 10(28)k; 10(-35) sec.
Quark partial charges allow the existence of electrically
neutral leptoquarks. "X" IVBs compress neutral leptoquarks,
causing color charge to self-annihilate in the limit of
"asymptotic freedom". With conserved color charges absent,
weak force decays proceed (via the "X" IVBs) with the
emission of leptoquark neutrinos. Asymmetric weak force
decay of electrically neutral leptoquarks vs antileptoquarks
4 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

produces level H1 Hyperon Era and matter asymmetry of
Cosmos. (Transformation of leptoquarks. Asymmetric
creation of matter and single hyperons; leptoquark
antineutrinos are "dark matter" candidates. "Proton decay".
Rebound = black holes.) (For "inflation" hypothesis, see:
Alan H. Guth The Inflationary Universe Helix Books 1997.)
Force-Unity Eras: Hyperon Era
1) Hyperon Era. W+, W-, W (neutral) IVBs; Higgs 1 (or
"Higgs w"), - EW unity (Electroweak Unification): hyperons
(heavy baryons) and heavy leptons. Weak and
electromagnetic forces unified. 10(15k); 10(-12) sec.
Matter-only asymmetry. Leptons and quarks separate into
unified lepton "genera" and unified hadron "genera". "W"
IVBs transform quarks into other quarks and leptons into
other leptons (but not leptons into quarks). Hyperons and
heavy leptons decay (via "W" IVBs) to "ground state"
proton, neutron, electron, and photon with emission of
leptonic antineutrinos. Leptons, mesons, and neutrinos serve
as alternative charge carriers for the decays of hyperons and
heavy leptons, avoiding antimatter annihilation reactions.
(Creation of leptons, neutrinos, mesons - alternative charge
carriers; creation of leptonic "singlets". Transformation of
baryons. Rebound = Stars)
Atomic Era: "Ground State"
Atomic Era. Cold "Ground State". Free-ranging photons;
creation of large spatial and temporal dimensions. Bosons,
leptons, hadrons - EM unity (Electromagnetic Unification).
Spacetime, light, and gravity remain unified, electric and
magnetic fields remain unified. Heisenberg/Dirac virtual
"vacuum" particle "sea". Photon separates from "W" IVBs,
creates and energizes space; gravity creates time from space,
time creates history. Photons and the spacetime metric are the
ground state (dimensional) analogs of the Higgs and IVB
"particle metric". Era of atomic matter, information, light,
5 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

gravity, and spacetime. (Creation of space, time, atoms.
Rebound = Planets.)
The "Ground State Vacuum" also hosts virtual particleantiparticle pairs, which are essential for maintaining an
active connection between the electromagnetic ground state
and higher energy electroweak transformations, (for
example, the transmutation of atomic nuclei in "radioactive"
decays and during element-building in stars during the early
"rebound phase"). Both processes (fission and fusion)
directly and continuously interact with the electromagnetic
ground state, whereas interactions at the GUT and TOE
energy levels are typically of one-time historic significance
(creation of Universe, creation of matter). Neutrino "flavor"
oscillations may be an example of a remnant union from the
more symmetric EW era.
Symmetry Restoration or "Rebound" Era
Ground State "Rebound" Information, life, and
consciousness era, including humanity, symbolic
information, and technology. Driven by symmetry
conservation, negentropic gravity, and biological
evolutionary forces. Rebound begins with planets (ground
state); continues through sun-like stars and neutron stars
(level H1); supernovas, quasars, and black holes (level H2);
and cosmic collapse or "Big Crunch" (level H3). Creation of
planets, stars, black holes, the "Big Crunch"; heavy
elements, molecules, chemistry, life, conscious experience,
symbolic information, technology, humanity, novel forms of
creativity and beauty. (See: "Nature's Fractal Pathway".)
We have previously (and correctly) understood the
gravitational rationale from the point of view of: 1) energy,
entropy, and causality conservation (the gravitational
creation of time from space, providing the temporal entropy
drive and causal linkages for bound energy); 2) the point of
view of symmetry conservation (the gravitational conversion
6 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

of bound to free energy, as in stars); 3) as the source of
negative energy (balancing positive electromagnetic energy)
in the "Big Bang". (See: Entropy, Gravitation, and
Thermodynamics"). The gravitational recapitulation of force
unification and symmetry states (culminating in the "Big
Crunch") allows us to understand the gravitational rationale
from a new, fourth perspective embracing only the
reunification of the four forces.
Rationale for the Higgs Boson
The role of the weak force in the cosmic scheme is to create, destroy,
or transform single elementary particles. An asymmetry in the action
of this force is thought to be responsible for the production of our
"matter-only" universe. The Higgs boson is necessary to gauge
(determine, standardize) the rest mass energy of the IVBs and the
elementary leptons and quarks, so their masses will have a defined
and invariant magnitude, reproducible everywhere and anywhen in
time and space. This is the grand "local gauge symmetry" of the weak
force and the single elementary particles it produces. An electron
created today can be "swapped out" with any other in the Cosmos, no
matter when or where it was produced, including in the "Big Bang"
(hence exact antimatter annihilation partners can also be produced,
when required, as for energy/symmetry conservation). The Higgs acts
through its IVBs to gauge the elementary particle masses. The large
Higgs and IVB masses reproduce the force-unity energy levels in
which these particles were first made (the electroweak force-unity
energy level in the case of the "W" IVBs). Thus every elementary
particle is forged from the same original mold, and every weak force
interaction involving the IVBs is a mini "Creation Event". Moreover,
the massive Higgs is also thought to stabilize the universe against
collapsing into a black hole during the "Big Bang" (see cite below).
The Higgs and IVBs must be massive to prevent the attenuation of
their energy content during the entropic expansion of the cosmos over
its lifetime. Regarding the inertial mass of particles as measured by
resistance to acceleration (F = MA), see: "The Higgs Boson vs the
Spacetime Metric".
7 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

The anomalous parity violation of the weak force is due to the
absence of antimatter. Lacking other distinguishing charges, left vs
right "handedness" is the only way neutrinos are differentiated from
antineutrinos - all matter neutrinos have left-handed spin and all
antimatter neutrinos have right-handed spin. In our matter-only
universe, the weak force can only interact with left-handed electrons
(for example), because the electron neutrinos which carry the
electron's leptonic "number" or "identity" charge (the alternative
charge carrier) is perforce exclusively left-handed.
Like other charges, "handedness" must either be conserved as it is, or
neutralized by its opposite. When an electron is created, its leptonic
"number" or "identity" charge must be neutralized by an
accompanying antineutrino, which however can only have righthanded spin, forcing the electron (which ordinarily can have either
handedness) to have the opposite and balancing left-handed spin.
When this electron is subsequently destroyed in some later weak
force reaction, its number charge must be conserved (carried forward
as is) by a (matter) neutrino, which of course can only have
left-handed spin. Hence we see the parity charge "left-handedness"
carried through the creation and destruction of (matter) electrons, first
by the electron itself, and then by its neutrino. Thus arises the weak
force violation of parity, coupling only to left-handed particles, an
asymmetry which would be completely reversed if our world were
made of antimatter.
References
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page
400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed Equations of Quark Theory."
Mee, Nicholas: Higgs Force The Lutterworth Press 2012
Close, Frank. The Infinity Puzzle. 2011. Basic Books.
Sean Carroll: The Particle at the End of the Universe, Dutton,
2012
M. Herranen, T. Markkanen, S. Nurmi, A. Rajantie. Spacetime
Curvature and the Higgs Stability During Inflation. Physical
Review Letters, 2014; 113 (21) DOI:
8 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

higgstable.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/higgstable.html

10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.211102
Links to other parts of this paper:
Go to: The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs
(Intermediate Vector Bosons): A General Systems Perspective
(part I)
Go to: The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs
(Intermediate Vector Bosons): A General Systems Perspective
(part II)
Go to: The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs
(Intermediate Vector Bosons): A General Systems Perspective
(part III)
Links:
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

9 of 9

8/31/18, 2:23 PM

