The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

THE PARTICLE TABLE
(revised Aug., 2013)
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
(The "Particle Table" has been translated into German, many thanks to Marina Dmitrieva! See: German
translation) (http://trenduhren.de/blog/?p=122)
(The "Particle Table" has been translated into Ukrainian, many thanks to Agnessa Petrova. See: Ukrainian
translation) by Jeweell team (http://jeweell.com/tablica/) by (http://jeweell.com/)
(The "Particle Table" has been translated into Polish, many thanks to Katia Osipova. See: Polish Translation)
(http://cheap.de/science/tabela-czastek)
(The "Particle Table" has been translated into Russian, many thanks to Aleksandr Molochan. See: Russian
translation) (Bisquit-mag team) (http://bisquit-mag.ru/blogs/chastitsa-tablitsyi)
(The "Particle Table" has been translated into Indonesian, many thanks to Jordan Silaen . See: Indonesian
Translation) https://www.chameleonjohn.com/translations/partable-Indonesian (homepage:
ChameleonJohn.com)
(The "Particle Table" has been translated into Portuguese, many thanks to Diana Gomes. See:
http://www.travel-ticker.com/translations/partable
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Table
IVBs and the Higgs
Leptons and Quarks
Field Vectors
Strong Force
Weak Force
Electromagnetic Force
Gravitational Force
Examples of Weak Force Decays
Lepton Decays
Meson and Baryon Decays
Proton Decay
Leptoquark Decay
Discussion of the Leptonic Spectrum
Appendix: Technical Terms
Particle Diagram
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 1 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

Links
Abstract
A table of elementary particles, including the weak force Intermediate Vector Bosons and Higgs
particles, is presented and discussed. The field vectors (force-carriers) are considered and
examples of several types of particle decay are given. A list of technical terms is appended.
Table I
(See also: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".)
The Particle Spectrum, Including the Weak Force "Intermediate Vector Bosons" ("IVBs")
Quarks
Designations:
Higgs, IVBs, Leptons
Designations:
.
.

.
.

H1, H2, H3 ("Higgs")
W, X, Y, (IVBs)

"Higgs" Bosons (3?)
IVBs (3 families?)

Lq (?)

Leptoquark

Lq, vlq (?)

Leptoquark, lq Neutrino

t, b
c, s

Top, Bottom .
Charm, Strange

t-, vt
u-, vu

Tau, Tau Neutrino
Muon, Muon Neutrino

u, d
Up, Down
Composite Particles Baryons, Mesons

e-, ve
Elementary Particles

Electron, Electron Neutrino
Electrons, Neutrinos

Primary Mass Carrier Nucleons, Nuclei

Alternative Charge Carriers

Leptons, Mesons

Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs) and "Higgs" Bosons
The W+, W-, and W (neutral) (or Z neutral) are the "Intermediate Vector Bosons" (IVBs - "field vectors" or
force-carriers) of the weak force (at the "electroweak" (EW) force unification energy level). The "W" IVBs
mediate the creation and destruction of unpaired or "singlet" (lacking antimatter partners) leptons, neutrinos,
and quarks, and transformations of identity between and among these elementary particles. The "W" neutral
(Z) typically mediates neutral weak force scattering ("bouncing" via a weak interaction) of neutrinos, or
interactions in which neutrinos simply swap identities with other leptons. The "W" IVBs are heavy particles;
the "W" is equal to approximately 80.4 GeV, the Z is equal to approximately 91.2 GeV (Fermilab data). The
hypothetical "X" IVB (at the strong and electroweak force unification energy level ("Grand Unified Theory"
or GUT), is an even heavier particle which compresses the quarks of baryons until their color charges selfannihilate ("asymptotic freedom"), producing leptoquark neutrinos and baryons during the Big Bang, and
causing "proton decay". A third family of even heavier "Y" IVBs may exist, producing electrically neutral
leptoquarks at the highest energy level, at which gravity joins the other forces during the first instant of the
"Big Bang" (the "Theory of Everything" or TOE energy level) . The "Higgs" boson, the presumed scalar of
particle mass, probably belongs here with the other massive bosons, although the Higgs is not itself an IVB
(the Higgs is a scalar boson with spin = 0 whereas the IVBs are vector bosons with spin = 1). If three families
of weak force IVBs exist, then we also expect to find three energy levels of Higgs bosons, one each for the
"W", "X", and "Y" IVB families. (Not shown in this table are the bosons of the electromagnetic force
(photon, spin 1), the strong force (gluon, spin 1), and the gravitational force (the hypothetical graviton, spin
2; all are massless and travel at velocity c). (See: "The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs"; see also:
"The 'W' IVB and the Weak force Mechanism".)
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 2 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

Leptons and Quarks
The elementary leptonic series consists of the electron (e), muon (u), tau (t), and the hypothetical leptoquark
(Lq), with their corresponding neutrinos (v). The electron, muon and tau are identical except for their masses
(tau is the heaviest) and their identity charges (carried in "hidden" or implicit form by the massive leptons,
and carried in explicit or "bare" form by their neutrinos). The (hypothetical) leptoquark is the even heavier
ancestor of the quarks and leptons; in the table it is indicated at the head of both the leptonic and quark series,
for although a (fractured) lepton when compressed, when expanded it reveals three sub-units, the quarks.
(See: "Identity Charge and the Weak Force".)
The quarks are named up, down (u, d), charm, strange (c, s), and top, bottom (t, b). The u, c, t series carries a
fractional electric charge of +2/3; the d, s, b series carries a fractional electric charge of -1/3. Quarks also
carry the strong force "color" charge, a three-part charge designated (for convenience of reference only) red,
green, yellow, and vectored by a field of 8 "gluons". Gluons consist of a color-anticolor charge in any
combination (except the doubly neutral "green-antigreen"). Baryons consist of three quarks, mesons consist
of a quark-antiquark pair. Hadrons are the class of particles containing quarks - that is, the baryons and
mesons. Baryons as a class all carry one and the same "identity" ("baryon number") charge, whose
(hypothetical) explicit form is the leptoquark neutrino.
The leptons and the leptoquark are the only known (or surmised) massive elementary particles. The neutrinos
are the (nearly?) massless, "bare", or explicit form of the identity charges of their corresponding massive
leptons. Quarks, although massive, are sub-elementary, carrying fractional electric, color, and identity
charges. The quarks occur (permanently) only in "white" color combinations as triplets (composed of all
colors) confined to baryons, or (temporarily) as quark-antiquark pairs (composed of a color and its specific
anticolor) in mesons. Primordially, quarks are produced in isolated particles of matter (isolated from
antimatter) by the expansion of internally fractured leptoquarks (yielding baryons); or then and now, as
particle-antiparticle pairs (either mesons or baryons) in high-energy astrophysical (or accelerator) interactions
and collisions.
The production of leptons and quarks as bound forms of electromagnetic energy is apparently a "given" or
inherent "anthropic" capability of the energized spacetime metric or Heisenberg-Dirac "vacuum". The
metric's capacity to produce specific bound electromagnetic energy forms (leptons and quarks) is simply
"packaged" into leptoquark form when all forces combine during the "Big Bang" or "Creation Event" to
produce massive particles from high-energy massless light and the structural (conservation) properties of the
spacetime metric or "vacuum". Hence particles and the spacetime metric are intimately related: the baryon
looks like a miniature universe with internal, massless particles (gluons) exchanging the color charges of the
strong force at velocity c; the three-part baryon may be a fractal "resonance" of the three spatial dimensions
within a "particle metric", etc.
Ordinary matter (including stars) consists of the electron and u, d quark energy level only. The quark
complement of a proton is (uud)+; that of a neutron is (udd). An exactly corresponding set of antiparticles
also exists, in which all charges are reversed, but is not shown. (In the case of neutrinos, it is the
"handedness" of their quantum mechanical intrinsic spin which is reversed: all neutrinos have left-handed
spin; all antineutrinos have right-handed spin. Our universe is fundamentally asymmetric in that it contains
only left-handed neutrinos, a one-way time dimension, a one-way gravitational field, and no antimatter.)
Neutrinos are associated only with elementary particles, and they uniquely identify the particle of their origin,
both as to species (electron, muon, tau, leptoquark) and matter vs antimatter. Hence we recognize neutrinos as
"bare" identity charges, which exist as a consequence of Noether's symmetry-conservation theorem and the
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 3 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

breaking of the photon's "anonymity" symmetry by "singlet" leptons and leptoquarks: (photons are
indistinguishable one from another and hence "anonymous"). (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field
Theory".) There are no neutrinos associated with the sub-elementary quarks. We therefore assume that all
baryons carry one and the same "hidden" leptoquark number or "identity" charge, which is balanced by an
explicit antileptoquark neutrino. These leptoquark neutrinos are only produced during proton creation or
destruction and are obvious "dark matter" candidates, remnants of the primordial and asymmetric "Creation
Event".

Field Vectors, Force- Carriers, or Bosons
1) Strong Force
There are two expressions of the strong force, one at a structural level of force/charge exchange between
quarks within single baryons, and a second at a structural level of force/charge exchange between multiple
baryons within a compound atomic nucleus. The primary or quark-level expression of the strong force
produces "quark confinement", the strong force that permanently confines quarks in baryon triplets. The
charge of this strong force is called "color", and the field vectors are called "gluons". All quarks carry one
color charge (red, green, or yellow), which they exchange with each other via a gluon force-field. Gluons are
composed of color-anticolor charge quanta, are massless, and travel at velocity c. The "round-robin"
exchange of virtual gluons between quarks (as per Gell-Mann) constitutes the primary expression of the
strong force, the permanent binding of quarks within baryons. Baryons are the primary mass carriers or
energy storage units of the cosmos. The composite structure of the baryon is necessary to produce an
electrically neutral mass-carrying particle which can break the initial symmetric energy state of the cosmos,
probably via the asymmetric weak force decay of electrically neutral leptoquarks. (See: "The Origin of
Matter and Information"; see also: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".)
The secondary or "nucleon" energy level expression of the strong force produces the binding of protons and
neutrons into the compound atomic nuclei of the heavy elements. The charge associated with this force is
called "flavor", and the field vectors or force-carriers are mesons, composed of a colorless quark-antiquark
pair. The "ground state" family of quarks (which exclusively comprises protons and neutrons) carry either
"up" or "down" flavors, and the exchange of flavors between protons and neutrons via meson force-carriers
(as per Yukawa) constitutes the binding principle of the secondary aspect of the strong force, as expressed
through the cohesion of compound atomic nuclei. Unlike the absolute confinement of quarks via gluons,
however, the confinement of nucleons via mesons, while powerful, is not absolute: under the proper
circumstances, protons and neutrons can escape from a compound nucleus, and heavy nuclei can fission into
lighter elements. (Meson binding is due to a "least bound energy" principle, whereas gluon binding is due to
the stricter charge conservation principle (in this case, conservation of whole quantum units of charge); both
are ultimately forms of symmetry conservation.) (See: "The Strong Force: Two Expressions".)
2) Weak Force
The weak force IVBs are unusual in that they are very massive bosons, whereas all other field vectors are
massless. The mass of the IVBs is why they are called "intermediate" vector bosons. The great mass of the
IVBs is used to recreate the primordial conditions of the "Big Bang" in which the reactions they now mediate
first took place. Such extreme measures are necessary because single elementary particles created today must
be the same in all respects as those created eons ago in the "Big Bang". Only the weak force is capable of
creating single elementary particles rather than particle-antiparticle pairs. See below and the "Higgs Boson"
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 4 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

papers. See also: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism".)
3) Electromagnetic Force
The photon, a quantum unit of light, is the field vector of electric charge and the electromagnetic force. The
exchange of virtual photons between the electric charges (or magnetic fields) of an electron and proton (for
example), binds these particles together and maintains the atomic structure of atoms and molecules. Our
Universe is an electromagnetic universe, composed of free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy (light
and matter). The electromagnetic constant "c" is the primary gauge constant of energy in the Cosmos,
determining, regulating, or "gauging" the inertial metric of spacetime, the entropic expansion of space, the
"non-local" symmetric energy state of light, the causal relations of matter, the invariance of charge, and the
proportional equivalence between free and bound electromagnetic energy (E = mcc) - among other things.
(See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory.)
4) Gravitational Force
"Gravitons" are the presumed field vectors of the gravitational force. The graviton, as conceived in these
pages, consists of a quantum unit of temporal entropy, or negative spatial entropy, or equivalently, a quantum
unit of time. Time is the active principle of the gravitational "location" charge. Time is connected to
("entangled" with) space, and the intrinsic, one-way entropic motion of time into history pulls space after it,
producing the spatial flow of a gravitational field. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time. It is the actual flow of space toward the center of a massive particle's "location"
charge that causes the "binding" effect of gravitation. Whereas the electromagnetic constant "c" gauges the
metric relation between space, time, and free energy, the gravitational constant "G" gauges the entropic
relation between space, time, and bound energy. Gravity creates a combined metric of historical spacetime in
which the conservation requirements of both matter and light in terms of raw energy, entropy, symmetry, and
causality can all be satisfied. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time"; see also: "A Description of
Gravitation"; see also: "A Rationale for Gravity".)

Examples of Weak Force Decays
While the reaction pathways below are speculative, the rationale for them is straightforward (the reactions
themselves are "Standard Model" reactions unless otherwise noted). The dense metric (or large mass) of the
IVBs functions to bring the participants of a weak force interaction into such close proximity that they can
exchange charges without risking any violation of the conservation laws, which they cannot do when
separated by ordinary distances. Typically this will involve a particle-antiparticle pair drawn from the virtual
particle "sea", as well as the reacting "real" or "parent" particle itself. For example, in the case of the leptonic
decay of a muon to an electron, the "W-" brings together within its dense metric a ("virtual") electronpositron particle pair, plus the ("real") parent muon. When these particles are sufficiently close together, the
positron and muon cancel each others' electric charges, and release their "identity" ("number") charges as
neutrinos. The reaction is possible only because the muon is so close to the particle pair that it can transfer its
mass-energy to the electron, materializing the virtual particle, thereby conserving the overall electrical and
number charge of the reaction while simultaneously conserving total energy. The role of the "Higgs boson" in
these transformations is to set, determine, or "gauge" the invariant energy scale of the reaction, and thus
select the IVB family (in this case the "W" or electroweak IVB family) appropriate to the critical task of
transforming the identity of an elementary particle. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)This
type of reaction, involving particle-antiparticle pairs drawn from the virtual "sea", explains how the "W" IVB
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 5 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

can participate in so many different reactions and produce so many different products without changing its
own identity. The "W" IVB acts as a sort of "metric catalyst" and bridge between the "virtual particle sea"
and "real" particles, simply bringing all reactants into very close contact with each other. It takes a lot of
energy to bring particles so close together that they can undergo weak force transformations of elementary
identity, hence the need for the large mass-energy of the IVBs. An equivalent way to understand this issue is
to realize that the IVB mass is recreating the original, "Big Bang" energy-dense metric of spacetime (the
electroweak force-unification symmetric energy state) in which these elementary particle transformations first
occurred. Another advantage of this hypothesis is that if the "W" and IVBs generally are "metric" particles,
then they may also contain a component of time, which could be the source of the weak force's asymmetric
character. (See: "The "W" Particle and the Weak Force Mechanism".)
This mechanism also raises another possibility: if the "W" has a "big brother" (the "X" IVB), it might be
powerful enough to squeeze the quarks of a baryon sufficiently to cause the color charge to vanish
("asymptotic freedom"), and initiate proton decay. The energy barrier to proton decay is very high (at least
the equivalent of leptoquark mass), so the "X" IVB would have to be very massive indeed. Presumably there
is another, heavier "Higgs" boson regulating the mass of the "X" IVB family. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the
Weak Force IVBs".)
The typical role of the weak force today is to produce (elementary) matter "singlets" from virtual particleantiparticle pairs. The electron produced today must be exactly the same in all respects as the electron
produced long ago during the "Big Bang", otherwise charge and symmetry conservation will fail. The only
way to ensure the invariance of elementary particle "singlets" whenever and wherever they are produced, is to
recreate the original conditions in which they were first formed. Hence the great mass of the IVBs, which
seem out of all proportion to the production of a tiny electron, is explained as required to reconstitute the
primordial electroweak force unification symmetric energy state of the "Big Bang", in which quark-quark and
lepton-lepton transformations occur as the normal course of events. The IVBs provide the transformation
mechanism while the Higgs boson scales the quantized and invariant symmetric energy state, selecting
(hypothetically) between three possible force unification energy levels with their associated IVB families.
(See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade"; see also: "The Higgs Boson VS the Spacetime Metric".) The IVBs
therefore function as "time machines" or "worm holes" connecting the primordial with the present-day
Cosmos, protecting across the eons a symmetry of uniformity within elementary leptonic particle species.
Lepton Decays:
(antiparticles underlined)
(Particle-antiparticle pairs are shown enclosed in parenthesis and with an "x" between the pair members - not
to be confused with the bold uppercase "X" IVB.)
1)
t-(u+ x u-)W- -----> vt + vu + u1) A tau decays (via an antimuon-muon particle pair complex formed by the W-) to a tau neutrino, a muon
antineutrino, and a muon. Within the complex, the tau and antimuon cancel each others' electric charges,
releasing their neutrinos and providing the energy to materialize the muon product.
2)
u-(e+ x e-)W- -----> vu + ve + e-

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 6 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

2) A muon decays (via a positron-electron particle pair complex formed by the W-) to a muon neutrino, a
positron neutrino, and an electron. Within the complex, the muon and positron cancel each others' electric
charges, releasing their neutrinos and providing the energy to materialize the product electron.
3)
ve + e-(e+ x e-)Z -----> e- + ve

3) An electron and electron neutrino interact via an electron-positron complex formed with the neutral "Z"
IVB, and swap identities. The original electron and virtual positron annihilate, releasing the original neutrino
and a replacement electron (this reaction could also be written using a neutrino-antineutrino virtual pair,
giving the same result). Here the "Z" (like all IVBs) provides a secure environment in which particles
(including virtual particles) are in such close proximity that charges and energy can be exchanged with no
danger of violating any conservation laws (essentially reproducing the primordial environment in which these
interactions first took place). The rationale for the heavy IVBs and the weak force mechanism is precisely to
safeguard the conservation laws during exchanges and transformations of energy and identity among
elementary and virtual particles. Although the neutral interaction above only results in a simple "bounce"
(scattering), the electrically neutral neutrino has no possibility for interaction with matter other than through a
heavy weak force IVB - which is why neutrinos interact so rarely.

Examples of Weak Force Decays: Mesons and Baryons
Meson Decay
(ud)-(u+ x u-)W- -----> vu + uA negative pion (ud)- decays (via an antimuon-muon particle pair complex formed by the W-), producing a
muon antineutrino, and a muon. Because quark partial flavor charges are not strictly conserved, once the
pion's electric charge is canceled by the antimuon, the meson, being composed of a matter-antimatter quark
pair, will simply self-annihilate, supplying the energy necessary to materialize the decay products.
Baryon Decays
1)
udd(ud+ x ud-)W- -----> udu+ + ud-(e+ x e-)W- -----> udu+ + ve + e1) "Beta decay": a neutron (udd) decays in a two-step process, via an antipion-pion pair, followed by a
positron-electron particle pair complex (both formed by the W-), producing a proton (udu)+, a positron
neutrino, and an electron. Baryon decay and transformation is a major function of the mesons,
complementing their baryon-binding role in compound atomic nuclei, in which they accomplish virtual
(rather than actual) transformations between protons and neutrons, creating "nucleons". Virtual mesons are
the donors (alternative charge carriers) of quark flavors in weak force transformations of baryons. Within the
first complex, the d quark of the positive meson annihilates a d quark in the baryon, and replaces it with an up
quark, transforming the neutron to a proton. This annihilation also helps supply the energy to materialize the
negative pion which immediately forms another W- complex with a positron-electron virtual particle pair. In
the second complex, the pion and positron cancel each other's electric charges, releasing the positron's
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 7 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

neutrino and supplying the energy to materialize the final electron. The neutralized remains of the pion,
which is a quark-antiquark combination, simply self-annihilates, as the partial flavors of quarks are not
strictly conserved. Although the reaction is shown in two steps for clarity, in nature it may occur in only one.
The complexity of the decay pathway, combined with the tiny energy differential between the neutron and
proton, is the reason for the extreme slowness of this reaction (half-life of ~15 minutes).
2)
duu+(ud- x ud+)W+ -----> dud + ud+(e- x e+)W+ -----> dud + ve + e+
2) A proton (duu)+ restructures in a two-step process, via a pion-antipion pair, followed by an electronpositron particle pair complex (both formed by the W+), producing a neutron (dud), an electron neutrino, and
a positron. This reaction requires an energy input. The reaction mechanism is similar to that detailed for beta
decay (above); and as in beta decay, while shown in two steps for clarity, in nature may proceed in one step.
For more weak force decays and transformations, see: The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (Adobe
Acrobat pdf file). (Also available in an html file.)

Hypothetical Weak Force Proton and Leptoquark Decays
Proton Decay
1) proton decay (hypothetical) mediated by the X+ IVB:
A) [(u+ x u-)(uud+)]X+ -----> vlq + vu + u+
B) [(ud+ x ud-)(uud+)]X+ -----> vlq + ud+ + y
A) A proton (uud+) decays via the super-heavy X+ IVB, producing a leptoquark neutrino (vlq), a muon
neutrino (vu), and an antimuon (u+).
B) The same, except that mesons rather than muons serve as the alternative charge carriers. A photon (y) and
positive pion (ud+) are produced in the product, along with the leptoquark neutrino (vlq). Note that different
conservation laws (allowing the conversion of quarks to leptons and vice versa) apply at the GUT force
unification or "X" IVB energy level. Here the proton is compressed by the heavy "X" IVB to the leptoquark
configuration, vanishing the proton's color charge (in the limit of "asymptotic freedom"); the color charge of
baryons is otherwise conserved (in reactions mediated by the "W" IVB, for example). (See also: "Proton
Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
Leptoquark Decay
2) leptoquark decay (hypothetical - during the "Big Bang" only - asymmetries in this decay are the source of
matter and the material Universe):
[(vlq x vlq )(Lq x Lq )]X -----> bbt + vlq + bb
The anti-member of an electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark pair decays (mediated via the "X" IVB
and the leptoquark neutrino), producing a neutral meson composed of bottom-antibottom quarks; the matter
leptoquark does not decay, but expands to produce a heavy neutral baryon (hyperon) (bbt), whose "hidden"
leptoquark identity charge is balanced by the explicit identity charge of the remaining anti-leptoquark
neutrino. (One of several possible decay pathways.)
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 8 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

In a leptoquark, the quarks are compressed by the "X" IVB to "leptonic size", vanishing the color charge ("in
the limit of asymptotic freedom"). An electrically neutral leptoquark should decay like a very heavy neutral
lepton, producing a leptoquark antineutrino plus energy in the form of neutral particles (photons, mesons,
etc.). Once released from the grip of the "X", the quarks in the unreacted leptoquark simply expand under the
force of their mutual repulsion to form an electrically neutral heavy baryon (hyperon). The electrical
neutrality of the leptoquark pair is necessary to allow time for the asymmetric weak force decay to occur: the
requirement of electrical neutrality is the reason why baryons must be composed of sub-elementary particles
(quarks) bearing partial charges which can sum to zero. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
Leptoquarks are presumed to be very heavy; leptoquark neutrinos may also be very massive (for neutrinos).
Leptoquark neutrinos are prime "dark matter" candidates; if they indeed account for the bulk of the dark
matter currently supposed to be present in the Cosmos, they would have to weigh approximately 5-6 proton
masses (5-6 Gev) - since there should be one antileptoquark neutrino for each proton produced in the "Big
Bang". If this seems too heavy for a neutrino, recall that the weak force comprises massive bosons (the W
and Z) which weigh much more than this, even though bosons in the other forces are massless. 5 Gev is also
less than the lower bound predicted for the least massive supersymmetric particle, the "neutralino" (10-20
Gev).
Discussion of the Leptonic Spectrum
The leptonic spectrum of elementary particles is clearly some sort of resonant series. In this case it appears to
be a resonant series of the combined electromagnetic and weak forces. The leptonic series identifies the massenergy at which the electromagnetic/photon and weak force/neutrino frequencies are in "sympathetic"
vibration - the leptonic particle series delineates the nodes of sympathetic vibration or resonance between
these two forces at the electroweak energy level. The electromagnetic force can probably produce particles of
any rest-mass energy, but it is only at the nodes of the resonance series where these two forces are in
sympathetic vibration that massive particles can be paired with neutrino "identity" charges. This joining of
forces is necessary to produce massive particles that can be conserved in the sense that they can be exactly
reproduced at any time and place, matching up precisely with others of their kind, including annihilation
reactions with their antiparticles, all because the neutrino provides a cross-reference of their identity. Hence,
whereas the variable magnetic field of the electromagnetic force functions to maintain the invariance of
electric charge, the variable energy of the neutrino of the electroweak force functions to maintain the
invariant mass of its associated elementary lepton.
The electroweak union is remarkable for its "leptonic spectrum", which at the highest energy level involves
the leptoquark and the strong force in a "grand unified" energy level. In this, the too-massive leptoquark
divides under its own self-repulsion to more stable, lower energy configurations of three quarks, held together
by the gluon field of the strong force, the latter arising naturally among the quark subunits, holding them
together in whole quantum units of charge (including the zero charge of a neutron-like configuration).
Electrically neutral leptoquarks are subject to asymmetric weak force decays (because of their long halflives), producing the matter-only atomic constituents of our cosmos. "Lepton number" or "hidden" identity
charges of the massive leptons and baryons are balanced by the explicit identity charges of neutrinos, one for
each type of lepton and anti-lepton (including the presumed leptoquark neutrinos). Electrical charges of the
baryons are the same as those of the leptons because baryons are derived from the leptonic spectrum via the
leptoquark, and the leptons are therefore able to act as alternative charge carriers for the baryons' electric
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 9 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

charges (or for other leptons or mesons).

List of Technical Terms:
Particles = fermions, bosons, and IVBs, virtual particles, and virtual particle-antiparticle pairs.
Virtual particles (often in particle-antiparticle pairs) = ephemeral particles which exist within the
Heisenberg time limit for virtual reality. Field vectors of the forces are typically in the form of virtual
particles.
Fermions = hadrons and leptons (spin 1/2 particles) (carriers of mass and charge - the constituents of
atomic matter).
Hadrons = particles containing quarks (mesons and baryons).
Quarks = sub-elementary particles, carrying fractional charges, apparently derived primordially from
splitting heavy elementary leptons into 3 parts (producing leptoquarks). Quarks occur in today's
universe only in meson and baryon combinations. Quarks occur in six "flavors" and three "colors". A
structurally distinct version of the strong force is associated with color vs flavor charge. Color charges
(carried by a gluon field) bind quarks in baryons; flavor charges (carried by a meson field) bind baryons
in compound atomic nuclei. Both leptons and quarks are produced today as virtual particles by the
Heisenberg-Dirac spacetime "vacuum" or structural metric, and it is this inherent or "given" capacity
for the production of bound forms of electromagnetic energy which is incorporated into the leptoquark
when the primordial spacetime metric is compressed into particles by the combined action of the four
forces of physics during the "Big Bang" or "Creation Event".
Mesons contain a quark-antiquark pair (examples: pions (ud)- and kaons (us)-). Mesons have integer
spin (0,1), depending upon whether the quarks spin oppositely or parallel to one another.
Baryons contain 3 quarks (examples: the neutron (ddu) and proton (uud+).
Baryons are mass carriers; mesons function as alternative charge carriers for electric charge and
especially for quark partial charges, assisting baryon decays and transformations, balancing the charges
of hadrons (and sometimes other leptons) in place of antiparticles. In the nuclear expression of the
strong force, mesons act as virtual field vectors of quark flavor charges, binding protons and neutrons
in compound atomic nuclei. In general, alternative charge carriers (leptons and mesons) function to
allow charges to be balanced, canceled, or otherwise neutralized while avoiding the matter-antimatter
annihilation reactions which would be inevitable if these functions were performed by the
corresponding charges of antiparticles. Hence the alternative charge carriers (leptons, mesons,
neutrinos) are necessary for the materialization of the baryons as single, asymmetric particles (lacking
anti-particles).
Leptons = massive leptons (electron, muon, tau) and (nearly) massless neutrinos (ve, vu, vt). Unlike
hadrons, leptons are true elementary particles with no internal constituents.
Leptons are alternative charge carriers. Massive leptons function as alternative carriers of electric
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 10 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

charge; neutrinos function as alternative carriers of "identity" ("number") charge. The hypothetical
leptoquark is the heaviest member of the leptonic elementary particle series, containing within its
fractured interior the primordial quarks, waiting to appear (in baryons) with the expansion of the
universe and the symmetry-breaking asymmetric decays of the weak force.
Bosons = photon, graviton, gluon (field vectors, force carriers). Particles with integer spin
(photon/gluon spin = 1, graviton spin = 2). The hypothetical Higgs boson is a spin = 0 scalar particle.
Gluons consist of a color-anticolor charge pair, in any combination other than green-antigreen, which is
doubly neutral. Thus there are eight effective gluon pairs. Virtual mesons can also act as massive
bosons or field vectors of the short-range strong force in compound atomic nuclei (the Yukawa strong
force).
Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs) = W+, W-, Z, ( X, Y ?) (all spin = 1). Heavy, transient metric
particles of interaction which catalyze and mediate transformations of identity, number, and flavor
among the fermions, including single particle creation and destruction. The supermassive "X" and the
even heavier "Y" IVBs are hypothetical, responsible respectively for proton decay and the production
of electrically neutral leptoquarks during the "Big Bang". (See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".)
Leptoquarks = hypothetical primordial particles consisting of a primitive, high mass, lepton fractured
into 3 parts (the nascent quarks) by the extreme pressures of the "Big Bang", including the compressive
force of gravity and the very massive "Y" IVB. The "Y" IVB mediates the creation of electrically
neutral leptoquarks from primordial, electrically charged leptons; the "X" IVB mediates the creation of
baryons from electrically neutral leptoquarks; the "W" IVB mediates the creation of leptons and
mesons from baryons. Leptoquarks may be so massive that they are unstable, and fracture under their
own size/weight due to the repulsive effects of their own electric charge. The sub-elementary quarks
therefore may represent a more stable configuration for this massive particle as they carry smaller
charges and masses. It is the role of the "Y" IVBs to create electrically neutral leptoquarks from their
electrically charged leptonic precursors. Neutral leptoquarks are necessary to break the primordial
matter-antimatter asymmetry of the "Big Bang" (via an asymmetric weak force decay mediated by the
"X" IVB). Hence the original mass carrier must exist as a composite particle capable of an electrically
neutral configuration among its internal parts. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
Charges: electric, color, "identity", and "location" (all symmetry debts of light). The weak force
"identity" charge is also known as "flavor" or "number" charge. The gravitational charge is known as
"location" charge. The active principle of "location" charge is time. The charges of matter are
symmetry debts of light - as per Noether's Theorem. Gravity is unified with the other forces through
Noether's Theorem, because like the other forces and their charges, gravity originates as a symmetry
debt of light (recording, conserving, and eventually restoring light's "non-local" symmetric energy
distribution - a symmetry broken during the conversion of non-local free energy with intrinsic motion
"c" (light) to local, immobile bound energy (mass, matter)). (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and
Thermodynamics"; see also: "A Rationale for Gravity".)
Forces: electromagnetic, gravitational, strong, weak (the forces represent demands for payment of
light's symmetry debts, held as characteristic charges). These demands are variously satisfied by
particle-antiparticle annihilations, fission, fusion, particle and proton decay, the nucleosynthetic
pathway in stars, the conversion of gravitational energy to light by supernovas and quasars, and by
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes - all processes returning bound to free energy or massive
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 11 of 12

The Particle Table

3/1/17, 7:47 AM

particles to massless light. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravity".)
During the Big Bang, high energy light, metric spacetime, and the combined action of all the forces,
produce massive particles of bound electromagnetic energy which carry charges: the charges of matter
are symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem). These charges produce forces which act to pay the
symmetry debts they represent, returning the asymmetric system of matter to its original symmetric
state of light. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory"; see also: "The Symmetry
Groups of Light".)

http://www.johnagowan.org/tetrapart.pdf
(In retrospect, I suggest placing the leptoquark, its neutrino and antiparticles at the central vertex (D))
Links:
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/partable.html

Page 12 of 12

