Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field
Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
(revised May, 2014)
John A. Gowan
home page
There is nothing so valuable as a fresh perspective
Table of Contents:
Row three: Charges - Symmetry Conservation
Electric Charge (cell 1)
The Magnetic Field
Gravitational Charge (cell 2)
Global and Local Gauge Symmetry in Gravitation: Symmetry Conservation
Strong Force Meson Field (cell 3)
Strong Force Gluon Field
Global and Local Gauge Symmetry in the Strong Force
Number Charge (cell 4)
Global and Local Gauge Symmetry in the Weak Force
Row four: Fields - Symmetry Payments
Photons (cell 1)
Gravitons (cell 2)
Quantum Radiance and Black Holes
Gluons (cell 3)
IVBs (cell 4)
Links And References
Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 1"
Go to Summary Section (Part III)
Abstract: (see abstract in Part I)

Row 3 - Charges: The Symmetry Debts of Light
Row 3: "Mortgage", "pay later", "pay through time", time deferred payment. Symmetry and charge
conservation in obedience to Noether's Theorem are the primary topics of Row 3. Each of the 4 forces
is discussed in terms of its motivating charge and the broken symmetry of light from which that
charge originates, and which that charge represents, carries, and conserves. Quantized charges
represent symmetry debts in invariant form, conserved through time for repayment at some indefinite
future date. Quantization is part of the conservation mechanism ensuring charge invariance, a
1 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

mechanism which also includes "local gauge symmetry currents" produced by the field vectors of the
four forces. Charge conservation is a temporal form of symmetry conservation, allowing the cosmos
to experience an alternative "credit card" existence, putting off the harsh reality of "pay now" raw
energy conservation. There is, of course, a cost for this fanciful lifestyle, which is simply stated in a
single word: gravity. Gravitation pays the interest on this "mortgage" or symmetry debt by creating
matter's time dimension, taking the necessary energy from the spatial expansion of the Cosmos, which
decelerates accordingly. Time is the relevant dimensional context in which concepts such as "time
deferred payment" or "repayment of a conserved debt or charge" can have meaning. Hence symmetry
conservation through time via the mechanism of conserved charges provides another rationale for
gravitation - in addition to balancing the primordial positive energy of Creation, and providing a
temporal accounting for the relative motion of massive particles.
I include in this section a discussion of the "global vs local gauge symmetry model" for each force. It
is primarily in the necessary maintenance of charge invariance as it is transferred from global to local
metrics and energy states by the field vectors of the forces that a synthesis can be made between the
"Tetrahedron Model" and the "Standard Model" of "establishment" physics, at least in terms of
symmetry conservation and Noether's Theorem.
Electric Charge
(row 3, cell 1)
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. Charge/spin conservation is a temporal form of
symmetry conservation. Forces generated by matter's charges are the demand for payment of the
symmetry debts those charges represent. Noether's Theorem is the formal theory addressing the
conservation of the symmetry of free electromagnetic energy (radiation, light). Charges are quantized
to help protect their values from inflation or deflation over time by entropy or relative motion in
spacetime; otherwise, in the absence of charge invariance, charge conservation would have little
meaning. This is also one of the reasons why matter must be separated and protected from the
expansive or enervating effects of its primordial entropy drive, time. Whereas light participates in the
entropic expansion of its spatial conservation domain, matter does not participate in the entropic
expansion of its causal information matrix (the historic domain of spacetime). Instead, matter
maintains a tangential position with respect to history, existing only in the "universal present
moment". (See: "The Time Train".) Magnetic forces are also instrumental in protecting the invariance
of electric charge in relative motion. (See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetries and the Tetrahedron
Model".)
We do not ordinarily realize that the symmetry of energy is conserved as well as its total quantity, but
it has been known for a long time that this must be true. In a famous theorem, Emmy Noether proved
mathematically that in a continuous multicomponent field, such as the electromagnetic field (or the
metric field of spacetime), wherever there is a symmetry one also finds an associated conservation
law, and vice versa. This great theorem has become the mathematical basis ("group theory") for
modern efforts to unify the forces. In the model presented here, I trace the unity of the forces back to
their common origin in charges representing conserved debts of light's broken symmetry. (See:
"Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work").
Charges arise naturally from the process of symmetry-breaking. When virtual particle-antiparticle

2 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

pairs are created from light, each member of the pair carries various charges which function to ensure
instant and successful annihilation, reconstituting the light from which the pair was created. Since
light itself carries no charges, it can only create particle pairs whose charges balance, cancel, or
neutralize each other, summing to zero. The positive/negative electric charge is prototypical of this
effect. Indeed, electric charge is a very general form of symmetry debt representing the absence of
antimatter in our cosmos.
Initially, all massive elementary particles are created in particle-antiparticle pairs, with equal but
opposite electric charges (among others) summing to zero. Opposite electric charges attract each other
powerfully, and at long range, allowing any particles carrying them to find each other anywhere in
space and recombine, hence motivating an annihilation reaction which returns their bound energy to
light, conserving the symmetry of the free energy which created them. Since photons, or light quanta,
are the field vectors (force carriers) of electric charge, we see light actively protecting its own
symmetry in matter-antimatter annihilation reactions, through the forces generated by electric charge.
Finally, because the electrical annihilations of virtual particles are caused by photons traveling at
velocity c, virtual particles are created and destroyed within the Heisenberg time limit imposed upon
virtual reality. Virtual particles do not live long enough to exist in "real" time, and hence they also,
like the light which created them, cannot produce a gravitational field. (Virtual particle pairs which
may be interpreted as associated with a particle's "observed mass" are, in such a case, obviously
participating members in a local system of bound energy, and therefore are exceptions to this rule,
which is strictly true only for massless non-local photons in free flight.)
When one member of a particle-antiparticle pair is isolated, as by the (hypothetical) asymmetric decay
of matter-antimatter leptoquark pairs during the Big Bang, the conserved charges of that isolated
particle, which were intended to motivate and facilitate an annihilation reaction with its antimatter
partner, are simply "hung" in time. The isolated particle is one-half of a symmetric particleantiparticle pair, one-half of light's symmetric particle form, and its uncanceled but conserved charges
are one-half of light's symmetry-keeping forces and conservation mechanism. These charges can
therefore be fairly characterized as the active "debts" or asymmetric remnants of light's broken
symmetry - a temporally conserved form of light's symmetry, just as mass is a temporally conserved
form of light's raw energy. This is, conceptually at least, a simple system with implications for the
unity of forces, charges, matter, fields, and light. Not only the quantity but also the quality of light's
energy must be conserved, both immediately as mass and through time as charge.
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. Light has global, timeless, non-local symmetry;
charges are a local, temporal transformation/representation of certain conserved parameters of light's
global symmetry. Charge-neutral, cold, atomic matter is a "ground state" of local, temporally
conserved symmetry debts . Gravity is the only charge of matter that cannot be neutralized - because
of gravity's double conservation role as both an entropy debt and a symmetry debt of light. The
entropic component (time, history) of the gravitational charge must continuously increase, until it is
satisfied by the return of bound to free energy (as in the stars). Gravity must continue to pay the
interest on the symmetry debt of matter.
While electric charge is always associated with mass, it is independent of the quantity of mass; the
three leptonic particles electron, muon, and tau, for example, have vastly different masses but carry
the same electric charge. Electric charge is not associated with bosons which move with intrinsic

3 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

motion c, such as the gluon, photon, or graviton. There is definitely a major, general asymmetry
associated with the loss of light's intrinsic motion which electric charge is powerfully guarding
against, and we would like to distinguish it from the asymmetry associated with the gravitational
charge. The gravitational constant (G), the electromagnetic constant (c), and the magnitude of electric
charge (e), are all invariant; all their values are also independent of the quantity of energy with which
they are associated.
Electric charge is the generalized symmetry debt representing the absence of antimatter. Of course,
there are multiple specific asymmetries associated with the isolation of matter from antimatter; one
major asymmetry I will single out as a contributing cause of the electrical charge symmetry debt is
dimensional: light is 2-dimensional, mass is 4-dimensional. Light lacks the x, t dimensions of bound
energy, as Einstein discovered. The jump from 2 to 4 dimensions in the conversion of light to particles
(or bound to free electromagnetic energy) is a general loss of symmetry, since the 4th dimension
inevitably includes time, which is an asymmetric, one-way dimension. It is this particular asymmetry,
time, which electric charge especially protects against. Electric charge, through matter-antimatter
annihilations, protects light's "non-local" dimensional symmetry by preventing light from devolving
into local matter, gravitation, and the asymmetric time dimension which is matter's entropy drive and
which provides matter's causal linkage. Electric charge is not related to the quantity of mass because
the dimensional asymmetry of time applies equally to all 4-dimensional massive forms, irrespective of
magnitude. Like most symmetry debts, electric charge is a charge of "quality" not "quantity". Raw
energy debts (mass, momentum) are "quantity" debts. Gravity is unusual in that it partakes of both, as
gravity is both an entropy debt of light (quantity - "pay now" - representing the quantity of mass) and
a symmetry debt of light (quality - "pay later" - representing the local distribution/concentration of
mass) - see below.
Electric Charge and The Magnetic Field
(See: "Global and Local Gauge Symmetry and the 'Tetrahedron Model'")
Because charges represent symmetry debts which must be paid in full upon demand (as for example
when they annihilate with an antiparticle or neutralize an anti-charge), symmetry conservation and
charge conservation would have little meaning if such debts were inflated or diminished by entropy,
age, gravitation, or relative motion. Therefore, all four forces have some compensatory component in
their field vectors which act to preserve the invariance of the original, global values of charge as they
are translated and transferred to new or material carriers, or otherwise interact with the relative and
variable realm of matter. The role of the field vectors is to enforce and maintain symmetry-keeping by
protecting charge invariance until such time as they can actually completely "pay off" the symmetry
debt by annihilation with antimatter.
In the case of the electromagnetic force, the local compensatory component of the field vector (the
photon or electromagnetic quantum) is the magnetic field; in the case of gravitation, the analogous
component is time (in which conception the field vector of gravitation is taken to be spacetime); in the
case of the strong force, it is the color-anticolor composition of the gluon field and the curious
short-range character of the strong force (which gets stronger with distance), producing both
"asymptotic freedom" and the permanent confinement of quark partial charges, protecting whole
quantum charge units; in the case of the weak force, it is the great mass of the IVBs (as gauged or
scaled by the Higgs boson), and the particle-antiparticle composition of the alternative charge carriers

4 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

in their virtual modes, creating invariant "singlet" elementary particle masses and charges (single
electrons created today must be the same in all respects as single electrons created eons ago during the
"Big Bang"). To this end, the great mass of the weak force Intermediate Vector Bosons recreates the
original environmental conditions of the force-unity state in which the elementary particles in
question were originally formed (for example, the "W" IVB family recreates the energy-density of the
electroweak force-unity state).
The global symmetry gauge of the electromagnetic force is the electromagnetic constant "c" ("velocity
c"). Before the creation of matter, all energy is in the form of radiation (light) moving at velocity c. In
this symmetric energy state, there is no time or distance (in the direction of motion), energy is
distributed equitably everywhere, simultaneously, and there is no charge or gravitational field - the
metric grid is flat. Matter and antimatter are in complete balance as virtual particle-antiparticle pairs.
This symmetric energy state of light is destroyed by the conversion of light into matter-only particles
via the asymmetric action of the weak force (the devil incarnate if ever there was one) - probably by
the asymmetric decay of electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark particle pairs.
Mass-matter has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion, has an explicit time dimension, and produces a
gravitational field, carrying various charges which conserve light's various broken symmetries, of
which the gravitational "location " charge is the most general (representing the broken non-local
distributional symmetry of light's energy), and electric charge is the most violently and immediately
active. Electric charge represents the symmetry debt of absent antimatter, or conversely, the isolation
of matter - a gigantic symmetry debt or violation, however it is phrased (half of the entire material
universe is missing).
Electric charge codes for the broken symmetry of the primordial matter-antimatter partnership which
in its original state maintained the universe in the complete symmetry of free electromagnetic
radiation due to constant annihilation reactions. Because photons are the field vectors of electric
charge, we surmise that electric charge is the locally conserved, temporal symmetry gauge derived
from the symmetry of light, symmetry lost when light was converted into immobile matter. Still today,
the opposite electric charges of any matter-antimatter particle pair will attract each other across all of
spacetime and motivate an annihilation reaction, restoring the energy locked in asymmetric
mass/matter to its original, primordially free state as electromagnetic radiation (light). Just as all of
physics conspires to protect and maintain the global value of the electromagnetic constant "velocity
c", so too does all of physics conspire to protect and maintain the invariance of electric charge, the
local and temporal derivative of the electromagnetic constant.
In light, the electric and magnetic field are completely balanced and equivalent, inducing each other in
the symmetric propagation of "velocity c", which prevents the formation of charge, time, mass,
gravity - all those grossly asymmetric and one-way properties of matter which are consequent upon
the isolation of particles from their antiparticle partners.
We can envision the role of the magnetic field in light as that of balancing, or quenching the electric
field, such that light remains electrically neutral (light carries no electric charge, even while it is the
field vector of electric charge). The interplay (induction) between the electric and magnetic field of
light keeps the photon moving at velocity c, maintaining its symmetric energy state. So too, the
5 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

interplay between the electric and magnetic fields of local matter maintains the invariant value of
electric charge.
Magnetic forces can be readily interpreted as the consequence of the "Lorentz Invariance" of special
Relativity, that is as consequent upon the interplay of spatio/temporal reference frames with respect to
a stationary observer and moving electric charges. (See: Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special
Relativity John Wiley and Sons, 1968, page 176, for an expert's mathematical discussion of this
point.)
Electromagnetic radiation is able to adopt two forms of energy - light and matter - exactly because it
has these two alternative forms of electrical energy (electric vs magnetic). The magnetic field of light
induces the spatial propagation of the photon, maintains the symmetric energy state of light, but it also
provides an alternative form of electrical energy which allows the kinetic energy of a (uniformly)
moving electric charge to manifest in a form which does not change the absolute value of the
rigorously conserved electric charge. Accelerated charges simply throw off their excess energy as free
radiation - as radio waves, for example, or as sunlight, demonstrating again the intimate connection
between electric charge and radiation. This ability of light to exist in two conserved and
interchangeable forms - massless light and massive matter - one spatial and one temporal - but both
conserved by either the invariance of velocity c or the invariance of electric charge, is just why we
find ourselves living in an electromagnetic cosmos.
Gravitational Charge
(row 3, cell 2)
(See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation")
In row 2 we emphasized the gravitational conservation role with respect to entropy, the creation of
matter's time dimension, and the conservation of energy (raw energy conservation). Here in row 3 the
gravitational role emphasized is with respect to the gravitational "location" charge, and the
asymmetric distribution of matter (or bound energy) in spacetime (symmetry conservation). The two
major conservation roles of gravitation (entropy and symmetry) are derived from the double role of
velocity c as the entropy and symmetry gauge of free energy.
Gravitation is a dimensional or "spacetime" charge, at once the most common and familiar, but
perhaps the most mysterious and intractable to explain. The symmetry debt associated with
gravitation is "location", representing the (broken) spatio-temporal distributional symmetry of light's
"non-local" character. When light is converted to mass, light loses its intrinsic motion and hence its
non-local symmetric energy state. Whereas light (in its own reference frame) is everywhere
simultaneously within its conservation domain (having no "x" or "t" dimension, light's Interval = 0),
mass has "intrinsic rest" and acquires a time dimension (via its gravitational "location" charge) and
(therefore) a positive Interval. The distributional symmetry of light's energy within spacetime is
consequently broken; mass is a concentrated lump of undistributed energy with a specific location (x,
y, z, t) in spacetime. The location of matter concentration is actually identified energetically and
inertially throughout spacetime, in terms of both quantity and density, by a warped gravitational
metric centered on the mass. Whereas light is 2-dimensional, mass is 4-dimensional; the acquisition of
the extra dimensions (x, t) identifies the spacetime coordinates and specific location of immobile

6 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

mass-energy.
But the gravitational charge is unusual in that it is more than just a "location" symmetry debt; unlike
electric charge, color, or number, gravity is also an entropy debt of light. The gravitational force
creates time and spacetime (bound energy shares spacetime with free energy as a compound
electromagnetic conservation domain), converting space to time, via the annihilation of space and the
extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. Gravity and time induce each other: they are
both primordial expressions of entropy in matter (due to the one-way expansion/aging of historic
spacetime).
-Gm = the neg-entropic energy of mass, the energy associated with the time dimension of bound
energy (T)m. The complexity of gravitation is due to the fact that its conservation function addresses
both the first and second laws of thermodynamics (through time, causality, and entropy), as well as
symmetry conservation (through the "location" charge and matter's positive "Interval"),
simultaneously. The active principle of the gravitational "location" charge is time, which is both a
symmetry (4-D location) and an entropy (intrinsic dimensional motion) debt. It is gravitation's
entropic character that causes it to so aggressively and relentlessly pursue its symmetry conservation
agenda (the conversion of bound to free energy, as in stars) - unlike electric charge, for example,
which is only a symmetry debt and is readily neutralized. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of
Gravitation".)
Think of the round, full Moon and the Sun; although they are of the same apparent size in the sky,
they illustrate for us the vast difference (and apparently opposite reactions) characteristic of the two
great conservation roles of gravity. The Moon illustrates gravity's proximate entropy (and hence
energy) conservation role (the simple conversion of space to time); the Sun demonstrates (in addition)
gravity's ultimate symmetry conservation role (the conversion of bound to free energy). The balance
of these two opposing forces stabilizes the sun's energy output. Furthermore, the Moon can eclipse the
Sun, as in the triumph of temporal entropy in a black hole; this neg-entropic victory is ephemeral,
however, as Hawking's "quantum radiance" reasserts the supremacy of light's symmetric and positive
spatial entropy and gravity's symmetry conservation role. Hence gravity's double conservation role is
paraded before our eyes daily, occasionally even including an allegory of their antagonistic
interactions. It is no wonder that humans have always found a metaphor of the divine in the heavens.
Gravity is a collapsing spatial wave centered on a massive particle whose dynamic is supplied by the
intrinsic motion of time, the entropy drive associated with the bound energy of the particle. The
collapse of space produces a metrically equivalent temporal residue, whose entropic march into
history collapses more space in an endless self-regenerating cycle. (See: "The Conversion of Space to
Time".) The temporal entropy drive thus supplied to matter is a conserved or alternative form of the
primordial spatial entropy drive which resided in the annihilated space - the transformed intrinsic
motion of light (implicit time transformed to explicit time). Implicit time (manifesting through
"frequency") drives the intrinsic motion of light and the expansion and cooling of space, maintaining
the non-local symmetry of light; explicit time, produced by gravity, supplies the intrinsic motion of
matter's temporal dimension and drives the expansion and aging of history. The temporal entropy
drive of matter is not quenched until gravity succeeds in returning bound energy to its original free
state, as seen in stars, supernovas, and quasars (partially), and via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of
black holes (completely), fulfilling the mandate of Noether's Theorem regarding the conservation of

7 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

light's symmetric non-local energy state. This is the gravitational pathway of symmetry conservation,
employing the engine of (temporal) entropy. The electrical pathway (of symmetry conservation) is via
chemistry and matter-antimatter annihilations, and the strong and weak force pathways are through
particle fusion, fission, and proton decay - all with the same end, the conservation (restoration) of
light's symmetric energy state. (See: "Entropy, Thermodynamics, and Gravitation".)
Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry in Gravitation: Symmetry Conservation
(See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry in Gravitation"
In the gravitational case (which is essentially that of the spacetime metric), the global symmetry is
gauged by the electromagnetic constant "c", and characterized by space and the "non-local"
distribution of light's energy. Light's "Interval" = 0, and light has no time dimension or "x" dimension
(in the direction of propagation). Having no time or distance parameters, light has forever to go
nowhere: the result is that light is everywhere within its spatial conservation domain simultaneously.
From light's perspective, all spatial coordinate positions are equivalent; light favors no particular
"location". This is light's global symmetry condition of "non-locality", the consequence of light's
intrinsic motion or spatial entropy drive, "velocity c". ("Light" = any form of electromagnetic
radiation or free electromagnetic energy; "matter" or "mass" = bound electromagnetic energy.)
However, light's symmetric spatial distribution does not hold for matter, the central player (with time
and gravitation) in any local gauge symmetry. Matter is a concentrated, immobile lump of bound
energy with no spatial distribution, and with no (net) intrinsic or spontaneous spatial motion. The
"Interval" of matter is always greater than zero, due to the explicit presence of the time dimension and
three full spatial dimensions. While matter is the local energy form (in contrast to global light), time is
the local dimension (in contrast to global space). The "location" charge of gravity responds to the
broken symmetry of light's non-local energy state as represented by local matter (or any form of
bound energy). The gravitational "location" charge identifies the position, magnitude, and density of
any violation of free energy's distributional symmetry, such as represented by immobile mass-matter.
The active principle of the gravitational "location" charge is time. Time specifies the 4-dimensional
position of matter in an ever-expanding, entropicly driven spatial universe. A gravitational charge
specifies an energetically and inertially preferred location in spacetime (the center of mass, the present
moment: "here and now"). (Just to be completely clear - bound and free forms of electromagnetic
energy are interchangeable, as matter-antimatter annihilations demonstrate, and one is always created
from the other - as virtual particles demonstrate. Hence massive particles carry symmetry, energy, and
entropy debts of light because bound energy forms are ultimately/originally created from free energy
forms.)
The intrinsic motion of the entropic time dimension (time is produced by the quantum mechanical and
gravitational collapse of space) pulls space along into the point-like beginning of the time line,
leading into the historic domain. Space self-annihilates at the point center of mass, leaving behind a
metrically equivalent (but one-way) temporal reside, which also marches off into history, repeating
the endless, self-feeding neg-entropic cycle. Meanwhile, all material objects are carried toward the
gravitational center of mass by the flow of space, resulting eventually in huge astronomical
accumulations of matter (planets, stars, galaxies), in which bound energy is returned to its symmetric
(and spatially pos-entropic) form of light by such processes as nuclear fusion, the nucleosynthetic
pathway of stars, supernovas, quasars, and the complete gravitation conversion of bound to free

8 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

energy by Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes.
This is the symmetry conservation role of gravitation as distinct from its energy/entropy conservation
role discussed in row 2 (above). Here in row 3, we focus on the non-local distributional symmetry of
light's energy and light's zero "Interval" as consequences of light's intrinsic motion (following from
the suppression of asymmetric time by the metric symmetry gauge "velocity c"). In row 2, we focused
on the entropic role of light's intrinsic motion, expanding and cooling space, and the entropic role of
the gravitational production of time, conserving light's spatial entropy drive in the alternative form of
matter's temporal entropy drive. Time also conserves the energy accounts of matter in relative motion,
protects the causal linkages of matter (and the invariance of matter's "Interval"), and creates historic
spacetime, the conservation domain of matter's causal information "matrix" or network.
The principle of charge invariance in the gravitational case is found in the invariance of the universal
gravitational constant "G", and in the invariance of the "Interval" and "causality". Massless light is
non-local, a-temporal, and a-causal; massive matter is local, temporal, and causal. When light or free
energy is transformed to matter or bound energy, the invariant, zero "Interval" or non-local (and
a-causal) symmetric energy state characteristic of light is transformed by gravity into the equally
invariant but positive "Interval" of matter, with matter's temporal component and causal linkages. This
transformation accords with the symmetry-conserving mandate of Noether's Theorem, and the
energetic necessity to conserve local matter's causal linkages and temporal relations, as well as the
invariance of velocity c (through the flexible time/space dimensions and "Lorentz Invariance").
The flexibility and interchangeability of time with space is necessary to preserve the invariance of
matter's Interval - as per Einstein's Special Relativity. Again, relative motion is involved (in matter),
rather than absolute motion (in light). Relative rather than absolute motion requires flexible
dimensions to maintain the invariance of matter's "Interval": with respect to the protection of charge
invariance, time is the metric analog of the magnetic field of electric charge. Moving clocks run slow;
the effect of relative motion upon the local clock rate varies with velocity ("Lorentz Invariance"), just
as the strength of a magnetic field varies with the relative velocity of an electric charge. One can view
the magnetic field associated with the relative motion of an electric charge as entirely analogous to the
dimensional "warpage" of "Lorentz Invariance" - the magnetic case conserving the invariance of
electric charge, the dimensional case conserving the invariance of causality, the Interval, and "velocity
c".
The tenacious gravitational charge associated with the positive Interval of matter (the "location"
charge whose active principle is time) will not be satisfied until matter is finally converted to light.
Once this symmetry restoration (conservation) is accomplished (as in stars), time and the gravitational
field vanish, as light has neither. We may regard the radiance of our Sun and the stars as a triumphant
announcement of the achievement of gravity's symmetry conservation goal.
Energy conservation within a temporal, relative, and local metric (as gauged by the universal
gravitational constant "G"), rather than within a spatial, absolute, and global metric (as gauged by the
universal electromagnetic constant c), is the local gauge symmetry "ground" state of row 2 (raw
energy and mass conservation). Planet Earth, and the Earth-Moon orbital system, are typical examples
of this quiescent, gravitational "ground state" of local symmetry and energy conservation comparable to the electrically quiescent ground state of cold, charge neutral, atomic matter. On the

9 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

other hand, "location" charge and symmetry conservation in terms of the restoration of light's
non-local symmetry by the gravitational conversion of mass to light, is a topic for row 3 (symmetry
and charge conservation). Our Sun is a typical example of this active gravitational stage, a completed
"circuit" of symmetry conservation - comparable to the weak force radioactive decay of atoms, and
the strong force fusion of compound nuclei. (See: "Currents of Symmetry and Entropy".) Of course,
both nuclear forces make use of gravitational energy to effect their contributions to the solar/stellar
nucleosynthetic pathway of energy conversion and element building.
Gravitation produces both an energy-conserving and symmetry-conserving local temporal metric for
matter (gauged by "G"), derived from, imposed upon, and conserving the global spatial metric of light
(gauged by "c"). In both cases, time is the compensating and variable local gauge symmetry
component of the gravitational field vector (spacetime or the graviton). Time conserves energy and
entropy, and the invariance of causality, the "Interval", and velocity "c" on the one hand, while
simultaneously conserving symmetry by identifying the coordinate position, magnitude, and density
of bound energy on the other. The latter information (provided in the inertial or metric terms of an
energetically preferred spacetime "location charge"), results in the eventual conversion of mass to
light, as in the stars. Gravity accomplishes the transformation of a global spatial metric to a local
temporal metric (and back again), by the gravitational annihilation of space and the extraction of a
metrically equivalent temporal residue, followed by the gravitational annihilation of matter and the
extraction of energetically equivalent light - as in stars and via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of
black holes. (See: "Global and Local Symmetry in Gravitation"; see also: "The Conversion of Space
to Time" and "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
For a more complete discussion of the gravitational charge and its mechanism, see: "Entropy,
Gravitation, and Thermodynamics" and "A Description of Gravitation".
Strong Force Binding in Compound Atomic Nuclei
(row 3, cell 3)
(See: "The Strong Force: Two Expressions")
There are two types or structural levels of the strong force, one involving binding the individual
quarks inside baryons via "color" charges and the exchange of 'gluons' (discovered by Murray
Gell-Mann and George Zweig (1964)), and the other involving binding nucleons (protons and
neutrons) in compound atomic nuclei via "flavor" charge and the exchange of mesons (discovered by
Hideki Yukawa (1935)). These are very different forces, even though both involve nuclear material
and both are called "strong", and they have very different consequences: quarks are permanently
confined, and can never escape the binding force of the gluon field; nucleons are tightly held, but
given sufficient energy, can and do escape the grasp of the meson field (as in radioactive decay). The
gluon-level strong force is the consequence of charge and symmetry conservation; the meson-level
strong force is the consequence of a "least bound energy" principle, which is also related to symmetry
conservation, but through a raw energy pathway rather than through charge conservation. (See: "The
Strong Force: Two Expressions".)
What is the conservation basis for the meson binding force of the compound atomic nucleus? It is
evidently the simple fact that when nucleons are herded together in sufficiently close aggregations,
they are able to exist in a lower bound energy state than when they exist singly. Just like poor college

10 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

students, they find that sharing an apartment or room is cheaper than living alone. And any condition
or state that reduces bound energy and releases free energy is favored by the conservation laws,
especially by symmetry conservation.
So what is it about the communal state of heavy nuclei that is so energetically favorable for the
individual nucleon? It apparently has to do with the clouds of virtual particles which surround any real
particle, and which constitute a part of the bound energy state or mass endowment of "real" particles.
The quark composition of a neutron is udd, that of a proton is uud+. The only difference between
them is a single u or d quark, and these are very nearly the same in mass. In virtual reality, it is a
relatively simple matter for a ud+ meson to change a neutron into a proton, and for a ud- meson to
change a proton into a neutron (antiparticles underlined). Note how the ud+ and ud- mesons together
make a neat particle-antiparticle meson pair. Protons and neutrons, if they are sufficiently close
together, will find themselves constantly being transformed into one another simply by the exchange
of these mesons in their surrounding virtual particle fields. In fact, they can get rid of some of these
virtual mesons if they are close enough to share them, and share also the energetic cost of their
production and maintenance. Hence sharing these (very similar) virtual particle fields is a means of
reducing their bound energy content, if these nucleons can come together closely enough and in
suitable combinations. The (individually and collectively) reduced mass energy of the nucleons then
becomes a binding principle or "glue" - any energy liberated during fusion must be replaced if the
proton or neutron is to be made whole again and become free. (Note the similarity to covalent
chemical bonds in which electrons are shared between the orbital shells of adjacent atoms.)
The most energy-efficient nucleon combinations are called alpha particles, or helium nuclei,
consisting of 2 protons and 2 neutrons. I point out elsewhere that this is a prototypical 4x3 General
Systems resonance or fractal combination - 4 nucleons each consisting of 3 quarks. (See: "Nature's
Fractal Pathway".) The alpha particle is an especially stable nuclear configuration, and becomes the
"brick" or standard building block of the stellar nucleosynthetic pathway. (See: "The Fractal
Organization of Nature".)
As the compound atomic nucleus grows in size, there is a diminishing energetic return (in terms of the
release of binding energy) with the addition of each new nucleon. This is because the shared field of
virtual particles eventually becomes saturated - all the advantages and possibilities for sharing the
burden of virtual particles have already been explored and exhausted. There's just no more room in
the commune. Furthermore, the collective long-range electrical repulsive forces of the protons finally
increase beyond the strength of the short-range binding energy of any individual new proton trying to
join the party.
After the nucleus has grown to iron 26 (56 nucleons), fusion nucleosynthesis becomes endothermic as much (or more) energy must be expended to break through the "front wall" of nuclear electrical
resistance as is gained by the release of binding energy. However, given an external source of energy
to surmount the initial barrier (such as gravitational acceleration), enough nuclear binding potential
energy remains available to grow compound nuclei (in nature) up to uranium 92 (238 nucleons).
Humans have created more than two dozen "trans-uranic" heavy nuclei in accelerators, of which
plutonium is the best known and most dangerous example. Most are highly radioactive and extremely
short-lived.

11 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

The Strong Force Color Charge
As noted above, there are three "color" charges which are exchanged between quarks by the "gluon"
field; gluons are composed of a color-anticolor charge pair. The constant "round-robin" exchange of
the massless gluons (at velocity c) from one quark to another is the strong force mechanism which
binds the quarks together. There is a strong resemblance between color and electric charge (gluons
have been compared to "sticky light" - because gluons attract each other), suggesting that the strong
force gluon field is possibly derived directly from the electromagnetic force (see below).
Quarks are sub-elementary particles, as we know from their fractional electric charges which are
either 1/3 or 2/3 of the unit charge carried by the truly elementary leptons such as the electron.
Allowed quark combinations always sum to zero or unit leptonic values of electric charge: the proton
is +1, the neutron 0, mesons are 0, +1 or -1. The symmetry which the strong force is protecting is this
whole quantum unit of electric charge, the elementary leptonic charge, and whole unit charges
generally. If quarks were not confined as they are, there would be no way to annihilate or even
neutralize their partial electric charges, or other partial charges they may carry (such as color and
identity) - other than by anti-quarks, which would result in annihilations. Symmetry could not be
conserved (as charge) in permanent matter if individual quarks and anti-quarks roamed free. The
strong force protects symmetry conservation in permanent forms of matter by confining these
sub-elementary particles into whole quantum unit packages of charge which can be neutralized,
cancelled, and/or annihilated by elementary unit anti-charges (such as the electron vs positron). The
strong force protects the quantum mechanical requirement of whole unit charge in the service of
symmetry conservation in permanent forms of atomic matter.
If one were to fracture an elementary leptonic particle into three parts, but require that when it became
"real in time" it must retain its "virtual" leptonic character in terms of whole quantum units of charge,
one would need a confining force with exactly the characteristics of the strong force as produced by
the gluon field of the color charge. And just as the quarks appear to be the remnant of a fractured
lepton, so the gluon field appears to be the remains of a fractured photon - "sticky light" - the divided
field vector of a divided leptonic electric charge. Earlier we noted that the ability to assume
electrically neutral internal configurations (as in the neutron or neutral leptoquark) was the
fundamental reason why the baryon must be a composite particle, if it is to break the symmetry of the
primordial particle-antiparticle pairs (via the asymmetric weak force decay of electrically neutral
leptoquark-anti-leptoquark particle pairs). (See also: "Proton Decay and the Heat Death of the
Cosmos"; and: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
The strong force represents a compromise between the necessity of cosmological symmetry-breaking
and the requirement of quantum mechanical whole-unit charge symmetry-keeping: the irresistible
agenda meets the immovable principle. The force of the collision accomplishes the impossible, but via
an accommodation - the "virtual" fracturing of an "unbreakable" elementary leptonic particle
(producing a leptoquark), resulting in the permanent confinement of its quarks and partial charges.
The strong and weak forces (the "short range" particle or nuclear forces), form a symmetricasymmetric force pair which is essential to the creation of matter. In this regard, they are curiously
similar to the two "spacetime" forces, electromagnetism and gravitation (the "long range" forces).
(See: "Diagram of the Spacetime and Particle Forces".)

12 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

The principle of "asymptotic freedom" illustrates the symmetry-keeping role of the strong force. As
the quarks move apart, their partial charges increasingly threaten the symmetry-keeping function of
whole quantum unit charges, and the strong force responds by strengthening its grip. Conversely, as
the quarks move closer together, the threat to whole charge unit symmetry-keeping posed by the
quark's partial charges diminishes, and the strong force relaxes. If the quarks were to completely
rejoin in their original leptonic or leptoquark configuration, the strong force would completely
disappear (self-annihilate - since the gluon field is composed of color-anticolor pairs in all
combinations, summing to zero color).
Strong Force Global and Local Gauge Symmetry
Proton decay has never been seen, and we many fairly presume that it requires the mediation of the
"X" IVB, a very massive particle, the "big brother" of the "W" IVB. The function of the "X" IVB is
the same as that of the "W" IVB - to recreate the metric and energetic conditions in which the
particles and transformations it now mediates were originally produced (baryon genesis in the "Big
Bang" during the "GUT" era of strong and electroweak unification). Only in this way can the multiple
conservation issues (of charge invariance and symmetry conservation) surrounding the partial charges
of the quarks be resolved, which are analogous to, but even worse than, the conservation issues
confronting the alternative charge carriers for which the "W" is required (because quark partial
charges require the additional "gluon" field). (See: "The Particle Table"; see also: "The Higgs Boson
and the Weak Force IVBs".)
The gluon field, the field vector of the strong force, is composed of color-anticolor charges in every
combination. The gluon's anticolor component is necessary to annihilate a quark's existing color
charge, making way for a replacement color. The analog of the magnetic field in the electromagnetic
force, and time in the gravitational force, is the confining action of the gluon field (a consequence of
the attraction of the gluons for each other), as it is confinement which restores the partial quark
charges to whole quantum unit charges, protecting charge invariance and symmetry conservation. The
field vectors of all the forces are their own antiparticles, either individually, or in sum. It is specifically
this characteristic which allows the field vectors to communicate (in either direction) between the
global realm of light (which is symmetric with respect to particles vs antiparticles), and the local
realm of matter-only particles.
In the strong force, whole quantum unit (elementary) charges constitute the universally invariant
global gauge symmetry (ultimately derived from the elementary leptons via the decay of the
leptoquark), while the partial charges of the quarks represent the local gauge symmetry, and the gluon
field represents the local gauge symmetry "current" exchanging one color for another, and increasing
or decreasing in strength as the relative motions of the individual massive quarks increases or
decreases the radius of the baryon. The gluon field functions to combine and maintain the various
partial quark charges (color, spin, electric, flavor) into whole quantum unit charges, which can be
neutralized and/or annihilated by other whole elementary charges, including those of the alternative
charge carriers (leptons, neutrinos, and mesons). Neutral heavy elements, for example, represent the
ground state of a local gauge symmetry achieved despite the various partial charges of the quarks or
their individual motions relative to one another; or the relative motion of the electron vs the proton; or
the fact that the electron and proton are not each others' antiparticles; or the fact that compound
atomic nuclei are composed of two different kinds of baryons. (In the latter case, as noted earlier, the

13 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

local gauge symmetry current is composed of mesons exchanged between protons and neutrons,
maintaining so-called "isospin symmetry", the combined state of the proton and neutron recognized as
the "nucleon".) The field vectors of the forces are local gauge symmetry "currents" which function to
translate global gauge symmetries of light, absolute motion, and "virtual" (spatial) particles into local
gauge symmetries of mass, relative motion, and "real" (temporal) particles; these local states
nevertheless conserve (and eventually restore) the global symmetries, because they obey and maintain
invariant the principles of energy, charge, and symmetry conservation.
The Weak Force: Lepton "Number" or "Identity" Charge
(row 3, cell 4)
(See also: "The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge")
The leptonic charge is known as "number" charge. I prefer to call it "identity" charge, a name which
better reflects its reason for existence. Photons (individual light quanta) are indistinguishable and
anonymous. They are all alike, and hence form a symmetry of identity which I call "anonymity".
Elementary particles, on the other hand, are not all alike (except with respect to their own kind); they
are distinguishable between "species" and distinguishable from the photon.
We know of three distinct massive elementary particles, comprising the leptonic "spectrum" or series:
electron, muon, and tau, differing in their masses which increase (dramatically) from electron through
muon to tau. Each has a specific neutrino associated with it, which functions as an alternative carrier
of leptonic "number" ("identity") charge. (Neutrinos are the "bare" or "explicit" form of "identity"
charge, which is also carried in "hidden" or implicit form by the massive leptons). (See: "The Particle
Table".)
The leptonic series has the appearance of a quantum mass series - that is, these elementary particles
are always created with a specific, discreet mass and no other; there are no elementary massive
particles in the gaps between their mass "slots", much like the discreet gaps between the rungs of a
ladder, or the energy levels of atomic electron shells. The neutrino that is associated with each
massive lepton is evidently the hallmark of the truly elementary particle (the sub-elementary quarks
have no associated neutrinos).
It seems likely, however, that there is an undiscovered neutrino associated with the ancestral particle
which gave rise to both the quarks and baryons, which I assume to be the heaviest member of the
leptonic series, the so-called "leptoquark". If we ever see proton decay, we would expect to see a
leptoquark neutrino produced in the process. (The leptoquark neutrino is possibly the source of the
"dark matter" or "missing mass" of the Universe.)
The lepton "number" or "identity" charge evidently facilitates particle-antiparticle annihilation
reactions by allowing the partners to identify suitable "mates" in a timely fashion; the handedness of
neutrino spin neatly distinguishes matter particles from their antimatter counterparts. Neutrinos also
comprise a type of accounting system, recording the number and identity of elementary particles (or
antiparticles) contained within the conservation domain of spacetime.
Identity or number charge plays a special role in the creation of the material universe. We can
characterize the light universe, before the creation of matter, with just 2 numbers representing its
symmetric charge state: Interval = 0, and Number = 0. After the creation of matter, both symmetries
14 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

are broken and become positive: Interval > 0, and Number > 0. (Electric charge is zero both before
and after the creation of matter, while color is an internal property of baryons, also summing to zero).
The positive Interval represents gravitation and time, the positive number charge represents the weak
force identity charge and elementary (leptonic) particles. The metric Universe, the Universe of the
dimensional conservation domains, responds to the positive number asymmetry by providing an
asymmetric temporal entropy drive, an historic conservation domain for information and matter's
causal matrix, and a compound conservation domain for both light and particles (spacetime), all
through the quantum mechanical and gravitational conversion of space to time.
The universe manifests through the identity charge, as identity provides a basis (an asymmetric
foothold of information) for the interaction between the symmetric quark field (the leptoquarks), the
leptonic alternative charge carriers (the neutrinos), and the asymmetric mediating field of the weak
force IVBs. It is through the identity charge that the IVBs recognize and separate leptoquark from
antileptoquark, setting them upon separate and asymmetric decay pathways, breaking the symmetry of
their particle-antiparticle pairs. (In a matter-antimatter pair of electrically neutral leptoquarks, one
particle's identity charge is neutralized by its antineutrino, allowing it to decay, while (for unknown
reasons) the other particle remains intact and unreactive.) Neutrinos are alternative carriers for
identity charge, which allows this charge to be conserved or canceled without the presence of
antiparticles (in this case anti-leptoquarks), with their inevitable annihilation reactions. Both the weak
force "identity" charge and the gravitational "location" charge are primordial symmetry debts which
carry information (who, where, how much), whereas the electric charge is more simply an
annihilation motivator, while its derivative, the strong force, is only an internal binding principle.
Electric charge and the strong force later become important carriers of information in the compound
atomic nuclei of the periodic table, their electron shells, and molecular chemistry. For a more
complete discussion, see: "The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information".
See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs" for a further discussion of the weak force in
its full energy spectrum.
Weak Force Global and Local Gauge Symmetry
(See: "Global and Local Symmetry in the Weak Force")
The role of the weak force is the most important in nature. It is the weak force that breaks the initial
global symmetry of the light universe and matter-antimatter particle pairs, bringing the asymmetric,
local, temporal, and causal universe of matter-only massive particles, charge, and gravitation into
existence. But for the weak force, the universe would exist only as a cold spatial volume of
ever-expanding and cooling electromagnetic waves.
Beyond its initial symmetry-breaking role during the "Big Bang" (the details of which are still not
understood), the weak force has the task of regulating the creation, destruction, and transformation of
"singlet" elementary particles: the quarks, leptons, and neutrinos. (See: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak
Force Mechanism".)
It is especially important to understand that the weak force always operates in an asymmetric mode.
Whereas the electromagnetic and strong forces also create and destroy elementary particles, they do
so only in matter-antimatter particle pairs; the weak force exclusively creates, destroys, or transforms

15 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

single elementary particles, which is the key to its unusual character. In order to perform its
transformations, the weak force has to balance and neutralize charges. However, unlike the
electromagnetic force, the weak force cannot directly use "real" antimatter particles to balance the
charges of matter, for these would cause annihilations, not transformations (the weak force does use
virtual antimatter particles for this purpose, however). For example, in the weak force decay of a
neutron to a proton, the proton's positive electric charge is not balanced by an anti-proton, but by the
electrically negative electron.
We are nowadays so used to the electron-proton combination of neutral atomic matter that we tend to
forget that this is a rather strange combination of particles: three quarks of two different flavors (uud)
whose partial electric charges add up to the equivalent of a single leptonic electric charge. The
proton's electric charge is balanced by an electron's whole quantum unit negative charge in atomic
orbit: 4 particles of three different kinds (ignoring the emitted but nevertheless indispensable electron
antineutrino), which all sum exactly to electrical neutrality, and what is more, are exactly equivalent
to every other hydrogen atom ever made, regardless of when the particles were created or combined,
the expansion of the cosmos, entropy, or any other vitiating (or enhancing) factor. How is such precise
uniformity among so many different particles of such different ages and origins achieved? This is the
task and the mystery of the weak force, for obviously, charge invariance and symmetry conservation
requires nothing less than perfect replication in the creation and transformations of elementary
particles and the charges they carry. Elementary particles created today must be the same in every
respect as those created during the "Big Bang", or indeed in any past or future time (or place).
The field vectors of the weak force, the IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons), are unusual in that they
are extremely massive particles, equal to about 80 proton masses, whereas the field vectors of the
other forces are massless. It is just the large mass of the IVBs that is responsible for the
transformation and creation of elementary particles of precisely equivalent energy, mass, and charge,
as compared to any other elementary particle, whenever or wherever created. This equivalence
protects charge invariance and hence symmetry conservation during particle transformations.
Although the electromagnetic force creates particle-antiparticle pairs within the local and
contemporaneous metric which are obviously symmetry-conserving partners, the weak force must
operate without antimatter to produce its transformations, using alternative charge carriers instead
(leptons, neutrinos, mesons). How is the weak force to guarantee that these alternative charge carriers
are: 1) the precise equivalent in terms of charge of a future, unknown charge partner which is not its
antiparticle; and 2) the precise equivalent of all other charge carriers of its own kind ever created ?
(For example, the electron created in the decay of a neutron to a proton must exactly balance the
electrical charge of any other proton, meson, lepton, or other charge-carrying particle, and also be the
exact equivalent in terms of mass, spin, or any other conserved parameter of all other electrons.)
To accomplish this seemingly impossible task without using "real" (rather than virtual) antiparticles,
the weak force uses the huge mass of the IVBs to recreate the initial matrix and energetic conditions
in which these particles and transformations were first formed during the early moments of the "Big
Bang". In other words, the mass of the IVBs tells us that this was the energy density of spacetime
when these particles were originally created and freely transformed, one into the other; nothing less
than this energy density will suffice to create these particles plus produce these seamless
transformations. The IVBs solve their equilibration problems by simply recreating the original

16 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

conditions; in effect, going back to the original mold in which these particles and transformations
were initially created. In is like going back to the Bureau of Standards to recalibrate our instruments,
or printing money at the mint from only a single, original plate. This is why the IVBs are strictly
quantized masses, so they can only recreate the exact energetic conditions under which these
elementary particles and transformations were originally produced. Hence every elementary particle is
born under identical conditions, whether in the "Big Bang" of cosmic birth, or subsequently in the
"Little Bang" of IVB birth. Charge invariance and symmetry conservation is enforced and protected
by the large mass of the IVBs and the Higgs boson. The role of the Higgs boson is to provide a scalar
gauge for the mass of the IVBs, ensuring that the environment they create (which is a specific
(electroweak) unified force symmetric energy state), and hence the particles they create, is always
exactly the same. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".) The IVB mass is therefore the
functional analog of the magnetic field of the photon, or of time in the gravitational field, or of the
confining action of the gluons, in that they are all "local gauge symmetry currents" playing a
symmetry conservation role of one sort or another. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of
light.
In the ideal world of light, space, and virtual particle-antiparticle pairs, no massive particles and no
IVBs exist. In the "real" world of gravitation and time, however, massive single particles must be
created and exactly replicated - requiring the "down and dirty" massive IVBs of the weak force. Mass
is introduced to the ideal world via the Higgs mechanism (whatever that may be), and symmetry is
broken by the weak force decays of the IVBs - for as we all know, nothing in the real world of
massive particles ever works perfectly.

Although the IVBs as a group (the W+, W-, and Z) are their own antiparticles, virtual particleantiparticle pairs of the alternative charge carriers (leptons, neutrinos, mesons) play a major role in
facilitating weak force transformations among elementary particles. The large mass of the weak force
IVBs essentially forms a bridge between the virtual particle-antiparticle pairs of the primordial dense
metric and the "real" (temporal) particles of today, making the charges and particles of primordial
"virtual reality" available for the transformation of contemporary "real" particles. The local gauge
symmetry "current flow" is both ways: virtual particles transform real particles, and vice versa. One
can imagine the IVBs as a sort of time machine or "worm hole" to the ambient conditions of the
electroweak force-unification symmetric energy state during the "Big Bang" - a time when all such
transformations were but the normal course of events, as specific particle identities were subsumed in
the generic identities of the electroweak force unity state. Charge invariance and symmetry
conservation is maintained and protected in these transformations by the large quantized masses of the
IVBs. See various weak force papers cited in the Links section (below) for details of the weak force
transformation mechanism.

Row 4 - Field Vectors: The Force Carriers as Symmetry
Payments
Row 4: "Retiring the debt, closing the account" - symmetry restoration via the four forces. In Row 4

17 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

we list the various ways in which the 4 forces act through their conserved charges to fully repay the
original energy, symmetry, and entropy debts incurred by the conversion of free to bound energy
during the "Big Bang". All energy, entropy, and symmetry debts are fully repaid by the conversion of
bound to free energy, returning matter to its original form of light. This is the payoff for symmetrykeeping and charge invariance - the local, asymmetric, temporal, and relative system of massive
matter is enabled to return to its global, symmetric, spatial, and absolute origin - massless light. (See:
"Currents of Symmetry and Entropy".)
Photons - The Electromagnetic Force and Electric Charge
(row 4, cell 1)
The electrical symmetry debt can be repaid partially by neutralization with alternative charge carriers,
or wholly by matter-antimatter annihilation, since unlike gravitation, electric charge is bipolar rather
than mono-polar (two-way rather than one-way). Whereas the gravitational symmetry debt can only
be repaid by the conversion of mass to light, electric charge can be neutralized by its opposite matter
charge, as well as annihilated by its antimatter charge. Electric charge acts to prevent the conversion
of free to bound energy (as in the suppression of virtual particles via matter-antimatter annihilation
reactions). Failing in this (as during "Big Bang" symmetry-breaking), electric charge seems to have
little further ability to restore symmetry, other than an eternal readiness to motivate an antimatter
annihilation if the opportunity arises. Instead, electric charge contents itself with neutralizing opposite
matter charges, confining them to small regions of spacetime, "paying down" its symmetry debt as far
as it can. Conversely, gravitation does not act to prevent or suppress the formation of bound energy,
but once matter is formed, seems to have a real "agenda" for its ultimate destruction - not "divide and
conquer", but "collect and conquer". In this aggressive agenda, we discern the entropic character of
gravitation, in contrast to the activity of any other charge or symmetry debt.
The field vector (force carrier) of electric charge is the photon, the quantum unit of light and the
electromagnetic force. In the annihilation of matter-antimatter particle pairs, we see the photon
protecting its own symmetry. Electric charge is bipolar, consisting of opposite charges which attract
each other powerfully over an infinite range of spacetime. The strength of this arrangement is that it
permits matter-antimatter pairs to find each other, no matter how great their spatial separation. The
weakness of this arrangement is that electric charges can neutralize as well as annihilate each other. It
is therefore possible for a composite particle (like the baryon) to arrange the partial charges of its
quarks into a neutral electrical configuration (as in the neutron). It is just such an arrangement that is
exploited by the weak force to produce the asymmetric decays of electrically neutral leptoquarks and
create an excess of matter in the "Big Bang". Electrical neutrality is the fundamental reason why a
composite particle (such as baryons composed of quarks) is necessary if matter is to be isolated from
antimatter, breaking the primordial symmetric energy state of light, particle-antiparticle pairs, and the
spatial Cosmos.
After "Big Bang" symmetry-breaking and the formation of the matter-only universe, electric charge
can do little to restore the symmetric state of energy because its force is quenched by its ability to
neutralize itself. The net electric charge of the Cosmos is zero, both before and after the creation of
matter. In chemical reactions, electric charge will drive toward the lowest bound energy state, but
chemical releases of energy are insignificant compared with the total energy content of matter.
Electrical annihilations of virtual matter-antimatter particle pairs continuously suppresses the

18 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

manifestation of particles from the "vacuum", maintaining the global symmetry of light and space, at
least in our current environment. Electric charge records the symmetry debt of absent antimatter (half
of the entire material universe is missing), and electric charge badly needs antimatter to retire its
symmetry debt.
Electric charge, however, in the form of the electron shell of atoms and the interplay of electric and
magnetic forces, is instrumental in building a neg-entropic information pathway (with energy supplied
mostly by solar gravitation), which culminates in biological systems and the rise of consciousness. In
this, electric charge seems to be attempting to reconstruct the original connectivity of light, even if it
cannot reconstruct its symmetry. The primordial system of light was not only a wholly symmetric, but
also a wholly connected entity. Likewise, life is a completely connected and interactive information
system. Similarly, we may see "beauty" as an emergent expression of symmetry conservation in the
"Information Pathway" of biology.
Biology is nothing if not a web of interconnected information systems, and through the evolution of
consciousness, humans have not only become aware of the essential connectivity of the Cosmos, both
intuitively and rationally, but are now engaged in the process of extending this biological web of
connection between the planets of our solar system, and perhaps on into the galaxy. Significantly,
through humanity, the biological "Information Pathway" (see table) has converged with the abiotic
gravitational symmetry conservation pathway, converting bound to free energy through hydrogen
fusion and the nucleosynthetic process. Hence, if we actually succeed in annihilating ourselves with
hydrogen bombs, we can always blame the universal symmetry conservation agenda rather than our
own aggressive stupidity. (See also: "Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age".
In purely dimensional terms, it is time that reconstitutes for matter the original connectivity of light.
Free energy is connected by space, bound energy is connected by time (historic causality, "karma"),
gravity connects everything. Time is extracted from space by matter's gravitational field. (See also:
"DeBroglie Matter Waves and the Evolution of Consciousness".)
Gravitons - Gravitation
(row 4, cell 2)
(See: "A Description of Gravitation")
Charge conservation acts as the "credit card" of the Cosmos - "buy now, pay later", with
gravity paying the entropy-"interest" on matter's symmetry debt by creating bound
energy's time dimension via the annihilation of space. The notion of charge conservation
would be moot in the absence of time (think of virtual particle-antiparticle pairs). On
planet Earth (for example), gravity only pays the entropy "interest" on matter's symmetry
debt, since the "principle" of this debt (mass or bound energy) is never reduced thereby,
nor is the gravitational field itself ever reduced, despite its continuous activity. However,
in our Sun (for another example), gravity pays down the "principle" of matter's symmetry
debt by the conversion of bound to free energy, reducing both the mass of the Sun and its
associated gravitational field. In Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes, gravity
completely pays off matter's symmetry debt by (eventually) completely converting the
hole's mass to light. The gravitational field vanishes when bound energy and its
associated symmetry debt disappears. The consequent dissolution of the gravitational

19 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

field tells us it is no longer needed because its symmetry-conservation role is fulfilled.
If we are to believe Einstein, gravitons, the field vectors of gravitation, must connect directly to the
dimensional structure of spacetime. This connection is attractive only, without a repulsive counterpart,
as in electricity. The effect is to "warp" or "bend" spacetime, an action which is due to the intrinsic
motion of time dragging space into the historic, temporal domain. The "warpage" affects time and
space in metrically equivalent terms. It may be difficult to imagine how anything could connect to
something so intangible as a dimension, yet this is certainly the best explanation we have. And the
dimensions are not so intangible when we encounter them through gravitational or inertial forces ("g"
forces felt during acceleration). The intrinsic motion of time, the intrinsic motion of light, and
gravitation itself can also be considered inertial forces, in that they are all dimensional (metric)
expressions of entropy, symmetry, or energy conservation.
A dynamical view of gravitational action is allowed by Einstein's equations, via his own "Equivalence
Principle". We are free to view a reference frame as either at rest in a static negative gravitational
potential (as on the surface of the Earth), or as accelerated in spacetime by an equivalent positive
motive force (as in a rocket ship). Hence we can view gravitation as the accelerated motion of
spacetime itself, rather than as a static, "warped", or "curved" metric field. It seems to me this
dynamic view offers a physically simpler way to visualize gravitational action, and is heuristically
more fruitful, leading to other insights as well.
The equivalence principle follows from the notion that we cannot distinguish between moving
ourselves through spacetime (acceleration), or spacetime moving itself through us (gravitation). In the
dynamic view, all objects fall with the same acceleration not because the static gravitational potential
is the same and exactly balances their inertial resistance, but because they are all co-movers in the
same accelerated flow of spacetime. Similarly, the local metric is "warped" simply by the physical
flow of space (caused by time's intrinsic motion); co-movers with the flow (free fall, orbit) are of
course unaware of its motion - all the ordinary gravitational effects are as readily explained by one
view as by the other - if we restrict our reference frame to small scales and local effects. (See:
"Extending Einstein's Equivalence Principle".)
"Quantum Radiance" and Black Holes
Like the other charges of matter, gravitation has a symmetry debt to pay, and like the other charges, if
gravitation cannot pay off the debt outright, it will always move in that direction by at least "paying
down" the debt as much as possible. Since an atom or a planet can have the same center of mass or
"location", the gravitational concentration of massive particles reduces the scatter of individual
"location" charges, confining them to as small a volume of spacetime as physically possible. (The
attractive principle of gravitation (-Gm), however, is simply the collapse of space caused by the
intrinsic motion of time. See also: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) According to Roger Penrose,
this collecting activity maximizes the entropy of the system. (See: From Eternity to Here by Sean
Carroll, Dutton 2010, page 302.) However, in my view, this collecting activity is an expression of
gravity's characteristic negative spatial entropy drive, and is a stepping stone on the pathway of
gravity's symmetry conservation agenda. If enough mass is accumulated, the fusion reactions of the
nucleosynthetic pathway are initiated, converting a portion of the bound energy to light, a direct
payment of the symmetry (and entropy) debt. However, nucleosynthesis can only go so far, as baryon

20 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

"number" conservation prevents the great bulk of any stellar mass from converting to light.
Nevertheless, gravitation drives on, collapsing the electron shells of atoms in "white dwarfs", and
finally driving this "electron sea" into the protons, forming neutron stars, essentially gigantic atomic
nuclei held together by gravitational forces. Still unsatisfied, if enough mass is present, gravitation
collapses even nuclear matter to the singularity of a black hole, surely the most bizarre and fearsome
object in the universe.
Matter simply falling into a black hole can convert much more of its bound energy to radiation than
through nucleosynthesis (more than 20% vs 1% - see: Sky and Telescope, Jan. 2007, pages 43-47).
This includes extracting energy from the rotational energy of the hole, from the gravitational potential
energy of highly accelerated particles (including any relativistic increase in mass), and even from the
binding energy of nuclear particles, which the intense gravitational field of the hole replaces.
In the creation of a black hole, gravitation reaches its symmetry-conservation goal, for as Stephen
Hawking has shown, through the principle of "quantum radiance", the total mass of a black hole will
eventually be converted to light. The defining feature of a black hole is that the gravitational
acceleration of spacetime reaches the equivalent of the intrinsic motion of light. As in the venerable
saying, "the extremes meet": matter began as light with intrinsic motion c; matter ends by itself
achieving intrinsic motion c through the gravitational acceleration of spacetime, a total reversal of the
roles of intrinsic motion and spatial vs temporal entropy. The full circle of the black hole returns
matter to light again, an amazing story of purposeful and relentless symmetry conservation which no
one would believe if Einstein's and Hawking's mathematics were not there to prove it (although the
early stages of this process are plainly before our eyes in our own Sun).
Because the "all way" spatial entropy drive of light (intrinsic motion c) has greater symmetry than the
"one-way" historical entropy drive of time (intrinsic motion T), Hawking's quantum radiance
demonstrates that even the symmetry of entropy is conserved. It is symmetry conservation at every
level and the ultimate expression of Noether's theorem that drives the evaporation of black holes. The
event horizon of a black hole is a temporal entropy surface (the Bekenstein-Hawking theorem),
displacing space somewhat (but not exactly) as a ship displaces water, providing a physical
demonstration of the gravitational conversion of space and the drive of spatial entropy to time and the
drive of historical entropy.
In thermodynamic terms, the conversion of light's entropy drive (light's intrinsic motion) to matter's
entropy drive (time's intrinsic motion) reaches a limiting case in the black hole. Because at the
Schwarzschild radius the inflow of space is already at velocity c, it is not physically possible to simply
continue increasing the intensity of the field when more matter is added to the hole. Therefore, the
only accommodation possible for (the entropy requirements of) further mass inputs is to increase the
size of the surface over which this maximum spatial flow is realized, resulting in the HawkingBekenstein theorem relating the entropy of a black hole to its surface area. Therefore black holes are
somewhat larger than one might otherwise assume. (If two black holes of equal mass merge, the result
will be a black hole with (at least) twice the surface area, not twice the volume.) Paradoxically, this
effect does not reduce the critical density of the hole as it grows larger, because we are dealing with a
time surface, not a spatial volume. Space is displaced by time, not by a competing spatial volume,
which is where the ship displacement analogy fails. Gravity has replaced the 3-D geometry of space
with the 2-D geometry of history.

21 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

Recall that light is a 2-D transverse wave whose intrinsic motion (entropy drive) "sweeps out" a third
spatial dimension. Hence the volume of space is light's entropy expression. It is just this spatial
volume which gravity has squeezed down to a flat surface, converting the 3-D spatial entropy of light
entirely to the 2-D temporal entropy of matter. Just as the 2-D wave of light is converted to a 3-D
volume of space by the intrinsic motion of light's entropy drive, so too is the 1-D time line converted
to a 2-D historical surface by the intrinsic (entropic) motion of time. The black hole is telling us that
historical entropy is actually 2-D, not 1-D as we might suppose. Hence we actually live in a 5-D
Cosmos of historical spacetime, not 4-D, as is commonly supposed. It can be readily appreciated that
historic time, which encompasses the vast domain of the past and rolls ever onward into the future,
should have a 2-dimensional representation (many simultaneous events moving together in one-way
time). (See: "The 'Spacetime Map' as a Model of a 5-dimensional Holographic Universe".)
It naturally takes more "space" to store historical entropy than we might expect (the event horizon is
larger than we might think), because the interior of the enclosed spherical volume is not available for
this purpose, only the surface of the event horizon can be used - because of the limitations imposed
upon the gravitational spatial flow by "velocity c", as mentioned earlier in the "water pipe" analogy.
The total raw energy of the black hole remains proportional to its mass, while the entropy of its
energy content is proportional to the surface area of the event horizon: the 3-D spatial entropy of light
is gravitationally crushed and transferred to the 2-D historical entropy of matter. This is the extreme
example of the gravitational metric of time and matter completely replacing the electromagnetic
metric of space and light - just as gravity replaces the roles of all the other forces in the black hole including the electrical and nuclear binding forces of atomic matter.
If the mass of the Earth were reduced to the density of a black hole, it would have an event horizon
approximately equal to the size of a Ping-Pong ball. I assume that the surface area of this "Ping-Pong
ball" represents the actual size of the "tangential" contact point between historical spacetime and the
entire mass-energy of planet Earth. (The fact that this contact point is greater than zero means that the
temporal entropy drive of matter will actually have a very small vitiating effect upon atoms, as
possibly realized through "proton decay".) (See: "Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the
Universe").
Gluons - The Strong Force: Fusion and Proton Decay
(row 4, cell 3)
In addition to its important role in confining quarks to elementary whole-quantum charge units, the
strong force contains an important internal symmetry. Each quark carries one color charge, which it
swaps with its neighbors in a ceaseless round-robin exchange (at "velocity c") by means of an internal
field of massless "gluons". Because the gluon field is composed of color-anticolor charges in every
combination, it sums overall to zero color, a crucial charge symmetry. Unlike photons, which gluons
resemble and from which they are probably derived, gluons attract each other, which causes their
binding effect to increase with distance, providing a "short range" force law and the permanent
confinement of quarks and their fractional charges within baryons.
Physically squeezing the quarks together has the effect of summing up the gluon field, so that as
quarks crowd together, the strong force relaxes and the quarks move more easily with respect to each
other, an effect known as "asymptotic freedom" (Politzer, Gross, and Wilczek: 2004 Nobel Prize for

22 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

Physics). "In the limit", if the quarks are fully compressed, the color charge (which is otherwise
conserved) sums to zero and vanishes. This is the charge configuration of the leptoquark, and is the
condition of "color symmetry" (color = 0) which is necessary for proton or leptoquark decay. Despite
the binding effects of the gluons, quarks repel each other electrically and through other quantum
mechanical forces (Pauli's "Exclusion Principle") - otherwise the gluon field would cause the
immediate and complete collapse of baryons. As quarks spread apart, the threat to symmetry
conservation and charge invariance posed by their fractional charges increases, and the color force
becomes explicit and stronger, limiting the baryon's expansion. Because the color charge is conserved,
the weak force cannot cause baryon decay while the color charge is explicit (neutrinos do not carry
color charge). But if for some reason the color charge should self-annihilate (as in the extreme
pressures of the Big Bang, a black hole, or via the "X" IVB, or perhaps simply by a quantummechanical random fluctuation in the positions of the three quarks), the leptonic decay of a baryon can
go forward. It is this effect that allows the weak force decays of electrically neutral leptoquarkantileptoquark pairs during the birth of the Cosmos.
"In the limit" (of pressure, compaction, and size) the color charge vanishes. This limit probably
translates physically to compacting the quarks of a baryon to "leptonic size", eliminating any threat to
symmetry-keeping by the quark fractional charges. In this condition, with no color charge present, a
baryon is indistinguishable from a heavy lepton, reverting to its ancestral form, the "leptoquark".
When fully compressed, the leptoquark is a lepton and the color charge is implicit; when the pressure
is relieved, the quarks expand, color charge becomes explicit, and the leptoquark becomes a baryon.
As a lepton, the leptoquark must have an associated neutrino, but as a baryon, this neutrino cannot
cancel the explicit color charge. Thus the baryon is stable against "proton decay" in its normal
(expanded) state. Only when the quarks are fully compressed, vanishing the color charge, does the
baryon return to its leptonic ancestral state, and proton decay becomes possible with the emission of a
leptoquark anti-neutrino.
Presumably, all baryons have one and the same "number" charge, as all derive from the same
leptoquark ancestor, and all must revert to this same high-energy form to decay, resulting in the
extraordinary stability of the proton. Other than the hypothetical super-heavy "X" IVB, it seems likely
that only the gravitational pressures of a black hole can provide sufficient symmetrically applied force
to routinely cause proton decay. If this is so, then the interior of black holes may consist of nothing
but gravitationally trapped light, a condition strangely reminiscent of the gluons or "sticky light"
trapped within a baryon. (While a neutron star is like a gigantic gravitationally bound compound
atomic nucleus, a black hole represents the next level of simplification, a gigantic gravitationally
bound single baryon.) Trapped light would solve the question of the infinite compressibility of matter
at the central singularity, as there is no quantum-mechanical limit to the superposition of photons.
(See also: "A Connection Between 'Inflation' and the 'Big Crunch'")
The primary strong force (baryon internal color field) acts to protect light's symmetry by confining
quarks to whole quantum unit charge combinations, and restores light's symmetry through
self-annihilation and proton decay. The secondary strong force (meson exchange field of compound
atomic nuclei) initiates nuclear fusion, resulting in the creation of heavy elements in the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, and the conversion of nuclear binding energy to light. This pathway,
however, is relatively short and ineffective, as only a small fraction of the energy stored in baryons
can be released through nuclear fusion. Proton decay converts all nuclear mass to light, but the

23 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

process is so rare that the proton, in terms of a human lifetime, is virtually eternal. We owe the
stability of matter to the conserved color charge of the strong force, the weakness of gravity, and the
huge mass-energy barrier of the "W" and "X" IVBs. But the seeds of its own destruction are contained
within the baryon, through the principle of "asymptotic freedom" and the potential for
self-annihilation of the color charge. (See: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the Heat Death of the
Universe.")
The Weak Force IVBs: Fission, Identity Charge
(See also: "Introduction to the Weak Force".)
(row 4, cell 4)
Because it is the weak force which breaks the symmetric state of energy in the "Big Bang" and brings
the material Universe into existence, we might not expect this force to be particularly active in
returning the material system to symmetry. Yet, the force that creates matter can also destroy matter,
and it does so in several ways - through the decay of heavy particles to their "ground state"; through
the fission of heavy compound nuclei (radioactivity); through contributions to fusion in the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars; and through the process of proton decay, for which it provides the
annihilating identity charge (the leptoquark antineutrino) as well as the "X" IVB. (See: "The Particle
Table".)
When we consider an elementary particle, such as the electron (e-), we often forget that (in addition to
spin) this particle carries two charges, electric charge and "identity" (or "number") charge. The
electric charge is indicated by the negative sign, the identity charge is indicated by the "e" (this charge
is sometimes also referred to as "flavor"). We say that identity charge is "hidden", or carried in
implicit form, by the massive electron, but is revealed in its explicit, "bare", and nearly massless form
as the electron neutrino. (Whether or not the neutrino is actually massless has little to do with its
symmetry debt of "identity". Most charges are in fact carried by massive particles). Usually the
"identity" charge is simply called lepton or baryon "number" charge (or even "flavor" charge), which
obscures the true meaning of this charge. If "number" charge adequately described its function, then
the number charge of the electron would also serve as the number charge of the muon and tau; but as
we have discovered, there is a specific and distinct neutrino associated with each member of the
elementary leptonic spectrum, so the charge is more accurately described as "identity". Moreover, we
can readily assign "identity" as the plausible symmetry debt of light's "anonymity", with a sensible
function to perform in annihilation reactions (facilitating the choice of the correct antimatter partner),
arguments and contact with Noether's theorem which we cannot make for a generalized "number"
charge.
It is at first a curious fact, and then after reflection an obvious one, that the "identity" charge is the key
to manifestation. It is identity that brings matter into existence as the principle or "cardinal" symmetry
debt. But then, how could it be otherwise? Identity is the essence of asymmetry, the key ingredient of
information that must be isolated from the symmetric field of energy if manifestation is ever to occur.
(See also: "The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric
(4-D) Reality".)
In addition to the mesons (which help in transformations of baryons in both strong force fusion
reactions and weak force decays), the leptonic field of elementary particles functions as an alternative

24 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

charge carrier, both for the composite field of the quarks and hadrons, and for other leptons. The
massive leptons function as alternative carriers of electric charge, the (nearly) massless neutrinos
function as alternative carriers of identity charge, the mesons function as alternative carriers of quark
spin, flavor, color, and partial electric charges. Without these services, the quark field could not
manifest, since in the absence of alternative charge carriers, quarks could only balance their charges
with anti-quarks, and they would remain forever locked in mutually annihilating particle-antiparticle
pairs. Without neutrinos, the massive leptons would likewise remain locked in their particleantiparticle pairs, themselves lacking an alternative carrier of identity charge. Hence it is that the
neutrino, the least of all particles, becomes the "mouse which nibbles the lion's net", providing a
material, alternative, and temporally conserved carrier of identity charge, and through this service (the
translation of a massless, a-temporal symmetry parameter into a massive, temporal charged particle),
unleashes the information potential of the Cosmos. There are deep analogies between nature's use of
charged particles to carry symmetry debts, the biological coding of genetic information in DNA
molecules, and the human invention of art, language, and mathematics: they are increasingly abstract
systems of information. (See: "The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge".)
Just as we see the biological information pathway of the electromagnetic force evolving to reestablish
the primordial connective unity of light (communications, mutualism, social systems, ecosystems),
and emergent forms of symmetry ("beauty") conserved throughout living systems, so we also see
through the rise of consciousness and the emergence of complex organisms with definite individuality
and personality, the reemergence and exploration of weak force "identity" in the biological realm.
There is an obvious analogy between our religious conception of a human soul - hidden in the body
but explicit otherwise - and the hidden and explicit identity charges of the leptons.
For a further discussion of the weak force IVBs (and associated Higgs bosons) in their full energy
spectrum, see:
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs
The Higgs Boson and the Evolutionary Eras of the Cosmos
(End Table)
Links:
Introduction to the Papers
Section I: Unification
Section II: Gravitation
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
Section VII: Entropy
Section VIII: General Systems, Complex Systems
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIII: The Solar Archetype
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
Weak Force Papers:

25 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D)
Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
The "Tetrahedron Model" in the Context of "Global and Local Gauge Symmetries":
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
General Topics:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3
(summary)
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
The Symmetry Groups of Light
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
About Gravity
Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train

26 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of...

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/appendix2.html

The Half life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (text - updated copy)
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (original gif diagram)
Tables and Diagrams:
Gravity
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model of Light and Conservation Law
The Particle Table
Unified Field Table: Simple Form
Unified Field Table: "Bare" Form
"The Symmetry Groups of Light: The Electromagnetic Ground State"
"The Symmetry Groups of Light: The Leptonic Spectrum"
The Symmetry Groups of Light: Particles
"The Symmetry Groups of Light: Leptoquarks"
home page
Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 1"
Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 3 (summary)"
Go to: "Simple Table of the Unified Field Theory, Rational Mode"

27 of 27

5/23/14 7:54 AM

