Section 8: General Systems, Complex Systems
(See also: Section 11: "Religion and Science")
(revised Nov., 2008)
John A. Gowan
home page
Papers:
The Fractal Organization of Nature
The Information Pathway
Nature's Fractal Pathway
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 1
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 2
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
Chronology
Three General Systems Forms or Models
A) The Grid, Matrix, or Table
B) The "Hourglass" or "Grail" Diagrams
C) The "Tetrahedron" Models
General Systems Papers
Links
Abstract
General Systems, as I use the term, denotes a repeating pattern of natural organization - a
fractal algorithm or ordering principle in the Cosmos. While not enforced with the same
stringency as a natural law (such as energy conservation), the pattern-forming impulse is
nevertheless all-pervasive in nature and seems to proceed from such fundamental principles as
resonance and the pathway of least energy or least resistance. It is just simpler, more efficient,
and takes less energy to create a universe using self-similar repeating patterns than following
any other plan. The "Tetrahedron Model" of cosmic order presents a General System based on a
4x3 universal fractal algorithm.
Introduction
General Systems is the most synthetic of all the branches of systematized human knowledge. It is both
science and art, and so manages to annoy both scientists and artists, and others whose intellectual discipline,
territory, or special province of knowledge and expertise it treads upon. General Systems is a young science,
founded as a distinct discipline in 1945 by Ludwig Von Bertalanffy, whose major book on the subject
appeared in 1968.
I think of General Systems as a study of patterns in nature as well as in human thought. The fact that
patterns exist in Nature and are reflected in human thought is demonstrated in the "Table of Natural
Organization". The fact that a single 4x3 pattern can be identified at so many organizational levels of nature
is quite astonishing, and potentially a very valuable observation - we can use this information to help us
bridge existing gaps in our knowledge and help us toward new discoveries.
As to why there should be patterns in nature, I can think of several good reasons. First, the base of natural
law is very narrow (as for example, the metric structure of spacetime), and the framework of this foundation
becomes projected upward through the succeeding levels of matter built upon it. Resonance is a physical
principle which helps us understand how energy might be transferred and captured most efficiently through
a chain of self-similar structures, resulting in a fractal hierarchy, like the famously nested sets of Russian

dolls.
At the base of the cosmic fractal structure we find natural law (modeled here as a 4x3 tetrahedron); above
that we find light and spacetime; and if, as we presume, these basic structures are projected into matter, that
is enough to establish a resonant chain of conservation laws and energy forms which evolves into the
material Universe we know and love, including ourselves and our brains: "In the beginning was the
Word...". Being part and parcel of this Universe, made from its substance and evolved from it, we, our
brains, and our thought processes are also part of the universal 4x3 fractal pattern. This is why, through the
ages, the intuitive mind has been so successful in discovering this resonant General System pattern.
Scientists will be shocked to discover that I include religion, mythology, the occult, the metaphysical, and
perhaps worst of all, astrology (apparently the favorite "whipping boy" of science), as part of the great
fractal pattern of the Cosmos, captured and reflected by the resonant mind of human intuitive genius; and
conversely, all the metaphysical savants will probably be dismayed that I dare to suggest that science also
reflects, in its rational way, the 4x3 General System algorithm of Nature.
Let it be said at once that General Systems is not worthy of its name if it fails or is afraid to encompass the
metaphysical, religious, occult, and mythological fields of intuitive thought. The fact that we are interested
in the patterns of thought or phenomena exhibited by these fields does not constitute an endorsement of
them. We are inclined to believe that the persistence of these belief systems or metaphysical fields over the
millennia is in consequence of their 4x3 fractal structure rather than their specific content, whether that
content is factual or fanciful. General Systems is interested in the patterns of these metaphysical fields; their
content is of interest (to our methodology) only insofar as it elaborates, contributes to, or explains that
general pattern.
Much has been made of the war (and attempted reconciliation) between science and religion. General
Systems affords a most natural bridge between these subjects, without doing harm to either. General
Systems sees them as simply the rational or intuitive resonance in the human mind of a single structure,
fractal pattern, or dynamic cycle in Nature.
Chronology
(See also: "Chronology of Papers and Ideas")
My first foray into General Systems was sometime in the early 1970s, when I was in my early to mid 30's.
At that time, the thought dawned on me that the 4x3 pattern so evident in metaphysics generally, and in the I
Ching and astrology particularly, might be connected, in the manner of a resonant or fractal General
System, with a similar pattern in the rational or scientific version of the unified field theory - emerging, for
example, as the 4 forces of physics. After all, both metaphysics and the unified field theory were allencompassing "World Systems", one ancient and intuitive, the other modern and rational. Perhaps a study of
the ancient, intuitive cosmological pattern could throw some light on the mysteries of the modern, rational
cosmological system. It would at least be a novel approach and provide an intellectually stimulating hobby.
Since I have no talent for math, General Systems, with its emphasis upon conceptual analogy, was my best
hope of achieving any sort of synthesis in this difficult but fascinating field.
I had been trained as a scientist in biology at Cornell University; when this hunch concerning the
connection between General Systems and Unified Field Theory first awakened in my mind, I held a strong
prejudice against metaphysics generally and astrology particularly. For excellent reasons of history and
experience, most scientists are wary of the "thought control" which seems inherently a part of "faith based"
metaphysical systems. But there eventually comes a point in any prejudicial judgment where "the baby is
thrown out with the bath water". Discrimination combined with tolerance is perhaps the most important and
difficult stance or attitude in life, science, or philosophy. There is - there must be - some element of truth in
these ancient traditions so universally a part of human culture; otherwise we should have to discount human
thought generally, of every sort. But what is the grain of truth in these ancient philosophies? From the
perspective of General Systems it is, for the most part, simply their common 4x3 structural pattern.
Once I got away from the highly intuitive circular representation of astrology, and recognized its 4x3 matrix

pattern (4 "Elements" x 3 "Qualities"), my scientifically trained mind saw the form of a Cartesian grid, or a
Heisenberg matrix, or a Periodic Table, a form which my rational mind recognized and could order and
think about in scientifically familiar patterns and terms. This simple transformation of a circular form into a
matrix table allowed me to entertain the notion that a General System pattern at the level of cosmological
law might possibly be present in the ancient intuitive "world system"; if so, this pattern could also be
relevant to the modern rational world system - the unified field theory.
I decided on 3 courses of action, to be pursued simultaneously: 1) study the astrological pattern, in its major
and classical aspects only, ignoring modern introductions (including the modern planets) and all trivial
("newspaper") aspects; 2) develop a 4x3 matrix of natural laws and principles for the rational form of the
unified field theory, and look for a "best fit" between the two systems; 3) look for other 4x3 patterns in
Nature, attempting to confirm that such a pattern might reasonably be expected to exist. This last effort is
based upon the notion that if in fact the unified field theory did have a 4x3 form, and the hypothesis of
fractal resonance is correct, then the unification structure, because it is the foundation of all higher systems,
should have spawned a great series of examples further up the natural hierarchy. In this view the unified
field theory, or unification structure, acts through natural law as a generative pulse, fractal algorithm, or
fundamental resonant note or iteration of energy, principle, and organization.
When these 3 projects were launched, my wife Esther and I were busy establishing our family, raising our
three sons. I was also building a house for my mother, and working full time in the biology department at
Cornell, where I was a research technician. Hence it was not until 1980 that the first tangible results of my
efforts surfaced in "The Table of Natural Organization". By then I had completed a large astrological study
(with negative result), begun serious reading of Einstein and general Physics, (1977), and found many other
examples of 4x3 patterns in nature, which at my father's suggestion I put together (1980) as a "Hierarchy of
Natural Organization" to present to a General Systems discussion group at the Creative Problem Solving
Institute (CPSI), in those days held every June in Buffalo, NY. My late father, Prof. John C. Gowan,
participated in CPSI as a teacher and authority on Creativity and Gifted Education. It was at this institute
that Gus Jaccaci and I first met and became instant friends, colleagues, and collaborators.
The Three General System Forms or Models
In my General Systems work, three distinct forms or models have emerged over the years, each type with
its particular virtue and area of application. In order of their discovery and appearance in the work, they are:
1) the 4x3 (or 4x4) "Matrix", "Grid", or Table (recording categories and hierarchies of phenomena); 2) the
"Hourglass" or "Grail" diagrams (illustrating interactions and relationships among the 4 forces of physics);
3) the "Tetrahedron" models (representing interactions and relationships among 4 conservation laws and
principles of physics). Gus Jaccaci collaborated in the development of the "matrix" and "Tetrahedron"
models, while the "Hourglass" models are entirely my own (see "Introduction to Fractals" for more on this
issue). Gus has often helped me with the General System aspects of the work; the "scientific" content is my
own responsibility.
The Grid, Matrix, or Table
The first General Systems model discovered or formulated, and perhaps the one of greatest practical utility,
is the table, "grid", or "matrix". The grid begins in a 4x3 form but becomes elaborated to a 4x4 table in
order to express emergent properties of complex systems, as well as to represent the resolution of system
operation, or the completion of a cycle. The core structure of the grid form is nevertheless 4x3.
The grid was the first form (1980) I used to join a rational and an intuitive system in a 4x3 General System
model. This was the "coordinated mapping" or overlay of the scientific system of "4 forces and 3 energy
states" upon the astrological system of "4 elements and 3 qualities", producing the basic conceptual table or
matrix of the unified field in terms of both structure and dynamics. Despite the fact that these are very
simple systems involving the overlay of only 12 cells each, it took me many years to settle on a
configuration that I was completely satisfied with. The grid was also developed into the large tables of the
"Fractal Organization of Nature", the "Information Ladder", Gus' abstract "Metamatrix®", and also provided
the necessary foundation and basic conceptual framework for the more intuitively integrated ""Hourglass

Diagrams" and "Tetrahedron" models which followed, both years later and with years between.
The great benefit of the matrix, and the great benefit of the General Systems method, is that it provided me
with a restricted form which forced me to think about the physics both in new ways and in its most essential
terms. There is no "fat" in a 4x3 matrix, not when it purports to incorporate a completely satisfactory
cosmological model of the operation of the whole of physical law. Hence the General System form is an
extremely strict discipline, not unlike mathematics, and quite similar, for example, to the Periodic Table of
the Elements in its power to both organize and inform. This is why it took me so long to match up the two
systems; I had to learn enough physics to reduce the whole of it to a sensible 4x3 (or 4x4) matrix.
Much of the mathematics of the theory has already been done; I certainly can make no contribution in that
area. Nevertheless, I expect the conceptual synthesis I have achieved will offer important clues toward a
future mathematical formulation of the theory. In that case we will (hopefully) have the theory in English
first, and in mathematics afterwards. And as we must expect of any good methodology, the understanding I
have gained in one area has influenced other important areas of knowledge as well, physical, social, and
metaphysical. The 4x4 matrix form culminated in two large papers: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified
Field Theory", and "A General System Approach to the Unified Field Theory". These remain the most
complete statements of the conceptual unification, although particular topics are more extensively covered in
other specialized papers (gravity, entropy, the weak force, proton decay, gauge symmetry, cosmology, etc.).
Readers familiar with the theory of "Chaos" may recognize a familiar pattern in the "matrix" model:
beginning with a "linear" or simple input (cell 1), passing to a stage of bifurcation (cell 2), progressing to a
stage of greater complexity including secondary bifurcations (cell 3), and finally a "chaotic" stage (cell 4)
which predictably settles in the "fractal basin" of a 4x3 (or 4x4) "strange attractor" (the precise physical
nature of the attractor, however, is unpredictable). Like a true fractal algorithm, the output of one level
becomes the input of the next, the self-feeding iterations producing new self-similar expressions at everhigher levels of information and system complexity. Finally, the model is also scale-invariant, not only
vertically with each row, but also with respect to the four major realms. (See: "Chaos: Making a New
Science" by James Gleick, Viking Penguin Inc., 1987)
"The "Hourglass" or "Grail" Diagrams"
Despite the great practical utility of the 4x4 grid representation of the unification theory, it is not an
aesthetically pleasing pictorial model. I had "circle envy" when I thought about the beautiful traditional
representation of the zodiac wheel. It was also difficult to lecture from the grid, and laymen did not respond
well to its form - it was easy for me, with a scientific background, to think in those categorical terms, but
not for the general public - my intended audience. Hence I began an active search for another more
integrated and intuitively pleasing form (like a "mandala") which could present the relationships between
the different parts of the theory in diagrammatic rather than matrix form. It took about a year before I hit
upon the form I had been looking for, the "Hourglass" or "Grail" diagrams. This form was developed out of
two sources - one was the diagonals of a square I was attempting to convert into a model; the other was the
Christian Cross. This latter connection got me to thinking about the shape of the diagram as a Grail cup, the
upper half holding the clear "spiritual water" of energy and principle, the lower half holding the transformed
and inverted "wine" or "blood" of manifestation.
I was (and remain) immensely pleased with the Hourglass or Grail diagrams; they showed exactly the
relationship between the forces, charges, and particles of physics that the grid had revealed, and they
showed it in a perfect 4x3 form - 4 triangles. Finally, they showed the fractal relationship between the 2
spacetime and 2 particle forces - the structure of spacetime was carried over into the structure of matter - the
short-range force pair of matter reflecting the relationship between the long-range force pair of spacetime.
The paired diagrams evolved into two conjoined diagrams, one of them 2-dimensional and due to me, and
the other 3-dimensional and due to my (very smart) wife Esther. While the 2-D diagram is lovely, the 3-D
diagram is striking in that upon revolution it actually becomes a goblet - the conceptual model becomes the
physical goblet or hourglass it purports to represent.
The "Hourglass" diagrams highlight the relationship between space and light, gravity and time, and the

strong and weak forces, with their quarks and leptons. They also do something the grid cannot do well or at
all: they distinguish the spacetime and particle forces as separate but interrelated force pairs, joined by
matter. They also distinguish "power centers" or "mass centers" of system organization, the paired charges at
the "waist" or centers of the hourglass, the locus of matter, charge, and massive particles. Hence the
hourglass diagrams bring a new sense of relationship and organization into the unification theory. Matter
appears as a central organizing/transforming principle which accepts inputs from the symmetric
spatial/energetic realm "above", and transforms them into asymmetric outputs "below" in the
material/particle realm. Thus an attribute of light (free energy's entropy drive, light's "intrinsic motion") is
transformed into a characteristic of time (bound energy's entropy drive, time's intrinsic motion), and the
symmetric spatial metric of light is transformed to an asymmetric gravitational metric by the presence of
mass. Quarks become baryons and compound atomic nuclei, while leptons create the electron shells of
chemistry and the periodic table, both produced from leptoquarks and baryons by the transformations
wrought by the central massive IVBs of the weak force (Intermediate Vector Bosons - the W, Z, X). The
extent of the structural parallel between the spacetime and particle forces as suggested by the congruent
hourglass diagrams is extensive, and more fully explored in Section 4: "Introduction to the Weak Force".
The Tetrahedron Models
The Tetrahedron models were discovered by Gus and I during a conference at Dick Spady's "Forum
Foundation" in Seattle, Washington (Oct. 2000). The Tetrahedron models had been a long time coming, for
both of us. For years I had been working with triangle diagrams of the holy Christian "Trinity", trying to get
a physical interpretation; and for years before that Gus had been nagging me to produce a 4x3 model of the
principles underlying the unification theory. In the Tetrahedron models we both got everything we asked
for, and a good deal more besides .
The Tetrahedron models are very simple and very powerful. They are models of the relationship between
the principles and conservation laws which underlie the forces and charges of matter and the Unified Field
Theory. They are also 4x3 models of the metaphysical realm. Whereas (in General Systems terms) I think of
the hourglass diagrams as representations of the "Grail", I think of the Tetrahedron diagrams as
representations of the "Word".
The tetrahedron diagram is the foundation of all other 4x3 models, and is even more basic than the unified
field theory figures which the matrix and "hourglass" forms represent. Nevertheless, since the tetrahedron is
composed of 4 triangles, it manages to encompass simultaneously the relationship between the fundamental
conservation laws and the higher level physical forces, energy states, and natural phenomena which are
consequent upon them as resonant iterations of the cosmic pattern.
The four physical principles of the tetrahedron are: 1) The Conservation of Energy; 2) The Conservation of
Symmetry; 3) Entropy; 4) Causality (law of cause and effect - "Karma"). The points of the tetrahedron are
identified with the 4 principles, and the 3 lines emanating from each point are identified with the charges,
forces, and associated energy states and phenomena of nature. Even the faces have been interpreted; the
entire tetrahedron represents electromagnetic energy in its primeval conservation parameters, energy states,
and forces.
Mathematically, the Tetrahedron Model represents a "symmetry group" of transformations between free and
bound forms of electromagnetic energy (light and matter). This connection with "group theory", the
mathematics of unification, tends to confirm my belief that the Tetrahedron Model is a valid representation
of the Unified Field Theory, which may some day be translated into its full mathematical form. In physical
terms, the unifying theme of the model is light itself: all forms of energy begin as light and eventually
return to light's symmetric energy form. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
Like the Hourglass diagrams, the Tetrahedron consists of 4 equilateral triangles. All lines and connections in
both diagrams are equivalent, although in the hourglass diagrams we see the first expression of the massive
organizational or "power centers". The physical evolution or operation of the models or forms is envisioned
in the reverse order in which they were discovered: the Tetrahedron is first, the "Word" of energy and
natural or conservation law which initiates the Cosmos. Second is the hourglass or "Grail" diagram, an

unfurling of the tetrahedron into the forces and charges of Nature; here the Cosmos is divided into
symmetric and asymmetric aspects, the realms of primary light and derivative matter, representing the
transformation of spirit or principle into the material realms: the "fall" or devolution of light, symmetry, and
connectivity into matter, asymmetry, and isolation. Finally the hourglass is elaborated, through evolution
both physical and biological, into the "matrix" form, including the "Fractal Table" and its human
permutation, the "Information Ladder". In the latter representation, in its endless search for antimatter, and
via its "memory" (charge), bound energy tries to recreate in material form the unity and connectivity it knew
as light. The attempt by humans to create Utopia or "Heaven on Earth", and our space program reaching
outward into the Solar System, are both emergent expressions of this drive, which Chardin saw as the
universal struggle of matter toward an asymptotic zenith of information, connection, and knowledge, his
"Omega Point" of cosmic evolution. (See: "Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age".)
The three General System models - actually 4 considering the embedded Land-Jaccaci GRST dynamic - all
work together to describe the workings and evolution of the Universe at successively deeper levels of
phenomena, force, and principle, and it is no accident they were discovered in reverse order of their
significance. The surface description of the phenomenal Universe and its GRST dynamics in the matrix,
Gus' abstract "Metamatrix"®, and their elaborations through the "Fractal Table" and the "Information
Ladder", are the most obvious manifestations of the creative energies of the Cosmos (actually seen also in
the models of "chaos" theory). Secondly, I discover the Hourglass or "Grail" diagrams, the representation of
the interrelated forces of Nature whose operation produces the phenomenal surface level; and finally,
beneath the forces themselves, lies the ultimate level of energy and conservation law, controlling the
operation of the forces and initiating the formation of the Universe. Our model of the Unified Field Theory
is just one example - although a fundamental one - of the operation of the 4x3 fractal algorithm in Nature.
We place it in the Metaphysical Realm, Rational Mode, of the "Table of Natural Organization", as an
abstract or symbolic product of human rational or "scientific" thought.
The General System Papers
General System papers include the series of 6 fractal papers, the "Human Condition" paper, and the
Information papers, with the Information Pathway", "Nature's Fractal Pathway", and the "Chardin" papers,
among others. These we have discussed in earlier sections (3 and 6). The unified field theory paper, based
on the 4x4 matrix format, is also a General Systems paper, including a version with a more explicit General
Systems summary section (see the discussion of this paper in Section I: Unification). The "Hourglass
Diagrams" paper explains some of the physics behind the diagrams, although to avoid repetition, most of the
physics exposition is left to other chapters and papers.
The only papers on my website that are not (at least indirectly) the result of the General Systems
investigation of the unified field theory, are the "Spacetime Map" paper and the "Weak Force Mechanism"
paper concerning the "W" IVB. (Recently, however, (spring 2007), even the weak force has been modeled
in a 4x3 General Systems format. See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".) All the other papers
on gravity, symmetry, and entropy, etc., are the consequence of General Systems thinking in terms of the 3
major models: the Matrix, the Hourglass, and the Tetrahedron. The message here is that this is a heuristic,
productive, creative way to think and formulate questions. And why not? One is just placing oneself in
harmony with the natural fractal pattern of the Universe, "in the resonance" ("good vibrations"), which
includes our minds and thought processes. Furthermore, one is forced to reduce the clutter of natural
phenomena to their most essential, generative, and powerful elements.
I mention here two more related works: one is a scholarly treatment of the metaphysical realm, done entirely
from the viewpoint of the psychic or spiritual element in man (including "Transpersonal Psychology"), by
my late father, Prof. J. C. Gowan, in his books "Trance, Art, and Creativity" and "Operations of Increasing
Order", available in their entirety on-line in his memorial website; the second is a wholly mathematical
General System, again in a 4x4 format, quite independently created by Stewart Dodd, a mathematician and
statistician, available on my website and also reproduced in the appendix section of my father's book (see
links to both below).
Links and References to some General Systems and Metaphysics Papers and Books

References
Ludwig Von Bertalanffy, "General System Theory", George Braziller, 1968, 295p. + xxiv
Teilhard de Chardin, "The Phenomenon of Man", Harper and Row, 1959, 318p.
August T. Jaccaci, In: Patricia A. Galagan, "Growth: Mapping its Patterns and Periods", Training and
Development Journal, November 1989
George T. Lock Land, "Grow or Die: The Unifying Principle of Transformation", Random House,
1973
Benoit B. Mandelbrot, "The Fractal Geometry of Nature", W. H. Freeman Co, 1983, 468p.
Ervin Laszlo, "The Relevance of General Systems Theory", George Braziller Inc., 1972
Ervin Laszio, "Science and the Akashic Field", Inner Traditions, 2004
John Curtis Gowan, "Trance, Art, Creativity", Privately printed, 1975, 448p. + xxvi
James Gleick, "Chaos: Making a New Science". Viking Penguin Inc., 1987.
Links:
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part 1: Microphysical Realm
Part 2: Biophysical Realm
Part 3: Astrophysical Realm
Part 4: Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Mode
Part 5: Metaphysical Realm - Rational Mode
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos
Commentary on the Metaphysical Realm (rational mode)
The Human Connection
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
General Systems and Metaphysics
Section VIII: Introduction to General Systems, Complex Systems
Section XI: Religion and Science
Section XII: Man's Role in Nature
Section XIII: The Solar Archetype
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 1
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 2
Synopsis of the "Tetrahedron Model" of the Unified Field Theory
The Tetrahedron Model in the Context of a Complete Conservation Cycle (text)
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical
Realm. A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
Stewart C. Dodd's 4x4 Mathematical General System Matrix
Spiritual and Scientific Principles of the Tetrahedron Cosmic Energy Model
Postscript: Causality, Information, Karma
The Grail and Hourglass Diagrams
A General Systems Analysis of the Creative Process in Nature
Is There Life After Death?
A Rationale for Love in the Cosmos
Human Development and Life Stages General Systems Models
DeBroglie Matter Waves and the Evolution of Consciousness
An Overview of the Astrological System of the Grail Diagrams

Text for the Sun Sign Table (The "Sun Signs" of Astrology: Part One)
Text for the Sun Sign Table (The "Sun Signs" of Astrology: Part Two)
General Systems and Astrology: A Study
Information (tables)
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table No. 1)
The Information Ladder (table)
General Systems (tables)
Human Life Stages 4x4 Table
The Erikson-Piaget-Gowan Life Stages Table
Unified Field Scientific Format
Unified Field General Systems Format
Astrological Equivalents of the Tetrahedron 4x4 Grid Table
Combined Table of Astrological and Physical Parameters
Table of the Astrological Sun Signs (providing a model of the Metaphysical Realm, Intuitive
Mode)
Astrological Birth Date Data
Astrological Death Date Data
General Systems (text)
"Causality" vs "Information" as the designated characteristic of the central or "matter" apex of
the tetrahedron model (text)
Synopsis of the Energy Tetrahedron Model: Explanatory Text
The Grail and Hourglass Diagrams
General Systems (Diagrams)
The Tetrahedron Model (diagram)
(I suggest viewing the tetrahedron diagrams in roughly the order listed below, to clarify
how they are composed and evolved:)
1) The Triangle Diagram
2) Conservation Base
3) Outer "Ethereal" Lines
4) Inner "Material" Lines
The Tetrahedron Model (complete version)
6) 4 Conservation Laws Connected in Triplets
7) The Fractal Tetrahedron
8) The "Ethereal/Material" Tetrahedron
9) Plato's Tetrahedron
Misc. Tetrahedron Diagrams
The "Afterlife" Tetrahedron
The Energy Tetrahedron: Relationship to the Fractal Realms and "Tetragrammaton"
("tetra3.gif")
The Energy Tetrahedron: Interpretation in Religious Terms
The Energy Tetrahedron: Correspondence to Philosophic Fields
The Biology Tetrahedron: Correlation with Biological Functions
The "Higgs Cascade" Tetrahedrons
Multiverse State: Selection of "life friendly" Physical Parameters (Constants) ("Anthropic
Principle")
Planck Era: Primordial "Leptonic" Particle: H3 Total Unification (T.O.E.) (Quarks)
Leptoquark Era: Strong plus Electroweak Unification (G.U.T) (Baryons)
Electroweak Unification Era: Hyperons and Alternative Charge Carriers (Leptons)
Electromagnetic Unification Era: Ground State Atomic Matter (Atoms)
The "Hourglass" or "Grail" Diagrams
The Grail and Hourglass Diagrams
3-D Grail diagram: spacetime, particles, physics, astrology
Human Culture as a "Grail" Diagram: Spiritual Section
Human Culture as a "Grail" Diagram: Physical Section
Astrological Hourglass of the Particle Forces

Astrological Hourglass of the Spacetime Forces
Double Hourglass of the Astrological Signs
The Astrological Grail Flower Diagram
home page
home page
sect8.html
Please use the URL http://www.webcitation.org/5YVGCex8R to access a cached copy of this page
(and then select the most recently updated version in the cache)
If you have any questions, please feel free to contact the WebCite team at http://www.webcitation.org

