spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

A Spacetime Map of the Universe: Implications for Cosmology
and Inflation
JOHN A. GOWAN
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
(revised Feb., 2014)
Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
Constructing the Map
The Observer's Perspective
Reality and the Map
The Cosmological Expansion of Spacetime
Conclusion
Appendix: Mapping Artifacts
Table: Cosmological Redshift (Z) Values and the Hubble
Constant for the Spacetime Map
Postscript: The Cosmological "Horizon" Problem
Thoughts Regarding the Map and the "Horizon" Problem
Links and References
The Spacetime Map (diagram)
Graph of Calculated vs Observed Galaxy Positions
Method for Calculating Limit Line
Data Table for Inputs to Graph
Abstract

1 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

I present a 4-dimensional spacetime map of the cosmos
(http://www.johnagowan.org/spacemapnew.pdf) showing the position
from which we view the universe. We exist on the spacetime edge of
the cosmos looking (in every direction) backward in time toward its
beginning and "center" (the "Big Bang"). As we look deeper into
spacetime we see successively smaller and younger historical eras of
our universe, all of which nevertheless surround us completely.
Implications for cosmology (including the theory of "inflation", the
"horizon problem", and the "flatness problem") resulting from this
(generally unappreciated) perspective are discussed. The map
predicts a "Hubble constant" (expansion rate) in excellent agreement
with the currently accepted value.
Introduction
(The reader may wish to consult the "preface" or "guide" to this
paper, which is found at "About the Papers: An Introduction" section
V).
Reading cosmology often leaves me wishing I had a simple map of
the cosmos for reference and orientation, just as I want a globe handy
when reading the geography or history of Earth. As I have never
found a suitable map for this purpose, however, I decided to attempt
its production myself, proceeding on the generally held assumption
that the universe has expanded to its present size from very small
beginnings. The resulting map is therefore relevant to "Big Bang" and
"Inflationary" cosmology, but does not distinguish between them. (I
am assuming that inflation (if it exists) ends before it produces a large
universe.) I found the mapping effort so illuminating and
mind-stretching that I feel others interested in astronomy and
cosmology generally will find the map and mental exercise it affords
both stimulating and useful. The map also has a good deal to say
about certain conceptual difficulties in cosmology - especially the
"horizon" or "flatness" paradoxes, and hence also "inflation", a theory
which was invented expressly to address these problems.

2 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

Producing a map of the universe is a problem - but not a
straightforward problem - in the scalar representation of
3-dimensional space. For example, how does one represent the fact
that we look backward in time to an ever-smaller universe as we look
outward into an ever-larger region of space? And how should we
indicate the central point of origin, or conversely, the outer boundary
of our universe? A three-dimensional model gives us no adequate
way to indicate the spatial limits of our universe because it lacks a
crucial dimensional parameter: time.
The mapping problem presented by the time dimension is easily
stated: as we look outward in space we look only backward in time.
Because of the finite speed of light, we cannot look out in space into
the present. We see our universe not as it is, but as it used to be, in an
ordered regression of concentric spatial observational shells receding
into the past as we look deeper into the heavens. Furthermore, the
past universe that we see from Earth is a unique subset of the whole
past, as we cannot see any of our own history, and we see only single
moments in earlier samples of the history of our cosmos. To escape
from the observational tyranny of the one-way character of time, the
finite velocity of light, and the linkage of both with space, we must
find a way to disentangle the spatial and temporal dimensions so that
we can map what "is" as well as what we are constrained to see.
Problems such as these are wholly unfamiliar to the Earth
cartographer and require the use of a 4-dimensional spacetime map.
(http://www.johnagowan.org/spacemapnew.pdf)
At this point we need to recognize that our mapping problem is not so
much one of content (the number and positions of galaxies), as of
finding an appropriate methodology for representing the universe of
spacetime which the galaxies occupy. To state the problem in the
more familiar terms of Earth's geography: cartographers needed to
develop spherical models of the Earth before they could make
realistic maps of continental positions. The spacetime map I present
is analogous to a blank cartographer's globe of the Earth, containing
only lines of longitude and latitude. Although for the present devoid
of material content, I think the reader will find there is much to learn
3 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

even from an (almost) empty map of our universe. In any case, it is a
necessary beginning.
Constructing the Map
To construct a spacetime map, we must reduce not just scale but also
dimensionality. All 3 spatial dimensions are collapsed into a single
line, and time and space are accorded equal status as mapping
parameters. The justification for this is that we are mapping space in
units of "light time" or "light years" (ct), so we are essentially
mapping t against ct, which are metric equivalents. Massive objects
move in time with a "velocity" which is the metric equivalent of
light's velocity in space: one second of temporal duration is
metrically equivalent to ~300,000 km of spatial distance. The
compression of dimensionality results in the loss of recognizable
features - the universe does not "look like" the spacetime map.
Nevertheless, the map allows us to represent our universe in a
dimensionally correct manner and at the same time show what we see
of it and what we don't. The map helps us to orient ourselves with
respect to the spacetime structure of the cosmos, understand the
cosmological redshift, and discover where we are with respect to the
observable, as well as the invisible, universe. The deployment of the
Hubble Space Telescope, and the construction of a new generation of
giant land-based telescopes, with their exceptionally deep and clear
views of space, has increased our need for such understanding.
Figure 1 (http://www.johnagowan.org/spacemapnew.pdf) shows a
spacetime map of a universe 14 billion years old. New measurements
by the Hubble and other telescopes suggest the universe is only 13.7
billion years old (Sky and Telescope, May, 2003). For our general
purposes, however, the relative size of the map or age of the universe
will not affect our discussion or understanding of the model (the
geometric relationships of a sphere are not affected by variations in
size). Where it does matter, we use the new values.
The map consists of 14 concentric, evenly spaced circles which
represent the increasing spatial volume of a uniformly expanding
universe at billion-year time intervals. The map implies the validity
4 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

of the modern notion that spacetime is not a void which preexisted
the Big Bang, but is itself a product of the Big Bang. In this
representation, the 3 spatial dimensions have been compressed into 1,
hence the line of any circle contains all of the space of the universe at
the particular historical moment indicated by its intersection with the
time line. The center of the circles represents the Big Bang, or "time
zero", and the outermost circle represents the spatial volume of the
present-day universe. The circular shape of each space line represents
an isometric time curve, that is, all the space in the line is of the same
age, as it is equidistant from the Big Bang, the center of the diagram.
The shape of the map does not reflect the physical shape of the
universe, but indicates instead its uniform age and finite size. Only
the (presumed) fact that the universe had a specific and point-like
beginning in space and time allows us to construct a map of this type.
An important consequence of our common beginning in the Big Bang
is that, on large scales, all galaxies/observers in the cosmos are the
same age, all are "entangled" quantum mechanically, and
observational relationships are reciprocal in character (we see them
as they see us).
The time dimension is the radius of the diagram and controls the
development of the map. Uniform intervals between spatial circles
indicate an even flow of time. Any number of radii could be drawn
from the center of the diagram through the spatial circles, like spokes
from a hub, to represent the time lines of other observers in galaxies
distant from our own. The map represents the Einsteinian connection
between time and space in three ways: 1) the time dimension is
constructed at right angles to all three spatial dimensions
simultaneously; 2) the spatial dimensions are measured in units of
light years; 3) time and space are linked by the geometry of the map
as the radius and circumference of a circle. Because this latter
relationship is linear, the map represents only the change in the cube
root of the volume of the universe per unit of time.
From the viewpoint of any observer, 3/4 of Fig. 1 is imaginary: as I
have drawn the map, only the upper left quadrant is "real". There are
two reasons for the large, imaginary map area: the asymmetry of the
5 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

time dimension and mapping artifact. Because time runs in one
direction, only the left or right hemisphere of Fig. 1 can be real.
Secondly, because the lines of the circles contain all three spatial
dimensions, either the upper or lower quadrant of the remaining
hemisphere is redundant. (The right angle between increasing space
and increasing time can be constructed either "above" or "below" the
time line.) We are left with a map more nearly resembling the
textbook 2-axis diagrams of spacetime. Nevertheless, I will continue
to refer to the full figure because: 1) its full symmetry is helpful to
generate and analyze the "real" portions of the map; 2) the full figure
is more easily visualized; 3) it is helpful to understand the
orientations of the space and time lines of other, distant observers
(whose "real" map quadrants partially or wholly overlap our
"imaginary" map quadrants).
Figure 1 is strictly appropriate only for a universe composed entirely
of light. The map shows a universe whose radius in light years is
equal to its age, indicating expansion at the maximum possible rate.
The spatial circles are evenly spaced and the map is flat, illustrating
an historically uniform rate of expansion. If we want our map to
represent a universe containing matter, then we must show a
gravitational deceleration of the expansion, that is, a reduced volume
increment per unit of time. We can indicate a deceleration by bending
the time line out of the plane of the paper (or bending the paper itself,
either toward or away from the reader), producing a curved map. In a
curved map, while the actual length of any time line increment
remains constant, its effective length as the controlling radius of the
map is shortened, reducing the rate of growth of the spatial circles.
The greater the gravitational deceleration, the greater the curvature of
the map and the more strongly the growth of the spatial circles is
suppressed. A change in the degree of curvature represents a change
in the rate of deceleration. If the curvature of the map is great
enough, it will begin to form a sphere, grow to the region of its
"equator", and continuing beyond, start to shrink in size, allowing us
to portray a contracting universe. Time does not "flow backwards" in
this spherical representation, its forward motion simply drives a
6 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

shrinking rather than expanding universe.
A gravitationally curved (or "closed") spherical map is simple to
visualize as an overlay on a globe of the Earth. Place the Big Bang
origin at the north pole, and the two major space and time axes
become lines of longitude 90 degrees apart. The spacetime arcs
between them consequently become "parallels of latitude" connecting
the two longitude axes. As the longitude axes flow over the globe
toward the equator, they gradually become parallel lines, "pulled
together" by the contracting "parallels of latitude" as they approach
the equator. Flowing past the equator, the longitude axes of space and
time converge at the south pole, in the "Big Crunch" of a "closed"
universe. Thus while the mathematics of "curved" (accelerated)
metric surfaces may be obtuse (General Relativity), visualizing the
result is not difficult, at least in simple cases. Everything we have
said about the flat map may be overlaid upon an (appropriately)
curved surface - at least in our imagination: transposing a flat map to
a curved surface (or vice versa) cannot be done directly and requires
special mathematical techniques.
The actual configuration of a gravitationally curved map should not
be spherical, but egg-shaped or ovoid, with the poles on the ends of
the oval. The ovoid shape reflects changes in the rate of expansion
and contraction, changes which are greatest near the "Big Bang" and
"Big Crunch", the "time poles" of the universe, where the spatial
volume of the cosmos is the smallest and the gravitational energy is
therefore the most concentrated and effective.
For a "closed" universe, which collapses, the full globe shape applies;
for an "open" universe, one which expands forever, the appropriate
shape is that of a widely flaring bell, gradually opening to a nearly
flat rim. The third possibility is that of a universe balanced between
the open and closed situations, barely changing as time passes. A
map of the latter condition would look something like half of a large
egg, continued indefinitely beyond its "equator" as a cylinder. (Recall
that, as in the flat map, only one quadrant of the curved maps is real).
To facilitate our discussion, I will not refer to any of these curved
7 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

forms, but only to the flat map of Fig. 1. Anything said about the flat
map can be converted to a curved figure by projecting or overlaying
the flat map onto the appropriate 3-dimensional form. (Furthermore,
all actual observations indicate the flat map is the appropriate shape
anyway. Later, we will see why this is to be expected, and it is not
necessarily because of "inflation".)
The Observer's Perspective
The present position of the Earth is indicated on the map by the dot at
position "A" on the outermost circle (at the scale of the map, this dot
is very much larger than our entire galaxy). Our view of the universe
is from the perspective of the outermost circle, the very edge of the
cosmos, looking back in time toward the center of the universe, its
beginning in the Big Bang. Observers elsewhere in the universe must
see the cosmos from the same perspective, and hence must also be
situated on the outermost circle. (All observers live in their own
"present moment", which, because we were all born together in the
Big Bang, is exactly the same age as our own present moment - the
same distance in spacetime from the origin of the cosmos or the
center of our diagram.) The "edge of the universe" is not somewhere
"out there in space", but is (for us) here and now on planet earth,
which is at the furthermost possible remove in spacetime from the
Big Bang. What is "out there in space" is the Big Bang itself, the
spacetime center of the cosmos, a small beginning which nevertheless
observationally surrounds us completely, and which we look toward
in every direction as we look outward into space and backward into
the past.
The "shape" of the universe is a four-dimensional concept, involving
time as well as space. This "shape" is the sum total of the "present
moment" as it is realized throughout the spatial volume of the cosmos
(the outermost circle). If light had an infinite velocity, this is the
universe we would see. This "shape" changes constantly due to the
passage of time, the intrinsic motion of light, and the influence of
gravity. The outermost circle of the map represents this instantaneous
shape, which because of the combined intrinsic motions of time,
8 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

light, and gravity is really a "happening" and not a fixed shape at all.
At the grand scale of the map, of course, this moving boundary is
relatively stationary.
From the Earth's position on the outer circle, I have constructed an
interior circle which has the time line as its diameter. I call this
interior circle the "observer's circle", or "light line" (= past "light
cone"). (For the present, the reader should ignore the second interior
circle constructed from B). The observer's circle is the path of all
light rays between Earth and the Big Bang; all that we can see of our
universe lies on this line (recall that due to the dimensional
compression of the map, the light line corresponds to our full 360
degree view of the heavens in ordinary space and experience).
The observer's circle is one-way, consisting of the paths of light rays
received, not sent, by the Earth. Light rays sent from the Earth (or
any other source), always move within the (current) outermost spatial
circle, and their paths trace out the observer's circles of the positions
which receive them. For example, the paths of light rays sent from
Earth 4 billion years ago (arc A'B) to another observer who is now 4
billion light years distant, and the reciprocal exchange (arc B'A), are
shown. These light paths result from the combined action of 2
intrinsic motions: the arc A'B, for instance, is the trace of: 1) the
upward motion (with respect to the map) of the light ray as it moves
within its current space line from A' toward B; 2) the radial, outward
motion of that space line as it ages 4 billion years.
The observer's circle is constructed by drawing tangent lines from the
Earth's present position to each of the interior spatial circles, then
connecting the points of tangency. The reader may verify, with a
straightedge, that these tangent points all lie on a circle which has
earth's time line as its diameter. For the sake of clarity, only the
tangent lines from Earth and observer "B" to the 10-billion-year
spatial circle are included in the diagram.
What is the rationale for our method of constructing the observer's
circle? The mapping problem to be solved is to determine the path of
a light ray coming from the Big Bang (or any other part of the visible
9 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

universe) as it is seen from Earth today. To do this we must
understand how we see our universe when we look outward into
space, then translate this understanding into a mapping procedure.
Any observer of the universe may be considered to occupy the center
of an infinite set of nested, concentric, spherical observational shells.
An observational shell is the 2-dimensional inner surface of a hollow
sphere whose radius is determined by the depth of the observer's view
into space. The observer sees the universe as a coherent, concentric,
3-dimensional nested stack of these shells. These shells are 2-D
spatial subsets of the universe as it existed at a particular earlier
moment in its 4-D history. They are unique to every observer's view.
The chief mapping significance of the shells is that they are
2-dimensional surfaces. Because a 3-dimensional volume is
represented in our map as a 1-dimensional line, a 2-D surface must be
mapped as a zero-D point.
An observational shell of appropriate radius from Earth must
intersect each of the interior spatial circles of the map (since we can
see all the way to the Big Bang); our task is to find the geometric
principle which allows us to identify these points of intersection.
Connecting these points from the edge to the center of the map will
represent the light path in question. Because the light line must
intersect each space line at only a single dimensionless point (from
the argument given above), there are just two possible geometric
construction procedures which yield solutions to the problem, one of
which produces the time line. We cannot see our own past, so the
time line is obviously not the solution we seek. The only other
possibility is the points of tangency, and it is these which I have used
to define the light path of the observer's circle.
Readers should try to generate the following mental pictures to verify
for themselves the intuitive logic of the preceding discussion:
imagine looking out in space to the distance of our Moon. Imagine
the complete observational shell that surrounds the Earth at this
distance: a 2-dimensional spherical shell of radius (approximately)
240,000 miles, or about 1 1/3 light seconds. This particular
10 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

observational shell is a 2-D spatial subset of the entire universe as it
existed 1 1/3 seconds ago, but the only part of that past universe we
can see is the slice that contains our Moon. Now repeat this
imaginary flight to the larger observational shell that contains our
Sun, which is a 2-D spatial subset of our entire universe as it existed
about 8 minutes ago (the Sun being 8 light-minutes distant).
Although we know the entire universe existed 8 minutes ago, the only
part of it we can see as it existed then is the slice containing our Sun since no other significant objects exist to be seen at exactly this
distance. Finally, imagine the huge observational shell that cuts
through our neighboring galaxy, Andromeda, at a distance of about
2.2 million light years. The Andromeda stars intersected by this large
observational shell are the only objects we can see in the entire
universe as it existed exactly 2.2 million years ago. Other visible
objects are part of either younger or older historical subsets of our
universe. (In all cases I have assumed that the remainder of these
shells cut through empty space). Note that, in principle, we can make
the "time thickness" (ct) of these shells as thick or as thin as we wish,
right down to a true 2-D surface.
The exercise above demonstrates that we never see all of our universe
as it existed at a single, past, historical instant of time, just as we
cannot see all of the universe as it exists "now". Rather, we see
successively larger, older, and always different portions of it in
spacetime shells which recede further into the past as we look deeper
into space. Each shell is a 2-dimensional surface which just "touches"
the 3-D volume of its historically associated (isometric or even-aged)
universe. It should be intuitively clear that these 2-D surface
"touches" are simply the higher dimensional analogs of the tangent
points on the spatial circles of the map. It is only the combined
thickness of an infinity of such shells that gives us the impression of
seeing spatial volume (recall that light is a 2-D transverse wave
whose intrinsic (entropic) motion "sweeps out" a third (historical)
spatial dimension). The observational shells become very small as we
approach Earth, finally reducing to the size of our own bodies. We
see practically nothing of the universe as it exists "now".
11 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

Our "processional" view of the cosmos is realized on the map in the
following way: as the spatial circles shrink toward the Big Bang, the
observer's circle intersects them at progressively higher positions on
their real quadrant arcs. No two spatial circles are seen at the same
relative point on their circumferences. The necessity for this
arrangement becomes obvious when we recall that each spatial circle
contains the whole universe at a given time; if we are not to see
objects in two or more positions at once, we must view these
universes in a sequential spatial as well as temporal progression
(contrast the path of the time line in this regard - this is why we
cannot see our own past). Gravitational lensing is the exception
which proves this rule, dramatically illustrating the structural
connection between metric spacetime and the path of light. What we
see in the heavens is only a "light show"; the actual solid bodies all
exist in the outermost spatial circle, the invisible spacetime
dimension of the "universal now". The fact that the light line cuts the
spatial circles in exactly this orderly, sequential way is one indication
that the map's geometry is valid.
Note in this regard that the more distant a galaxy or region of
spacetime is from us today, the greater must have been its original
separation from our own position (during and just after the
"recombination event" of the "Big Bang"). Thinking in terms of
divergent velocity vectors (as we are always tempted to do by virtue
of our usual conception of explosive dynamics) doesn't work, since
the recessional velocity of galaxies depends only on the amount of
spacetime between us and them, never on their direction. Some
portions of these earlier universes were, of course, near neighbors
right from the beginning - Andromeda and our "local group", for
example - close enough to become gravitationally coherent. Within
the line of any given spatial circle of the map, our neighbors are
located near earth's timeline; distant galaxies are located nearer the
"spatial limit" line.
Because the time line is: 1) the radius of the outermost space line; 2)
the diameter of the observer's circle; it follows by simple geometry
that, within the map's real quadrant, the outermost space line and the
12 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

observer's circle are equal in length. I interpret this to mean that the
universe we see, even though it is a composite view of many earlier
universes, is of the same spatial volume as the universe of the present
day, which we cannot see. We do see portions of the whole universe,
but (like our own history) only as a fleeting parade, for the most part
well-ordered in time as well as in space (excepting gravitational
lenses). Although the observer's circle was not constructed to
represent space, it has space-like properties since it is composed of an
infinite series of nested 2-D concentric spherical surfaces. In
aggregate, these nested surfaces form the bulk "electromagnetic
volume" of the visible universe, which, together with the much larger
invisible universe, comprise an historical reservoir of light,
gravitation, and information: matter's "causal matrix". Every event
which has ever occurred in spacetime is stored as light and as a
causal history within this 4-dimensional volume of historic
spacetime. (See: "Introduction to Entropy".)
The map shows a second observer's circle. The second observer (B) is
situated (presently) 4 billion light years from Earth. We find B's map
position, as seen from Earth, by counting back 4 billion years along
Earth's time line, then following that spatial circle out to its
intersection with Earth's observer's circle; their point of intersection
represents our entire observational shell at that distance. We find the
second observer's present position in space by constructing B's time
line from the Big Bang to B's observed position and extending that
time line to the outer spatial circle (this procedure assumes the
second observer is not in significant "peculiar" motion with respect to
Earth). When we construct B's observer's circle, we find that it
intersects Earth's time line just 4 billion years in our past, as it should.
This observational reciprocity between A and B is crucial further
evidence validating our geometric mapping method.
(Note that only the area between the time lines of A and B is a valid
map of the simultaneous view of both observers - see appendix. Note
also that the half-circle of B's light line above B's time line is
superfluous (not real); likewise, the half-circle of Earth's light line
below Earth's time line is superfluous. Finally, the space line for B is
13 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

not shown; it would have to be constructed (at right angles to B's time
line and below Earth's time line), from the Big Bang to the outermost
circle, meeting the perimeter below Earth's position.)
Reality and the Map
One of the striking features of the map is that it exhibits several
different kinds of reality. For example, the Earth's observer's circle
(light line) is what we usually think of as the "real world"; it is what
we can see of our universe, and it is the path of massless energy
forms which travel to us with intrinsic spatial motion "c"
(electromagnetic radiation, gravity). Nevertheless, this line is clearly
composed of nothing more than an ordered sequence of observational
shells, defining a particular subset of the universe's history that is
unique to Earth observers. There are in fact no material objects in this
reality at all - they are all forms of light. We might call this reality the
"visible past". Only a fleeting portion of our time line is visible to
other observers, and conversely, we can only glimpse a fleeting
portion of theirs.
The time line of the Earth is another sort of reality. It is the historical
path along which the Earth and other massive objects (humans, our
galaxy) travel, objects which have intrinsic motion in time, not space
(see: "The Time Train"). Although we cannot see our own past
(except in mirrors), observers elsewhere in the universe can see some
part of it, and influence certainly travels to them and to us from our
past (part of the "causal matrix" of all bound energy forms). What we
may refer to as our own "historic past" is part of the "visible past" of
some other observer, and vice-versa, confirming the continuing
reality of our causal history, even though it is quite invisible to us.
Still a third type of reality is illustrated by the outermost line of the
present spatial surface of the universe. This represents a sort of
"universal present moment" in which we continuously participate. We
receive influence from this sector of the cosmos only by touch, for
this part of the cosmos contains all material objects. We encounter
them only in the present moment when we physically touch them.
14 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

This is the part of the universe into which we send light signals,
rather than receive them. (B's observer's circle is the trace of a light
ray sent from Earth 4 billion years ago; it was invisible to us during
its entire trip and its arrival "today" in B's "universal now" will not be
seen (by us) for another 4 billion years.) Light travels always in the
"present moment" of the "universal now" (light's "clock" is stopped).
Even though we see the light from the ancient history of distant
galaxies, we see that light only in our portion of the "universal now",
our personal "present moment".
A fourth type of reality is a composite, the triple intersection of time,
space, and light, the reality of the observer's present moment. Our
own present is unique in that it is the only type of reality in which we
can both generate and receive influence. It is in the present moment
that we receive effects from our historical past (consequences,
"karma"), and produce causes for our future. Here we also receive
influences from the light universe (information, gravitation, energy)
and send signals into it (communications); finally it is also here that
we physically contact and rearrange the present material universe in
our interactions with other physical bodies.
The hemispherical area between our light line and time line is an area
of spacetime (physically real) which consists of our "causal past", the
domain of our own "causal matrix". For us, it contains all the history
of the universe that we could potentially have interacted with
(two-way interactions) if we had been there from the moment of the
Big Bang onward to the present day. It is invisible to us now, but for
others in the universe, all of it is in someone's light line, or "visible
past", still sending influence and information. It contacts us through
our light and time line, its upper and lower bounding surfaces, and
through the triple intersection of time, space, and light which
constitutes our experience of the "Universal Present Moment".
However, one-way exchanges of light rays outside this area are
possible, as is demonstrated by the reciprocal but one-way exchange
of light rays between A and B, separated by 4 billion light years of
spacetime.

15 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

The area shaped like a cornucopia between our light line and the
outermost spatial surface is for us a "manifest future", already formed
and quite real, of all events we will be able to see and receive
influence from that have occurred from the Big Bang to the present
moment, but whose light has not yet reached us. Both our "causal
past" (below the light line) and our "manifest future" (above the light
line) are (partly) in the real light line of some observer elsewhere on
the outermost spatial surface, the universal "present moment" (note
B's light line, for example). Simple geometry proves that these two
areas ("causal past" and "manifest future") are equal in size (area) and
must always remain so. The necessary reciprocity between all
observers is the intuitive basis for this result (as we see them in their
past, just so must they see us in our past).
Another way to state this necessary reciprocity is the realization that
if we see B four billion years in his past, then there already exists, for
B, a future of equal length (the last four billion years of our history)
which will eventually be revealed to him; and vice-versa. Hence the
light line must split the map into equal areas of past and future, and
the observer's circle is the shortest line which can accomplish this
feat. Since light always travels the shortest path between two points,
the observer's circle is the only line which can possibly represent the
path of light between Earth and the Big Bang. Note that this evidence
for the validity of the observer's circle as the true path of light is
independent of the others given; it also provides a helpful criterion
for the construction of the light line in the more geometrically
complex gravitational models.
It is even possible to see our own past; we do so every time we look
in a mirror. If we could look into a giant mirror in the Andromeda
galaxy with a telescope, we would see the Earth as they saw us 2.2
million years ago, that is, 4.4 million years in our past!
The area above and below our light line is a 5th spacetime dimension
composed of the summation of all light lines of all possible observers
in the universe; in a real sense it is our light line "squared". Hence our
universe is actually 5-dimensional, with past, present, and future
16 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

spacetime ("bulk" spacetime) forming a 5th, large, (mostly) invisible
spacetime dimension hidden beneath our noses. (See the further
discussion of this idea in: "The "Spacetime Map" as a Model of a
5-Dimensional Holographic universe".) The fact that we see distant
galaxies where they were, not where they are, demonstrates the
existence of this 5th spacetime dimension, which resides (partly) in
the invisible gap between where galaxies are "now", and where we
actually see them.
The great historical body of the universe (historic spacetime) is the
conservation domain and repository of matter's "causal matrix"; not
just our own, but of all bound energy forms in the universe. This area
(the bulk of the real surface area of the diagram both above and
below Earth's light line, mostly invisible to us) is the causal domain
or 5th dimension of spacetime, an area which must remain real
because all of it is in some observer's light line or "active past" (or
could be), and all of it continues to exert influence on various parts of
the universe through the long-range effects of gravitation,
electromagnetism, quantum entanglement, information, and other
propagating physical, causal, and temporal linkages. (Because the
historical/spatial gap between us and all distant galaxies apparently
contains an extra full set of our usual 4 large dimensions, there is
some reason to wonder if our universe actually has 8 (or 9)
dimensions rather than 4 or 5.)
Once an object enters the domain of our historic past, passing through
the nexus of our present moment (where two-way interaction is
possible), we are causally connected with that object, and therefore
its associated universe can never disappear entirely from our light
line, which bounds the area of our historic causal matrix. For
example, Julius Caesar is causally connected with us historically, and
stars 2,050 light years away, which are part of his associated
universe, are obviously readily visible to us; moreover, we will
forever remain able to see some part of his associated universe. The
extension of this idea also means that we are causally connected,
through our historic past, to every star and galaxy we can see in our
light line, no matter how distant, because if for no other reason, we
17 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

were all born together in the Big Bang, and we all passed together
through the long plasma era of thermal equilibrium, mutual
interaction, and causal entanglement.
The dismal notion that the future universe will, due to its continued
expansion or even accelerated expansion, become "empty" and lonely
is only partially true. It may certainly become more redshifted, but it
will never become completely invisible, as causal connections, once
formed, cannot be broken. Furthermore, our "naked eye" universe, to
which we are gravitationally bound (our galaxy and its "local
group"), will not change due to future cosmological expansion. We
will always have many hundreds of billions of stars for nearby
companions. (We should not worry too much about the fate of the
human species a billion or more years from now; in that length of
time evolution will have changed us unrecognizably - if any of our
descendants still exist. Recall that a billion years ago our
predecessors and relatives were still single cells.)
The Cosmological Expansion of Spacetime
The expansion of the cosmos from the moment of the Big Bang until
"recombination" - when free electrons could take up orbits around
protons and the cosmos was cool enough to change from an optically
opaque ionized plasma to an optically transparent and electrically
neutral gas - this early period of expansion was driven entirely by the
primordial entropy drive of light (an entropic expansion which
continues to this day). The expansion and cooling of spacetime is the
result of the intrinsic motion of light, which is the primordial entropy
drive of free energy. The intrinsic motion of light creates, expands,
and hence cools spacetime. During the plasma phase of the cosmos, a
period of approximately three or four hundred thousand years,
photons outnumbered particles (protons, electrons, helium nuclei) by
a factor of (about) ten billion to one - the plasma was
overwhelmingly photons, which is why it was able to expand and
become our universe rather than collapsing immediately in a black
hole. (See: The First Three Minutes by Steven Weinberg).

18 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

The matter and radiation of the plasma era were in thermal
equilibrium - they interacted freely and constantly, the matter was as
hot and energetic as the photons, moving at nearly velocity c. The
motion of the particles themselves was completely random and hence
could have no net movement other than a uniform expansion, driven
by the intrinsic motion of light. The particles were driven apart from
each other because they were coupled to the one-way (expansive) and
constant (entropic) intrinsic motion of light, which also caused an
expansion of the space between them. Because the particles were
coupled with light during the plasma era (due to their electric
charges), they behaved like the light, moving apart from each other
with the entropy driven expansion of the spatial universe. The
entropic motion of free energy (light) was transferred to bound
energy (particles) via the coupling between light and matter's electric
charges. There was negligible gravitational coupling between
particles during the plasma era as the kinetic energy and momentum
of the particles was much too great.
What is the "Big Bang" expanding into, if not pre-existing space? The
expansion is into the energy-conserving combined entropy domain of
free and bound electromagnetic energy: historic spacetime. Both
light and matter have intrinsic (entropic) motion within this entropic
domain, motions that both create the spatial and temporal dimensions
of our familiar universe and simultaneously establish the foundations
of energy conservation for both free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy. Consequently, we find ourselves living in a
cosmos with an expanding spatial horizon and a moving historical
dimension, accommodating the disparate energy conservation
requirements of both light and matter.
The "Hubble Flow"
The consequence of this contest between two entropy drives, one of
free energy (light's intrinsic motion and the expansion of space) and
one of bound energy (gravity, time, and the expansion of history), is
the standard model of spacetime expansion, in which discreet
gravitationally bound clumps are embedded in a spacetime which
19 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

expands (and cools) in every direction around them, giving observers
everywhere the visual impression of galaxies receding from them in a
spherical halo with an increasing velocity proportional to their
distance (the "Hubble flow"). One addition my Spacetime Map makes
to this standard view (besides the "light line" and the suggestions
above), is to fix our position as an observer (and the position of every
observer) at the furthermost "edge" of the cosmos (in the "universal
present moment"), looking back in spacetime toward a center (the
Big Bang) which completely surrounds us despite the fact that the
universe becomes progressively younger and hence smaller as we
look outward in space. It is just this difference in the size of the
nested set of ever smaller universes we observe that produces the
cosmological "redshift" of the receding galaxies.
Another factor contributing to the observational effect of the
symmetric distribution in space of all receding galaxies is that the
universe can have no visible spatial "edge", because all of space is
contained within it (a "3-sphere"). There is no space outside it into
which we can look. When we try to look "to the edge of the
universe", which people (including many astronomers), generally
seem to think is somewhere "out there" in deep space, we can only
look backward in time toward the spacetime center and beginning of
the universe (the Big Bang), which, paradoxically enough,
completely surrounds us (at least visually). Since we can only look
toward the center of the universe into more space, we, and all other
observers, can only see a symmetric dispersion of galaxies in every
direction (the consequence of the entropic dispersion of the
primordial "gas"). All observers are receding from the central
spacetime event of the Big Bang with the same velocity in time - all
observers in the universe necessarily exist in a region of spacetime on
its expanding edge which is exactly as old as the universe itself, and
all see the universe as we do. The linkage between the spatial and
temporal dimensions of the cosmos cannot be decoupled from the
perspective of any material observer.
The "edge" of the universe, like its center, is 4-dimensional in
spacetime, not 3-dimensional in space. Thus we see the center when
20 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

we look outward but only backward (in time) to the Big Bang, and
the "edge" when we try to look forward (in time) of our present
spacetime position into the future, and discover we cannot. The
anticipated blackness beyond the "edge" of spacetime is the blackness
of the unknowable future. Our present position in spacetime is on the
"edge" of the 4-dimensional universe, where we coexist with all other
observers in the universal "now", and uniformly move with them into
the future. It is the arrow of time, and the very curious fact that the
universe has an actual beginning (apparently correctly intuited by
every early indigenous society as expressed through "creation
myths"), that allows us to discover our orientation in the otherwise
confusingly symmetric domain of space. While in spatial terms our
view of the heavens is symmetric and "static" (due to scale), in
temporal terms we find a definite sense of asymmetry, direction, and
motion. When we look forward into the future we look into the
blackness of "no space" beyond the "present moment" edge of the
cosmos, while behind us in the past lie all the galaxies, those nearby
(gravitationally bound) hardly moving at all, those further away (in
every direction) receding faster and faster, their recessional velocity
proportional to the amount of expanding spacetime between us and
them. Such is the view from the bridge of "Spaceship Earth", as we
all move in time at metrically equivalent light speed toward an
unknown, invisible, and (partially) unformed tomorrow.
It must be clearly understood that the observed symmetric dispersion
and recessional velocity of the distant galaxies is not simply a
perceptual consequence of our fortuitous position on the furthermost
spacetime edge of the universe. Our view of the universe (and that of
all material observers) is constrained by the metric relationship
between time, space, light, and matter, including the fact that matter
(including material observers such as ourselves) moves with an
intrinsic motion in time which is the metric equivalent of light's
intrinsic motion in space. We do not see objects in space; we see
lights in spacetime (the multiple images produced by gravitational
lensing demonstrates this point). The Spacetime Map emphasizes the
difference between "being" and "seeing". We don't have a choice
regarding how we do either one. The seemingly arbitrary constraints
21 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

placed by the map upon our view of the cosmos are due to this metric
(and gravitational) regulation of light, time, matter, and the spatial
dimensions which their primordial entropy drives ("intrinsic
motions") force upon us.
The surface on which the map is drawn represents the entropy
parameter of historic spacetime, the entropy "dimension" into which
light and time expand, cool, age, and become diluted. The entropy
parameter is realized through the three "intrinsic" motions of free and
bound forms of electromagnetic energy: the intrinsic spatial motion
of light, the intrinsic historical motion of matter, and mediating
between them (converting either into the other), the intrinsic
spacetime motion of gravity.
The iron linkage between time, space, light, and matter established by
the electromagnetic metric of spacetime as "gauged" or regulated by
"velocity c", means that the intrinsic motion of massive objects in
time (such as galaxies) is metrically equivalent to the velocity of
massless light. These intrinsic motions (c, t) are the primordial
entropy drives of free and bound electromagnetic energy,
respectively. This metric equivalence is regulated by the
electromagnetic constant c, and is a necessary basis for energy
conservation in interactions between light and matter within their
shared dimensional domain of spacetime. Gravity "warps" the local
metric near massive objects, favoring time over space, but the full
global extent of the gravitational influence upon cosmic expansion
remains unknown and controversial. (See: "A Description of
Gravity".) The map reflects this metric equivalency by according
space and time equal mapping parameters at right angles to each
other, mapping "t" against "ct". We are aware of our temporal motion
but not our spatial motion, whereas light's "clock is stopped" and
light is "aware" of only its spatial motion. The map "works" because
it reflects the natural relationship between time, space, light, and
matter established by the electromagnetic constant c as the spacetime
metric, in which "velocity t" of massive historical objects (bound
electromagnetic energy) is recognized as the metric equivalent of
"velocity c" of massless spatial energy forms (free electromagnetic
22 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

energy).
Conclusion
Having addressed our original question concerning the construction
of a map of the universe, we can now orient ourselves with respect to
our position in, and view of, the cosmos.
We live on the edge of the cosmos in the "Universal Present
Moment" of spacetime, as do all other material observers. As we look
outward in space, we look in every direction backward in time toward
the center of our cosmos, its beginning in the "Big Bang". We cannot
see beyond the spacetime edge of our universe into the future, nor
beyond its center into a past preceding its origin.
Neither space nor time can be seen in their pure forms, for otherwise
we could see the present spatial universe and our own past. We see
only light, an electromagnetic vibration of spacetime, whose finite
velocity constrains our view to a personally unique sequence of
spherical spacetime shells receding to the "Big Bang". We are
fortunate, nevertheless, to be able to see a sample of the
developmental history of our universe, as this information will
ultimately be more important for our understanding of the cosmos
than a complete view of its present state.
[For a corresponding diagram and text of relativistic time dilation as
it affects our view of very distant galaxies, see: Dr. Richard D.
Stafford's "Spacetime Map".]
Appendix: Mapping Artifacts
Due to their inappropriate topology, and the loss of a single spatial
dimension, flat maps of the whole Earth contain discrepancies of
representation called "mapping artifacts": the poles are stretched into
lines, Greenland is disproportionately large, the eastern and western
hemispheres do not join, etc. Due to the loss of 2 spatial dimensions,
our spacetime map contains even more severe mapping artifacts (the
23 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

"spatial limit" line, for example). The most obvious problem was
emphasized early in this article: the universe does not "look like" the
map. Four other artifacts, some already mentioned, are discussed
below:
1) Because of the joint effects of the one-way flow of time and the
loss of 2 spatial dimensions, only one quadrant of the full circular
map can be real for a specified observer. Furthermore, the map is
strictly valid from the viewpoint of only one observer at a time. If
interactions between two observers are considered, only the area
between them (their "shared angle") is a valid map of what both see.
The simultaneous view of three observers cannot be represented at
all. (I am speaking here of observers widely separated on
astronomical scales of distance.) The crux of the problem is that
increasing distance from an observer must be represented only in one
mapping direction; to do otherwise would recognize positive and
negative spatial volumes. When a second observer is placed on the
map, the same distance rule must be applied, but the direction of
increasing distance for the second observer can only be back toward
the first, because the observers must appear in each other's view of
the cosmos. Hence regions of the map which do not lie between the
two observers are excluded from mutual mapping interactions (such
as the joint sighting of a third external position), because such
positions must lie in the "negative space" of one or the other observer.
Although the full symmetry of the spatial circles generates the map
conceptually, once we specify the position of the primary observer,
3/4 of the map immediately becomes unreal. However, the full
circular map symmetry is appropriate for a universe composed only
of light, because without the presence of matter it would be quite
impossible to choose a specific point of reference on the outer circle
from which to orient either time or distance. We can therefore think
of the quartered (and curved) map as reflecting the broken symmetry
of spacetime occasioned by the presence of matter, and the fully
symmetric (and flat) map as representing the primordial generative
form.

24 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

2) If we construct time lines from the Big Bang through all the
intersections of the Earth's observer's circle with the 14 inner spatial
circles, and project these time lines to present-day positions on the
outer circle, we find that although these positions are separated by
equal increments of time, they are not separated by equal distances on
the outer circle. The unequal spacing is a consequence of the
decreasing size of the inner spatial circles, and reflects the fact that
objects were closer together in the early universe. Projecting these
positions to the outer spatial circle produces a mapping artifact
analogous to (but even worse than) that causing Greenland to appear
inappropriately large on flat maps of the Earth.
3) As we look outward in space, the surface area of our observational
shell (the total area of observed sky at a particular distance) increases
as the square of the radius of our depth of view. This increase in area
is not reflected by the map. Because the observational shell is
2-dimensional, and we have lost 2 of the 3 spatial dimensions in the
map, these shells, regardless of size, appear only as the dimensionless
points of intersection of the observer's circle with the spatial circles.
4) Some readers may suppose that the arcs of the space lines and
observer's circle represent "curved space", or curved paths in space,
even in the flat map of Fig. 1. This is not the case. The space lines are
curved because they represent space of the same age (and hence the
same distance from the Big Bang point of common origin), and the
observer's circle is curved only because the space lines are curved.
"Curved" spacetime is caused by gravitation, whose effects are
illustrated by the spherical, egg, and bell-shaped maps discussed
earlier. Gravitationally "curved" or "warped" spacetime can be
represented by bending the paper upon which the map is drawn.
5) The "Redshift". Although not a mapping artifact, it seems
convenient to discuss the "redshift" in this section (and see above and
below). There are three types of "redshift": one is due to the effect of
strong gravitational fields (gravitational redshift); a second is due to
the effect of retrograde relative velocity (Doppler redshift); and a
third is due to the expansion of spacetime, the difference in size
25 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

between the universe of light's source vs the universe of light's
observer (cosmological redshift). Due to the operation of the
cosmological redshift, all distant galaxies appear "redshifted" in
proportion to their distance: the greater their distance, the smaller the
size of the universe in which we see them as compared to our own,
and hence the greater their redshift. From the redshift observations of
distant galaxies, first attributed to Vesto Slipher, Edwin Hubble, and
Milton Humason (Mt. Wilson, 1929), we have concluded that the
universe has expanded from very small beginnings to its present
immense size.
We imagine the initial ("Big Bang") expansion of light and particles
as wholly entropic, driven by the overwhelming preponderance of
photons compared to particles (in a ratio of about 10 billion to one,
the aftermath of the primordial annihilation event between matter and
antimatter). During the first three or four hundred thousand years (the
"plasma era"), photons and particles are coupled (due to the electric
charges of the particles) and in thermal equilibrium, and both expand
entropically as if the particles were also photons. After
"recombination", when atoms formed and the cosmos became
transparent to light, light and particles decoupled, but particles kept
right on dispersing entropically as before, due to the conservation of
their considerable momentum (they would otherwise have formed a
cosmic-size black hole).
Evolution has not prepared (not pre-adapted) our minds to think
about or intuit at either the microscopic scale of quantum mechanics,
or the macroscopic scale of cosmology. Consequently, all attempts to
describe the cosmological expansion of spacetime leave us (at least)
vaguely dissatisfied and we must resort to abstractions and "hand
waving". What we can say is that the process is driven by entropy in
the primordial form of the intrinsic motion of light. The standard
model of "raisins embedded in a rising bread dough" or "dots painted
on the surface of an expanding balloon" seem to be about the best we
can manage for a mental image of the process. Leaving aside (for the
moment) the speculative issue of "inflation", we note that the
expansion is (at least) 4-dimensional, taking place in one-way time as
26 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

well as 3-D space. Furthermore, the particles and photons are in
thermal equilibrium (during the "plasma era"), with the particles
moving and expanding as if they were light. From the point of view
of any one particle, wheresoever it may be situated, all other particles
will appear to be moving away from it as the entire mass expands and
disperses. And this apparent (or actual) motion will be in proportion
only to the distance between them and the observer - particles further
removed will appear to be moving away faster because there is more
intervening, expanding space. And all particles will "see" those
furthest removed from themselves as moving at (very nearly) velocity
c: all such views will be reciprocated among all particles. This is
probably the best we can manage for a visual image. It ends up today
with our (reciprocal) views of far-flung galaxies receding in
proportion to their distances, deep sunk in time because of the finite
velocity of light and the fact that they are all continuing to expand
away from us, the most distant at (nearly) velocity c. Exactly how the
galaxies and galactic clusters managed to form and cohere within this
expanding "gas" of photons and particles is still being actively
debated; it is currently thought that "dark matter" must have been
involved as gravitational "seed" material. (See: "The Origin of Matter
and Information".)
Notice that there are two effects possibly contributing to the redshift
of these distant galaxies: 1) the actual motion of the galaxy itself,
which is proportional to the amount of empty space expanding
between us and them; 2) the size difference between the present
universe and the observed universe, obviously a consequence of this
motion. In addition, there is a relativistic time dilation (and space
contraction) effect ("moving clocks run slow", etc.), as Dr. Stafford
points out, which disproportionately affects our view of the more
distant and faster-moving galaxies. Remember, however, that all such
effects are reciprocal - they see us as we see them, and therefore, in a
certain sense, "cancel out". This reciprocity also reminds us that we,
too, are participating in the spatial expansion of the cosmos, although
the red shift of the distant galaxies is the only way we discover this
fact. Our actual experience of this motion is restricted to its metric
equivalent in the temporal dimension - the march of time.
27 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

All this means the interpretation of the luminosity and redshift of
very distant galaxies and supernovas may be fraught with hidden
pitfalls and uncertainties, so we should not rush to judgment
concerning the fate of an "accelerating" universe. (The universal
expansion is in fact accelerating, as we will see later, but by how
much and why is the issue.) My plotting of the data (see graph)
suggests that the size difference parameter is the crucial factor in
determining the "redshift", summing up the effects of all other
contributing factors. (See: Delsemme pages 23 - 32); (See: "Gravity,
Entropy, and Thermodynamics".)
6) Finally, I wish to point out the remarkable fact that we are able to
construct a four-dimensional map of (flat) spacetime while still
adhering to Euclid's rules for geometric constructions, using only a
straightedge and a draftsman's compass.
Cosmological Redshift (Z) Values for the Spacetime Map
Values for the Redshift and the Hubble Constant
The redshift parameter (Z) is calculated by the procedure: wavelength
observed minus wavelength emitted, the remainder then divided by
the wavelength emitted = Z. In other words, the change in
wavelength divided by the original wavelength - the part divided by
the whole - equals Z, the redshift, the % change in wavelength. Z can
have any value from zero to infinity. The 2.7 degree Kelvin cosmic
background radiation is thought to have a Z value of about 1100.
Assuming the cosmological redshift has its origin only (or
equivalently) in the size difference between the universes of observer
and observed, we can directly calculate the redshift we "should" see
for each of the billion year intervals of the Spacetime Map, simply
substituting the map's radius in years for the wavelength of light. For
example, a very distant galaxy observed at the intersection of our
light line with the 4-billion-year spacetime arc (that is, seen when the
universe was only 4 billion years old), should have (in a 12 billion
year-old cosmos) a redshift or Z value of (12-4)/4 = 2; in a 13.7
billion year-old cosmos the equivalent calculation yields Z = 2.425.
28 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

The "Hubble Constant" (velocity of recession per unit of distance) is
the velocity required per unit of distance to collapse (or expand) the
universe in the time available (the assumed age of the universe). The
Hubble constant is calculated in this paper simply by dividing
velocity c by the size (radius or age) of the universe, then multiplying
that result by some distance unit of choice, such as a million light
years, or a megaparsec (3.26 million light years). The rationale for
this procedure is the assumption that the cosmological expansion is
primarily driven by the entropy of free energy, the intrinsic motion of
light. Therefore, our baseline or first estimate of the expansion rate is
founded upon the assumption that it converges upon velocity c.
Gravitational inputs, of course, will somewhat reduce this velocity,
"curving" the map, "warping" spacetime. Unfortunately, we do not
yet know how much gravity to add to our model - we do not know by
how much the spacetime map should be "bent". However, as these
calculated Hubble constant values for expansion at velocity c (in the
14 billion year old universe) are almost exactly the same as the recent
observational data from the NASA WMAP satellite, it appears there
is in fact very little gravitational slowing of the universal expansion,
at least currently (the Hubble "constant" changes as the universe
evolves, due to the cosmos' changing size, age, and gravitational
environment). (See Sky and Telescope May 2003 page 16). (See the
discussion in appendix point 3) (above) regarding the "flatness" of the
observed universe.)
In the table below, note that the value of Z rises sharply as the
universe becomes young and small. The deeper we look, the more the
increasing size differential between the universe of observer and
observed seems likely to complicate the interpretation of
high-redshift data. The problem is surfacing now only because the
new generation of large and space-based telescopes can, for the first
time, see into the region of "exploding" Z values.
Below I list the redshifts or Z values as calculated for universes 12
-18 billion years old, using only the billion-year integers as inputs. In
the 16 billion-year universe, recessional velocities have also been
calculated from the Z values, and are presented after the Z value in
29 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

units of thousands of kilometers per second.
For purposes of comparison, in the 15 billion year universe column
the second entry is calculated for a closed universe which at 15
billion years is halfway to its maximum expansion (designated
"closed 30", or "Zc30"); the third entry in this column is for a closed
universe ten times larger than Zc30 (designated "closed 300", or
"Zc300"). Note that the size differentials, and hence the Z values, of
these closed universes are changing much more slowly than the open
case, which has no gravitational input. Note also that it might be
difficult to distinguish between the two closed cases observationally,
at least in their present assumed early stage of development (both
only 15 billion years old). We expect observed values for our actual,
present day universe to fall between the open and closed examples. Z
values for the "closed 300" universe example will be approximately
the same (during the first 15 billion years of its development) as for a
universe which is poised between open and closed, the "critical
density" universe, which is the reason for its inclusion.
The "closed universe" entries were calculated using the relative
lengths of the "latitude" lines on a sphere with radius 30 or 300 units
(representing 30 or 300 billion light years), beginning from the zero
point, Big Bang, or "North Pole", and working "south" 15 units
toward the "equator", or region of maximum expansion (see diagram,
and the discussion of gravitationally curved 4-dimensional metric
surfaces in earlier parts of this paper).
The formula for converting Z values into velocities is (5):
{[(Z+1)sq -1] divided by [(Z+1)sq +1]} times c = recession velocity
(where sq means squared, and c is the velocity of light (300,000
km/sec)
The table assumes no gravitational input (other than "Z30" and
"Z300", see above). Gravity exactly equal to the "critical density" (a
universe balanced between open and closed) would reduce the age
associated with a given Hubble constant by about 33% (8).
30 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

Currently the best estimate for the age of the universe suggests it is
13.7 billion years old, give or take 200 million, and evidence
indicates the universe is flat and near critical density, with a Hubble
constant around 71 (plus or minus 4) kilometers per second per
megaparsec (Sky and Telescope May 2003 page 17); the observed Z
data should conform roughly to the scale listed for the 13-14 billion
year columns. However, the calculated Z values in these columns are
maximum values, as they assume uniform expansion at light speed,
without any gravitational deceleration (except "Z30" and "Z300", see
above). It is obvious that a modest gravitational input is required to
bring the bottom values of the table into reasonable agreement with
the higher observed values of Z (see the table footnotes and column
"Z300" values). First values in the table columns are interpolations.
While the approximations of the table and the data inputs are very
"rough", they are good enough to confirm that the map "works"
empirically and operationally (see graph) - it is properly constructed
in that observational data can be sensibly plotted on it, and likewise,
reasonable approximate expected values can be calculated from it.
Finally, we can fairly assume that the Map would work even better if
we knew how to "bend" it gravitationally. Note in this regard that the
value of the Hubble constant calculated for our 14 Gyr Map universe
(69.8) is almost exactly the same as the observed value (71) obtained
(at considerably greater expense) by the recent NASA WMAP
satellite (Sky and Telescope May 2003 page 17 (and see update
below)). It must be understood that the graph only intends to
demonstrate the general validity of the model and our mapping
method. It is not intended to show the finer details of Cosmic
"acceleration" or "deceleration", etc. Nevertheless, all things
considered, there is a remarkably good fit between the (averaged)
observational data and the values calculated from the bare map
parameters.
On October 4, 2012, NASA/JPL/CalTech announced the most recent
refinement to measurements of the Hubble constant obtained with the
Spitzer Space Telescope: 74.3 plus or minus 2.1 kilometers per
second per megaparsec, still in good agreement with the original
31 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

estimate calculated from my map using only its "bare" parameters,
without gravitational corrections (about 71.3 for a 13.7 Gyr Cosmos).
(UPDATE: in Oct. 2017 gravitational wave observations reported on
the internet (and in the science journal "Nature") indicated this value
should be adjusted to about 70 km per mps - again confirming the
validity of our "kitchen table" map.) (UPDATE #2: July 16, 2019
internet news reports a new study using the "helium flash" of red
giant stars as "standard candles" finds value of the Hubble Constant
to be 69.8, again essentially exactly the same as we calculate for the
14 Gyr version of our map (see table below) - confirming once more
that our flat and simple map is a valid representation of our universe at least as we observe it optically). (Citation: https://phys.org
/news/2019-07-hubble-constant-mystery-universe-expansion.html)
Redshift (Z) Values as Calculated From the Parameters of the "Spacetime Map" (no observational data)
ASSUMED AGE OF UNIVERSE
(top of table is present moment; bottom is Big Bang origin)
18 Billion
17 Billion
Year Age
Year Age
Hub. Const. Hub. Const.
= 54.3
= 57.5
km/sec/Mpc km/sec/Mpc

32 of 49

16 Billion
Year Age
Hub. Const.
= 61.1
km/sec/Mpc

15 Billion
Year Age
Hub. Const.
= 65.2
km/sec/Mpc

14 Billion
13 Billion
12 Billion
Year Age
Year Age
Year Age
Hub. Const. Hub. Const. Hub. Const.
= 69.8
= 75.2
= 81.5
km/sec/Mpc km/sec/Mpc km/sec/Mpc

Age
Bil
Yrs

Z

Age
Bil
Yrs

Z

Z=redshift;
R=recess.
Z open;
Age
Age
Age
Velocity
Z closed 30;
Bil
Bil
Bil
(1000
Z closed 300
Yrs
Yrs
Yrs
km/sec)
Zo; Zc30; Zc300
Z; R

18

0.03

17

0.03

16

0.03; 9.5

15

0.04; 0.01; 0.01

14

0.04

13

0.04

12

0.05

17

0.06

16

0.06

15

0.07; 19

14

0.07; 0.02; 0.03

13

0.08

12

.08

11

.09

16

0.13

15

0.13

14

0.14; 39

13

0.15; 0.05; 0.07

12

0.17

11

.18

10

.2

15

0.2

14

0.21

13

0.23; 61

12

0.25; 0.08; 0.12

11

0.27

10

.3

9

.33

14

0.29

13

0.31

12

0.33; 83

11

0.36; 0.12; 0.16

10

0.40

9

.44

8

.5

13

0.38

12

0.42

11

0.45; 107

10

0.50; 0.16; 0.22

9

0.56

8

.625

7

.71

12

0.5

11

0.55

10

0.6; 131

9

0.67; 0.21; 0.28

8

0.75

7

.86

6

1

11

0.64

10

0.7

9

0.78; 156

8

0.88; 0.27; 0.36

7

1.0

6

1.16

5

1.4

10

0.8

9

0.89

8

1.0; 180

7

1.14; 0.35; 0.45

6

1.33

5

1.6

4

2

9

1.0

8

1.13

7

1.29; 204

6

1.50; 0.44; 0.57

5

1.8

4

2.25

3

3

8

1.25

7

1.43

6

1.67; 226

5

2.0; 0.57; 0.72

4

2.50

3

3.33

2

5

7

1.6

6

1.8

5

2.2; 247

4

2.75; 0.73; 0.92

3

3.67

2

5.5

1

11

6

2.0

5

2.4

4

3.0; 265

3

4.0; 0.98; 1.22

2

6.0

1

12

0

--

5

2.6

4

3.25

3

4.3; 279

2

6.5; 1.41; 1.71

1

13

0

--

.

.

4

3.5

3

4.7

2

7.0; 291

1

14; 2.38; 2.82

0

--

.

.

.

.

Z

Age
Bil
Yrs

Z

Age
Bil
Yrs

Z

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

3

5.0

2

7.5

1

15.0; 298

0

--

.

.

.

.

.

..

2

8.0

1

16.0

0

--

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

1

17.0

0

--

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

0

--

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

"BIG BANG": ORIGIN OF COSMOS, TIME BEGINS
John A. Gowan 6 May 2001 Reproduction Permitted with Attribution http://www.johnagowan.org/spacetxt.html

Observational Data - Z Estimates From Various Sources - for
Comparison with Above Table of Map Calculated Entries (Gyr =
billion years age, or billion light years distance); (Note that 1+Z =
factor of expansion); (See also graph of 13.7 Gyr cosmos. The
references below are the data inputs to the graph. Observations are
grouped for cases where averages were used as inputs.)
1a) Z = 0.04 = 0.4 Gyr distant; Nature Vol. 410, 8 Mar 2001, p. 153.
1b) Z = 0.145 = 2 Gyr distant; Science Vol. 301, 29 Aug 2003,
p.1218.
1c) Z = 0.158 = 1.96 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006
page 70.
1d) Z = 0.1685 = 2 Gyr distant (Sky and Telescope July 2003 page
18).
2a) Z = 0.25 = 3Gyr distant (Sky and Telescope Dec. 2003 page 19).
3a) Z = 0.3 = 3.5 Gyr distant; Science 293(5533):1273-8 17 Aug.
2001.
3a1) Z = 0.31 = 3.4 Gyr ago; Sky and Telescope, Oct. 2007, page 21.
4a) Z = 0.5 = 5 Gyr distant; Science 293(5533):1273-8 17 Aug. 2001.
4b) Z = 0.57 = 5.5 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006 page
70.
5a) Z = 0.6 = 6 Gyr distant; Science 293(5533):1273-8 17 Aug. 2001.
5a1) Z = 0.68 = 6 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope Oct. 2006 page 22.
5a2) Z = 0.702 = 6 Gyr distant; Einstein's Telescope, Evalyn Gates,
Norton, 2010, page 155.
33 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

6a) Z = 0.8 = 7 Gyr distant; Science 11 April 2003 page 270 - 4.
6a1) Z = 0.82 = 6.8 Gyr ago; Sky and Telescope, Oct. 2007, page 21.
7a) Z = 1.0 = 8 Gyr distant. Science 293(5533):1273-8 17 Aug. 2001.
7b) Z = 1.33 = 8.9 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006 page
70.
7b1) Z = 1.4 = 9.1 Gyr distant. Sky and Telescope Nov. 2005 page 38.
7c) Z = 1.44 = 9.2 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006 page
70.
7d) Z = 1.69 = 9.8 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006 page
70.
7d1) Z = 1.7 = 10 Gyr distant (supernova); Sky and Telescope July
2001 page 20; (fits 16 bil yr. cosmos, or younger with gravity).
7d2) Z = 1.74 = 10 Gyr distant (quasar); Sky and Telescope Oct.,
2006 page 22.
8a) Z = 2.0 = 10.3 Gyr ago; Sky and Telescope, Oct. 2007, page 20.
8a1) Z = 2.01 = 10.3 Gyr distant;Sky and Telescope March 2006 page
70.
8a2) Z = 2.07 = 10.4 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006
page 70.
8b) Z = 2.15 = 11 Gyr distance (fits in 16 bil yr. cosmos; fits younger
cosmos with gravity); Sky and Telescope 103(6):19.
8c) Z = 2.515 = 11 Gyr distant; Einstein's Telescope, Evalyn Gates,
Norton, 2010, page 156.
9a) Z = 3 = 2 Gyr old universe (fits at about 3 Gyr old) (Science 23
Jan 1998 page 479).
9a1) Z = 3.16 = 11.6 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006
page 70.
9a2) Z = 3.36 = 2 Gyr old cosmos; Science 7 Nov. 2003 page 951-2.
9b) Z = 3.7 = 12.0 Gyr ago; Sky and Telescope, Oct. 2007, page 20.
34 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

9b1) Z = 4.0 = 12 Gyr distant or 11 % of present age (fits 15 bil
cosmos) (Sky and Telescope 102(3):44).
9b2) Z = 4.10 = 12.1 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006
page 70.
9b3) Z = 4.35 = 12.2 Gyr distant; http://cerncourier.com April 1,
2009 (GRB 080916c).
10a) Z = 4.75 = 12.4 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope March 2006
page 70.
11a) Z = 5.0 = 1Gyr after Big Bang (Nature Vol. 421 page 329 Jan.
23, 2003).
11a1) Z = 5.0 = 1.2 Gyr after Big Bang; Sky and Telescope, April
2006, page 20.
11b) Z = 5.576 = 12.6 Gyr distant; Einstein's Telescope, Evalyn
Gates, Norton, 2010, page 156.
11c) Z = 5.58 = 4% of age of cosmos (about 0.56 Gyr; requires
gravity to fit anywhere); Sky and Telescope 103(1):17.
12a) Z = 5.7 = 12.6 Gyr distant. Sky and Telescope Nov. 2005 page
38.
12a1) Z = 5.8 = 13 Gyr distant quasar in 14 billion year old cosmos
(fits at about 2 bil years old; better fit with gravity) (Sloan Digital Sky
Survey).
12a2) Z = 6 = 13 Gyr ago; Data from Chandra X-ray Observatory Sky and Telescope Aug. 2002.
12a3) Z = 6.2 = 12.8 Gyr ago; Sky and Telescope, Oct. 2007, page 20.
12a4) Z = 6.28 - Quasar; cosmos less than 1/7.3 present age and 800
million years old (fits at about 2 bil years old; better fit with gravity)
(Sloan Digital Sky Survey: Nature 27 June 2002 page 905).
12a5) Z = 6.29 - gamma ray burst (GRB 050904) - cosmos less than
1 Gyr old - SPACE.com 12 Sept. 2005
12a6) Z = 6.42 = 870 million years after Big Bang. Sky and
Telescope, Feb. 2005, page 19 (QSO J1148 + 5251).

35 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

12a6a) Z = 6.43 = 12.83 Gyr distant; Sky and Telescope Sept. 2009 p.
27 (CFHQS J2329-0301).
12a7) Z = 6.5 = 800 million years after the Big Bang. Sky and
Telescope, Feb. 2005, page 18.
12a8) Z = 6.65 = 0.780 Gyr after Big Bang; (requires gravity to fit
anywhere); Sky and Telescope 103(6):28.
12a9) Z = 6.7 = 12.9 Gyr distant; www.scientificblogging.com April
28, 2009 (GRB 080913).
12a9a) Z = 6.7 = 12.8 Gyr distant; Einstein's Telescope, Evalyn
Gates, Norton, 2010, page 157.
12a10) Z = 6.96 = 12.88 Gyr distant; www.scientificblogging.com
April 28, 2009 (galaxy 10k-1).
12a11) Z = 7 = 800 million year after Big Bang. Sky and Telescope,
Feb. 2005, page 19.
13a) Z = 7.6 = 650 to 800 million years after Big Bang. Sky and
Telescope, Feb. 2005, page 18.
13a1) Z = 7.9 = 650 million years after Big Bang. Sky and Telescope,
Feb. 2005, page 18.
13a2) Z = 8 = 650 million years after Big Bang. Sky and Telescope,
Feb. 2005, page 19.
13a3) Z = 8.26 = 13.1 Gyr distant; www.scientificblogging.com April
28, 2009 (GRB 090423).
14a) Z = 10 = few hundred million years after BB. Science
293(5533):1273-8 17 Aug. 2001.
14a1) Z = 10 = 500 million years after Big Bang. Sky and Telescope,
Feb. 2005, page 19.
14a2) Z = 10 = 1 Gyr after Big Bang. Science 18 Aug. 2006 page
926.
14a3) Z = 10 = 500 million years after Big Bang. Sky and Telescope,
Oct. 2007, page 16.
15a) Z = 11 or 12 = 400 million years after Big Bang. Sky and
Telescope, June, 2006, page 22. (first stars appear)
15a1) Z = 17 = 400 million years after Big Bang. Science 18 Aug.
36 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

2006 page 926.
16a) Z = 18.3 = 13.4 Gyr distant. Sky and Telescope Nov. 2005 page
38.
17) Distant supernovae are unexpectedly dim, hence more distant
(brightness/redshift); expansion rate is 15% greater now than when
universe was 1/2 its present age (data from 7 billion light year distant
supernovae) (supernova redshifts in these observations range from Z
= 0.18 - 0.83) (Science 18 Dec. 1998, page 2156). (For a transparent
discussion of the "accelerating universe" see pages 164-165 in:
Robert P. Kirshner: "The Extravagant universe". Princeton University
Press, 2002. See also: Richard Panek: "Going Over the Dark Side".
Sky and Telescope Feb. 2009, pages 22-27.)
18) Because the universe is constantly converting its original mass
into light (via nuclear fusion/fission and gravity, especially in
quasars), but no known process adds to the original mass, we expect
the total gravitational field of the universe to decrease with time
(since light moving freely in space produces no gravitational field).
Hence a small "acceleration" of the Cosmic expansion (actually a
small reduction in the rate of gravitational deceleration) is to be
expected from this mass and gravity loss. However, if the early
universe converted mass to light at a much higher rate than today
(vigorous star formation, galaxy mergers, quasar and black hole
formation, etc.), a significant reduction to the total gravitational field
during that era could result. Black holes, for example, can convert up
to 28% of a particle's rest mass into radiation as it falls toward and
through the "event horizon" - far more than the nucleosynthetic
pathway of ordinary stars. (See: Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines
Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2012 (book).)
It has been objected that the conversion of bound to free energy in
stars is not sufficient to account for the observed acceleration of the
cosmos; however, if the conversion of bound to free energy also
occurs in the non-baryonic "dark matter" presumed to be five times
more abundant than the ordinary baryonic matter of the stars, then
such universal processes, driven by the conservation of the symmetry
37 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

of free energy, whether that energy is "dark" or "light" (as demanded
by "Noether's theorem"), might well be sufficient to account for the
observed lessening of the gravitational deceleration. Evidence that
such processes are indeed occurring has recently been found: see:
Science Vol. 322, 21 Nov. 2008 page 1173; see also: Science Vol.
324, 8 May 2009 page 709. Also, the contribution from black holes
and quasars may be more significant than has been realized - since it
has only recently been discovered that supermassive black holes lie at
the centers of nearly all large galaxies (see: Science vol. 337 3 Aug.,
2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on black holes). Finally, the
existence and decay of a fourth, heavy "leptoquark" neutrino might
even account for the deceleration within the limits of "ordinary"
baryonic matter. (see: Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics).
If a "cosmological constant" is postulated as either the cause of, or a
contributing factor to, the recently observed "acceleration" of the
cosmos, it should be in the context of some conservation law or
function, such as entropy. If the "cosmological constant" were an
entropy function of the spacetime metric, causing an "intrinsic"
expansion of the metric over time, then we could more readily
understand and accept its role in the expansion of the metric during
the early moments of the "Big Bang", and its contributions to the
accelerated expansion of the cosmos in later times, as recently
observed.
19) The graph of the 13.7 Gyr cosmos demonstrates empirically that
the map is correctly constructed - observations reported in the
literature (above) fall on or between "limit lines" calculated directly
from the bare parameters of the map - as they should (see also the
table of data inputs for this graph).
Postscript: The Cosmological "Horizon" Problem (revised March
2014)
Note to readers: This postscript has been added to the original paper
in response to a recent Scientific American article in which an
inappropriate illustration of spacetime was used to demonstrate the
38 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

"cosmological horizon problem". While this postscript does directly
point up the general need for a better spacetime map, it is not
necessary to a reading of my original paper. This postscript will be
most useful to those with the Sci. Am. illustration in hand
(unfortunately, apparently not available from their website.)
The "cosmological horizon problem" consists of the notion that
widely separated regions of our universe cannot have had enough
time, given the finite velocity of light and the age of our universe, to
communicate with each other since their common origin in the Big
Bang. Although "their common origin" makes this notion seem
ludicrous on first encounter, it apparently has an observational basis,
as illustrated in a recent Scientific American article (January 1999,
vol. 280 no. 1, page 69). In this example, two galaxies, each 12
billion light years distant from Earth, but seen in opposite directions,
cannot have had enough time since the beginning of the universe to
"see" each other, since the universe is less than 24 billion years old.
This supposition, however, is at odds with data regarding the
cosmological background radiation, which is uniform to within one
part in 100,000. If widely separated regions of the universe have
never been in communication with each other, how could the great
uniformity of the background radiation, which implies a period of
general cosmic and thermal equilibrium, have been established? The
"inflation" theories of Alan Guth and others have been proposed to
resolve this paradox.
Considerations stemming from a properly constructed
four-dimensional "Spacetime Map" however, suggest the "horizon"
problem is bogus, resulting from a misinterpretation of how we see
the cosmos generally and at great depths particularly.
The Sci. Am. illustration is a typical example of this common
misperception, even among highly placed professionals. Here, the
two galaxies are shown at the "edges" of the universe, while
observers on Earth are shown at the center. This is exactly the reverse
of the actual situation: as the Spacetime Map makes clear, we view
the universe from its edge, looking backward in time toward its
39 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

center. We can only look backward in time as we look outward in
space, to a center which apparently surrounds us (at least
observationally - the background thermal radiation of the Big Bang
itself). The universe has a center in spacetime, not in space. The
spacetime center of the universe is its beginning in the Big Bang.
When we construct a geometrically correct four-dimensional
spacetime map, it at once becomes obvious that our common
perception that faraway objects lie at the "edge of the universe" is
completely wrong: we (the observers) are at the "edge" of spacetime,
since our present moment is at the furthermost remove possible in
time and space from the Big Bang (the proof of which is that we can
only look backward in time as we look outward in space). The
observed galaxies of the Sci. Am. illustration should be placed
toward the center of the universe, sunk in the past, much closer than
we in time and space to the origin of the cosmos. Placing the
observed galaxies at the edge of the universe rather than the center of
the illustration is the reason why the expansion of the universe
appears to cause the "horizon" problem, whereas in fact the
expansion solves the problem. Of course, it is impossible with the
type of diagram utilized by Sci. Am. to portray the actual
four-dimensional situation.
The relevant question is not simply how far these galaxies are from
us (which we can measure directly if we know their true luminosity),
but how far they are from each other (which we cannot directly
measure but can only infer), in their much smaller universe of 12
billion years ago, the era in which we now see them (according to the
parameters of the Sci. Am. article). The fact that these galaxies are
distant from us does not mean they are distant from each other; in
actuality, given the same angle of observed separation (in this case,
the maximum possible, 180 degrees), the further they are from us, the
closer they will be to each other, since more distant universes are
smaller.
Presumably, we know both galaxies are 12 billion light years distant
because of their comparable "redshifts". The redshift is telling us that
40 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

the spatial radius of the universe from which their light comes is
significantly smaller than our own. On principle, the light from their
smaller, early universe must nevertheless uniformly fill the larger
radius of our present-day cosmos, stretching its wavelength, which
produces the "redshift". Hence these galaxies cannot possibly be
separated from each other by 24 billion light years (as the authors
suggest), since the universe in which both reside is only about three
billion years old (if our current universe is fifteen, as the authors
assume). The perceptual paradox is that the further out into space we
look the smaller becomes the universe we actually observe (even
though our "observational shell" becomes larger).
However, if we know the redshift of the galaxies in question, and if
we know the present age of the universe, then we can at least infer
their maximum spatial separation (within their distant universe); this
separation can be (in light years) no more than the age of the universe
they inhabit. The only problem with the redshift is that it simply
gives us a ratio between sizes, not the sizes themselves. We must
know by some independent means the size of either our universe or
that of the observed universe, before we can translate the redshift
ratio to actual sizes and distances. Here we use the estimated age of
the Sci. Am. universe (15 billion years, according to the authors) and
assume it has expanded uniformly at velocity c, without taking
gravitational deceleration into account. The redshift of these galaxies
(Z = (15 - 3)/3 = 4) would have to indicate that our present universe
is 5 times larger than their own (factor of expansion = Z + 1), for this
particular choice of numbers (and assumed conditions) to agree.
Another misrepresentation in the Sci. Am. illustration which
contributes significantly to the illusion of a horizon problem is that
the Earth is shown (in the top panel) receiving light from the galaxies
as if all three were in the same present moment of our time. Clearly
this is impossible, and directly contradicts the stated conditions that
these galaxies are 12 billion light years from Earth. This explicitly
means that we see them where they were 12 billion years ago, not
where they are "now" (our present time). Where they are "now" will
not be revealed to us until 12 billion years in our future (although we
41 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

infer they are "now" somewhere on the outermost spatial circle near
the "spatial limit" line). We see them "now" in their 3 billion-year-old
universe (if ours is fifteen); hence as we see them, their maximum
spatial separation from each other is 3 billion light years, not 24. As
mentioned above, even in our present-day universe, their maximum
spatial separation can be no greater (in light years) than the current
age of our universe - 14, not 24 billion light years - resolving the
"horizon" paradox.
Thoughts About the Map and the "Horizon" Problem
A. The question of the maximum possible separation of two objects
in spacetime is most easily resolved by considering our own
situation. Assuming our universe is 14 billion years old, and has
expanded at the speed of light, we are currently 14 billion light years
from the Big Bang, the origin and center of spacetime. This is
(currently) the maximum visible separation between any two objects
in our universe - nothing can possibly be further from us than the Big
Bang and still be seen (or even be within our universe). Therefore,
the length of the time line limits the maximum separation between
objects in any of the smaller universes we observe - if they have a
time line of 3 billion years, then 3 billion light years is the
approximate maximum spatial separation between any two objects in
that universe. Hence there is always enough time in any universe for
all its constituent parts to reassemble at their point of common origin,
if they move toward each other at velocity c.
As noted earlier, all distant galaxies, wherever they may appear in our
night sky, are in fact much closer together in a younger and smaller
universe whose visual display and image (paradoxically) surrounds
us completely. It is the size difference between our current universe
and these ghostly images of earlier universes that produces the
cosmological "red shift". We live at the outermost edge of spacetime
(the oldest position) and look in every direction backward in time to
younger and smaller historical eras of our universe, as we look
outward in space to the Big Bang and the common beginning of
space, time, light, and matter.
42 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

B. Since the size of our observational shells increases with distance,
one might suppose the observed density of galaxies would decrease
with depth of view. However, the increasingly large observational
shells intersect increasingly densely populated regions of space, since
the smaller, distant universes nevertheless contain the same total
number (approximately) of galaxies as the larger, nearer ones. The
two effects counterbalance each other, so that the density of galaxies
does not appear to diminish with distance - as observed. There will,
of course, be some visible evolutionary effects, especially in the very
early universe.
The peculiar way we are forced to observe our universe - we see
successively smaller universes as we look deeper into space produces some of the observational effects and "benefits" attributed
to the "inflation" theory: specifically, the flattening of the geometry of
space while simultaneously providing a solution to the "horizon"
problem. The cosmological background radiation is thought to be
red-shifted (or "inflated") by the enormous factor of 1,100.
Apparently, it is our view of the universe that is "inflated", not the
universe itself. Since the "inflation" theory was invented specifically
to solve the horizon and flatness problems, one must wonder about
the theoretical foundations of this theory. How is the "inflation"
theory related to, or required by, the conservation laws? Is inflation a
type of entropy? Perhaps inflation is useful or necessary to the
"Multiverse" theory? (See: Paul J. Steinhardt "The Inflation Debate"
Scientific American April 2011 p. 38 - 43.)
C. The very early universe probably expanded at (slightly) less than
"c" since light (the driving force of the expansion) was in thermal
equilibrium with matter. This is the plasma period of mixing and
thermal equilibrium. Expansion at "c" probably occurred only after
"recombination", about 3 or 4 hundred thousand years after the Big
Bang. The uniformity of the cosmological background radiation, and
the symmetric distribution of galaxies, is the consequence of this long
period of thermal equilibrium, when all parts of the cosmos were in
intimate and sustained contact with each other.

43 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

D. As diagrammed in the Map, due to the finite velocity of light, in
effect we "peel" the electromagnetic images of the galaxies away
from their spatial positions on the outer circle of the Map. Beginning
at the triple point of contact between light, space, and time in the
observer's "present moment" (Earth's position), as we proceed into
the past the light line falls progressively further and further away
from the actual spatial position of the galaxies (the outer circle), until
at the opposite pole of the universe, light, space, time, and matter
meet again in the Big Bang.
E. Recent Thoughts Concerning "Inflation" (July 2010): Although the
early "inflationary era" of the Cosmos (Alan Guth et al.) has nothing
to do with the Spacetime Map as presented in this paper (the map is a
representation of how we see the Universe, not what we see, and in
any case treats only the "post-inflationary" era), it is nevertheless
appropriate to comment on this important cosmological topic, as
possibly it may set the stage for the map.
I have always been suspicious of the theory of "inflation" because of
the bizarre concepts and language used to explain it (supercooled
"Higgs field", "false vacuum", "negative" gravity, etc.). Nevertheless,
recently it has occurred to me that inflation might be the evidence that
the fabric of our 4-D spacetime metric was simply torn apart by the
violence of the initial energy input of the "Big Bang", resulting in a
runaway, unregulated vacuum state characterized as "inflation". This
chaotic quasi-dimensional state allowed the initial energy pulse to
expand and cool until our ordinary 4-D spacetime metric could cope
with the extreme energy density, at which point "inflation" ceased and
the usual 4-D metric expansion of spacetime took over (as regulated
or "gauged" by the electromagnetic constant "c"). This scenario
seems to me to be a possible interpretation of the putative inflationary
era, including how it came to an end. How it began is another matter,
but in this scenario it could not have begun in our 4-D spacetime,
since our metric couldn't cope with such an intense energy density,
and therefore certainly couldn't have created it. Hence (on this view)
the source of the "Big Bang" energy must lie outside our
dimensionality and Universe, evidently in a "Multiverse" and/or
44 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

higher dimensional reality (or a-dimensional reality), the primal
origin of all energy and dimensions for all Universes.
Links
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
References
(1) Adams, C. and Shapiro, J. Sept-Oct 2001. The Shape of the
Universe: Ten Possibilities. American Scientist Vol. 89(5):443-53
(2) Bahcall, N. A., et al. 28 May 1999. The Cosmic Triangle:
Revealing the State of the Universe. Science 284 (5419): 1481-88
(3) Davis, M. Weighing the Universe. 8 March 2001. Nature
410(6825): 153-4
(4) Delsemme, A. Our Cosmic Origins. Cambridge University
Press 1998.
(5) Emiliani, C. 1988. The Scientific Companion. John Wiley and
Sons, Inc.
(6) Goldhaber, G. and Perlmutter, S. 1998. A study of 42 Type Ia
Supernovae and a Resulting Measurement of Omega(M) and
Omega(lambda). Physics Reports 307: 325-31
(7) Goobar, A., et al. 2000. The Acceleration of the Universe:
Measurements of Cosmological Parameters from Type Ia
Supernovae. Physica Scripta T85, 47-58
(8) Gribbin, J. 1999. The Birth of Time. Yale University Press.
(9) Guth, A. 1997. The Inflationary Universe. Helix Books,
Addison-Wesley, Inc.
(10) Kirshner, R. P. 2002. The Extravagant Universe. Princeton
University Press.
(11) Peacock, J. A., et al. 8 March 2001. A Measurement of the
Cosmological Mass Density from Clustering in the 2dF Galaxy
Redshift Survey. Nature 410(6825): 169-73
45 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

(12) Perlmutter, S., et al. 1 June 1999. Measurements of Omega
and Lambda from 42 High-Redshift Supernovae. The
Astrophysical Journal 517:565-86
(13) Perlmutter, S., Turner, M. S., and White, M. 26 July 1999.
Constraining Dark Energy with Type Ia Supernovae and
Large-Scale Structure. Physical Review Letters 83(4) 670-3
(14) Silk, J. 2001. The Big Bang W. H. Freeman and Co.
(15) Weinberg, S. 1977. The First Three Minutes. Basic books,
Inc.
(16) Sloan Digital Sky Survey, New Mexico Apache Point
Observatory (www.sdss.org/)
(17) Two-Degree Field (2dF) Galaxy Redshift Survey, AngloAustralian Observatory New South Wales (www.aao.gov.au/2df/)
See also: Paul J. Steinhardt "The Inflation Debate" Scientific
American April 2011 p. 38 - 43.
Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus
and Giroux 2012 (book)
Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on
black holes.
Acknowledgement: Special thanks to Patrick Kennedy who drew
my attention to an error in a previous version of this paper!
A Spacetime Map of the Universe

(http://www.johnagowan.org/spacemapnew.pdf)

Graph of Observational Data vs Calculated Galaxy Positions

46 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

Method for Calculating Limit Line of Gravitationally "Closed" Universe

47 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

48 of 49

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

spacetxtcopy.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/spacetxt.html

Data Input Table to 13.7 Gyr Graph
for Spacetime Map (Spacetime Map see main text for sources)
Billion Light Years Open Cosmos
Observations
Closed Cosmos
Number of
(distance from Earth) (no gravity)
(from literature)
(~ critical gravity) (calculated Z)
Observations
(Gyr)
(calculated Z)
(Z = "red shift")
0.4

0.0224

0.0152

0.04

single

1.0

0.056

0.038

-

-

2.0

0.171

0.080

0.1572

average of 3

3.0

0.29

0.129

0.25

single

3.5

-

-

0.30

average of 2

4.0

0.412

0.184

-

-

5.0

0.575

0.25

0.50

single

5.5

-

-

0.57

single

6.0

0.78

0.33

0.661

average of 3

6.9

-

-

0.81

average of 2

7.0

1.154

0.42

-

-

8.0

1.404

0.54

1.0

single

9.0

1.915

0.69

1.356

average of 2

9.2

-

-

1.44

single

10.0

2.703

0.91

1.71

average of 3

10.35

-

-

2.04

average of 3

11.0

4.076

1.23

2.332

average of 2

11.66

-

-

3.17

average of 3

12.0

7.059

1.81

3.9

average of 3

12.2

-

-

4.35

single

12.4

-

-

4.75

single

12.6

-

-

5.0

double

12.76

-

-

5.75

average of 4

12.880

-

-

6.240

average of 5

12.876

-

-

6.706

average of 7

13.0

18.571

3.37

7.8

average of 3

13.1

-

3.72

8.26

single

13.2

-

4.17

10.0

average of 4

13.3

-

4.79

14.0

average of 2

13.4

-

5.68

18.3

single

13.5

-

7.18

-

-

13.6

-

10.56

-

-

15.0

-

-

-

63 total obsv.

John A. Gowan Jan., 2011
homepage

49 of 49

7/16/19, 5:23 PM

