identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

THE WEAK FORCE: "IDENTITY" OR NUMBER CHARGE
(revised Dec., 2012)
John A. Gowan
home page
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
Leptons as Alternative Charge Carriers
Proton Decay and Leptoquark Antineutrinos
The "Anonymity" Symmetry Debt of Light: "Identity" Charge
Neutrino Mass and Oscillation
Hiding the Neutrino's Identity Charge
Summary
Postscript
Postscript II
Links and References
Abstract
"Noether's Theorem" states that in a continuous multicomponent field such as the
electromagnetic field (or the metric field of spacetime), where one finds a symmetry one
will find an associated conservation law, and vice versa. In matter, light's symmetries are
conserved by charge and spin; in spacetime, by inertial and gravitational forces.
Neutrinos carry "identity" charge (aka "number" or "flavor" charge), the symmetry debt
of light's "anonymity". The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
Introduction
The charge associated with the weak force is usually known as "number" charge, although I prefer to
call it "identity" charge, as the latter term better characterizes the function of this most important
charge or symmetry debt. All elementary particles (the leptons) carry number (identity) charge, which
occurs in two forms: 1) a "hidden" form carried by the massive leptons (the electron and its kin); 2) an
"explicit" form carried by the (nearly) massless leptons, the neutrinos. A neutrino is simply the "bare",
explicit form of number or identity charge. (The reader should refer to the "Particle Table" if the
terminology in this article is unfamiliar.)
Number charge is strictly conserved as follows: every elementary particle - which means every lepton
- carries a positive number charge, corresponding to its species or type, and every kind of elementary
antiparticle carries an exactly equivalent but negative number charge. Together, the positive and
negative number charges sum to zero. Number charge, like electric charge (and even the strong force
color charge), must always exist in neutral combinations. For example, if an electron-positron
particle-antiparticle pair is formed, their opposite number charges sum to zero. However, if a single
electron is created (as in a weak force decay), its electric and number charge must still be neutralized,
but because number charge occurs in two forms, this can be done by a positron neutrino instead of the

1 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

positron itself. The advantage of this dual system of charge carriers is that it allows the creation of
single particles whose charges do not have to be balanced by their antiparticles; by using a neutrino
rather than an antiparticle, the otherwise inevitable annihilation reaction between matter and
antimatter is avoided, and unpaired, isolated elementary particles of matter ("singlets") can be brought
into existence, nevertheless with balanced charges. Matter can be isolated from antimatter only
because the free neutrino can carry and balance matter's identity charge in alternate form. Hence the
neutrino, as an alternative carrier of identity charge, is the most important charge of the material
universe, as it allows the creation of our matter-only Cosmos during the "Creation Event" or "Big
Bang".
Leptons as Alternative Charge Carriers
The "identity" charge of the weak force functions in (at least) three crucial ways to conserve
symmetry within the context of the material realm of atomic matter. In the first instance, it allows
elementary particles to identify their appropriate annihilation partners in a timely fashion (in the case
of both "real" and "virtual" particles); in the second instance, and perhaps more fundamentally, the
"identity" charge is necessary to allow the exact replication of elementary particles, such that (for
example), one electron is precisely identical to every other electron ever created. Without the identity
charge, there would be no "benchmark" against which to measure one electron against another,
especially in those cases (typical of the weak force) in which single electrons are created rather than
particle-antiparticle pairs. Finally, the identity charges of neutrinos, which are the "bare" identity
charges of their massive leptonic counterparts, provide an alternative identity charge carrier which
accomplishes charge conservation even when single massive leptons (rather than particle-antiparticle
pairs) are created. Without this charge-conservation service via the alternative pathway of the
neutrino, our asymmetric "matter-only" universe could not have broken the perfect symmetry of light
and its particle-antiparticle form during the "Big Bang", since without neutrinos, charge conservation
could only have been accomplished via antimatter partners (such as electron-positron pairs), resulting
in perpetual annihilations reactions. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
The role of identity or number charge is perhaps best explained and most readily appreciated by
examining its role in actual weak force leptonic decays. A simplified form of 5 weak force decay
reactions is given below, the simplicity allowing us to focus upon the conservation of two charges, the
electric and identity charges. (More complete forms of these same reactions can be seen in the
"Particle Table". See Also: "The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism").
Simplified examples of weak force leptonic decays (antiparticles underlined):
t = tau; u = muon; e = electron; v = neutrino; lq = leptoquark (hypothetical)
(decays 1-4 mediated by the "W" IVB; decay 5 mediated by the (hypothetical) "X" IVB)
1) t- -----> u- + vt + vu
(a tau decays to a muon, tau neutrino, and muon antineutrino)
2) u- -----> e- + vu + ve
(a muon decays to an electron, muon neutrino, and electron antineutrino)
3) (ud-) -----> u- + vu
(a negative pion decays to a muon and a muon antineutrino)
4) N -----> P+ + e- + ve

2 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

(a neutron decays to a proton, electron, and electron antineutrino)
5) P+ -----> u+ + vlq + vu
(hypothetical "proton decay", producing an antimuon, leptoquark neutrino, plus a muon
neutrino)
Electric charges are usually represented by positive (+) and negative (-) signs, and it is easily seen by
inspection that the electric charges on the left side of the reactions are equal to those on the right. The
reader will also see that the same is true of identity charges. Recall that the massive leptons (electron,
muon, and tau (e, u, t)) carry the charge in hidden form, while their neutrinos (ve, vu, vt) are the
explicit form of the same charge; matter carries positive identity charge while antimatter carries
negative identity charge. Using these rules, one can see that the total number of leptons and leptonic
"number" or "identity" charges is the same on the left as on the right side of the reactions.
Hypothetical reaction (5) is no exception because the proton is also assumed to carry a "hidden"
number charge (vlq). This arithmetic method of summation is why this charge is usually called "lepton
number" charge. However, this charge is more specific than simple "number", as it is furthermore true
that the identity of the "parent" lepton is conserved from one side of the reaction to the other, being
carried on the right by neutrinos. Let us examine these reactions one at a time. Note that electric
charge makes no distinction between its carriers, whereas neutrinos do.
In reaction (1) a massive tau (t-) decays to a less massive muon (u-). The electric charge of the tau is
conserved by passing it to the muon. However, a single elementary particle has disappeared (the tau),
and another has been created (the muon). Both carry hidden identity charges which must be conserved
(in the case of the tau) or balanced (in the case of the muon) by their respective neutrinos or
antineutrinos. Hence we must find a tau neutrino and a muon antineutrino on the product (right) side
of the reaction. (The reader may wish to consult the more complete form of all these reactions to see
how they are very simply accomplished by the "W" IVB and virtual particle-antiparticle pairs (derived
from the Heisenberg-Dirac "vacuum" or "particle zoo" of spacetime): see "The Particle Table" or "The
'W' Particle and the Weak Force Mechanism").
In reaction (2) a massive muon (u-) decays to the ground state electron (e-), the lowest mass possible
for an electrically charged particle. An electron is just a "bare" electric charge plus a "hidden" identity
charge. Reaction (2) is exactly like reaction (1), except the muon decays rather than the tau, producing
an electron rather than a muon. (All particles in these reactions also carry spin, which although not
shown, is also strictly conserved from one side of the reaction to the other.)
In reaction (3) a negatively charged meson (ud-) decays to a muon and a muon antineutrino. Mesons
are always composed of quark-antiquark pairs, which will annihilate each other provided their electric
charges can be conserved. What is different about this reaction is that we see no neutrinos are
necessary to conserve quark identity, even though two different quark "flavors" (u, d) are involved.
Whatever partial identity or "flavor" charge a sub-elementary quark may carry is evidently neutralized
by its antimatter partner. The same is true for color charges (and spin) carried by quark-antiquark pairs
in mesons. The separate "flavors" or partial identity charges of quarks are not strictly conserved. In
other respects, charged meson decay is like a heavy lepton decay; electric charge is conserved by a
muon; in turn, the muon's identity charge (and spin) is balanced by a muon antineutrino. (Because all
antineutrinos are right-handed, the muon must have left-handed spin; hence the weak force is said to
violate parity conservation, since only left-handed leptons can participate in weak force decays if they

3 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

produce antineutrinos. This parity asymmetry would be balanced if both matter and antimatter could
co-exist, but parity is broken in our matter-only universe.)
Reaction (4) involves the decay of a neutron to a proton, known as "beta" decay because it produces
"beta" particles, or electrons. A neutron (or proton) is composed of 3 quarks: the quark composition of
a neutron is (ddu); that of the proton is (uud+). The proton is slightly lighter than the neutron, so the
proton is the "ground state" or lowest energy state of the baryons (the class of all particles containing
3 quarks).
What is new in reaction (4) is that one baryon replaces another: the neutron decays to the proton, but
baryons as a class never simply disappear (or appear) in any reaction - unlike the leptons and mesons,
which come and go, so long as their various charges are balanced. This suggests that the baryon
carries an additional conserved charge which cannot be balanced, neutralized, canceled, or otherwise
carried by the leptonic field of alternative charge carriers; this is indeed so, and the charge is known as
"color". All quarks carry color charges; the quarks of mesons, however, do not carry net color because
their quark-antiquark pairs always carry color charge in neutral combinations - red-antired, for
example. The weak force leptonic decay pathway is therefore open to color-neutral mesons but closed
to color-charged baryons. The three quarks of baryons carry color in a composite, "white"
combination which can self-annihilate when sufficiently compressed (the physical limit of the
phenomenon of "asymptotic freedom" (Gross, Politzer, and Wilczek 1973) - see discussion in "The
Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information"). (Because the gluon field is composed of coloranticolor charges in all combinations, the field will sum to zero color if strongly compressed.)
However, when quarks and their color charges are expanded and explicit (the normal state), baryon
color charge can only be neutralized by "antiwhite" (that is, antimatter baryons). Given the absence of
antimatter, normal baryons cannot completely decay because there is no alternative charge carrier for
whole-baryon ("white") color. (Baryons may also carry another conserved charge, the analog of lepton
"number" charge, with an alternative charge carrier in the form of a leptoquark neutrino.) The special
circumstances under which baryons can completely decay ("proton decay", reaction 5), are discussed
under the color charge section in "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".
Proton Decay and Leptoquark Antineutrinos
While baryons (or any other particles) can be readily created as particle-antiparticle pairs given
sufficient energy, the production of any single, unpaired particle ("singlet") is difficult; indeed the
asymmetric process of creating unpaired, single particles constitutes the "secret of matter" of the weak
force and the material world. The mysterious and asymmetric weak force can create unpaired leptons,
but the creation of a single, unpaired baryon (or its destruction) has never been seen, and has perhaps
never even occurred since the primordial creation of matter in the "Big Bang". (See: "The 'W' IVB as
a Bridge Between Virtual and Real Particles".)
There is no known weak force decay of a proton which is the equivalent of reaction (3), the leptonic
decay of a meson. The absence of (the much sought for) "proton decay" has led to the notion of
"baryon number" conservation, the equivalent of lepton number conservation. However, as we have
seen, there are no separate neutrinos associated with the various (six in all) quark flavors, so if baryon
number conservation is the equivalent of lepton number conservation, it must be associated with
baryons as a class, not with the individual flavors of the sub-elementary quarks. In other words, there

4 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

must be one single neutrino species which carries the identity charge of all baryons, regardless of their
internal quark composition. If we ever observe "proton decay", we should also observe the production
of this type of neutrino (the leptoquark neutrino - vlq). See: "The Particle Table".)
Reaction (5) shows just such a hypothetical "proton decay", with the production of a leptoquark
neutrino (vlq), which carries baryon number or leptoquark identity charge. This is the equivalent of
the leptonic decay of a charged meson (reaction 3). The reason this reaction is so rare (in fact,
unknown) is that the (hypothetical) "X" IVB required to compress the quarks to "leptonic" size and
hence color neutrality is extremely massive and hence extremely difficult to produce. Once the color
charge is sufficiently compressed to achieve complete "asymptotic freedom" and color neutrality,
however, this reaction is no different from other weak force leptonic decays - except for the presence
of the leptoquark antineutrino. (See: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the
Cosmos".)
The major point here is that once a baryon (any baryon) has attained the (colorless) internal
configuration of a leptoquark, it becomes the 4th and heaviest member of the leptonic spectrum, the
primordial ancestral particle which unites the quark and leptonic elementary particle families. (See
"The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information" for a more complete discussion of the
leptoquarks.) (See also: "The Leptoquark Diagram".)
Note especially in the 5 reactions above the role of the leptons as alternative charge carriers both for
each other and for the mesons and baryons. Charges in these reactions are not balanced, neutralized,
or canceled by antimatter partners, which would result in annihilation reactions, but by the leptonic
field of alternative charge carriers. The massive leptons (electron, muon, tau) function as alternative
carriers of electric charge, while their neutrinos function as alternative carriers of identity charge.
(Mesons perform a similar function as alternative carriers of quark flavor, color, spin and electric
partial charges in the transformations and decays of baryons.) Without the services of these alternative
charge carriers, the world of matter would not exist, as all charges would have to be balanced by
antimatter, resulting in annihilation. The leptonic charge field of elementary particles, or alternative
charge carriers, functions to reveal the information content of the quark mass field. Nevertheless,
while alternative charge carriers are a necessary condition for the creation of matter, by themselves
they are not a sufficient condition; there still must be an additional asymmetry in the rate of weak
force decays in matter as compared to antimatter (Cronin, 1981). Presumably, this asymmetry
involves the rate of decay of electrically neutral leptoquarks vs electrically neutral anti-leptoquarks.
(For a further discussion of the weak force in its full energy spectrum, see: "The Higgs Boson and the
Weak Force IVBs".)
The "Anonymity" Symmetry Debt of Light: "Identity" Charge
While everyone is aware of electric charge, few people outside physics are familiar with number
charge (although most have heard of neutrinos), yet it is perhaps the most important of all charges, the
one most responsible for the phenomenon of manifestation and the creation of matter. The charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light: the symmetry associated with number or identity charge is the
"anonymity" or sameness of all photons. All photons are alike - one cannot be distinguished from
another; those that are more energetic are simply composed of greater numbers of superimposed
identical photons, or quanta of light. This is the "symmetry of anonymity" which is characteristic of

5 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

this type of particle (the "bosons"), and allows quanta of light to pile up one on top of another (unlike
fermions (leptons, quarks) which repel one another - according to the "Pauli Exclusion Principle").
The photon is said to be its own antiparticle and carries no charges of any kind. Hence any particleantiparticle pair a photon creates must necessarily bear charges which sum to zero, since the photon
has none to begin with. All charges of any particle-antiparticle pair exist to facilitate an annihilation
reaction between matter and antimatter, recreating the parent photon and thus preserving its symmetry,
which includes (among other characteristics) light's lack of charge, lack of a gravitational field and
time dimension, light's intrinsic motion, and light's metric and "non-local" distributional symmetry.
This is why we say the charges of matter represent the symmetry debts of light, since the original
function of charge in the particle-antiparticle pair is to motivate, facilitate, and produce an annihilation
reaction, returning the particle-antiparticle system to the symmetric energy state of the light which
created it, fulfilling "Noether's theorem" (see above) regarding the conservation of symmetry. When
matter is isolated from antimatter, its charges retain (conserve) their original function and potency, but
must find a new reaction pathway back to the original symmetry state of the light which created them.
(See also: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".
Unlike light, the massive particles which light produces ("fermions") are not all the same - as
"singlets" they do not carry the symmetry of light's "anonymity", they are distinct, different, and
distinguishable, at least as between the various elementary species. Therefore fermions break the
photon's symmetry of "anonymity" and acquire the symmetry debt of "identity". One symmetry
conservation function of the identity charge is evidently to facilitate timely annihilations (within the
Heisenberg limit for virtual reality) by the identification of appropriate reaction partners for matterantimatter pairs.
The simple view of neutrino function presented above is correct so far as leptonic decays are
concerned. However, this picture has recently become more complicated by the discovery of neutrino
mass states and the oscillation of neutrino flavors in flight after the decay. Here symmetry
conservation is observed at the generic level of flavor, rather than the specific level - see the
discussion below.
Neutrino Mass and Oscillations
See: Scientific American, May 2010 pages 38-45: "Through Neutrino Eyes" by Gelmini, Kusenko,
and Weiler for an authoritative discussion of neutrino oscillation and mass.
According to Gelmini et al., neutrino mass is the basis upon which one neutrino is distinguished from
another. Neutrinos oscillate not only between their 3 leptonic "flavors", but between 3 "mass states",
and it is the relative proportion of these mass states that determines flavor. Because any neutrino
flavor can exhibit any mass state, neutrinos evidently code for flavor identity at both the generic level
of all lepton flavors, and at the specific level of a single leptonic flavor. This solves the "mystery of
the missing solar neutrinos". (See: A. McDonald, J. Klein, and D. Wark: "Solving the Solar Neutrino
Problem". Scientific American, April, 2003.) (See also: Science: Vol. 313, 21 July 2006, page 291,
regarding neutrino oscillations). The situation is complex in that while an electron neutrino can only
react with an electron (or positron), it may nevertheless change into a muon or tau neutrino during
flight, and while in this new configuration, react only with a muon or tau (or their antiparticles).

6 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

Hence while a specific neutrino flavor does code for and react with a single leptonic flavor, you can't
be sure which neutrino flavor you are going to end up with, no matter what flavor you began with.
However, because all neutrino flavors play the same game, in sum they balance out each other's
charges.
The fluid mix of neutrino identities (in flight) reflects the fluid state of identity in the electroweak
symmetric energy state generally, in which all leptonic identities are merged at their generic level, and
likewise all quark identities are merged at their generic level. In the electroweak symmetric energy
state (or during the electroweak era of the "Big Bang"), transformations of one leptonic flavor into
another, or one quark flavor into another, were simply the normal course of events. This is the generic
level of symmetry which the "W" family of IVBs recreates (and is how the "W" effects identity
transformations), not the specific level of "broken" symmetry (individual identity) we experience
today. Specific leptonic and quark identities "freeze out" or "crystalize" only in the cold ground state
of our present electromagnetic era. In flight, the neutrino seems to at least partially return to this fluid
state of electroweak generic identity. Oscillations or superpositions of identity also occur between
other closely related (massive) particles as well, including the quarks of the "K-neutral long" and
"K-neutral short" mesons, and even the proton/neutron "nucleons".
The leptonic mass series (electron, muon, tau) serves as an alternative charge carrier for two charges,
the electric charge of the electromagnetic force, and the "identity" charge of the weak force. Electric
charge is quite independent of mass, and serves only as a long-range "locator" charge, identifying the
spacetime location of an electrically charged particle, in this way serving matter's eternal search for
antimatter and a return to the symmetric energy state of light (via an annihilation reaction). It is the
task of the weak force "identity" charge (AKA lepton "number" charge) to distinguish between the
several massive leptons so that they may in fact identify and annihilate with their appropriate
anti-partners, once the electric charge has performed its locating and motivating functions.
The leptonic series is distinguished only by mass and identity charge, and it is interesting to note that
the several identity charges (as carried in explicit form by neutrinos) are also distinguished one from
another by mass - in this case by the disparate proportionate allocation of the superimposed deBroglie
mass waves of the three neutrino "flavors" (see the Gelmini article cited above). The weak force focus
upon mass, whether in the Higgs boson and its associated IVBs, the leptonic spectrum, or the
neutrinos, suggests that the force which creates the massive, material, and particulate universe uses
mass (bound electromagnetic energy) in all cases as a hedge against the attenuating effects of entropy,
whether spatial or temporal, in our rapidly expanding universe. Charges and massive particles are
simply immune from entropic enervation by the expansion of the cosmos, hence both can and do
serve as invariant conservation parameters in the economy of Natural Law.
The "W" IVB "family" recreates an invariant, primordial state of force-unification symmetry (the
Electroweak Era) by virtue of its huge and quantized mass. In this state the three members of the
leptonic elementary particle spectrum are all equivalent (a "generic" level of identity rather than a
"specific" level of identity), and transformations of one leptonic species into another are accomplished
as a matter of course. Now it is most curious to note that the observed oscillations of the neutrinos
apparently preserve a "memory" of this same primordial "generic" symmetry state, and in this
reflection we catch a glimpse of why both the IVBs and the neutrinos must share a massive parameter.
The neutrino cannot interact unless the "memory" of the "generic" electroweak symmetric energy

7 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

state it carries within itself can be recreated, matched, or decoded by the IVB field - a "lock and key"
mechanism. There is something special about the mass state of a neutrino which allows it to interact
with (and only with) the mass state of an IVB. Hence we arrive at the curious phenomenon of a
particle which carries its charge (partly) in the form of mass, and yet can travel through light years of
lead without interacting.
As to why the Z is heavier than the W, I suggest it is because the W, within the symmetric energy state
the IVBs create, has only to accommodate the quarks and massive leptons (since only they bear
electric charges), but the Z has to account for the neutrinos in addition. Since Z-neutral elastic
scattering can occur with all quarks and leptons, the set of particles "under the Z's wing", as it were, is
larger than the W's, hence requiring more energy to conjure from the vacuum. There are simply more
possibilities for neutral interactions than for charged interactions, and therefore the primordial
electroweak unified-force symmetric energy state recreated by the Z is larger and more inclusive (in
terms of membership) than that created by the W. Furthermore, since the role of the massive IVBs is
expressly to ensure the exact replication of single elementary particles, we may suspect that the
neutrino which emerges from a seemingly humble Z-neutral scattering event is not the same
"individual" that entered the interaction, even though both are of the same "flavor". This points up the
fact that Nature is at considerable pains to protect the integrity and value of the "identity" charge of
the neutrinos, requiring a full-on 91 Gev Z-neutral interaction even for an apparently simple scattering
event.
It has been suggested that the three-family structure of the particle spectrum (including the quarks) is
necessary to produce the weak force asymmetry which allows the primordial creation of matter during
the "Big Bang" (because the three-family structure provides many more opportunities to form
electrically neutral "leptoquarks" during the "Big Bang"; these in turn can undergo asymmetric weak
force decays). If this is true, the "harmonic" 3-part family structure of the elementary particles may
have its ultimate explanation as "anthropic" necessity. Because "cosmological" neutrinos can carry,
without interaction, significant amounts of energy (due to the phenomenon of relativistic mass?), they
may have been instrumental in the dispersal of energy during the initial expansion of the Big Bang,
preventing the collapse of the entire system into a cosmic-scale black hole.
The hypothetical leptoquark neutrino is a candidate for "dark matter". This neutrino could be quite
massive (and therefore relatively slow moving?), and if it is sufficiently different from the other
leptonic neutrinos, it may not participate in their "harmonic" spectrum and oscillations. It is "sterile"
to the extent that it can only be seen during proton decay or proton creation - via the "X" IVB. The
search for a "sterile" (non-interactive) 4th neutrino species is currently ongoing in both Europe and
the US, as an internet search on the term will confirm. (See: Adrian Cho: "The Sterile Neutrino:
Fertile Concept or Dead End?" Science Vol. 334 21 Oct., 2011 page 304-6.)
Hiding the Neutrino's Identity Charge
The charge conservation reason for hiding identity charge is simple. Since identity charge is a
"handed" charge, as we know from the explicit example of the neutrino, massive leptons (such as the
electron) cannot conserve this charge in its explicit form, since any massive particle can be either leftor right-handed in its spin orientation. "Hiding" the handed identity charge as an implicit lepton
number charge renders this conservation dilemma moot, since in this hidden condition the charge

8 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

exhibits no handed preference. Only during a weak force transformation involving the IVBs must the
lepton "awaken" to its true identity and left-handed spin orientation.
We can think of neutrinos as traveling (existing) from one IVB "event" to another - almost as an
airplane travels only between airports. Typically, the neutrino is "born" or initiated in an IVB event
(for example, during the decay of a muon to an electron, in which both a muon neutrino and an
electron antineutrino are produced (in all reactions below, antiparticles are underlined; the
electroweak transformation matrix of the "W" IVB is represented by square brackets; virtual particleantiparticle pairs of mesons and leptons are enclosed in parentheses)):
Muon Decay:
u-[ (e+ x e-) ]W- ---> vu + ve + eIn such an initiating decay, neutrinos pick up their symmetry debt of "identity" and perform their
function as alternative charge carriers (and conservers) of the muon's and electron's identity charges
(which are "hidden" in the massive leptons). Subsequently, the neutrinos carry their charges through
spacetime at nearly the speed of light until they engage in another IVB interaction in which their
services as alternative charge carriers are required, or they are annihilated/neutralized by
corresponding anti-charges. Neutrino oscillations during flight mean that weak force charge
conservation may by observed at the generic level of lepton number rather than the specific level of
lepton identity: what began as an electron neutrino may end up as a muon neutrino (and vice versa),
etc. Once within the transformation matrix of the "W" IVB, however, oscillations cease and weak
force charge is conserved at the specific level of lepton identity: electron neutrinos only react with
electrons, etc. Below I give abbreviated examples of baryon transformations occurring in the Sun and
in the neutrino detector (antiparticles are underlined):
Solar fusion: proton ---> neutron
uud+[ (du- x du+)(e- x e+) ]W+ ---> udd + ve + e+
Neutrino detector: neutron ---> proton
ve + udd[ (du+ x du-)(e+ x e-) ]W- ---> udu+ + eIn the detector reaction, the incoming electron neutrino cancels identity charges with the positron of
the leptonic particle-antiparticle pair, releasing the electron of the pair to the product. The positron's
positive electric charge cancels the negative electric charge of the pion in the adjacent mesonanti-meson pair; the pion subsequently self-destructs. Meanwhile, the positive pion's anti- d quark
annihilates one of the neutron's d quarks, replacing it with an u quark, and donates its electric charge
to the product proton. All charges, leptonic and electric, are balanced from one side of the equation to
the other.
For a more detailed explanation of these reactions and symbols see either "The Particle Table" or "The
'W' IVB and the Weak Force IVBs".
See also: Sverker Johansson's website for an authoritative discussion of neutrinos and the "Soar

9 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

Neutrino Problem":
http://www.talkorigins.org/faqs/faq-solar.html
"The Solar FAQ"
Electron and Neutrino Pair Production
(added Nov. 28, 2011)
In the case of electron-positron pair production, we need only supply enough energy to satisfy the rest
mass of the pair according to Einstein's famous equation: E = mcc. However, in the creation of a
matter-antimatter neutrino pair, with a very much smaller rest mass energy, we must supply enough
energy to create a Z (neutral) IVB (about 91 MEV) - the equivalent of approximately 91 proton
masses. Why this enormous difference between particles joined in the electroweak unification? In the
case of the electron-positron pair, the weak force identity charges are hidden and balancing, so only
the electromagnetic force boson (photon) need be involved to create the electric charges. However, in
the case of the neutrino-antineutrino pair, there is no electric charge present and the neutrinos
represent "bare" weak force identity charges, which can only be produced by a weak force boson, in
this case the Z (neutral) IVB. Similarly, in the case of the production of an electron and electron
antineutrino during the decay (for example) of a neutron to a proton (beta decay), a "bare" single
antineutrino is produced (balancing the hidden "lepton number" or weak force "identity" charge of the
electron). This bare, single neutrino (an explicit weak force identity charge) can only be created by a
weak force IVB, in this case the W-. (We have elsewhere noted that the huge mass of the weak force
IVBs is necessary to recreate the primordial conditions of the electroweak force-unity symmetric
energy state in which these leptons and mesons were first created, thus ensuring that all elementary
particles ever produced will be absolutely identical in every respect.)
The ability to "hide" neutrinos or weak force "identity" charges is what determines the members of the
massive leptonic spectrum or series - the electron, muon, and tau, and in all probability, the
leptoquark. The leptoquark is the heaviest member of the series and progenitor of the proton, neutron,
and hyperons, providing the missing link between leptons and quarks.
The ability to hide the weak identity charge in leptonic alternative charge carriers is absolutely
necessary for weak-force symmetry-breaking via the production of single matter baryons from
electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark pairs during the "Big Bang" - since by this means
charge conservation is satisfied despite breaking the symmetry of matter/antimatter leptoquark pairs.
(See: "The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information".)
Hence the high energy regime of the IVBs and the weak force identity charges follows the usual and
logical pattern that higher energy processes nearer in time (and space) to the Big Bang lay the
foundation and pave the way for the lower energy phenomena which follow - all the way down the
scale to the electron shell chemistry of life.
The interior of stars, where the transmutation of particles and the building of the heavy nuclei of
"metallic" elements is on-going, is the current locus of weak force activity. Metaphorically, we can
think of the stars as bits torn off the Big Bang and scattered throughout space and time, bits
reconstituted by the negative energy and entropy of gravity, the ancient era of the electroweak
unification at least partially recapitulated and still blazing in the cold sky of our biological Cosmos.

10 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

Summary
All this leads us to the conclusion not only that a leptoquark neutrino species must exist (serving to
identify the whole class of the baryons through their ancestral elementary leptonic form, the
leptoquark), but that "identity" is the fundamental charge to be associated with the weak force, taking
its place as one of the four fundamental charges of nature (electric, location, color, identity). Just as
the "location" charge of gravitation represents the fundamental information "bit" of the dimensional
realm, so "identity" represents the fundamental information "bit" of the particle realm. It is a
remarkable fact that between the dimensional charge of gravitation and the information charge of the
neutrino, spacetime records the location, mass, and identity of every elementary particle within its
cosmic domain (as symmetry debts). Finally, every action or event is stored indefinitely in historic
spacetime (as causality debts - "Karma"). This exhaustive record is part of the function of spacetime
as a true "conservation domain" - extending beyond simple raw energy conservation to include
symmetry conservation (as charge, spin, inertia, and gravity), entropy (as time and - again - gravity),
and causality (as information stored in historic spacetime). (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
The universe of matter only exists due to a basic asymmetry in weak force reactions between matter
vs antimatter (manifesting most probably in the asymmetric decays of electrically neutral leptoquarks
vs antileptoquarks during the "Big Bang"), and because the meson and leptonic fields of alternative
charge carriers provide a charge-conserving decay pathway in lieu of antimatter charge partners. The
mesons and leptons exist to provide alternative charge carriers for the mass-carrying quarks; this is the
natural role and function of the mesons and leptons. (This all works because the leptoquarks are the
common source of both the leptons and quarks.) The massive leptons (such as the electron) provide
alternative carriers for electric charge; the (almost) massless leptons (neutrinos) provide alternative
carriers for number or identity charge; the mesons provide alternative carriers for quark partial
charges, including color, spin, electric charge, and flavor. It is due to the services of the meson and
leptonic fields of alternative charge carriers that the information content and potential of the primary
mass-carrying quark field can actually manifest as "singlet" baryons.
Postscript: Another Reason why the "Identity" Charge is "Hidden"
Unlike electric charge, "identity" charge (AKA lepton "number" charge) is "hidden" or implicit in the
massive leptonic charge carriers, the electron, muon, and tau (and probably the "leptoquark" as well).
Neutrinos are the explicit form of identity charge; there is no hidden form of electric charge among
the elementary leptons, although the neutron is an inexact analog among the composite baryons. It is
instructive to consider why this difference should exist, and its significance for these two types of
charge.
The symmetry between matter and antimatter lies at the root of the difference between any charge and
its anti-charge. It is probably easiest for us to intuit this fundamental natural division as analogous to
that between positive and negative numbers, or in financial terms, as between a debt and the
equivalent positive balance - with the added feature of an attractive force engendered between the
opposite members. In the case of electric charge, we know that an electrically neutral photon
(quantum unit of light) of sufficient energy can momentarily divide into two halves, one with positive
electric charge and the other with negative electric charge (electron vs positron). Since opposite
electric charges attract each other but similar charges repel, it is apparent that the purpose of these

11 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

charges is to cause the annihilation of the particle pair, restoring (conserving) the former symmetric
energy state of the photon that created them (in satisfaction of Noether's symmetry conservation
theorem). It is possible to give these opposite charges a dimensional interpretation: Feynman thought
positrons might be electrons traveling backward in time (in such a case, anti-charges represent the
presence of an anti-universe). In "virtual" pair creation, where there is not enough energy in the
original photon to create a "real-time" electron-positron pair, in addition to the positive and negative
electric charge, we attribute negative energy to one partner and positive energy to the other, with the
consequence that the annihilation must occur within the "Heisenberg time limit" for virtual reality.
Hence virtual pair creation requires no net energy.
While it is not completely clear what "negative energy" might be, other than a bookkeeping device for
purposes of conservation, we seem to have an actual example in gravitation. Taking this hint, even
though gravitational energy is not typically involved in virtual pair production (except in "Hawking
radiation" near black holes), we surmise that "negative energy" is a type of binding energy which
exists in response to threats to some conserved parameter, just as negative electric charge exists in
response to threats to symmetry conservation. The two make common cause in virtual pair creation
and annihilation.
In the case of the neutrino, rather than positive and negative electrical charges (however they may be
physically interpreted), we find another type of symmetry conservation protected by a completely
different kind of charge, the left- vs right-handed spin of the partners: all neutrinos have left-handed
spin, all antineutrinos have right-handed spin (this is part of the "identity" symmetry charge of
neutrinos, in this case distinguishing matter from antimatter). Consequently it is said we live in a
left-handed universe. (In the strong force we find yet another charge system protecting symmetry
(through protecting whole quantum units of charge), the color vs anti-color charges of the quarks and
gluons.)
There is something unusual about this neutrino "handed" symmetry charge, in that there is no
long-range weak force analog of the photon or graviton field vector. If a virtual neutrino-antineutrino
particle pair is created, what force then acts to cause their recombination and annihilation, conserving
the original symmetry of spacetime, as Noether's Theorem requires? It is likely that simple geometry,
or their mutual "entanglement" within the spacetime metric, would ensure the annihilation of such a
pair. However, if entanglement does not immediately annihilate this pair, then they might well roam
the universe until they are reunited in a black hole or in the cosmic scale "Big Crunch" gravitational
collapse of spacetime itself. In either case, we see gravity performing yet another conservation role.
"Bare" neutrino matter-antimatter particle pairs can only be created by the weak force field vector, the
"Z" IVB. The mysteries of the weak force and its strange short-range massive field vectors, the
"Intermediate Vector Bosons" (which regulate symmetry and energy conservation and the
transmission of the weak force "identity" charge), can best be understood within the context of its
natural role: the creation, transformation, and annihilation of single elementary particles. Elementary
particles created today must be exactly the same in all respects as those created eons ago during the
"Big Bang"; it is surmounting this challenge that makes the weak force so strange. (See: "The Higgs
Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
Consider now the difficulty of separating a neutrino-antineutrino particle pair, mutually "entangled"

12 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

within the spacetime metric. Electrons and positrons can be separated because they have a long-range
field vector (photons) which can be brought to bear from external sources (electric/magnetic fields),
but neutrinos lack any such "handles" by which we might manipulate them. Nevertheless, nature must
separate these neutrino pairs if symmetry is to be broken and matter is to be created without its
antimatter complement. The method nature uses is to "hide" one member of the pair in a massive
particle, such as the electron. The hidden identity charge can then be manipulated via the electric
charge of the electron which carries it. The other (explicit) member of the identity charge pair is then
free to roam about the universe, although it will forever retain its ability to annihilate the charge of its
hidden partner. The electron is therefore an alternative charge carrier for both electric and (hidden)
identity charge. The electron's electric charge is explicit and typically functions to balance the proton's
positive electric charge, while the identity charge is hidden, functioning nevertheless to balance the
explicit identity charge of the electron anti-neutrino.
Because electron-positron pairs are readily produced by (high-energy) photons alone, it is obvious that
the "hiding" of identity charges within these massive leptons does not require the action of the weak
force IVBs, as does the creation of a "singlet" neutrino (via the "W" IVB), or the creation of a "bare"
neutrino-antineutrino pair (via the "Z" IVB). Rather, we see that however such massive leptonic
particle pairs are produced, they always carry both explicit electric and implicit identity charges. We
surmise, therefore, that the ability of Nature to create "hidden" identity charges predetermines what
massive elementary particles (leptons) can be materialized - apparently only 3 or 4 types, if we
include the leptoquark.
Except for matter-antimatter annihilation reactions, neutrinos originate in and return to the symmetric
force-unity environment of the weak force IVBs, and they evidently retain a "memory" of the generic
identity state of their origin which facilitates their return. In weak force transformations mediated by
the "W" family of IVBs, the Higgs boson sets the energy scale for a unified-force symmetric energy
state (the electroweak force-unity state), and the "W" IVBs perform the actual transformations. (See:
"The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism".) As a consequence of the hidden quality of its weak
force identity charge, the electron is not constrained in its normal activities by the handedness of its
identity charge, whereas the explicit electric charge completely controls its behavior. Only during
transformations or annihilations must the electron acknowledge and be constrained by the handedness
of its "hidden" identity charge.
Postscript II: WEAK FORCE IVBs, NEUTRINOS, AND INFORMATION
(IVBs = "Intermediate Vector Bosons": the strange, massive field vectors (force carriers) of the weak
force)
John A. Gowan
January 2016
In the domain of the weak force, we find two types of elementary particles: 1) the (relatively) massive
electrically charged leptons (electron, muon, tau); 2) their associated "identity charges", the
(relatively) massless and electrically neutral neutrinos. Neutrinos are the "bare" identity charges of
their massive leptonic namesakes, one for each type of massive lepton (the electron, muon, or tau
neutrino). Although the three types of neutrinos resonate from one identity to another while in flight
(apparently because their only distinguishing characteristic is a slight difference in mass), they will

13 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

only interact with their own specific massive and charged namesakes, during transformations or the
creation/destruction of single leptonic elementary particles. Neutrino "identity charges" (the
characteristic charge of the weak force) provide the foundation for the information content of the
cosmos - just as the weak force asymmetry provides the matter surplus of the cosmos.
We have already noted the strange fact that the "W" IVB, which weighs the equivalent of about 80
proton masses, is required to regulate the creation, transformation, or destruction of single charged
leptons, even though an electron is lighter than a proton by a factor of nearly 2,000. We have
explained this enormous "overkill" of available energy as due to the necessity to return to the original
environment in which electrons were created, in order to ensure that every electron ever made - past,
present, or future - is absolutely identical (for reasons of energy and symmetry conservation - for
example, they must always be able to annihilate with an exact antimatter counterpart).
With respect to the neutrinos, whose mass is still unknown but may be as little as one-millionth that of
an electron, we find an even more extreme mismatch between the" Z" neutral IVB and the particles
whose transformations it regulates: the "Z" neutral IVB weighs about 90 proton masses. As in the case
of the "W" IVB, we explain the huge mass of the "Z" as necessary to recreate the original energy
environment in which neutrinos were created, and for the same reason: within type, every neutrino
ever created - past, present, and future - must be exactly alike. If this hypothesis is correct, it suggests
that the neutrinos were created before the massive leptons, in an earlier, smaller, and hotter universe,
closer in time to the actual origin of everything.
But of course this only makes sense: the identity charge must be ready before the arrival of the
massive lepton it will delimit and characterize. The mold must pre-exist the substance poured into it.
The massive leptons would not "know" what form to take without the neutrinos to guide them. The
presence of the neutrino precludes potential chaos during the initial "packaging" of energy into
discreet, massive leptons during the Big Bang. Think for a minute, and you will realize that "Identity"
is, and must be, matter's most primitive and basic charge (otherwise matter could not recognize and
annihilate with antimatter - energy, symmetry, and charge conservation would be lost). How our
matter-only universe manages to achieve conservation despite this glaring asymmetry is the major
subject of this website. (The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light).
In the spirit of General Systems in which this webpage is founded, I wish to note the following
concordance: neutrinos are evidently the first elements of information to appear in our cosmos, and as
we have suggested above, necessarily pre-exist the massive elementary leptonic particles for which
they provide "identity charges" (implicit in the massive leptons, explicit in the neutrinos). To use an
analogy, it is almost as if the neutrinos are the "souls" of the massive particles they code for presenting us with a natural example of Platonic dualism. While the rational mind has only recently
discovered massive leptons, neutrinos, identity charges, and the scientific concept of information, the
intuitive mind long ago recognized the fundamental ontogeny of the cosmos in a single, simple
statement: "In the beginning was the word".
Further in the same vein: when Moses asks God what his name (identity) is, God replies: "I am that I
am". This is nothing less than a statement of absolute identity, sufficient unto itself, underived from
any prior, higher, or more universal source. God simply IS, and cannot be encompassed, captured, or

14 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

otherwise diminished by a name or category. When we refer to God, we refer to that which cannot be
named. God is simply the "Almighty", the "First Cause" or "Prime Mover", the "One", the "Creator".
We are all subdivisions of the eternal "I AM", the everlasting, living, "Creative Principle".
And what are we to make of the notion that humanity is created in the "image and likeness" of God?
To me, this suggests the idea of God as the central, single, all-encompassing "Identity" of the cosmos,
from which the souls (identities) of His creations are derived - much as the "Big Bang" is the central
single source of the neutrinos bearing identity charges of the elementary particles they will create. We
are created in the image and likeness of our universe. This is something Chardin understood.
Links:
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs")
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D)
Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions
The Particle Table
home page
References:
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work.
1981. M. Dekker, New York.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin: The Phenomenon of Man. 1959. Harper and Row, New York.
Cho, Adrian: "The Sterile Neutrino: Fertile Concept or Dead End?" Science Vol. 334 21

15 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

identity2.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/identity...

Oct., 2011 page 304-6.
Frank Close: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Frank Close, 2010. Neutrino Oxford University Press.
G. Gelmini, A. Kusenko, and T. Weiler,Scientific American May 2010 pages 38-45:
"Through Neutrino Eyes".
John Curtis Gowan, "Trance, Art, Creativity". 1975. Privately printed.
Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
J. E. Lovelock. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Robert Oerter: The Theory of Almost Everything. 2006. Penguin (Plume).
Pais, Abraham Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. 1986. Oxford
University Press, NY
Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
James S. Trefil: The Moment of Creation 1983. Collier, Macmillan.
Frank Wilczek: The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.

16 of 16

2/7/16 12:19 PM

