Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
(revised June, 2014)
John A. Gowan
home page
Papers: "A Description of Gravitation";
"Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics"
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
The Symmetric "Non-Local" State of Light
"Location" Charge
Time
Entropy and Gravity
Local Gauge Symmetry
Quantum Relations
The Intrinsic Motion of Light
The Sign of "G"
Black Holes
Why Gravity is so Weak
Philosophical Connections
Letter to a Skeptic
Links
Abstract
Gravity is matter's memory it once was light.
The rationale for gravity begins with the creation of the Cosmos - the negative
energy of gravity is necessary to balance the positive energy of the "Big Bang", so
that the "Creation Event" requires zero net energy. For similar reasons, antimatter is
also required to balance the charges of matter so that creation occurs from a state of
zero net charge. Beginning in a condition of complete neutrality (perhaps as a giant
quantum fluctuation of the vacuum, an "inflationary bubble", or by Divine Fiat), the
Universe can only subsequently evolve into a state of complete conservation.
Regarding the beginning of the Universe, we can only speculate.
Following on from its primary role of providing negative energy during the "Big
Bang", gravity plays two further major conservation roles in the evolving universe:
1) energy conservation (at all gravitational field strengths) for bound forms of
energy, via the creation of time, history, and matter's temporal entropy drive; 2)
symmetry conservation (at stellar and higher gravitational field strengths) via the
conversion of bound to free energy (mass to light) in stars, supernovas, quasars,
and related astrophysical processes, and ultimately and completely, via Hawking's

1 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

"quantum radiance" of black holes. These secondary conservation roles,
manifesting as the gravitational conversion of space to time and bound to free
energy, are natural consequences of the mode of action of gravity's primary role,
which is the creation of negative energy and entropy via the contraction, heating,
and destruction of space (creating time), in contradistinction to the creation,
expansion, and cooling of space by the positive energy and entropy of light.
The relationship of gravity to the other forces is through "Noether's Theorem" of
symmetry conservation: all charges and their forces originate as symmetry debts of
light. In its broadest "global" sense, then, the negative energy of gravity is the
symmetry debt of the net positive energy of electromagnetic energy. In a narrower,
"local"sense, however, the gravitational charge of mass (Gm), whose active
principle is time, represents the symmetry debt arising from the (lost) "non-local"
distributional symmetry of light's free energy, a debt incurred whenever free
electromagnetic energy is converted to bound electromagnetic energy: hv = mcc. I
refer to the gravitational charge as "location".
Gravity pays the entropy-"interest" on the symmetry debt of matter by creating a
time dimension for bound energy in which charge conservation can have an
historical expression and causal significance. This conversion of space to time, as
on planet Earth, does not vanish either mass or the gravitational field (hence the
analogy with "interest"). Gravity pays the energy-"principle" on the symmetry debt
of matter by converting mass to light (in stars and related astrophysical processes) which vanishes both mass and its associated gravitational field (hence the analogy
with "principle"). The first reaction causes a deceleration of the spatial expansion
of the Cosmos, while the second causes an apparent acceleration (as recently
observed).
Introduction
The subject of gravitation is of course central to any attempt at force unification; the
well-known standoff between quantum mechanics and relativity theory centers on the inability
of "establishment" physics (or the "standard model") to produce a satisfactory theory of
quantum gravity, or any theory that integrates gravity with the other forces of physics
(electromagnetic, strong, and weak).
There has always been an element of mystery surrounding gravitation - what is gravity and why
does such a dimension-warping force exist? What is the role of gravity in the economy of
natural law - what is the conservation reason for the existence of this force? Why is gravity so
weak? These are among the questions concerning gravity which neither Newton nor Einstein
(nor anyone since) has answered satisfactorily.
The unification theory presented in these papers is nevertheless built around the central
question: why does gravitation exist as a force in Nature; why must it exist; what is the
conservation role of gravity? Newton and Einstein have figured out the "how" and the
quantitative mathematical representation of gravitation; I set out, many years ago now, to figure

2 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

out the "why". (I assume in these papers that Einstein's mathematical representation of
gravitation, minus his "cosmological constant", is essentially correct. However, I do not agree
with Einstein's apparent assumption that light, moving freely in the vacuum of spacetime,
produces a gravitational field.)
Einstein had tried to unify the long-range "spacetime forces", gravity and electromagnetism, but
without success. In his day the short-range "particle forces", the strong and weak forces, were
essentially unknown. A fully unified theory had no chance of being developed until the two
"particle forces" were better known, long after Einstein's death. In the light of present
knowledge, however, we can have a more reasonable hope of achieving unification.
Chronologically, I climbed the first (and most important) rung on the ladder of my personal
understanding of gravitational unification with my introduction to "Noether's Theorem", which
essentially states that the symmetries of light (and the symmetries of the spatial metric which
light creates) must be conserved. I realized that the charges of matter are the symmetry debts of
light, that is, the conserved charges (and spin) of particles - charge conservation - is just a basic
form of symmetry conservation. This is the simple, overarching principle which unifies gravity
with the other forces of physics. Charge conservation is one example of Noether's Theorem
enforced in the "real" (rather than the theoretical) world. The "inertial" forces of spacetime,
including gravitation, are the corresponding "metric" or dimensional examples of Noether's
Theorem enforced. Einstein had tackled the gravitation problem (with resounding success) from
the inertial, geometric, dimensional, and metric point of view. Perhaps something in addition
could be gained by looking at the gravitational question from the perspective of particles and
charges - completing, as it were, the particle-wave analysis of the force.
If gravity represented the conservation force associated with a symmetry debt of light (if
gravity, like the other forces, was produced by a "charge"), then it would fall under the
conservation umbrella of Noether's theorem and could be treated like any other charge of
matter. Also, by treating gravity as one of the quantized charges of matter, one automatically
had a leg up on the problem of joining quantum mechanics and relativity. The immediate
question, therefore, was: what symmetry of light was gravity conserving, and what was the
consequent gravitational charge?
The Symmetric "Non-Local" Energy State of Light
I soon realized that indeed light did have a symmetry which was broken during the conversion
of free to bound energy that looked as if it might be the cause of the gravitational "charge" or
symmetry debt. This symmetry is the "non-local" equitable distribution of light's energy,
everywhere in spacetime, simultaneously. This distributional symmetry of light's energy comes
about because of light's intrinsic motion and "non-local" character (gauged by "velocity c") - as
discovered by Einstein. Light's position in spacetime cannot be localized or specified because
light has no time dimension and no "x" spatial dimension in the direction of propagation.
Lacking two dimensions, it is impossible to specify light's position in either 3 or 4 dimensional
space or spacetime. Since neither time nor distance exists for light, yet light has intrinsic
motion, light has essentially forever to go nowhere (whatever the actual magnitude of "velocity
c" might be); hence we can say that in free flight in its own reference frame (moving freely in

3 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

the vacuum of space at velocity c), light is everywhere within its conservation domain of
spacetime simultaneously (light is "non-local" or has an "infinite" velocity).
Einstein characterized this spatially symmetric condition of light's "non-local" energy state
through his mathematical formula for the "Interval": light's "Interval" equals zero. (The
"Interval" is an invariant measure of the quantity of spacetime separating two events.) When I
realized that "velocity c" was not usefully conceived as an ordinary (nor even as a
"non-ordinary") velocity, but was instead a "gauge" or regulator of energetic and metric
symmetry which vanished (suppressed) time and distance - and that Noether's theorem required
such symmetries to be conserved - I knew that the combination of Einstein's "Interval" and
Noether's Theorem provided the formal basis for understanding gravitation as a conserved
charge or symmetry debt of light. In the gravitational case, the lost or broken symmetry is
light's "non-local" energy state and the lost symmetric distribution of light's energy throughout
space everywhere, simultaneously (in its own reference frame). The distributional symmetry of
light's energy is lost when free energy (light) is converted to immobile bound energy (massmatter), whose concentrated "rest mass" (hv = mcc) has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion.
The fact that the metric "warpage" or "curvature" of a gravitational field (-Gm) identifies (in
aggregate) the spacetime position of the immobile lump of bound energy (m), and also reflects
the quantity and density of mass, in other words, the concentration of bound energy at a
particular spacetime locus, was proof to me that this force behaved exactly as a symmetry debt
or charge should if it was recording, as hypothesized, the (broken) symmetry of the spatiotemporal distribution of the energy of light. Gravity was telling the conservation domain of
spacetime in the universal, energetic language of metric asymmetry (inertial-dimensional force)
exactly where, how large, and how intense was matter's distributional symmetry debt (violation
of energy's distributional symmetry) as represented by the spacetime location, quantity, and
density of the offending immobile concentration of bound energy. Finally, the light of the Sun
bore witness to the fact that gravity was acting, exactly according to the expectations of
Noether's theorem, to "pay off" this symmetry debt by converting mass back to symmetrically
distributed free energy. Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes carries the gravitational
conversion of bound to free energy to completion - which is one reason why Hawking's result is
so important, as it confirms the ultimate symmetry conservation role of gravitation.
The "Location" Charge of Gravity
In 1980, I named this gravitational charge "location", and wrote my first paper on this subject.
My father, the late Prof. John C. Gowan, actually published a version of this early paper in his
book "Enveloped in Glory" in 1982.
While the "location" charge of gravitation remains to this day as the essential "first rung" in my
understanding of gravitation (gravity represents the symmetry debt of the (lost) "non-local"
distribution of light's energy), it was only many years later that I climbed the next rung toward
understanding this complex force. According to my records (which are in most other respects
lamentably incomplete), it was not until November of 1997 (17 years later - remember this is a
hobby I pursued while I worked a full-time job at Cornell, built a house for my mother, and
with my wife Esther raised a family of 3 boys) that I took the next step, realizing that gravity

4 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

was creating the time dimension of matter by the annihilation of space. Gravity, I finally
understood, was quite literally converting space into time, and time itself was the active
principle of the gravitational "location" charge. Hence the time quantum or charge is the
connection between Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity - a graviton is a quantum unit
of time, metrically equivalent to a quantum unit of negative spatial entropy, spatial contraction,
or gravitational force.
In November of the following year, 1998, I climbed another rung and realized that time and
gravitation actually induce each other in an endless cycle - much as do the electric and magnetic
fields of light, but via quite a different mechanism. The intrinsic motion of time pulls space after
it into the point-like beginning of the one-dimensional time line situated at the center of any
given mass; there space self-annihilates, + x canceling - x and so on, but leaving a +T temporal
residue, the metric equivalent of the annihilated space, which cannot cancel since time being
one-way, there is no -T. The intrinsic (entropic) motion of the new time charge immediately
marches down the time line into the historic conservation domain of information and matter's
"causal matrix" (historic spacetime), pulling more space after it in an endless cycle, and causing
the collapsing accelerated flow of spacetime we recognize as a gravitational field.
The historic domain of bound electromagnetic energy is at right angles to all three spatial
dimensions; time is one-way because time protects causality and thereby energy conservation;
the gravitational field is spherically symmetric because time couples equally to all three spatial
dimensions; the field accelerates due to the constant application of a force (the constant intrinsic
motion of time), and vanishes at the center of mass where the spatial metric self-annihilates. A
gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. This mechanism is
perfectly in agreement with Einstein's "Equivalence Principle", the collapsing, accelerated flow
of spacetime being the indistinguishable equivalent of a static "warped" or "curved" metric
field: spacetime accelerating through us is the "reciprocal equivalent" of our accelerating
through spacetime. This is the macroscopic qualitative mechanism, but not yet the whole "why"
of gravitation.
In terms of the present theory, we can now formulate the analogy between gravitation and
electromagnetism which so intrigued Einstein: As magnetism is the invisible, spatially
projective, electrically active ("electro-motive") force of the loadstone, so gravity is the
invisible, spatially projective, dimensionally active ("inertio-motive") force of the ordinary
rock. In the case of magnetism, we trace the force back to the moving (and aligned) electric
charges of atomic electrons in the loadstone; in the case of gravity, we trace the force back to
the moving (and one-way) temporal charges of bound energy in the rock. A moving electric
charge creates a magnetic field; a moving temporal charge creates a gravitational field. In both
cases the field is produced at right angles to the current. The relation is reciprocal as well:
moving magnetic and spatial (gravitational) fields create electric and temporal currents. Finally,
gravity and time induce each other endlessly, as do the electric and magnetic field components
of light. Both time and magnetism represent "local gauge symmetry currents" of their respective
forces, protecting energy conservation and the invariance of causality (time), and symmetry
conservation and the invariance of electric charge (magnetism).

5 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

Time (added Feb. 2014)
It should be noted that I treat the gravitational "location" charge like other charges, in the sense
that antimatter carries the same charge but with an opposite sign. Hence particle-antiparticle
pairs will cancel each others "location" charges, just as they do all other charges. My
expectation is that the antimatter gravitational "location" charge nevertheless is universally
attractive with respect to bound energy of any type, in the same manner as our familiar matter
gravitational charge (since space is perfectly symmetric with respect to "anti-space"), but differs
in the one-way (asymmetric) "direction" of antimatter time. We are familiar with our own
one-way time asymmetry - in the anti-universe, I expect this same one-way causal temporal
flow to occur, but in a "direction" opposite to our own. By this I do not mean causality is
violated in the anti-world (which would also violate energy conservation), I simply mean the
one-way direction of time is opposite our own, much like "east vs west", but expressed within
the temporal rather than spatial parameter. We have a related example of such an effect in the
"handedness" or "parity" of our neutrinos - all matter neutrinos are left-handed, all antimatter
neutrinos are right handed, distinguishing the information content of matter vs antimatter.
Wheeler and Feynman raised similar speculations regarding the time travel of antimatter, but
later abandoned them, evidently due to causality concerns. However, I think the causality
violations can be avoided if a purely "directional" reversal of time flow is postulated, that is, a
reversal (like parity) that does not have causal consequences violating energy conservation.
Nevertheless, two oppositely directed time flows cannot coexist within the same reference
frame, hence accounting for the immediate and violent annihilation of matter vs antimatter (the
head-on collision of two universes time-traveling in opposite directions). This may be the actual
mechanism producing the attraction between opposite electric charges - whereas the principle
involved is the conservation of light's non-local symmetric energy state (returning bound energy
to light via particle-antiparticle annihilation reactions).
Accordingly, in the "Spacetime Map of the Universe", we would diagram the anti-universe with
the spatial axis increasing upwards, as before, but with time increasing toward the right, rather
than the left, as in the original diagram. That is, the universe and anti-universe would occupy
opposite (left-right) quadrants in the upper half of the figure.
More to the Story: Entropy and Gravitation
(See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy")
It was while driving to work one fine spring day in 1999 that I climbed another rung in my
personal understanding of the "why" of gravitation, as the connection between gravity and
entropy finally dawned on me. In addition to its symmetry conservation role, gravity must also
be conserving the entropy of the "Universe of light", the entropy drive of free energy, the
expansive principle of space, the intrinsic motion of light as gauged (regulated) by "velocity c".
By July 1999 I had written the first version of the "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics"
paper. In November of 1999, I submitted the paper to the Archives of Physics (an electronic
archive of physics papers, originally at Los Alamos, but now at Olin Library, Cornell
University). (The archive paper has been updated several times since, but the most recent
version will always be found on my public website - and on the public viXra.org alternative

6 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

open E-print archive.)
"Velocity c" is the gauge (regulator) of light's non-local, spatial, symmetric energy state, light's
symmetric spatial/inertial metric, and the gauge of light's symmetric "all-way" spatial entropy
drive (the intrinsic motion of light). On the one hand, "c" regulates the metric symmetry of
space, suppressing the asymmetric time dimension, and maintaining light's "non-local" energy
state, while on the other hand "c" regulates the creation, expansion, and entropic cooling of
light's spatial conservation domain. By the summer of 2002 I was writing papers on "velocity c"
and "velocity T" as the entropy gauges of free and bound electromagnetic energy, and on the
entropic significance of their metrically equivalent and effectively infinite velocities. To fulfill
their entropy functions, both c and T must represent effectively "infinite" velocities as a
guarantee against any violations of causality or energy conservation (by fast spaceship or "time
machine"). (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
By the summer of 2003 I understood the relation between entropy and symmetry in the double
role of the free energy gauge "velocity c" regulating light's intrinsic motion, and the consequent
double conservation role of gravity as the carrier of the symmetry/entropy debt of light's lost
"non-local" symmetric energy state. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravity"). The
relation between light's non-locality, metric symmetry, and lack of a time dimension meant that
light is non-local, a-temporal, and a-causal. The temporal sequence of cause and effect is
meaningless to an energy form which has no time dimension. Light has no gravitational field,
nor the time charge which could produce one. But matter is local, temporal, and causal, with a
gravitational field produced by the intrinsic and self-renewing motion of matter's time charge.
The active principle of the gravitational "location" charge is time itself, both identifying the
4-dimensional position of bound energy (recognizing light's non-local distributional symmetry
debt), and due to time's intrinsic motion, serving as matter's entropy drive (recognizing light's
lost intrinsic motion or entropy debt). (See also: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?")
Hence the ultimate reason for the existence of gravitation (beyond the primordial energy
balance of the "Big Bang") is a twofold conservation linkage (the consequence of conserving
the double gauge role of "velocity c"): 1) the conservation of light's non-local distributional
symmetry or symmetric energy state; 2) the establishment and maintenance of matter's entropy
drive (time) and historic "causal matrix" (historic spacetime). The gravitational creation of time
from space can also be seen as the conservation of light's entropy drive - the conversion of
light's intrinsic motion into time's intrinsic motion. This double conservation role is
accomplished through the double role of gravity's entropic time charge. Time is the active
principle of gravity's "location" charge, both identifying the 4-D spatial coordinate position of
asymmetrically distributed immobile, concentrated mass-energy, and simultaneously
establishing the historical entropy drive of matter, the intrinsic motion of bound energy's time
dimension (see: " The Time Train"). The conservation of energy and causality are of course also
served by the gravitational creation of matter's time dimension (since matter has relative rather
than absolute motion).
By Dec. 2008 I understood that the intrinsic motion of time and gravitation produces the
historic conservation domain of information (historic spacetime), which links today with
yesterday and space with time, a linkage which is essential to upholding the reality of the

7 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

"Universal Present Moment". The latter is the real effect of and necessity for matter's historic
"causal matrix" - the continuum of spacetime. This last bit of understanding - that gravity
produces and maintains the necessary historic/energetic connection between past and present
and space and time - creating the historic continuum of spacetime - is simply another step up
the ladder of understanding the conservation role of this most complex and paradoxical of the
four forces of physics. Light is connected by space, matter is connected by time, gravity
connects everything. Gravity both creates and is created by the intrinsic motion of time. Time
and gravity induce each other in a self-feeding endless cycle. (See also: "A Spacetime Map of
the Universe".) (Still other conservation roles for gravity are surmised in the "Higgs Boson"
papers, involving the recreation of the primordial force unification eras of the "Big Bang".) (See
also: "A Description of Gravity".)
Local Gauge Symmetry
The notion of gravity as the spacetime flow of a "local gauge symmetry current" creating time,
gave me yet another perspective upon this primal conservation force (Nov. 2006). We can now
formulate a (somewhat technical) statement of gravity's role which accommodates the
"Standard Model" of "establishment" physics:
The 1st law of thermodynamics, energy conservation, can be regarded as the
primary role of gravitation, with the conservation of entropy, causality, and
symmetry as corollaries, since the role of the spacetime metric is first and foremost
to conserve energy. The action of gravitation converts a global electromagnetic
metric of space, light, and absolute motion gauged by "c", to a local gravitational
metric of time, matter, and relative motion gauged by "G". Time or temporal
entropy can be regarded as a "local" form of entropy drive, distilled from the
"global" entropy drive of light (by the gravitational annihilation of space and the
extraction of a temporal residue). Time is the local compensating component of the
gravitational field vector (spacetime) - equivalently, the local gauge symmetry
"current" - protecting the invariance of the "Interval", causality, and "velocity c"
within the gravitational metric, accomplishing energy conservation despite the
variable and relative motions of matter, or a variable gravitational/metric field. To
this end, time itself must be flexible and interchangeable with space (covariance of
time and space in Special and General Relativity - "Lorentz Invariance"). In this
local gauge symmetry role, time is the functional analog of the magnetic
component of the electromagnetic field: time protects energy conservation and the
invariance of "velocity c", magnetism protects symmetry conservation and the
invariance of electric charge. (See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and
Gravitation".)
Quantum Relations
(See: "The Conversion of Space to Time")
Time and gravity are the microscopic (quantum mechanical - particle/charge/temporal/entropic)
and macroscopic (general relativistic - mass/location/spatial/symmetric) aspects of the same
force. The unification of gravity with quantum mechanics subsists in the unification of gravity

8 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

with time. Gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. Time is the active
principle of the gravitational "location" charge. It is the entropic nature of the gravitational
"location" charge that distinguishes gravitation from the other forces and their charges: the latter
represent symmetry debts only. Gravitation carries both a symmetry and an entropy debt of
light, the consequence of the fact that gravity conserves both aspects of the double regulatory
role of "velocity c", which gauges both the "non-local" symmetric energy state of light and the
entropy drive of light (light's spatially expansive intrinsic motion). In conserving light's
(broken) non-local distributional symmetry, gravitation automatically conserves both the
symmetric and entropic metric gauge functions of c. Hence in the Sun, gravitation is both
creating the Sun's time dimension by converting space into time, and simultaneously reversing
this reaction by converting bound energy (mass) into light. (See: " Spatial vs Temporal
Entropy".)
One of several rationales for gravitation (in addition to registering immobile matter's
asymmetric spatio-temporal distribution), is the causal nature of bound energy, which requires a
one-way temporal sequence to regulate its energy accounts. This temporal flow also serves as
bound energy's entropy drive, which is the metric equivalent of velocity c, the latter gauging the
entropy drive of free energy. "Velocity c" also gauges "velocity T" (determining that one second
of temporal duration is metrically equivalent to ~300,000 kilometers of distance), and hence "c"
is the ultimate gauge of both entropy drives (see: "Gravity Diagram No. 2"). "G" (the universal
gravitational constant) is the metric conversion/conservation gauge and force acting between
the primordial entropy drives of space and time, converting either into the other. "c" is the
regulator of the metric equivalence between space, time, and light (free electromagnetic
energy); "G" is the regulator of the entropic equivalence between space, time, and mass (bound
electromagnetic energy).
Both forms of entropy drive (the intrinsic motions of light and time) create dimensional
conservation domains for their energy types (space and history), in which energy can exist, be
used and transformed, but nevertheless be conserved. It is the effectively "infinite" velocity of
both c and T which prevents the abuse of energy while it is being used, and also seals the
borders of space and history against causality violations via fast space ship or "time machine".
In the case of the black hole, where the gravitational metric of matter completely overwhelms
and replaces the electromagnetic metric of light, including its protective entropic functions,
gravity seals the borders of spacetime via the "event horizon" and central "singularity". T, c, and
G are all entropy gauges which both create and protect dimensional conservation domains:
history, space, and spacetime. The creation of dimensional conservation domains via "infinitely"
fast intrinsic/entropic motions is the connection between the first and second laws of
thermodynamics. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
The Intrinsic Motion of Light
The intrinsic motion of light is caused by the symmetric spatial component ("wavelength") of
an electromagnetic wave "fleeing" the asymmetric temporal component ("frequency") - the
latter is an internal property of light's own nature (frequency multiplied by wavelength = c).
Only by moving constantly at velocity c can the symmetric wavelength component of light
suppress the asymmetric temporal component to an "implicit" state - light has no time

9 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

dimension, yet it has a "frequency". Light requires one dimension each for its electric and
magnetic components, and a third for its entropic motion. Hence space is the entropic
dimension, providing the base of light's energy conservation domain. When light is brought to
rest and becomes bound energy, the implicit time component becomes explicit, serving as
matter's temporal entropy drive. The explicit time dimension of matter marches off into the
historic domain (at right angles to all three spatial dimensions), dragging space after it, and so
causes the macroscopic gravitational field. The entropic time charge of gravitation is thus the
connection between gravity and quantum mechanics, realized through the switch of the
temporal component of the electromagnetic wave from implicit to explicit, 2-dimensional to
4-dimensional. This simple switch is the whole difference between the expansion of space as
driven by the intrinsic motion of light, and the collapse of space as driven by the intrinsic
motion of time and gravity - the difference between positive and negative spatial entropy, or
implicit vs explicit time (see: "The Conversion of Space to Time").
The Sign of "G"
The sign of G is determined by the small energy difference between the symmetric spatial
entropy drive (S) of light (the intrinsic motion of light, as gauged by "velocity c"), and the
asymmetric temporal entropy drive (T) of matter (the intrinsic motion of matter's time
dimension, as gauged by "velocity T"):
S - T = -G
This is equivalent to the small energy difference between implicit (S) and explicit (T) time.
(See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
It takes energy to create the drive of one-way temporal entropy from the drive of "all-way"
spatial entropy, because an asymmetric, one-way temporal order must be imposed upon the
symmetric, "all-way" spatial expansion. This entropy-energy cost of time is the origin of the
"negative energy" characteristic of gravity and the negative sign of "-G".
The notion of the gravitational conversion of space and the drive of spatial entropy (S) to time
and the drive of historical entropy (T), can be symbolically represented by a (quasimathematical) "concept equation" as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
Because I assume the general validity of Einstein's gravitational equations
(excepting his "cosmological constant" and the case of light in free space), it
follows that I assume Einstein's formulation of the gravitational "warpage" of
spacetime must be a mathematical description of the conversion of space to time
(his "covariance" of space and time). For example, when Einstein tells us that
meter sticks shrink and clocks run slow in a gravitational field, I assume that the
missing space reappears as the extra time, such that the metric total remains
constant - as is indeed the case in Einstein's formulation of the spacetime
"Interval". Hence the actual mathematics behind my grossly simplified "concept

10 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

equation" has already been done. (See also the paper "The "Higgs" Boson and the
Spacetime Metric".)
The time element which is implicit in the photon (as "frequency") and causes the intrinsic
motion of light (the entropy drive of free energy), is the very same time element which becomes
explicit in mass or matter, causing the intrinsic motion of time (the historical entropy drive of
bound energy). The small energetic difference between the symmetric spatial form (S) and the
asymmetric temporal form (T) of the entropy drive determines the sign of G: S - T = -G.
(Energy must be borrowed (from space) to produce an asymmetric entropy drive from a
symmetric one, hence G is negative.) Finally, this entropy-energy, like any energy, must be
conserved, and how else could this conservation be accomplished except by completing the
gravitational loop between the spatial and temporal entropy drives - decelerating the expansion
of the entire Cosmos in consequence? The historical expansion of the cosmos is funded by the
gravitational deceleration of the spatial expansion of the cosmos. This is physically
accomplished by the gravitational annihilation and conversion of space into metrically
equivalent temporal units. When mass is converted to light (as in stars), the total gravitational
energy of the Cosmos is reduced, and the expansion increases again in consequence - recently
observed as the mysterious "acceleration" of the universe. "Dark energy" is the reduction of
cosmic gravitational entropy-energy and its replacement by the expansive spatial entropy drive
of light.
Black Holes
Black holes are the physical evidence and demonstration that gravity creates time from space.
The "event horizon" of a black hole is the "frozen" entropy of light, light's intrinsic motion and
spatial metric completely converted to time and matter's historical metric, both light and time
brought to rest in a gravitationally bound form (the Bekenstein-Hawking theorem) - just as the
mass of a stone is the "frozen" energy of light converted to matter/atoms and brought to rest in a
chemically bound form. Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes is the ultimate
expression of Noether's Theorem fulfilled (in the case of the gravitational symmetry/entropy
debt), confirming that only in the black hole is gravity's symmetry-conservation quest totally
realized. With the complete evaporation of the black hole via "quantum radiance", the mass and
temporal entropy of asymmetric matter are all converted to its original symmetric form (light),
and the gravitational field that was associated with the bound energy of the hole vanishes, its
conservation work finally accomplished. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
(See: Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on black holes.)
Black holes actually convert a relatively large percentage of the rest mass of in-falling matter
into light - as the brilliance of quasars demonstrates. This conversion of mass to light is
considerably more efficient than nucleosynthetic conversion in ordinary stars (up to 28% of the
in-falling rest-mass energy), and so forms a distinct, major conversion category at both the
stellar and galactic structural levels. (See: Caleb Scharf Gravity's Engines Scientific
American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2012 p 76.) This is yet another stepping stone in the
inexorable gravitational pathway leading toward total mass conversion and complete symmetry
conservation, culminating, as we have seen, in Hawking's "quantum radiance". (See: "Nodes of
the Gravitational Metric".)

11 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

Why Gravity is so Weak
Gravity is weak because mass is connected to its entropic conservation domain of historic
spacetime only by the tangential point of the "present moment" (time is at right angles to all
three spatial dimensions). Gravity creates only enough time to provide the temporal entropy
drive for this point-like tangential connection between matter and its historic conservation
domain. This notion accords with P. A. M. Dirac's observation that the ratio between the
strength of the electromagnetic and gravitational forces is the same as the ratio between the size
of the cosmos and an electron. Black holes demonstrate that the intrinsic strength of gravity is at
least as great as the other forces, when measured at the tangential point of contact between
space and time. For more on this topic, see: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat
Death' of the Cosmos".
Philosophical Connections of the "Tetrahedron Model"
(See: Maudlin, Tim. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time 2012 Princeton Univ. Press.)
In a beautiful convergence between philosophical tradition (both ancient and modern) and the
gravitational physics of the "Tetrahedron Model", Tim Maudlin (see citation above) points out
that since empty 3-D space is perfectly symmetric, there is no point/place in it that can be
preferred over any other point/place. Hence God could not decide "where" to place the
Creation. In the "Tetrahedron Model", massless light can (therefore) only be symmetrically
distributed throughout the spatial domain, and simultaneously at that, since light and 3-D space
both lack a time dimension. Hence light and space are equivalently symmetric, and indeed, we
think of light as creating space for its own conservation needs. The intrinsic motion of light is
the fundamental expression of entropy in free electromagnetic energy, creating, expanding, and
cooling the primary dimensional conservation domain (space) of free electromagnetic energy
(light). Light and space both lack a time dimension, and hence both also lack a space-warping
gravitational field. (See: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?") The electromagnetic
constant "velocity c" also "gauges" (regulates) the metric symmetry of light's spatial
conservation arena. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
Contrast this situation with that of massive forms of bound (rather than free) electromagnetic
energy, from atoms to galaxies, which all produce space-warping gravitational fields whose
precise effect is to identify in the undeniable energetic terms of metric-warping inertial force the
exact spatial location of the massive system's "center of mass". Since massive particles,
completely lacking the intrinsic spatial motion of massless light, cannot distribute themselves
symmetrically within the volume of 3-D space, some way of selecting/identifying a particular
place within that spatial plenum must be found. This is accomplished by time and the
gravitational field of the particle(s), which induce each other. (See: "The Conversion of Space to
Time".) The extra time dimension is added to 3-D space to break the spatial symmetry and
identify a specific location within the spatial domain, which becomes a 4-D spacetime
continuum with an infinity of identifiable points due to the addition of the extra time dimension.
Time has "intrinsic" (entropic) motion, the analog of light's intrinsic (entropic) motion, except
in time's case it is one-way motion to provide completely distinguishable points ("events")
within an infinite and expanding historical spacetime. These 4-D spacetime positions are unique
not only because time runs one-way, but also because the Cosmos as a whole unit begins

12 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

simultaneously in the "Big Bang". History is the temporal analog of space, the conservation
domain of matter's causal information field. Light is connected through space, matter is
connected through history, gravity connects everything, converting space to time and vice versa.
(See: "A Description of Gravity".)
There is a similarity in function between the color charges and gluon field of the strong force,
and time and the gravitons of gravity: both provide an extra dimension ("degree of freedom") in
which to separate and distinguish particles in what would otherwise be an overcrowded field of
fermions. This is another view of the connection between the spacetime and particle "metrics"
of free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy, and the activity of their field vectors as
"currents of local gauge symmetry".
Letter to a Skeptic
Aug., 2014
Dear Sir,
I can't remember exactly how I got to the realization (on Nov. 10, 1998) that gravity and time
are not just related, but actually create each other in an endless self-feeding process. A
gravitational field (as per Einstein) is the wholesale accelerated motion of spacetime (not just
space), leading to Einstein's celebrated "Equivalence Principle". It struck me that at the center
of the Earth, of an atom, or of any bound form of energy, the spatial component of this flow
(being symmetrically directed to the center of mass from all directions) would self-annihilate,
leaving behind a metrically equivalent temporal residue, which could not self-annihilate since
time is asymmetric (being one-way). This temporal residue would immediately march off into
the historic domain (because of time's "intrinsic" motion), dragging space along with it (since
the two dimensions are usually inseparable). But 3-D space cannot fit into the one-dimensional
time line (which moreover is directed at right angles to all three spatial dimensions), and so
space self-annihilates at the center of mass, leaving again a metrically equivalent temporal
residue, which repeats the endless and entropic cycle. Thus gravity and time induce each other,
somewhat analogously to the mutual induction of the electric and magnetic components of
light, but by a very different process.
This is a rough-and-ready description of the gravitational conversion of space into time, in
terms of dimensionality and metrics which also has a quantum mechanical interpretation in
terms of "wavelength vs frequency", and a thermodynamic interpretation in terms of alternative
entropy domains for free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy, and an interpretation in
terms of general conservation principles. Einstein's equations of Special and General Relativity
provide the mathematical context for such ideas - an interpretation foreshadowed by the flexible
and interchangeable parameters of space and time necessary to maintain the constant value of
Einstein's "Interval" (causality relations) in both theories. Note that by gravitational conversion
of space to time a perfectly integrated spacetime metric is achieved, in which the entropy drive
of light is completely conserved (although in an alternative form) as the entropy drive of time.
See my website for papers on these topics if you are interested. (http://www.johnagowan.org
/index.html)
I was led to these conclusions by considerations of entropy. It is a most interesting fact that

13 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

there are three related "intrinsic" dimensional motions in nature, the intrinsic motion of light,
the intrinsic motion of time, and the intrinsic motion of gravity, and all three are entropic
motions, that is, they are dimension-creating intrinsic motions which produce metric/entropic
conservation domains for their energy types: expanding and cooling space for free
electromagnetic energy (light), expanding and aging history for bound electromagnetic energy
(massive forms of matter), and contracting and heating gravitational spacetime (negative
entropy - including black holes). Entropy is such an essential part of energy conservation that it
is fundamentally embedded in all energy forms of our universe, its most primordial expression
seen in the "intrinsic" dimensional motions of light, time, and gravity.
Now a very curious aspect of gravity is that it also creates a spacetime metric, a combined
metric of space and time "gauged" by Newton's gravitational constant "G", whereas light itself
only creates a symmetric spatial metric as gauged by the electromagnetic constant "c". The
gravitational metric (as per Einstein) is "accelerated", "curved", or "warped" by the presence of
asymmetric time, which as we have surmised above is in fact created by gravity via the
annihilation of space. As gravitational field strength increases, it goes from a "passive"
condition (as on planet Earth) of simply creating the planet's time dimension (gravity's basic,
low energy entropy-conserving role - converting the spatial entropy drive of light to the
alternative historical entropy drive of matter). Hence the earth's gravitational field represents the
(negative) entropy-energy required to create Earth's time dimension. At higher field strengths,
gravity moves to its "active" condition as seen in our sun and the stars, in which (via the
nucleosynthetic pathway) it begins to return bound energy to its original symmetric form, light.
This is a symmetry-conservation role which continues on in supernovas, quasars, and finally in
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes, where gravity completely annihilates matter
(rather than space), returning the entire bound energy of the black hole to symmetric light. In
this series we see gravity obeying Noether's symmetry-conservation theorem, since free
electromagnetic energy (light) is a much more symmetric form of energy than bound
electromagnetic energy (matter): for starters, light has no time dimension .
Again, it is very curious that in the black hole gravity takes over and displaces all of the
electromagnetic functions of light, including those of chemical and nuclear binding forces as
well as those of the electromagnetic metric. Gravity imposes its own metric in the black hole,
the metric of time and matter rather than the electromagnetic metric of space and light. But at
the black hole's "event horizon", where g = c, we find that all forms of energy, including
massive objects, move at velocity c and time stands still while meter sticks shrink to nothing in
the direction of motion. But these are exactly the symmetry conditions imposed on light in free
space by the electromagnetic metric. The "extremes meet" - both the pure electromagnetic
metric of light and the pure gravitational metric of matter impose the same symmetry conditions
upon the energy forms of their respective domains.
This puts the relentless drive of gravity toward the black hole in a new perspective: is the
inexorable gravitational drive a manifestation of gravity's symmetry-conservation role (in
obedience to Noether's theorem), or is gravity intent on producing its own (alternative)
symmetric metric in the temporal domain of the black hole - a metric gauged by "G" rather than
"c"?

14 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

I haven't yet tried to explain all this to a five-year old, since if I could I would have to wonder
why it took me 70+ years to understand it myself. I have tried to come up with a few simple
aphorisms, however: "Gravity is matter's memory it once was light"; "A gravitational field is
the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time". Whether these phrases would mean
anything to a five-year old I don't know; I do know that the sun in our sky is telling us
something - its glorious radiance announces that gravity's symmetry-conservation agenda has
taken its first step!
Ultimately, we are able to place gravity and the conversion of space to time (as on planet earth)
and vice versa (as on the sun) within the context of a much wider theory which unifies all four
forces of physics beneath the symmetry-conserving mantle of Noether's theorem: "The charges
of matter are the symmetry debts of light."
I know this is all inadequate as an explanation of my general theory, but for that I have labored
mightily to produce a more comprehensive explanation in various papers on my website, to
which I must refer you for further details:
http://www.johnagowan.org/index.html
Best wishes,
John A. Gowan

PS: As with most phenomena associated with gravity, it is easier to see what is going on at large
(astrophysical) scales rather than small. For example, it is simple enough (on the planetary scale
of Earth) to imagine that the one-way spatial vector of gravity ("falling downward" toward the
"center of mass") is converted into the one-way causally directed temporal vector of history
("forward" into the future) - a direct swapping of one asymmetric dimensional entropy drive for
another. There is also conservation going on here at several conceptual levels: space is
annihilated by gravity (at the center of mass) but nevertheless converted/conserved in an
alternative entropic form as history: the entropic drive of light (manifest as the "intrinsic
motion" of light causing the expansion and cooling of space), is conserved/converted to the
alternative entropic drive of time (manifest as the expansion, decay, or aging and dilution of
history). Mathematically, we have the positive entropy drive of light and space (free
electromagnetic energy) neutralized by the negative entropy drive of matter and gravity (bound
electromagnetic energy), but conserved nevertheless in alternative form by conversion to the
positive entropic drive of history, creating historic spacetime - the conservation domain of
matter's causal information field. One positive entropy drive is gravitationally neutralized and
converted to another. (The conversion also runs in the opposite direction via the conversion of
mass, time, and gravity to light and space in stars.) You can't destroy space without creating
time, just as you cannot destroy matter without creating light - not even in a black hole, as
Hawking's "quantum radiance" and the entropic character of Bekenstein's "event horizon"
demonstrate. - JAG

15 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

Links:
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part
I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part
2
A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
The Tetrahedron Model in the Context of a Complete Conservation Cycle
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
About Gravity
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Half-life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Gravity Diagrams
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model (complete version)
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric

16 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

Gravitation

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/sect2.html

References:
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8),
2333-46.
Bekenstein, J. D. Information in the Holographic Universe. Scientific
American, Aug. 2003, 58-65.
Bohm, D. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. Routledge & Kegan Paul
1980, 224 + xv pp.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life
and Work. M. Dekker, New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in
Mathematical Physics 1975, 43 (3), 199-220.
Maudlin, T. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time 2012 Princeton Univ.
Press.
Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux
2012
See: Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on black
holes.

17 of 17

8/28/14 12:23 PM

