Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of
Everything") - Part I (revised May, 2014)
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
The Charges of Matter are Symmetry Debts of Light
Abstract:
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory as presented in
these pages may be deduced from "Noether's Theorem":
The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light.
The "Big Bang" origin of the cosmos is the conversion of
pure, symmetric electromagnetic energy (light) into
asymmetric atomic "information" (our "matter only"
universe). "Noether's Theorem" states that in a
multicomponent field such as the electromagnetic field
(or the metric field of spacetime), symmetries are
associated with conservation laws and vice-versa. Hence
the symmetry of light (and spacetime) must be
conserved. Noether's Theorem provides the key to
Einstein's dream of a "Unified Field Theory" through the
seminal concept that the symmetry of light, no less than
its energy, must be conserved.
(Questions such as "What existed before the "Big
Bang"?" (probably the Multiverse) and "Why is there
something rather than nothing?" (because of the
possibility of life) are questions for philosophy/religion,
not science. In what follows, I conceive of the "Big
1 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Bang" as a "breakout" from the all-symmetric Multiverse
into the asymmetric realm of atomic matter, information,
time, causality, gravity, entropy, charge, etc.)
Our asymmetric "matter-only" Universe was created (in
the "Big Bang") from all-symmetric free electromagnetic
energy (light), via an unknown asymmetric weak-force
interaction, resulting in a loss of cosmic symmetry and a
corresponding, compensating gain in symmetryconserving (charge-conserving) bound energy states
("atomic matter"). For conservation reasons
(energy/entropy/symmetry), matter is furthermore
embedded in a secondary entropic and causal domain
(historic spacetime), created by gravity from light's
primary entropic and a-causal domain (space). The
negative energy of gravity not only creates time from
space, it also balances the positive energy of the "Big
Bang" such that no net energy is required to produce our
cosmos. Our "matter-only" Universe is the original
"light-only" universe (still with us today as the universal
spatial dimension with its 2.7 kelvin "cosmic background
radiation"), plus a small portion which (following
primordial symmetry-breaking) was "frozen" by
symmetry conservation (charge conservation) into
various familiar material forms (present today as atomic
matter, gravity, and historic spacetime). Today's
(low-energy) "matter" atom is exactly one-half of an
original (high-energy) charge-balanced (neutral,
symmetric) "matter-antimatter" particle-pair, which
somehow escaped annihilation by its complementary
member (see: primordial symmetry-breaking by the
weak force during the "Big Bang"). Hence the charges of
matter, originally intended to conserve symmetry via
matter-antimatter annihilations, remain, due to the
absence of antimatter, as unbalanced symmetry debts of
light. In matter, light's (broken) symmetries are
2 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

conserved by charge and spin; in spacetime, light's
metric symmetries are protected by the invariance of
"velocity c", inertial/entropic forces, Einstein's
"Interval", causality, "Lorentz Invariance" (phenomena
associated with the Special Theory of Relativity), and
conserved (when broken) by gravitational forces
associated with "local" mass ("Gm" - phenomena
associated with the General Theory of Relativity).
All forms of energy originate (directly or indirectly)
from light; matter carries charges (including gravity)
which are the symmetry debts of the light which created
it. Charges produce forces which act to return the
material system to its original symmetric state (light),
repaying matter's primordial symmetry debts.
Repayment is exampled by any spontaneous interaction
producing net free energy, including: exothermic
chemical reactions and matter-antimatter annihilation
reactions; radioactivity, particle and proton decay; the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, the gravitational
conversion of bound to free energy (as in supernovas and
quasars), and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes. Identifying the broken symmetries of light
associated with each of the 4 charges and forces of
physics (see below) is the first step toward a conceptual
"Unified Field Theory".
In weak gravitational fields (as on planet Earth), gravity
only pays the entropy "interest" on the spatial symmetry
debt of "local" matter (which is carried as "location
charge": Gm), converting space to time, in effect
producing an alternative entropic drive and
dimension/domain (time/history) in which charge
conservation (and causality) are serviced by an
indefinitely extended temporal duration and
consequential ("karmic") significance. In stronger fields
(as in our Sun), gravity additionally pays down the
3 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

"principal" of matter's spatial symmetry debt, converting
asymmetric "local" mass to symmetric "non-local" light.
This latter conversion continues in supernovas and
quasars, and finally goes to completion via Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes. The conversion of
mass to light reduces the total gravitational field of the
cosmos, resulting in the apparent "acceleration" of
cosmic expansion, recently observed (see: Science 7 Oct.
2011 Vol. 334 Page 30). (See: "A Description of
Gravity".)
The symmetry-conserving requirement of charge
invariance, through time, despite entropy, and despite
relative, variable, and contingent forces of
motion/acceleration, is the key to understanding the
rationale for the local action of the "4 forces"
("global/local gauge forces"), including quantization of
charge and the "Lorentz Invariance" and magnetism of
Special Relativity. In the mathematical terms of Evariste
Galois' "Group Theory", our "Tetrahedron Model" is a
description of the symmetry group of light, including its
destruction by asymmetric weak force decays (resulting
in our asymmetric "matter-only" Cosmos), and the
on-going spontaneous restoration of cosmic symmetry in
obedience to Noether's Theorem of symmetry
conservation (as in the conversion of bound to free
energy in stars). (See: Neuenschwander, Dwight E.
Emmy Noether's Wonderful Theorem. 2011. The Johns
Hopkins University Press.)
Biology is included in our physical unification scheme
through the notion of "information": information charts a
"lawful" (charge-conserved) pathway for matter's return
to light's symmetry, while simultaneously producing a
way for the universe to achieve localized consciousness,
know itself in part as well as in whole, and diversify its
experience and creativity through a multitude of
4 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

evolutionary forms. Life is the rationale for the existence
of the universe. While atomic nuclei promote symmetry
conservation through high-energy, exothermic
nucleosynthetic pathways in stars, their associated
electron shells create life through low-energy,
neg-entropic chemical pathways on planets. Using
energy and heavy elements ultimately provided by
gravity, stars, and the galaxy, the "Information Pathway"
of planetary biology is the means whereby the universe
comes to life, awakens to itself, achieves consciousness,
experiences and elaborates itself, explores new modes of
creativity (including abstract/symbolic modes), and
evolves new forms of beauty and symmetry. Carbon's
electron shell is the crucial link between the abiotic and
biotic information systems of the Cosmos; the concepts
of Information and the Multiverse are crucial links
between our scientific and religious world views. "We
come trailing clouds of glory..."
(See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Alternative Charge
Carriers".) (See also: "The Information Pathway".)
(Abstract revised Oct., 2017.)
See:
The "Tetrahedron Model" (diagram)
"The Fractal Organization of the Universe" (text)
Translations
This paper has been translated into French by Anna Chekovsky - many thanks
Anna! 13 Jan., 2015. See link below:
http://www.teilestore.de/edu/?p=9315
This paper has been translated into German by Lukas Schmidt: 5 April, 2017.
Many thanks, Lukas!
http://gameperiod.com/symmetry-prinzipien-der-einheitlichen-feldtheorieeine-theory-of-everything-teil-i
German Translation provided by Gameperiod.com

5 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

This paper has been translated into Japanese by Haruto Anami. 20 June, 2017.
Many thanks, Haruto!
http://www.dailydealscoupon.net/symmetry-principles-of-the-unified-field-theorya-theory-of-everything-part-i/
Japanese translation by Daily Deals Coupon

Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 2"
Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 3 (summary)"

Part 1, Row 1 - Symmetric Energy States
and the "Big Bang"
Note (1): I recommend the reader consult the "preface" or
"guide" to this paper, which may be found at "About the Papers:
An Introduction" and "The Sun Archetype". Because this paper is
already too long, I have broken it into three parts, and "farmed
out" the discussion of several major but complex topics,
including " cosmology, "gravitation, "entropy, the "weak force,
etc., to other papers on my website devoted solely to those topics.
The reader must consult these (and related) papers if a thorough
discussion of these topics is desired.
Note (2): The format of this paper ("Row 1", "Row 2", etc.)
follows a 4x4 table which the reader should access and print out
for ready reference (also available at the end of this paper). A
very simple rendering of this table is available at: 4x3 table. This
table provides a convenient way to organize an extensive subject
matter, and is furthermore part of a "General System, or Fractal
Model of the Universe, which facilitates comparison and
correlation with other "world systems". The introductory papers:
""Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime"
and ""Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of
Matter", provide a general summary of the topic.

6 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Note (3): Symmetry in nature is found in many forms. The
mathematical symmetries of the four forces usually discussed by
"establishment" physics in the context of unification are derived
from the "group theory" of Evariste Galois, Sophus Lie, and
Wilhelm Killing. These symmetries generally describe "rotations
in phase space" in which particles, forces, and/or actions are
rendered indistinguishable from one another (see Ian Stewart:
"Why Beauty is Truth" (Basic Books 2007) for an expert
discussion at the layman's level of the mathematical symmetries
of the Lie groups). Because I worked independently of the
mathematical physics "establishment", I discovered and used a
different set of symmetries to achieve a unification among the
forces. "My" symmetry principles are derived from (my own
reading of) Noether's Theorem: the charges of matter are the
symmetry debts of light. The two sets of symmetry principles
actually complement each other, illustrating the great value of
independent approaches to a common problem. Both come
together in the "Table of the Higgs Bosons and Weak Force
IVBs". For another view of the synthesis between my own and
the establishment's version of unification, see: "The 'Tetrahedron
Model' vs the 'Standard Model': A Comparison"; and: "A Short
Course in the Unified Field Theory".
Note (4): In each of the four rows below I suggest a financial
metaphor for the energetic process characteristic of the row,
beginning with the assumption of a debt, followed by two
contrasting payment modes, and ending with a full repayment of
the debt. The intent is to help the reader gain an overview of, and
feeling for, the unfolding energy budget of the Cosmos as
outlined in this model, by reference to another quantitative,
conserved, and energetic system with which we are all familiar.
Row 1: Incurring the energy, entropy, and symmetry debt "taking out a loan, opening a mortgage contract" - symmetrybreaking during the Big Bang. Important concepts in Row 1
include the nature of light and its intrinsic motion, as gauged by
7 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

"velocity c"; the establishment of the spacetime metric;
"Noether's Theorem" and the conserved symmetries of light; the
interaction of light with metric space to create the particle "sea"
or "zoo"; and finally, the breaking of the symmetry of light, the
spacetime metric, and matter-antimatter particle pairs by the
asymmetric interactions of the weak force with matter vs
antimatter. Symmetry-breaking results in the creation of isolated
particles of matter - the atoms which form our material Universe.
Symmetry-breaking also results in the creation of symmetry,
entropy, and energy debts which must be protected, conserved,
and ultimately repaid through the actions of the 4 forces of
physics (see row 4).
How the Universe actually begins (for example, "inflationary"
scenarios) is not considered in this account (see: "The Origin of
Matter and Information" and "The Higgs Boson and the Weak
Force IVBs" for "genesis" scenarios). I assume, however, that the
initiating positive energy is completely balanced by some type of
negative energy (such as gravity). Furthermore, it is not
unreasonable to suppose that our Universe is but one of many (a
member of the "multiverse"), whose unique physical constants
are constrained by the "anthropic principle" (must allow the
evolution of our life form), and the requirements of energy
conservation.
Synopsis of Row One:
Illustrating the concordance of the sequence of forces in
Row One with the sequence of forces in the "Higgs
Cascade".
The sequence of events in the first row is addressed in
the paper and table describing the "Higgs Cascade". This
sequence was originally established using "General
Systems" intuitive criteria; many years later it was
discovered to also conform to the rational series as
delineated by the "Higgs Cascade".
8 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

In cell one we have the initial state of our Cosmos as it
separated from the "Multiverse". This separation is
effected and characterized by the set of "life friendly" or
"anthropic" physical constants that eventually make
possible the evolution of life and humanity on our own
planet Earth. Cell one contains an unknown primordial
physical state of energy described as "Ylem" by George
Gamow. I presume the "Ylem" consists of a mixture of
quarks and leptons, including most significantly, very
heavy, primordial leptoquarks in matter-antimatter pairs.
(Leptoquarks are heavy primordial leptons internally
fractured into three quarks; an alternative description is
primordial, heavy, colorless baryons). (See also: "The
Origin of Matter and Information"; see also: "The
Particle Table".)
The four forces of physics are combined in cell one, and
will separate themselves one by one as the universe
expands and cools. It is this 4-stage unfolding of forces
that row one represents.
The most important feature of cell one - other than the
"anthropic" value of its physical constants - is that it
contains matter and antimatter in equal amounts, and
consequently positive and negative forms of energy and
charge in equal amounts (if they are all virtual particles),
such that it contains no net charge and no net energy. If
we are speaking of real particles, then the balancing
negative energy is provided by gravitation. Hence our
cosmos in its initial form can be separated from the
Multiverse as a quantum fluctuation, a totally
self-contained and internally conserved entity. (If our
universe seems too large to be characterized as a
"quantum fluctuation", perhaps we should ask instead:
"What is the energy scale or "gauge" of the
'Multiverse'"?) I assume the mixture of gravitation with
9 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

electromagnetic energy, when combined with the strong
and weak forces, is instrumental in creating a bound
form of electromagnetic energy (matter) from the free
form (light). Cell and column one are named for the
electromagnetic force, as our universe is an
electromagnetic cosmos in both its free and bound
energy forms, as matter-antimatter annihilations
demonstrate. Column one deals with selected matters
pertaining to the electromagnetic force and its boson or
force carrier, the photon, including magnetism and the
symmetry and entropy relations of light and its spatial
conservation domain.
Gravity is the first force to separate itself from the
primordial "Ylem", and so takes its place at the head of
column two. In cell one, gravity is completely united
with the other forces in the creation of bound energy
forms (massive particles) from free energy (massless
light). Hence we will find that particles and the
spacetime metric are forever afterward to some degree
intertwined (as is most remarkably demonstrated by the
spontaneous creation of Heisenberg-Dirac virtual
particles). But once gravity and the spacetime metric
have participated in the creation of particle mass, gravity
is immediately needed for another crucial task - the
creation of time to govern the energy conservation
accounts of these same newly created massive particles.
The spatial metric of cell one governs the absolute
motion of massless particles (photons) at velocity c, but
cannot by itself regulate the relative motions of massive
particles at velocities less than c. For this the time
dimension is necessary; time is created by the
gravitational annihilation of space and the extraction of a
metrically equivalent temporal residue. (See: "The
Creation of Time from Space".) Hence as soon as
massive particles are created, a gravitational metric
10 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

incorporating time as well as space must also be created
to accommodate their energy conservation requirements.
The time dimension also serves as the entropy drive of
bound energy, creating and expanding the historical
domain of matter (history contains matter's causal
information field), the analog of, and alternative to, the
spatial conservation domain conserving the energy and
symmetry of light. Cell two and the column it heads
therefore concerns all things temporal and gravitational,
including history, the creation of time from space, black
holes, and the composite gravitational metric of
spacetime.
Column three represents the strong force of the color
charge, the force holding quark triplets together in
baryons. The strong force and its gluon field is naturally
in third place as it is required to produce leptoquarks, a
composite particle and not simply a massive monolithic
elementary particle such as a lepton. The primordial
mass carrier must be a composite particle in order that it
may achieve electrical neutrality via the suitable choice
and arrangement of its internal components (quarks) - as
exampled by the neutron. Leptons by themselves always
bear single electrical charges, which ordinarily can only
be balanced by an anti-lepton, resulting inevitably in an
annihilation reaction. In order to have some surviving
matter particles after the general (primordial)
annihilation of matter with antimatter, we must have an
electrically neutral particle capable of undergoing an
asymmetrical weak force decay (in cell four). Hence the
necessity for the composite particle capable of arranging
its quarks in an electrically neutral configuration, and
hence also the necessity of the strong force to effect and
bind this arrangement of internal parts. ( See: "The
Strong Force: Two Expressions".) Column three
therefore deals with the mass-carrying baryons and all
11 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

matters pertaining to them and the strong force (solar
fusion for example), including quarks, gluons, color
charges, the elements of the periodic table, and the
meson field of alternative charge carriers.
Column four remains to accommodate the mysterious
and asymmetric weak force, the creator and destroyer of
matter. Here also reside the alternative charge carriers
(leptons, neutrinos), so necessary to circumventing
annihilation reactions during the production of baryons
and atomic matter, and the massive Higgs boson and
Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs), responsible for
gauging and effecting transformations among single
elementary particles. It is the weak force which finally
breaks the symmetry of the particle-antiparticle pairs and
virtual reality, thrusting unpaired particles of atomic
matter into "real" (temporal) existence in the asymmetric
4-dimensional realm of gravitational spacetime. Column
four is therefore concerned with issues surrounding
radioactivity, fission, alternative charge carriers, and all
questions concerning the symmetry-breaking activity of
the weak force, especially the creation and destruction of
(single) elementary particles of invariant charge, mass,
and spin.
Begin Table:
Light
(including the entire spectrum of electromagnetic radiation "free" electromagnetic energy)
(row 1, cell 1)
The Universe begins with light (in physics, as in many "genesis"
mythologies) - free electromagnetic energy - which is a perfectly
symmetric energy form. Light is massless, carries no charges of
any kind, produces no gravitational field, and has no time
12 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

dimension in the ordinary sense. Light's "intrinsic" motion
("gauged", regulated, and its magnitude determined by "velocity
c") is the primordial spatial entropy drive of free energy, and also
the gauge of a "non-local" symmetry condition formally
characterized by Einstein as light's zero "Interval" (the "Interval"
of light = 0). Light's zero "Interval" (the "Interval" is an invariant
measure of spacetime and causality) mathematically defines
light's symmetric energy state of "non-locality".
Light is a 2-dimensional transverse wave whose "intrinsic"
(entropic) motion sweeps out a third spatial dimension. Lacking
both a time dimension and one spatial dimension (in its direction
of propagation), light's position in 3-dimensional space or
4-dimensional spacetime cannot be specified. Since both time
and distance are meaningless to light, and yet light has intrinsic
motion, light has in effect an infinite amount of time to go
nowhere. Hence in its own reference frame (moving freely in the
vacuum of spacetime at velocity c), light must be considered to
be everywhere simultaneously. From this results the "non-local"
(and therefore a-temporal and a-causal) symmetric energy state
of light. "Non-locality" is the primary symmetry condition of
massless, free electromagnetic energy, and constitutes its chief
distinction from massive, local, temporal, and causal bound
electromagnetic energy (matter). Several other symmetries are
associated with light's non-local energy state, all of which require
conservation (in accordance with "Noether's Theorem" - see
below).
Light's "zero Interval" means that light is everywhere throughout
its conservation domain simultaneously - a symmetry condition
with respect to the distribution of light's energy in spacetime
("symmetry" refers to a condition of balance, sameness, or
equality). It is due to this symmetry condition that we can (in
theory) circumnavigate the Universe within a human lifetime - in
a rocket ship moving at nearly velocity c. At exactly c it takes no
time at all (time does not exist - clocks stop - at velocity c; also,
13 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

distance in the direction of motion shrinks to nothing).
The electromagnetic constant c is the universal "gauge" or
regulator (in the sense of railroad track or wire gauges) for the
"metric" of spacetime, the fixed relationship which establishes
the equivalence of measurement within and between the
dimensions: 300,000 km of linear spatial distance is metrically
equivalent to 1 second of temporal duration. At c this
equivalence is complete and time is suppressed to a locally
implicit state (light has no time dimension). The suppression of
the asymmetric time dimension (and time's asymmetric
companions, mass, charge, and gravitation), and the
inertial/entropic/energetic equilibration of the 3 spatial
dimensions, is the principle symmetry-keeping function of c. To
think of c as a velocity, even as a "non-ordinary" velocity, is to
miss the point: the physical significance of c is that c gauges both
light's non-local symmetric energy state and light's primordial
spatial entropy drive. It is because of these "gauge" functions that
c appears to us as an effectively "infinite" and invariant velocity.
Another famous gauge function of c (also discovered by
Einstein) fixes the energetic equivalence of free to bound
electromagnetic energy: E = mcc. "c" also functions as the gauge
or messenger of causality (via the "Interval"). These various
gauge functions (among others) indicate the primacy of light in
our Universe - and the fundamental significance of Einstein's
scientific contributions through his Special Theory of Relativity.
The Metric of Spacetime
(row 1, cell 2)
The role of gravity at this stage is to provide sufficient
negative energy to counterbalance the positive energy of
the "Creation Event", such that the Cosmos is born from
a state of zero net energy and charge (the latter due to the
equal admixture of matter vs antimatter - row 1, cell 3).

14 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Gravity is (implicitly) carried in the metric as time.
When all forces and the spacetime metric are united with
energy, light, matter and antimatter at the initial moment
of the "Creation" (cell one), it is the temporal component
of the metric that provides the counterbalancing negative
gravitational energy. However, this is a precarious initial
condition of balance (between matter and antimatter) that
cannot remain static for long. But how does the universe
escape the gravitational confinement of a black hole
when it is being born? Although this is clearly part of the
mystery surrounding quantum gravity, it may be that the
lack of an external spacetime environment is the crucial
difference allowing the escape of the "Big Bang". The
gravitational metric/energy of the "Creation Event" has
no way to replenish itself given the lack of an external
spacetime, and so is overwhelmed by the matterantimatter explosion and the drive of spatial entropy
(light's "intrinsic" motion). It is also likely that much of
the energy of the "Big Bang" is carried in the form of
"sterile" (non-interacting) neutrinos, which would greatly
facilitate the rapid expansion and cooling of the early
cosmos. ("Sterile" neutrinos are probably leptoquark
neutrinos, forming the major component of "dark
matter".)
"Inflation" takes place, if at all, in this cell. "Inflation"
may result from the extreme violence of the original
explosion, the fireball simply ripping spacetime apart,
expanding uncontrolled until it is cool enough to be
harnessed and regulated by the usual spacetime metric of
electromagnetism and gravity. (See: "Inflation and the
'Big Crunch'".)
Imagine a Universe of pure light, before the creation of matter, in
which the dimensional metric of spacetime is everywhere the
same, as no gravitational fields are present to disturb its
15 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

symmetry. The metric is a necessary condition of the spatial
domain, as it is the regulatory structure and mechanism which
performs the conservation function of the domain (via "inertial"
forces), controlling and coordinating the rate of expansion and
cooling of space both globally and locally, regardless of the
changing size of the Universe. It is for this reason that a
"non-local" metric gauge such as c is required - one whose
regulatory influence can be everywhere simultaneously,
irrespective of the physical extent (or rate of expansion) of its
domain. Both space and its metric are created by the intrinsic
motion of light. Without the metric every photon could have a
unique velocity; it is the metric which imposes the universal
constant c upon them all. While we conceive of the metric as
produced by light, the metric's origin is in the inherent energy
conservation parameters of light, including entropy (light's
intrinsic motion) and symmetry (light's non-locality).
The primordial entropy drive of light (free electromagnetic
energy) is expressed through its intrinsic motion, expanding and
cooling the Universe, hence reducing the Cosmos' capacity for
work. But it is light's intrinsic motion which also creates the
conservation domain of spacetime and maintains its metric
symmetry, suppressing time, equilibrating the spatial dimensions,
etc. Therefore light and space are related through the first and
second laws of thermodynamics, while c functions to gauge both
the primordial entropy drive and the non-local symmetric energy
state of light. It is the function of entropy's primordial form to
create a dimensional conservation domain in which energy can be
transformed, used, but nevertheless conserved. Without entropy
(the 2nd law of thermodynamics), the Universe could not spend
its energy capital, since the 1st law of thermodynamics (energy
conservation) would forbid any use of energy at all. The
dimensions of spacetime are entropy domains, created by the
intrinsic (entropic) dimensional motions of light (creating space),
time (creating history), and gravitation (converting space to time
and vice versa), as gauged by "c" (the intrinsic motion of light),
16 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

"T" (the intrinsic motion of time), and "G" (the gravitational
constant). (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
The intrinsic motion of time is also primarily gauged by c as the
temporal duration (measured by a clock) required by light to
move a given distance (measured by a meter stick). The
gravitational constant G is the entropy conversion gauge, fixing
the volume of space which must be annihilated and converted to
time per given mass (Gm). Gravitation converts the entropy drive
of free electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic motion of light as
gauged by "velocity c") to the entropy drive of bound
electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic motion of time as gauged by
"velocity T") and vice versa (as in the conversion of bound to
free energy in stars). (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".) Our
universe contains a mixture of free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy, and the intrinsic motions of light and
gravity provide metric/entropic domains (space, time, historic
spacetime) to accommodate the conservation requirements of
both energy types.
Our physical Universe, including the conservation domain of
spacetime, is wholly the product of a single form of energy electromagnetic energy (the "monotheism" of physics). Light is
the most primordial form of this energy, which we know because
light has the greatest symmetry of any energy form, and provides
the basic gauges, both metric and energetic, for either free or
bound electromagnetic energy. Light is the only energy form
which can produce its own conservation domain from its own
nature (intrinsic motion c) - matter must produce its temporal,
historic domain from preexisting space via the gravitational
conversion of space to time. Finally, light is the form from which
all other kinds of energy are created, and to which they all reduce
and return (as in matter-antimatter annihilations). (See: "Entropy,
Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
Noether's Theorem
17 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

"Noether's Theorem" (Emmy Noether, 1918) states that in a
multicomponent field (such as the electromagnetic field, or the
metric field of spacetime), where one finds a symmetry, one will
also find an associated conservation law, and vice versa.
Noether's Theorem is saying that in the conversion of light to
matter (for example), not only must the raw energy of light be
conserved in the mass and momentum of particles, but the
symmetry of light must also be conserved - not only the quantity
but the quality of energy must be conserved.
Before symmetry-breaking we find Noether's Theorem expressed
through: 1) the inertial forces of metric symmetry-keeping as
gauged by "velocity c", suppressing the asymmetric time
dimension; 2) through the electrical annihilation of particleantiparticle pairs, suppressing the asymmetric appearance of any
immobile bound (massive) energy form, whether matter or
antimatter. After symmetry-breaking (in the "Big Bang"), we find
additional expressions of Noether's Theorem in: 1) the metric
fields of gravitation and time; 2) the conserved charges (and spin)
of particles - which all work together (as in our Sun) to return
asymmetric matter to its original form of symmetric light. The
gravitational process (of symmetry conservation) drives to
completion via supernovas, quasars, and finally Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes. (See: "Nodes of the
Gravitational Metric".)
I think of Noether's theorem as the "Truth and Beauty" theorem,
in reference to Keat's great poetic intuition:
"... Beauty is truth, truth beauty, - that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know"
("Ode on a Grecian Urn": John Keats,1819)
in which Beauty corresponds to Symmetry and Truth corresponds
to Conservation.

18 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Two common examples of Noether's Theorem enforced in Nature
are charge/spin conservation among the particles, and
gravitational and inertial forces in the spacetime metric. These
are the more enlightening because the former (charge) is an
example of symmetry conservation and debt payment deferred
indefinitely through time, while the latter (inertia) is an example
of raw energy conservation in which the debt must be paid
immediately. Furthermore, in the case of inertial forces, we see
the implication that gravitation will also fall under the
conservation mantle of Noether's Theorem, via Einstein's
"Equivalence Principle". This indication is borne out and verified
by the discovery that gravitation (like the other forces) is indeed
a symmetry debt of light, responding to, conserving, and finally
restoring the non-local spatial distribution of light's energy, a
symmetry broken by the conversion of light to the immobile and
hence undistributed concentrations of mass energy (E = mcc)
represented by atomic matter.
Noether's theorem tells us why the basic forces of nature are all
spontaneously busy converting matter back to light: matter was
created from light in the "Big Bang", but since light has greater
symmetry than matter, it is to conserve light's symmetry that all
the charges and forces of matter work to accomplish the return of
bound energy to its original symmetric state. The charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light. These charges produce
forces which act to return the system of matter to light (free
energy). Our Sun is an archetypical example of symmetry
conservation in nature: the radiance of our star is the evidence of
a completed symmetry conservation circuit. (See: "Currents of
Symmetry and Entropy".)
A Conceptual Unification
A program of unification is therefore clearly suggested by
Noether's Theorem: identify the (broken) symmetries of light
carried, represented, and conserved by the charges of matter. The
19 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

actions of the forces produced by these charges should offer clues
as to what these original symmetries were. This will allow us to
refer all the charges and forces of matter to their common origin
as specific symmetries of light, accomplishing our conceptual
unification. Matter is but an asymmetric form of light, as time is
an asymmetric form of space, and gravity is an asymmetric form
of spacetime/inertia. The charges and forces of matter act to
return bound energy to its symmetric, original state of free
energy, in obedience to Noether's Theorem. In the pages which
follow, we will follow out this simple conceptual program of
force unification, by identifying the broken symmetries of light
represented by the conserved charges of matter - including
gravity's "location" charge. While this is a conceptual rather than
a quantitative unification, is is hoped that by framing the
argument firmly within the constraints of the known conservation
laws, a pathway to a more formal, quantitative, mathematical
unification will at least be indicated. (See also: "The 'Tetrahedron
Model' vs the 'Standard Model' of Physics: A Comparison".)
Finally, this will be a unification in English rather than
mathematics (the author has neither mathematical training nor
ability), but this has the advantage that most people will be able
to understand it. (In fact, most of the mathematics relevant to the
theory has already been done - by Einstein, Noether, Galois,
Hawking, etc.)
Particles
(row 1, cell 3)
(See: "The Particle Table")
Matter consists of two types of massive particles, the elementary
particles with no internal parts, called leptons, and composite
particles with internal parts (quarks) called hadrons. Together
they comprise atomic matter, the electron a member of the lepton
family, and the nuclear particles (protons and neutrons) examples
of the hadron family. Hadrons containing a quark-antiquark pair
are known as mesons, while those containing 3 quarks are called
20 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

baryons; no other quark combinations are thought to exist in
nature - at least commonly (see: Discover "The Year in Science"
Jan. 2006 page 39).
Together, high-energy light and metric spacetime have the
capacity to produce particles (as demonstrated by the DiracHeisenberg vacuum "zoo" of virtual particles), which are
essentially a "packaging" of light's free energy. The mechanism
by which the primordial transformation of free to bound
electromagnetic energy occurs is still unknown, although actively
investigated. We believe our Universe began as an incredibly hot,
energy dense, and spatially tiny "singularity" (the standard "Big
Bang" model - see Steven Weinberg's "The First Three
Minutes"). One can readily appreciate that a simple "packaging"
mechanism for compactly storing the wave energy of light which by its very nature (its intrinsic motion) takes up a lot of
space - would be useful in the spatially cramped conditions of the
initial moments of the Big Bang. (See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade".)
In a purely pragmatic way the "packaging" concept accounts for
the existence of particles and some of their salient features: the
spectrum of identical elementary particles of various masses (the
leptonic series), the heavier ones presumably more useful
"packages" at earlier times and higher energy densities, and
similarly, the spectrum of composite particles (baryons), which
can store additional energy internally, as if they contained a set of
compressible springs (the quarks). Finally, massive particles can
store an unlimited quantity of energy as momentum (thanks to
Einstein's relativistic mass increase with velocity), a feature of
particular utility in the early Universe, helping to avoid the "still
birth" of a cosmic "black hole". (The conversion from a spatial
(free energy) to a temporal (bound energy) entropy drive,
preserving the Universe's capacity for work by storing energy as
immobile, non-expanding mass (E = mcc), is perhaps an even
better "reason" (from the "anthropic perspective") for the initial
21 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

conversion of light to matter.) Still another argument favoring the
existence of mass is that the gravitational field of massive
particles provides a form of negative energy which exactly
balances the positive energy of the "Big Bang", allowing the
Universe to be born as a quantum fluctuation of the "void" or
"Multiverse", containing no net energy at all (as in Alan Guth's
theory of "inflation").
I presume there is a fractal or "resonant" relationship between the
metric of spacetime and the structure of particles - the
dimensional structure of spacetime is carried into, reflected in, or
otherwise directly influences, the structure of particles. Light
exists as a 2-dimensional energetic vibration of the metric
structure of spacetime. Usually this energetic vibration is simply
transmitted by the metric field at velocity c, the "inertial"
symmetry condition imposed upon light by its conserving metric.
However, it is also possible for this vibrational energy to become
"entangled" in the metric and tie itself into higher dimensional
"knots", which cannot be transmitted at c because they are no
longer 2-dimensional. The elusive "Higgs boson" is thought to
play a central regulatory or "gauge" role in these entanglements,
endowing the elementary particles with mass (see: "The Higgs
Boson vs the Spacetime Metric"). Such metric "knots" comprise
particle-antiparticle pairs, and their energy, structure, and
information content is derived from the mixture of metric
spacetime and light. The otherwise inexplicable existence of
three energy families of both quarks and leptons is perhaps a
consequence of the origin of particles as electromagnetic "knots"
in the 3 spatial dimensions of the metric. The
mathematical/geometric connection between free energy, the
metric, and the structure of particles is currently being
investigated (in 10 or 11 dimensions!) by "string" theory (see
Brian Greene's "The Elegant Universe"), and by "Group Theory"
(see Ian Stewart's book, referenced above). In this paper,
however, I sketch much simpler ideas in the usual 4 dimensions.
(The totality of historic spacetime may be conceived as 5
22 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

dimensional - or even 8 dimensional - see: "Juan Maldacena's
5-Dimensional Universe".) (Another idea regarding the "three
family" structure of elementary particles is that it greatly
increases the number of ways quarks can combine to form
electrically neutral baryons or leptoquarks - a critical
consideration for symmetry-breaking via the slow-acting weak
force. The family series is therefore self-limiting when it is
sufficiently diverse to produce symmetry breaking.) (In the
"Higgs Cascade", I suggest that all the forces, including gravity
and the spacetime metric, are involved in the initial creation of
massive energy forms (particles) during the "Big Bang".)
It remains a mystery how the elementary leptons are related to
the composite baryons, but it is plausible that this relationship is
through an ancestral, heavy, leptonic particle (the "leptoquark"),
which "fractured" under its great mass and the enormous pressure
of the "Big Bang", and so could arrange its internal fractional
charges in electrically neutral configurations - as in the neutron.
This notion is based on the theory of "asymptotic freedom"
(Politzer, Gross, Wilczek - 2004 Nobel Prize) - a symmetry
principle which observes that as the quarks of a baryon are
squeezed together, the strong force which binds them becomes
weaker, affording the quarks more freedom of movement. If the
quarks are squeezed together completely - as by the ambient
pressure of the "Big Bang", or by the "X" Intermediate Vector
Boson (IVB) of the weak force, or by the gravitational pressure
of a black hole's singularity - the color charge of the gluon field
sums to zero (see Row 4, "Gluons", below), leaving a particle
indistinguishable from a heavy lepton, the hypothetical
"leptoquark". Beginning with the heavy analog of a neutron, a
"colorless" and electrically neutral leptoquark would result, and
therefore be susceptible to a typical weak force decay via a
leptoquark neutrino and the "X" IVB, hypothetical particles we
examine in the following section. (See also: "The Origin of
Matter and Information"; see also: "The Particle Table"; see also:
"The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
23 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Symmetry Breaking and the Weak Force
(row 1, cell 4)
Leptons as Alternative Charge Carriers
The leptonic elementary particles (charge-bearing particles with
no internal parts or sub-units, exampled by electrons and
neutrinos) function as alternative charge carriers for the hadrons
(composite mass-bearing particles containing quarks). Without
these alternative charge carriers (electrons carry electric charge,
neutrinos carry "number" or "identity" charge), the massive
hadrons would remain unmanifest, locked in symmetric particleantiparticle pairs, forever annihilating and reforming. (Mesons
also function as alternative charge carriers for the fractional
charges of quarks, especially active in the transformations of
baryons.)
In fact, we discover that in order to produce (during the "Big
Bang") an asymmetric, "singlet" particle of matter from a
symmetric particle-antiparticle hadron (leptoquark) pair, we
require: 1) an electrically neutral, composite, primary
mass-carrying field (quarks bearing partial charges, similar to a
neutron); 2) a secondary field of alternative charge carriers
(electrons, neutrinos, and mesons); 3) interactions between the
hadron and lepton field must be brokered by a third quantized
mediating field, the Higgs boson and the Intermediate Vector
Bosons (IVBs) of the weak force, the W, Z, and X particles; 4)
the IVB field must furthermore be asymmetric in its interaction
with the primary field, such that its reactions with particles
proceed at a different rate than its reactions with antiparticles.
IVBs and the scalar Higgs function to regulate and standardize
the reaction pathway and products, such that all elementary
particles (of a given species) are exactly alike whether created
today or in the "Big Bang"; 5) a final requirement is that there
must exist some fundamental basis of similarity between all three
fields if they are to interact at all - they must be able to recognize
24 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

and mesh with each other at the quantum level of charge. For
example, the electrical charge of the proton must be exactly equal
in magnitude to that of the positron or electron (hence the
necessary supposition of their common origin in the leptoquark).
(See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
Obviously, the relationship between the hadrons and leptons must
be intimate, and almost certainly they are related through
ancestry, that is, one is derived from the other, both are derived
from the metric, both are decay products of the leptoquark, etc. A
complex arrangement, but nothing less will suffice to break the
initial symmetry of free energy and the particle-antiparticle pairs
it so abundantly produces. Matter is only as complex as it must
be to break symmetry and still conserve energy and charge. Free
energy is flirting with the danger of manifestation (in the form of
"real", temporal particles) in the ready creation of such virtual
particle-antiparticle pairs, and in the end it pays the price. (See:
"The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism").
IVBs - Quantum Process and Particle Transformation
The field vectors or force carriers of the weak force are known as
Intermediate Vector Bosons, or IVBs. The IVBs include the W+,
W-, and Z (neutral) particles. As a group, they are the most
unusual particles known and the most difficult to understand (I
also include in this group the hypothetical super-heavy "X"
particle thought to be responsible for producing leptoquark and
proton decay.) The charge carried or mediated by the IVBs is the
"number" or "identity" charge of the weak force. The weak force
only creates or transforms "singlets", unpaired elementary
particles, which must be invariant in all their attributes (mass,
charge, spin, etc.), no matter where or when they are created. It is
this heavy conservation constraint upon its operation and
products that requires the massive and exotic mechanism of the
weak force. (See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force
IVBs".)
25 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

The weak force is the asymmetric and symmetry-breaking
physical mechanism that produces elementary massive particles
from light (more specifically, from light's particle-antiparticle
form), and governs the creation, destruction, and transformation
of single elementary particles, both quarks and leptons. Only 3
massive leptonic elementary particles are known, the electron,
muon, and tau, identical in all their properties other than mass
and identity ("number"/"flavor") charge. This is the leptonic
particle family, series, or spectrum. It is a quantized mass series,
each member separated from the others by a large, discreet, and
exact mass difference. (I suspect the leptoquark is the 4th and
heaviest member of this series, representing the primordial
common ancestor of the baryons and leptons.) It is the role of the
IVBs to mediate or broker the transformation, creation, and
destruction of single elementary leptons, and transformations of
quark "flavors" in certain situations, notably in the decays of
baryons. The "Z" governs electrically neutral weak force
interactions in which neutrinos simply scatter ("bounce",
exchanging momentum) or swap identities with other heavy
leptons. The super-heavy "X" IVB is hypothesized to govern
weak force proton and leptoquark decay. The actual weak force
transformation mechanism is discussed below. (See also: ""The
Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge"). (See also: "The
Particle Table".)
What is most remarkable about the IVBs is that they seem to be
"metric" particles providing bridges between real particles and
their counterparts in the "virtual particle sea" of the vacuum. The
IVBs are not particles like the leptons and baryons which form
stable matter; they are particles of interaction, present only when
mediating a reaction, "virtual" particles usually known only by
their effects, existing within the "Heisenberg Interval" for virtual
reality, but real enough and producible as distinct, massive
entities if the ambient energy density is sufficient.
The "W" IVB particle (which is nowadays readily produced in
26 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

accelerators) is approximately 80 times heavier than the proton,
which explains the relative "weakness" of the weak force - there
is a huge energy barrier to surmount before weak interactions can
occur. However, this also raises the obvious question of what this
massive particle is composed of - certainly not ordinary matter,
the stuff of baryons and leptons. My guess is that the IVBs
generally are nothing other than a piece of very compact
spacetime metric, similar to the dense metric of the early
moments of the Big Bang. The huge mass energy of the particle
is the binding energy required to compress the metric, perhaps
fold it, and secure and quantize it in the particular configuration
that characterizes the W, Z, or X IVB. Hence these particles are
perhaps similar to the compacted, topological, multidimensional
particles of "string" theory. The hypothetical "Higgs" boson may
also be a "metric" particle. (See details of the weak force
transformation mechanism in row 3, cell 3.) (See also: "The
Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs for a further discussion of
the weak force in its full energy spectrum.)
The IVBs are an especially complex example of nature's
penchant for quantization, and like other quantum processes, are
responsible for a good deal of head-scratching. I can think of two
reasons why the process of particle transformation should be
quantized: 1) quantized units are indefinitely reproducible
without loss of information or precision (due to entropy, for
example - nature's "digital" information coding); 2) to ensure the
charge invariance of the "hidden" or implicit lepton number
charge (see below) - or indeed, any charge. (See: "Global-Local
Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force".)
In the initial phase of particle creation, particle-antiparticle pairs,
presumably of all types, are created but annihilate each other
instantly, recreating the light energy from which they are made.
So long as these pairs are created and annihilated in equal
numbers, the symmetry of the light Universe is maintained. But
there is an inherent asymmetry in the way the weak force
27 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

interacts with matter vs antimatter, with the consequence that
even though particle pairs are created symmetrically (via the
electromagnetic and strong forces), they do not decay
symmetrically (via the weak force). Most probably these
asymmetric decays occur in electrically neutral leptoquarks,
heavy analogs of the neutron. An excess of matter is produced in
this decay process, breaking the symmetry of the particleantiparticle pairs and the light Universe, creating the matter
comprising the Cosmos we experience today. It is the
consequence of this broken symmetry of light, manifesting as
massive matter-only particles, their quantized charges, including
time and gravitation, that we will trace in the remaining rows of
our 4x4 fractal model of the unified field theory.

Part 1, Row 2 - Particles - Raw Energy
Conservation
Row 2: "Down payment", "money up front", "pay now" - raw
energy conservation. The major concepts of Row Two concern
bound energy, mass, momentum, particles, time, gravitation, and
inertial forces as raw energy debts, conserved states, or reactions
occasioned by the conversion of free electromagnetic energy
(light) to bound electromagnetic energy (mass/matter) in the "Big
Bang" or "Creation Event". The local, temporal, causal nature of
massive matter vs the non-local, a-temporal, and a-causal nature
of massless light is emphasized. The elementary particles of
matter, the quarks and leptons, are discussed.
With symmetry-breaking and the creation of matter from light
during the "Big Bang", we pass from the initial global and
non-local symmetry of light, space, and absolute motion, as
"gauged" (regulated) by the universal electromagnetic constant
"c", to the local asymmetry of matter, charge, time, gravity, and
relative motion, with a spatial metric modified ("warped",
"curved") by the universal gravitational constant, "G". A basic
28 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

challenge posed to the forces of nature is to conserve energy and
symmetry simultaneously in both free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy - in space as well as in historic spacetime.
Mass or Bound Energy
(row 2, cell 1)
Einstein's most famous formula, E = mcc, expresses the notion
that the energy stored in mass is enormous and somehow related
to light through the electromagnetic gauge constant c. DeBroglie
noted that the Einstein-Planck formula for the energy of light: E
= hv (where v = the frequency of light, and h = Planck's constant)
contained the same E; putting the two together, DeBroglie wrote
hv = mcc, expressing the energetic equivalence between free
energy and its bound form, and suggesting their interconvertibility. This equation implies that all the energy of light is
conserved in massive form in such a transformation.
We might think with some justification that energy conservation
is satisfied by DeBroglie's equation and nothing more need be
said. But this is just "raw" or total energy conservation,
conservation of quantity, not quality. The conservation of the
quality, or symmetry, of free energy has not been addressed by
this formula, nor has the conservation of light's entropy. No
massive particle can be created from free energy without
engendering a symmetry (and entropy) debt and charge of some
sort. If the free energy is simply absorbed by an existing massive
system (for example, the absorption of a photon by the electron
shell of an atom) without the creation of a new charged particle,
then at least a gravitational (= entropy) charge will be recorded.
Whenever we encounter the "intrinsic" dimensional motions of
"velocity c" (light), "velocity T" (time), or "velocity G" (gravity),
we are dealing with the entropy drives of free and bound energy
in their primordial or most fundamental forms. At its most basic
level, the gravitational charge represents the transferal,
29 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

conversion, and conservation of the spatial entropy drive of free
energy (light) to the temporal entropy drive of bound energy
(matter). In the case of gravity, a symmetry debt is always
combined with the entropy drive/debt. Free energy cannot be
transferred to bound energy (or vice versa) without also
transferring, converting, or conserving the primordial entropy
drive of that energy; in massive particles, the intrinsic motion of
time is the primordial entropy drive of the bound-energy system.
Time is created by the gravitational (or quantum mechanical)
conversion of space and the drive of spatial entropy (light's
intrinsic motion) to time and the drive of historical entropy
(time's intrinsic motion) (see: "Entropy, Gravitation, and
Thermodynamics"; and see also: "The Conversion of Space to
Time"). Hence we must include time, the primordial entropy
drive of bound energy, along with gravitation in Row 2, keeping
in mind, however, that gravitation has in addition to its entropy
conservation role a symmetry conservation role which also links
it to the charges and discussion of Row Three.
The basic function of mass and momentum is apparently the
compaction ("packaging") and storage of free energy, and the
conversion of light to a bound energy form with a less destructive
entropic drive, as touched upon in the discussion of Row One.
We also took note of the role of gravitation as a supplier of
negative energy in the creation of matter during the "Big Bang".
Mass is bound electromagnetic energy, and it is asymmetric in
many ways by comparison to the free electromagnetic energy
(light) from which it is derived. For this reason mass carries
various charges, which are symmetry debts whose origins we
have traced to the conservation of light's perfect symmetry (see
Row 3). Beyond the absence of anti-matter, the most fundamental
symmetry debt of mass is dimensional - mass is 4-dimensional,
with no (net) intrinsic spatial motion, but with a one-way time
dimension which moves instead. Because time exists (among
other reasons) to establish and control the causal relations of
matter, the time dimension itself is necessarily one-way, hence
30 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

asymmetric. Free energy, from which mass is formed, is a
2-dimensional transverse wave, whose intrinsic motion sweeps
out a third spatial (entropic) dimension. Four-dimensional
massive matter or bound energy is local, temporal, and causal;
two-dimensional massless light or free energy is non-local,
a-temporal, and a-causal.
Time and Entropy
Time
(row 2, cell 2)
(See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy")
One-way time is a dimensional asymmetry, or dimensional
symmetry debt carried by mass; time is also the primordial
entropic drive and expression of entropy in matter: the intrinsic
motion of time is the entropy drive of bound energy and history.
Gravitation creates the time dimension of matter by annihilating
space and extracting a metrically equivalent temporal residue.
The gravitational field of bound energy is a remnant of the
entropy drive or intrinsic motion of the free energy which
originally created matter. Essentially, gravitation converts the
intrinsic motion of free energy (as gauged by "velocity c") into its
entropic analog and metric equivalent, the intrinsic motion of
matter's time dimension (as gauged by "velocity T"). (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time".)
The intrinsic motion of light creates space and the intrinsic
motion of gravity creates time. Time marches on to create history,
the temporal analog of space. The intrinsic motion of light is the
spatial entropy drive of free energy, and the intrinsic motion of
time is the historical entropy drive of bound energy. Welded
together by gravitation, the intrinsic motions of time and light
create historic spacetime, the compound conservation domain of
free and bound electromagnetic energy. Space and the drive of
spatial entropy (S) (light's intrinsic motion), are gravitationally
transformed into time and the drive of historical entropy (T)
31 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

(time's intrinsic motion), a transformation which can be
symbolically represented in a quasi-mathematical "concept
equation" as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
(Because I assume the general validity of Einstein's gravitational
equations (other than the case of light in free space), it follows
that I assume Einstein's formulation of the gravitational
"warpage" of spacetime can be interpreted as the conversion of
space to time. The interconversion of space with time is well
known in other contexts involving moving or gravitational
reference frames (Einstein's invariant "Interval", "Lorentz
Invariance") in both Special and General Relativity. Hence the
actual mathematics behind my grossly simplified "concept
equation" has evidently already been done.) (See also the paper
"The "Higgs" Boson vs the Spacetime Metric".)
(See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
Again excepting the lack of anti-matter, bound energy's most
obvious asymmetry (matter's 4-dimensional energy state), is due
to matter's lack of intrinsic spatial motion "c", meaning bound
energy is "local" and associated with one-way temporal causality
chains. The 4-dimensional energy state of matter gives bound
energy a different inertial status than free energy, because light is
2-dimensional. The "Interval" of free energy = 0 and light
produces no gravitational field; in contrast, bound energy has a
real, positive Interval (because of its time dimension), and a
gravitational field (also because of its time dimension). Both time
and gravity are asymmetric dimensional attributes. I associate the
gravitational charge ("location") with the primordial entropy
drive of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time), and with the
broken symmetry of the universally equitable distribution of
light's energy throughout space (light's symmetric "non-local"
32 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

energy state or "zero Interval") - a symmetry obviously broken
when massless light is converted to massive matter. Both local
time and local gravity vary in intensity with the quantity and
density of matter, demonstrating their association with the local
character of bound energy, and with the significant dimensional
parameters of the asymmetric spacetime distribution of matter's
immobile energy content, especially matter's location, quantity,
and density.
When free energy is converted to bound energy, entropy-energy
driving the spatial expansion of the Universe is converted to
entropy-energy driving the historical expansion of the Universe;
in the process, space is gravitationally annihilated, consequently
decelerating the spatial expansion. (See: "A Spacetime Map of
the Universe".)
The gravitational conversion of space to time is physically
demonstrated by black holes. The Bekenstein-Hawking theory
mathematically relates the surface area of a black hole's "event
horizon" to its entropy content (see: Scientific American August
2003). (See also: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat
Death' of the Cosmos".) The "event horizon" of a black hole is a
temporal surface where clocks stop (because the duration of a
second becomes infinitely long). The black hole itself is ruled by
a gravitational/temporal metric which completely displaces the
electromagnetic spatial metric (hence leaving a "black hole" in
space).
Time also plays a crucial part in the symmetry-conservation role
of gravitation (as we will see in Row 3 when we consider the
"location" charge of gravity), providing the historical
dimensional parameter within which charge conservation has
durable meaning and consequential causality relations ("Karma").
(See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravity".)
Charge Invariance
33 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

(See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and the 'Tetrahedron
Model'")
The invariance of charge in the service of symmetry conservation
is another rationale for the tangential relationship between matter
and matter's entropic conservation domain, historic spacetime.
Matter, and matter's associated charges, exist only in the present
moment of time, and do not participate in the entropic expansion
(either spatial or temporal) of historic spacetime. The charges of
matter, as well as the energy content of matter, are therefore
protected from entropic enervation or dilution by the "march of
time" or the expansion of space. Atoms simply do not age (in
their "ground" state), and charge magnitudes are invariant
through time. The tangential contact between matter and historic
spacetime is also the reason for the weakness of gravity: gravity
need supply matter with only enough temporal entropy to
maintain or "service" the tiny tangential point of contact. At this
point of contact, gravity is actually the same strength as the
electromagnetic force - as the black hole demonstrates. This
notion accords well with the observation of P. A. M. Dirac that
the ratio of the strength of the gravitational force to the
electromagnetic force is the same as the ratio of the radius of an
electron to the radius of the Cosmos - the electron in this
comparison representing the physical size of the "tangential"
point of contact between matter and historic spacetime.
Of course, Special Relativity also tells us that matter cannot
move with the metric equivalent of "velocity c", and that
therefore the time dimension must move instead, while matter
remains stationary and rides the "time train". There are multiple
reasons for matter's isolation in the "universal present moment",
illustrating the seamless interweaving of all natural law, and
raising again Einstein's question: did God have any latitude in the
construction of the Universe? From the perspective of the
"Anthropic Principle" (natural law must allow human life), the
answer is apparently "no".
34 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Entropy
(See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy")
Entropy exists in several forms in nature, always with the same
purpose, to prevent violations of energy conservation. Unless the
context indicates otherwise, when I refer to "entropy" in these
papers (especially in such phrases as "space and spatial entropy"
or "time and historical entropy"), I am referring to entropy in its
most primordial or pure form, as the intrinsic motion of light
"gauged" or regulated by "velocity c" (in the case of "spatial
entropy"), or as the intrinsic motion of time "gauged" or
regulated by "velocity T" (in the case of historical or "temporal
entropy"). Of course, time is also ultimately "gauged" or
regulated by "velocity c", since time is defined as the duration
(measured by a clock) required by light to travel a given distance
(measured by a meter stick).
The Dimensions
(See: "The Time Train".)
The dimensions of spacetime are conservation/entropy
domains, created by the entropic, "intrinsic" motions of
free and bound electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic
motion of light and the intrinsic motion of matter's time
dimension). These domains function as arenas of action,
where energy in all its forms can be simultaneously used,
transformed, but nevertheless conserved. This is the
major connection between the 1st and 2nd laws of
thermodynamics.
Bound energy (matter) requires a time dimension to establish and
maintain causality, to provide an entropy drive, and to balance its
energy accounts, because the energy contained in mass varies
with its relative velocity, and relative velocity involves time.
Light does not require a similar accommodation because light's
absolute velocity is non-relative and invariant; light's energy
35 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

varies not with velocity but with frequency. Time is one-way
because raw energy conservation forces the continual updating of
matter's energy accounts, from one instant to the next, protecting
causality, the temporal sequence of cause and effect. The "local"
character of matter requires a causal temporal linkage, whereas
the "non-local" character of light does not. Causality itself
requires the one-way character of time; energy conservation
requires the presence and protection of causality and its
associated temporal entropy drive in every system of bound
energy.
The intrinsic motion of time ("velocity T") is the primordial
entropy drive of bound energy, causing the aging and decay of
matter and information, and creating and expanding history, the
conservation domain of information and matter's "causal matrix".
History is the temporal analog of space: "intrinsic motion T" and
"intrinsic motion c" are metric equivalents. The entropy drives T
and c both produce analogous dimensional conservation domains
for their energy types, history for information (matter's "causal
matrix"), space for light. Space connects light; time and causal
history connect matter; gravity connects all. It is the non-local
symmetry of light that requires a spatial entropic domain,
whereas it is the local asymmetry of matter that requires an
historic entropic domain. Gravitation (entropy drive "G")
converts space into time and matter into light (as in the stars),
producing the equilibrated joint dimensional conservation
domain of historic spacetime, where both free and bound forms
of electromagnetic energy can interact and find their conservation
needs satisfied.
Entropy is a necessary corollary of energy conservation, actually
responsible for the creation of our dimensional experience of
spacetime through the intrinsic (entropic) motions of light, time,
and gravitation (the entropy drives or "gauges" c, T, G). (See:
"The Tetrahedron Model")

36 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

The Interval
(See: Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's
"Interval")
The "Interval" is Einstein's mathematical formulation of a
quantity of spacetime that is invariant for all observers regardless
of their motion, uniform or accelerated. It is the analog of the
Pythagorean theorem in 4 dimensions. The "Interval" of light is
zero, which means light is "non-local". This is the fundamental
symmetry condition of light. Light could not create its spacetime
conservation domain, perform its primordial entropy function,
nor "gauge" its metric without the spatio-temporal symmetry of
"non-locality". But the Interval of mass, or bound energy, is
always some positive quantity greater than zero, and this is
because the time dimension is necessarily explicit for immobile,
local mass, for reasons of entropy, causality, and energy
conservation we have considered above. Conversely, because
light is missing both the X and the T dimensional parameters,
light's position in 4 dimensional spacetime cannot be specified.
The basic function of Einstein's "Interval" is to rescue causality
in material systems from the shifting perspectives of Einstein's
reference frames in relative motion.
This all makes sense when we think about space filled only with
light - in such a domain there is no purely spatial Interval because
there is nothing to distinguish one place or point from another all is uniform and indistinguishable spatial, metric, and energetic
symmetry. But enter mass with its inevitable companions: time,
charge, and gravitation (the asymmetric "gang of four"), and
immediately we can distinguish a point or place - here is the
particle - more significantly, here is the gravitational field
pointing to the particle's location from every other place in space
(the influence of the field is universal in extent). The gravitational
field organizes the formerly featureless space around the
particle's center of mass. But one more thing is needed to pin
down this location as absolutely unique: because the Universe is
37 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

always moving, expanding due to the spatial entropy drive of
light's intrinsic motion, the time dimension is also required to
specify which of an endless succession of moving locations (or
evolving, cooling energy states) will dimensionally indicate the
"center of mass" of any form of bound energy.
Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?
(See: "Dark Energy: Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?".)
The positive "Interval" of mass represents a dimensional
asymmetry because it is unique, distinguishable, and invariant for
all observers. Light has no associated gravitational field because
it has no Interval and hence no "location". Being non-local, light
cannot provide a center for a gravitational field, and an
uncentered gravitational field constitutes a violation of energy
conservation (because of producing "net" motion and hence
energy). Consequently, freely moving light cannot and does not
produce a gravitational field. Light's zero Interval is precisely the
symmetry condition necessary to prevent the formation of an
explicit time dimension and its associated gravitational field.
Light could hardly function as the metric gauge of spacetime if it
were itself plagued by a metric-warping "location" charge and
gravitational field. Finally, light has no time dimension nor the
gravitational field which could produce one.
This is the basic conservation reason why the intrinsic motion of
light - whatever its actual numerical value - must be the "velocity
of non-locality", the symmetry gauge and entropy drive of free
energy, the gauge of the metrical equivalence between time and
space, effectively an infinite velocity within its spatial domain.
Otherwise light would have a "location charge", a time
dimension, and a gravitational field, and spacetime would
immediately collapse into a black hole. (If light produced a
gravitational field, the Universe would have been "still born" as a
black hole; instead of a "Big Bang" there would have been a "Big
Crunch". The fact that (much of) the scientific "establishment"
38 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

believes that free light produces a gravitational field continues to
be a major conceptual roadblock in their ongoing effort to unify
gravitation with the other forces. This is a major, crucial, and (at
least in principle) testable point of difference between the
unification scenarios of the "Tetrahedron Model" and
"establishment" physics.)
In fact, the recently announced "acceleration" of the cosmic
expansion of spacetime (see, for example, Sky and Telescope
March, 2005, pages 32-39) provides observational evidence
favoring my view that light lacks a gravitational field. As mass is
converted to light in stars and quasars, by Hawking's "quantum
radiance", and by particle and proton decay (and perhaps by
analogous conservation processes in "dark matter"), the total
gravitational field of the Cosmos is reduced, resulting, over
cosmological time, in the observed "acceleration". "Dark energy"
is therefore simply the attrition of the primordial gravitational
field of the universe (and its replacement by expansive light).
Symmetries of Light Conserved in Matter
In terms of conservation: in obedience to Noether's theorem,
bound energy stores the symmetry of light as the conserved
charges (and spin) of matter; in obedience to the first law of
thermodynamics, bound energy stores the raw energy of light as
the mass and momentum of matter; in obedience to the second
law of thermodynamics, bound energy stores the spatial entropy
drive of light as the gravitational field and temporal entropy drive
of matter. Gravitation and time induce each other endlessly. Thus
entropy produces the dimensional conservation domains of free
energy (space - through the intrinsic motion of light), and of
information and matter's "causal matrix" (historic spacetime through the intrinsic motion of time and gravitation). This is the
iron linkage between the first and second laws of
thermodynamics. Noether's theorem is drawn into this "trinity" of
natural law because velocity c is both the entropy drive and the
39 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

symmetry gauge of free energy, and as a conservation
consequence, gravitation with its "location" charge is a symmetry
as well as an entropy debt of light. (See: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravitation"). The gravitational entropy
debt causes the creation of time from space, the deceleration of
cosmic spatial expansion and the creation of historic spacetime;
the gravitational symmetry debt actually reverses this process,
through the radiation of stars, galaxies, black holes (Hawking's
"quantum radiance") and quasars, resulting in the "acceleration"
of the cosmic spatial expansion as such astrophysical processes
spontaneously convert bound energy and its neg-entropic
gravitational/temporal field to light and light's electromagnetic
pos-entropic spatial field.
The Mechanism of Gravitation
time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge
(See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Time and space are both implicit in the description of the motion
of an electromagnetic wave: "frequency" (time) multiplied by
"wavelength" (space) = c, the velocity of light. In the quantummechanical creation of a time "charge", when an electromagnetic
wave collapses or becomes "knotted", it switches from the spatial
or "wavelength" character of a moving wave to the temporal or
"frequency" character of a particle or stationary wave - like a
coin flipping from heads to tails. It is reasonable to call this
temporal expression a "charge" because time is asymmetric:
being one-way, time has the asymmetric or informational
character of any other isolated charge of matter. Time differs
from the other charges in that it is an "entropic charge" - a charge
with intrinsic dimensional motion. The asymmetric time charge
produces a specific "location" in the otherwise symmetric field of
space - giving the massive particle it is associated with a positive
"Interval", whereas the light from which the particle was derived
had a "zero" Interval. (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)

40 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

This is the formal character of gravity's "location" charge - the
positive "Interval" of bound energy breaks the non-local spatial
symmetry of the free energy from which it was created. This
non-local symmetry state had produced the equitable distribution
of light's energy throughout space (everywhere simultaneously),
a symmetry broken by the concentrated lump of immobile energy
represented by bound energy's undistributed "rest mass". It is the
distributional asymmetry of matter's energy content which is the
origin of gravity's symmetry debt and "location" charge.
Demonstrating this point, the "location" or gravitational charge
records the spacetime position, quantity, and density of the
asymmetric energy distribution represented by any form of bound
energy. Nor is gravity a passive signal: gravity will direct you to
the center of this asymmetry by carrying you there bodily
("rubbing your nose" in it). Finally, gravity will repay the
symmetry debt by converting bound to free energy in stars and
quasars (partially), and via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of
black holes (completely).
As magnetism is the invisible, "intrinsic", long-range, "electromotive" (electrically active) force of the loadstone, so gravity is
the invisible, "intrinsic", long-range, "inertio-motive"
(dimensionally active) force of the ordinary rock. In the case of
magnetism, we trace the force back to the moving (and aligned)
electric charges of the atoms in the loadstone; in the case of
gravity, we trace the force back to the moving (and one-way)
temporal charges of bound energy in the rock. A moving electric
charge creates a magnetic field; a moving temporal charge creates
a gravitational field. In both cases the field is produced at right
angles to the current. The relation is reciprocal as well: moving
magnetic and spatial fields (gravity) create electric and temporal
currents (time). This is the intuitive analogy between
electromagnetism and gravitation which so intrigued Einstein.
Finally, gravitation and time induce each other endlessly, as do
the electric and magnetic components of light.

41 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Extending the analogy, both time and magnetism are examples of
"local gauge symmetry currents" associated with material
systems in relative motion, which protect the invariance of
"global" symmetries - velocity c, causality, and the Interval in the
case of time ("Lorentz Invariance"), and electric charge in the
case of magnetism.
The "graviton" or field vector of the gravitational charge is a
quantum unit of temporal entropy, a quantum unit of time, the
transformed, "flipped", or inverted spatial entropy drive or
intrinsic motion of the photon (implicit vs explicit time = photon
vs graviton). Time is the active principle of gravity's "location"
charge; time is the implicit entropy drive of free energy and the
explicit entropy drive of bound energy; time is the connecting
link between Quantum Mechanics and General Relativity.
Quantum Mechanics and Gravitation
(See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation")
Gravitation is both a symmetry debt and an entropy debt, unique
among the charges and their forces. Gravity's double
conservation role is due to the double gauge role of c, which
gauges both the entropy drive and the non-local symmetric
energy state of free energy. Gravity cannot conserve either gauge
function of c without conserving both. This double nature is
reflected in two different mechanisms, both of which convert
space to time, one at the quantum level of charge - the entropy
debt, and one at the macroscopic level of gravitational force - the
symmetry debt. The two mechanisms are distinct but both are
part of the gravitational conversion of space to time, connecting
the quantum-mechanical aspect of gravitational charge (particlecharge-time-entropy) to the macroscopic aspect of gravitational
flow (mass-location-space-symmetry). For a more extensive
discussion of the mechanics of gravitation and the relationship
between quantum mechanics and gravitation, see: "Entropy,
Gravitation, and Thermodynamics"; and: "A Description of
42 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Gravitation".
Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and the Gravitational Metric:
Energy Conservation
(See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry in Gravity".)
The gravitational contribution to our 4x4 matrix or fractal table at
this position (row 2, cell 2) is the time dimension of bound
energy. In the "global vs local gauge symmetry" interpretation of
the cosmic order, the global symmetry state of reference in the
case of gravity is the spatial symmetry state established by the
electromagnetic constant "c" in row 1, cell 2, immediately above
"time" in the 4x4 matrix representation. Time is the
compensating component of the local gauge symmetry "current"
or field vector (the graviton of spacetime), derived from the
global state by the gravitational annihilation of space and the
extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. The local
state is derived from, imposed upon, and "warps" the global state,
being an asymmetric derivative which introduces a one-way
temporal and gravitational component into the local metric, both
having a privileged or defined directionality or vector ("forward"
in time and "downward" in space: radially inward toward the
center of mass).
The primary function of a dimensional metric is always the
conservation of energy. In the local, temporal metric established
by gravitation (as gauged by the universal constant "G"), time is
the new dimensional parameter which is required to conserve the
energy accounts of matter, for at least four reasons: 1) the energy
content of matter varies with matter's relative motion (whereas in
the global, spatial metric, light's energy varies with frequency,
not light's "absolute" motion); 2) time provides the primordial
entropy drive of matter (unlike light, matter has no (net) intrinsic
spatial motion to supply its entropy drive); 3) time orders the
causality linkages of matter in the information domain of historic
spacetime (whereas light is a-causal, being both non-local and
43 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

a-temporal); 4) time provides the "local gauge symmetry current"
which is necessary to compensate for the relative motion of
material reference frames, protecting the invariance of the
"Interval", causality, and velocity c (the "Lorentz Invariance" of
Special and General Relativity).
Through the dimensional agency of time, energy conservation is
accomplished in the local gravitational metric of relative motion
and matter gauged by G, no less than in the global spatial metric
of absolute motion and light gauged by c. The spherical
symmetry of a gravitational field is crucial to its energy
conservation role, not only to extract time from space, but to
avoid imparting a (net) spatial motion to the central (gravitating)
mass. All gravitational fields of whatever strength are exactly
symmetric (in their net effect), and vanish, self-annihilate, or
cancel at the center of the field, whether individually in an atom
or collectively in a planet.
Historic Spacetime
(See: ""A Spacetime Map of the Universe")
The temporal entropy drive of matter is provided at the expense
of the spatial entropy drive of light. The expansion of history is
funded by the expansion of space, resulting in the gravitational
deceleration of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos. The energy
for matter's expanding historical domain comes (via gravity)
from the expansive energy of light's spatial domain. This
conservation/symmetry circuit is completed by the gravitational
conversion of bound to free energy in stars and related
astrophysical processes, returning light to its spatial domain,
reducing the total gravitational field of the Cosmos, and
consequently allowing the Universe to "accelerate" toward a
gravity-free maximum rate of expansion.
Light is linked by space, matter is linked by time, causality, and
history. Gravity links everything. Historic spacetime is the
44 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

conservation domain of matter's causal information "matrix" or
network, the "karmic" field of consequences, cause and effect,
and historical connectivity. Today is the causal effect of
yesterday, and yesterday must remain real in historic spacetime if
the reality of our present moment is to be upheld. The material
Universe is bound together by gravitation, historic spacetime, and
temporal causality ("karma").
Fermions: Quarks and Leptons
(massive particles, Row 2, cells 3 and 4)
(See: "The Short-Range or Particle Forces")
Mass assumes quantized, specific, particulate form as the strong
force quarks and hadrons, and the weak force leptons. Hadrons
are defined as particles containing quarks; hence all hadrons
carry "color" charge, the source of the (quark-level) strong force.
Leptons contain no quarks and hence carry no color charge.
Leptons carry lepton "number", "flavor", or "identity" charge, the
symmetry-debt source of the weak force. The leptons are true
elementary particles (having no internal parts) whereas the
quarks are sub-elementary (quarks are the internal parts of
hadrons). Electrons are familiar examples of the heavy members
of the lepton family (electron, muon, tau, and (?) leptoquark);
neutrinos are (nearly) massless members of the lepton family
(there is a separate and distinct neutrino for each massive lepton).
Protons and neutrons are familiar examples of the "hadron"
family; they are further distinguished as members of the "baryon"
class of hadrons, which are composed of 3 quarks. The only other
hadrons are the mesons, which are composed of quark-antiquark
pairs (see: "The Particle Table"). In general, the baryons function
as mass carriers, and the leptons and mesons function as
alternative charge carriers (as for example in the familiar
electron-proton combination of atomic matter). Alternative
charge carriers perform the crucial function of balancing charges
of matter which otherwise would have to be balanced by
antiparticles - which of course would cause annihilation
45 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

reactions.
3 Elementary Families Each of 4 Particles
(See: "The Fractal Organization of Nature")
The quarks and the leptons each occur in three "families" of
differing energy levels; the quark and lepton families appear to
be paired in these 3 families as follows (a precisely
corresponding set of antiparticles exists but is not shown). The
pairing of the quark and lepton "families" is facultative, not
obligatory:
1) down, up (d, u) quarks and the electron and electron neutrino
(e, ve);
2) strange, charm (s, c) quarks and the muon and muon neutrino
(u, vu);
3) bottom, top (b, t) quarks and the tau and tau neutrino (t, vt).
There is no generally accepted explanation why there should be 3
energy levels of particles, why they occur in apparently
correlated pairs, or how the quarks and leptons are related.
Ordinary matter (including stars) is composed of the "1st family"
only. It seems likely that the quarks and leptons are both derived
from a high energy, primordial "ancestor" particle, the
"leptoquark"; it also seems likely that the 3 energy families of
particles are in some sense reflecting their origin in the
3-dimensional metric structure of space. (See: "The Leptoquark
Diagram"; and also: "The Hourglass Diagram".) (It has also been
suggested that the "3 family" structure of the elementary particle
spectrum is necessary for the weak force asymmetry which
produced isolated particles of matter in the "Big Bang". With
three quark families the possible quark combinations producing
electrically neutral baryons (hyperons) is greatly increased - a
critical factor for the asymmetric weak force creation of matter
via leptoquark decay.)

46 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

Quarks
(row 2, cell 3)
(See: "Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of
Matter"
In contrast to the "long-range" electrical and gravitational forces,
which have an infinite range through spacetime, the strong force
is a "short-range" force, an internal characteristic of nuclear
matter. Quarks occur in only two kinds of particles: "baryons"
composed of 3 quarks, and "mesons" composed of quarkantiquark pairs. Baryons are familiar to us as neutrons and
protons, but there are many other 3 quark combinations possible
using members of the heavier quark families ("hyperons"). In
addition, every quark combination seems to have many possible
energetic expressions, or "resonances", just as electron orbits
have many "excited" states. Typically, all excited nuclear states
are exceedingly short-lived. Six known quarks are paired in three
"energy families"; the paired quarks are named "up, down";
"charm, strange"; and "top, bottom". Ordinary matter consists
only of the up, down quark pair in their unexcited or "ground"
state (protons and neutrons).
At a higher level of strong force structural order and cohesion, a
meson exchange field binds nucleons (protons and neutrons) into
compound atomic nuclei. This higher-order or nucleon-level
expression of the strong force (inter-baryonic rather than intrabaryonic) is essentially an "oscillation" of the nucleons between
their possible neutron or proton identities (sometimes known as
"isospin" or "isotropic spin" symmetry). "Isospin" symmetry
amounts to an oscillation between quark up and down "flavors",
whereas the lower order or gluon-level strong force amounts to
an oscillation between quark red, green, and blue "colors"
(leading in the gluon case to a symmetry known as "asymptotic
freedom"). We will discuss strong force symmetry effects, debts,
and charges more extensively in row three. (See: "The Strong
Force: Two Expressions".)
47 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

The baryon is an incredible, miniature universe of structure,
information, charge, and activity. A large compound atomic
nucleus is a swarming "hive", a veritable metropolis of quantum
mechanical action and force exchange, all quite beneath our
notice, due to the short-range character of the strong force (in
both its "color" and "flavor" expressions). Think the universe of
matter is complex? Look no further than a heavy atomic nucleus.
Add the busy electron shell, and virtual particles both within and
without, electric and magnetic fields, the spacetime metric - even
a single atom is almost too much to contemplate. The essential
miracle of matter resides within the massive bound energy
system of the baryon, and its mysterious, high-energy origin
within the early micro-moments of the "Big Bang". (See: "The
Origin of Matter and Information".)
Quarks are sub-elementary particles, as they carry electric
charges which are fractions of the unit electric charge of the
leptons; leptons are the only truly elementary particles. When one
considers the properties of a baryon, it is hard to escape the
impression that this is what a lepton would look like if it were
somehow fractured into three parts. Since, by definition, you
cannot "really" fracture an elementary particle, perhaps you could
do so "virtually", provided the parts could never become "real"
(individually separated), but remained forever united in
combinations that sum to elementary leptonic charges. In this
way, the fractured particle would still "look like" an elementary
particle to the outside observer; nature is not above such tricks, as
we have learned from the virtual particles and Heisenberg's
"Uncertainty Principle". It seems probable that baryons are, in
some sense, primordially "fractured" leptons. Such an origin (the
"leptoquark") would go far toward explaining both the
differences and the similarities of these two fundamental classes
of particles (leptons vs hadrons). Just as the baryon seems to be a
fractured lepton, so the gluons seem to be a fractured photon
("sticky light" - gluons attract each other) - the fractured field
vector of a fractured electric charge. Hence the strong force gluon
48 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

field appears to be a permanently confined derivative of the
electromagnetic force, and both are strictly symmetric in all their
interactions.
As for the masses of the quarks and baryons, they are due almost
entirely to the huge binding energy of the strong force. See Frank
Wilczek's book: :"The Lightness of Being": Basic Books 2008,
for an expert exposition regarding the mass of hadrons.
Leptons
(row 2, cell 4)
(See: "The Particle Table")
Collectively, the hadrons and leptons, which comprise the
material component of atomic matter (the nucleus, electron shell,
and associated neutrinos), are known as "fermions". All fermions
have a "spin", or quantized spin angular momentum, in 1/2
integer units of Planck's energy constant (1/2, 3/2, etc.). Fermions
obey the Pauli exclusion principle, which simply states that no
two fermions can be in the same place at the same time, if all
their quantum numbers are also the same. Fermions cannot pile
up on top of one another indiscriminately; they keep their own
counsel, which is why we get specific, discreet, sharp, and
crystalline atomic structure, rather than goo.
In contrast to the fermions is the class of energy forms known as
"bosons", which includes the force carriers or field vectors of the
4 forces: the photons of electromagnetism (the quantum units of
light), the gravitons of gravity, and the gluons of the strong force.
As their name implies, the IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons) of
the weak force have some characteristics of both classes, being
very massive bosons. Together, the fermions, bosons, and IVBs
comprise the particles and forces of matter. Bosons have whole
integer spins (0, 1, 2, etc.) and they can and do superimpose or
pile up on one another. Thus a photon or graviton can have any
energy because it can be composed of an indefinite number of
49 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

superimposed quanta, whereas an electron has a single, specific
"rest mass" energy and charge. The bosons all bear some
relationship to light and the metric, their probable common
origin. Thus we have the photon (ordinary massless light), the
graviton (inverted light or time), the gluon (divided or "sticky"
light), and the IVBs (massive light or metric particles). (See:
"The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
Once again we have a natural dichotomy which invites our
curiosity, experiment, and speculation: what is the relationship
between the quarks and leptons? They seem made for each other
- are they indeed made from each other - perhaps both arising
from a common ancestor?
I speculate that the ancestral particle of the quarks and leptons is
the "leptoquark", the heaviest member of the leptonic elementary
particle series. The leptoquark is a lepton at very high
(primordial) energy densities, when its quarks are sufficiently
compressed (by ambient pressure during the Big Bang) that its
color charge vanishes through the principle of "asymptotic
freedom". (The gluon field, being composed entirely of coloranticolor charges in all possible combinations, sums to zero when
compressed to "leptonic size".) At lower energy densities, the
quarks expand under their mutual quantum mechanical and
electrical repulsion, causing the color charge to become explicit.
The explicit (and conserved) color charge stabilizes the baryon,
since neutrinos, which would otherwise cause its decay, do not
carry color charge. Through the internal expansion of its 3
quarks, the leptoquark becomes a baryon, decaying eventually to
the ground state proton, producing leptons and mesons (via the
"W" IVB) along the way, which function as alternative charge
carriers for the electric and identity charges of quarks and other
leptons. (See: "Introduction to the Weak Force".)
Neutrinos
(See: "Neutrinos and the Weak Force 'Identity Charge'")
50 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

The neutrinos remain mysterious particles and are actively being
researched. Apparently neutrinos do have a tiny mass, too small
to measure (apparently on the order of one millionth of an
electron's mass). If neutrinos do have mass, why is it so small,
and how do they escape carrying an electric charge, as do all
other massive particles? Is there a 4th "leptoquark" neutrino?
What is the smallest possible natural mass quanta? Are neutrinos
composite or elementary particles? Does the leptoquark neutrino
exist and is it the source of "dark matter"? It is currently believed
that neutrinos have a very small mass and "oscillate" between
their several possible identities, just as the massive leptons,
whose identity charges are carried in "hidden" form, can change
identities among themselves via reversible weak force decays
(but only when mediated by the IVBs). (See: Science, Vol. 306,
26 Nov. 2004, page 1458.)
Neutrinos were, until recently, thought to be massless leptons
with intrinsic motion c. They are now thought to have a tiny mass
and to move very nearly at velocity c because they are so
energetic when formed. Neutrinos are the explicit form of lepton
number ("identity") charge, which is "hidden" or implicit in the
massive leptons (and probably also hidden in the massive
baryons and the leptoquark). Neutrinos, if they have any mass at
all, are so light that they are apparently completely dominated by
their deBroglie "matter waves". Hence in the particle-wave
spectrum of energy forms, neutrinos are much more wave than
particle. (See: "deBroglie Matter Waves".)
Each massive lepton (electron, muon, tau, and (perhaps) the
hypothetical leptoquark) is associated with a specific neutrino, or
number charge, which I refer to as an "Identity" charge to
acknowledge the symmetry debt carried by the weak force. All
photons are indistinguishable one from another, but the leptons
do not share the photon's "symmetry of anonymity". While all
electrons are identical, they are distinct from the photon, and
from the other elementary particles - the muon, tau, and
51 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

leptoquark. Neutrinos are the hallmark of an elementary particle;
they are telling us that there are only three or four; all else is a
composite (or, as in the case of the quarks, a subunit). Due to
Noether's Theorem, the conservation domain requires this
identity asymmetry to be recognized and accounted for, but
nature is economical in its bookkeeping, concerning itself only
with massive elementary particles. All neutrinos have left-handed
spin, while all anti-neutrinos have right-handed spin, neatly
distinguishing the leptonic series from its antimatter counterpart.
Evidently, these specific "identity" charges function to facilitate
annihilation reactions between matter and antimatter, allowing
the various particle species to identify their proper "anti-mates"
in a timely fashion. Through the facilitation of annihilation
reactions (which must occur within the Heisenberg time limit for
virtual reality), the identity charges make a proximate
contribution to conserving light's symmetry. The neutrino's
ultimate symmetry conservation role is to serve as the physical
embodiment of identity charge, which is conserved through time,
can act as an alternative charge carrier for the weak force
"identity" symmetry debt, and is forever payable upon demand
(via annihilation with the appropriate anti-identity charge). Even
though the neutrino's identity charge "oscillates", it still can only
annihilate the anti-charge of its namesake heavy lepton. Given
the absence of an actual positron, only an electron anti-neutrino
can annihilate, cancel, or neutralize an electron's identity charge.
(See: Gelmini et al., "Through Neutrino Eyes". Scientific
American May 2010 pages 38 - 45.)
Neutrinos are quanta of information keeping the symmetry
records of spacetime concerning the identity and number of all
massive elementary particles within its domain. Combined with
the metric warpage of gravitation, we see that spacetime contains
an actual structural "knowledge" of the location, mass, and
identity of every elementary particle. This startling fact informs
us that spacetime is as scrupulous concerning symmetry
conservation as it is concerning raw energy conservation. We
52 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Ev...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/appendix1.html

have already noted that historical spacetime contains a complete
causal record (in the form of information) of all past events. In
scientific terms, we are only beginning to appreciate how
comprehensive is the meaning of the term "conservation domain"
- a concept which the ancients understood in terms of "karma",
the "Akashic Record", the continuing reality of the historical
domain of ancestors, religious notions of the "afterlife", the
conservation ("salvation") of souls (human "identity" charges),
the spiritual conservation domains of "heaven" and "hell", etc.
Links:
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
References:
Bekenstein, J. "Information in the Holographic Universe".
Scientific American Aug. 2003, page 58-65
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306
page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed Equations of Quark
Theory."
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 +
x pp.

Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 2" Go to:
"Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 3 (summary)"

53 of 53

10/9/18, 9:28 PM

