THE ORIGIN OF MATTER AND INFORMATION
(revised Dec., 2011)
John A. Gowan
home page
(Note to readers: the reactions presented in this paper, and the "X" IVB and the "leptoquark" particles, are
hypothetical. For a guide to the particles, both "real" and speculative, see the "Particle Table". For a more
comprehensive overview of this subject, see: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs". This paper treats
only the asymmetric decay of electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark pairs.)
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
Discussion
Color Charge
Neutrinos
IVBs
Leptoquarks
General Principles
Alternative Charge Carriers and Forces
links
references
Postscript
Abstract
The creation of matter during the "Big Bang" is apparently due to the asymmetric decay of
electrically neutral leptoquarks and antileptoquarks, in which the antileptoquarks decay at
a slightly faster rate than the leptoquarks. The leptoquarks in these decays (which are
electrically neutral due to the fractionally charged quarks) are also colorless (in the limit of
"asymptotic freedom"), due to the great compressive force exerted by the "X" IVB. A
leptoquark antineutrino is produced in this decay, balancing the baryon "number" charge
of the eventual proton. This neutrino is a "dark matter" candidate. The interaction is the
initiating example of a general class of reactions between symmetric primary energy fields
and asymmetric secondary or "alternative" information fields or charge carriers.
Introduction
During the first micro-moments of the birth of our Cosmos (the "Big Bang"), all the matter of our
Universe was produced by an asymmetric reaction between matter and antimatter involving the quarks
and color charges of the strong force, and the leptons and Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs) of the
weak force. The reaction requires the asymmetric decay of a matter-antimatter pair (or its equivalent in
terms of single particles) of "leptoquarks", which are neutral with respect to both electric and color
charge ("leptoquarks" are very massive, internally fractured leptons). This asymmetric decay is
"mediated" or catalyzed by the weak force IVB "X", and can be represented succinctly by the reaction
equation below (in which antiparticles are underlined):
X(Lq ) x Lq -----> baryon + vlq + (energy)
where Lq indicates a leptoquark and vlq a leptoquark antineutrino.

We can also write this reaction in a more specific and complete form as:
X[(Lq x Lq) (vlq x vlq )] -----> bbt + vlq + bb
(or)
X[(Lq x Lq) (vlq x vlq )] -----> bbt + vlq + bb + bb
(or)
X[(Lq x Lq) (vlq x vlq )] -----> bbt + vlq + bt+ +u- + vu
1) where the left-side reactants are:
-) "Lq" represents an (electrically neutral) antileptoquark whose quarks are compressed so tightly (by
the "X" IVB) that their color charge has vanished (in the limit of "asymptotic freedom");
-) "(Lq x Lq)" represents an electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark pair (both leptoquarks in the
pair are "color" neutral);
-) "(vlq x vlq )" represents a leptoquark neutrino-antineutrino pair (particle-antiparticle pairs are shown
in brackets with an x between them to indicate their linkage - the lower-case "linking x" not to be
confused with the upper case bold "X" IVB); (neutrinos are the pure, "bare", or explicit form of
"identity" or "number" charge - the weak force charge sometimes referred to as "flavor"). (See:
"Identity Charge and the Weak Force".)
2) the reaction is mediated by:
-) an Intermediate Vector Boson (IVB) of the weak force, "X", which catalyzes the reaction by forming
the complex X[(Lq x Lq ) (vlq x vlq )], in which the members of the complex are brought into such
close spatial proximity by the X that they can exchange, neutralize, or otherwise cancel each other's
charges. In this case the vlq identity charge of the neutrino particle pair annihilates the anti-identity
charge of Lq in the leptoquark particle pair. (See similar weak force reaction mechanisms in: "The
Particle Table" and "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism.") The "X" IVB can also be thought
of as the quantized expression of a unified force "symmetric energy state" (the GUT unified force
symmetric energy state), in which quarks and leptons have merged their otherwise separate identities.
(See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
3) the right-side products of this reaction are:
-) "bbt", the unreacted leptoquark carried over from the left side (originally "Lq"), whose quarks have
expanded under their mutually repulsive (electrical and quantum mechanical) forces to reveal their
color charges. By the simple expansion of its internal, latent, or nascent quarks (perhaps in concert with
and/or in response to) the rapidly expanding early Universe), this particle has transformed itself from a
"colorless" leptoquark to a "colored", normal, electrically neutral, heavy baryon (hyperon) containing
the bottom (b) and top (t) heavy quark species ("flavors"); it will eventually decay to the ground state
proton (via the much lighter "W" IVB).
-) "vlq", an antileptoquark neutrino, liberated from the X complex when its partner (vlq) annihilated
with the anti-identity charge of the antileptoquark Lq. The presence of "vlq" balances the baryon
number charge of the newly formed matter baryon (bbt);
-) energy, in the form of some electrically neutral meson (bb) or meson pair (bb x bb), or some other
electrically neutral combination of decay products such as the positively charged meson (bt+), the
negatively charged muon (u-), and the muon antineutrino (vu). This is all that remains of the
antileptoquark Lq, which being electrically neutral, and with its color charge vanished due to the
compression of its quarks by the X, will simply convert its neutralized mass-energy to lighter particles
in some energy, momentum, charge, and spin conserving combination, and self-annihilate, once its
conserved number charge has been canceled by the leptoquark neutrino "vlq".

Discussion
The reaction begins with a symmetric matter-antimatter pair of electrically neutral leptoquarks and a
symmetric matter-antimatter pair of leptoquark neutrinos. (While I show a particle-antiparticle pair, the
reaction is representative of the general asymmetric weak force decay of leptoquarks whether singly or
in pairs.) The source of both is the (real or virtual) particle "sea", the unlimited reservoir of symmetric,
particle-antiparticle pairs of all kinds created by the interaction of light with the Heisenberg-Dirac
"vacuum" or metric of spacetime (these particle pairs are real or virtual depending upon the energy
density and temperature of their spacetime environment). From this symmetric mixture we nevertheless
produce, via the mediation of the X, an asymmetric product - an unpaired matter hyperon (which will
decay to a proton, electron, and electron antineutrino), and an unpaired antileptoquark neutrino, which
remains unchanged to balance the "identity" or baryon number charge of the hyperon and its eventual
decay product, the proton. The asymmetric character of the weak force is expressed in the decay of just
one member of the leptoquark-antileptoquark pair, rather than both. What we actually expect is that
this decay occurs slightly more often than its antimatter counterpart (for reasons unknown), thus
producing a surplus of matter baryons.
The electrical neutrality of the leptoquark pair is crucial to the success of the reaction, as an electrically
charged pair (Lq- x Lq+) would immediately annihilate each other. This electrical neutrality is the
reason why this reaction requires a composite particle whose constituent quarks can sum their
fractional charges to zero electric charge (as in the neutron). The quark-lepton-IVB system also
requires a Higgs scalar boson to select the appropriate force unification domain and associated IVBs
(since there is more than one - TOE (Y), GUT (X), or electroweak (W). While the quantized weak
force transformation mechanism may seem dauntingly complex, no doubt this is nevertheless the
simplest system which is capable of breaking the primordial symmetry of light and its particleantiparticle pairs in a repeatable and invariant fashion, producing absolutely uniform elementary
particles and the atomic matter of our material Universe.
Color Charge
Just as crucial to the success of this reaction as its electrical neutrality is the internal symmetry of the
conserved color charge. Because the gluons which carry the color charge are composed of coloranticolor charge pairs in all possible combinations, the gluon field as a whole sums to zero color. The
color field will sum to zero physically if the quarks are sufficiently compressed, yet return to full
(explicit) color charge when the compressive forces are relaxed and the quarks expand under the
influence of their mutually repulsive forces (both electric and quantum mechanical). This symmetry
property allows the antileptoquark to effectively vanish, via the weak force "X" IVB and leptoquark
neutrino (essentially, the process of "proton decay"), when its quarks are compressed and the color
charge is only implicit. However, the same mechanism prevents such total decays when the quarks
separate and the color charge becomes explicit (because neutrinos do not carry and hence cannot cancel
the conserved color charge). It is the role of the X IVB to effect the compression of the quarks,
vanishing the color charge (the effect is the limiting case of the principle of "asymptotic freedom":
Politzer, Gross, and Wilczek 1973 - 2004 Nobel prize).
Hence the antileptoquark can vanish in the high temperature, energy-dense environment of the Big
Bang, but the quarks of the leptoquark (the particle-pair partner which does not decay), simply expand
(as the Universe expands and cools) under their mutually repulsive forces to reveal their conserved
color charge. By simply expanding its quarks, the remaining "singlet" leptoquark is transformed into a
heavy, neutral baryon which can only decay partially (to the ground state proton), but cannot vanish
completely, as its color charge can neither be neutralized by, nor transferred to, any alternative charge
carrier (no leptons carry color charge, and mesons carry only complementary color-anticolor charges).

To become a baryon, the leptoquark must only resist decay long enough that the ambient compressive
forces of the Big Bang become insufficient to prevent the expansion of its quarks, a very short time
indeed in the rapidly expanding and cooling early Universe. For a short time during the early Universe,
the X IVB will be indistinguishable from the very dense primordial metric. After the Universe expands
and cools, however, the energy density of the X will be greater than that of the ambient metric, and
energy to produce it will have to be borrowed (in accordance with the usual quantum mechanical rules
governing the lifetime of Heisenberg virtual particles).
The asymmetry in the weak force reaction creating matter is very small (on the order of one part per
ten billion). In most reactions, the leptoquarks will be electrically charged and simply annihilate each
other; of those in which the leptoquark partners are neutral, most will annihilate each other anyway, or
decay simultaneously despite their electrical neutrality. A few neutral leptoquarks will decay
asymmetrically (without their partners also decaying) via the X and leptoquark neutrino, but a few
more antileptoquarks will decay asymmetrically by an analogous antimatter route. It is this slight
imbalance (for which there is no explanation) that produces all the matter of the present Universe.
Matter and antimatter are evidently not perfectly symmetric opposites, at least not in their interactions
with the weak force IVBs. Even though matter and antimatter are produced in symmetric pairs, they do
not decay symmetrically: there is some unknown, subtle difference between them which affects their
rate of weak force decay and creates the material Cosmos (Cronin 1981).
The hypothetical "Higgs" scalar boson is presumed to endow the IVBs with mass, and through them,
the elementary particles also. The actual conversion of free energy to quantized mass forms such as the
IVBs, quarks, and leptons is thought to be "scaled" or "gauged" by the "Higgs". This particle is actively
being sought at the largest accelerators; its mass is thought to lie between 100 and 1000 proton masses.
(See: Science vol. 315, 23 March, 2007 page 1657.) As mentioned above, the quantized Higgs boson is
necessary to scale or "gauge" the interaction in a repeatable and invariant fashion to the appropriate
force unification energy level (the TOE, GUT, or the electroweak, with a separate Higgs for each), a
symmetric energy state in which the separate identities of the quarks and/or leptons are merged and
hence can be transformed, swapped, or exchanged simply in the normal course of events by the
resident IVBs. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
Neutrinos
The crucial role of the neutrino in the creation of particles must also be emphasized. The neutrino is the
alternative charge carrier for the "identity" charge, a symmetry debt of light which accrues from the
"anonymity" of light. All photons (quanta of light) are alike - they have no individual identity, one
cannot be distinguished from another - hence their "symmetry of anonymity". The elementary particle
spectrum, however - the leptonic series of electron, muon, tau, and (perhaps) leptoquark - are
distinguishable one from another: they are not alike, they occupy different "rungs" on the quantum
"ladder" or "spectrum" of massive leptonic elementary particles, and their antiparticles are also
distinguishable by their opposite charge and/or spin. Hence the symmetry/information debt of
"identity" is in contrast to the photon "sea" of anonymity and is carried by elementary particles as a
charge, where it is usually referred to as the conserved "number" charge of the leptons and baryons (all
baryons carry one and the same number or identity charge, that of their leptonic ancestor, the
leptoquark (vlq). Leptoquark neutrinos have never been observed because proton decay has never been
observed). The leptoquark (or baryon) antineutrino is an excellent candidate for the "dark matter" of
the universe.
The conservation of light's various symmetries is required by Noether's Theorem. The charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light. "Identity" or "number" charge is the symmetry debt of the weak
force, recording and conserving the broken symmetry of light's "anonymity". (See: "Symmetry

Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
In the massive leptons, including the leptoquark, this identity charge is said to be "hidden", or in its
"implicit" form. The neutrino is the "explicit" or "bare" form of identity charge. As such, the neutrino
functions as an alternative carrier of identity charge, which otherwise could only be carried by the
particle itself, or neutralized by its antiparticle. It is because this charge is specifically "identity" that it
alone, among all other charges, must have its own unique carrier. In contrast, the universal electric
charge can be carried by, or transferred to, any other lepton, baryon, or meson, and color charge can be
carried by any quark. But identity, being specific to each "rung" of the elementary particle quantum
"ladder" (spectrum), requires a carrier specific to that rung, either the particle itself or its specific
neutrino. (Note that the identity charge carried by the electron, muon, tau, and baryon, while different
from each other, are exactly the same within each particle type; hence it is quite possible for one
electron to swap identities with another electron, as in reactions mediated by the "Z" IVB, but identities
cannot be exchanged between different types of elementary particles - an electron cannot swap
identities with a muon, for example. When a muon decays to an electron, the identities of both particles
are conserved or neutralized by their separate neutrinos, a reaction requiring the mediation of the "W"
IVB).
Without the neutrino, there would be no material Universe, as there would be no alternative carrier for
identity charge - only particles and antiparticles could carry this charge and the system would be
"stuck" with particle-antiparticle pairs which could only annihilate each other. Manifestation requires
"information", which in its essential character is asymmetric - otherwise it is not "information". In the
particle realm, the fundamental bit of information is "identity". Particles can manifest only because
their identity can also be carried by neutrinos, which provide a conserved alternative to the usual
antiparticle carriers. These alternative carriers maintain the essential features of the original symmetry
by balancing or neutralizing the identity charge of the manifest particle such that overall identity still
sums to zero, as it did in the particle-antiparticle pair: identity is simply carried in two different forms,
one "hidden" or implicit in the particle, one "bare" or explicit in the neutrino. (Whether or not neutrinos
have mass makes no difference to their role as the alternative, "bare", or explicit carrier of identity
charge; most charges are in fact carried by massive particles. If the leptoquark neutrino is (very)
massive, it may account for the "missing mass" or "dark matter" of the Cosmos.)
Recent observations suggest that neutrinos "oscillate" among their several identities; in this they are
somewhat similar to their massive leptonic counterparts which exchange identities among themselves
(and with particle-antiparticle pairs in the virtual particle "sea"), but which require the mediation of the
"W" IVB and their specific neutrinos to do so. Despite these "oscillations" or excursions into "identity"
space, only an electron neutrino can cancel or neutralize an electron's hidden identity charge; hence
neutrinos must revert to type in any interaction with a specific lepton - perhaps another example of a
quantum mechanical "collapsing wave function". (See: Science Vol. 313, 21 July, 2006 page 291.)
The IVBs
Because all particles are derived from the interaction of light with the structural metric of spacetime,
the virtual particle "sea" will contain any asymmetry embedded in light, spacetime, or their interaction.
The only asymmetry we know of in either light or spacetime is the potential time asymmetry; in light
the component of time is implicitly expressed as "frequency". In virtual particle pairs the potential for
asymmetry is expressed as "information" in the form of various charges, which in unpaired "real"
particles we characterize as the conserved symmetry debts of light. It is likely that the IVB particles are
"metric" in origin, "string-like" particles (as in the particles of "string theory"), which are composed of
a compressed dimensional matrix requiring a huge binding energy to maintain - the source of the IVB's
enormous mass-energy (the W is about 80 times more massive than the proton). This compressed

metric, derived from (or identical to) the dense metric of the early Universe, is the mechanism which
enables the IVBs to bring particles into such close spatial proximity that they can exchange charges,
swap identities, or create new ones without violating the applicable conservation laws. Being derived
from the metric, the asymmetric principle (if any) embedded in the IVBs must apparently be time. The
time asymmetry is reflected in the differential rate of decay of leptoquarks vs antileptoquarks.
The view we adopt here is that the mass of the "W" recreates the dense metric of the electroweak force
unification era, when all leptons shared a single generic "flavor" or identity, and similarly, all quarks
shared a single generic flavor. The "X" IVB recreates the still higher level, more energetic GUT force
unification era, when all leptons and quarks merged their generic identities in the more inclusive
"family" identity level of fermions (the joining of the strong and electroweak forces). The Higgs boson
is the quantized particle which selects between these eras or force unification symmetric energy states,
"gauging" or "scaling" the appropriate energy level or symmetry domain, while the IVBs do the
transformation work (there is a distinct Higgs for each era). This complex weak force particle creation
and transformation mechanism is necessary to ensure that the elementary particles created today are the
same in all respects as those created eons ago during the "Big Bang" - charge invariance and charge
and symmetry conservation require no less. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
Like the "X", the "W" is a heavy "metric" particle, but much less massive (see: "The Particle Table").
Both X and W have the similar role of bringing ordinary particles very close together within their
spatially compressed metrics. The very massive X compresses quark triplets, the less massive W
incorporates baryons, mesons, or leptons requiring alternative charge carriers into complexes with
leptonic virtual particle-antiparticle pairs that can provide carrier leptons (or with mesons which can
supply quark colors and "flavors"). Similarly, the Z brings particles so close together that (if they are
compatible), they can swap identities (or simply scatter or bounce off each other). In all cases, the IVBs
essentially provide a bridge between the virtual particle "sea" of the vacuum and real particles, such
that real particles can exchange charges and energies with the unlimited information resources of the
"sea", and thus effect their "real world" decays and transformations. (See: The Weak Force "W"
Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D) Reality
Leptoquarks
The fact that both leptons and hadrons have equivalent whole quantum unit electric charges is
evidently due to their common origin in the spacetime "vacuum". Leptons and hadrons of all kinds can
be produced as either virtual or real particles from the vacuum in high-energy collisions between
cosmic rays and atomic particles in our atmosphere, or in similar high-energy collisions in earth-bound
laboratory accelerators. The leptonic unit electric charge (of the electron, for example) is evidently
what our electromagnetic universe is prepared to bestow upon all her massive elementary particles, of
whatever kind, at least in their allowed "ground" states.
While quarks carry electric charge in fractional amounts (-1/3, +2/3), they are only allowed to manifest
when combined in whole quantum charge units, either as baryons or mesons. The origin of the quarks
and their partial charges and gluon field is most readily understood as the product of a fractured
primordial lepton (a "leptoquark"). It is also possible that an ultra-hot primordial "soup" composed of
quark-antiquark pairs and lepton-antilepton pairs existed which reassembled (upon cooling) into barons
and antibaryons. Following matter-antimatter annihilations, nothing remained but a few heavy neutral
baryons which decayed as modeled above to produce hyperons with their charge-balancing leptonic
alternative charge carriers - one lepton per charged baryon. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak
Force IVBs".)
In the leptoquark scenario, the conceptual difficulty is splitting the primordial elementary leptons; in

the "quark soup" scenario, the conceptual difficulty is why the primordial universe should produce both
quarks and leptons. This problem is surmounted if the primordial leptons are simply split, producing
leptoquarks with an internal gluon field, the latter in response to quantum mechanical and symmetry
demands to maintain (at least the outward appearance of) whole quantum units of charge by
permanently confining the fractionally charged quarks.
The primordial leptoquark is conceived as the most massive member of the leptonic series or spectrum
(e, u, t, Lq). The leptoquark may in fact be so massive as to be unstable, split asunder into three parts
by the self-repulsion or disruptive effects of its own electric charge. By splitting into 3 quarks, which
have smaller masses and lesser electric charges, the leptoquark achieves a more stable configuration an accommodation perhaps necessitated by the reduction of confining pressures in a cooling and
expanding "Big Bang". Leptoquarks therefore form a natural end to the leptonic elementary particle
spectrum or series. It is the role of the "Y" IVBs of this TOE or Planck era force-unification energy
level to create electrically charged leptoquarks, either by assembly from the primordial quark soup, or
by splitting a primordial heavy lepton, and to transform charged leptoquarks into their electrically
neutral congeners. (See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".)
It should be noted that the bestowing (by the "vacuum") of a uniform and universal quantum unit of
electric charge upon all types of massive elementary particles is perfectly commensurate with our
hypothesis that the origin of electric charge is due to the asymmetry of time vs the symmetry of space.
Massive particles must have a time dimension to accommodate their variable and relative energy
accounts, but this descent into dimensional asymmetry is mightily resisted by the spatial metric or
electromagnetic vacuum, which creates massive particles only in particle-antiparticle pairs such that
they annihilate each other instantaneously via their opposite electric charges, thereby restoring and
protecting the spatial symmetry of the vacuum in accordance with Noether's theorem.
The electric charge is dimensional in origin, a symmetry debt of the Heisenberg-Dirac "vacuum" or the
spacetime metric, carried by any and all massive particles which enter the 4th temporal dimension,
violating in so doing the symmetry of light and space from which they originated, and to which, sooner
or later, they must return through the good offices of electric charge and matter-antimatter
annihilations. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
General Principles
The general principle at work in this reaction, which is significant for the origin of matter, information,
and the systems they produce, is the interaction of two fields, one symmetric (the color charge of the
strong force and quarks - the mass-energy carriers) and one asymmetric (the weak force IVBs and the
leptonic field of alternative charge carriers - the information or charge carriers). The action of the
asymmetric field is necessary to reveal the information content embedded in both fields. We see the
same principle at work in the dimensional conservation domains of light and matter, where the
intersection of symmetric space with asymmetric time (an intersection which produces gravitation),
reveals a specific "location" in the symmetric field of space. "Location" is the fundamental information
"bit" in the dimensional realm (as indicated by the character of gravity), just as "identity" is the
fundamental information bit in the particle realm (as indicated by the character of the weak force). The
information bit "location" (requiring time) is the anchor point of Einstein's "Interval". The asymmetric
potential is embedded in the symmetric field from the beginning, as is time in spacetime, "frequency"
(time) in light, or the information content of the virtual particle "sea" in the vacuum. Thus the manifest
world is a revelation of the information potential and content of the symmetric unmanifest world, as
exposed by interaction with its own embedded asymmetric energy component or field. By such means
is pure energy converted into conserved charges and information.

It is of interest to note that between the metric warpage of gravity and the "bare" or explicit identity
charges of the neutrinos, spacetime contains a complete record of the location, mass, and identity of
every elementary particle within its conservation domain - and within historic spacetime resides a
causal memory of every event. This is the "Akashic Record" of occult tradition, and the basis for the
notion of universal "karma".
Alternative Charge Carriers and Forces
The role of alternative forces and charge carriers is thoroughgoing and absolutely essential
to breaking the initial symmetric energy state of the universe, which begins with light, the
spacetime metric, and elementary particle-antiparticle pairs. Alternative forces and charges
are usually local transformations of global parameters. The crucial role of embedded
alternative forces has long been recognized in philosophical systems of thought. In
religious terms and symbolism, the "devil" is necessary so that God may manifest; the role
of "evil" in the world is to energize the good. The "soul" is an alternative form of personal
identity, the physical realm is an alternative form of the spiritual realm, etc. Holographic
models of reality are modern extensions of these ancient ideas.
1) Mass is an alternative (bound, local) form of electromagnetic energy which allows the
conservation of energy in the time dimension and the transformation of massless light to
massive particles.
2) Charge is an alternative (local) form of symmetry which allows the conservation of
symmetry in the time dimension and the transformation of symmetric light to asymmetric
"information".
3) Entropy is an alternative form of energy which allows the transformation of light to
space, space to time, time to history, and energy to "work".
4) Time is an alternative (local) form of space and entropy which allows the
transformation of the absolute motion of massless light to the relative motion of massive
particles, and the transformation of acausal space to causal history (historic spacetime).
The causal integrity of history is an alternative form of the energetic unity of space.
5) Gravity is an alternative (local) form of the spacetime metric which allows the
transformation of space and the spatial entropy drive of free energy (the intrinsic motion of
light), to time and the historical entropy drive of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of
time), and vice versa. Gravity converts a global, spatial metric to a local, historical metric,
so that (by means of the time dimension so created) energy may be conserved in the
relative realm of matter no less than in the absolute realm of light (the compound
conservation domain of spacetime). Gravity creates time by the annihilation of space and
the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. Gravity ultimately restores
metric and energetic symmetry via the conversion of mass to light - as in the stars and
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes.
6) Magnetism is an alternative form of electricity conserving the invariance of electric
charge and allowing its relative motion.
7) Leptoquarks are an alternative form of leptons which allow the transformation of
elementary leptonic particles into sub-elementary quarks and composite baryons.
8) Gluons are an alternative form of light which allow the transformation of whole leptonic
charge units into fractional quark charge units.
9) IVBs are alternative forms of force unity symmetry states which allow the
transformation of virtual particles into real particles (and vice versa), and the creation and
destruction of (single) elementary particles.
10) Leptons, neutrinos, and mesons are alternative charge carriers (for electric charge,
identity charge, and quark partial charges) which allow the transformation of virtual

hadrons and leptons into "real" (temporal) atomic matter.
11) The material universe is an alternative form of the light universe, which allows the free
energy content of light to express itself in terms of (locally) bound energy, gravitational
and astrophysical megastructure, conserved information and charge, atomic matter and
chemical material systems, including life.
12) Life is an alternative form of matter which has achieved consciousness, selfawareness, and a personal identity and survival agenda. Life is the information pathway by
which the universe knows and explores itself, extending its creative potential and
information content.
Links:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 1
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 3 (summary)
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs")
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D) Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
Table of the "Higgs Cascade"
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions
The Particle Table
References:
H. D. Politzer. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30: 1343.
Cronin, J. W. 1981. CP Symmetry Violation - the Search for its Origin. Science 212: 1221.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed
Equations of Quark Theory."
Suggested Additional Reading:
"The Origin of Matter". James M. Cline, American Scientist, March-April 2004, Vol. 92, No. 2, Pages
148 - 157.
home page
Postscript (added Dec., 2011)
The large spacetime dimensions (space, time, historic spacetime) are unique features of our "ground
state" (electromagnetic) chemical, information, or biological era and are unknown at the higher-energy
force unification eras (EW, GUT, TOE). (See: Table of the "Higgs Cascade".) Our large dimensions

are entropic/conservation features of our ground state electromagnetic domain, created by the
"intrinsic" (entropic) motion of light, time, and gravity, necessary for energy (entropy), symmetry
(charge), and causality (time) conservation of both free and bound electromagnetic energy forms in
their shared domain of historic spacetime. (See: Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part
1.)
Because particles are originally created (during the "Big Bang") by the compression of the spacetime
structural metric (a combined action of all four physical forces), particles and spacetime are intimately
related and share many features, as demonstrated even today in the creation of virtual particleantiparticle pairs by the Heisenberg-Dirac spacetime "vacuum" or structural metric. We need to think
in terms of a "particle metric" of allowed and regulated symmetry states at the higher energy forceunification levels, just as we think of a spacetime metric which allows and regulates interactions in our
own ground state large-scale dimensions. In this regard, the Higgs boson is the analog of the photon,
the Higgs mass is the analog of velocity c, the three quarks and the three family energy levels of
particles may be resonances of the three spatial dimensions, the inertial/dimensional "metric
symmetries" of our ground state are mirrored in the force/particle "identity symmetries" of the higher
energy Higgs domains, etc.
In addition to these and similar analogies between particles and the spacetime metric, there is another
series of comparisons we can make between the spatial and temporal conservation modes of free vs
bound forms of electromagnetic energy. In these comparisons the conservation modes of free spatial
forms of electromagnetic energy (light) have been translated into corresponding conservation modes of
bound temporal forms of electromagnetic energy (matter/atoms). For example: Time is an alternative
form of entropy ("velocity T" is the entropic analog of "velocity c", history is the analog of space);
charge is an alternative form of symmetry, mass is an alternative form of energy, gravity is an
alternative form of inertia; causality is an alternative form of entanglement. All such transformations
serve conservation purposes, especially regarding energy and symmetry, as free forms of
electromagnetic energy are converted into bound forms of electromagnetic energy. The charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem). Charge conservation and charge
invariance = symmetry conservation in the temporal domain. (See also: Global-Local Gauge
Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model".)

