Origin of Life

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/darwin.html

Origin of Life: Newton, Darwin, and the Abundance of Life in the Universe
(revised Dec., 2010)
John A. Gowan and August T. Jaccaci
home page
This article has been translated into French by Natalie Harmann. Many thanks Natalie! See it at:
http://www.besteonderdelen.nl/blog/?p=3556

Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
The 4x3 Fractal Algorithm Creates a Replicating Molecule
Links
Abstract
Two giants of British science, Newton and Darwin, developed theories of negentropic force in
physics and biology. The two scientists are adjacently interred in Westminster Abby, and their
theories of gravity and evolution likewise share common ground and a fractal resonance with
DNA. Because DNA/RNA is both a replicating molecule and part of the universal 4x3 fractal
pattern, the implications for the abundance of life in the Cosmos are enormous.
Introduction
Newton and Darwin are buried a few feet apart in Westminster Abby, but this is not the only
distinction they have in common. Both developed major theories of negentropic forces which
create information domains. Newton developed the theory of gravitation which produces time
and the historical arena for evolution, and indeed creates the entire fractal hierarchy of Nature
either directly or indirectly; Darwin developed the theory of Evolution through Natural
Selection, producing in time the entire biotic realm (see: "The Table of Natural Organization").
The two theories intersect in DNA, which, like gravity, has a 4x3 fractal structure, dynamic, and
negentropic role, but is also a replicating, biological molecule. Although gravity's connection is
indirect, there can be no DNA without gravitation to produce the galaxies, stars, and planets
where the molecule and its constituent elements are created and assembled. Even more
fundamentally, without gravitation there is no temporal and historic dimension in which
evolution can operate (see: "Introduction to Gravitation"). Gravity is the overarching
negentropic energy source producing information as the crown of matter, in which DNA, life,
and evolution are embedded like jewels.
Darwin's theory is biotic, and depends upon the 4x3 molecular structure and coding pattern of
DNA, of which he was completely ignorant. Nevertheless, Darwin correctly developed the
gross features of the theory of evolution and discovered its operant mechanism in Natural
Selection. Natural Selection can also be modeled as a 4x3 mechanism: 1) heritability of 2)
1 of 4

10/17/14 9:19 PM

Origin of Life

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/darwin.html

differential fitness with respect to 3) the utilization of a limiting resource (Leowntin 1970)
within a 4 level population structure: a) the variable individual; b) the reproductive pair; c) the
locally adapted population; d) the reproductively isolated species. Newton developed the idea of
gravitation by discovering its mechanism or force law (F = GMm/rr), which was later shown by
Einstein to also have a 4x3 basis (four third-order equations - the changing rate of acceleration
in x, y, z, t). Neither Newton nor Einstein elaborated upon the information building potential of
gravitation, but this is displayed in "The Information Ladder".
Although gravitation is an abiotic force, it is nevertheless responsible, directly or indirectly, for
every level of the fractal hierarchy, creating the stars and galaxies, creating the elements in
stars, and creating the planets which support life. Therefore Newton's Gravitation stands to the
Fractal Hierarchy of Nature as Darwin's Natural Selection stands to the Theory of Evolution gravity is the negentropic engine which produces all the material realms of the fractal hierarchy,
while Natural Selection is the negentropic engine of biotic evolution. The fact that both these
negentropic drives intersect in the 4x3 fractal, replicating molecule of DNA has enormous
implications for the abundance of life in the Universe, amounting to a theory of and a prediction
for exobiology.
The 4x3 Fractal Algorithm Creates a Replicating Molecule
In addition to the physical manifestations of free and bound electromagnetic energy (light,
dimensions, particles, charges, forces, etc.), the closed cosmic system is governed by four
fundamental physical laws: the 1st and 2nd laws of thermodynamics (energy conservation and
entropy), "Noether's Theorem" (symmetry conservation), and Causality-Information (the law of
cause and effect, or "karma"). During the "Big Bang" or "Creation Event", these 4 natural
regulatory laws interact with each other and the 4 dimensions of the spacetime metric to
produce matter and the 4 charges and forces of physics, as illustrated in the "Tetrahedron
Model". This still-mysterious symmetry-breaking process (mediated by the weak force)
represents the primordial example and dynamic of the 4x3 fractal algorithm in Nature,
producing in turn the first material iteration of the fractal: the 3 families of 4 elementary
particles, followed by the ground-state baryons of 3 quarks carrying 4 charges, etc. (see:
"Nature's Fractal Pathway").
After producing the baryon at the particle level (via weak force symmetry-breaking during the
Big Bang), the 4x3 fractal mechanism (operating both in the Big Bang and in the stellar
nucleosynthetic pathway) produces alpha particles (helium nuclei) and carbon at the atomic
level (carbon carries an astounding 5-fold resonance of the 4x3 algorithm). Shifting to the lower
energies of the planetary arena and the atomic electron shell, the fractal drive next produces
tetrahedral bonds and crystals at the molecular level (notably in both carbon and water), and
finally the 4x3 molecular structure of RNA-DNA. DNA is the molecular intersection of the
abiotic fractal resonance and the biological replicating series, due to the simple fact that DNA,
while on the molecular structural level a fractal 4x3 resonance, is on the biological level a
replicating molecule producing a 4x3 genetic code. Once DNA begins reproducing, molecular
competition within a finite environment between similar consumers with similar needs for
limited resources creates a new negentropic drive in the domain of Information - Natural
Selection - which, like gravity, can also be modeled as a 4x3 dynamic (see above). Acting in

2 of 4

10/17/14 9:19 PM

Origin of Life

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/darwin.html

concert with matter's eternal search for antimatter (via the electromagnetic force), gravity and
natural selection are complementary abiotic and biotic negentropic drives which have carried
biological information systems to fantastic levels of complexity. Augmented further by the
abstracting, symbolizing intelligence and technology of humans, there is no known limit to the
sophistication information systems may eventually achieve.
Finally, the fact that RNA-DNA is a 4x3 fractal resonance has enormous implications for the
abundance of life in the Universe, for it means that the creation of the replicating molecule
DNA is not a random event, but a likely and predictable product of the abiotic fractal algorithm
operating in any suitable environment. Because water also has a tetrahedral bonding pattern, the
linkage between carbon and DNA via the 4x3 fractal series is especially enhanced in the
presence of the "universal solvent". This evidently is why life arose on water-covered Earth so
quickly after the cessation of the initial period of our planet's accretion and bombardment.
See also: "A Simpler Origin for Life" by Robert Shapiro. Scientific American, June, 2007, pages
46-53 (and on www.sciam.com).
See also: "The Origin of Life" by James Trefil et. al. American Scientist May-June 2009 Vol. 97
No. 3 pages 206-213.
Links:
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
Section VIII: Introduction to General Systems
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part 1: Microphysical Realm
Part 2: Biophysical Realm
Part 3: Astrophysical Realm
Part 4: Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Mode
Part 5: Metaphysical Realm - Rational Mode
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos
Commentary on the Metaphysical Realm (rational mode)
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
The Human Connection
Diagrams
darwin.html
The Tetrahedron Model
The "Biology" Tetrahedron

3 of 4

10/17/14 9:19 PM

Origin of Life

4 of 4

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/darwin.html

10/17/14 9:19 PM

