Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/rationale.html

Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravitation
Gravity is matter's memory it once was light
John A. Gowan
home page
(Revised June, 2014)
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction: Why Gravity?
The Gravitational "Location" Charge
A Second Conservation Role
Other Conservation Roles
Time and Magnetism
Black Holes
Postscript Diagram: 8 Nodes of the Gravimetric Series
Links
Abstract
The rationale for gravity begins with the creation of the Cosmos - the negative energy of
gravity is necessary to balance the positive energy of the "Big Bang", so that the
"Creation Event" requires zero net energy. This is the time when gravity is joined with the
other forces in equal strength, and bound energy (mass) is created from free energy (light)
and the structural metric of spacetime. Initially, bound energy is in the form of matterantimatter pairs, so that creation is initiated from a state of zero net charge as well as zero
net energy. Beginning in such a state of complete neutrality (perhaps as a giant quantum
fluctuation of the vacuum, an "inflationary bubble", or Divine Fiat), the Universe can
only evolve into a state of complete conservation. (All "Creation" scenarios are
speculative, whether rational or intuitive.)
The gravitational rationale extends beyond the "Creation Event" to the production of
matter's time dimension and the conservation of the entropy and symmetry of free
electromagnetic energy (light). These secondary conservation roles (which manifest as
the gravitational conversion of space to time, and the gravitational conversion of bound to
free energy via the nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, supernovas, quasars, and Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes), are natural consequences of the mode of action of
gravity's primary role, which is the creation of negative energy and entropy via the
contraction and destruction of space (creating time), in contradistinction to the creation,
expansion, and cooling of space by the positive energy and entropy of light.
Introduction: Why Gravity?
Why does gravity exist as a force in the Cosmos? What is gravity's rationale and origin in the context
of conservation law? These and other questions concerning gravitation are addressed in various papers

1 of 6

6/29/14 10:47 AM

Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/rationale.html

on my website (and linked below). Here I give only a brief summary of my major conclusions. (See
also: "An Introduction to Gravitation".)
The first role and necessity for gravity is to provide negative energy to balance the positive energy of
the "Big Bang". Our universe can be born only if it requires no net energy and no net charge in its
initial state. All other gravitational roles are derivative and secondary to gravity's primary "midwife"
role of energy balance and conservation during the "Big Bang".
Gravity also serves two secondary and related conservation laws - entropy and symmetry - (entropy
immediately and symmetry eventually); because these in turn serve energy conservation and causality,
gravity ultimately serves all four. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".) Like the other fundamental forces
of physics, gravity is characterized by a charge that originates as a symmetry debt of light (Noether's
Theorem). Light has perfect symmetry, bearing no charges of any kind, but when light (free
electromagnetic energy) is converted to matter or any form of bound electromagnetic energy
(including simply momentum or kinetic energy), light acquires various charges as a bound form of
energy. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light; these charges include spin and
gravitation, among others. (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
The Gravitational "Location" Charge
In the case of gravity, the symmetry debt or charge is "location" (gravitational charge), and the broken
symmetry of light represented by "location" charge is the "non-local" distributional symmetry of
light's energy everywhere, simultaneously, throughout spacetime. As Einstein discovered, in its own
reference frame, moving freely in vacuum at "velocity c", light's "clock" is stopped and meter sticks
shrink to nothing in the direction of propagation. Hence in its own reference frame, light has forever
to go nowhere, resulting in light's "infinite velocity" and "non-local" symmetric energy state. Einstein
mathematically characterized light's non-local symmetric energy state in his equation of the spacetime
"Interval": light's "Interval" = zero. "Noether's Theorem" states that the symmetries of a
multicomponent field (such as the electromagnetic field or the metric field of spacetime) must be
conserved, and so it is to conserve light's non-local symmetric energy state and the consequent
equitable (symmetric) distribution of light's energy throughout spacetime that the gravitational force
arises. (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
We see this conservation argument expressed physically in two ways. The first is that the gravitational
charge "locates" the undistributed mass-energy (E = mcc) of matter in spacetime, specifying in terms
of inertial or gravitational force the 4-dimensional position of matter, including matter's total mass and
density, all physical parameters reflecting matter's asymmetric spatio-temporal distribution (unlike
light, matter has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion and matter's "Interval" is always greater than zero).
Secondly, and clinching this argument, gravity acts to restore light's distributional symmetry through
the conversion of bound to free energy, as exampled by stars, supernovas, quasars, and ultimately and
completely, by Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. This is the conservation rationale for
gravity from the point of view of symmetry conservation, as required by "Noether's Theorem". (See:
"Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics.")
A Second Conservation Role
But gravity has another conservation role, intimately related to symmetry, which comes about because
2 of 6

6/29/14 10:47 AM

Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/rationale.html

the active principle of the gravitational "location" charge is time. Light has no time dimension but
matter does, and matter's time dimension is conferred upon it and created by matter's gravitational
field. Gravity creates the time dimension of matter by the annihilation of space and the extraction of a
metrically equivalent temporal residue. The intrinsic motion of the time dimension so created marches
off into history, dragging space along behind it. History is at right angles to all three spatial
dimensions - space self-annihilates at the point-like entrance to the historical domain (at the "center of
mass"), creating another temporal residue, which repeats the cycle. Gravity and time induce each
other in an endless entropic circle. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic
motion of time. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
The intrinsic motion of matter's time dimension serves as the primordial form of matter's entropy
drive (creating, expanding, aging and diluting the causal linkages of history), so the entropy drive of
matter (time) is a gravitational byproduct of the conservation of light's distributional symmetry - or
vice versa: symmetry conservation is ultimately the byproduct of the gravitational creation of time. In
effect, the intrinsic motion of light (the primordial form of the entropy drive of free electromagnetic
energy) supplies the energy to produce the intrinsic motion of time (the primordial form of the entropy
drive of bound electromagnetic energy). The spatial expansion of the Cosmos is reduced in
consequence of the gravitational conversion of space to time, funding its historical expansion. (See:
"Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
Here we see gravity in its entropy conservation/conversion role, producing the time dimension and
historical entropy drive of matter via the annihilation of space. Gravity functions as the mediating
force between the primordial forms of the entropy drives of free and bound electromagnetic energy,
converting one to the other in either direction and even simultaneously. For example, the gravitational
field of planet Earth is busy converting space to time, supplying Earth's time dimension and historical
entropy drive, while on the Sun the reaction is running in both directions at once, creating time from
space on the one hand (as on Earth), but also converting mass to light (as in stars).
The double conservation role of gravity derives from the double gauge (regulatory) role of light:
"velocity c" gauges both the primordial entropy drive and the "non-local" symmetric energy state of
free energy. Light's intrinsic motion creates, expands, and cools space (entropy role), while
simultaneously suppressing the time dimension, thus maintaining the inertial (dimensional) symmetry
of the spacetime metric, as well as the "non-local" distributional symmetry of light's energy. The
intrinsic motion of light is the direct cause of light's zero "Interval" or "non-local" symmetric energy
state, so when gravity conserves and restores light's non-local energy state (via the conversion of
bound to free energy in stars), gravity also conserves and restores (by default) the entropic role played
by light's intrinsic motion. Because gravity conserves both the entropy and symmetry functions of the
electromagnetic gauge "velocity c", gravity may be included under the conservation mantle of
Noether's Theorem, arising like the other forces from a material charge ("location"), which reflects a
symmetry debt of light (light's lost "non-local" spacetime distribution = the symmetric distribution of
light's energy throughout spacetime). As we have learned from quantum mechanics and subatomic
physics, matter is in fact an asymmetric form of light: one-half of a particle-antiparticle pair.
It is because the antimatter part of these primordial matter-antimatter particle pairs is missing in our
post "Big Bang" universe that all matter's symmetry debts arise - from conserved charges that were
originally intended to produce annihilation reactions with antimatter, and thus maintain the primordial

3 of 6

6/29/14 10:47 AM

Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/rationale.html

symmetry of the "light-only" Cosmos. The symmetry debt carried by electric charge I attribute to the
missing antimatter of the Cosmos, whereas the gravitational symmetry debt and "location" charge I
attribute to the (lost) "non-local" distributional symmetry of light's energy. (For a further discussion of
the origin of gravity and the other forces as symmetry debts of light, see: "Symmetry Principles of the
Unified Field Theory".)

Other Conservation Roles
An associated conservation role of gravity involves causality, obviously because gravity creates the
time dimension of matter. The intrinsic motion of time creates history, just as the intrinsic motion of
light creates space. Just as space is the conservation domain of free energy, so history is the
conservation domain of information, matter's causal web, net, field, or "matrix". Historic spacetime is
the creation of gravity and matter's entropy drive, the intrinsic motion of time. Combined with the
intrinsic motion of light, historic spacetime creates and upholds the reality of matter's "universal
present moment". The reality of today depends absolutely on the continuing reality of yesterday
(because of the interwoven net of temporal, causal linkages: our "yesterday" is another observer's
"today", and vice versa). This is a third conservation role and rationale for gravity as a long-range and
universal force: gravity is necessary to create and maintain (through time) the causal reality and
temporal linkage of matter with historic spacetime throughout the Cosmos ("karma"). (See: "A
Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
The weakness of gravity is due to the fact that matter is connected to its entropic conservation domain
(historic spacetime) only tangentially, via the single "touch" of the universal "present moment". Time
and history are at right angles to all three spatial dimensions, simultaneously. Gravity creates only
enough time to service this tangential connection. On this view, we would expect gravity to be
stronger if the unit of time (the "tangential touch") were greater - which is exactly what General
Relativity predicts. Time slows down (seconds become of longer duration) in a gravitational field, and
time actually stops at the event horizon of a black hole, where the "present moment" becomes the
"eternal now", the tangential point of contact between matter and the temporal dimension becomes
infinitely enlarged, and g = c. For a further discussion of the weakness of gravity, see: "Proton Decay
and the 'Heat Death' of the Universe".)
Finally, the 1st law of thermodynamics, energy conservation, can be regarded as the primary role of
gravitation, with entropy, causality, and symmetry conservation as corollaries, since the role of the
spacetime metric is first and foremost to conserve energy. We saw above that the "global" function of
the gravitational metric is to provide negative energy to balance the positive energy of the
electromagnetic metric (during the "Creation Event"). This global function has a "local" extension or
counterpart in the latter-day cosmos as well. The action of gravitation converts a global metric of
space, light, and absolute motion gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c", to a local
metric of time, matter, and relative motion gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G". Time
or historical entropy can be regarded as a "local" form of entropy drive, distilled from the "global"
spatial entropy drive of light (by the gravitational annihilation of space and the extraction of a
metrically equivalent temporal residue). Time is the local compensating component of the
gravitational field vector (spacetime) - the local gauge symmetry "current" - protecting the invariance

4 of 6

6/29/14 10:47 AM

Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/rationale.html

of the "Interval", causality, and "velocity c", accomplishing energy conservation despite the variable
and relative motions of matter, and the variable gravitational metric of historic spacetime. To this end,
time itself must be flexible and co-vary with space (as per the "Lorentz Invariance" of Special and
General Relativity). In this regard, time is the functional analog of the magnetic component of the
electromagnetic field. ("Lorentz invariance" produces a magnetic field when associated with
electrically charged particles in relative motion, and both time and magnetism function as "local
gauge symmetry currents" protecting the Interval, causality, the invariance of charge, and the
invariance of "velocity c".) (See: Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special Relativity. John Wiley and
Sons, Inc. 1968 pp. 175 - 177.) (See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and Gravitation".)
Time and Magnetism
As magnetism is the invisible, "intrinsic" projective electrical force ("electro-motive" force) of the
loadstone, so gravity is the invisible, "intrinsic" projective dimensional force ("inertio-motive" force)
of the ordinary rock. In the case of magnetism, we trace the force back to the moving (and aligned)
electric charges of the electrons in the loadstone; in the case of gravity, we trace the force back to the
moving (and one-way) temporal charges ("location") of the bound energy in the rock. A moving
electric charge creates a magnetic field; a moving temporal charge creates a gravitational field. In both
cases the field is produced at right angles to the current. The relation is reciprocal as well: moving
magnetic and spatial fields (gravity) create electric and temporal currents (time). Finally, time and
gravitation induce each other endlessly, as do the electric and magnetic field components of light, and
both time and magnetism function as "local gauge symmetry currents". This is the analogy between
gravitation and electromagnetism which so intrigued Einstein. (See: "Global-Local Gauge
Symmetries and the 'Tetrahedron Model'".)
Black Holes
At the "event horizon" of a black hole, both clocks and light come to a halt, as the electromagnetic
metric is completely replaced by the gravitational metric. Within the event horizon, all former
functions of the electromagnetic metric are either defunct or performed by the gravitational metric,
including those of the the binding forces between particles. Also absent are the primordial entropy
drives of space and history, the intrinsic motions of light and time. Hence the black hole is just that
physical environment in which entropy, in its usual electromagnetic expressions, does not exist, and
hence no change is possible as we ordinarily experience it. But gravitation is also a form of (negative)
entropy, and indeed we find, just at the boundary between the electromagnetic and gravitational
domains, entropy operating to convert the mass of the black hole entirely to light - via the mechanism
of "Hawking radiation". This is the ultimate expression of Noether's symmetry conservation theorem,
the complete gravitational conversion of bound to free energy, definitively revealing the final
conservation rationale for gravitation, and by extension, for time as well.
Postscript Diagram: Nodes of the Gravitational Metric

Links
Unified Field Theory

5 of 6

6/29/14 10:47 AM

Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravity

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/rationale.html

Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Gravity Diagrams
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric
home page

6 of 6

6/29/14 10:47 AM

