Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries: Part II (Gravitation, Section A)
John A. Gowan
(Revised June, 2014)
home page
Related Papers:
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part 1)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation (part 2)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in the Weak Force (part 3)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part 4)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part 5)
Table of Contents:
Section A
Abstract
Preface
Big G and Little g
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation
Gravitation as a Conservation Force
Non-Local Light vs Local Matter
Links and References
Go to Section B
Global and Local Gauge Symmetries: Gravitation, Section A
Abstract
"Local gauge symmetry currents" are forces that maintain the local invariance of universal constants,
charges, and other conserved parameters (such as causality, "velocity c", and the "Interval") despite
the hostile environment of a variable gravitational (or inertial) metric, relative rather than absolute
motion, entropy, partial (fractional) charges, etc. These compensatory forces are due to the activity of
the field vectors of the four forces, which not only act (in the long term) to return asymmetric material
systems to their original symmetric energy state (light), but also act (in the short term) to protect and
maintain the invariant values of charge and other conserved symmetry debts. Conserved charges are
conserved symmetry debts awaiting a final repayment via antimatter annihilation, proton decay, the
"quantum radiance" of black holes, or a universal "Big Crunch". Gravity pays the entropy-"interest"
on the symmetry debt of matter by creating matter's time dimension via the annihilation of space,
providing a historical domain within which charge conservation can have durable significance, and in
which the repayment of symmetry debts can be indefinitely deferred. Gravity eventually also pays the
energy-"principle" on matter's symmetry debt, converting bound energy to free energy in stars,
supernovas, quasars, and finally via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes, in the latter case
completely vanishing mass and its associated gravitational field.
Preface

1 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

Because gravity is a metric, dimensional force, in order to apply the usual global-local
analysis to this most universal of local forces, we begin by considering the fact that if the
spacetime metric were the same everywhere there would be no gravitational force.
According to Einstein, gravity is a distortion of the global electromagnetic (spacetime)
metric, as gauged by "velocity c". Suppose we were able to create a local change in the
spacetime metric centered on matter (for example, slowing local clocks and shortening
local meter sticks), what would the effect be upon the surrounding global metric? The
effect would be a gravitational force field, with spacetime accelerating symmetrically and
concentrically toward the center of the disturbance.
We establish the warped metric by means of a universal constant "G" ("big G" - Newton's
gravitational constant), which applies uniformly to mass everywhere at all times: "Gm")
"Big G" determines the strength of the gravitational field associated with a given unit of
mass (gram, kilogram, pound, ounce, etc.). "Big G" is the same on Jupiter, Mars, our
Moon, the Sun, as it is on Earth. "Little g", however, denotes the local strength of a
gravitational field, and it differs depending on the quantity and density of an object's mass
and where the measurements are taken. "Little g" is different on the surface of every
planet and varies continuously with distance from the center of any given mass. "Big G"
is the global value of the gravitational constant and "little g" is the local value, the later
producing a "local gauge symmetry current": the accelerated inrush of spacetime,
symmetric and concentric upon the center of mass of any object. The effect of this local
"current" is to maintain the measured value of all global constants, "c" as well as "G", on
all the planets despite their variable metric fields, such that causality, the "Interval", and
the value of electric charge and any other conserved symmetry debts remain invariant on
whichever planet or in whatever gravitational environment (on the space station, inside
the planet, or wherever) we choose to measure them.
The gravitational flow constitutes a "local gauge symmetry current" caused by the
one-way intrinsic motion of bound energy's (matter's) time dimension. Time, the entropy
drive of bound energy, exits space at right angles into the historic domain, pulling space
along behind it. Space self-annihilates at the center of mass, leaving in its place a
metrically equivalent temporal residue, whose intrinsic motion continues the entropic
cycle. Hence time and gravity endlessly induce each other, as gravity converts the spatial
entropy drive of free electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic motion of light) into the
historic entropy drive of bound electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic motion of time).
(See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
The covariance of space and time conspire to maintain the invariance of velocity c, the
"Interval", causality ("Lorentz Invariance"), and other conserved charges, conforming to
our expectation for the action of a local gauge symmetry force field: a global invariance is
maintained despite a variable environment. In the gravitational case, the variable
environment is the metric field of spacetime itself, with time as the local gauge symmetry
field vector (time is thus the field vector of gravitation). The ultimate motivation
(rationale) for gravitation is the conservation (restoration) of light's non-local
distributional symmetry in space, as required by Noether's Theorem. (See: "A Rationale
for Gravity".) The time dimension of matter is an entropic "charge" (a charge with

2 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

intrinsic dimensional motion), addressing light's non-local distributional symmetry debt,
incurred when free electromagnetic energy is converted into bound electromagnetic
energy in any form or process. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. The
gravitational symmetry debt is ultimately repaid by the conversion of mass/matter to light
in stars, supernovas, quasars, going to completion via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of
black holes. (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
As Einstein taught us, gravity is a metric force and phenomenon - that is, gravity is a force affecting
the dimensions and their relations to each other. From this we have learned that "clocks run slow" and
"meter sticks shrink" in a gravitational field, and that the one-way flow of gravity is toward the
slowest (local) clock and shortest (local) meter stick - this apparently being the direction of "cheapest"
energy.
The "global" or absolute metric, however, is not a gravitational metric, but an electromagnetic metric,
established, regulated, maintained, and "gauged" or scaled by the universal electromagnetic constant
"c" (one second of temporal duration is metrically equivalent to 300,000 kilometers of linear
distance). The "velocity" of light ("c") is in fact both a gauge of the "non-local" symmetric energy
state of light and metric symmetry (the intrinsic motion of light vanishes time and distance), and the
gauge of the entropy drive of light and space (the intrinsic motion of light both creates space and
causes the expansion and cooling of space). The metric of spacetime regulates space as an energyconserving domain for light (free electromagnetic energy), and is apparently part and parcel of light light (photons) being the energy form, the metric being the conservation structure created by and
embedded within the energy form. The intrinsic (entropic) motion of light creates, expands, and cools
the spatial domain, and so serves not only to create the spatial domain, but provides the primordial
entropy drive of free electromagnetic energy and space as well. Finally, the symmetric structure of
space is maintained by inertial forces associated with energy conservation laws ("Noether's
Theorem"), while the asymmetric time dimension, always present as a potential threat, is suppressed
at velocity c (light's "clock" is stopped).
In fact, time can be seen as the implicit driver of the intrinsic motion of the photon (time is implicitly
present as "frequency"); the photon may be conceived as "fleeing" the asymmetric threat of time, and
just managing to keep ahead of and suppress time by always moving at "velocity c". "Velocity c" is
the gauge of light's "non-local" symmetric energy state, in which both time and distance (in the
direction of motion) are reduced to nothing. The photon consequently, having no distance to travel
and forever to get there, has an effectively "infinite" velocity. The "non-local" spatial distributional
symmetry of the photon derives from this "infinite" velocity, and from its lack of two dimensions,
which means in either a 3 or 4 dimensional space or spacetime, the photon's coordinates or "location"
cannot be specified. Light is the most symmetric form of energy, having neither mass, charge,
location, time, nor an associated gravitational field. Einstein expressed light's symmetric energy state
mathematically by putting light's "Interval" equal to zero.
This is the electromagnetic metric which gravity will modify or "warp" by adding explicit time to it the same time that is already implicitly present as the driver of light's intrinsic motion. Given the
presence of free electromagnetic energy, we can say that energy conservation, symmetry conservation,
and entropy are the root cause of light's intrinsic motion, creating also space and the spatial metric.
Light is not only the most symmetric energy form, but also the only one which is self-sufficient (or
3 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

"primary"), in that it produces its own entropy drive (intrinsic motion), and its own conservation
domain and metric structure (space). Virtual particles (Dirac/Heisenberg "quantum fluctuations") are
also associated with light and light's metric structure. Hence, while light is symmetric and primary, it
is not especially simple. All other forms of energy are secondary, derived from light's energy and
conservation metric - including gravity - see below).
When free electromagnetic energy (light) is converted to bound electromagnetic energy (mass-matter)
during the "Big Bang", there is a conservation requirement for the explicit form of the time
dimension, both to service the energy accounts of matter in relative (rather than absolute) motion, and
also to serve as bound energy's entropy drive. (See: "The Time Train".) Recall this is the same time
dimension that is implicitly present in space and light as the driver of the photon's intrinsic motion
(seen most directly in the "frequency" component of the electromagnetic wave). Einstein (and
Minkowski) taught us that space is really spacetime, and when light is converted to matter, the
implicit temporal component of space becomes explicit, producing time and spacetime. This
conversion from implicit time to explicit time is accomplished by the gravitational annihilation of
space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. (See: "The Conversion of Space
to Time".)
Big G and Little g
The universal gravitational constant ("big G") is the global gauge constant defining a local, temporal
metric. The magnitude of "big G" determines how much space must be converted to time (per given
mass) to provide an historical entropy drive for bound energy. The sign of "G" is determined by the
energy difference between the implicit vs explicit form of time. The energy of "G" is negative because
it takes energy to convert the symmetric "all-way" spatial entropy drive of free energy to the
asymmetric "one-way" historical entropy drive of bound energy - it takes energy to create an
asymmetric entropy drive from a symmetric one.
Because time is created directly from space (by gravity), these two entropy drives are automatically
equilibrated - they are metric equivalents of one another. The expansion of history and the "velocity of
time" is metrically equivalent to the expansion of space and the "velocity of light": "time flies".
Historical spacetime is a single, entropic unit, aging and expanding, decaying and cooling, created and
held together by gravitation. Finally, spacetime is a completely natural and integrated compound
metric because time and space are both implicitly present in the basic electromagnetic energy form
which creates spacetime: frequency (time) multiplied by wavelength (space) = velocity "c". (See: "A
Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
The universal gravitational constant "Big G" is a global gauge imposed upon another global gauge,
the universal electromagnetic constant "c", together producing the compound metric of spacetime.
Because velocity c and the electromagnetic metric are responsible for regulating or gauging all the
essential conservation parameters of the Cosmos, including energy conservation, symmetry
conservation, entropy, and causality, tampering with or modifying the electromagnetic metric is no
trivial matter. Gravitation is accordingly heavily constrained in how it may modify the symmetric
spatial metric.
First of all, gravitation must produce time directly from space, and time must be inherent in the basic

4 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

conservation structure and energetic makeup of space - as we have seen (no foreign elements are
introduced to the metric). Secondly, gravity can not change the value of the gauge constant c, since
that would affect all aspects of energy conservation, including causality, entropy, and charge
conservation. Thirdly, gravity must itself be an energy-conserving operation locally - as we see in the
spherically symmetric self-annihilating spatial flow of a gravitational field (for example, the Earth's
gravitational field does not impart any net spatial motion to the Earth). Finally, the gravitational field
energy must come from somewhere and return to somewhere - must be a conserved form of energy in
the cyclic global economy of the Cosmos. This we find in the gravitational deceleration of the spatial
expansion of the Cosmos, which in fact funds the historical expansion of the Cosmos (via the actual
gravitational conversion of space to time). Eventually, because the gravitational "location" charge is
conserved, the conversion of bound energy to free energy in stars, supernovas, and quasars goes to
completion via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. Matter is returned to light, the
gravitational metric and field energy is returned to the electromagnetic metric and field energy conserving light's original "non-local" symmetric energy state - in full and final obedience to
"Noether's Theorem" of symmetry conservation.
The "local gauge symmetry current" associated with gravitation is the flow of spacetime which we
experience as the activity of a gravitational field. We can think of "little g" as characterizing local,
variable gravitational metrics, demonstrated by the several planets of our solar system, each with
different "surface gravity" and hence with different surface clock rates and overall spacetime metrics.
Nevertheless, on all these different planets, causality, energy conservation, symmetry and charge
conservation, and entropy are all strictly observed, "velocity c" and Einstein's "Interval" remain
invariant, despite differences in their local gravitational metrics, thanks to the covariance of space and
time ("Lorentz Invariance" of General Relativity) - the "local gauge symmetry current" which we
(following Einstein) recognize as the spacetime flow of a gravitational field. A gravitational field is
the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. (Nothing about gravity is hidden except its
twofold conservation purpose in the latter-day Cosmos: to provide the metric and entropic
conservation requirements of bound energy (historic and aging spacetime), and to return the
asymmetric system of matter to its symmetric origins - light.) (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and
Thermodynamics".)
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation
The primordial conservation role of gravity is to provide negative energy sufficient to exactly balance
the positive energy of the "Creation Event", so the universe can be born from a state of zero net
energy as well as zero net charge (the latter due to the equal admixture of matter with antimatter). All
subsequent conservation roles of gravity are secondary to and derived from this original creation-role.
Following on from its primary role of providing negative energy during the "Big Bang", gravity plays
two further major conservation roles in the evolving universe: 1) the creation of bound energy's time
dimension (energy/entropy conservation role); 2) the conservation/restoration of light's "non-local"
distributional symmetry (symmetry conservation role). In creating time, gravity also creates matter's
primordial entropy drive, and the basis for matter's causal linkage. The time dimension also provides a
domain in which charge conservation can have application and historical significance. Gravitation
affects all four conservation corners of the "Tetrahedron Model". The symmetry conservation role of
gravitation can be seen as temporally deferred charge conservation involving the "location" charge of

5 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

gravity. Time is the active component of gravity's "location" charge, identifying the 4-D coordinate
position of bound energy with respect to the total amount and concentration of mass/matter present.
Unlike the other conserved charges of matter, time is a charge with intrinsic dimensional motion - an
entropic charge, creating and expanding the historic domain, the conservation dimension containing
matter's causal information network, web, or "matrix". (See: "The Double Conservation Role of
Gravitation".)
Entropy debts are similar to energy debts in that they must be paid immediately, so gravity
immediately converts the intrinsic motion of light to the intrinsic motion of time,
converting/conserving the entropy drive of free electromagnetic energy to an alternative form as the
entropy drive of bound electromagnetic energy. Symmetry debts in the form of charges, however, can
be discharged or paid at any future time (due to charge conservation); the universe of matter and time
runs on the credit card or promissory note of charge conservation. Gravity pays the entropy-interest on
matter's symmetry debt by creating the time dimension in which charge conservation can have
meaning (compare the instantaneous action of charge in virtual particle-antiparticle annihilations).
The energy which funds the historical expansion is debited from the spatial expansion, which
decelerates accordingly. The first indication of gravity's time-deferred symmetry conservation role is
seen in the Sun and stars, where bound energy (mass-matter) is gravitationally converted to free
energy (light). This process goes to completion in Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes,
fulfilling "Noether's Theorem" of symmetry conservation. (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
We see a progression of local gravitational metrics of greater and greater intensity passing from
planets to stars to white dwarfs to neutron stars to black holes, where "little g" (the gauge of the local
gravitational metric) approaches and finally equals "c", restoring in an equivalent but backhanded
fashion the essential elements of the original electromagnetic metric. At the black hole's "event
horizon", where "g" = "c", matter itself moves at "velocity c", time stands still, and meter sticks shrink
to nothing, just as in the original electromagnetic metric involving only photons. Inside the black hole,
proton decay is probably commonplace as gravity squeezes baryons and quarks into elementary
leptonic units of charge, which undergo leptonic decays via leptoquark anti-neutrinos. Outside the
black hole, via Hawking's "quantum radiance", the gravitational field energy of the black hole is
directly converted to light, a process eventually transforming the entire mass energy of the black hole
to free electromagnetic radiation. This is actually accomplished by the direct gravitational creation of
matter-antimatter particle pairs from the spacetime metric, something like a reprise of the original
creation of matter during the "Big Bang". The gravitational conversion of mass to light also reduces
the total gravitational energy of the Universe (since light produces no gravitational field), resulting
eventually in a relaxation of gravity's early deceleration of the cosmos - seen as the recently observed
"acceleration" of the cosmic spatial expansion.
The Origin of Gravitation as a Conservation Force
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
Gravity is a conservation force which arises in response to symmetry losses or deficits in two
intertwined "gauge" (regulatory) functions of light's "non-local" symmetric energy state - losses
consequent upon the conversion of light to matter, or free to bound energy forms, as in the "Big Bang"
creation of matter, or simply in the capture of a photon by the electron shell of an atom. According to
"Noether's Theorem", reductions in light's symmetric energy state must be compensated by some

6 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

conservation force, usually seen in the form of a conserved charge or inertial force. Light's symmetry
losses when converted to bound energy forms are manifold, but those specifically addressed by
gravitation include: 1) the spatial entropy drive of light (light's intrinsic motion, regulating the
creation, expansion, and cooling of spacetime); 2) the "non-local" energy state of light (regulating the
symmetric distribution of free energy in spacetime: everywhere simultaneously). Both functions are
consequences of light's intrinsic motion, as gauged by the electromagnetic constant "c" (light's
intrinsic motion serves as the primordial spatial entropy drive, and creates space and the spatial
metric, the conservation domain of free energy).
The universal gravitational constant "G" is the entropy conversion gauge, regulating how much space
must be annihilated and converted to time (per given mass), providing matter with its requisite
historical entropy drive, locally expressed as "velocity T", but globally gauged by "velocity c". Time
is produced by the gravitational annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent
temporal residue. The intrinsic motion of time is the primordial entropy drive of bound energy,
creating the historic conservation domain of information and matter's "causal matrix" (historic
spacetime). Time is also ultimately gauged by c, since "velocity T" is defined as the duration
(measured by a clock) required for light to travel a given distance (measured by a meter stick). "G" is
therefore related to "c" through their common factor time. Time is a local and flexible dimensional
gauge, produced by the gravitational annihilation of space. Both G and c are globally invariant gauge
constants. "c" gauges the spatial metric of free energy (including the entropic expansion of space);
"G" gauges the the conversion of space to time, per given mass (Gm). (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2"
and " The Conversion of Space to Time").
The intrinsic motion of light produces space and the expansion and cooling of space; hence the
intrinsic motion of light is the primordial entropy drive of free energy. (See: "Spatial vs Temporal
Entropy".) It is the function of entropy (in its primordial mode) to create a dimensional conservation
domain in which its energy source, whether free or bound (light or matter), can exist and be
transformed, used, and conserved: this is the relationship between the 1st and 2nd laws of
thermodynamics. Because both the spatial entropy drive and the spatially symmetric ("non-local")
energy state of light are gauged by c (both are consequences of light's intrinsic motion), "Noether's
Theorem" will automatically require the conservation of light's entropy drive in any transformation in
which light's non-local symmetry state must be conserved - as in the conversion of free to bound
energy, and/or the creation of matter. Conserving either role of light's intrinsic motion - as the source
of light's entropy drive, or the creator of light's non-local symmetric energy state - conserves the other
role by default. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
One of gravity's several conservation roles concerns the spatial entropy drive of free energy (the
intrinsic motion of light), which gravity conserves by transforming light's intrinsic motion to the
historical entropy drive of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time). Time is created by gravity via
the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue, resulting in
the deceleration of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos. Because the spatial expansion is driven by the
intrinsic motion of light, it is light's spatial entropy drive (S), which ultimately funds matter's
historical entropy drive (T). We can represent this transformation by a quasi-mathematical "concept
equation":
-Gm(S) = (T)m

7 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
This "concept equation" represents an entropic conservation loop between space (created by light),
and time (created by gravity). The loop continues through the gravitational conversion of mass to light
in stars (which essentially reverses this equation), reducing the stars' mass and associated gravitational
energy, and resulting in the "acceleration" of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos (as recently
observed). The equation also suggests that time, as Einstein noted, is a local characteristic of
gravitating mass: (T)m is different for Earth, Mars, Jupiter, the Sun, etc., as seen in its metric effect on
clock rate, for example.
(See: "Currents of Entropy and Symmetry".)
Non-Local Light and "c" vs Local Matter and "G"
"Velocity c" is the gauge of both the primordial, spatial entropy drive of light, and the spatially
symmetric "non-local" energy state of light (free electromagnetic energy). "Non-locality" is due to the
fact, discovered by Einstein, that light has no time dimension and no spatial dimension in the direction
of its motion. In Einstein's mathematical formulation of this symmetry, the "Interval" of light = zero.
Within its own reference frame, the energy of any individual photon (quantum of light) is distributed
uniformly, everywhere, simultaneously. This symmetry in the spatial distribution of light's energy is a
consequence of light's "non-locality", and according to Noether's Theorem, "non-locality" is a
symmetry of light which must be conserved.
Einstein's "Interval" is an invariant quantity of spacetime (in any reference frame) whose function is
to rescue causality from the shifting dimensional perspectives of Einstein's Special and General
Relativity - the relative and variable motions of matter and the metric "warping" of gravity. Massless
2-D light is non-local, a-temporal, and a-causal; massive 4-D matter is local, temporal, and causal.
Light is a 2-dimensional transverse wave whose intrinsic motion sweeps out a third spatial dimension.
Light requires one spatial dimension each for its electric and magnetic fields, and a third (in the
direction of motion) is required for entropy. Expanding 3-D space is a (positive) entropic conservation
domain for free electromagnetic energy (light). Lacking both a time dimension and one spatial
dimension (in its direction of propagation), light's position in 3-dimensional space or 4-dimensional
spacetime cannot be specified. Since both time and distance are meaningless to light, light has in
effect an infinite amount of time to go nowhere. Hence in its own reference frame (moving freely in
spacetime (vacuum) at velocity c), light must be considered to be everywhere simultaneously. From
this results the "non-local" character of light, light's zero "Interval", light's effectively "infinite"
velocity, and the globally symmetric distribution of light's energy.
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light, and light's "non-local" distributional and metric
symmetry is conserved through the "location" charge of gravitation, of which time is the active
principle. The time "charge" and the gravitational field it induces identify energetically the specifiable
(and hence asymmetric) location of immobile, undistributed, "rest mass" energy in 4-D spacetime,
including the quantity and density of the distributional symmetry violation - the local concentration of
matter. Einstein's "Interval" of mass is always greater than zero, due to the presence of time and a
third spatial dimension. The time charge breaks the metric symmetry condition of light's "zero
Interval", establishing the gravitational metric symmetry debt of bound energy (the warpage of space
8 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

due to the intrinsic motion of time). Because time is an "entropic" charge (a charge - unlike any other
- with intrinsic dimensional motion), the spatial "location" symmetry debt is combined with an
asymmetric (one-way) temporal entropy drive. Both debts are dimensional or metric in character. The
one-way character of time is necessary not only for reasons of causality and energy conservation, but
also to break the otherwise symmetric metric of space, specifying the actual 4-D location of bound
energy amidst the isomorphic and entropic spatial expansion.
Gravity (eventually) restores (conserves) the non-local spatial symmetry of light by the conversion of
bound to free energy in stars, quasars, supernovas, and other astrophysical processes, culminating in
the complete gravitational conversion of matter to light via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes, in full satisfaction of the symmetry conservation requirements of Noether's Theorem. The
conversion of bound to free energy pays the entropy debt simultaneously with the symmetry debt,
since light is both a-temporal and non-local. The gravitational field "evaporates" along with the mass
of the black hole, signifying the final and full payment of gravity's symmetry and entropy debt.
If the purpose of a metric is energy conservation - as it clearly must be - why is the
gravitational metric necessary to address this issue? The gravitational metric is necessary
to provide negative energy to balance the positive energy of bound electromagnetic
energy (mass/matter). It is the exact balance between the positive rest mass energy of
matter and the negative energy of matter's gravitational field which allows the creation of
matter from zero net energy during the "Big Bang". This is another and perhaps the most
fundamental conservation role of gravity, addressing the upper vertex of the "Tetrahedron
Model" diagram.
In the black hole, the gravitational/temporal metric completely replaces the
electromagnetic/spatial metric, including the binding functions of chemical and nuclear
physics. But the black hole also exhibits a form of symmetry all its own, in that within its
event horizon, all forms of energy, even including massive objects, move at "velocity c".
It is also probable that proton decay occurs inside the event horizon (perhaps at the
central "singularity"), so that a black hole may contain nothing but gravitationally trapped
light. in other words, gravity's relentless drive can be seen as an "agenda" towards its own
brand of symmetric energy state, not just toward "Hawking radiation" and the complete
restoration of the electromagnetic symmetry state. In the black hole, gravity has
established the ultimate metric of the temporal domain of bound energy and there set its
flag - the opposite pole to the electromagnetic metric of empty space. Both extremes are
symmetric energy/entropy states in which all forms of energy move at "velocity c" - "the
extremes meet". Nevertheless, because the entropy drive of "one-way" time is less
symmetric than the entropy drive of "all-way" space, we see in "Hawking radiation" that
even the symmetry of light's entropy drive is conserved in accordance with Noether's
theorem - producing the final triumph of light over darkness.
We have seen the conservation role of gravity with respect to the four conservation
parameters of the "Tetrahedron Model": entropy (converting light's intrinsic motion to
time's intrinsic motion), symmetry (the conversion of bound to free energy), causality
(the creation of time and historic spacetime, and including "Lorentz Invariance"), and
finally energy itself (providing negative energy to balance matter's positive energy). All
these roles are intimately connected and related to the regulatory or "gauge" functions of

9 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

"velocity c". Negative gravitational energy is provided by an imploding rather than
exploding spatial metric, which in turn is caused by the intrinsic motion of time, matter's
entropy drive (time and gravity induce each other endlessly). Time provides matter's
causal linkage and creates matter's historic conservation domain of information, while
simultaneously providing matter with a "location" charge representing light's non-local
distributional symmetry debt. "Location" charge (whose active principle is time)
identifies the 4-dimensional location of immobile, undistributed "rest mass" energy, and
eventually converts matter back to its original and symmetric form, light (in stars, black
holes, and other astrophysical/gravitational processes). The active "push" or "drive" of
this chain of conservation effects is provided by entropy - the implicit or explicit presence
of time causing the expansion of space or history.
In the post-"Big Bang" universe, entropy and matter's eternal search for antimatter are the
primary motivational impulses. Life arises as an inevitable consequence of matter's
information content and the expansion of entropy's spatial/historical conservation
domains.
For a more complete discussion of gravitation the reader is referred to: "A Description of
Gravitation"; and "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".
Go to Section B
Links:
Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry

10 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12.html

12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Half-life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Gravity Diagrams
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model (complete version)
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric
home page References:
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. 1981. M.
Dekker, New York.
Frank Close: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Robert Oerter: The Theory of Almost Everything. 2006. Penguin (Plume).
Pais, Abraham Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. 1986. Oxford
University Press, NY
Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
James S. Trefil: The Moment of Creation 1983. Collier, Macmillan.
Frank Wilczek: The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.

11 of 11

6/20/14 3:24 PM

