General Systems and the Unified Field Theory
(Part 1)
(revised Dec., 2008)
John A. Gowan
home page
There is Nothing so Valuable as a Fresh Perspective
Go to: General Systems and the Unified Field Theory: Part II
Contents:
Introduction
Unified Field Table
Row one: Symmetric Energy States: Creation Event
Light and Spacetime
Noether's Theorem
Particles, Leptoquarks
Symmetry-Breaking
IVBs
Row two: Particles - Raw Energy Conservation
Mass - E = mcc
Time and Entropy - Causality and History
The Interval - Local vs Non-Local Energy
The Mechanism of Gravitation - Gravity as the Spatial Consequence of Time's Intrinsic
Motion
Quantum Mechanics and Gravitation - Primary vs Secondary Process
Currents of Entropy and Symmetry
Quarks and Leptons
Quarks
Fermions and Bosons
Neutrinos
Abstract:
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory, as presented in these pages, can be briefly sketched
as follows:
"Noether's Theorem" states that in a multicomponent field such as the electromagnetic
field (or the metric field of spacetime), where one finds a symmetry one finds an
associated conservation law, and vice versa. In matter, light's symmetries are conserved
by charge and spin; in spacetime, by inertial and gravitational forces. All forms of energy,
including the conservation/entropy domain of spacetime, originate as light. During the
"Big Bang", the asymmetric interaction of primordial, high energy light with the metric
structure of spacetime produces matter; matter carries charges which are the symmetry
(and entropy) debts of the light which created it. Charges produce forces which act to
return the material system to its original symmetric state (light), paying matter's
symmetry/entropy debts. Repayment is exampled by matter-antimatter annihilation
reactions, particle and proton decay, the nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, and Hawking's

"quantum radiance" of black holes. Identifying the broken symmetries of light associated
with each of the 4 forces (and charges) of physics is the first step toward a conceptual
unification of those forces.

Introduction
(I recommend the reader consult the "preface" or "guide" to this paper, which may be found at "About
the Papers: An Introduction" and the "Preface: The Sun Archetype". See also the related article:
"Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model" in which the 4 general conservation
laws underlying the forces and charges of the field theory are discussed.)
Acknowledgment: The author gratefully acknowledges the contributions of his colleague, August T.
Jaccaci, to the General Systems format and concepts in this paper. The "scientific" content is my own
responsibility - JAG.
(The format of this paper ("row 1", "row 2", etc.) follows a 4x4 table which the reader should access
and print for ready reference. This table provides a convenient way to organize an extensive subject
matter, and is furthermore part of a General System, or Fractal model of the Universe, which
facilitates comparison and correlation with other "world systems". For a summary of the topic, see:
"Synopsis of the System of Spacetime"; and "Synopsis of the System of Matter". See also an
alternative form of the primary table: "A 4x4 Table of Conservation Law vs the Forces of Physics".
This paper presents a General Systems Model of the Unified Field Theory in a conceptual, nonmathematical form. The Unified Field Theory, Einstein's dream, is the essential cosmology of the
rational, scientific mind. Science is a social effort, not the product of any one person, although it
certainly has its luminous figures. Science is the product of a Civilization, with a history that stretches
back at least 2500 years to its apparent origins in Greece.
We live in a time in which the cosmology of science is gaining ascendancy over the ancient,
traditional, and intuitive cosmologies of religion - even the Pope has finally embraced Evolution, and
the crimes of Galileo have long been forgiven. Although religions are also social phenomena, unlike
science they tend strongly to be the product of a single profoundly intuitive mind, and to be centered
upon the thought of that single individual - Moses, Buddha, Confucius, Lao-Tzu, Zoroaster, Christ,
Mohammed, Joseph Smith, Mary Baker Eddy, Etc. Religion appeals to our intuitive and emotional
nature, science to our rational and practical nature. Religions are also extremely conservative,
tradition-bound, and resistant to change or new ideas; science by contrast is exploratory,
experimental, and encourages change and new ideas.
Religious cosmologies are roundly criticized for being incapable of proof, and therefore subject to any
kind of manipulation and interpretation. Scientific cosmologies are criticized for having nothing of
significance to say about the human condition and the fundamental mysteries of life: Why are we
here? What is the meaning and purpose of life? Of existence and the Universe? Is there life after
death? Is there a God? Is there a spiritual realm or dimension? Do we have an immortal soul?
It is the unique character and purpose of General Systems to take a view which bridges religion and
science, to see both these products of human thought as simply the intuitive vs rational discovery of a
single natural pattern, the fractal algorithm or generative resonance of our Universe. A fractal is a
repeating pattern, whose iterations generate both larger and smaller "self-similar" images or systems.
A fractal is therefore the epitome of a General System. Resonance is a closely allied phenomenon, in
that resonance can occur between similar patterns on different scales. For example, the notion that
"man is created in the image and likeness of God" is a fractal (or resonant) notion, as is the venerable

adage "as above, so below". The phenomenon of resonance would therefore allow communication and
exchanges of energy within any fractal system, including between man and God, and indeed between
God and all of creation, providing a rationale for what is otherwise an outrageously presumptive
assertion.
This great Fractal Organization of Nature I have roughed out to the level of my ability- experts in the
various fields could carry it further. This pattern is in its essence a 4x3 iteration which usually fills out
to a 4x4 due to the emergent properties associated with its complexity. You will notice from the table
that I have divided the universal fractal into 5 realms, 3 physical and 2 metaphysical, the latter both
perceptions of the human mind, which is not to deny their reality, but only to distinguish their type. I
trace this pattern from its inception in the conservation laws, spacetime metric, and the original
families of subatomic particles produced in the Creation Event or "Big Bang", to the nuclear and
atomic levels, thence through organic molecular forms to DNA and the genetic code of all life. It
continues on through the astrophysical realm in gravitation and the nucleosynthetic pathways of stars.
Beyond these, we find it again in our own metaphysical formulations of divine principle and scientific
law, the abstract order which stands in the shadow behind physical reality. (See also: "The
Information Pathway".)
All five realms - twenty levels in all - have the same fundamental pattern. It is this universal natural
pattern which our mind is apprehending through both its intuitive and rational faculties, individually
and collectively, religiously and scientifically.
We are but one part of this grand fractal pattern of information and energy, but we are a very
important part, for we represent the emergence of the self-awareness of the Universe, the attempt of
the fractal to reflexively witness and experience itself. Just as we value our self-awareness, so the
Universe values its own. It is in us and through us that the Universe awakes and begins to understand
and appreciate itself. If we do not smell the rose, the Universe loses its chance to experience joy.
Humans may be small in terms of size; but in terms of information content and our potential for
complex experience, we are astronomical in magnitude and significance for the Universe.
It is generally believed that the physical sciences cannot address the fundamental questions of human
life and its significance which traditionally have been the province of religion. I do not share this
belief. While it is perfectly true that the job of science is to get the rational cosmology "right", without
any reference to its intuitive counterparts, and "let the chips fall where they may", it is certainly not
true that science has nothing to say about the fundamental questions. Everything in the Universe has
something to say about the human condition, for we are part and parcel of this Universe, its product,
its flesh and blood, its eyes and ears and thoughts. As Carl Sagan famously observed: "we are starstuff contemplating our origins"
People embrace religion because it tells even the least of us that we are important and connected to
the Universe. If there is a God, the Universe acquires greater significance and connectivity, and by
extension, so does humanity. Science needs to pay attention to this simple lesson in psychology and
tell people why they and the Universe have significance. Humans will never trade a sense of personal
significance for "scientific" knowledge - rather, knowledge must lead to an appreciation of every
person's value, and to an understanding of humanity's connection to, and unique place and importance
in, the Solar System, Galaxy, and Universe.
General Systems provides a methodology which allows us to look at the great body of scientific work
- now available for the first time in the history of our species - relate it directly to our intuitive,
religious cosmologies, and vice versa, extracting from this comparison a common language which can
speak meaningfully to us about our place in the Universe and the significance of our lives, in

"scientific" as well as in "religious" terms.
The Unified Field Theory is the rational, scientific counterpart of intuitive conceptions of Divine
Order, invoking physical rather than spiritual principles to generate the material Universe. As the
fundamental note of the entire resonant system, the unified field theory should fit the fractal pattern
just as neatly as any of its harmonic iterations (the various levels), and since 1977 (the year I turned
40), I have struggled with the scientific (and popular) literature to discover this fit. I am at last
personally satisfied that I have found the correct, general conceptual features of this fit, which you
will find in the "Unified Field General System Table". (See also the "Hourglass" or "Grail" Diagrams"
and the "Tetrahedron" models.)
The four forces of physics of course exactly fit the 4x4 pattern horizontally (see table). Vertically, I
have listed the four principle energy states of our physical reality: free energy, bound energy, charges,
and force fields. The logic is that free energy (light) produces particles (matter) which bear charges
(the symmetry debts of light); the charges produce force fields (demands for payment) which act to
return the system to its original symmetric form (light), paying the symmetry debts conserved by the
charges.

The Unified Field Table
Let's consider the physical aspects of the table first and then move on to its general system properties.
First we note that the table accommodates all the conventional fields, particles, charges, and forces of
physics; there is a place for them all, and the simple act of organizing this data is in itself useful, just
as the organized data of the Periodic Table of the Elements is useful. Like the Periodic Table, this is
no random organization; the order is congruent with the General System pattern of all the other
cosmological systems and physical realms modeled in the "Hierarchy" table. Finally, the order tells a
story, the physical story of the creation of matter, the conservation of energy and symmetry, and the
evolutionary "redemption" of the Universe (the return of bound energy to light's original symmetry).
(For those unfamiliar with the concept of conservation: conservation refers to any quantity which is
invariant, which does not change, during a transformation. A familiar example is "number" in
arithmetic. "Number" is conserved. Hence 2 + 2 always = 4, because number is conserved. If you
think of the numbers 1 - 100 as the pennies of a dollar, then anytime you get change for a dollar you
expect conservation to be observed in both our number and monetary systems during the
transformation. Mathematics is a useful symbolic system for a quantitative description of nature
primarily because it provides us with an abstractly conserved system (of numbers and operations)
which can represent and model a physically conserved system (of energy and forces).

Row 1 - Symmetric Energy States and the "Creation Event"
("Big Bang")
(See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs" and "The Origin of Matter and Information")

Light and the Metric of Space
In row 1 (see table) I list the symmetric forms of free energy, and the breaking of their symmetry,
during the "Creation Event" - the "Big Bang". The Universe begins as light - free electromagnetic
energy - which is a perfectly symmetric energy form. Light is massless and carries no charges of any
kind, produces no gravitational field, and has no time dimension in the ordinary sense. Light's intrinsic

motion c is a symmetry condition formally characterized by Einstein as its zero "Interval", which is a
condition of "non-locality", and consequently "acausality" (lacking both place and time). The negative
energy of gravity balances the positive energy of any bound energy forms which may exist during the
"Big Bang". The creation of the Universe requires no net energy (or charge), and may be initiated as a
quantum fluctuation of the "Multiverse" or the a-dimensional "vacuum".
Space is the conservation/entropy domain of light, created for its own conservation by the intrinsic
motion of light (as gauged by "velocity c"). The potential existence of both space and time in light is
implicit in the formulation of light's intrinsic motion - frequency (time) multiplied by wavelength
(space) = c, the electromagnetic constant or "velocity of light". However, before the creation of matter
the concept of time can only be applied globally to the Universe as a whole in the sense of its rate of
entropic expansion and cooling, not locally to its parts, as we do today (before the creation of matter
there are no "parts"). Einstein teaches us that before the creation of matter, there is only one clock, the
Universe (effectively, its temperature); after the creation of matter, every particle carries its own
timepiece, whose rate depends upon its relative motion and gravitational environment. Spacetime is
actually a compound dimensional conservation/entropy domain (for free and bound electromagnetic
energy) created by the interaction of matter and gravitation with light and space.
The zero Interval and "non-local" character of light means that light, in its own reference frame, is
everywhere throughout space simultaneously - a symmetry condition with respect to the distribution
of light's energy within its conservation domain ("symmetry" refers to a condition of balance,
sameness, or equality). The electromagnetic constant c is the "gauge" or regulatory standard for the
metric of spacetime, the fixed relationship which establishes the equivalence of measurement between
the dimensions: 300,000 km of linear space is metrically equivalent to 1 second of temporal duration.
At c this equivalence is complete and time is suppressed to a locally implicit state (light's "clock is
stopped"). The suppression of the asymmetric time dimension (and time's inevitable companions,
charge, mass, and gravitation) is the principle symmetry-keeping function of c. (See: "The Conversion
of Space to Time".)
In a universe of pure light, before the creation of matter, the metric is everywhere the same, as no
gravitational fields are present to disturb its symmetry. The metric is a necessary condition of the
spatial domain, indeed the very reason for its existence, as it is the regulatory mechanism which
performs the conservation functions of the domain (energy, symmetry, entropy), controlling and
coordinating the rate of expansion and cooling of space both globally and locally. The entropy of light
is expressed through its intrinsic motion; but it is also light's intrinsic motion which creates light's
spatial conservation domain, while simultaneously maintaining metric symmetry (including the
suppression of time), and causing the expansion and cooling of space. Therefore light and space are
related as the first and second laws of thermodynamics. It is the function of entropy to create a
dimensional conservation domain in which energy can be used, transformed, but nevertheless
conserved. Without entropy, energy conservation would not allow the Universe to spend its energy
capital; without symmetry, energy could not be conserved within the spatial metric.
Our physical universe, including the conservation domain of space, is wholly the product of a single
form of energy - electromagnetic energy (the "monotheism" of physics). Light is the most primordial
form of this energy, which we know because light has the greatest symmetry of any energy form, and
light is the only energy form which can create its own conservation domain (space) from nothing (or
rather, from its own intrinsic motion) - matter must create its time dimension and historic causal
domain from preexisting space, via gravity. Light is the energy from which all other energy forms are
made, and to which they all reduce and return. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
Noether's Theorem

"Noether's Theorem" (Emmy Noether, 1918) states that in a multicomponent field, such as the
electromagnetic field (or the metric field of spacetime), where one finds a symmetry, one will find an
associated conservation law, and vice versa. Noether's Theorem is saying that in the conversion of
light to matter, not only must the raw energy of light be conserved in the mass and momentum of
particles, but the symmetry of light must also be conserved - not only the quantity but the quality of
energy must be conserved. The theorem does not say exactly how this must be done, but in practice
the symmetry of light is conserved through the charges (and spin) of matter - charge conservation =
symmetry conservation - and the symmetry of the metric field of spacetime is conserved through
inertial and gravitational forces.
I think of Noether's theorem as the "Truth and Beauty" theorem, in reference to Keats' great poetic
intuition:
"... Beauty is truth, truth beauty, - that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know"
("Ode on a Grecian Urn": John Keats,1819)
in which Beauty corresponds to Symmetry and Truth corresponds to Conservation.
Noether's theorem tells us why all the forces of nature are busy converting matter to light: matter was
created from light in the "Big Bang", but since light has greater symmetry than matter, it is to
conserve light's symmetry that all the charges and forces of matter work to accomplish the return of
bound energy to its former state of perfect symmetry. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of
light. These charges produce forces which act to return the system of matter to its original symmetric
form, light.
A program of unification is therefore clearly indicated by Noether's Theorem: identify the (broken)
symmetries of light carried, represented, and conserved by the charges of matter. The actions of the
forces produced by these charges should offer clues as to what these (broken) symmetries are. This
will allow us to refer all the charges and forces of matter to their respective origins as specific
symmetries of light, accomplishing our conceptual unification. Matter is but an asymmetric form of
light; the charges and forces of matter act to return bound energy to its symmetric, original state of
free energy. In the pages which follow, we will follow out this simple program of force unification, by
identifying the broken symmetries of light represented by the conserved charges of matter (including
gravitation).
This is a conceptual unification only, in terms of general principles of conservation law. Almost no
mathematics is involved. The disadvantage is that no quantitative calculations can be performed from
such a unification scenario (although many may suggest themselves); the advantage is that most
people can understand it. The great difficulty with modern science is that although it intends to
produce a rational cosmology to replace the ancient intuitive "world systems", almost no one can
understand either the terminology or the mathematics involved. Modern science has succeeded in
disenfranchising the public from modern cosmology, and in so doing has produced a backlash of
resentment in which traditional religions and mythologies are being embraced with renewed emotion
and enthusiasm. Whether "ancient wisdom" or "new age religion", the public can at least understand
and feel a personal connection to the intuitive cosmological order, and this is why a General Systems
bridge between these perspectives is so important. The bridge can be produced in English, in terms of
a few conservation laws (including simple diagrams), and almost anyone who wishes can understand
it.

Particles

Matter consists of two types of massive particles: 1) elementary particles with no internal parts, called
leptons; 2) composite particles with internal parts (quarks) called hadrons. Together they comprise
atomic matter, the electron a member of the lepton family, and the nuclear particles or "nucleons"
(protons and neutrons), examples of the hadron family. Hadrons containing a quark-antiquark pair are
known as mesons, while hadrons containing 3 quarks are called baryons; no other stable quark
combinations exist in nature (see: "The Particle Table").
Together, the energy of light and the structure of metric space have the capacity to produce particles,
which are essentially a "packaging" of light's free energy. The mechanism by which this
transformation of wave to particle occurs is still unknown, although actively investigated. We believe
our universe began as an incredibly hot, energy dense, and spatially tiny "singularity" - the standard
"Big Bang" model (see Steven Weinberg's "The First Three Minutes"). One can readily appreciate that
a simple "packaging" mechanism for compactly storing the wave energy of light - which by its very
nature (its intrinsic motion) takes up a lot of space - would be useful in the spatially cramped
conditions of the initial moments of the Big Bang. In a purely pragmatic way, this "packaging"
concept accounts for the existence of particles and some of their salient features: the spectrum of
identical elementary particles of various masses (the leptonic series), the heavier ones presumably
more useful "packages" at higher energy densities, and similarly, the spectrum of composite particles
(baryons), which can store additional energy internally, as if they contained an internal set of
compressible springs (the mutually repulsive forces between quarks). (The ability to form electrically
neutral quark combinations (as in the neutron) is another and more compelling "reason" for the
composite nature of baryons). Finally, massive particles can store an unlimited quantity of energy as
momentum, a feature of particular utility in the early universe, helping to avoid the "still birth" of a
cosmic "black hole". Another good "reason" (from the anthropic point of view) for the initial
conversion of light to matter, is to rescue at least some of the Universe's energy from the vitiating
entropy drive of light's intrinsic motion, as gauged by "velocity c". This is because the quiescent
entropy drive of mass (the intrinsic motion of time) does not attack matter's useful energy content in
any significant way. (See: "The Time Train".)
I presume there is a physical correspondence and relationship between the metric of space and the
structure of particles (the beginning of the universal fractal resonance). Light exists as a 2dimensional energetic vibration of the metric structure of space; the intrinsic motion of light "sweeps
out" a third spatial dimension. The metric is a conservation structure associated with light and light's
intrinsic motion, created by light for its own conservation. Usually this vibration is simply transmitted
within the metric structure at velocity c, the "inertial" symmetry condition imposed upon light by its
conserving metric. However, it is also possible for this vibrational energy to become entangled in its
own metric and tie itself into higher dimensional "knots", which cannot be transmitted at c because
they are no longer 2-dimensional. Such "knots" comprise particle-antiparticle pairs, and their
structure, energy, and information content is derived from the mixture of metric space and light. The
otherwise inexplicable existence of three energy families of both quarks and leptons is probably a
consequence of the origin of particles as electromagnetic "knots" in the 3 spatial dimensions of the
metric. The connection between energy, the metric, and the structure of particles is currently being
investigated by "string" theory (see Brian Greene's "The Elegant Universe").
Four-dimensional "knots" will contain an asymmetric dimension, time, which is presumably the
source of the weak force asymmetry in its matter-antimatter interactions. Just how leptonic "knots"
differ from quark "knots" (dimensionally? topologically? symmetrically?) remains a mystery.
Nevertheless, deriving both from the same spatial (or spacetime) metric provides an essential
conceptual basis for understanding their relationship. The further value of such theoretical notions is
that they provide a direct connection between light, spacetime, and matter, a connection which is

evident in other physical phenomena, such as the interchangeability of light and matter in the creation
and annihilation of particle-antiparticle pairs, Einstein's and Debroglie's mass-energy and particlewave relations (hv = mcc), the gravitational and electromagnetic fields associated with massive
particles, etc.
It remains a mystery how the elementary leptons are related to the composite baryons, but it is
plausible that this relationship is through an ancestral particle (the "leptoquark") which "fractured"
under the high pressure of the "Big Bang" and so could store more energy, and assume an electrically
neutral internal configuration of its quarks. This notion is based on the theory of "asymptotic freedom"
(Politzer, Gross, Wilczek - 2004 Nobel Prize) - a symmetry principle - which observes that as the
quarks of a baryon are squeezed together, the strong force which binds them becomes weaker,
affording the quarks more freedom of movement. If the quarks are squeezed together completely (or
to "leptonic size" - by the ambient pressure of the Big Bang, a black hole, or the "X" Intermediate
Vector Boson (IVB)), the color charge of the gluon field sums to zero (see row 4, "Gluons"), leaving a
particle indistinguishable from a heavy lepton, the hypothetical "leptoquark". A "colorless" and
electrically neutral leptoquark would therefore be susceptible to a typical weak force decay via a
leptoquark antineutrino and the "X" IVB, a particle we examine in the following section (this is also
the weak force pathway of "proton decay"). (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)

Symmetry-Breaking and the Weak Force
Leptons and Mesons as Alternative Charge Carriers
The lepton and meson fields function as alternative charge carriers for the massive quark field of the
baryons. Without these alternative charge carriers (electrons carry electric charge, neutrinos carry
number or "identity" charge, mesons carry quark flavor, spin, color, and partial electric charges), the
baryon field would remain locked in mutually annihilating (symmetric) particle-antiparticle pairs.
Hence we see that in order to produce an asymmetric, isolated particle of matter (a "singlet") from a
symmetric particle-antiparticle hadron pair, we require: 1) the primary mass-carrying field (the quarks,
composite baryons, electrically neutral leptoquarks); 2) a secondary field of alternative charge carriers
(electrons, neutrinos, mesons); 3) the secondary field must furthermore be asymmetric in its
interaction with the primary field, such that its reactions with particles proceed at a different rate than
its reactions with antiparticles; 4) in practice, we find a third field is required, the weak force
"Intermediate Vector Bosons" (IVBs - including the Higgs boson), which mediate and broker
transformations between and within the mass carrying field of the baryons and the alternative charge
carrying fields of the leptons and mesons (see below); 5) a final requirement is that there exist some
fundamental basis of similarity between the mass and charge carrying fields if they are to interact at
all - they must be able to recognize each other at the quantum level of charge. For example, the
electrical charge of the proton must be exactly equal in magnitude to that of the positron, electron, or
IVB. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
Obviously, the relationship between the quark and lepton fields must be intimate, and almost certainly
they are related through ancestry, that is, one is derived from the other, both are derived from the
metric, both are decay products of the leptoquark, etc. A complex arrangement, but nothing less will
suffice to break the primordial symmetry of free electromagnetic energy (light) and its particleantiparticle form.

IVBS - Quantum Process and Particle Transformation
The field vectors or force carriers of the weak force are known as Intermediate Vector Bosons, or

IVBs. The IVBs include the W+, W-, and Z (neutral) particles. As a group, they are the most unusual
particles known and the most difficult to understand (I include in this group the hypothetical "X"
particle responsible for producing leptoquark and proton decay, as well as several Higgs bosons). (See
also : "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
The weak force is the asymmetric physical mechanism that produces elementary massive particles
from light during the initial moments of the "Big Bang", and continues in today's Universe to govern
the creation and destruction of elementary particles, including transformations of flavor, number, or
identity charge among quarks as well as leptons. Only 3 massive leptonic elementary particles are
known, the electron, muon, and tau, identical in all their properties other than mass and "identity"
charge. This is the leptonic particle "family", series, or spectrum. It is a quantized mass series, each
member separated from the others by a large, discreet, and exact mass difference. The hypothetical
leptoquark is the 4th and heaviest member of this series, representing the primordial common ancestor
of the baryons and leptons. It is the role of the IVBs: 1) to regulate the creation and destruction of the
leptonic series through interactions with the symmetric vacuum "sea" of virtual particle-antiparticle
pairs (the "X" IVB family produces leptoquarks and baryons, the "W" IVB family produces leptons
and mesons); 2) govern the transformations and decays of elementary particles, quarks as well as
leptons, via the "W". The "Z" mediates neutral weak force interactions in which particles (typically
neutrinos) simply scatter ("bounce") or swap identities.
What is most remarkable about the IVBs is that they seem to be reaction processes cast in quantized,
massive, particle form. These are not particles like the leptons and baryons which form stable matter;
they are "metric" particles of interaction, catalysts of transformation present only when mediating a
reaction, "virtual" particles usually known only by their effects, existing within the "Heisenberg
Interval" of virtual reality, but real enough and producible if the ambient energy density is sufficient.
The IVBs are the most complex example of nature's penchant for quantization that we know of, and
like many quantum processes, are responsible for a good deal of head-scratching. I can think of three
reasons why this process should be quantized: 1) quantized units are indefinitely reproducible without
loss of information or precision (Nature's "digital" information coding); 2) to protect the invariance of
weak force charge magnitudes ("identity" charge); 3) how otherwise could the asymmetry of the weak
force be built into its structure?
The W particle (which is nowadays readily produced in accelerators) is approximately 80 times
heavier than the proton, which explains the relative weakness of the weak force - there is a huge
energy barrier to surmount before weak interactions can occur. However, this also raises the obvious
question of what this massive particle is composed of - certainly not ordinary matter, the stuff of
baryons and leptons. My guess is that this particle (and the IVBs generally) are nothing less than a
fragment of very compact spacetime metric, similar to the energy-dense metric of the early moments
of the Big Bang. The huge mass energy of the particle is the binding energy required to compact the
metric, perhaps fold it, and secure it in the particular configuration of the W, Z, or X. Hence these
particles may be analogous to the compacted, topological, multidimensional particles of "string
theory".
While this is pure speculation, the notion has several advantages. First, it offers a mechanical
explanation for the reactions mediated (catalyzed) by this particle. The dense metric of the W simply
functions to bring the reactants of a weak force process into such close proximity that they can
exchange charges in full satisfaction of the conservation laws, which they cannot do when separated
by ordinary distances. Typically this will involve a particle-antiparticle pair drawn from the virtual
particle "sea", as well as the reacting particle itself. For examples of these types of reactions, see: "The
Particle Table" and "The 'W' IVB and the Weak force Mechanism" (pdf) (an HTML version of this

paper is also available).
The most significant feature of the massive IVBs is that they recreate the original conditions of the
energy-dense primordial metric in which particles were first created and transformed during the early
micro-moments of the "Big Bang". This recapitulation (of the electroweak force unification era, or
symmetric energy state) ensures that the original and invariant values of charge, mass, and energy are
handed on to the next generation of elementary particles. The IVB mass not only provides a "safe
house" where charge and energy transfers can take place, it simultaneously ensures that the
appropriate alternative charge carriers are present. Elementary particles created today must be the
same in all respects as those created eons ago during the "Big Bang".
There is a crucial difference between the creation of particles via electromagnetic particle-antiparticle
pair formation, and the weak force transformation of existing particles to other elementary forms. In
the case of particle-antiparticle pair creation, there can be no question of the suitability of the partner
for a subsequent annihilation reaction which will conserve symmetry. However, in the case of the
transformation of an existing elementary particle to another form, alternative charge carriers must be
used, since actual antiparticles can only produce annihilations. But how is the weak force to guarantee
that the alternative charge carriers - which may be a meson, a neutrino, or a massive lepton - will
have the correct charge in kind and magnitude to conserve symmetry at some future date in some
future reaction, or with an unknown partner which is not its antiparticle? Furthermore, the quark
charges are both partial and hidden (because they are "confined"), and the number charges of the
massive leptons and baryons are also hidden (because they are "implicit") - they have no long-range
projection (such as the magnetic field of electric charge) to indicate to a potential reaction partner the
relative condition of their energy state.
These conservation problems are all solved by a return to the original conditions in which elementary
particles and their transformations were first produced, much as we return and refer to the Bureau of
Standards when we need to recalibrate our instruments. The necessity for charge and mass invariance
in the service of symmetry and energy conservation therefore offers a plausible explanation for the
otherwise enigmatic large mass of the weak force IVBs. The IVB mass (as scaled or "gauged" by the
Higgs boson) serves to recreate the original environmental conditions - metric and energetic - in
which the reactions the IVBs now mediate first took place, ensuring charge and mass invariance and
hence symmetry and energy conservation, regardless of the type of alternative charge carrier that may
be required, or when or where these transformations take place. (See: Global-Local Gauge
Symmetries of the Weak Force.)
We should also note that all particle creation and transformation processes, whether electromagnetic
or weak, involve (at some stage) virtual particles drawn from the vacuum "sea". The mass, charge, and
all other conserved parameters of virtual particles are gauged and regulated by universal constants of
electromagnetism and the metric - c, e, h, etc. - which also ensures the uniformity of any elementary
particles produced from this common source.
While the details of the weak force mechanism remain to be clarified by experiment, the general
picture is clear. There is a specific, primordial mechanism for transforming light into its particle form,
a mechanism which utilizes the IVBs (and the Higgs boson scalar) of the weak force. This mechanism
produces the leptonic spectrum of elementary particles during the initial moments of the Big Bang
(and precisely reproduces it at all later times). This particle spectrum includes the leptoquark as its
heaviest and highest energy member (produced by the "X", or simply by the ambient pressure of the
Big Bang); the leptoquark is the first particle actually isolated by the asymmetric action of the weak
force during the Big Bang. Subsequently, the leptoquark expands to become a heavy baryon
("hyperon"), and then decays (via the "W" IVB) to produce the lower energy (lighter) baryons,

mesons, and leptons.
Space is the conservation domain of light. As such, the metric is very particular about what happens
to its free energy content, and strictly regulates the transformation of symmetric light to asymmetric
bound forms. The weak force is the guardian of the transformation process - all candidates for
transformation must pass through its gates, stop at its checkpoint, receive "identity" tags (charges) and
quantized forms - and just those whose "identities" spacetime is prepared to conserve (via neutrinos),
no others. The weak force mechanism is nothing less than a border crossing, requiring passports "Checkpoint Charlie". Once these conservation formalities have been observed and particles have
received their "identity" tags, the particles are free to pass through the boundary between the 2dimensional, spatial conservation domain of light, and enter the 4-dimensional combined conservation
domain of mass and light (spacetime), where they must obey new laws of energy, entropy, and
symmetry conservation. The "identity" charges are necessary to ensure the particle's ultimate
conservation and retrieval from the 4-D conservation domain of spacetime. (For a further discussion
of the weak force in its full energy spectrum, see: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
In the initial phase of particle creation, particle-antiparticle pairs, presumably of all types, are created
and annihilate each other instantly, recreating the light energy from which they were made. So long as
these pairs are created and annihilated in equal numbers, the symmetry of the light universe is
maintained. But there is an inherent asymmetry in the way the weak force interacts with matter vs
antimatter, with the consequence that even though particle pairs are created symmetrically, they do not
decay symmetrically. Most probably these asymmetric decays occur in neutral leptoquarks, heavy
analogs of the neutron. An excess of matter is produced in this process (of about one part per ten
billion), breaking the symmetry of the particle-antiparticle pairs and the light universe, creating the
matter comprising the universe we see today. For a discussion of these reactions, see: "The Formation
of Matter and the Origin of Information".
The first row of our 4x4 matrix, through symmetry-breaking and the creation of matter, has set the
stage for the evolution of the Universe and the remainder of our story. Rows two and three discuss
conservation reactions by spacetime to the creation of massive particles; the fourth row concerns the
return of the material system to symmetry and light. The system of light and space has been degraded
from its initial symmetry by the creation of atoms, and it is here that the story becomes of special
interest for bound energy forms such as ourselves. (For a diagram and discussion of the general
principles underlying the theory, see: "The Cosmic Tetrahedron" and its "Explanatory Text".) (For a
conceptual synthesis of the tetrahedron model with the more formal "Standard Model" of
"establishment" physics, see: "Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in the Tetrahedron Model"; see also:
"The 'Tetrahedron Model' vs the 'Standard Model' of Physics: A Comparison".)

Row 2 - Particles - Raw Energy Conservation
Mass: E = hv; E = mcc; hv = mcc
This is the row of bound energy: conservation of light's raw energy in terms of massive particles,
momentum, etc. Einstein's most famous formula, E = mcc, expresses the notion that the energy stored
in mass is enormous and somehow related to light through the electromagnetic constant c. DeBroglie
noted that Planck's formula for the energy of light: E = hv (where v = the frequency of light, and h =
Planck's constant) contained the same E and wrote hv = mcc, expressing the equivalence between free
energy and its bound form. This equation states that all the energy of light is conserved in massive
form in this transformation.

We might think with some justification that energy conservation is satisfied by DeBroglie's equation
and nothing more need be said. But this is just raw or total energy conservation, conservation of
quantity, not quality. The conservation of the quality, or symmetry, of free energy has not been
addressed by this formula. No massive particle can be created from free energy without engendering a
symmetry (and/or entropy) debt and a corresponding charge of some sort. Even if free energy is
simply absorbed by an existing massive system without the creation of a new charged particle (for
example, the absorption of a photon by the electron shell of an atom), then at least a gravitational
symmetry (and entropy) debt will be recorded by the "location" charge of gravitation. The same is true
for changes in the momentum of massive systems. Time is the entropy drive of massive systems, and
time is created by the gravitational annihilation and transformation of space. (See: "Entropy,
Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
The basic function of mass and momentum is apparently the compaction ("packaging") and storage of
free energy as touched upon in the discussion of row one (although the conversion from spatial
entropy to temporal entropy is perhaps of even more fundamental importance - see: "Proton Decay
and the "Heat Death" of the Universe"). Mass is bound energy, and it is asymmetric in many ways by
comparison to free energy. For this reason mass carries various charges, which are conserved
symmetry debts whose origin we have traced to the perfect symmetry of light (see row 3 below). The
most fundamental symmetry debt of mass is dimensional - mass is 4-dimensional, having a time
dimension. The time dimension itself is of course asymmetric, being one-way. Free energy (light),
from which mass is formed, is a 2-dimensional transverse wave, whose intrinsic motion sweeps out a
third spatial dimension. As Einstein discovered, light has no time dimension, and no spatial dimension
in the direction of propagation.
Linked to bound energy's most obvious asymmetry (time), is matter's lack of intrinsic spatial motion
c. This attribute gives bound energy a different inertial status than free energy, because bound energy
has a different dimensionality than free energy. The "Interval" of free energy = 0, but bound energy
has a real, positive Interval and a gravitational field; both are asymmetric dimensional attributes. We
associate electric charge with the dimensional asymmetry of time, and the gravitational charge with
the positive Interval of bound energy. The fact that time is involved in the symmetry debts of both
electric charge and gravitation complicates the distinction between these two very different charges.
The electric charge acts to prevent the formation of time, charge, mass, and gravitation (via particleantiparticle annihilation reactions); gravitation is a dimensional conservation reaction to the failure of
electric charge to prevent the formation of bound energy, and in particular, to the explicit appearance
of time. However, gravity does not act to prevent bound energy's formation, but after the fact,
patiently goes about repairing the damage to light's symmetry.
Finally, the entropy drive of light (or free electromagnetic energy) is expressed as light's intrinsic
motion in space. The entropy drive of matter (or bound electromagnetic energy) is time, created by the
gravitational field of mass. Gravity converts space and the drive of spatial entropy (the intrinsic
motion of light), to time and the drive of historical entropy (the intrinsic motion of time), converting
the expansive principle of space to its metric and entropic equivalent, the expansive principle of
history. Quite unlike electric charge (or any other charge), gravity carries an entropy debt as well as a
symmetry debt. Time and entropy-energy is the monopolar, (one-way) active principle of the
gravitational "location" charge, whose field vector is spacetime itself. The active principle of the
dipolar electric charge is symmetry-energy, and its field vector is the photon. (See: "The Conversion
of Space to Time".)

Time and Entropy - Causality and History
Note to Readers Concerning "Entropy":

Unless the context indicates otherwise, when I refer to "entropy" in these papers (especially in such
phrases as "space and spatial entropy" or "time and historical entropy"), I am referring to entropy in
its most primordial or pure form, as the intrinsic motion of light "gauged" or regulated by "velocity c"
(expanding and cooling the spatial Cosmos in the case of "spatial entropy"), or as the intrinsic motion
of time "gauged" or regulated by "velocity T" (expanding and aging the historic Cosmos in the case of
"temporal entropy"). Of course, time is also ultimately "gauged" or regulated by "velocity c", since
time is defined as the duration (measured by a clock) required by light to travel a given distance
(measured by a meter stick). (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)

The Interval - Local vs Non-Local Energy Forms
I begin this section by pasting in part of a paragraph from page 253 in my late father's book: "Trance,
Art, Creativity", which presents a marvelous mathematical insight into the nature of the time
dimension, by way of Einstein's formula for the "Interval":
"Analysis of this equation [the "Interval"] provides us with the proportion that time is to
space as "i" (the square root of -1) is to 1. Now "i" multiplied by itself is -1, so that in a
metaphoric sense we can say that the time dimension is "half" a space dimension.
Curiously one finds this out intuitively. We have full intuition of the three spatial
dimensions, but we cannot intuit the fourth dimension, so we experience it as "time."
Furthermore this experience is not full; it is partial, for we are on a one-way street
indicated by "time's arrow" which allows us always to experience duration as getting later
and later, but never the opposite."
(The book "Trance, Art, Creativity" is linked to and can be accessed in its entirety from my
homepage).
The "Interval" is Einstein's mathematical formulation of a quantity of spacetime that is invariant for all
observers regardless of their relative motion, uniform or accelerated. It is the analog of the
Pythagorean Theorem in 4 dimensions. The Interval of light is zero, which means light is "non-local";
the "zero Interval of light" is Einstein's mathematical statement of the fundamental symmetry state of
light. Light could not create its spacetime conservation domain, nor gauge the metric of an expanding
universe, without the symmetry of non-locality. But the Interval of mass, or bound energy, is always
some positive quantity greater than zero, and this is because the time dimension is necessarily explicit
for mass, for reasons of energy conservation, entropy, and causality we have considered above. The
basic function of Einstein's "Interval" is to rescue causality from the shifting perspectives of Einstein's
moving reference frames. The invariance of the "Interval", causality, and "velocity c" ("Lorentz
Invariance") is the metric equivalent of the invariance of particle charge.
This all makes sense when we think about space filled only with light - in such a space there is no
purely spatial Interval because there is nothing to distinguish one place or point from another - all is
uniform, indistinguishable, spatial and energetic symmetry. But enter mass and with it its inevitable
companions, time, charge, and gravitation, and immediately we can distinguish a point or place - here
is the particle - more significantly, here is the gravitational field pointing to the particle's location
from every other place in space (the influence of the gravitational field is universal in extent). But one
more thing is needed to pin down this location as absolutely unique: because the universe is always
moving, either expanding or contracting (due to entropy), the time dimension is also required to
specify which of an endless succession of moving locations in space we are to consider. Gravity
provides matter with a time dimension as well as a spatial location - time is the active principle of
gravity's "location" charge, and time is also produced and continuously replaced and renewed by the

gravitational annihilation and transformation of space. (See: " A Description of Gravitation".)
The positive "Interval" of mass is not just a mathematical abstraction of geometry; it is a dimensional,
energetic reality defined by gravitation and time. The positive Interval, therefore, represents a
dimensional asymmetry because it is unique, distinguishable, and invariant for all observers. Light has
no associated gravitational field because it has no "location"; its zero Interval is precisely the
symmetry condition necessary to prevent the formation of an explicit time dimension and a
gravitational field. Light could hardly function as the metric gauge of spacetime if it were itself
plagued by a metric-warping "location" charge and gravitational field.
This is the basic conservation reason why the intrinsic motion of light - whatever its actual numerical
value - must be the velocity of "non-locality", the symmetry gauge and entropy drive of free energy,
the gauge of the metric equivalence between time and space, effectively an infinite velocity within its
spatial domain. Otherwise light would have a location charge, a time dimension, and a gravitational
field, and spacetime would immediately collapse into a black hole. (If light produced a gravitational
field, the Universe would have been "still born" as a black hole at the Creation Event; instead of a
"Big Bang" there would have been a "Big Crunch". The fact that the scientific "establishment"
believes that light in free flight produces a gravitational field continues to be a major conceptual
roadblock in their ongoing effort to formally (mathematically) unify the forces.) (See: "Does Light
Produce a Gravitational Field?")
In terms of conservation: 1) in obedience to Noether's theorem, bound energy stores the (broken)
symmetry of light as the conserved charges (and spin) of matter; 2) spacetime obeys Noether's
Theorem through the inertial (and gravitational) forces of the metric; 3) in obedience to the first law
of thermodynamics, bound energy stores the raw energy of light as mass and momentum; 4) in
obedience to the second law of thermodynamics, mass stores the spatial entropy drive of light as its
temporal entropy drive. In turn, the intrinsic motion of time produces the gravitational field of matter.
Thus entropy produces the dimensional conservation domains of both free energy (space - through the
intrinsic motion of light), and of bound energy and information, matter's "causal matrix" - (historic
spacetime - through the intrinsic motion of gravitation and time). Spacetime, the joint dimensional
conservation domain of free and bound energy, is produced by the intrinsic motions of both c and T,
as they are welded together and equilibrated by "G", the gravitational constant and the entropy
conversion gauge. This is the iron linkage between the first and second laws of thermodynamics.
Noether's theorem is drawn into this web because "velocity c" gauges both the entropy drive and the
non-local symmetry state of free energy, and gravitation is likewise (and consequently) a combined
symmetry and entropy debt, as we shall discover below. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model").
The Mechanism of Gravitation - Gravity as the Spatial Consequence of Time's Intrinsic Motion
Time and space are both implicit in the description of the motion of an electromagnetic wave:
frequency (time) multiplied by wavelength (space) = c, the velocity of light. In the quantum
mechanical creation of a gravitational time charge (time is the active principle of gravity's "location"
charge), when an electromagnetic wave collapses or becomes "knotted", it switches from the spatial or
"wavelength" character of light or a moving wave, to the temporal or "frequency" character of a
particle or stationary wave - like a coin flipping from heads to tails. It is reasonable to call this
temporal expression a "charge" because time is asymmetric; being one-way, time has the asymmetric
or informational character of any other isolated charge of matter. Time differs from the other charges
in that it is an entropic charge - a charge with intrinsic dimensional motion. The asymmetric time
charge produces a specific "location" in the otherwise symmetric field of space - giving the massive
particle it is associated with a positive Interval, whereas the light from which the particle was
produced had a zero Interval. The magnitude of "G" (the universal gravitational constant) is

determined by the energy difference between the symmetric spatial entropy drive (S) (the intrinsic
motion of light as gauged by "velocity c") and the asymmetric temporal entropy drive (T) (the
intrinsic motion of time as gauged by "velocity T"): S - T = -G. This is equivalent to the small energy
difference between implicit and explicit time. (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
This is the formal character of gravity's "location" charge - the positive Interval of bound energy
breaks the non-local symmetry of the free energy which created it. This non-local symmetry produced
the equitable distribution of light's energy throughout spacetime, a symmetry broken by the
concentrated lump of immobile energy represented by bound energy's "rest mass". It is the
distributional asymmetry of matter's local energy which is the origin of gravity's "location" charge.
The "location" charge records the spacetime position, quantity, and density of the distributional
asymmetry of energy represented by any form of bound energy. However, the gravitational "location"
charge actually has a double origin (due to the dual gauge function of "velocity c"), both as an
entropy debt related to causality and energy conservation, as well as a symmetry debt related to
location and charge conservation. Both debts stem from the local nature of matter, both are carried by
the time charge of gravitation, and both are paid off simultaneously by the gravitational conversion of
bound to free energy, as in our Sun, the stars, and the "quantum radiance" of black holes. (See: " The
Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
The intrinsic motion of light is caused by the implicit presence of time. In the mathematical formula
for light's intrinsic motion, wavelength multiplied by frequency = c. The presence of time is implied
by "frequency", the presence of space is implied by "wavelength". In the freely moving wave, the
spatial or wavelength component is explicit and dominant; when the wave is stationary, collapsed to a
particle or other form of bound energy, the temporal or frequency component of the wave is explicit
and dominant, expressing the opposite side of the entropy "coin". Light's intrinsic (self-motivated)
motion is actually caused by the symmetric wavelength component "fleeing" the asymmetric temporal
component, which is however an embedded characteristic of its own nature, the classic "bur under the
saddle". Because light's intrinsic motion suppresses time to an implicit state, metric symmetry
conservation in the service of energy conservation is the physical principle or natural law driving the
intrinsic motion of light. As we have noticed earlier, however, this same intrinsic motion causes the
expansion and cooling of spacetime: "velocity c" also gauges the entropy drive of free energy. Hence
both symmetry and entropy must be invoked to fully explain the conservation causes of light's
intrinsic motion. The "switching" or "flipping" of the entropy component of the electromagnetic wave
from implicit time to explicit time is the whole difference between the intrinsic motion of light and
the intrinsic motion of time, the expansion of space vs the gravitational collapse of space, or the
positive spatial entropy drive of light vs the negative spatial entropy drive of gravitation. (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time".)
Time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge, and time is unique among the charges of
matter in that it is an entropic charge - a charge with intrinsic dimensional motion. Hence as soon as it
is formed, time moves into the expanding historic domain of information (the entropy domain for
bound electromagnetic energy), at right angles to all three spatial dimensions (the entropy domain for
free electromagnetic energy). However, because space and time are connected, when time moves it
drags space after it. It is this spatial motion that we recognize as the gravitational field, but it is
actually caused physically by the intrinsic motion of time pulling space along behind it.
As space is dragged after the time charge, it is pulled symmetrically from all possible 3-dimensional
spatial positions (because time is connected equivalently to all three spatial dimensions), and at the
center of mass or at the time charge itself, space self-annihilates: +x cancels -x, +y cancels -y, and +z
cancels -z, leaving behind, of course, a new residue of +t, which cannot cancel because time being
one-way, there is no -t. The new time charge replaces the old, which has moved down the one-way,

one dimensional time line into the historic domain of information, and the cycle repeats - the new
time charge moves down the time line dragging more space after it, the space self-annihilates at the
center of mass (as it tries to squeeze into the zero-dimensional beginning of the one-dimensional time
line), producing a new time charge, etc. forever. Hence gravity and time induce each other, creating
the continuous one-way flow of time, the continuous one-way flow of gravitation, and a spherically
symmetric gravitational field with a local "center of mass" where the field vanishes. The acceleration
of the gravitational field is caused by the constant application of a force - the intrinsic motion of time.
(The 1/rr attenuation of gravitational force is the simple consequence of the interaction between
spherical geometry and energy conservation. The same force law applies to electric fields (Coulomb's
law) and to the quenching of stellar luminosities, for the same reasons. Einstein's modification of
Newton's law was due to his recognition of the appropriate geometry of spacetime as 4-dimensional
rather than 3-dimensional.)
This perspective of the gravitational field is perfectly in accord with Einstein's "Equivalence
Principle", which asserts that we cannot tell the difference between the inertial forces of acceleration
due (for example) to rocket engines, vs the equivalent gravitational forces experienced as "weight"
while resting on the surface of the Earth. In the gravitational case, spacetime moves through us; in the
accelerating case, we move through spacetime.
The one-way character of time is a necessary consequence of causality protection and energy
conservation for bound energy forms in relative motion, as noted before. The time flow produces
information's aging, expanding entropy domain (history), which is the analog of, and derived from,
the expanding spatial entropy domain of light. The two are welded into historic spacetime by
gravitation; historic spacetime is visible in the stars and galaxies as we look out into space and back
into time. (Light's spatial entropy drive is actually visible as the cosmological "redshift".) (See: "A
Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
Note that in gravity we have symmetric space "chasing" asymmetric time, exactly the reverse of the
situation producing the intrinsic motion of light, where symmetric space "flees" asymmetric time
(wavelength multiplied by frequency = c). This is just the difference between explicit and implicit
time (reminiscent of David Bohm's "explicate and implicate order"), and the negative and positive
spatial entropy drive of gravitation vs light. (See: "The Gravity Diagram 1", and "The Gravity
Diagram 2"), and "The New Gravity Diagram".
Quantum Mechanics and Gravitation - Primary vs Secondary Process
Gravitation is both a symmetry debt and an entropy debt of light, unique among the charges and their
forces. This double nature is reflected in two different mechanisms, both of which convert space to
time, one at the quantum level of charge - the entropy debt, and one at the macroscopic level of
gravitational force - the symmetry debt. The double conservation role of gravity is due to the double
gauge role of the electromagnetic constant "c", both of which gravity conserves. "Velocity c" gauges
both the non-local symmetric energy state of light and the spatial entropy drive of light; gravity must
conserve both gauge roles of c if it conserves either one. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
The collapse of an electromagnetic wave confers a quantized time charge on a massive particle. This
is the quantum mechanical process of producing the entropy debt or time charge. We can visualize
this as the conversion of the "wavelength" or spatial aspect of light or the moving electromagnetic
wave, to the "frequency" or temporal aspect of the particle or stationary wave - the "flipping" of the
electromagnetic entropy "coin" from "head" to "tails". (see: "Gravity Figure No. 2"). Once this time
charge is established, the secondary or symmetry aspect of gravitation comes into play: the cyclic,
continuous flow of symmetric space as it is pulled toward the center of the asymmetric time charge by

the intrinsic motion of time, producing the macroscopic gravitational field (see fig. "gravity"). The
"secondary" process simply copies or reproduces the time charge established by the one-time
"primary" process. We can visualize this secondary process as the actual symmetric flow and
annihilation of the spatial dimensions, leaving in their place an uncanceled, ephemeral temporal
residue whose intrinsic motion - at right angles to all three spatial dimensions - pulls space along after
it, producing the continuous spatial collapse that is a gravitational field (see fig. "gravity1").
The two mechanisms are distinct but both are part of the gravitational conversion of space to time,
connecting the quantum-mechanical aspect of gravitational charge (the entropy debt) to the
macroscopic aspect of gravitational flow (the symmetry debt). Both are linked by their common gauge
c and Noether's Theorem requiring the conservation of light's "non-local" symmetric energy state. The
gravitational charge, "location", is unique among charges in that its active principle is time. The
gravitational charge is an "entropic" charge, a charge with intrinsic dimensional motion. It is the
entropic nature of the gravitational charge which connects the quantum mechanical (particle-chargetime-entropy) and macroscopic (mass-location-space-symmetry) aspects of gravity. In turn, the
double nature of the gravitational charge gives gravity a double conservation role, on the one hand
conserving the entropy drive of free energy by converting space and the intrinsic motion of light to
history and the intrinsic motion of time, and on the other hand conserving the non-local symmetric
energy state of light by converting bound to free energy (as in the stars, and in Hawking's "quantum
radiance of black holes). This duality extends backward in a conservation chain to the dual role of
"velocity c", which gauges both the symmetric energy state and the entropy drive of free energy.
Gravity must conserve both gauge or regulatory roles of light's intrinsic motion if it conserves either
one (see: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation").
A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. The collapse of space
leaves a (metrically equivalent) temporal residue whose intrinsic motion pulls more space after it, in
an endlessly repeating cycle. The intrinsic motions of gravitation and time continuously induce each
other, much as the oscillations of an electric and magnetic field induce each other. In both cases, the
motion of a current, either moving space or moving electrical charges, produces a field at right angles
to the current flow (time or a magnetic field). Conversely, a moving time or magnetic field produces a
spatial (gravitational) or electric current. Both magnetism and time can be seen as local conservation
consequences of distorting the global symmetry of charge and space. (See: "Material Effects of Global
vs Local Gauge Symmetry".) (See also: "Currents of Entropy and Symmetry".)
The "graviton" or field vector of the gravitational charge is a quantum unit of matter's temporal
entropy drive, the gravitationally transformed entropy drive or intrinsic motion of the photon (S),
energetically equivalent to a quantum unit of time (T), symbolically expressed in a "concept equation"
as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
(See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics", and "A Description of Gravitation"). For a
discussion of the weakness of gravity - which is due to the tangential nature of the contact point
between matter's "universal present moment" and matter's causal conservation domain of historic
spacetime - see: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)

Quarks and Leptons
Mass assumes quantized, specific, particulate form as the strong force quarks, baryons, and mesons
("hadrons"), and the weak force leptons. Hadrons are defined as particles containing quarks; hence all

hadrons carry "color" charge, the source of the quark-confining strong force. Leptons contain no
quarks and hence no color charge. Leptons carry lepton "number" or "identity" charge, the source of
the weak force. The leptons are true elementary particles whereas the quarks are sub-elementary.
Electrons are familiar examples of the massive members of the lepton family (electron, muon, tau, and
(?) leptoquark); neutrinos are (nearly) massless members of the lepton family (there is a separate and
distinct neutrino for each heavy lepton). Protons and neutrons (the "nucleons") are familiar examples
of the "hadron" family: composed of 3 quarks, they are members of the "baryon" subfamily of
hadrons; the only other hadrons are the mesons (pions, kaons), composed of quark-antiquark pairs
(see "The Particle Table"). In general, the baryons function as mass carriers, and the leptons and
mesons function as alternative charge carriers (supplying balancing or neutralizing charges in place of
antiparticles).
3 Families of 4 Particles
The quarks and the leptons each occur in paired "families" of three energy levels; the quark and lepton
families appear to be paired in these 3 families as follows (a precisely corresponding set of
antiparticles exists but is not discussed):
1) up, down (u, d) quarks and the electron and electron neutrino (e, ve);
2) charm, strange (c, s) quarks and the muon and muon neutrino (u, vu);
3) top, bottom (t, b) quarks and the tau and tau neutrino (t, vt).
There is no commonly accepted explanation why there should be 3 paired energy levels of particles,
or how the quarks and leptons are related. Ordinary matter is composed of the 1st family only. It
seems likely that the quarks and leptons are both derived from a high energy, primordial "ancestor"
particle, the "leptoquark"; it also seems likely that the 3 energy families of particles are somehow
reflecting the 3-dimensional structure of space (because particles are ultimately derived from the
interaction of light's energy with the metric structure of spacetime).
Quarks
In contrast to the "long-range" electrical and gravitational forces, which have an infinite range
through spacetime, the strong force is a "short-range" force, an internal characteristic of nuclear
matter. Quarks occur in only two kinds of particles: "baryons" composed of 3 quarks, and "mesons"
composed of quark-antiquark pairs. Baryons are familiar to us as neutrons and protons, but there are
many other 3 quark combinations possible using the heavier members of the quark family
("hyperons"). In addition, every quark combination seems to have many possible energetic
expressions, or "resonances", just as electron orbits have many "excited" states. Typically, all excited
states are exceedingly short-lived. Six quarks are known in three "energy families"; the quarks are
named "up, down"; "charm, strange"; and "top, bottom". Ordinary matter (even in stars) consists only
of the up, down quarks.
All quarks carry partial electric charges (u, c, t quarks carry +2/3; d, s, b quarks carry -1/3), and their
distinguishing charge, color. There are 3 color charges, red, green, blue (not actually colors, just
names of convenience) which are exchanged between quarks by a "gluon" field; each gluon is
composed of a color-anticolor charge pair. One of the nine possible combinations of color-anticolor is
doubly neutral (green-antigreen), leaving 8 effective members of the gluon field. The constant "roundrobin" exchange of the gluons from one quark to another is the strong force mechanism which binds
the quarks together within baryons and mesons (quark "confinement").
At a higher level of strong force structural order and cohesion, meson exchange binds nucleons

(protons and neutrons) into compound atomic nuclei. This higher-order or nucleon-level expression of
the strong force (the "Yukawa" force) is essentially an "oscillation" of the nucleons between their
possible neutron or proton identities (sometimes known as "isospin symmetry"). "Isospin" symmetry
amounts to an oscillation between quark up and down "flavors", whereas the lower order or quarklevel strong force amounts to an oscillation between quark red, green, and blue "colors" (leading in
the latter case to a symmetry known as "asymptotic freedom"). We will discuss strong force symmetry
effects more extensively below and in row three.
The baryon is an incredible, miniature universe of structure, information, charge, and activity. A large
compound atomic nucleus is a "hive", a veritable metropolis of quantum mechanical action and
exchange, all quite beneath our notice, due to the short-range character of both binding levels of the
strong force.
Being composed of color-anticolor charges in all possible combinations, the gluon field as a whole
sums to zero, a crucial symmetry property ("asymptotic freedom"). Quarks are permanently confined
by gluons to meson or baryon combinations; they never occur alone or in any other combination in
nature (except possibly a "quark soup" state existing in super-dense stars or at super-high
"primordial" energy and temperature). Finally, only quark combinations which electrically sum to
zero or unit electrical charge, and neutral or "white" color charge, are allowed. Hence the quarkantiquark pairs composing mesons carry a single color and its corresponding anticolor (such as redantired), whereas in baryons the colors pair with anticolors in all possible combinations.
Quarks are sub-elementary particles, as they carry electric charges which are fractions of the unit
electric charge of the leptons, the only truly elementary particles. When one considers the properties
of a baron, it is hard to escape the impression that this is what a lepton would have to look like if it
were somehow fractured into three parts. Since, by definition, you cannot "really" fracture an
elementary particle, perhaps you could do so "virtually", provided the parts could never become "real"
(separated), but remained forever united in combinations that sum to elementary leptonic charges. In
this way, the fractured particle would still "look like" an elementary particle to the outside observer,
or what is equivalent, to the long-range forces. Nature is not above such tricks, as we have learned
from the virtual particles and Heisenberg's "Uncertainty Principle". It seems probable that baryons are,
in some sense, primordially "fractured" leptons. Such an origin would go far toward explaining both
the differences and the similarities of these two fundamental classes of particles, including the gluon
field, which has been compared to "sticky light".
Fermions and Bosons
Collectively, the hadrons and leptons, which comprise the material component of atomic matter (the
nucleus, electron shell, and associated neutrinos), are known as "fermions". All fermions have a
"spin", or quantized spin angular momentum, in 1/2 integer units of Planck's energy constant (1/2, 3/2,
etc.); fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle, which simply states that no two fermions can be in
the same place at the same time, if all their quantum numbers are also the same. Fermions cannot pile
up on top of one another indiscriminately; they keep their own counsel, which is why we get specific,
crystalline atomic structure rather than goo. In contrast to the fermions is the class of energy forms
known as "bosons", which includes the force carriers or field vectors of the 4 forces: the photons of
electromagnetism (the quantum units of light), the gravitons of gravity, the gluons of the strong force,
and the IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons) of the weak force (the IVBs, as their name implies,
exhibit characteristics of both groups). Together, the fermions and bosons comprise the particles and
forces of matter. Bosons have whole integer spins (1, 2, etc.) and they can and do superimpose or pile
up on one another. Thus a photon or graviton can have any energy because it can be composed of an
indefinite number of superimposed quanta, whereas an electron has a single, specific rest energy and

charge.
If we add the charges, or symmetry debts of matter (including spin), and the intrinsic motions and
inertial forces to the fermions and bosons, we have a complete list of the fundamental (unexcited)
energy states of free and bound electromagnetic energy. Historic spacetime is the dimensional
conservation domain they create and occupy. The primordial mixture of light and metric spacetime
creates fermions; fermions carry charges producing forces whose field vectors are bosons. All forces
act to return the material system to the primordial symmetric state of free energy (light) which created
it. Thus massive leptons and quarks bear electric charges whose field vectors are photons; elementary
particles bear identity charges whose field vectors are the IVBs; all quarks bear color charges whose
field vectors are gluons; all forms of bound energy bear gravitational charge whose field vector is the
graviton (or spacetime).
Once again we have a natural dichotomy which invites our curiosity, experiment, and speculation.
What is the relationship between the quarks and leptons? They seem made for each other - are they
indeed made from each other - perhaps both arising from a common ancestor?
We speculate that the ancestral particle of the quarks and leptons is the "leptoquark", the heaviest
member of the leptonic elementary particle series. The leptoquark is a lepton at very high (primordial)
energy densities, when its quarks are sufficiently compressed (by ambient pressure of the "Big Bang"
or the "X" IVB), that its color charge vanishes through the principle of "asymptotic freedom" (the
gluon field, being composed entirely of color-anticolor charges, sums to zero when compressed to
"leptonic size"). At lower energy densities, the quarks expand under their mutual quantum mechanical
and electrical repulsion, causing the color charge to become explicit. Through the internal expansion
of its 3 quarks, the leptoquark becomes a baryon, decaying eventually to the ground state proton,
producing leptons and mesons (via the "W" IVB) along the decay pathway, which function as
alternative charge carriers for the electric, identity, color, and flavor charges of quarks and other
leptons.
Neutrinos
The neutrinos remain mysterious particles and are actively being researched. Whether or not neutrinos
actually have mass is still a question. If neutrinos have mass, why is it so small, and how do they
escape carrying an electric charge, as do all other massive particles? Is there a 4th "leptoquark"
neutrino? What is the smallest mass quanta permissible in nature? Are neutrinos composite or
elementary particles? It is currently believed that neutrinos have a tiny mass and oscillate between
their several possible identities, somewhat as the massive leptons, whose identity charges they carry,
can change identities among themselves via reversible weak force decays, mediated by the IVBs.
(Other examples of "oscillation" have been noted above between quark colors and flavors in the
strong force.)
Neutrinos were thought to be massless leptons with intrinsic motion c. They are now thought to have
a tiny mass and move very nearly at velocity c because they are both so light and energetic when
formed. Neutrinos are the explicit, "bare" form of lepton number ("identity") charge, which is hidden
or implicit in the massive leptons (and probably also in the massive baryons and leptoquark).
Each massive lepton (the electron, muon, tau, and the hypothetical leptoquark) is associated with a
specific neutrino, or number charge, which I refer to as an "identity" charge to acknowledge the
symmetry debt carried by this charge. All photons are indistinguishable one from another, but the
leptons do not share this "symmetry of anonymity". While all electrons are identical, they are distinct
from the photon, and from the other elementary particles - the muon, tau, and leptoquark. Neutrinos

are the hallmark of an elementary particle; they are telling us that there are only three or four such; all
other particles are composites. The conservation domain requires this identity asymmetry to be
recognized and accounted for, but it is economical in its bookkeeping, concerning itself only with
massive elementary particles. All neutrinos have left-handed spin, while all antineutrinos have righthanded spin, neatly distinguishing the leptonic series from its antimatter counterpart. Evidently these
specific "identity" charges function to facilitate annihilation reactions between matter and antimatter,
allowing the various particle species to identify their proper "anti-mates". Through the facilitation of
timely annihilation reactions, the identity charges make their contribution to conserving light's
symmetry. Identity charge also plays a role in the quantization of elementary particle mass (as do the
"flavor" charges of the quarks), such that these specific particle masses can be reliably, accurately, and
indefinitely reproduced.
Neutrinos are quanta of information, keeping the symmetry records of spacetime concerning the
identity and number of all elementary particles (or antiparticles) within its domain. Combined with the
metrical warpage of gravitation, we see that spacetime contains structural information concerning the
location, mass, and identity of every elementary particle within its conservation domain. This startling
fact informs us that spacetime is as scrupulous concerning symmetry conservation as it is concerning
raw energy conservation. Not only is every hair on your head numbered, but every elementary particle
in that hair is numbered and its mass and location known. (We also discover that the historic record of
spacetime is complete in the conservation domain of matter's causal information matrix. We, and all
our activities, are immortal in historic spacetime.) "Every jot and tittle of the law will be fulfilled."
(See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
Go to: General Systems and the Unified Field Theory: Part II
homepage
Please use the URL http://www.webcitation.org/5cvWL5byS to access a cached copy of this page
(and then select the most recently updated version in the cache)
If you have any questions, please feel free to contact the WebCite team at http://www.webcitation.org

