Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

Light and Matter - a Synopsis
(Revised Oct., 2012)
John A. Gowan
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Abstract
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory, as presented in
these pages, can be briefly sketched as follows:
Our Universe is asymmetric in that it consists only of matter,
without an antimatter complement. This cosmic-scale asymmetry
was created during the "Big Bang" by the action of the weak force,
creating matter from perfectly symmetric light, thus bringing our
manifest world into existence (our Cosmos is an asymmetric
"breakout" from an all-symmetric "Multiverse"). "Noether's
Theorem" states that in a continuous multi-component field such as
the electromagnetic field (or the metric field of spacetime), where
one finds a symmetry one finds an associated conservation law, and
vice versa. The symmetries of light must be conserved no less than
its energy. Consequent upon the creation of asymmetric matter from
symmetric light during the "Big Bang", light's lost symmetries are
conserved in matter by charge and spin; in spacetime, by inertial and
gravitational forces. Light's raw energy is conserved as mass and
momentum; light's "non-local" intrinsic motion or entropy drive (as
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 1 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

"gauged" by "velocity c") is conserved in "local" matter as time and
gravitation.
All forms of energy, including the entropic conservation domain of
spacetime, originate as light. During the "Big Bang", an unknown,
asymmetric self-interaction within primordial, high-energy light
produced single particles of matter (lacking antimatter partners);
matter carries charges which are the symmetry (and entropy) debts
of the light which created it. Charge invariance is therefore an
important corollary of charge and symmetry conservation,
maintained in our temporal (gravitational) metric of relative motion
by "local gauge symmetry currents" (compensating components of
the field vectors, such as magnetism, time, the strong force "gluons",
and the massive "Intermediate Vector Bosons" ("IVBs") of the weak
force). The invariance of "velocity c", the "Interval", and causality
are likewise important metric corollaries of energy conservation (the
"Lorentz Invariance" of Special and General Relativity). Charges
produce forces which act to return the material system to its original
symmetric energy state (light), paying (partially or completely)
matter's symmetry/entropy debt. Repayment of matter's symmetry
debt is exampled by: 1) spontaneous, exothermic chemical reactions
(partial) and matter-antimatter annihilations (complete); 2)
radioactivity (partial) and "proton decay" (complete); 3) the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars (partial) and Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes (complete). Identifying the broken
symmetries of light associated with the charges and forces of physics
(including gravity) is the first step toward their conceptual
unification. The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light.
(Abstract revised Oct. 2016.)

http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 2 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

Table of Contents:
Abstract
Introduction
Matter is a Conserved Form of Light
Constants of Physics
Symmety Breaking
Conservation
Symmetry Restoration
Role of Life
Role and Linkage of the Forces
Links and References
The Tetrahedron Model
Introduction
Our Universe is composed of electromagnetic energy in two forms,
free and bound, light and matter. The evidence for this assertion is
the complete conversion of matter to light in matter-antimatter
annihilation reactions. Our Universe is an electromagnetic subset of
the Multiverse, a Cosmos conserved within an entropic dimensional
arena of its own creation, historic spacetime. All other forces and
energy forms (gravitation, nuclear forces) are ancillary to, and
derived from, the electromagnetic bound forms and are likewise
converted to light in electromagnetic annihilation reactions.
Einstein's most famous equation (E = mcc), relating energy, mass,
and the velocity of light, is a quantitative expression of this simple
but fundamental relationship.
It is the ability of electromagnetic energy to exist in two alternative
yet wholly conserved forms that allows (rather than causes) the
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 3 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

breaking of the initial symmetric energy state of light (during the
"Big Bang"), and the transformation of free electromagnetic energy
into the bound state of matter. The actual cause of "Big Bang"
symmetry-breaking is evidently a small asymmetry in the interaction
of the weak force with matter vs antimatter - probably an inequality
in the rate of the weak force decay of leptoquarks vs antileptoquarks,
such that more leptoquarks survived to become baryons. (See: "The
Origin of Matter and Information"; see also: "The Particle Table".)
As matter is an alternative, asymmetric, bound and quantized form
of light (one-half of a particle-antiparticle pair), charge is an
alternative, bound and quantized form of symmetry; mass is an
alternative, asymmetric, bound and local form of energy; history is
an alternative, asymmetric form of space and entropy; gravity is an
asymmetric, alternative metric, creating and accommodating time,
spacetime, and history. (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
Leptoquarks are alternative forms of leptons, producing quarks and
baryons; leptons, neutrinos, and mesons are alternative charge
carriers for the mass-carrying quarks (replacing antiquarks). The
Higgs scalar boson and the heavy weak force IVBs (Intermediate
Vector Bosons) gauge and regulate the transformation of free energy
into massive elementary particles (IVBs are an alternative (bound,
quantized) form of the "electroweak" unified force symmetric energy
state). (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I".)
The gravitational constant (G) gauges the transformation of space
into time. Gravitational forces represent an alternative metric,
regulating spacetime, light, and matter rather than simply space and
light, as in the case of the electromagnetic constant "c". (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time".)

http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 4 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

The connections between the free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy are wholly "internal" and natural: time is
simply an alternative form of space ("spacetime") - time is directly
extracted from space by gravity (gravity annihilates space, leaving
behind a metrically equivalent temporal residue). In turn, gravity is
the spatial consequence of time's intrinsic motion: gravity and time
induce each other endlessly. Matter is an alternative form of light,
derived from particle-antiparticle pairs by weak force symmetrybreaking during the "Big Bang". Particle-antiparticle pairs are the
product of light's energy and the structural metric of spacetime; the
metric is also produced by light's intrinsic motion for light's own
conservation. The intrinsic motion of light is the entropy drive of
light, also conserving light's energy and "non-local" symmetry.
Quarks are fractured leptons (leptoquarks); the strong force is
derived from the electromagnetic force - color charge and the gluons
are derived from electric charge and photons. Once matter is created,
all forces act to conserve, protect, and safeguard matter's bound
energy and symmetry content, eventually returning matter to its
original free symmetric form, light. (See: "Symmetry Principles of
the Unified Field Theory".)
Matter is an Asymmetric, Bound, Massive, Conserved Form of
Light
The fundamental relationship between light and matter is this: matter
is an asymmetric, massive, immobile, local, conserved form of light,
comprising one-half of a symmetric particle-antiparticle pair.
Massless light is atemporal, acausal, and non-local, carrying no
charges and (in free flight) producing no gravitational field; massive
matter is temporal, causal, and local, carrying various charges
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 5 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

(symmetry debts) and producing a gravitational field which creates
matter's time dimension, entropy drive, and historic conservation
domain.
The fundamental problem posed to the universe following the
creation of matter in the "Big Bang", is how to return matter to its
original symmetric form (light) in the absence of antimatter - (as
required by Noether's symmetry-conservation theorem)? Can it be
done at all? Matter contains only one-half of the information of the
original particle-antiparticle pairs, which easily accomplished the
feat by mutual and instantaneous annihilation reactions. The return
of matter to light in the absence of antimatter is actually possible,
but only if an extra dimension (time) is added to accommodate the
variable energy accounts of matter in relative (rather than absolute)
motion, and to provide an entropy drive for immobile matter, which
has no intrinsic motion of its own (hence the dimension itself must
move), and finally to provide a conservation domain for matter's
causal information field (historic spacetime). Finally, an extra force
must be added to create this time dimension - gravity. This is
accomplished by the gravitational annihilation of space and the
extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. Naturally
enough, the necessary gravitational field is produced by the particle
itself, in exact proportion to its bound energy content, or mass: Gm.
Light itself is wholly spatial and "non-local", having no time
dimension, whereas matter is light in a local form which can exist
and be conserved in time - matter is electromagnetic energy which
can reside in the historical domain and nevertheless be eventually
restored - primarily through the principle of charge conservation - to
its original spatial, symmetric form. The charges of a "virtual"
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 6 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

particle-antiparticle pair exist only to cause the pair's annihilation,
restoring (and hence conserving) the symmetric "non-local" energy
state of the light which created the pair. When one member of a
virtual pair becomes isolated and "real" in time, its charges are
conserved and retain their original functionality and purpose.
Everything we know about matter can be related to this fundamental
relationship: the charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light
(Noether's Theorem). Because symmetry conservation in the time
dimension takes the form of charge (and spin) conservation, the
issue of charge invariance in a world of relative rather than absolute
motion becomes of paramount importance, explaining many of the
anomalous phenomena of Quantum Mechanics, Special and General
Relativity, and the nuclear forces. For material systems, charge
conservation (and hence symmetry conservation) would be
meaningless in the absence of charge invariance - and moot in the
absence of time (witness the instantaneous annihilation reactions of
virtual particle-antiparticle pairs).
From a conservation perspective, some necessary characteristics,
capabilities, and parameters of electromagnetic energy follow:
Constants of Physics
1) The fundamental constants of physics are the "given" constants of
electromagnetic energy, or derived from them. (c, G, e, h, Higgs
mass, etc.). These constants are necessary delimiting structural,
metric, and energetic parameters for the conservation of the energy
and symmetry of electromagnetic energy and originate with it,
perhaps at the "multiverse" level. ("c" is the universal
electromagnetic energy gauge constant, and among other functions
acts as the gauge (regulator) for light's entropy drive (intrinsic
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 7 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

motion) and "non-local" distributional and metric symmetry
(vanishing time and distance). "G" is the universal gravitational
gauge constant regulating the conversion (in either direction) of
light's spatial entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of light) to matter's
historical entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of time). "e" is the
quantized constant of electric charge; "h" is Planck's quantized
energy constant; the quantized Higgs boson regulates the mass scale
of the weak force IVBs and the elementary particles they produce,
etc.). (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II,
III, IV".)
Symmetry Breaking
2) The bound form of electromagnetic energy (matter) must be able
to break the initial symmetric energy state of the free form of
electromagnetic energy (light), specifically light's particleantiparticle form. This is the role of the strong and weak nuclear
forces, creating, transforming, and destroying single elementary
particles, both originally during the "Big Bang", and subsequently,
continuing to the present day (fusion, fission, elementary particle
transformation and decay). Characteristics which contribute to
matter's symmetry-breaking capabilities include: composite nuclear
particles (quarks) which can sum to electrical neutrality (because
quarks carry fractional charges); "asymptotic freedom" (selfannihilation of the baryon's gluon field and color charge - possible
because gluons are composed of color-anticolor charges in all
combinations); leptoquarks (joining leptons and hadrons) and
leptoquark neutrinos (carrying leptoquark "number" or "identity"
charge). Alternative charge carriers (leptons, neutrinos, and mesons)
serve the mass-carrying quarks in place of antiquarks, which would
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 8 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

only cause annihilation reactions; a weak force asymmetry with
respect to matter vs antimatter reaction products and/or rates
produces an excess of matter; the Higgs scalar boson gauges or
regulates the massive weak force Intermediate Vector Bosons, and
through them regulates elementary particle mass, accomplishing the
creation, transformation, and destruction of single elementary
particles, etc. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information"; see
also: "Lepton 'Number' or 'Identity' Charge".)
Conservation
3) Matter must be able to conserve (through time) the total energy of
light, including raw energy (as mass, momentum), symmetry (as
charge, spin), and entropy (as gravity, time). Because matter has
relative rather than absolute motion, the conservation of light's total
energy and symmetry in matter (and in interactions between light
and matter) becomes a crucial and complicated affair, requiring
compensating forces ("local gauge symmetry currents") and
dimensions such as: gravity and time; magnetism; quark
confinement by gluons; "Lorentz Invariance", quantization, the
massive weak force IVB mechanism, etc.) Single elementary
particles created today must be the same in all respects as those
created during the "Big Bang" - hence the elaborate structure of the
weak force (Higgs scalar boson, massive IVBs). (The
aforementioned forces and effects are all local gauge symmetry
currents or conservation mechanisms protecting the invariance of
elementary particle rest mass, charge, causality, the "Interval", and
velocity "c", as well as conserving total energy involving relative
motion in a variable temporal metric). (See: "Global and Local
Gauge Symmetries in the 'Tetrahedron Model'.)
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 9 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

The role of "velocity c" as the invariant gauge constant of
electromagnetic energy is of primary importance for the
maintenance of charge invariance, the invariance of Einstein's
"Interval" and causality, for metric symmetry, and for the "nonlocal" distributional and metric symmetry of light, as well as for
gauging and sustaining light's entropy drive. "Velocity c"
furthermore gauges Einstein's mass-energy relation (E=mcc), as
noted above. For all these reasons, and more, the entire conservation
structure of the Cosmos, including its dimensional metric and its
energy content, depends upon the invariant magnitude of "velocity
c". To think of "c" only as a large or even absolute "velocity" is to
fail to appreciate the critical significance and role of this most
important gauge constant of nature.
The gravitational constant "G" establishes the entropic temporal and
historic metric of bound energy directly from the entropic spatial
metric of free energy (creating historic spacetime), via the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent
temporal residue. Gravity is weak for two reasons: 1) the small
energy difference between implicit and explicit time (the spatial
entropy drive of light vs the historical entropy drive of matter); and
2) because matter is connected to its entropic conservation domain
(historic spacetime) only by the tangential point of the "present
moment" or "eternal now". Gravity creates only enough temporal
entropy drive to establish and maintain matter's tangential point of
connection to its historical conservation domain - historic spacetime,
which contains the "causal matrix" of matter's historical information
field, web, or network ("karma"). (See: "Proton Decay and the 'Heat
Death' of the Cosmos"; see also: "A Spacetime Map of the
Universe".)
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 10 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

Symmetry Restoration
4) Matter must be able to eventually return to light. This is the
ultimate role of information (in its primordial form of charge), and
of the four forces of physics: (electrical matter-antimatter
annihilation reactions; gravitational fusion reactions (stars),
gravitational potential energy conversions (quasars), Hawking's
"Quantum Radiance" (black holes); strong force fusion and proton
decay; weak force fission, particle and proton decay). (See:
"Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
Role of Life
5) The role of biology and living forms is the self-knowledge, selfexperience, self-exploration, and creative evolution of the Cosmos,
which is the rationale for the conversion of light into matter,
information, identity, and "work". Life is how the universe becomes
aware of and experiences itself. Biology is a special "information"
sub-domain and neg-entropic force of the electromagnetic force (the
"life force" encompassing both negative entropy (growth,
development and evolution) and positive entropy (aging, death, and
decay)), acting through gravity, information, chemistry, identity,
genetics, evolution, and the universal 4x3 algorithm in the causal
arena of historic spacetime. (See: "The Human Connection"; "The
Information Pathway"; "Newton, Darwin, and the Origin of Life";
see also: "Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age".)
Role and Linkage of the Forces
The special role of gravity (aside from its primal role of providing
balancing negative energy to enable the creation of the Cosmos), is a
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 11 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

function derived from its primal role: the creation of time (via the
annihilation of space), including historical spacetime, a conservation
domain for matter's causal information field or "matrix". The
intrinsic motion of light (light's primordial entropy drive) creates
space, the original symmetric, atemporal, "global", acausal,
dimensional and entropic electromagnetic metric which is modified
by gravity to accommodate bound energy's relative motion and
causal relations (energy conservation), provide matter's primordial
historical entropy drive (entropy conservation), and (eventually, as in
stars) convert mass to free energy, conserving light's non-local
distributional and metric symmetry. (See: "Global vs Local Gauge
Symmetry in Gravitation"; see also: "The Double Conservation Role
of Gravity".) The special role of the nuclear forces is the creation,
transformation, and destruction of single elementary particles (not
particle-antiparticle pairs), including the initial symmetry-breaking
which created matter from light during the "Big Bang". Acting
together, the strong and weak forces not only create matter during
the "Big Bang", but subsequently (in stars) create all 92 elements of
the Periodic Table. (See: "Global vs Local Gauge Symmetry and the
Weak Force"; see also: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force
Mechanism".)
The electrical and weak forces are linked through the "electroweak"
unification and the leptons (electron, neutrino, photon, IVBs). The
strong and weak forces are linked through the leptoquark and
leptoquark neutrino ("identity" charge); the strong and electrical
forces are linked through the photon and gluon ("sticky light"), and
thus through color and electric charge. The electromagnetic force
and gravity are linked through "velocity c", the metric, and the
gravitational creation of time via the annihilation of space - a
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 12 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

"graviton" is a quantum unit of time or negative entropy. The
intrinsic motion of light ("velocity c", the primordial entropy drive
of light), creates space, the entropic conservation domain of free
energy. The intrinsic motion of matter ("velocity G", gravity/time,
the primordial entropy drive of matter), creates spacetime, the
entropic conservation domain of bound energy. Time marches on to
create history (historic spacetime), the conservation domain of
matter's causal information network. Because gravity creates time
via the annihilation of space, gravity essentially converts light's
spatial entropy drive into matter's historical entropy drive. (See:
"The Conversion of Space to Time".) This reaction is reversed
during the gravitational conversion of bound to free energy in stars
(for example), a process which goes to completion in Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes. Hence we see that (among other
conservation roles), gravity is actually conserving (via the creation
of time and time's intrinsic motion) the entropy drive (the intrinsic
motion) of light, while simultaneously (in stars) conserving the nonlocal distributional and metric symmetry of light via the conversion
of bound to free energy. (See: "A Description of Gravitation"; see
also: "Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light (Noether's
Theorem). Gravity is one of those charges ("location" charge),
conserving light's metric, entropic, and distributional symmetric
energy state (all consequences of the "non-local" character of light's
energy, and all gauged by "velocity c"). Gravity creates time by the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent
temporal residue; the intrinsic motion of the temporal residue
proceeds into the historic domain, at right angles to all three spatial
dimensions, causing the further collapse of space, and producing a
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 13 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

self-feeding, continuous cycle. A gravitational field is the spatial
consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. Gravity pays the
entropy-"interest" on the symmetry debt of matter by converting the
spatial entropy drive of light to the historical entropy drive of matter,
decelerating the spatial expansion of the Cosmos in consequence.
Hence it is ultimately the expansive entropy-energy of light which
funds the expansive entropy-energy of history. Gravity pays the
energy-"principle" of matter's symmetry debt, and demonstrates its
symmetry conservation role, by returning bound energy to its
original symmetric form through the conversion of mass to light via
the nucleosynthetic pathway in stars, and via the conversion of
gravitational potential energy to light in quasars. The conversion
goes to completion via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes, the final repayment of all matter's symmetry and entropy
debts. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
The Tetrahedron Model
The "Tetrahedron Model" offers a succinct, visual representation of
the relationship between light and matter in terms of four
fundamental conservation laws which characterize, regulate, and
define their interaction: Energy Conservation; Symmetry
Conservation; Entropy; Causality-Information (see: "The
'Tetrahedron Model'"; see also: "The 'Tetrahedron Model' vs the
'Standard Model' of Physics"). Finally, these four conservation laws
comprise the foundation of a fractal hierarchy of nested physical
structures in the natural (and even in the man-made) world, all built
upon the global-local relationship between light and matter, free and
bound electromagnetic energy (see: "Nature's Fractal Pathway" (and
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 14 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

Table); see also: "The Information Pathway" (and Table)).

Fig. 1: The Tetrahedron Model
References:
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D,
1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to
her Life and Work. M. Dekker, New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. +
10 plates.
de Chardin, Pierre Teilhard: The Phenomenon of Man. French:
Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1955; English: Harper and Row, New
York, 1959.
Close, Frank: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin.
Science 1981, 212, 1221-8 (Nobel lecture).
Books by my late father Prof. John Curtis Gowan
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous
Element and the Metaphysical Realm. A Book by Prof. John
C. Gowan, Sr.
"Operations of Increasing Order" Further Investigations of
the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical Realm. A
Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Psychedelic Individual". A Book by
Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Creative Individual". A Book by Prof.
John C. Gowan, Sr.
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999,
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 15 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

448 + xiii pp.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos. A. A. Knoph, 2004, 569 +
xii pp.
Gross, D. J. and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of NonAbelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1343.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306
page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed Equations of Quark
Theory."
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes.
Communications in Mathematical Physics 1975, 43 (3), 199220.
Lederman, Leon with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006.
Mariner Books.
Lederman, Leon and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008.
Promethus Books.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979.
Oxford University Press.
Oerter, Robert: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin
(Plume) 2006.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the
Physical World. Oxford University Press, NY
Politzer, H. D.. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
Resnick, Robert: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John
Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Stewart, Ian. "Why Beauty is Truth". 2007, Basic Books
Trefil, James: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier)
1983.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x
pp.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.
http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 16 of 17

Light and Matter

8/17/18, 11:23 AM

Links:
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

http://www.johnagowan.org/light.html

Page 17 of 17

