Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
(revised March, 2012)
(see home page index page for a synopsis of the system of spacetime)
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
(see also: "The Particle Table"; "The Intrinsic Motions of Matter";
and "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs"; and "The Strong
Force: Two Expressions ".)
The Charges of Matter are the Symmetry Debts of Light
Abstract
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory, as presented in
these pages, can be briefly sketched as follows:
"Noether's Theorem" states that in a continuous multicomponent field such as the electromagnetic field (or the
metric field of spacetime), where one finds a symmetry
one finds an associated conservation law, and vice versa.
In matter, light's symmetries are conserved by charge and
spin; in spacetime, by inertial and gravitational forces.
Light's raw energy is conserved as mass and momentum;
light's intrinsic motion or spatial entropy drive is
conserved as time and gravitation.
All forms of energy, including the conservation/entropy
domain of spacetime, originate as light. During the "Big
Bang", the asymmetric interaction of primordial, high
1 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

energy light with the metric structure of spacetime (and
the unified action of the four forces of physics) produces
matter; matter carries charges which are the symmetry
(and entropy) debts of the light which created it. Charge
invariance is therefore an important corollary of charge
and symmetry conservation, maintained in our temporal
(gravitational) metric of relative motion by "local gauge
symmetry currents" (compensating components of the
field vectors, such as magnetism and time). The
invariance of "velocity c", the "Interval", and causality
are likewise important corollaries of energy conservation
(the "Lorentz Invariance" of Special and General
Relativity). Charges produce forces which act to return
the material system to its original symmetric energy state
(light), paying (partially or completely) matter's
symmetry/entropy debt. Repayment of matter's
symmetry debt is exampled by: 1) spontaneous
exothermic chemical reactions and matter-antimatter
annihilation; 2) radioactivity and proton decay; 3) the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars and Hawking's
"quantum radiance" of black holes. Identifying the
broken symmetries of light associated with the charges
and forces of physics (including gravity) is the first step
toward a conceptual unification. The charges of matter
are the symmetry debts of light.
Table of Contents:
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II,
III, IV
The "Higgs" Boson and the Evolutionary Eras of the
Cosmos
The Particle Table
Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two
2 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

ExpressionsAbstract
Introduction: Matter
Particles
Quarks, Leptons, and Leptoquarks
The Strong Force
The Weak Force
Links

Introduction: Matter
Matter originates through the asymmetric interaction of very high
energy light with the metric framework of spacetime (and with
the combined action of the four forces of physics); bound
electromagnetic energy is a mixture of free electromagnetic
energy and dimensional structure. It is thought that the "Higgs"
scalar boson is responsible for endowing the weak force IVBs
(Intermediate Vector Bosons) with mass, and through the IVBs,
also regulating the mass of elementary particles of matter (see
below, and: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs:
Material Effects").
Light is 2-dimensional while matter is at least 4-dimensional; this
dimensional difference is reflected in the differing inertial status
of light vs matter - for example, the intrinsic motion of light in
space vs the intrinsic motion of matter's time dimension.
Massless light is non-local, atemporal, acausal, and does not
produce a gravitational field. Massive matter is local, temporal,
causal, and produces a gravitational field. Matter's gravitational
field creates matter's time dimension. Matter has intrinsic motion
in time, whereas light's "clock" is stopped. Conversely, light has
intrinsic motion in space, whereas matter has none.
There are two forms of bound energy: matter and antimatter. The
two are identical except that their charge and spin-handedness
3 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

(parity) are reversed. Light has neither charge nor handedness of
its own, being a perfectly symmetric energy form in every
respect. Hence when light creates particles it can only create
particle-antiparticle pairs whose charges sum to zero, since light
begins with none. (Light has spin = 1, so it typically creates
particle-antiparticle pairs each with spin 1/2 (fermions) but with
opposite handedness). Matter and antimatter powerfully attract
each other across space by their opposite electric charges,
annihilating one another on contact, thus recreating and
conserving the energetic symmetry of the light which originally
produced them. Our Universe as currently composed consists
exclusively of matter, but "in the beginning" it was equal parts
matter and antimatter. These equal parts annihilated each other,
leaving nevertheless a tiny residue (approximately one part per
ten billion) of matter which comprises the galaxies of the current
Universe. (The excess of matter is thought to arise from the
asymmetric weak force decays of electrically neutral
"leptoquarks" - matter and antimatter are apparently not precise
opposites (not exactly symmetric) in their interactions with the
weak force.)
The term "mass" refers to the quantity of bound energy contained
in matter, of which matter's inertial resistance to acceleration (or
its gravitational field) is an exact measure. Bound energy is any
discrete energy form which does not move freely in space with
intrinsic motion c, whose location in spacetime can be specified
(whose "Interval" is greater than zero), and which has a time
dimension and produces a gravitational field. The term "matter"
refers to a specific information characteristic of energy which is
more unique than simple quantity: the charge-parity composition
which distinguishes matter from antimatter. In the absence of
charge and spin, "mass" is indistinguishable from "anti-mass",
just as the photon is its own antiparticle, and there is no
distinction between energy and "anti-energy". (However, there is
"negative energy", of which gravitational energy is the primary
example.)
4 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

From the perspective of the "Anthropic Principle" (the laws of
the Universe must allow the existence of our life form or its
equivalent), the role or "reason for being" (rationale) of atomic
matter, bound energy, or mass is (at least) fourfold:
1) To provide negative gravitational energy, which exactly
balances the positive energy of the "Big Bang", enabling the
creation of the material Universe from zero net energy, perhaps
as a type of quantum-mechanical fluctuation in a primordial
high-tension ("false vacuum") non-dimensional energy field
("inflation" - the "least energy" pathway of Cosmic Creation) (?);
2) To provide a means of compacting energy (including the
momentum of mass) in the very early, very small Universe,
thereby facilitating the birth of the Cosmos;
3) To provide a carrier and a mechanism for transforming light's
immaterial and atemporal energy and symmetry into a material
and temporal form of information and symmetry (conserved
charges), such that the bound energy of matter can return to free
energy even in the absence of antimatter, conserving the energy
and symmetry of the light which created it. The elaboration of
information systems (including biological systems) is a
consequence of matter's search for antimatter and its elemental
"memory" (in the form of conserved charges) of the original
unity, connectivity, and symmetry of free energy;
4) To escape the vitiating entropy drive of free energy (intrinsic
motion c), transforming some of the free energy of the Universe
into bound energy, whose entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of
time) is of a different character and is insignificant by
comparison to c in its destructive effect upon the capacity of
bound energy to produce "work". This preserves at least some of
the energy of the Universe so that it can be made slowly available
(for example, in stars) to do the patient work of evolution, and so
allow the Universe to awaken to itself. (See: "Proton Decay and
the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
Matter and its information content are products of the interaction
of a symmetric with an asymmetric field - the asymmetric field is
5 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

embedded from the beginning within the symmetric field as a
hidden, latent, or implicit characteristic. With respect to the
production of matter: space, light, and the gluons are
fundamental symmetric fields, while time, gravity, and the IVBs
(Intermediate Vector Bosons) are embedded asymmetric fields.
The asymmetric character of the leptonic field manifests only at
high energy through the reactions of the weak force IVBs (still
seen today in the decays of neutral kaons via the "W" IVB, and
as hypothesized during the "Big Bang" in the decays of neutral
leptoquarks via the "X" IVB). (See: "The Origin of Matter and
Information". See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force
IVBs" for a further discussion of the full energy spectrum of the
weak force.)
The System of Matter: Particles
(See: "The Particle Table")
Matter consists of three interrelated classes of particles: 1) the
hadrons, or particles containing quarks (composite particles:
baryons and mesons); 2) the leptons, or elementary particles
(electrons and their heavier kin, and the (almost?) massless
neutrinos); 3) the bosons, or field vectors of the charges and
forces: the gluons of the strong force; the Intermediate Vector
Bosons (IVBs) of the weak force; the photon of the
electromagnetic force; and the graviton of the gravitational force.
The first two particle classes (the constituents of atomic matter)
are known as "fermions", and each class differs in the charges
they carry. Hadrons carry color, electric, and flavor charge;
massive leptons carry electric and number charge; neutrinos carry
only number charge (I often refer to number charge as "identity"
charge). All fermions also carry 1/2 integer spin; fermions obey
the "Pauli Exclusion Principle", repelling one another. Bosons
have whole integer spins, do not repel each other, and can freely
superimpose their energies with others of their own kind.
The combination of three particle classes with the four forces of
6 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

physics is a primary expression of a ubiquitous 4x3 fractal
algorithm which evidently organizes the material Cosmos.
Another example is found in the three families of 4 elementary
particles (see below). It is also expressed as 4 conservation laws
connected in triplets, and in other similar formulations involving
dimensions, forces, particles, laws, etc. It seems very likely this
organizational motif is related to the 3 and 4 dimensional
structure of space and spacetime - the structural metric of
spacetime is reflected in the structural metric of particles and in
the particles themselves: particles are composed of the bound
energy of light and reflect the structure of spacetime. This
generalized 4x3 system expression apparently originates as the
simplest system of sufficient complexity to break the symmetry of
the primordial particle-antiparticle pairs and so materialize the
world. See: "The Fractal Organization of Nature", and "The
Information Pathway".
There are three energy levels or "families" of quarks, each level
consisting of two quark species, or "flavors": up, down (u, d);
charm, strange (c, s); and top, bottom (t, b). (Quarks carry partial
or fractional charges, which combine in permanently confined
combinations to produce the whole quantum unit charges of the
composite baryons and mesons.) There are similarly three energy
levels or families of leptons, also in pairs: the electron and
electron neutrino; muon and muon neutrino; and the tau and tau
neutrino. (Leptons carry whole quantum units of elementary
electric and "number" ("Identity") charge). There is currently no
explanation for the existence of these 3 energy levels or
"families" of paired particles, although it is obvious the heavier
families would be useful for storing energy in the extreme
density of the early Universe. It is possible they are related
through some principle of structural resonance to the 3 spatial
dimensions. Ordinary matter, even in the hottest stars, is
composed exclusively of the lowest energy level or ground state
quark flavors (the proton quark composition is uud, the neutron
ddu). It has been suggested that the three energy levels of
7 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

particles are necessary to produce the primordial asymmetry in
the matter-antimatter annihilations of the "Big Bang". (For
example, with three families of quarks rather than one, there are
many more ways to form electrically neutral leptoquarks and
baryons, all of which would be susceptible to asymmetric weak
force decays. See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
Quarks, leptons, and Leptoquarks
Quarks are the mass carriers (in "hadrons" as baryons and
mesons). Baryons consist of three quarks; mesons consist of a
quark-antiquark pair. Baryons are the primary mass field because
only composite particles can assume the electric charge-neutral
configuration (as in neutrons) necessary to the primordial
asymmetric reaction producing the cosmic residue of matter (via
the presumed asymmetric weak force decay of electrically neutral
"leptoquarks").
Leptons and mesons are alternative charge carriers, both for the
quark (baryon) system and for themselves. Massive leptons (the
electron and its kin) carry electric charge; the electron neutrino
and its kin carry the explicit form of "identity" or "number"
charge; mesons carry quark flavor, color, spin, and electric charge
(partial or fractional charges). Alternative charge carriers permit
charge conservation but avoid the annihilation reactions of
antimatter; the lepton and meson fields are therefore essential to
the expression of the quark field through the baryons, beginning
with the leptoquark and its neutrino. Only mesons can carry
quark "flavor" and color (or other fractional charges), providing
antiquark annihilators which perform quark flavor
transformations for the decays of heavy baryons, including
proton-neutron transformations ("beta decay" and its inverse).
See: "The "W" Particle and the Weak Force Mechanism" and
"The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge".
Leptons and hadrons are presumably related through the
8 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

(hypothetical) leptoquark, which is a heavy, "fractured" lepton,
whose internal structure allows it to assume both a color neutral
and an electrically neutral configuration (as in a colorless
neutron). During the "Big Bang", this electrical neutrality
provided enough time for individual leptoquarks to undergo
asymmetric weak force decays rather than paired, symmetric
electromagnetic annihilations with their antimatter partners. The
slight asymmetry - of unknown origin but consisting of about one
part in ten billion - in these electrically neutral weak force decays
was nevertheless sufficient to produce the matter residue that
comprises our Universe.
The leptoquark is the heaviest member of the leptonic elementary
particle series. The leptoquark is essentially a heavy lepton which
is fractured into 3 parts (quarks) by the force of the Big Bang,
and must forever after remain as a "virtual" elementary particle
with whole charge units maintained by the strong force - the
confining color charges of its internal "gluon" field (see below).
The leptoquark is the "ancestor particle", the common
evolutionary origin of the leptons and hadrons, which is why
those particle classes carry exactly the same electrical charges
and so readily interact with each other. Just as quarks apparently
originate from primordially divided leptons, so the gluon field
seems to have originated in the same interaction from "split"
photons. See: "The Origin of Matter and Information" and: "The
Leptoquark Diagram".
Strong Force Gluons
(See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs"; See
also: "The Strong Force: Two Expressions".)
The quarks of baryons and mesons are held together by a "gluon"
field which functions to confine the quarks to whole quantum unit
charge configurations. Quarks carry "color" charges, the charge
of the strong force, in three "colors": red, green, yellow (not
actual colors, only terms of convenience; some authors cite
9 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

"blue" rather than "yellow"). Gluons are the field vectors or force
carriers, the bosons of the strong force. Gluons are composed of
paired color-anticolor charges in all combinations, are massless,
move at velocity c, and have been compared to "sticky light"
(unlike photons, gluons attract each other). There are only 8
active gluon pairs, as the charge combination "green-antigreen" is
doubly neutral, and hence nonfunctional. If sufficiently
compressed (by the dense metric of the "X" IVB, the "Big Bang",
or black holes), the gluon field will sum to zero color and
self-annihilate in the limit of "asymptotic freedom" (since it is
composed of all possible color-anticolor charge pairs), allowing
"proton decay" to proceed like the decay of a heavy lepton, with
the emission of a leptoquark neutrino. (See: "The Half-Life of
Proton Decay and the Heat Death of the Cosmos".)
The strong force has two structural levels of expression, quite
different, one within the individual baryon (mediated by a gluon
exchange field), and one between the individual baryons of a
compound atomic nucleus (mediated by a meson exchange field).
While the internal baryon level of the strong force consists of an
interaction among three quarks carrying 3 "color" charges ("red,
green, yellow") exchanging a color-carrying gluon field, the
strong force at the compound nuclear level consists of an
interaction between two or more baryons carrying 2 quark
"flavor" charges ("up, down"), exchanging a flavor-carrying
meson field. The gluon field is composed of virtual coloranticolor charges, and the meson field is composed of virtual
flavor-antiflavor charges, so the analogy is complete, except that
the gluon field is massless while the meson field is massive. The
massless gluon field nevertheless produces a short-range force
because unlike photons, the gluons attract each other ("sticky
light"). (See also: "The Short-Range or Particle Forces".)
Two particle charges unique to the quarks, "flavor" and "color",
each produce a version of the strong force, expressed at different
structural levels of the nuclear material. The color version of the
10 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

strong force is expressed within the baryon, producing absolute
quark confinement (because symmetry and charge conservation is
at risk), while the flavor version of the strong force is expressed
between baryons in a compound atomic nucleus, producing a
very powerful (but not absolute) binding of baryons within the
nuclear boundary (because only a "least bound energy" state is at
risk). Both the Yukawa meson exchange field and the Gell-Mann
gluon exchange field form "local gauge symmetry currents". The
meson field produces the so-called "isospin" or "isotropic spin"
symmetry of the "nucleons": protons and neutrons bound
together in a sort of hybrid state in compound atomic nuclei,
irrespective of their differing "flavor" charges. The gluon field
produces the permanent confinement of quarks in massive
particles bearing whole-quantum charge units: baryons. (See:
"Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions".)
Weak Force IVBs (W, X, Y)
(See: "Section XVIII: The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force
IVBs".)
The role of the "W" IVBs is to effect transformations of identity
among (single) elementary particles (leptons) and of (single)
quark flavors among the baryons. The role of the associated
Higgs boson is to scale or gauge the mass of the IVBs to an
appropriate level, such that they reproduce the original
electroweak force unification symmetric energy state of the "Big
Bang", which first created and transformed these elementary
particles. Transformations are accomplished by combining real
particles with appropriate particle-antiparticle pairs drawn from
the virtual particle "sea" (the quantum energy fluctuations of the
Heisenberg-Dirac vacuum). The "W" forms a bridge between real
particles and the virtual particle "sea", making all the charges of
the "sea" available to catalyze real particle transformations. (See:
"The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism".)
The most significant feature of the massive Higgs electroweak
11 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

scalar and weak force IVBs is that they recreate the original
conditions of the energy-dense primordial metric in which
particles were created and transformed during the early micromoments of the "Big Bang". This recapitulation ensures that the
original and invariant values of charge, mass, and energy are
handed on to the next generation in the charge-transfer chain. The
IVB mass not only provides a "safe house" where charge and
energy transfers can take place, it simultaneously ensures that the
appropriate alternative charge carriers are present, and that the
charges and masses of elementary particles are always created
from one and the same original, invariant mold.
There is a crucial difference between the creation of particles via
particle-antiparticle formation (as by the electromagnetic or
strong forces), and the weak force transformation of existing
single particles to other elementary forms. The weak force only
produces, and is the only force which can produce, "singlet"
(unpaired) elementary particles. In the case of particleantiparticle pair creation, there can be no question of the
suitability of the partner for a subsequent annihilation reaction
which will conserve symmetry. Universal constants of the
spacetime metric and electromagnetism (such as c, h, G, e, etc.)
gauge or regulate the invariant mass and charge of particleantiparticle pairs. However, in the case of the transformation of
an existing single elementary particle to another form, alternative
charge carriers must be used, since actual antiparticles can only
produce annihilations. But how is the weak force to guarantee
that the alternative charge carriers - which may be a meson, a
neutrino, or a massive lepton - will have the correct charge in
kind and magnitude to conserve symmetry at some future date in
some future reaction, or with an unknown partner which is not its
antiparticle? This is why the "W" IVB must also use particleantiparticle pairs created from the global spacetime "vacuum" to
produce transformations of elementary particles (see: "The 'W'
IVB as a Bridge Between 2-D and 4-D Reality").

12 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

As an additional measure of safety, and to activate the
transformation mechanism of the IVBs, the weak force returns
(via the Higgs mass scalar) to the original conditions in which
these particles were created, much as we return and refer to the
Bureau of Standards when we need to re-calibrate our
instruments. The necessity for charge invariance in the service of
symmetry conservation therefore offers a plausible explanation
for the otherwise enigmatic large mass of the weak force IVBs
and their associated Higgs boson. The Higgs and IVB mass
serves to recreate the original environmental conditions - metric
and energetic, particle and charge - in which the reactions they
now mediate took place, ensuring charge invariance and hence
symmetry conservation regardless of the type of alternative
charge carrier that may be required, or when or where new
elementary particles may be created. (See: Global-Local Gauge
Symmetries of the Weak Force.)
In these reactions the elementary leptonic field functions as a
permanent alternative carrier for the conserved electric and
"identity" (number) charges (electrons, electron neutrinos, and
their heavier kin), while mesons function as transitory carriers of
partial (fractional) quark flavor and electric charges (charged and
neutral pions, and their heavier kin). The "Z" IVB mediates
certain neutral (uncharged) weak force reactions (usually
involving neutrinos) in which two particles simply swap
identities or scatter ("bounce") off each other. This is why
neutrinos almost never interact - their only pathway of interaction
(other than gravity) with another particle is via the massive and
quantized weak force mechanism, even in the case of a simple
"bounce". (See: "Introduction to the Weak Force".)
The large IVB mass corresponds to a primordial, force
unification symmetric energy state (of which there are probably
three, each with an associated and distinct scalar Higgs boson),
and along with the virtual particle-antiparticle pairs of alternative
charge carriers enlisted from the Heisenberg-Dirac virtual
13 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

vacuum "zoo", form a local gauge symmetry "current" which
maintains and protects the invariance of elementary particle mass
and charge over the eons of cosmic history and entropy. The
IVBs represent primordial, force unification symmetric energy
states, and they are so energy dense that they appear to us today
as quantized massive particles. Single elementary particles
created by the weak force today must be the same in all respects
as those created eons ago during the "Big Bang". Hence the
necessity for the elaborate, massive, and quantized mechanism of
the weak force IVBs and Higgs boson. (See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade.)
The primordial role of the (hypothetical) "X" IVB (the "big
brother" of the "W" IVB, gauged by the GUT Higgs boson) is to
compress quarks into the leptoquark configuration - vanishing the
color charge of the gluon field (in the limit of "asymptotic
freedom") - which allows a colorless and electrically neutral
leptoquark to decay via the alternative charge carriers of the
elementary leptonic field. The very massive X is also involved in
proton decay, where electrical neutrality is not required. The W,
Z, and X are all "metric" particles derived from (or analogous to)
the dense metric of the very early Cosmos; they are "metric
catalysts" which produce reactions through dimensional
compression. The unusually large masses of the W, Z, and X are
due to the enormous binding energy associated with the
formation, configuration, and maintenance of their compressed
dimensional structure. (Recall that almost all of the mass of a
baryon is also due to binding energy, not to the actual mass of the
quarks themselves.) It is this dimensional structure (which is
possibly also unusual in terms of its topology, geometric
configuration, or number of dimensions) which relates the IVBs
to some of the multidimensional particle structures currently
under investigation by "String" theory. The IVBs may be
unrecognized "strings", or their analogs.
An Heuristic Analogy Borrowed from Biology
14 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

Another way to think of the transformation mechanism
of the weak force IVBs is to employ an analogy from the
taxonomic hierarchy of biology. If we think of the
various quarks and leptons as individually distinct
"species", then the IVBs may be thought of as
representing or creating a "genus" level of particle
identity - a higher symmetric energy state in which the
electromagnetic and weak forces are joined into the
"electroweak" unified-force symmetric energy state. In
this E/W unified state the individual quark species are
subsumed into a "generic" level of identity ("hadrons"),
where all quark species are equivalent and any one can
replace any other. The same holds true for electrons,
electron neutrinos, and their heavier kin ("leptons"), but
at the electroweak energy level the quark "genus" and the
lepton "genus" remain distinct. The next higher
force-unity symmetric energy state is the GUT ("Grand
Unified Theory") in which the quark and lepton genera
are joined at a "family" level of merged identity. This
GUT level is represented by the "X" IVB, which
mediates "proton decay" and the interchange of lepton
and quark species identities (in "leptoquarks"). At the
GUT symmetry level, however, the "fermion" and
"boson" families remain distinct. (Bosons are the force
carriers or field vectors of the forces - photons, gluons,
gravitons, IVBs.) The final force-unity symmetric energy
state is represented by the "Y" IVBs and the "TOE"
("Theory of Everything") or Planck energy level. This
corresponds to the joining of the fermion and boson
"families" into the "order" of electromagnetic energy
forms. At this final energy level, bound and free forms of
electromagnetic energy are exchanged, mass is created,
and the structure of the electromagnetic metric is carried
into particles. At each force-unity level, transformations
take place naturally because at that energy level the
distinctions between particles either no longer exist or
15 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/matter.html

are insignificant. While the IVBs represent the actual
transformation mechanism, Higgs bosons (one at each
level) select and scale the energy state appropriate to a
given transformation. (See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade".)
In addition to the operation of the IVBs and the alternative charge
carriers of the meson and elementary leptonic field, there must be
a fundamental asymmetry in the rate of decay of electrically
neutral leptoquarks vs anti-leptoquarks to produce a residue of
matter during the Big Bang. The source of this fundamental
temporal asymmetry is not understood, but without it the
Universe of matter cannot manifest, as it simply self-destructs
through completely symmetric matter-antimatter annihilations.
Matter is only as complex as is necessary to break the primordial
symmetry of the particle-antiparticle pairs during the Big Bang no more; but even that level of minimal sufficient complexity
produces beings like ourselves, over evolutionary time.
Note: The leptoquark, its neutrino, and the X particle are
hypothetical (predicted). I have had to include them to join the
leptons and quarks, and to make sense of the other standardly
recognized parts of the "System of Matter", which are not
hypothetical, but nevertheless lack a unifying theory regarding
their common origin. (See: "The Particle Table".)
Links:
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

16 of 16

8/13/18, 9:27 PM

