The "Hourglass" or "Grail" Diagrams
(revised Sept., 2010)
home page
John A. Gowan
Abstract
A General Systems model in the form of an hourglass is used to illustrate the relationships among the four
forces of physics, space, time, and nuclear and elementary particles.
It was not until the fall of 1997 that the "matrix" or 4x4 grid model of the field theory evolved to a
diagrammatic representation. The 4x4 grid had endured in various interpretations for approximately 16
years. I had discovered in my attempts to present the grid to groups at the CPSI meetings and elsewhere,
that the matrix form was difficult to lecture from and difficult for the audience to grasp. I needed a more
intuitive, diagrammatic way of presenting a memorable model which could be taken in at a single glance,
essentially a mandala, and I searched for at least a year before I discovered what I was looking for in the
"Grail" or "Hourglass" models.
The "Grail" model was discovered as a variation of the Christian cross, in the form of the diagonals of a
square. The hourglass shape suggested immediately the transformation of a physical variable as it passed
through a massive center. I was of course well aware of the influence of massive centers in nature both from
my own work with the hierarchy and from reading Teilhard de Chardin's great book "The Phenomenon of
Man". The transformations of light to time, and space to gravity (or equivalently, space to time and light to
gravity), through a center of mass, mapped immediately and perfectly. These were the long-range,
"spacetime" forces. A second hourglass would be necessary to map the short-range "particle" forces, the
strong and weak forces. These also mapped immediately as transformations of quarks and leptons through a
massive center (composed of IVBs and Leptoquarks), to produce the compound nuclei and electron shells
of atoms. Together, the spacetime and particle hourglass diagrams allow the physical forces to be mapped as
a system of four intersecting triangles - a further example of the universal 4x3 General System algorithm at
work, both in Nature and our minds.
In the years following, I discovered the "Flowergrail" form, 2-dimensional intersecting diagrams: the two
hourglass or Grail figures (long- and short-range forces) are to be joined at their centers and displayed at
right angles to each other, as the dimensionality of one is spatial and the other temporal. Finally, my wife
took pity on me and showed me how the figures should actually be represented as a 3-dimensional
hourglass or Grail shape. Rotating this figure actually produces the 3-dimensional hourglass or "Grail"
goblet.
The Spacetime Hourglass
One of the chief advantages of the diagrammatic representation of the field theory is that the relationships
among the forces are visually indicated by the geometry, configuration, and connecting lines of the diagram.
The Hourglass diagrams are a General Systems analog of the famous Feynman diagrams. Whereas the
Feynman diagrams are of specific particle interactions, the Hourglass diagrams are a generalized
representation of interactions among the 4 forces of physics. In the Spacetime Hourglass, for example, in the
upper triangle the vertices representing light and space are connected by a line, corresponding in the theory
to the creation of space by the intrinsic motion of light. In turn, both light and space are connected to the
central point, or "waist" of the hourglass, where we find mass and electric charge together. In the theory,
mass (representing raw energy conservation) and charge (representing symmetry conservation) are the two
central aspects of energy conservation in the conversion of light and space (free electromagnetic energy) to
matter (bound electromagnetic energy). The third conservation requirement is entropy, satisfied in the lower

half of the hourglass diagram via time and gravitation. The central massive point transforms the light line
into time, and the space line into gravity (or equivalently, space to time and light to gravity) (see: "The
Conversion of Space to Time"). Time is the implicit entropy drive of free energy (light), and in its explicit
form time becomes bound energy's entropy drive. Time converts from an implicit to an explicit expression
when free energy converts to bound energy. (See: "Gravity Diagram No. 2".) In Einstein's theory, gravity
manifests as the "warpage" of space in the presence of mass, just as the diagram indicates.
Because in our theory time is produced by either the gravitational annihilation of space or the quantum
mechanical "switch" from implicit to explicit time (as free energy is converted to bound energy), the
Hourglass Model will accommodate either the creation of time from space or from light. The same
ambiguity applies to the creation of gravity, since we view gravity as the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time. If time can be produced by either transformation, so too can gravity, since gravity
follows the production of time in the quantum mechanical transformation of the intrinsic motion of light to
the intrinsic motion of time, and gravity and time mutually induce each other in the creation of time via the
annihilation of space.
In our interpretation, gravity conserves the intrinsic motion (the spatial entropy drive) of light, and converts
it to the intrinsic motion of time, the historical entropy drive of matter. Conversely, gravity is the spatial
consequence of time's intrinsic motion - hence the bottom line connecting gravity and time. The intrinsic
motions of time and gravity induce each other. In a similar manner, light and space also interact in the upper
triangle: light creates space, but the spatial metric regulates light's motion. At the central point, the
interaction of the energy of light with the structure of space creates matter. Hence the diagram is absolutely
faithful to every aspect of the field theory, at least with respect to the spacetime long-range force pair. And
we see these relationships at a glance, we don't have to repeatedly reason them out, once they are
understood.
The jump from 2 to 4 dimensions, the conversion of light to mass, is usually prevented by symmetryconserving electric charge via matter-antimatter annihilations. Electric charge, universally attached to
matter, is the "angel with the flaming sword" guarding the gateway between manifestation (real particles)
and "heaven" (virtual particles) (the "waist" of the spacetime hourglass). When symmetry-breaking occurs
during the Big Bang (via the weak force), then the asymmetric 4-dimensional lower halves of the spacetime
and particle diagrams come into being. (See: "Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics"; and "A Description
of Gravitation".)
The Particle Hourglass
The "Particle Grail", or the short-range force pair "hourglass" diagram, is also a faithful a representation of
our understanding of the relationship between the strong and weak forces. This second "Hourglass" diagram
is actually an "exploded" or expanded view of the mass center of the spacetime hourglass diagram, which
can readily be imagined (or drawn) with a tiny hourglass at its center (a fractal iteration), representing the
structural content or nested fractal geometry of the relationship between and among the spacetime metric,
particles, and forces created in the nuclear forge of the Big Bang.
We know less about the particles in the material half of the Hourglass diagrams than we do about the forces
in the spacetime half. The spacetime forces of light and gravitation are far more familiar to us than are the
strong and weak forces of the atomic nucleus and elementary particle transformations. Indeed, we can
deduce a great deal about the fundamental principles controlling the long-range forces by simple intuition
and reasoning (based upon the existing groundwork laid by Einstein and Noether, of course). Similar tactics
are either impossible or much less successful in the case of the particle forces, for which we seem to have
no evolved intuitive or rational familiarity. These forces are governed by the laws of quantum mechanics,
which even physicists find utterly bizarre. The great Richard Feynman remarked that no one understood

quantum mechanics, and he was referring to professional physicists, not laymen. To properly understand the
strong and weak forces - if understand is the right word - we must rely on experiment and highly abstract,
obtuse mathematical representations. Since I don't understand these myself, I won't be burdening the reader
with them either.
With these caveats retained firmly in mind, however, the method of General Systems does offer us some
hope of at least constructing a plausible model of these complex forces. For example, we posit that the
particle diagram must be in the same form as the spacetime diagram and that we know enough general
information about this force pair to see that this is very likely true. This at least gives us a framework to
work on, a way to organize the data as it is reported, a skeleton of structure which we can flesh out with
data as the big accelerators are energized, the satellites are launched, and the "big science" reports are
published. As we saw with the matrix, it is immensely helpful to have some sort of structure or organizing
principle to keep the critical issue in front of us in the face of a flood of information and data, almost all of
which is tangential or superfluous to the central question concerning the structural organization of the
Cosmos and the unified field theory.
In the case of the particle diagram, we noticed at once that the bottom two vertices, the compound atomic
nucleus and the electron shell, are a completely natural and obvious pair - these are composites of leptons
and the hadrons, the two major classes of particles, which again form a natural pair as inputs at the top of
the diagram - the quarks and gluons representing the strong nuclear force of the mass carriers, and the
leptons and neutrinos representing the weak force of alternative charge carriers. The role of c as the
regulator of the spacetime metric at the top of the spacetime hourglass is mirrored by the role of the "Higgs"
boson as the regulator of the particle metric at the top of the particle hourglass. Whereas c determines the
size ratio and scale of the dimensions, the Higgs determines the mass ratio and scale of the particles. The
bottom line connecting the nuclear and leptonic particles represents the "W" IVB of the weak force, the
mediator of radioactive decay, a completely natural and satisfactory assignment. Getting from the inputs at
the top of the diagram to the outputs at the bottom requires the "thruput" of the central symmetry-breaking
dynamic of the massive "X" IVBs and leptoquarks in the extremely dense metric of the early micromoments of the Big Bang.
The line connecting the quarks and leptons at the top of the diagram indicates their intimate relationship we believe the sub-elementary quarks arise from primordial, elementary leptons when the latter are
internally fractured into 3 parts by the action of the "Y" IVB and the intense pressure of the "Big Bang".
Because quarks carry partial (fractional) charges, they can form electrically neutral leptoquarks, which can
live long enough to decay asymmetrically via the "X" IVB of the weak force, producing the mass-carrying
quarks and baryons on the one hand, and the charge-carrying leptons and neutrinos on the other (the lower
lines connecting the hourglass center with the bottom vertices). The particle and spacetime figures are
plausibly connected because particles are originally formed (in the "Big Bang") by the interaction of high
energy light with the structure of the spacetime metric.
We see therefore that this structural analysis yields the same diagram for the two particle forces as we used
for the two spacetime forces. We know what the output of this system is, the atoms of the periodic table,
which have two major components - the nucleus and the electron shell, creating the realms of nuclear
reactions (in the stars), and chemistry (on the planets), respectively. We think we know what the inputs at
the top of the diagram are, the primary ingredients of the strong and weak forces, the quarks and leptons.
We know least about the central symmetry-breaking reaction, because it occurs at such high energy density
we cannot duplicate it. It seems likely we will never be able to duplicate it. Hence this area may always
remain speculative. But General Systems at least allows us to model the overall structural dynamic of the
process, while we wait to fill in the details as they arrive from the experimental frontiers. (See also: "The
Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)

For a more detailed discussion of the particle diagrams see: "The Short-Range or Particle Forces", and:
"Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 1" and: Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field
Theory: Part 2. (See also: "The Particle Table".)
Links:
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part 1: Microphysical Realm
Part 2: Biophysical Realm
Part 3: Astrophysical Realm
Part 4: Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Mode
Part 5: Metaphysical Realm - Rational Mode
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos
Commentary on the Metaphysical Realm (rational mode)
The Human Connection
"The Particle Table"
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
General Systems and Metaphysics
Section VIII: Introduction to General Systems, Complex Systems
Section XI: Religion and Science
Section XII: Man's Role in Nature
Section XIII: The Solar Archetype
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 1
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 2
Synopsis of the "Tetrahedron Model" of the Unified Field Theory
The Tetrahedron Model in the Context of a Complete Conservation Cycle (text)
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical
Realm. A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
Stewart C. Dodd's 4x4 Mathematical General System Matrix
Spiritual and Scientific Principles of the Tetrahedron Cosmic Energy Model
Postscript: Causality, Information, Karma
The Grail and Hourglass Diagrams
A General Systems Analysis of the Creative Process in Nature
Is There Life After Death?
A Rationale for Love in the Cosmos
Human Development and Life Stages General Systems Models
DeBroglie Matter Waves and the Evolution of Consciousness
An Overview of the Astrological System of the Grail Diagrams
Text for the Sun Sign Table (The "Sun Signs" of Astrology: Part One)
Text for the Sun Sign Table (The "Sun Signs" of Astrology: Part Two)
General Systems and Astrology: A Study
Unified Field Theory

Hourglass and "Grail" Diagrams
Diagram of the Spacetime Forces
Diagram of the Particle Forces
The Hourglass Diagrams
Unified Diagram of the Four Forces
The Leptoquark Diagram
The "Hourglass" or "Grail" Diagrams
The Grail and Hourglass Diagrams
3-D Grail diagram: spacetime, particles, physics, astrology
Human Culture as a "Grail" Diagram: Spiritual Section
Human Culture as a "Grail" Diagram: Physical Section
Astrological Hourglass of the Particle Forces
Astrological Hourglass of the Spacetime Forces
Double Hourglass of the Astrological Signs
The Astrological Grail Flower Diagram
home page

