Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 1"
Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 2"
Go to: "Simple Table of the Unified Field Theory, Rational Mode"
Links:
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
SUMMARY OF: "SYMMETRY PRINCIPLES OF THE UNIFIED FIELD THEORY"
JOHN A. GOWAN
(revised May, 2014)
This paper has been translated into French by Vicky Rotarova. Many thanks, Vicky! (see link below)
http://www.piecesdiscount24.fr/edu/?p=8949
Symmetry Conservation and Charge Invariance in the Unified Field Theory ("Tetrahedron Model")
Abstract
Abstract
The Cosmos begins with a (very) high energy form of free electromagnetic energy: light. Light is the purest,
simplest, and most symmetric energy form known (massless, timeless, chargeless). But - evidently there is no
sufficient reason to prevent this - light also exists in the alternative form of symmetric particle-antiparticle
pairs, which usually simply annihilate, reverting to light. Sometimes, however, instead of annihilating, light's
alternative form of symmetric particle-antiparticle pairs is converted (through weak-force symmetrybreaking), into asymmetric single particles of bound electromagnetic energy, producing atomic matter.
Atomic matter is an alternative, bound, massive, and temporally (historically) conserved incarnation of light's
free, massless, spatial (and timeless) form. In matter, light's raw energy is conserved as mass and momentum;
light's symmetry is conserved as charge and spin; light's spatial entropy drive (intrinsic motion) is conserved
as matter's temporal entropy drive (intrinsic motion); light's spatial continuity is conserved as historical
causality. Gravity converts light's spatial entropic domain into matter's temporal entropic domain, and vice
versa (gravity creates time from space and vice versa). Energy Conservation, Symmetry Conservation,
Entropy, and Causality/Information are the four principle conservation parameters of the "Tetrahedron
Model", and constitute the foundations of natural or physical law which underlie and support the Unified
Field Theory of the four physical forces. (See: "The 'Tetrahedron Model' of the Unified Field Theory").
In this paper I explore the connections between of the four physical forces, with special emphasis upon their
symmetry relations under the unifying mantle of Noether's symmetry conservation theorem - which I
paraphrase as: "The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light". The particles of matter bear light's
symmetry debts as charges; these charges produce forces which act to spontaneously return the asymmetric
massive system of matter to its symmetric massless origin as light (including such processes as particleantiparticle annihilations; various astrophysical processes converting bound to free energy (stars, supernovas,
quasars, etc.); Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes, and possibly even "proton decay").
"Information" and the carbon atom provide connecting links between Life and the abiotic universe. "Given"
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 1 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

or "underived" physical constants are presumed to originate in the "Multiverse". The enduring mystery of the
Universe is not in physics but in biology: how do we get from mud to man? From the periodic table to
Beethoven's ninth symphony? From the galaxies to philosophy? In some form, the information must be in the
atoms from the beginning, or it could not be there at the end.

1) Noether's Theorem requires the conservation of light's symmetry no less than light's energy.
2) The charges (and spin) of matter are the symmetry debts of light.
3) Charge/spin conservation is a temporal, material form of symmetry conservation. Charges are
a material translation (representation) of specific symmetry parameters which can be conserved
through time as active, invariant debts awaiting repayment (as by annihilation with antimatter).
4) Maintaining the invariance of, and paying (discharging) light's symmetry debts as held by the
charges of matter, is the role of the field vectors of the four forces of physics.
5) The maintenance of charge invariance (in the service of symmetry conservation) is the key to
understanding the local action of the forces ("local gauge symmetry currents").
Symmetry debts of the four forces, as conserved by their charges, are identified as:
a) Electromagnetic force: electric charge. Matter-only asymmetry - the antimatter
matching half of the cosmos is completely missing. This giant asymmetry, which
characterizes our entire universe, includes a vast dimensional asymmetry: 2-D or 3D symmetric space (in the symmetric light universe) vs 4-D asymmetric spacetime
(time and gravity asymmetry of the matter universe). The left-handed neutrino
asymmetry is another universal asymmetry due to the absence of antimatter.
Opposite electrical charges attract, motivating matter-antimatter annihilation
reactions, hence restoring the material system to its original light symmetry.
b) Gravity: "location" charge. "Non-local" distributional symmetry of light's energy
("free electromagnetic energy") vs local, immobile, undistributed concentrations of
mass energy ("bound electromagnetic energy") (the "Interval" of light is zero, the
"Interval" of mass is positive). The active principle of "location" charge is time, so
the gravitational location charge (Gm) carries both an entropic drive for bound
energy (the intrinsic dimensional motion of time), as well as a symmetry debt (the 4D spacetime coordinate position of mass, including the quantity and density of any
form of bound energy).
c1) Strong force: baryon level, color charge, gluon field. Gluons attract each other.
Whole quantum charge units vs the fractional charges of the quarks (symmetry
conservation via charge conservation, resulting in permanent confinement of the
sub-elementary quarks). Fractional charges threaten the quantum mechanical
mechanism of charge conservation (resulting in "asymptotic freedom" and the
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 2 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

vanishing of color charge in the leptoquark - since the gluon field, which is
composed of color-anticolor charges in all combinations, naturally sums to zero
when sufficiently compressed.)
c2) Strong force: nuclear level, flavor charge, meson field. Least bound energy
solutions to compound nuclear arrangements of protons and neutrons ("nucleons",
"isospin symmetry", Yukawa nuclear binding field - exchange of virtual mesons
between neutrons and protons). Symmetry conservation through principle of "least
bound energy" = "nuclear chemistry" and the nucleosynthesis of heavy elements in
stars and supernovas.
d) Weak force: "identity" ("number") charge (sometimes known as "flavor").
Distinguishable (as to type) elementary leptonic particles vs "anonymous" photons.
Leptonic elementary particles break the "anonymity" symmetry of the photons (all
photons are alike and indistinguishable from one another, a symmetry of
"anonymity"). Neutrinos carry "bare" identity charges, which identify elementary
leptonic particles and their appropriate antimatter annihilation partners, by "flavor"
distinctions and spin - the beginning of the "information" parameter of our cosmos.
Alternative charge carriers (leptons, neutrinos, mesons) are necessary (but not
sufficient) to allow the mass field of the quarks to break the primordial symmetry of
matter-antimatter particle-pairs during the "Big Bang".
Primordial symmetry-breaking probably occurs via the asymmetric weak force
decay of electrically neutral leptoquarks, as mediated by the "X" IVB. Higgs bosons
gauge the mass of weak force IVBs (probably 3 families), which in turn control the
weak force creation, destruction, and transformation of single elementary particles.
IVBs reconstitute the energy density of the primordial force-unity era of the Big
Bang in which these particles were originally created - such as the electroweak era
of the "W", "Z" IVB family. Single elementary particles created today must be
exactly the same as those created in the "Big Bang" - explaining the complex,
massive mechanism of the weak force.
6) The field vectors of the forces act as local gauge symmetry "currents" which transform
globally conserved symmetry parameters of light, space, and absolute motion in flat metrics
("velocity c"), to locally conserved symmetry parameters in relative motion in warped metrics of
mass/matter, history, causality, charge/spin, and information. The photon in its role as the field
vector of electric charge, magnetic forces, and antimatter annihilator is prototypical of this
function. The electromagnetic constant "c" gauges the spacetime metric, causality and the
"Interval", the value of electric charge, and the energetic equivalence between mass and free
energy (hv = mcc).
7) Gravity transforms the global spatial metric of absolute motion and massless light, as gauged
by the electromagnetic constant c, into a local spacetime metric for relative motion and massive
matter, as gauged by the gravitational constant G.
8) Gravity pays the entropy "interest" on matter's symmetry debt, creating time by the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue, decelerating
the cosmic spatial expansion in consequence. Conversely, the gravitational conversion of bound
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 3 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

to free energy (as in the stars, supernovas, quasars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes), pays the "principle" on matter's symmetry debt, discharging all symmetry and entropy
debts, and accelerating the cosmic expansion - as recently observed - by reducing the total mass
and associated gravitational energy of the universe. The expansion of matter's historic domain
(historic spacetime - the conservation domain of matter's causal information "matrix"), is funded
by and replaces the purely spatial expansion of the Cosmos. Black holes are an example of the
total gravitational conversion and complete replacement of space and its pos-entropic
electromagnetic metric by time and the neg-entropic gravitational metric.
9) Time and gravity induce each other endlessly, creating historic spacetime, the conservation
domain of matter's causal information matrix: a gravitational field is the spatial consequence of
the intrinsic motion of time.
10) The radiance of our sun and the stars announces a completed "circuit" of symmetry
conservation. The solar gravitational field is reduced as the sun's mass is converted to light.
When a black hole's mass is completely converted to light via Hawking's "quantum radiance",
the hole's gravitational field likewise vanishes, indicating that its symmetry-conservation role has
finally been fulfilled.
11) Gravitation arises in response to light's (broken) "non-local" distributional symmetry in
space, a symmetry destroyed by the immobile, concentrated, and hence undistributed energy
content of mass, matter, or bound energy generally (matter has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion).
The active principle of gravity's "location" charge is time. Time and gravity identify the 4-D
location, quantity, and density of matter's immobile energy content. The gravitational "location"
charge is unique in that it is an entropic charge, a charge with intrinsic, dimensional motion.
Gravitation creates the time dimension through its ceaseless annihilation of space, extracting a
metrically equivalent temporal residue. In turn, time creates gravity as time's intrinsic motion
drags space into the historic domain. Space self-annihilates at the point-like entrance to the onedimensional and one-way time line, creating another temporal residue, again the metric
equivalent of the annihilated space. The new temporal residue marches off into history, dragging
along more space, which creates more gravity, etc.
12) Gravity creates a local, spacetime metric (gauged by "G"), imposed upon the global, spatial
metric (gauged by "c"), in which the conservation requirements of both free and bound
electromagnetic energy can be satisfied simultaneously. Spacetime becomes the dimensional
entropy/conservation stage upon which a cosmic drama now unfolds, a neg-entropic arena
provided by the energy of gravitation (energy borrowed, in turn, from the entropic expansion of
space). Gravity pays the entropy-interest on the symmetry debt of matter by the creation of time,
funded through the deceleration of cosmic spatial expansion. The question posed to the Cosmos
is this: can the particles, using their conserved symmetry charges, either individually or
collectively, revert to their symmetric wave form (light) in the absence of their antimatter
partners? Is one-half of the information contained in the original particle-antiparticle pair enough
to accomplish this magical transformation? The answer is yes, but only in the additional
dimension of explicit time, and in two modes: a collective process (the gravitational conversion
of bound to free energy in stars and black holes), and an individual process (proton decay). Both
will arrive at the same result, the complete transformation of the particle and bound energy to
light. Meanwhile, as a sort of subplot or "play within the play", an electromagnetic information
pathway develops (life, biology), which attempts to express or reconstitute in material systems
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 4 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

its charge-memory of the symmetry and connective unity of its primordial state. The
development of personal "identity" and the abstract information systems of humans reprise and
recollect our primordial, abiotic, physical origins, in religious, artistic, psychological, intuitive
and rational terms, including even the fractal algorithm of the information pathway. (See: "The
Information Ladder").
Postscript
As for the issue of "intelligent design", the recent concept of the global "Multiverse" in service of the
"Anthropic Principle" offers a completely satisfactory resolution of the problem of the "special balancing" or
"exquisite adjustment" of our Universe's physical constants. According to this view, we naturally find
ourselves inhabiting that special local Universe, of perhaps infinitely many realized possibilities, in which the
physical constants of Nature are so adjusted, by chance alone, as to favor the evolutionary development of
our life form. While this is a completely rational explanation for the peculiar characteristics of our Universe,
it actually says nothing at all regarding the existence of a "First Cause" or "Creator" - neither for nor against;
that issue is simply pushed back to the level of the all-symmetric "Multiverse". Concerning the issue of
evolution, it is simply a biological form of negative entropy driven by Natural Selection, as factual,
mechanical, and impersonal as gravity or chemistry. (See: "Newton and Darwin: the Evolution and
Abundance of Life in the Universe".)
Information
The miracle of Life, the raising of atoms to conscious biological information systems of incredible
complexity and sophistication, appears to be the means by which the Universe becomes self-aware and
experiences itself, including exploring new modes of creativity and new forms of beauty. The meaning of the
biological information pathway that develops through time in the neg-entropic domain of gravitation, the
significance of our human experience and our Universe, are separate topics which I address in other papers
(see: "The Information Pathway"; and: "Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age"); "The Human Condition";
"Is There Life After Death?"). See also my late father's book: "Trance, Art, Creativity" in regard to the
significance and meaning of the human experience.
The physical reason for the existence of "Information" (which exists primordially in the form of charge), is to
provide a lawful pathway for matter back to its original symmetric energy state - a sort of road map to
salvation. This same information becomes, over cosmological time, elaborated into the life forms we know
on planet earth: remarkably, we too have begun to convert matter back to light following the sun's example,
making common cause with the universal drive of the natural forces. So if we blow ourselves to bits, we can
always say we were driven to it by the cosmos itself! Life provides the universe with self-awareness and
experience, multiple new evolutionary pathways, and a fully satisfactory rationale for its existence. Why is
there something rather than nothing? So there may be life! Only a universe capable of supporting some form
of life could justify the enormous expenditure of energy required for its creation.
References
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. M. Dekker, New
York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
de Chardin, Pierre Teilhard: The Phenomenon of Man. French: Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1955; English:
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 5 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

Harper and Row, New York, 1959.
Close, Frank: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212, 1221-8 (Nobel
lecture).
Gowan, J. C. (Sr.) 1975. "Trance, Art, Creativity"
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos. A. A. Knoph, 2004, 569 + xii pp.
Gross, D. J. and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30: 1343.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed
Equations of Quark Theory."
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics 1975, 43
(3), 199-220.
Lederman, Leon with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Lederman, Leon and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Neuenschwander, Dwight E. Emmy Noether's Wonderful Theorem. 2011. The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Oerter, Robert: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin (Plume) 2006.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. Oxford University
Press, NY
Politzer, H. D.. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
Resnick, Robert: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Stewart, Ian. "Why Beauty is Truth". 2007, Basic Books
Trefil, James: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier) 1983.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.

Tetrahedron Model Diagram

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 6 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

4 Forces of Physics --->

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

Table of Forces and Energy States (Simple Table #1)
Electromagnetism
Gravitation
Strong

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Weak
Page 7 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

Below: Comments on the
Energy State Rows:

FORCES

Free Energy, Light:
electromagnetic
radiation; space;
symmetric forms;
virtual particles;
symmetry-breaking;
(reprising the
"Big Bang");
(incurring the debt);
Spatial Energy Forms;
(row 1)

Light: E = hv (Planck);
Space;
Intrinsic Motion c;
Conservation/Entropy
All Charges = 0;
Domain of Light;
Symmetric Energy
Light's "Interval" = 0;
("velocity c" is free
The Spatial Metric;
energy's entropy drive
Metric Symmetry,
and symmetry gauge);
Inertial Symmetry;
Invariance of
Metric Curvature = 0
"velocity c"
("non-local" energy)

Sub-Elementary
Particles
(fractured leptons);
Quarks;
ParticleAntiparticle pairs;
Leptoquarks;
Particle Symmetry

Elementary Particles;
Leptons;
Neutrinos;
ParticleAntiparticle Pairs;
Higgs (Mass Gauge);
Intermediate
Vector Bosons
(IVBs);
Symmetry-Breaking

Bound Energy:
matter; history;
asymmetric forms;
real particles
(consequences of row 1
symmetry breaking);
raw energy
conservation;
(down payment),
"pay now";
Temporal Energy Forms;
(row 2)

Causality;
Time, History;
Mass:
Conservation/Entropy
E = mcc; hv = mcc; Domain of Information;
(Einstein-deBroglie);
Mass Interval > 0;
Matter, Momentum;
Metric Asymmetry;
E
Asymmetric
Time, Gravity;
N
Bound Energy;
("local" energy)
E
Charges > 0;
("intrinsic motion T" is
R
bound energy's
G
entropy drive)
Y

Mass Carriers;
Baryons,
Mesons,
Nucleons;
Atomic Nucleus;
(elements)

Alternative
Charge Carriers;
Leptons,
Neutrinos:
Electron Shell;
(atoms)

Charges:
S
Gravitational Charge:
Partial Charges:
quantized
"Identity" Charge:
T
"Location" Charge;
Color Charge;
symmetry debts
Neutrinos are
A
Electric Charge:
"Location" Asymmetry, (fractional charge
(carried by particles
"Bare"
Identity Charges;
T
Asymmetry:
Temporal Entropy;
asymmetry);
of row 2);
("anonymity"
E Lost Antimatter (the
Spacetime Metric;
"Asymptotic
symmetry (charge)
asymmetry S "Great Asymmetry"):
Time;
Freedom";
conservation;
distinguishable
Magnetism,
Conservation/Entropy
Flavor Charge
(mortgage, credit),
elementary
Quantum Mechanics,
Domain of Free and (least bound energy,
"pay later";
particles);
Charge Invariance
Bound Energy;
Nucleon "isospin");
Temporal Symmetry Forms;
Neutrino Parity;
("G" is the entropy
"Yukawa binding"
Symmetry Carriers;
Asymmetric
conversion gauge)
(mesons)
(row 3)
Weak Force Decay
Force Carriers,
Field Vectors, Bosons:
(produced by charges
of row 3)
(symmetry restoration
via the conversion
of bound to free energy);
(retiring the debt);
Temporal Conservation
Cycles;
(row 4)

Photons;
Exothermic
Chemical Reactions;
Matter-Antimatter
Annihilation Reactions

Gravitons:
Stars,
Supernovas,
Quasars,
Black Holes;
"Quantum Radiance"
Gravitational
Conversion
of Mass to Light

Mesons, Gluons:
Fusion,
Nucleosynthesis;
Proton Decay

Intermediate
Vector Bosons
(IVBs: W, Z, X);
Leptonic Decays,
Fission,
Radioactivity;
Particle and
Proton Decay

John A. Gowan and August T. Jaccaci May, 2014

Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 1"
Go to: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory: Part 2"
Go to: "Simple Table of the Unified Field Theory, Rational Mode"
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 8 of 9

Summary of the Unified Field

8/20/16, 9:04 AM

home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/appendixsum.html

Page 9 of 9

