The Intrinsic Motions of Matter
John A. Gowan
(revised May, 2011)
home page
Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
Noether's Theorem
The Dimensional Intrinsic Motions of Matter
1) Gravitation
1a) Gravity
2) Time
2a) Time - Causality
Abiotic Non-Dimensional Intrinsic Motions of Matter
3) Electromagnetic Force
4) Strong Force
5) Weak Force
6) Nuclear Fusion
7) Chemical Fusion
Biological and Emergent States of Intrinsic Motion in the Information Realm
8) Life
9) Information Drive of the Cosmos
10) Evolution of Higher Cognitive Functions
11) Return of Matter to Light
12) Chardin
The Motions of Space and Time
Links
Abstract
The "intrinsic motions" of matter demonstrate conservation law and cosmic order in nature. The Universe,
and everything in it, is always in some type of motion, whether absolute, relative, intrinsic, entropic, atomic,
orbital, biological, or evolutionary. I distinguish between intrinsic dimensional motions such as time and
gravitation (primordial entropy drives), and other non-dimensional types of intrinsic motion, such as that of
electrons in atomic orbits. Both types of intrinsic motion create entropic domains, whether of space, history,
or information.
Introduction
Intrinsic motions of any kind are expressions of the conservation laws (Energy and Symmetry
conservation) and their corollaries (Entropy and Causality-Information) (see: "The Tetrahedron
Model"). While in the case of free electromagnetic energy, the intrinsic motion of light can be
traced to Entropy and Symmetry conservation in the service of Energy Conservation, the
intrinsic (dimensional) motions of matter (time, gravity) involve in addition a third principle,
Causality-Information, also serving Energy Conservation. Bound energy is asymmetric
information, essentially the matter half of the information contained in light's particleantiparticle form. This information is carried as charge, spin, mass, momentum, identity,
location, quantum numbers, etc., conserved attributes of the energy, entropy, symmetry, and

dimensionality of the light which created the particle-antiparticle pairs. The purpose of the
charge component of this information set is to ensure and facilitate the immediate annihilation
of the particle-antiparticle pairs, conserving and protecting the symmetry of the light which
created them. Although matter is isolated from antimatter during the Big Bang, this symmetryconservation purpose remains unaltered through time, resulting in matter's eternal search for
antimatter, and in the ultimate return of bound energy to light via gravitationally driven
processes such as the conversion of mass to light in stars, quasars, and Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes; or via radioactivity, particle and proton decay.
The development of life and the Information Pathway is a probable outcome of the intersection
of the negentropic gravitational drive and the 4x3 Fractal Algorithm of the material Cosmos.
Not only does life allow the Universe self-awareness, self-knowledge, and self-appreciation,
and a new creative possibility through humanity and the abstraction of information, but the
information pathway also represents a parallel or biotic route for the conversion of bound to
free energy, of which our development of the hydrogen bomb and the pursuit of fusion energy
technology is only the most current and highly evolved of many lesser examples.
Noether's Theorem
In 1918 the German mathematician Emmy Noether published a theorem which has become of pivotal
importance in the attempt to formulate a Unified Field Theory. "Noether's Theorem" states that in a
multicomponent field, such as the metric field of spacetime or the electromagnetic field of light, where one
finds a symmetry, one finds an associated conservation law, and vice versa. In Nature, the conserved
charges (and spin) of particles, and the inertial and gravitational forces of spacetime, are Noether's Theorem
enforced and demonstrated.
Elsewhere in these pages I have made much of the intrinsic motion of light or massless free electromagnetic
energy. Below I consider the various intrinsic motions (dimensional and otherwise) of atomic matter or
massive forms of bound electromagnetic energy.
The Dimensional Intrinsic Motions of Matter
(primordial entropy drives of bound electromagnetic energy)
(Conservation of the symmetric characteristics of light's wave form: light's "non-local" metric and
distributional symmetry - light's spacetime "Interval" = zero. The "location" charge of gravitation and
matter's search for a return pathway to symmetric light: gravity is matter's memory it once was light.)
G, T (gravitation, time): these are the dimensional intrinsic motions of matter, the primordial forms of
matter's historical Entropy drive (as required by the Conservation of Energy and Causality). (See: "A
Description of Gravitation"; see also: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
1) Gravitation: gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time; conversely, time is created
by the gravitational annihilation of space. Time and gravity induce each other endlessly, much as electric
and magnetic fields induce each other. Implicit time (in the form of "frequency") is the hidden spatial
entropy drive of free electromagnetic energy ("intrinsic motion c"); explicit time is the primordial historical
entropy drive of bound electromagnetic energy ("intrinsic motion T"). Time is the common factor between c
and G. The magnitude of "G" (the universal gravitational constant) is determined by the energetic difference
between implicit and explicit time, the energy required to create asymmetric explicit time from symmetric
implicit time (in other words, G represents the energy required to create the "one-way" entropy drive of
matter (the intrinsic motion of time and history) from the "all-way" entropy drive of light (the intrinsic
motion of light and space)). A "graviton" is a quantum unit of time or negative entropy. Gravity is both a
symmetry and an entropy debt of light. The gravitational charge is "location", which specifies the spacetime

symmetry and an entropy debt of light. The gravitational charge is "location", which specifies the spacetime
location of bound energy. Time is the active principle of the "location" charge, a charge with an intrinsic
one-way dimensional motion. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time", and "Gravity Diagram No. 2".)
The negative gravitational energy of matter is borrowed from the expansion of space (that is, borrowed from
the positive spatial entropy drive of light), consequently decelerating the Cosmos. The negative gravitational
energy of matter exactly equals the positive rest mass energy of matter, enabling the creation of bound
energy from zero net energy during the process of symmetry-breaking in the "Creation Event" or "Big
Bang". Even so, matter is created with symmetry debts conserved as charges (Noether's Theorem). The
quality of energy must be conserved no less than its quantity. Gravitation pays the "entropy-interest" on
matter's symmetry debts by converting space to the time dimension in which these debts must be conserved
and eventually repaid. In the historical domain, charge conservation has a significance (for Information and
Causality: "Karma") which goes beyond the immediate annihilation of particle-antiparticle pairs. In the
creation of matter's asymmetric historical domain, the role of the alternative charge carriers (electrons,
neutrinos, mesons) is also crucial. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information"; see also: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
1a) Gravity:
1) Provides the negative energy which balances the positive energy of the "Big Bang" (allowing
creation of the universe from zero net energy);
2) Creates time via the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal
residue (entropy conservation role); this reaction is reversed by the gravitational conversion of bound
to free energy in stars (symmetry conservation role); gravity and time induce each other endlessly in a
self-feeding cycle. The gravitational charge is "location", which specifies the spacetime location of
bound energy. Time is the active principle of the "location" charge.
3) Pays the entropy-"interest" on the symmetry debt of matter by creating a time dimension in which
charge conservation can have an extended functional (historical) significance (and information can
have a causal ("karmic") significance);
4) Pays the entropy-"principle" on matter's symmetry debt (partially) by the conversion of bound to
free energy in stars and quasars and (completely) via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes
(the gravitational force vanishes when matter/mass vanishes);
5) Is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time;
6) Causes the deceleration of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos;
7) Provides a physical (inertial, dimensional) connection between bound energy and the conservation
domain of light and space;
8) Is weak because matter is only tangentially connected to its historical conservation domain (via the
"present moment"), and gravity provides only enough temporal entropy to service this tangential and
ephemeral connection;
9) Causes the accretion and creation of planets, stars, galaxies and creates their orbital motions;
10) Is the abiotic source of negative entropy driving biological evolution;
11) Creates stellar life histories and final states (in conjunction with the weak and strong forces):
supernovas, white dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes, quasars, etc.;
12) Replaces the symmetric spatial metric gauged by "c" with an asymmetric spacetime metric
gauged by "G".
Gravity is matter's memory it once was light.
See: "Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics"; "A Rationale for Gravity"; "The Double Conservation
Role of Gravitation".
2) Time: the intrinsic motion of bound energy's time dimension (which causes the expansion of history) is
derived from the intrinsic motion of free energy (which causes the expansion of space). The entropy drive

of matter (explicit time) is derived from the entropy drive of light (implicit time), a debit which causes the
gravitational deceleration of the spatial expansion of the Cosmos. Similarly, the raw energy content of
matter is derived from the raw energy content of light (hv = mcc), and the charges, spin, inertial and
gravitational state of matter represent conserved debts of light's symmetric energy state (in accordance with
Noether's Theorem). Both light and matter are entropic forms of energy, but the dimensional entropy drive
and conservation domain of matter (the intrinsic motion of time, history) is at "right angles" to matter's
spatial dimensions, whereas light's entropy drive and conservation domain (the intrinsic motion of light,
space) is completely conjoined with light's spatial dimensions. (See: "The Time Train", and: "The Half-life
of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Universe".)
Matter is distinct from its entropy domain (history, historic spacetime - the conservation domain of
information and matter's "causal matrix"), whereas light is identified with its entropic domain (space - the
conservation domain of free energy and light's regulatory metric). Gravitation is a complex dimensional
symmetry debt or energy penalty (involving both Entropy and Symmetry), which matter must pay for this
separation from its entropy/conservation domain (and for which we, as sentient beings, also pay
psychologically). Gravitation creates matter's separate time dimension via the annihilation of space and the
extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue (light's implicit temporal entropy drive is converted to
matter's explicit temporal entropy drive). The separate time dimension created by gravity is necessary to
allow matter to move in time as fast as light moves in space, in other words, the entropy drives of matter and
light are metrically equilibrated by the gravitational extraction/conversion of time from space (or the reverse
- as in the gravitational conversion of mass/time to light/space in stars, quasars, Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes, etc.). Matter cannot move in space as fast as light, but it can do so in metrically
equivalent time, which is the conservation rationale for the gravitational conversion of space to time.
Matter's symmetry debts are quantized as charges which are payable (via matter-antimatter annihilation) in
undiminished magnitude at some indeterminate, contingent, future position in the historical dimension. The
Cosmos is a "buy-now pay-later" charge-conserved 4-dimensional entropic domain operating on the "credit
card" of gravity, which pays the entropy-"interest" on the symmetry debt of matter, creating historic
spacetime, a compound conservation/entropic domain simultaneously accommodating both free and bound
forms of electromagnetic energy. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
2a) Time - Causality:
1) Time is the implicit and explicit entropy drive of both free and bound energy, creating the
dimensions of spacetime;
2) Gravity creates time from space, paying the entropy-interest on matter's symmetry debt (conserved
charges) by decelerating the Cosmos; matter's time dimension or temporal entropy drive is therefore
funded by debiting light's spatial entropy drive;
3) Time is the necessary dimension for keeping and updating the energy accounts of matter in relative
motion;
4) Time is the necessary dimension for contracting and paying the symmetry debts (charges) of
matter;
5) The one-way character of time and gravitation is due to the one-way linkage of Causality;
6) Time is the local gauge symmetry current of "Lorentz Invariance", co-varying with space to
maintain the invariance of velocity c, the "Interval", and causality for matter in relative motion or
gravitational fields - the "warped" spacetime of Special and General Relativity;
7) Time is the necessary dimension for the evolution of the abiotic and biotic Cosmos;
8) The intrinsic motion of time creates history just as the intrinsic motion of light creates space: history
is the analog of space. History (historic spacetime) is the conservation domain of matter's causal
information matrix (see: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe");
9) Gravity is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time; time and gravity induce each
other in an endless cycle;

10) Matter is connected through history; light is connected through space; gravity connects all;
11) Atoms do not age because matter is only tangentially connected to its historic
conservation/entropy domain via the ephemeral "present moment"; this is also the reason why gravity
is weak. Matter's tangential connection to history is necessary to protect bound energy's symmetry
debts (quantized charges) from enervation by matter's entropy drive, and accords massive objects a
certain degree of freedom of motion, and (in our case), freedom of action and intent (see: "The HalfLife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos");
12) Matter is local, temporal, causal, massive, immobile, with intrinsic motion in time, producing a
gravitational field; light is non-local, atemporal, acausal, massless, with intrinsic motion "c", and
when traveling in free space does not produce a gravitational field (hence the conversion of bound to
free energy in astrophysical processes causes, over time, a reduction of the total gravitational energy
in the Cosmos, producing the observational impression of an "accelerating" Universe). See: "The
Time Train".
Abiotic Non-Dimensional Intrinsic Motions of Matter
(Conservation of the symmetric characteristics of light's particle form: light's particle-antiparticle symmetry "particle number" = zero. Matter's search for antimatter: the charges of matter are the symmetry debts of
light. See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".)
The non-dimensional intrinsic motions of matter include, but are not limited to:
3) Electromagnetic Force:
1) Electron shell orbital motion (electrons);
2) Electron spin;
3) Exchange of virtual photons, magnetic and electric fields between all electrically charged
particles.4) Zero-point quantum "jitters" due to Heisenberg uncertainty relation regarding position vs
momentum.
Matter's search for antimatter is carried out via the long-range electromagnetic force. Electrons,
electrons shells, and electrical forces are carriers of charge, energy, and information. Electrons
function as alternative charge carriers for the baryons, allowing charge conservation and balance
without causing antimatter annihilations.
4) Strong Force: (within baryons - gluon exchange - Gell-Mann)
1) Gluons - color field exchange between quarks (at velocity c), resulting in permanent confinement
of quark fractional charges to whole quantum charge units (baryons, mesons);
2) Quark orbital motions (within baryons);
3) Quark spin.
Quarks are chiefly carriers of mass, fractional charges, momentum, and concentrated energy (E = mcc). The
principle of "Asymptotic Freedom" makes possible proton decay. Mesons also function as alternative
fractional charge carriers for quark color, flavor, and charge, in baryon decays and transformations, and as
the field vectors of the "Yukawa strong force", converting protons and neutrons into "nucleons" in
compound atomic nuclei. The fractional charges of quarks are permanently confined to baryons and mesons
by the exchange of gluons, protecting whole quantum units of charge and thereby protecting charge and
symmetry conservation.
5) Strong Force (between baryons - meson exchange - Yukawa)
1) Exchange of mesons betwen protons and neutrons (in compound atomic nuclei - Yukawa strong

force binding "nucleons" in heavy elements)
2) nucleosynthetic pathway, fusion;
3) nucleon orbits and spin;
4) Heavy element building in stars and supernovas - creation of the 92 Periodic Table elements.
5) The nucleosynthetic pathway: determining (in conjunction with gravity) the life cycle and final
states of stars.
6) Weak Force:
1) Single elementary particle creation, destruction, and transformation; particle and proton decay,
radioactivity, fission, the creation of matter in the Big Bang, all mediated by the "Intermediate Vector
Bosons" (IVBs) (see: "The Particle Table");
2) Neutrinos are the "bare" or explicit form of the weak force "identity" charge, which is also carried
in implicit form by the massive leptons (and perhaps by the "leptoquark");
3) The "identity" charge of elementary particles - carrying the potential for existential reality (in 4-D
"real time");
4) Neutrinos have a unique and poorly understood type of intrinsic motion, which causes them to
travel at very nearly (but not quite) velocity c. Neutrinos apparently have such a tiny mass (perhaps
500,000 electron neutrinos equal an electron's mass) that:
a) in any process that produces neutrinos they are ejected with nearly light speed, and simply keep
moving until they interact via the weak force, which is almost never;
b) neutrinos are so light that DeBroglie "matter waves" completely dominate their character, making
neutrinos more wave-like than particle-like;
c) much about these "wavicles" remains a mystery, including their apparently spontaneous
"oscillations" from one type of neutrino to another (quantum mechanical "superpositions").
The weak force IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons) form a bridge between today's 4-D "real"
spacetime world of asymmetric manifest particles, and the primordial 2-D "virtual" vacuum world of
the symmetric unmanifest particle-antiparticle "sea". The vacuum particle-antiparticle "sea" cannot
ordinarily manifest because of symmetry conservation. The weak force IVBs are the symmetrybreaking bridge to manifestation (for single elementary particles) in the "real" asymmetric world of
time - hence their exotic and massive character. (See: "Identity Charge and the Weak Force";
"Introduction to the Weak Force"; "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism"; "The Higgs
Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
7) Chemical Compounding (molecules):
1) electron shell bonding; spin; shared orbitals; virtual photon exchange between charged particles;
magnetic interactions;
2) inorganic and organic molecules, compounds, and crystals.
Biological and Emergent States of Intrinsic Motion in the Information Realm
Dimensional intrinsic motions of light, time, and gravity create the entropic domains of space, history, and
historic spacetime. The non-dimensional intrinsic motions of matter also create a dimensional entropic
domain of Information, both in the abiotic realm of nuclear and chemical information, but especially in the
biotic realm of life and genetics, which seems to be the whole point of the exercise. The universe achieves
self-awareness through this ceaseless intrinsic and evidently purposeful activity which drives toward everhigher states of information. Hence we must name life and the "life force" as the culmination of the
Causality-Information apex of the "Tetrahedron Model", a force or conservation goal of equal importance
with and supported by the conservation of Energy, Symmetry, and Entropy. Humans have carried the

evolution of information into the abstract realms of thought, imagination, language, math, music, art,
science, and technology, including machine language. In the information domain, negative entropy drives
are supplied by gravity and Darwin's Natural Selection, while positive entropy drives are seen in the forms
of genetic mutation, aging, death, decay, and radioactivity. (See: "The Information Pathway".)
8) Life and Evolution (driven by negentropic gravitational energy and the 4x3 Fractal Algorithm of the
material Cosmos). Creation of the information domain of biology by gravity, the nucleosynthetic pathway,
carbon chemistry, DNA, genetics, and evolutionary forces (via Natural Selection).
See: "The Information Pathway", "The Fractal Organization of Nature", "Newton, Darwin, and the Origin
and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos".
1) Reproduction, genetic recombination, mutation, Natural Selection;
2) Identity, self-interested survival drives, mechanisms, and adaptations ("agency)";
3) Higher order intrinsic motions of complex interacting systems (evolution of least-energy and most
efficient ecosystems; symbiosis, mutualisms, etc.).
9) The Self-Awareness Drive of the Biological Cosmos (the search for consciousness via the information
pathway and the fractal algorithm of the Cosmos:
1) Individuality, consciousness, self awareness, intelligence, curiosity;
2) Emergent properties of higher multicellular organisms: drives, motivations, instincts, desires,
emotions (fear, joy, love, hate, etc.).
10) Evolution toward humanity, language, spirituality, and aesthetic appreciation (the reprise or
conservation of Cosmic Connectedness, Unity, Wholeness, and the higher system expressions of Noether's
Theorem of symmetry conservation and the 4x3 Fractal Algorithm) (humans only):
1) Creativity, inspiration, revelation, the Muse, genius, art, the intrinsic motion of the Muse or Spirit;
2) Mythology, religion, occult practices, philosophy;
3) Science, Art, "Truth and Beauty";
4) Evolution of Society and Civilization;
5) Gaia; (world ecosystems or planetary life form).
11) Return of matter to light via all forces - proton decay, gravity, and matter-antimatter annihilations,
including the technological, spiritual, artistic, and intellectual Information Pathway - via fusion energy, fast
spaceships, "Enlightenment", aesthetics, and formulation of the "Unified Field Theory":
1) The dispersal of humans to space, the return to the intrinsic motion of the photon via light-speed
spaceships; this (and the black hole "event horizon") is the ultimate return of atomic matter to the
intrinsic motion of light.
12) Chardin's "Omega Point" of total, universal self-awareness and self-knowledge:
1) "Cosmic Consciousness", or the Cosmos everywhere awakening to itself, to its information
potential, to its potential for experience and connection, and to new creative modalities and
experience. (See: "Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age".)
The Motions of Time and Space
Readers may suppose that the intrinsic motion of space, time, and spacetime referred to in these pages is
simply metaphorical or a mathematical formalism rather than literal motion, but these are actual motions,

usually in the sense or form of entropic expansions or contractions of spacetime. Below I list examples of
(or evidence for) these metrical or spacetime motions (which usually serve some type of entropy function)
that are either familiar or a commonplace of physics.
1) Einstein's "Equivalence Principle": the physical acceleration of an observer through
spacetime is indistinguishable from the action of a gravitational field (gravitation is the actual
accelerated motion of spacetime). The "g" forces of gravity and accelerated motion are
identical (at small scales).
2) Inflation; the inflationary expansion of spacetime during the "Big Bang" (?) (remains
controversial)
3) The cosmic expansion of spacetime (the "Hubble flow" - cosmological red shift) - including
the acceleration and deceleration of the cosmic expansion by gravitation.
4) Entropy - the intrinsic motions of time, light, and gravitation (c, T, G), and the creation of
dimensionality (space, history, historic spacetime); the "infinite velocities" of time and light
(and of gravity or spacetime in black holes).
5) Causality - time; the one-way march of time and the temporal-causal ordering and linkage of
material events ("karma"); the expansion of history and historic spacetime (a rationale for
gravitation). (Historic spacetime is the (abiotic) conservaton domain of information and matter's
"causal matrix". The "genome" is a molecular or biotic conservation domain for information,
lacking most of the one-way temporal component of history).
6) Gravity and the effects of General Relativity - the warpage or "curvature" of spacetime by
gravitational acceleration. The gravitational bending of light rays. All things (including light)
fall with the same velocity in a gravitational field due to the uniform accelerated flow of
spacetime (which is the spatial consequence of time's intrinsic motion into history).
7) Black holes - spacetime moves at velocity c, time stands still in the "event horizon", where g
= c.
8) "Frame dragging" and the distortion of spacetime by rotating black holes or other
gravitational sources. (Recently confirmed. See: Science Vol. 332, 6 May 2011, page 649.)
9) Gravity waves.
Related Papers on the Website
Links
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation (Part 2, Section A)
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
About Gravity
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?

Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
The Intrinsic Motions of Time, Space, and Gravity
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
Traveling Twin Paradox: Covariance of Space and Time
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part 1: Microphysical Realm
Part 2: Biophysical Realm
Part 3: Astrophysical Realm
Part 4: Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Mode
Part 5: Metaphysical Realm - Rational Mode
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos
Commentary on the Metaphysical Realm (rational mode)
The Human Connection
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
References
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. M. Dekker,
New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
de Chardin, Pierre Teilhard: The Phenomenon of Man. French: Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1955;
English: Harper and Row, New York, 1959.
Close, Frank: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212, 1221-8 (Nobel
lecture).
Gowan, J. C. (Sr.) 1975. "Trance, Art, Creativity"
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos. A. A. Knoph, 2004, 569 + xii pp.
Gross, D. J. and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30: 1343.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who
Tamed Equations of Quark Theory."

Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics 1975,
43 (3), 199-220.
Lederman, Leon with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Lederman, Leon and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Oerter, Robert: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin (Plume) 2006.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. Oxford University
Press, NY
Politzer, H. D.. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
Resnick, Robert: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Stewart, Ian. "Why Beauty is Truth". 2007, Basic Books
Trefil, James: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier) 1983.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.
home page

