General Systems Form

12/4/10 6:16 AM

Table of Forces (Columns) and Energy States (Rows) (Simple Table #1)
4 Forces of Physics --->
Electromagnetism
Gravitation
Strong
Weak
Below: Comments on the
Energy State Rows:
Free Energy, Light:
electromagnetic
radiation; space;
symmetric energy;
virtual particles;
symmetry-breaking;
(reprising the
"Big Bang");
(incurring the debt);
Spatial Energy Forms;
(row 1)

FORCES
Light: E = hv (Planck);
Intrinsic Motion "c";
Space;
All Charges = 0;
Created by Light's
Symmetric
Entropy Drive;
Free Energy
Conservation/Entropy
("c" gauges Light's
Domain of Light;
entropy drive
Light's "Interval" = 0;
and "non-local"
The Spatial Metric;
distributional
Gravitational Negative
symmetry);
Energy and Entropy;
Non-local, Acausal,
Total Energy = 0
Atemporal Energy

(virtual)
(virtual)
Composite and
Elementary Particles;
Sub-Elementary
Neutrinos; Leptons;
Particles; "Ylem";
Leptoquarks;
Fractured Leptons;
ParticleQuarks; Gluons;
Antiparticle Pairs;
ParticleHiggs (Mass Gauge);
Antiparticle pairs;
Intermediate
Leptoquarks;
Vector Bosons;
Neutral Particles; Symmetry-Breaking:
Particle Symmetry
"Higgs Cascade";
Total Charge = 0
Real Particles

Bound Energy:
Mass:
Gravitational Creation
Alternative
matter; history;
E = mcc; hv = mcc;
of Time from Space;
Mass Carriers;
Charge Carriers;
asymmetric energy;
(Einstein-deBroglie);
Historic Spacetime;
Quarks,
Leptons,
massive real particles
Matter, Momentum;
Conservation/Entropy
Mesons,
Neutrinos:
(consequences of row 1
Asymmetric
Domain of Information;
Baryons,
Electron Shell;
symmetry-breaking); E
Bound Energy
Mass Interval > 0;
Nucleons;
(atoms);
N
raw energy
Carriers;
Metric Asymmetry;
Atomic Nucleus;
Higgs and IVBs
E
conservation;
Charges > 0;
("intrinsic motion T" is
(elements);
Mass Scale;
R
(down payment),
Local, Causal,
bound energy's
Whole Quantum
Elementary
G
"pay now";
Temporal Energy;
entropy drive);
Charge Units
Particle
Y
Temporal Energy Forms;
"Lorentz Invariance"
Relative Motion;
Invariance
(row 2)
Special Relativity
General Relativity
S
Charges:
Gravitational Charge: Fractional Charges:
T
"Number" or
quantized
"Location" Charge;
Color Charge
A
Electric Charge:
"Identity" Charge:
symmetry debts
"Location" Asymmetry
(quantum T
(4 - dimensional
Neutrinos;
(carried by particles
of
Bound
Energy;
mechanical
E asymmetry = time)
(neutrinos are "bare"
of row 2);
Warped Metric;
fractional charge
S
(vs 3-dimensional
identity charges);
symmetry (charge)
Compound
asymmetry);
spatial symmetry);
("anonymity"
conservation;
Conservation/Entropy Quark Confinement;
Quantum Mechanics;
asymmetry (mortgage, credit),
Domain of Free and
Flavor Charge
Magnetism;
distinguishable
"pay later";
Bound Energy;
(least bound energy,
Charge Invariance
elementary
Symmetry Carriers;
("G" is the entropy
nucleon "isospin");
particles)
(row 3)
conversion gauge)
"Yukawa Binding"
Force Carriers,
Field Vectors, Bosons:
(produced by charges
of row 3)
(symmetry restoration
via the conversion
of bound to free energy);
(retiring the debt);
Symmetry Conservation/
Restoration Cycles;
(row 4)

Gravitons:
Photons;
Stars, Quasars;
Exothermic
Nucleosynthetic
Chemical Reactions;
Pathway;
Matter-Antimatter
Black Holes;
Annihilation Reactions
Hawking's
("Big Bang" and
"Quantum Radiance";
Suppression of
Gravitational
Virtual Paticles)
Conversion
of Mass to Light

Gluons, Mesons:
Fusion,
Nucleosynthesis;
Proton Decay

Intermediate
Vector Bosons
(IVBs: W, Z, X);
Fission,
Radioactivity;
Particle and
Proton Decay

John A. Gowan and August T. Jaccaci Dec., 2010

file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/simple.html

Page 1 of 3

General Systems Form

12/4/10 6:16 AM

This table may be read like an English paragraph. Row one recapitulates the the creation of matter in the
"Big Bang". The universe begins with light, free electromagnetic energy - a perfectly symmetric form of
energy. The role of gravity at this stage is to provide sufficient negative energy to counterbalance the
positive energy of the "Creation Event", such that the cosmos is born from a state of zero net energy and
charge. The intrinsic motion of light (which is the entropy drive of light) creates space, the expanding and
cooling entropy/conservation domain of free energy. The interaction of high-energy light with the metric
structure of spacetime creates virtual particle-antiparticle pairs of primordial leptoquarks (leptoquarks are
primordial leptons broken into three subunits, the quarks). (See: "The Particle Table".) Symmetry is
maintained so long as there are equal numbers of particles vs antiparticles. Row one ends with symmetrybreaking of the primordial leptoquark pairs and the production of single (matter) baryons and leptons by the
action of the Higgs boson and the weak force Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs). (See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade".) (Although leptoquark particle-antiparticle pairs are produced in equal numbers, electrically
neutral antimatter leptoquarks apparently decay at a slightly faster rate than their matter counterparts.) The
sub-elementary quarks carry fractional charges necessary to the production of electrically neutral
leptoquarks, allowing the neutrals to live long enough to undergo asymmetric weak force decays. These
decays should also produce leptoquark neutrinos, which are "dark matter" candidates. (See: "The Origin of
Matter and Information".)
In row two we find the massive matter products of row-one symmetry-breaking. Row two conserves the
raw energy of row one. Atomic matter is an alternative, asymmetric, local, temporal, causal, bound form of
electromagnetic energy. Mass is the conserved form of light's raw energy; time is the conserved form of
light's entropy drive (intrinsic motion); charge is the conserved form of light's symmetry. "Velocity c"
gauges the invariance of the "Interval" and causality, including "Lorentz Invariance", the covariance of
space and time in Einstein's Special Relativity. Gravity creates time by the annihilation of space and the
extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue (General Relativity); the intrinsic motion of time goes
on to produce historic spacetime. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) Time is a necessary
dimensional parameter for massive objects because of their relative motion and causal relations. (See:
"Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".) Atoms are composed of two classes of particles, the masscarrying quarks and the charge-carrying leptons. Gluons are necessary to confine the fractionally charged
quarks to whole quantum unit charge combinations. (See: "The Strong Force: Two Expressions".) Leptons
are necessary as alternative charge carriers for the massive quarks, balancing their charges in place of
antiparticles, thus avoiding annihilation reactions. Electrons are alternative carriers of electric charge,
neutrinos are alternative carriers of the weak force "identity" charge. The elaborate weak force Higgs and
IVB mechanism is necessary to reproduce single, invariant elementary particles anytime, anywhere.
Elementary particles created today must be the same in every respect as those creatd eons ago during the
"Big Bang". It is the creation of single invariant elementary particles that is the difficulty posed to and
overcome by the massive mechanism of the weak force. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force
Mechanism".) (See also: "Identity Charge and the Weak Force".)
Row three exhibits the charges carried by the massive matter particles produced by symmetry-breaking in
row one. Row three conserves the symmetry of row one. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of
light. Noether's Theorem states that the symmetry of light must be conserved, no less than the raw energy of
light. Charge conservation = symmetry conservation. Charge conservation allows the symmetry of light to
be carried into the time dimension where it can be stored in an alternative form (charge) and repaid at any
future time through annihilation with an appropriate anticharge - thus returning the material system to the
symmetric state of light which originally created it. Gravity pays the entropy-"interest" on the symmetry
debt of matter by creating a time dimension (via the annihilation of space) in which matter's charges can be
file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/simple.html

Page 2 of 3

General Systems Form

12/4/10 6:16 AM

stored and eventually repaid. (Gravity pays the energy-"principle" on matter's symmetry debt in row 4.) The
spatial expansion of the cosmos is reduced as gravity annihilates space and converts the spatial entropy drive
of light into the historical entropy drive of matter.
Each of the four forces of physics is produced by a charge which can be traced to a broken symmetry - a
"symmetry debt" of light. This is the conceptual unification of the forces: they all represent symmetry debts
of light (including gravity, which is both a symmetry and an entropy debt of light). (See: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravity".) Electric charge is due to light's broken dimensional symmetry (2- and 3dimensional symmetric space vs 4-dimensional asymmetric spacetime); gravity is due to light's broken
spatial distribution symmetry (light's broken "non-local" symmetric energy state), plus light's broken
symmetric entropy drive (light's intrinsic motion), both gauged by "velocity c", and both broken by the
local, immobile, undistributed mass-energy of matter. The strong force color charge is due to the fractional
charges of the quarks, which threaten the quantum currency (whole quantum charge units) of the symmetry
debts themselves. The weak force is due to light's broken "anonymity": all photons are alike, but elementary
particles are not and therefore have an "identity" charge (AKA "number" charge) (neutrinos are "bare"
identity charges). Magnetism is a "local gauge symmetry" expression of the electromagnetic force which
protects the invariance of electric charge in relative motion. Analogs of magnetism's local gauge function in
the other forces include the covariance of time and space ("Lorentz Invariance") protecting causality,
velocity c, and the "Interval" (gravity); quark confinement by gluons, protecting unitary quantum charges
(strong force); and the massive weak force IVBs, protecting elementary particle invariance. (See: "The
Tetrahedron Model of the Unified Field Theory".) (See also: "Local vs Global Gauge Symmetry in the
Tetrahedron Model".)
In the 4th row we list the payment modes of light's symmetry debts by the 4 forces - forces are the demand
for payment of the symmetry debts held by the charges of matter. Row four repays all the symmetry, energy,
and entropy debts incurred by symmetry-breaking in row one. Payments include partial as well as complete
payments. In the electrical force we have exothermic chemical reactions and matter-antimatter annihilation
reactions; in the gravitational force we find numerous astrophysical forces converting bound to free energy,
culminating in Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. As high-energy gravity repays its symmetry
debt (converting mass to light), gravity reverses the effect of its own low-energy reaction, which paid
matter's entropy debt (by the conversion of space to time). This reversal reduces the total cosmic
gravitational field (due to mass reduction), allowing the spatial expansion to recover a portion of its original
acceleration (observed recently as the "acceleration" of the cosmos due to "dark energy"). Gravity pays the
energy-"principle" of light's symmetry debt through the conversion of bound to free energy, as in the stars.
The vanishing of gravity as mass is converted to light is the vital clue regarding gravity's symmetryconserving role in the natural economy of today's universe - the force vanishes only when its conservation
role is accomplished. In the strong force we have fusion and the nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, and
ultimately proton decay; and in the weak force we find fission, radioactivity, contributions to the
nucleosynthetic pathway, and particle and proton decay. Presumably "dark matter" also participates in some
type of symmetry conservation cycle. "Dark matter" may consist of leptoquark antineutrinos. For more
details, see: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".
home page

file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/simple.html

Page 3 of 3

