John A. Gowan
home page
(revised Jan., 2011)
de Broglie Matter Waves and the Evolution of Consciousness
In 1923 Louis de Broglie introduced the notion of matter waves, the particle-wave duality of matter which is
the reciprocal extension of the notion of the particle-wave duality of light. The wave nature of matter is
evidently a "memory" of its origin in light, much as the particle aspect of light suggests its capacity to create
matter. Such dualities are part of the connective tissue of the Cosmos and its two principle energy forms,
light and matter (free and bound electromagnetic energy). The less massive the particle, the more strongly is
its wave nature expressed. The wave nature of the tiny electron is very pronounced, as is famously
demonstrated by the interference phenomena of the canonical 2-slit experiment of quantum mechanics. In
the extreme case of neutrinos, which apparently have almost no mass, their wave nature completely
dominates their particle nature. However, as particles become heavier and more massive, their wave nature
becomes rapidly overwhelmed, until for ordinary macroscopic masses to which we are sensible it is
completely obscured.
The rise of consciousness and intelligence in large biological organisms can be seen as a direct reassertion of
the wave nature of matter even in large masses; for surely our thoughts, intuitions, and inspirations are
nothing if not part of the wave nature of both light and matter, and therefore constitute our personal longrange connection to and medium of communication with the Cosmos - whether in the rational or intuitive
mode. An evolutionary goal of biology can be proposed as the reestablishment of the wave nature of matter
in macroscopic masses (through consciousness).
This is a basic rationale in purely material-physical terms for the existence of the biological information
pathway. It is a parallel development to the abiotic gravitational drive in the same direction, culminating in
macroscopic bodies such as our Sun, which are as much radiant wave as they are massive particle. Most
curiously, the negentropic gravitational drive and the negentropic biological drive have both culminated in
the same process, hydrogen fusion (humanity develops the hydrogen bomb), restoring symmetry through
the conversion of bound to free energy. The appearance of this convergence in a destructive rather than a
constructive mode is a caution to our species, for we are quite literally engaging, at our peril, the "dark side
of the force". The Sun will eventually destroy the Earth, needing no assistance from humans. (See also:
"The Information Pathway".)
In terms of natural connectivity, this explanation is also completely consistent with the development of life
through the 4x3 fractal algorithm, through matter's search for antimatter, and with the biological destiny of
humanity as the reproductive seed and dispersal agent of Gaia. The connectivity of the Universe is the
essence of its physical character and is what we perceive as its "spiritual" nature; our perception,
consciousness, intelligence, and rational and intuitive awareness are all part and parcel of this wavelike
connectivity and evolving cosmic self awareness - and not just here on Earth, but everywhere in the Cosmos
that suitable conditions for life exist. See: "Newton, Darwin, and the Evolution and Abundance of life in the
Cosmos".)
Links:
General Systems and Metaphysics
Section VIII: Introduction to General Systems, Complex Systems
Section XI: Religion and Science
Section XII: Man's Role in Nature
Section XIII: The Solar Archetype
A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 1

A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory: Part 2
Synopsis of the "Tetrahedron Model" of the Unified Field Theory
The Tetrahedron Model in the Context of a Complete Conservation Cycle (text)
A book by Prof. J. C. Gowan (Sr.): Trance, Art, Creativity: An Investigation of the Numinous
Element and the Metaphysical Realm.
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part 1: Microphysical Realm
Part 2: Biophysical Realm
Part 3: Astrophysical Realm
Part 4: Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Mode
Part 5: Metaphysical Realm - Rational Mode
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos
Commentary on the Metaphysical Realm (rational mode)
The Human Connection
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
home page

