Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" Part III: Postscript
John A. Gowan
Homepage
(Revised Jan., 2013)
Related Papers:
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part I)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part II)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (Postscript)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in the Weak Force
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part IV)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part V)
Table of Contents
Introduction
Global vs Local Gauge Symmetries
Global-Local Parameters in the Electromagnetic Force
Summary
Links
References
Introduction: Duality in Nature
Go to "Global and Local Gauge Symmetry: Part I"
Go to "Global and Local Gauge Symmetry: Part II"
From ancient times we have intuited and named a dual level of reality - it is a defining characteristic of
abstract thinking, symbolic language, and the human condition. This recognition of abstract reality has
its most explicit social expression in our religious (and political) systems of thought, the realm of the
gods (and the State), religious and secular law vs the realm of humanity and the "citizen". Plato
recognized it as the realm of ideal forms vs the realm of their material "shadows". Duality takes
additional forms in philosophical, ethical, moral, and aesthetic conceptual systems. In our own
physiology, in addition to the biological duality of gender, we seem divided between the intangible
realm of thought and imagination and the realm of physical action and the body (mind-brain). In
science we recognize dualities between the realm of physical or natural law vs the realm of
phenomena, the theoretical vs the experimental, mathematics vs material reality, symbol vs substance,
and virtual or potential vs actual or realized forms of energy, among many other types of duality.
A significant duality in mathematical physics is expressed as "global vs local gauge symmetry" - a
methodology of conceiving the laws and phenomena of physics that is especially conducive to
mathematical formulation ("group theory"), and is currently the favored theoretical approach in the
ongoing search for the "Holy Grail" of physics, Einstein's dream of a unified field theory.
The world is a mysterious place, and not just in terms of the enduring question of humanity's role in the
Cosmos. We find in all natural phenomena a variety of "hidden", relative, or emergent forces. This is
nowhere more evident than in the paradoxes of relatively and quantum mechanics, enigmas at the very
foundations of physics (spacetime warps, "non-locality", etc.).

At the level of the four forces, we have the mysteries of gravitation, time, and magnetism in the longrange, "spacetime" forces. These are local effects set against and derived from the global invariants of
electromagnetism: "velocity" c, a symmetric spatial metric, and electric charge. In the particle or shortrange forces, we find the hidden "identity" or "number" charges of the massive leptons, the
Heisenberg-Dirac virtual vacuum "zoo" of particle-antiparticle pairs, and the strange realm of the weak
force, with its massive IVBs, Higgs boson(s), ghostly neutrinos, spontaneous symmetry-breaking, the
creation and destruction of matter, etc. Finally, in the strong force we have the permanently confined
and forever hidden quarks with their partial quantum unit charges, and the gluon field of "sticky light",
exchanging color charges between quarks at velocity c.
The atomic realm is a hive of activity completely beneath our notice - the whirling electrons in their
orbits, the exchange of virtual mesons between "nucleons" in the compound atomic nucleus, and the
frenzied exchange of gluons between quarks within baryons. The "vacuum" bubbles and froths with the
creation and annihilation of Heisenberg's virtual particles; neutrino, gravitational, and electromagnetic
waves of every description traverse the Cosmos unrecognized - either for lack of biological sensory
apparatus or physical interaction. Yesterday, historical spacetime, and the "realm of the ancestors" is
largely hidden from our view, even though its continuing reality in some alternative, causal form
cannot be doubted - as it sustains our own reality today in the "universal present moment", or "now".
Our "yesterday" forms part of "today's" reality in some distant part of our universe - and vice versa.
(See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
These are some of the documented, rational, "scientific" physical phenomena, and I have only
mentioned the tip of the iceberg, ignoring "dark matter", "dark energy", "inflation", the "Multiverse",
etc. Is it any wonder we have intuited a hidden, parallel, "occult" universe of paranormal effects and
miracles, of gods, angels, and demons? Of "Paradise" or "Heaven", a conservation domain of spirit and
the eternal realm of invariant Divine Law - where all humanity finds itself in a globally symmetric state
of universal spiritual equality?
Global vs Local Gauge Symmetries
Global symmetries are those that apply everywhere, and for all time, such as the electric
charge, mass, and spin of an elementary particle. This is a symmetry only because all
electrons (for example) everywhere and always have exactly the same electric charge,
mass, and spin - any electron could be swapped with any other without causing the least
disturbance to the universe. Other global symmetries include the value of the universal
electromagnetic constant "velocity c", the value of the universal gravitational constant "G",
the value of Planck's energy quantum (h), among many others. These physical constants or
physical global symmetries never change and are determined, fixed, set, or "gauged" at the
beginning of the universe. They are the defining parameters of our universe, distinguishing
it from any other in the "Multiverse".
Local symmetries, on the other hand, involve actual changes in a single particle from one
globally conserved symmetry state to another, as in the decay of a single neutron to a
proton, electron, and electron anti-neutrino. In such a decay, all the original charges must
reappear (in some form) in the product particles, and both the original and product
particles must themselves be members of some global symmetry set or state. Finally, such
locally gauged symmetry changes are, at least in principle, reversible given sufficient
energy. Local gauge symmetry interactions involve post-"Big Bang" interactions between
particles (or dimensions), and are mediated by the field vectors of the four forces of
physics. They are the conserved interactions between particles (or the metric) that produce

the common environment of our daily experience.
While the title of this paper may sound formidably obtuse, it is typical physics/math-speak for a simple
but powerful idea: the value or magnitude of certain universal constants, such as the electromagnetic
constant "c" and charges of all kinds, must be maintained and protected, for excellent and obvious
reasons of conservation, including energy, symmetry, and causality. This is not a particularly difficult
task in the perfect realm of light and space, where in the absence of matter, time, and gravity, all
velocities are "c", all charges are virtual, and all energy forms are non-local and massless. In our actual,
compounded world of free and bound types of interacting electromagnetic energy, however, we find (in
addition to light) massive particles bearing various real charges, having specific locations in spacetime,
and moving with various relative motions. Time and gravity are also present wherever matter is
present.
In this highly complex "real" rather than "ideal" world, maintaining the constant value of c and various
charges, etc., is a difficult but nonetheless necessary task, requiring some extra help from ancillary
forces which have come to be known as "local gauge symmetry forces". Because it is the real world
and not the ideal world we ordinarily inhabit, these local forces are among the most familiar of our
daily experience: gravity, time, and magnetism, among others.
The concept of symmetry is central to the modern effort to achieve Einstein's dream of a unified field
theory of physics. I have used the concept extensively in my work (See: "Symmetry Principles of a
Unified Field Theory"), but from a slightly different perspective than that of "establishment" physics.
(See: The Moment of Creation by James S. Trefil, 1983, Macmillan, pages 87-125 for an expert but
non-mathematical explanation of the use of symmetry concepts in the "standard model" of unification
physics.)
Although the global-local gauge symmetry concept is often couched in purely numeric terms of the
universal vs the individual, for reasons of physical relevance I have broadened this usage to include the
category of absolute motion vs relative motion. As I employ the terms, absolute stands to relative as
global stands to local or as the universal stands to the individual. The relative is unpredictable and
peculiar to the individual. The task of local gauge symmetries is to maintain within the temporal,
unpredictable, individual, and relative material domain some essential, conserved aspect of the global
invariant - for example, the invariance of the magnitude of electric charge despite the freedom of
relative motion of individual massive charge carriers (electrons, protons, mesons, etc.).
Mathematical physics distinguishes between the concepts of "global" vs "local" gauge symmetry:
"local" gauge symmetries are derived from and represent individual variations upon universal or
"global" gauge symmetries. The word "gauge" refers to a regulating property that establishes a
magnitude or scale, as for example the value of the electromagnetic constant (c), a global symmetry
gauge for electromagnetic energy and the spatial metric. The magnitude of the electric charge (e),
Planck's energy constant (h), the value of the universal gravitational constant (G), and the mass of the
Higgs boson, also represent global gauge constants established during the "Big Bang" at the creation of
our universe. On the other hand, a magnetic field, the time dimension, the massive IVBs (Intermediate
Vector Bosons) of the weak force, and the gluon/meson fields of the strong force, are all local gauge
"currents" of matter (field vectors of the forces) which establish and maintain local gauge symmetries
in the post-"Big Bang" universe. Cold, crystalline, and neutral atomic matter is the prototypical
example of an energy form established and maintained by "local gauge symmetry currents" from a
globally symmetric energy form - light.
Light (free electromagnetic energy) is a globally symmetric energy state from which locally
asymmetric atomic matter (bound electromagnetic energy) is devolved. The charge neutrality and

inertial stasis of cold, quiescent atomic matter is the evidence of a locally symmetric energy state,
involving charge conservation and neutralization, alternative charge carriers, and inertial forces, which
is achieved or derived from, and replaces, the globally symmetric energy state of light. In many
respects, the local symmetry state is just as invariant and conserved as the global one, and in fact the
two regimes are in constant interaction and equilibration (through virtual particles and other quantum
effects of the spacetime "vacuum", long-range electromagnetic and gravitational fields, etc.). However,
the fact that forces are at work in our local environment (gravity is the obvious example, in our
experience of "weight" and the radiance of our Sun; radioactivity is another example), tells us that the
two systems of light and matter are not yet in a state of complete equilibrium.
The reason why we have a dual system of global vs local gauge symmetries in physical law and
phenomena is because our Universe consists of massive, local energy forms in relative motion (matter),
which are derived from light - a massless, non-local (global) energy form in absolute (invariant)
motion. Functionally, the local symmetries are embodied and enforced through the field vectors of the
forces. The field vectors translate timeless global symmetries (such as the virtual charges of matterantimatter particle pairs) into alternative, material, local, temporal forms (such as the real charges of
atomic matter). These local charges conserve the invariant values of the original global symmetries
through time, until they can be returned (via the action of their associated forces) to their original
symmetric form, light (typically via charge-anticharge annihilations).
Through an (as yet) unknown mechanism of "spontaneous symmetry-breaking" during the "Big Bang",
high-energy light, interacting with the metric structure of spacetime and with all the four forces of
physics, produces matter (from particle-antiparticle pairs via asymmetric weak force decays, probably
of electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark pairs). Matter carries active charges (and spin) from
one member of the primordial particle-antiparticle pair, charges which represent symmetry debts (since
charges exist only to motivate and facilitate annihilation reactions between particle-antiparticle pair
members, restoring light's waveform or "non-local" symmetry state). The charges of matter are the
symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem.) These charges produce forces which act to return matter
(sooner or later) to its original symmetric form, light. Our Sun is the archetypical example of this
universal phenomenon and natural agenda in action (symmetry conservation as required by Noether's
Theorem, and achieved by the spontaneous activity of the forces of physics).
While the ultimate role of the field vectors of the four forces is to return matter to light, their proximate
role is to translate globally invariant symmetries into locally invariant charges. The reason why they
bother to do this is because in the absence of antimatter (following "Big Bang" symmetry-breaking),
local symmetry-keeping and charge conservation is a necessary maintenance function in the pathway
leading to the eventual and complete restoration of light's original symmetric non-local energy state - a
restoration required by symmetry conservation and Noether's Theorem.
The charges of matter are derived from invariant global gauge symmetries, and their field vectors
(including the graviton, or time) represent local gauge "currents" establishing and maintaining similarly
invariant local charge magnitudes. The field vectors, in addition to transmitting the forceful effect of
the charge, must also protect, conserve, or otherwise maintain the invariant magnitude of the charge.
Symmetry conservation = charge conservation, which is why charge invariance is so important. Charge
and symmetry conservation would have little meaning if charge invariance was not rigorously
enforced. This is why all field vectors, in dealing with the relative energy state of matter, must have a
flexible component or capability, like the photon's magnetic field, whose strength varies with the
relative motion of electric charge. The flexibility of the local component is what protects the inflexible
(invariant) global component in the unpredictable and turbulent domain of matter and relative motion.
Mathematical physics uses symmetry principles to obtain quantitative equations describing the

operation of the forces, and for predictions and explanations of experimental results. I use the concepts
of symmetry in a non-mathematical, qualitative way to understand why the forces act as they do, and
why they must exist in nature. The concepts of symmetry, when properly applied, provide a broad
avenue to the understanding of nature - equivalent to the fundamental and powerful ideas of entropy,
causality, and energy conservation (See: "The Tetrahedron Model"). Both establishment physics and I
have been successful in our own ways. This paper (and others in the global-local gauge symmetry
series) is an attempt to join the perspectives of the "Tetrahedron Model" and the "Standard Model", not
mathematically (because that desideratum is quite beyond my ability), but conceptually, in English.
(See also: The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison.)
Global-Local Parameters in the Electromagnetic Force - General Considerations
The conversion of light to matter, free electromagnetic energy to bound electromagnetic energy, during
the "Big Bang", represents the conversion of a globally symmetric form of energy (matter-antimatter
symmetry, space, and massless "non-local" light with intrinsic spatial motion "c") to a locally
asymmetric form of energy (matter, time, and massive local particles with no (net) intrinsic spatial
motion). In purely energetic terms, this conversion is symbolized by DeBroglie's equation: hv = mcc.
For simple reasons of conservation, a local form of energy (massive particles of matter) requires a local
form of entropy (time), a local form of symmetry (charge), a local form of metric (gravitational
spacetime), a local connectivity domain (history, causality). Charge invariance with whole quantum
charge units, the invariance of velocity c, the "Interval" and causality, and the invariance of elementary
particles: all are conservation mandates which follow upon the transformation of free to bound
electromagnetic energy during the "Big Bang", and which necessitate the existence of various sorts of
local gauge symmetry currents to cope with and compensate for local conditions of relative motion,
variable gravitational metrics, etc.
The original and primordial global-local conversion of our primary electromagnetic energy form
(light), is accompanied by the gravitational conversion of globally symmetric space with its spatial
entropy drive (the intrinsic motion of light), to locally asymmetric history with its historical entropy
drive (the intrinsic motion of time). Finally, light's symmetric energy state, which is realized (in its
particle form) as globally symmetric matter-antimatter particle pairs, is converted (quantummechanically through an asymmetry in the weak force), to locally asymmetric matter-only charges.
Charge conservation = symmetry conservation (Noether's Theorem), in which charges are carried by
massive particles and conserved through time. The conserved charge-symmetry debt of matter is fully
repaid when charges are eventually annihilated by antimatter charges. The "entropy-interest" on
matter's symmetry debt is paid by gravitation, which creates the time dimension of matter by the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. The spatial
expansion of the Universe is consequently slowed as it supplies energy for the historical expansion of
matter's causal information domain - historic spacetime. Thus it is ultimately the spatial entropy drive
of light's intrinsic motion which supplies the energy for the historical entropy drive of matter's time
dimension. This energy cycle "loops to ground" by the gravitational conversion of bound to free energy
(and the consequent conversion of the historical entropy drive of time to the spatial entropy drive of
light) in the Sun, stars, and quasars, and goes to completion in Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes.
Light is non-local, atemporal, acausal, massless, chargeless, and produces no gravitational field. Matter
is local, temporal, causal, massive, charged, and produces a gravitational field. The conversion of
globally symmetric light to locally asymmetric matter results in matter's three fundamental and local
conservation parameters: mass, charge, and time. (See: The Tetrahedron Model (diagram).)

Summary
The magnetic field associated with an electric charge in relative motion is the transformed motion of
the charge's electrical field to an alternative electromagnetic form which does not alter the original
magnitude of the electric charge. The magnetic field functions to protect the invariance of electric
charge in relative motion, hence also protecting charge and symmetry conservation. Magnetic effects
can be seen as related, ancillary consequences of the "Lorentz Invariance" of Special Relativity, in
which the local flexibility and covariance of time and space are necessary to maintain the global
invariance of the "Interval", causality, and velocity c. Related to these effects we note the fundamental
quenching of an electric field by magnetic induction in the free electromagnetic wave, a balancing or
compensation which results in the electrically neutral photon (a quantum unit of light), the field vector
of the electromagnetic force.
At the next level of material expression, we see the atomic combination of the election and proton,
which also achieves electrical neutrality thanks to the magnetic field of the electron, despite the
electron's orbital motion around the comparatively stationary proton. The universe is constructed in
such a way (through global-local gauge symmetries and their transformations via the field vectors) that
invariant constants derived from the spatial and absolute realm of light can nevertheless subsist in the
relative, temporal realm of matter, although in an altered (but also invariant) form - charge. In their
completely global or universal symmetric form, charges are directly related to light's symmetry through
the virtual matter-antimatter particle pairs that light's energy constantly creates and annihilates
throughout the spatial "vacuum". Similarly, material local charges are constantly in communication and
equilibrium with their global counterparts through the swarms of virtual particles that surround them.
Thus the separation between global and local energy forms, charges, and symmetry states is more
apparent than real: the ideal forms remain with us, and we experience them directly through light and
thought.
Links
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3 (summary)
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part I)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part II)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model":Postscript
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries (part IV)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part V)
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Synopsis of the "Tetrahedron Model" of the Unified Field Theory
The Tetrahedron Model in the Context of a Complete Conservation Cycle (text)
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation

Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs")
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D)
Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson Papers
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
References:
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. 1981. M. Dekker,
New York.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin: The Phenomenon of Man. 1959. Harper and Row, New York.
Frank Close: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Books by my late father Prof. John Curtis Gowan
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical
Realm. A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Operations of Increasing Order" Further Investigations of the Numinous Element and the
Metaphysical Realm. A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Psychedelic Individual". A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Creative Individual". A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
J. E. Lovelock. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Neuenschwander, Dwight E. Emmy Noether's Wonderful Theorem. 2011. The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Robert Oerter: The Theory of Almost Everything. 2006. Penguin (Plume).
Pais, Abraham Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. 1986. Oxford University
Press, NY
Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
James S. Trefil: The Moment of Creation 1983. Collier, Macmillan.

Frank Wilczek: The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.

