Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries: Part II
(Gravitation, Section B)
John A. Gowan
(Revised June, 2014)
home page
Related Papers:
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part 1)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation (part 2)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in the Weak Force (part 3)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part 4)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part 5)
Table of Contents:
Section B
Global and Local Gauge Symmetries: Gravitation
Gravitons
Summary
A Hierarchy of Gravitational Domains
Links and References
Return to Section A
Global and Local Gauge Symmetries: Gravitation, Section B
Massless light is non-local, a-temporal, and a-causal; massive matter is local, temporal, and causal.
"c" is a global constant gauging a global spatial metric; "G" is a global constant gauging a local
temporal metric.
Einstein discovered that gravitational fields slow clocks and shrink meter sticks, as does relative
motion of any kind, breaking the global metric symmetry of space. These local effects are caused by
relative (and accelerated) motions - either our motion through spacetime, or spacetime's motion
through us (gravitation). These relative motions of matter require (or cause) compensatory
adjustments in the local spacetime metric ("local gauge symmetry currents"), which are necessary to
protect and conserve the invariant values of various conserved material charges, including the metric
parameters "velocity c", the "Interval", and causality. Hence we find the "Lorentz Invariance" of
Special Relatively, in which "moving clocks run slow" and meter sticks shrink in the direction of
motion, and similar effects due to gravitation in General Relativity. Time and space can vary, as
Einstein realized, but only if both vary together in such a way as to maintain the value of the
electromagnetic energy gauge "c", and the ability of the metric as as a whole to conserve energy.

1 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

Thus in spite of the fact that the metric of gravitational spacetime ("little g") varies continuously with
distance from the center of the field's source, or from one planet or star to another, "velocity c"
remains constant wherever it is measured. The same is true for relative motions of any kind: clocks
may slow and meter sticks may shrink, but causality and the measured value of "velocity c" remains
invariant - independent of the relative motion (whether linear or accelerated) of source or observer.
The same holds true for electric charge and indeed, for all of light's conserved symmetry debts.
But gravity, as Einstein realized, does much more than simply make things fall down. Gravity is more
than accelerated motion with the associated effects of "Lorentz Invariance" coordinating
measurements of space and time - even a sports car can produce the effects of accelerated motion and
"Lorentz Invariance". As Einstein discovered, gravity produces its effects by the "warpage" or
"curvature" of the spacetime metric, such that space itself is set in wholesale motion, "falling" with
acceleration toward any local center of mass. Co-movers with the flow feel no force. But again, what
produces this spatial flow? In the hypothesis presented in these pages, it can be nothing else but the
one-way flow of time into the historic domain, at right angles to all three spatial dimensions. This
temporal flow, which is initiated from every center of mass beginning with atoms, pulls space after it
and so produces the attractive principle - of every massive object for every other: the symmetrically
concentric in-fall of space toward every mass center, as time marches only forward into history. The
process is set in motion by the collapsing wave function of light as it is converted into bound forms of
energy (by any process), and thereafter is self-feeding: the in-falling spatial parameters annihilate each
other, leaving a metrically equivalent temporal residue, which continues the temporal march into
history. Thus gravity and time induce each other endlessly, until bound energy is re-converted into
free energy. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Since we are making the assumption that the field vectors of the forces are all in effect "local gauge
symmetry currents", converting global symmetries into local symmetries (and vice versa), we must
allow the field vectors to inform us regarding the activity and conservation role of the force in
question. In the case of gravitation, the field vector or "graviton" is time or spacetime, the activity is
the conversion of space into time (and vice versa), and the conservation role is extremely broad,
encompassing the conservation of energy, entropy, symmetry, and causality. In the context of the
"global vs local gauge symmetry" paradigm, the conservation role of gravitation is most generally
characterized as the conversion of the symmetric global, spatial metric, whose only energy form is
light, to an asymmetric, local spacetime metric which accommodates the conservation requirements of
both light and matter (free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy).
The purpose of a dimensional metric is energy conservation, and gravitation acts to convert the
energy-conserving symmetric global metric of space and light to the energy-conserving asymmetric
local metric of spacetime, light, and matter. This is essentially the conversion of a global Newtonian
metric consisting of an invariant space and time, to an Einsteinian local metric consisting of an
invariant electromagnetic constant "c", with co-varying space and time (Minkowski spacetime). The
key local interaction is the Lorentz transformation or "Lorentz Invariance", in which space and time
co-vary in such a way ("moving clocks run slow and meter sticks shrink in the direction of motion")
that regardless of relative motions or variable gravitational fields, velocity c remains an invariant
universal constant, conserving causality, the "Interval", and the value of the various charges and
symmetry debts of matter. This is part of the basic energy conservation role of gravity, which must
include the creation of bound energy's historical entropy drive (time). The gravitational force will, in

2 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

addition, eventually fulfill and complete its symmetry conservation role via the conversion of bound
to free energy in stars, supernovas, quasars, and finally and completely, through Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes.
In the gravitational force, co-varying time and space are the analogs of light's co-varying electric and
magnetic fields, the local gauge symmetry "current" or force. Time is implicitly resident in the
spacetime metric, just as magnetism is implicitly resident in light's electromagnetic field.
Gravitons
The graviton is the presumed field vector of gravitation, the local symmetry current exchanged
between all massive particles (via its effect upon the spacetime metric). The graviton is actually a
form of time or spacetime. A graviton is a quantum unit of time or temporal entropy. All massive
objects have a "location" charge, whose active principle is time. As the time charge exits space (at
right angles to all three spatial dimensions, marching off into history via its intrinsic, entropic
dimensional motion), time pulls the spatial dimensions along behind it, causing them to annihilate
each other at the point-like entrance to the one-way time line. Annihilating spatial dimensions leave
behind a temporal residue which is the metric equivalent of the collapsed space. This new temporal
residue likewise moves off down the time line into history, pulling more space behind it, repeating the
endless, self-feeding entropic cycle. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic
motion of time. (See: "A Description of Gravity"; and see: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Summary
The invariant, global magnitude of "big G", the gauge of gravity's "location" charge, must
be maintained because of the intimate connection between time and energy conservation
(entropy, causality, the Interval, relative motion, etc.). Hence both c and G must be
universal and invariant metric gauge constants. Nevertheless, time can vary locally if
space co-varies, a combination which maintains the constant value of c, the "Interval",
and causality. Time can vary locally only within the framework of a global metric
structure which as a whole remains capable of conserving energy. Charge invariance including the "Lorentz Invariance" of Special and General Relativity - is the key to
understanding the local forces and the local action of the field vectors (local "gauge
symmetry currents"). The local, relative motions of matter require local compensatory
forces to maintain and protect the invariant, global parameters of charge, including the
"Interval", causality, and the electromagnetic constant, "c".
We see a hierarchy of global-local gauge symmetries, with the global "multiverse" at the top, existing
purely in terms of creative potential, with all the various possible universes as the local gauge
expressions of the next lower (derivative) level. Our universe is one such local choice among these
(infinite?) possibilities, whose physical laws and constants (by chance alone) favor the evolution of
our life form (the "Anthropic Principle"). (Within our own universe, however, the evolution of life is
not due to simple chance, but to the operation of a 4x3 General Systems or fractal algorithm. See:
"Nature's Fractal Pathway".) At the multiverse level, the energy type, dimensional parameters, and
physical constants of our universe are but the local gauge parameters of a specific (electromagnetic)
choice or realization, perhaps among an infinitude of possible universes. I would guess that the only

3 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

restriction upon the physical parameters of any universe is that: 1) it requires no net energy (or
charge) to create; 2) it must be capable of conserving such energy as it does contain; 3) it must be able
to break its initial symmetry condition; 4) it must be able to return to its symmetric origins (like a
cosmic-scale "current" returning to "ground").
Within our electromagnetic, 4-D universe, the electromagnetic constant "c" is the dominant global
energy gauge, regulating spacetime and its perfectly symmetric metric, with massless, non-local light
as its perfectly symmetric energy form. Next below light, "c", and the symmetric (inertial) spacetime
metric, is matter and gravity, both derived from light and light's spatial metric. "G" is a global gauge
but defines a local metric, which is characterized and "warped" by asymmetric time. The gravitational
charge recognizes all particles (whether matter or antimatter) only in terms of their mass, the broadest
category among material particles (excluding only light). Next below the gravitational "location"
charge (in terms of generality) is the electric charge, recognizing the equivalency of all electrically
charged particles, but distinguishing between matter vs antimatter (as in the opposite charges of
electron vs positron). However, not all massive particles carry electric charge (neutrinos), and electric
charge can neutralize itself (neutrons, atoms). The weak "identity" charge follows, recognizing three
or four subcategories of number or "identity" charge (lepton and baryon "number" charges) within
matter, and distinguishing by parity between left-handed matter and right-handed antimatter. Finally at
the bottom, we find the narrowest category, the strong force charge recognizing only other color
charges within baryons or mesons.
This same hierarchy is like a set of nested Russian dolls with respect to the physical volumes of space
within their domains. At the top, we have the multiverse of infinite potentiality and n-dimensional
conservation domains; next, our 4-D unbounded universe of light, followed by our gravitationally
bounded universe, and the gravitational boundaries of galaxies, stellar systems, stars, and planets;
below planets is the electrical domain of crystals and organic molecular systems and forms, and
atomic electron shells; below the atomic level is the realm of the two nuclear forces, the weak force at
the level of elementary particles (creation, destruction, decay, and transformation), followed by a final
(?) layer of the sub-elementary quarks, permanently confined by the color charges of the strong force.
Biological (living) systems, depending upon how one defines them, fit somewhere below stellar
systems (space-faring species) and above crystals (bacteria, virus). Humans currently occupy the
planetary level, and are attempting to move up to the stellar level of Solar Systems.
At every level, from the "Big Crunch" to the Sun, stars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes, to the matter-antimatter annihilations of particle-antiparticle pairs, or particle and proton decay,
the system of interwoven and nested global and local symmetries drives toward a single goal: the
return of bound to free energy, the transformation of matter to light, as required by the symmetry
conservation mandate of "Noether's Theorem".
A diagrammatic representation of the global-local gauge symmetry structure of natural law and the
physical forces can be seen in: "The Tetrahedron Model". A comparison of the "Tetrahedron Model"
vs the "Standard Model" of physics is also available.
Postscript
A Hierarchy of Gravitational Conservation Roles and Domains
(See: "Nodes of the Gravitational Metric".)

4 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

1) Gravitational Realms: Single Systems (planets and stars)
A) Entropy-only Conservation Domains: (the gravitational creation of time via the
gravitational conversion of space to time) (atoms ---> planets):
Atoms - time ("half-life") - radioactivity, particle, and proton decay (gravity
provides the time dimension within which all forms of charge conservation can
have an historical significance - another example of the connection between gravity
and symmetry conservation);
Spherical shapes created by symmetric gravitational forces (large composite
objects); large asteroids, satellites, moons, planetesimals;
Planetary life zone - biological information domain (atmosphere, liquid water,
magnetic field, all necessary?); (time is necessary for biological evolution);
Planets (various sizes, approximately Earth to (?) Jupiter-sized planets);
Brown dwarfs ("failed" stars: ~13 - 80 Jupiter masses; limited fusion of deuterium
and lithium).
B) Entropy-plus-Symmetry Conservation Domains: (the gravitational creation of space
and light via the conversion of bound to free energy - simultaneously with the
gravitational conversion of space to time: nuclear fusion reactions (the nucleosynthetic
pathway) repaying both the entropy and symmetry debts of matter simultaneously)
(stars):
Sun and Stars - various types and sizes (above 80 Jupiter masses up to ~ 100 (?)
solar masses); stellar "generations" (first generation stars may be (much?) more
massive);
Nucleosynthetic pathway (creation of heavy elements);
Novas and supernovas (creation and dispersal of heavy elements);
White Dwarfs - electron shell collapse; electron "gas" (condensed matter series
begins);
Neutron stars - pulsars and magnetars;
Black Holes: small (primordial); large (stellar); giant (galactic):
"Quantum Radiance" - Hawking (total conversion of mass to light and final
gravitational repayment of matter's entropy and symmetry debts);
Proton Decay - probably common at central "singularity" of black holes
(black holes therefore probably consist only of gravitationally bound light).
2) Gravitational Realms: Complex Orbital Systems (Stellar Systems and Galaxies)
C) mixed entropy, symmetry, and neutral domains (stable orbits are gravitationally
neutral ("free fall") domains) (orbital pairs ---> Universe):
Orbital motions (moons, satellites, asteroids, comets, etc.);
Stellar Systems (planetary systems with a central star or stars);
Binary stars, and simple multiple orbital systems;
Globular Clusters;
Galaxies and galactic structures (disc, central bulge, halo, globular clusters, giant
molecular clouds, stellar nurseries, spiral arms, central giant black hole, etc.);
Galaxy types: spirals, barred spirals, ellipticals, irregulars, dwarf, etc. (small large; primitive - evolved);
Quasars (and "active" galaxies);
Galaxy clusters, giant central galaxies, satellite galaxies, interactive galaxy pairs,

5 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

colliding galaxies, etc.;
Giant galactic "walls" and "voids"; galactic superclusters; "foam-like"
mega-structure of Cosmos.
3) Cosmic Scale: Creation, Destruction, Fate of Universe
D) Creation of light, spacetime, and matter (from multiverse?); creation of
energy/entropy conservation domains of space and historic spacetime:
Deceleration of cosmic expansion (due to gravitational annihilation of space);
Acceleration (rebound) of cosmic expansion (due to gravitational annihilation of
mass and vanishing of associated gravitational fields);
Creation of Universe: "Big Bang" (via compensating negative gravitational energy:
net energy = 0);
Destruction of Universe: "Big Crunch" (net entropy = 0) (return to multiverse?).
Return to Section A
Links:
Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3
(summary)
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy

6 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

Global and Local Gauge Symmetries in the "Tetrahedron Model"

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/gauge12a.html

Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Half-life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Gravity Diagrams
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model (complete version)
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric
home page References:
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. 1981. M.
Dekker, New York.
Frank Close: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Robert Oerter: The Theory of Almost Everything. 2006. Penguin (Plume).
Pais, Abraham Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. 1986. Oxford
University Press, NY
Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
James S. Trefil: The Moment of Creation 1983. Collier, Macmillan.
Frank Wilczek: The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.

7 of 7

6/21/14 11:47 AM

