Negentropic Information

11/16/11 8:59 AM

Negentropic Information
John A. Gowan
2 Oct. 2011
home page
Abstract
Order and information (in the negentropic sense) are built upon charge conservation - the symmetry debts of
light - symmetry transformed from a 2-D (or 3-D) atemporal, non-local, massless free energy form (light) to a
4-D, temporal, local, and massive bound energy form (charged elementary particles). With charge comes
quantized mass, time, and gravity - the asymmetric "gang of four" necessary to conserve all the energy,
entropy, and symmetry of the light that created atomic matter.
In physics today, the term "information" is largely synonymous with "entropy". Systems with greater entropy
contain more information; an ice cube contains less information and less entropy than the same molecular
system liquified, simply because it requires more information to specify the location or momentum of all the
water molecules in the liquid vs the solid state. As a gas, the molecular system contains even more entropy,
energy, and information. However, in the "Tetrahedron Model", as presented in these web pages, we are not
interested in information as entropy, rather we are interested in information in the sense of order, which is to
say, negentropy. In the example given of liquid water vs the ice cube, we are more interested in the crystal
than in the liquid (or gaseous) phase. We are especially concerned with information in the sense of biological
information, the highly complex order that characterizes living systems. Biological systems are negentropic
systems, and in the only example we know (Earth-life), these systems have their energetic origin in the
negentropic action of gravitation and the energy released by this force through our Sun.
The conversion of a purely entropic and symmetric flow of energy (such as a freely expanding system of
photons or light), into a lesser entropic and finally negentropic flow of energy, is suggested by a trend among
the three intrinsic motions listed at the "Entropy" vertex of the "Tetrahedron Model". First we list the intrinsic
motion of light (as gauged by velocity c), the purest pos-entropic (and most symmetric) form of energy.
Secondly, we list the intrinsic motion of time, which, because it is one-way and causally connected, has less
degrees of freedom and is a more orderly (historically collimated and entangled) system entraining less
positive entropy than pure light. Temporal systems will necessarily contain matter, that is, bound
electromagnetic energy, whereas light is free electromagnetic energy. Finally, temporal systems necessarily
contain gravity (since they contain matter), the final intrinsic motion we list at the Entropy vertex. Gravity,
being a spacetime contractile force (or collapsing geometry), is as completely and purely neg-entropic as light
is completely and purely pos-entropic. Time seems to be halfway between these extremes, and indeed, time is
created by gravity from light's intrinsic motion and light's spatial conservation domain. Gravity creates time
via the annihilation of space and the extraction (or revelation) of a metrically equivalent temporal residue.
(See: "The Creation of Time from Space by Gravity".) The dimensions of spacetime are entropic
conservation domains for free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy, created by the intrinsic (entropic)
motions of light, time, and gravitation. (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
The creation of a local system of negentropic order from a non-local system of pos-entropic light is the story
of the creation of our material Universe. Light is born with a spacetime metric: "In the Beginning", light and
spacetime are created together, spacetime acting as the entropic conservation domain for light's energy.
file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/negentropic.html

Page 1 of 6

Negentropic Information

11/16/11 8:59 AM

Spacetime and its metric are created by the intrinsic (entropic) motion of light: light is the only energy form
which can create its own conservation domain from nothing (via its own intrinsic motion). The combination
of light and its dimensional metric has (as we have discovered during the last century) another energetic
expression or form, manifesting as "virtual particles", typically elementary particles (such as electronpositron pairs) which flash into existence and then annihilate within the Heisenberg time limit for such virtual
productions. These particle-antiparticle virtual pairs are simply the elementary forms of bound
electromagnetic energy (matter) - the alternative form of free electromagnetic energy (light) - trying to
manifest, knocking on the door, trying to gain a foothold in light's conservation domain, trying to establish its
own alternative conservation domain (historic spacetime). Usually this attempt by the bound electromagnetic
energy forms to manifest an alternative (and less symmetric) 4-D conservation domain is firmly suppressed
via matter-antimatter annihilation reactions in which the bound elements destroy each other and return to
their original form of 3-D light or free electromagnetic energy (a primary example of light conserving its own
symmetric energy state).
It is an intrinsic and unexplained (a "given") characteristic of our universe that its principle energy form
(electromagnetic energy) consists of two interchangeable types, free (light) and bound (atomic matter). The
conversion of light into atomic matter has happened only once, during the "Big Bang", whereas the
reconversion of matter into light has been ongoing ever since, a process of symmetry conservation or
recovery, of which our Sun provides the prime local example.
The original and one-time conversion of light into matter requires both extremely high energy and breaking
the symmetry of the primordial light universe via the weak force. (See: "The Origin of Matter and
Information"). Some of the original particle-antiparticle pairs (about one in ten billion) do not annihilate each
other; the antimatter member (probably an electrically neutral leptoquark) self-annihilates and leaves its
matter counterpart without an annihilation partner, essentially isolating it in "real" time and the 4-D universe.
The charges of the stranded partner, however, remain with it and are conserved (charge conservation). These
are the same charges that were intended to produce an annihilation reaction with its antimatter mate, thereby
returning the system to light and its original symmetric energy state. The conserved charges are therefore
light's symmetry "debts", symmetry transformed to a manifest, 4-D particle form of conserved charges which
are held indefinitely in the temporal dimension until they can find a suitable annihilation partner, that is,
reunite with their lost antimatter mate or its equivalent. Order and information (in the negentropic sense) are
built upon charge conservation - the symmetry debts of light - symmetry transformed from a 2-D (or 3-D)
atemporal, non-local, massless free energy form (light) to a 4-D, temporal, local, and massive bound energy
form (charged elementary particles). With charge comes quantized mass, time, and gravity - the asymmetric
"gang of four" necessary to conserve all the energy, entropy, and symmetry of the light that created atomic
matter. (See: "A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory".)
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light: this is a realization of "Noether's Theorem", and it is
the pathway by which a purely pos-entropic system of light becomes transformed into an orderly system of
atomic matter, conserved charges, and negentropic gravity. (See: Entropy, Gravity, and Thermodynamics".)
Free electromagnetic energy becomes transformed into bound electromagnetic energy via the asymmetric
action of the weak force, but the indefinitely conserved charges of the bound atomic form are the symmetry
debts of the free light form, charges which will act at every and any opportunity to return the derived bound
system of lesser symmetry to the original free system of greater symmetry - in accordance with "Noether's
Theorem". (See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".) Noether's Theorem states that in any
continuous, multicomponent field, such as the electromagnetic field (or the metric field of spacetime), where
we find a symmetry we will find an associated conservation law, and vice versa. Charge conservation in
file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/negentropic.html

Page 2 of 6

Negentropic Information

11/16/11 8:59 AM

matter and the inertial forces of spacetime are common examples of Noether's Theorem enforced in nature.
The importance of symmetry principles in physics is precisely because they are associated with conservation
laws. This is the great "Truth and Beauty" theorem, first realized in intuitive, poetic form by John Keats
(1819) and in rational, mathematical form by Emmy Noether about a century later (1918).
Conservation laws and symmetry principles can be expressed mathematically, thus allowing the rational,
abstract, and quantitative investigation, comprehension, and harnessing of natural law - humanity's universal
niche, the key to man's dominion over nature: mind over matter.
We do not understand the mechanism of weak force primordial symmetry-breaking (although I speculate
upon this issue in "The Origin of Matter and Information"), nor do we understand its magnitude. Both seem
to be "givens" of our Cosmos, perhaps determined randomly at the Multiverse systems level. This would
amount to an "anthropic" explanation for these parameters - only in the subset of life-friendly material
universes (all electromagnetic?) could the Cosmos become self-aware through creatures ("agents") like us
and speculate about such issues. (See: "The Information Pathway".)
Negative and Positive Energy and Entropy
15 Nov., 2011
The positive entropy drive of light (the "intrinsic motion" of electromagnetic radiation or free
electromagnetic energy) creates space and the expansion and cooling of space - as "gauged" (regulated) by
the universal electromagnetic constant "c". The energy gauge "c" also establishes the metric of space and its
symmetric "non-local" energy state (suppressing time, mass, gravitation, and explicit charges).
The negative entropy drive of gravitation (the "intrinsic motion" of gravitational space associated with any
mass/matter or bound form of electromagnetic energy) creates time and the expansion and dilution of history
- as gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G". The gravitational gauge "G" modifies the metric of
space by converting some space to time, establishing an asymmetric (one-way) dimensional temporal
component which "warps" the original non-local symmetry of space and creates local centers of energy
concentric upon mass/matter or the bound (immobile) forms of electromagnetic energy. (See: Entropy,
Gravitation, and Thermodynamics.)
Whereas the positive entropy drive of light causes the expansion and cooling of space, the negative entropy
drive of gravitation causes the contraction and heating of space, and the aggregation of matter and all forms
of bound energy toward a common central massive local point. The actual intrinsic motion of gravitation or
gravitational space is caused by the intrinsic motion of time, which is the entropy drive of bound
electromagnetic energy, just as the intrinsic motion of light is the entropy drive of free electromagnetic
energy. The intrinsic motions of light and time are both gauged by velocity c, establishing a spacetime metric
in which one second of temporal duration is metrically equivalent to ~300,000 kilometers of linear spatial
distance (the time component of spacetime is suppressed in the absence of bound energy forms). The motion
of time is one-way into history (matter's causal information conservation domain) and symmetrically
concentric upon the center of any mass. (Time is necessarily one-way due to its function as the causal linkage
between material events. Matter is connected by one-way causal history, light is connected by all-way
acausal space.) Time's intrinsic dimensional motion drags space along with it to the center of mass where
time disappears into the historical 4th dimension (at right angles to all three spatial dimensions), causing the
spatial dimensions to self-annihilate (3-D space cannot follow 1-D time through the point-like center of mass
into history). (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)

file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/negentropic.html

Page 3 of 6

Negentropic Information

11/16/11 8:59 AM

When the spatial dimensions self-annihilate, they leave behind (or reveal) a temporal residue which is the
metric equivalent of the annihilated space (because "space" is really "spacetime", containing a hidden or
suppressed temporal component, as Einstein discovered). This temporal residue, having its own intrinsic
(entropic) motion, immediately marches off into history, dragging more space behind it, etc., the self-feeding
cycle continuing forever. Hence time and gravity induce each other somewhat in the fashion of the electric
and magnetic components of an electromagnetic field, but yielding in this case a field of spacetime with a
gravitational metric (a spatial metric with an explicit (rather than implicit) asymmetric "warping" temporal
component). (See: "The Creation of Time from Space".)
In our sun, the negative energy and entropy of gravitation not only produces heat but causes the fusion of
hydrogen into helium, releasing huge quantities of positive nuclear energy which balances the negative
gravitational energy of the sun's mass, providing a steady and long-term source of radiant energy for life on
earth. The negative gravitational energy of the sun holds the planets in their orbits, provides heat and light,
and builds the elements of the periodic table which life will need for its full expression (the heavy elements
are built in larger and hotter stars than our sun, including supernovas which also disperse the elements
throughout our galaxy).
On planet earth, negative gravitational energy has built up the planet from the debris of the solar accretion
disc, including violent early periods of heavy bombardment by massive meteorites, comets, asteroids, and
even planetesimals (the latter apparently creating our moon), during a primordial era when fragile living
forms could not have existed on our planet. But when the bombardment ceased and the planet cooled, with its
precious load of heavy elements and water created by the negentropic work of stars and supernovas
throughout the Milky Way galaxy (itself a gigantic negentropic assembly), life rapidly burst into existence
under the light and heat of the sun, following a negentropic evolutionary/information pathway culminating in
humanity. (See: "The Information Ladder".) Hence the patient work of both positive and negative entropy
and energy, within the entropic conservation domains of space and history, as provided by the intrinsic
dimensional motions of light, time, and gravity (gravity being but the spatial consequence of time's intrinsic
motion, and the conversion force (in either direction) between the spatial and temporal entropic drives of free
vs bound electromagnetic energy), have allowed the Cosmos to achieve self-awareness through living
systems containing enormous quantities of sophisticated, coordinated, and purposeful (self-interested and
reproducing) information. Living information systems have their own peculiar form of intrinsic motion Darwinian organic evolution - and their own equally peculiar entropic pathways - disease and death. (See:
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos.)
While the negentropic energy of the sun builds the elements and produces a huge positive outflow of heat and
light, the negentropic energy of the earth, being a much weaker field, produces instead the complex systems
of life (with help from the sun's energy), but the earth does not produce much radiant energy of its own, other
than reemitting most of what it receives from the sun. There is of course a small thermal entropic flow
leaving the planet from exothermic chemical reactions (especially wildfires), radioactivity, volcanoes,
electrical discharges, and residual cooling of the planet's interior, but nothing even vaguely comparable to the
massive positive outflows of energy from our sun. We have compared this difference to the gravitational
payment of "interest" on matter's symmetry debt (in the case of the earth) vs the gravitational payment of
"principle" on matter's symmetry debt (in the case of the sun). In both cases, gravity creates the time
dimension of matter, but only in the case of the sun does gravity actually convert bound to free energy,
paying off the principle of matter's symmetry debt in accordance with Noether's Theorem. This symmetryconservation role of gravitation goes to completion in Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. (see:
"The Double Conservation Role of Gravity"). However, the living organic information systems of earth, the
file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/negentropic.html

Page 4 of 6

Negentropic Information

11/16/11 8:59 AM

creations of negentropic energy from both the earth and the sun, do emit thermal and electromagnetic energy
to the distant cosmos from both wildfires and human technological activities - the latter have come to include
releases of both fusion and fission nuclear energy, as if we are trying to mimic the sun's activity. Continuing
this theme, we have even created new heavy ("transuranic") elements. Humans are furthermore sending
satellites and spaceships into orbit, other planets, and interstellar space. Hence the information component of
the earth's living system is producing its own small contribution to the positive entropic outflow from earth's
surface, which in the course of time, may yet prove to be the most valuable product of the negentropic
energies of our solar and galactic systems.
Links
Information
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
Section VI: Introduction to Information
The Information Pathway (text)
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
The Destruction of Information
The Fractal Organization of Nature (table No. 1)
The Information Ladder (table)
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
The Intrinsic Motions of Time, Space, and Gravity
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
Traveling Twin Paradox: Covariance of Space and Time
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation (Part 2, Section A)
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
About Gravity
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy" and the "Accelerating Universe": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
The Fractal Organization of Nature
Section III: Introduction to Fractals
file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/negentropic.html

Page 5 of 6

Negentropic Information

11/16/11 8:59 AM

The Fractal Organization of Nature (table)
Part 1: Microphysical Realm
Part 2: Biophysical Realm
Part 3: Astrophysical Realm
Part 4: Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Mode
Part 5: Metaphysical Realm - Rational Mode
Part6: The Fractal Organization of Nature (summary) (text)
Newton and Darwin: The Evolution and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos
Commentary on the Metaphysical Realm (rational mode)
The Human Connection
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3 (Summary)
Unified Field Table: Simple Form
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"; Postscript
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
A Short Course in the Unified Field Theory
home page

file:///Users/johngowan/Documents/TheoryOfEverything/negentropic.html

Page 6 of 6

