A General Systems Approach to the Unified Field Theory - Part 4 (General Systems
Discussion)
(revised Jan., 2012)
John A. Gowan
home page
(The 3 papers below form the first three "scientific" parts of this paper, to which I simply provide links, rather
than repeat.)
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3 (Summary)
GENERAL SYSTEMS PROPERTIES OF THE TABLE
(See also: Introduction to General Systems; and: Introduction to Fractals.)
Note to readers: The author views certain religious, mythological, astrological, and occult "World Systems"
or cosmologies as examples of ancient, intuitive General Systems which display relevant features of the
universal 4x3 fractal algorithm, a pattern also seen in today's "scientific" or "rational" cosmologies. These
intuitive systems are examined in the context of their General Systems properties only, without endorsement
in any other sense.
Nowadays we are equally plagued by scientific (rational) and religious (intuitive) "fundamentalism" - people
who are convinced they alone are in possession of the "One Truth". Scientists have become as bigoted and
blind as the Church that martyred Bruno and persecuted Galileo - and even those people are still with us,
except lately they have fastened upon Darwin and "Intelligent Design", rather than upon Copernicus, Kepler,
and the heliocentric model of the Solar System.
While the scientific and rational mind may scoff at religious and occult systems of thought, few scientists
would care to deny the value of the arts, which are also peculiarly human and non-rational perceptions of
reality. The fact is, as science itself has forced us to realize, that our human-scale perception of "reality" is at
once specialized, relative, personal, subjective, and limited. There is no greater fool than the man who thinks
there is only one "right" way to see the world. Nobody knows what an atom "really" is; but apparently atoms
make human beings to try to answer that very question: humans are (apparently) a collection of atoms in
search of themselves. Our view of life is that it is the chemical information pathway by which the universe
knows and explores itself, including new modes of creativity, new forms of beauty, and new means of
connectivity.
General Systems is just another way to get at the "truth underlying reality", whatever that phrase may mean.
We pile up circumstantial evidence of a certain sort (the 4x3 fractal algorithm, for example) and hope it
points us toward a general understanding of our situation, toward the general principles which underlie our
existence and that of the World. As a social rather than a personal effort, it is perhaps the best methodology
we have at present.
A central purpose of this paper is to discover and share a glimpse of how the physical Universe works in
terms of the general principles governing energy and its conservation. But because this table of our rational,
scientific cosmology is arranged in accordance with the pattern and dynamics of a universal General System,

or fractal algorithm of the Cosmos, we are in a position to get more than just scientific information from it.
We can compare it to other historic and traditional intuitive cosmic systems, religious and occult, which to
one degree or another share this same pattern and dynamic. By this comparative means, we can actually
extract some "human meaning" from all this "scientific" data.
"As above, so below": the phrase is an ancient, intuitive acknowledgement of the fractal nature of the
Universe. But while it presumably works in both directions, we must realize that emergent properties of size
and complexity will always prevent us from making exact analogies and transferals of logic between levels.
We can expect to find general patterns, but also unpredicted surprises - quantum mechanics and black holes
are good examples at opposite ends of the scale of size. "Inflation", the "multiverse", "strings" and
"wormholes" may be others. We don't know what we don't know, so above all, we must keep an open mind.
General Systems is an invaluable tool and guide, but it must always be supplemented by experimental
scientific data and rationality, as well as by the arts and our intuitive and aesthetic faculties. Understanding
the universe (in a scientific sense) is a "whole brain", open mind, social effort. Establishing a personal
relationship with the universe (in a spiritual sense) is entirely a subjective and intuitive matter for each
individual.
The intuitive mind is just as clever as the rational mind in discovering the underlying order of the Universe,
and it has been busy at this task for a much longer time. The "Einsteins" of the intuitive mind have figured
out this order in generalized, abstract terms long ago; the rational mind is only now catching up. We live in a
fortunate time - even 50 years ago we could not have filled out the rational table; it would not have been
possible, due to lack of scientific data, to make the comparisons we are now able to consider.

Religious Systems
The first comparison I want to make is between the cosmological story told by this scientific model and that
told by the Old and New Testament of the Bible. In their larger features these stories are virtually identical.
The Universe in both cases begins as light, followed by a short period of grace or symmetry, which is spoiled
by a descent or "fall" into a chaotic, disharmonious state of manifestation and asymmetry. In the rational
model, the weak force plays the role of Satan, the fallen angel, a principle of manifestation, a duality
apparently built into the system from the beginning.
But God does not abandon his "spoiled" creation; the principle of conservation, the salvation of souls,
promises an eventual redemption, a return to the original condition of "grace", the analog of the return to
symmetry, unity, connectivity, and light which we have mapped in the physical model. "Heaven" is but the
conservation domain (or "dimension") of spirit. Spirit itself resides in the connections of the Cosmos, and in
the physical laws and principles which govern its existence, conservation, interactions, and evolution. In the
rational model, "God" is embodied as the "Multiverse" - all-symmetric and all-creative, the Source and First
Cause of all reality and energy.
As material beings, humans are especially aware of and disturbed by the fact that bound energy as a class is
curiously separated from its conservation domain, historic spacetime. We experience instead an "Eternal
Now", which is largely the causal effect of matter's historic information matrix. (See: "The Time Train".) We
need to understand that this separation, while necessary and purposeful, is temporary and to some extent
illusory, as the Universe is in fact a wholly connected unity in time and space, and is constantly evolving
toward a more perfect realization of that central fact. We are all immortal in history; while the Universe lives,
we live.
We live in the separate, manifest world of the weak force, the temporal "hell" of the physical realm, but we
remember with longing an earlier time of unity, when we were but a potential for experience in the womb of

the Universe. It is to this condition of unity ("enlightenment") we hope to return, not as infants, but as adults,
creative in our own right, illumined by spiritual awareness, and with a more complete understanding of
reality.
The interaction of two energy states or two conservation domains is a fundamental and recurring theme in
Nature and our model (space vs time, strong force vs weak force, light vs matter). The intersection of a
symmetric with an asymmetric conservation domain is necessary to bring any system into manifestation. The
interaction or intersection of the symmetric spiritual domain with the asymmetric physical domain is the
fundamental symbolism of the Christian Cross. Such an interaction is possible only if the conservation rules
of both domains are respected. Hence the death of Christ on the cross symbolizes a necessary obedience by
spirit to the rules of the physical domain; the Resurrection follows as a compensating obedience to the rules
of the spiritual domain. Christ's physical mortality, like our own, is the price spirit must pay to interact with
the physical world. Whether or not you believe this story in its literal and religious sense, it is symbolically
correct, rationally and intuitively, which is why it has endured. (See: "A Religious Interpretation of the
Tetrahedron Model".)

Astrological Systems
Next I want to look at the correspondence of this physical matrix to the astrological world model, as
astrology is also an ancient, western, intuitive 4x3 cosmological model, but one I would characterize as
occult, rather than religious, at least as we view it today.
Astrology is a General Systems model of the human condition. What is unusual about astrology is that it
models humanity in terms of a cosmological (astronomical) system. Astrology makes a fractal or General
Systems statement about the relationship of humanity to the Universe: if we understand one, we understand
the other; at the least, they are iterations of the same 4x3 fractal algorithm.
The constellations, stars, and planets visible to the naked eye (in essence, the Milky Way galaxy), were the
full extent of the Universe known at the time astrology originated, at least 4,000 years ago. In terms of its
historical origins, Astrology is a mixture of a rational and an intuitive model (as it is based on astronomical
observations) and was just as universal in its intended scope as our present day Unified Field Theory. The
ancients wanted more from their rational model than simply the ability to predict planetary positions,
eclipses, and seasonal changes; they wanted human meaning from it as well. I am asking the same from our
modern Unified Field model: what is the meaning of our modern cosmological system for humanity? What
does it say about our fundamental questions? What can we learn from it about ourselves and the "human
condition"?
The ancients essentially compared humanity to our galaxy, which was their observable Universe; we are
extending this comparison to the limits of the Universe as we know it today (in terms of fundamental physical
principles as well as cosmological observations). If Man, galaxy, and Universe are all iterations of the same
fractal, the comparison should remain valid.
A test of this hypothesis is provided by mapping the ancient system on top of the modern, and seeing if there
is a significant convergence of meaning. In this way we compare the thought of two kinds of genius - the
intuitive genius of the ancients, and the rational genius of the modern world. The "heavy lifting" in both
camps has already been done. Our contribution must be that of aligning the two systems correctly and
interpreting the results with skill and sensitivity.
The astrological system can be represented as a 4x3 matrix of 3 "Qualities" vertically mapped against 4
horizontal "Elements". Again we see a symmetric, general, or spiritual domain (the 3 Qualities: Cardinal,

Fixed, Mutable) intersecting or interacting with a more asymmetric, specific, physical domain (the 4
Elements: Fire, Water, Earth, Air). (Seen also as global vs local gauge symmetry.)
As the modeler, I have to decide how to assign the astrological attributes to the physical matrix, that is,
choose the appropriate correspondences between the two systems.
On the vertical axis I pair "Mutable" with Energy, since energy is changeable but conserved, taking many
forms; "Cardinal" corresponds to symmetry and charge conservation, the principle which translates Law
(symmetry conservation) into matter (charge conservation); "Fixed" corresponds to manifestation, therefore
to particles and matter. Astrology does not give us a 4th quality to fill out our 4x4 table, so I have had to
invent one which I call "Motive", conveying the idea of directional action, intent, or evolution to correspond
with the "agenda" or "drive" of the force fields (field vectors) in paying matter's symmetry and entropy debts,
and converting bound energy to free energy.
For the horizontal axis of the elements of the physical world, I choose Fire for the electromagnetic force,
Water for the gravitational force, Earth for the strong force, and Air for the weak force. Those who know
astrology can now fill in the "Sun Signs" corresponding to the cells of the matrix and see if they like the fit
between the traditionally described attributes of the Sun Signs and the physical characteristics of their
rational counterparts. (See: "Table of the Sun Signs" and "Combined Table of Astrology and Physics".) I
think in every case they will find the fit remarkably good, and fraught with meaning both old and new.
Unfortunately, it is rare to find a person who is versed in both physics and astrology, so the beauty of the
correspondence between the two systems may not be readily apparent to the uninitiated. I try to make them so
in some of the astrological papers cited below.
In the terms of Norbert Wiener's cybernetics, the Qualities are the "inputs", the Elements are the "thruputs",
and the Sun Signs are the system "outputs", a dynamic which applies equally well to the rational system.
The correspondence between the astrological and rational cosmic systems is also shown in the "Hourglass" or
"Grail" diagrams (see also: "The Particle Grail Diagram" and "The Spacetime Grail Diagram"). The
interpretation of the human condition as revealed by these convergent systems is shown in the "Personal" and
"Civil" Grail diagrams. These diagrams are discussed in detail in two papers, the "Physical Correlates of the
Astrological Sun Signs", The "Sun Signs" of Astrology: Part One and The "Sun Signs" of Astrology: Part
Two. (See also the "Overview of the Astrological System of the Grail Diagrams" for a synoptic and general
discussion.) Although such papers are the result of years of thought, reading, and work, of course they remain
purely subjective, containing in the end nothing more nor less than my personal speculations upon these
matters.

Summary
Here, and in the papers, diagrams, and tables cited above, we have seen how the astrological system maps
upon the modern rational system with exquisite meaning and precision. The Chinese classic "I Ching" (Book
of Changes) is an Eastern example, independently derived, of an ancient, intuitive, occult system which is
also based on a perfect 4x3 metric: 4 male trigrams joined to 4 female trigrams, producing 4 hexagrams. Its
basic dynamic and structure are perfectly in accord with the General System features of our other
cosmological systems, but I do not know enough about its elaborated form to discuss it further.
All these systems of human thought are examples of how the mind, in both its intuitive and rational mode,
has grasped the fundamental pattern and order of the fractal Universe. Since we ourselves, including our
brains, are part and parcel of the same fractal order, these correspondences of thought are the natural outcome
of the patient process and evolution of truth-seeking. (See: "Table of Natural Organization" and "The Fractal
Organization of Nature".)

It should be noted that the 4x4 matrix table is but one approach to General Systems modeling of the Unified
Field Theory. Others are discussed and cited in the "introductory" papers linked near the beginning of this
paper. Especially to be noted is the "Tetrahedron Model", which considers the conservation laws and
principles which underlie and support the four forces, forming a more fundamental and simpler level of the
universal fractal hierarchy. (See: "Spiritual and Scientific Principles of the 'Tetrahedron Model'"; and:
"Synopsis of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedron Model".)
The Universe values symmetry, for that is the conservation principle which upholds us all (charge
conservation, charge invariance). Our natural perception of symmetry is beauty, hence we are naturally led by
our delight in beauty toward enlightenment. We should look very carefully at this issue of symmetry and
beauty, for in this aesthetic principle is our natural path to salvation (in every sense). Einstein's strict
adherence to the principles of aesthetics led him to truth in his equations, and the discovery of the symmetry
conditions of light and spacetime.
We also seem to have a natural perception of symmetry in our native sense of social justice. The "Golden
Rule": "do unto others as you would have them do unto you", is the fundamental and universal symmetry
principle of social behavior. "Liberty, equality, fraternity"; "all men are created equal"; "one man, one vote";
"all men are equal before the law": these are all symmetry statements regarding the civil and political status
of humanity. "All men are equal before God" is the equivalent expression of spiritual symmetry.
Spiritual awareness is the awareness of connection - of our connections to the fractal nature of the Universe,
all the way back to its beginnings in the "Multiverse" as unmanifest Principle. Our spiritual awareness is the
self-awareness of the fractal Universe: "Man created in the image and likeness of God". We are each a
quantum unit of this fractal self-awareness. We cannot escape it, it is in our DNA as a genetic heritage
bestowed through evolution upon our species. Let us learn to use it well, remembering that symmetry in all
its meanings is our true and natural guide - Noether's Theorem is the "Golden Rule" of natural law. "Beauty
is truth, truth beauty - that is all ye know on Earth and all ye need to know" (Keats - Ode on a Grecian Urn 1819). And similarly, from Socrates in Plato's Symposium: "This is the life which man should lead above all
others in the contemplation of Beauty absolute ... Dwelling in that realm alone, he will bring forth not images
of beauty, but Beauty itself, and so would become immortal and be the friend of God." (c. 370 B.C.) (See:
The Tetrahedron Conservation Model and Plato's "Symposium".)
Links:
Introduction to the Papers
Section I: Unification
Section II: Gravitation
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
Section V: Introduction to Cosmology
Section VII: Entropy
Section VIII: General Systems, Complex Systems
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIII: The Solar Archetype
Section XIV: Causality
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions
Weak Force Papers:
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)

The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D) Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
The "Tetrahedron Model" in the Context of "Global and Local Gauge Symmetries":
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
General Topics:
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (text - updated copy)
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (original gif diagram)
Information
The Information Pathway (text)
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Causality vs Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway

Tables and Diagrams:
Gravity
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model of Light and Conservation Law
Unified Diagram of the Four Forces
Diagram of the Particle Forces
Diagram of the Spacetime Forces
The Particle Table
The Information Ladder (table)
Unified Field Table: Simple Form
Unified Field Table: "Bare" Form
The Interaction of 4 Conservation Laws with the 4 Forces of Physics
References
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. M. Dekker, New
York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
de Chardin, Pierre Teilhard: The Phenomenon of Man. French: Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1955; English:
Harper and Row, New York, 1959.
Close, Frank: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212, 1221-8 (Nobel
lecture).
Gowan, J. C. (Sr.) 1975. "Trance, Art, Creativity"
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos. A. A. Knoph, 2004, 569 + xii pp.
Gross, D. J. and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 30: 1343.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed
Equations of Quark Theory."
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics 1975, 43
(3), 199-220.
Lederman, Leon with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Lederman, Leon and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Oerter, Robert: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin (Plume) 2006.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. Oxford University
Press, NY
Politzer, H. D.. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
Resnick, Robert: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Stewart, Ian. "Why Beauty is Truth". 2007, Basic Books
Trefil, James: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier) 1983.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.
home page
Go to Part 2

Go to Part I

