John A. Gowan
home page
The Short-Range or "Particle" Forces: Part II
(revised March, 2012)
(go to: "The Short-Range or 'Particle Forces': Part I")
Table of Contents:
Abstract
Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs)
The Weak Force Creation of Singlets
A Particle Metric
Virtual Particles
Virtual Particles and the Spacetime Metric
Particle Creation
Particle Decays
Baryon Decays
Summary
Links
Abstract
The strong force is responsible for the binding of compound atomic nuclei and the binding of quarks in the
class of heavy composite particles, the hadrons. Hadrons consist of baryons (containing 3 quarks) and mesons
(containing quark-antiquark pairs). The weak force is responsible for the creation, destruction, and
transformation of single, unpaired elementary particles (quarks and leptons). Both forces are to be understood
in terms of energy, charge, and especially symmetry conservation. The strong force conserves whole
quantum units of charge and achieves "least bound energy" nuclear configurations; the weak force ensures
the invariance of all conserved parameters in elementary particles during the creation, destruction, or
transformation of single, unpaired particles.
The Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs) (weak force)
The IVBs are unusual in that unlike all other field vectors of the "standard model", they are massive. It is the
great mass of the IVBs that makes the weak force "weak", that is, slow to act. This is because the energy to
produce these massive bosons must be borrowed, and the more energy required, the more difficult it is to
borrow it. The "W" and "Z" are about 81 and 91 times heavier than the proton, respectively, and the
hypothetical "X" is presumed to be very much more massive still.
The IVBs are probably metric particles, that is, particles composed entirely of the dimensional metric bound
into a dense and specific configuration. Their mass is derived entirely from the binding energy required to
deform and hold the metric in their own particular way. The IVBs apparently act by engulfing particles
within their unique geometry, which brings reactants very close together so they can interact in ways they
could not in ordinary, extended space. In this regard the IVBs are like metric catalysts, and resemble the
"strings" of string theory. The IVBs are evidently derived from the dense metric of the early Universe, when
the reactions they now rarely produce would have been a commonplace of that primordial energy-dense
environment. The mass of the IVBs recreates a primordial force unification symmetric energy state, as
gauged by the Higgs boson (in the case of the "W" IVBs, the "electroweak" force unification era as it existed
during the "Big Bang"). All transformations originating with the electroweak force unification symmetry
state or era can therefore be reproduced by the "W" IVB. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force

IVBs".)
A basic function of the IVBs is to form a bridge between real particles and the virtual particle "sea" of the
vacuum; the IVBs thus make available all the electric, number, color, and flavor charges of the virtual
particle "sea", so that "real" particles can use them to accomplish transformations and decays, and to
materialize and dematerialize as necessary. The IVB is essentially acting like a human "spirit medium" or
priest, bridging the gap between the manifest and unmanifest worlds. It is the "magical" ability of the IVBs to
contact, catalyze, and materialize the virtual particle "sea" that is their distinguishing characteristic and that
requires their unique structure and mass.
The role of the (hypothetical) "X" IVB is to compress the quarks of a baryon so tightly within its dense
metric that the color charge self-annihilates, producing a leptoquark. The "X" IVB reproduces the primordial
force unification symmetric energy state of the "GUT" era, as it existed during the "Big Bang", as gauged by
an appropriate Higgs boson ("Grand Unified Theory" or strong force plus electroweak force unification era).
(See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".) With no color charge, the leptoquark can decay like any other heavy
lepton. Proton decay is rare because the mass of the X is so great; the great mass of the X is due to the great
energy required to compress the quarks sufficiently to vanish their color charges (the principle of "asymptotic
freedom"). The role of the IVBs is to bring real particles and virtual particle-antiparticle pairs into a sufficient
proximity, enabling real particles to exchange their conserved charges and energy with the alternative charge
carriers of the virtual leptonic and/or meson field, thus manifesting aspects of the virtual field, and so
facilitating the decay of the "real" particles to lower bound energy states. (See: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak
Force Mechanism".)
The Weak Force Creation of Singlets
The weak force only creates particle "singlets" - isolated particles of matter without antimatter partners.
Charge and symmetry conservation require charge invariance over time - elementary particles created today
must be the same in all respects as those created in the "Big Bang". The weak force mechanism satisfies this
criterion by recreating the original energy-dense environmental conditions (via the huge mass of the IVBs) in
which the elementary particles in question were first created.
The most significant feature of the massive IVBs is that they recreate the original conditions of the energydense primordial metric in which particles were first created and transformed during the early micromoments of the "Big Bang". This recapitulation ensures that the original and invariant values of charge, mass,
and energy are handed on to the next generation. The IVB mass not only provides a "safe house" where
charge and energy transfers can take place, it simultaneously ensures that the appropriate alternative charge
carriers are present.
There is a crucial difference between the electromagnetic creation of particles via particle-antiparticle
formation, and the weak force transformation of existing particles to other elementary forms. In the case of
particle-antiparticle pair creation, there can be no question of the suitability of the partner for a subsequent
annihilation reaction which will conserve symmetry. However, in the case of the transformation of an
existing elementary particle to another form, alternative charge carriers must be used, since actual
antiparticles can only produce annihilations. But how is the weak force to guarantee that the alternative
charge carrier - which may be a meson, a neutrino, or a massive lepton - will have the correct charge in kind
and magnitude to conserve symmetry at some future date in some future reaction, with an unknown partner
which is not its antiparticle? Furthermore, the quark charges are both partial and hidden (because they are
"confined"), and the number charges of the massive leptons and baryons are also hidden (because they are
"implicit") - they have no long-range projection (such as the magnetic field of electric charge) to indicate to a
potential reaction partner the relative condition of their energy state.

These problems are all solved by a return to the original conditions in which these particles and
transformations were first created, much as we return and refer to the Bureau of Standards when we need to
recalibrate our instruments. The necessity for charge and mass invariance in the service of symmetry, charge,
and energy conservation therefore offers a plausible explanation for the otherwise enigmatic large mass of the
weak force IVBs. The IVB mass serves to recreate the original energy-dense environmental conditions in
which the reactions they now mediate took place, ensuring charge and mass invariance and hence symmetry,
charge, and energy conservation regardless of the type of alternative charge carrier that may be required, or
when or where the new elementary particles may be created. (See: Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the
Weak Force.)
A Particle Metric
In the dimensional realm we have seen that space, created by the intrinsic motion of light, is also the entropic
conservation domain of light, establishing (via the inertial forces of the metric) the rate of propagation of
electromagnetic waves, the symmetry of the dimensional metric, and conserving free energy within a defined
dimensional framework. Space also accommodates the additional energy conservation requirements of bound
energy through the addition of a 4th dimension, time (an alternative, primordial entropy drive for matter,
creating history). The forces of gravitation and inertia, the intrinsic motions of light and time, demonstrate
these dimensional conservation properties to our physical senses. (See: "Spatial vs Temporal Entropy".)
But spacetime is also the conservation domain of particles. The fact that a dimensional framework exists
(time and historic spacetime) to conserve the energy accounts of matter implies that a corresponding particle
framework, a particle "metric", must also exist embedded in the structure of spacetime. The inherent capacity
of space and light to accommodate and conserve the dimensional aspects of mass (via time and gravitation)
implies also that space and light have an inherent capacity to produce massive particles, and vice versa. Each
capacity implies the latent presence of the other: why otherwise should either exist?
For a further discussion of the weak force in its full energy spectrum, see: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak
Force IVBs".
Virtual Particles
The manifest world of particles is but the 4-dimensional, explicit, "real" expression of this 2-dimensional,
implicit, "virtual" potential of space to produce matter (the elementary particle analog of Plato's realm of
"ideal forms"). It is like the metric of spacetime, inherent in the structure and conservation function of light,
but expressed in terms of particles rather than waves. This is the particle spectrum of spacetime (the virtual
particle "sea" or "zoo"), a spectrum whose full extent we are still exploring with our accelerators.
Ordinarily, this spectrum is expressed only virtually, in the production of particle-antiparticle pairs of
different types; if we could identify all the allowed types of virtual particle-antiparticle pairs, we would know
what the full particle spectrum is that spacetime is prepared to produce and conserve. Of course, we only see
the ones that become real, including those we succeed in producing in our accelerators. But the "vacuum"
(spacetime) is at all times full of these virtual pairs, in greater or lesser abundance and duration depending
upon the energy required to produce them. It is this background of virtual particles which I refer to as the
embedded particle "metric", "sea", or "zoo" of spacetime (the Heisenberg-Dirac "vacuum sea" of virtual
particle-antiparticle pairs).
As far as we can tell from the "real" particles which come from the virtual "sea" of spacetime, only a very
few particle types are allowed and produced - the particle spectrum is quantized and quite limited, as we have
seen in the preceding section. We have identified this particle spectrum as the leptonic spectrum (or series) of
elementary particles. This embedded particle spectrum is simply a "given condition" of our spacetime - we

can no more explain its form or energy parameters than we can explain the magnitude of c or Planck's
constant of energy. But we can learn something about its range and characteristics, depending upon how
complete our theories are, how powerful and/or sensitive our instruments are, and what instruments and
theories we choose to use. It is only in this century that we have become aware of the virtual particle
spectrum embedded in the vacuum, or made much progress in identifying its range in terms of "real"
particles; the "top" quark has been found only recently (Fermilab 1994), although long suspected; the "X"
IVB particle, the leptoquark (and its neutrino), still exist in theory only. A host of other hypothetical particles
may also be present, like fish deep in the vacuum "sea" waiting to be discovered: among others, the particles
of supersymmetry and string theory; the "Higgs" boson; and the particles comprising the notorious "dark
matter" and "dark energy" of cosmology - if any of these actually exist. The high-energy vacuum of
spacetime is like the Earth's ocean depths - we still don't know what is in there. (The leptoquark neutrino
(which may be quite heavy) is my choice as a likely candidate for "dark matter".)
Virtual Particles and the Spacetime Metric
We are usually unaware of the virtual particle-antiparticle background of space, just as we are usually
unaware of the dimensional metric. We become aware of the dimensional metric through gravitation, time,
velocity c, and the inertial forces associated with accelerated motion, and we become aware of the particle
"metric" through high-energy physics experiments, radioactivity and "cosmic rays", and because we and the
world are made from a materialized portion of it. Of course, one awareness is dependent upon the other - we
are aware of the dimensional metric because it affects the massive particles we are made of. What we are
usually not aware of is that the universal system is a conserved and integrated whole - particle and
dimensions alike. Particles are as much a part of spacetime as light; indeed, particles are made from light (a
long-standing hypothesis also proved experimentally only recently - at SLAC). Matter is an asymmetric form
of light, 1/2 of a symmetric particle-antiparticle pair, the energy of light brought to rest in the conserved form
of an elementary particle.
So long as particles remain as particle-antiparticle pairs, they simply continuously annihilate one another and
never intrude into the "real" world of 4-dimensions (we are 4-dimensional chauvinists - the 2-dimensional
world is quite real, but it is so symmetric and quantized at such an energy level that we cannot experience it.
Light is as close as we get to it, but we only see light when it, too, becomes bound and part of our 4-D world.
Our thoughts and dreams are perhaps the only 2-dimensional "virtual" reality we physically experience). Note
the grand analogy (awaiting exposition) between the manifestation of 2-D virtual particles via the massive
weak force IVBs and the manifestation of 2-D thoughts via our hard-won social comprehension and
implementation of natural law. In this we compare the "hard" mathematical structure of natural law plus a
formal social structure, to the massive quantum-mechanical mechanism of the weak force and IVBs. (See: "A
General Systems Analysis of the Creative Process in Nature".)
Particle Creation (weak force)
The difficult problem is how to bring a single particle of matter (rather than a particle-antiparticle pair) out of
the virtual world of 2-dimensions and into the "real" world of 4-dimensions. The problem is one of
conservation: the raw energy, the symmetry, and the entropy of free energy must all be conserved in such a
transformation. The raw energy of light is conserved as the mass and momentum of particles. Symmetry
conservation takes the form of conserved charges (and spin); unless the particle is electrically neutral to begin
with, there will have to be electric charge conservation; a gravitational location charge will inevitably be
engendered, ushering in the time dimension (conserving entropy and causality); if quarks are involved, there
must be a color charge; and finally there must be an "identity" charge (carried by a neutrino), informing
spacetime as to the particular type of particle created. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information".)
An especially difficult problem is that all elementary particles, whether created today or eons ago in the "Big

Bang", must be exactly the same in mass, charge, and all other respects - for obvious reasons of energy,
symmetry, and charge conservation. It is this problem of charge and mass invariance in the creation and
transformation of elementary particles that requires the hugely massive IVBs of the weak force (as scaled by
the Higgs boson) to recreate the primordial energy-dense environmental conditions in which these elementary
particles originated. Only in this way can they be exactly reproduced, anytime, anywhere, regardless of
entropy, the passage of time, the expansion of the Cosmos, etc.
During the Big Bang, the weak force "X" IVB brings (electrically neutral) leptoquarks into the 4th dimension
of real time. As these particles cascade downward via the "W" IVB to their ground state (the proton), they
bring other single leptons (alternative charge carriers) into existence as required to balance electric charge.
The ordinary leptonic field (below the mass energy level of the leptoquarks) functions as an alternative
charge carrier for the massive quark field, which in its absence could not manifest, as quarks could, in that
case, only balance their charges with antiquarks, resulting in "mutually assured annihilation". The identity of
every elementary particle is conserved as an antineutrino (or neutrino) as it is created. All elementary matter
particles in the Universe today have a conserved identity in spacetime in the form of an antineutrino. For
baryons, this is the antineutrino of the antileptoquark whose decay forced matter leptoquarks to become
"real" (the proportion of these asymmetric decays to symmetric particle-antiparticle annihilations is thought
to be roughly one in ten billion). I suggest a possible reaction pathway in "The Particle Table"; (or see: "The
Origin of Matter and Information"). Since all particles are elementary in their origin (including baryons
because of their derivation from leptoquarks), all particles have a conserved identity (and through gravitation,
a known location and mass) in spacetime. Finally, through historic spacetime, all events are permanently
recorded so long as the Universe does not collapse in a "Big Crunch". (See: "A Spacetime Map of the
Universe".)
The philosophers, the poets, and the shamans have known for a long time about the "virtual sea" in its most
generalized spiritual and ideal context and meaning (the "Akashic Record" for one example); the scientists of
today are investigating its narrowest, most literal, and most specialized aspect. Before we put too much
emphasis on the machinery of particle physics, it is well for us to remember that neither "Truth" nor "Beauty"
comes out of a particle accelerator, but only out of the abstracting, synthetic, and emergent communicative
power of the minds, hearts, and souls of human beings.
Particle Decays (weak force)
The leptonic series of elementary particles - electron, muon, tau, and leptoquark, represent quantum steps or
"rungs" in the particle spectrum or "ladder" of spacetime. Elementary particles can be created in these
discreet energies but no others (analogously to the discreet quantum energy levels of electron orbital shells in
atoms). Each step is distinguished by a corresponding neutrino, which is the (explicit) identity charge and
hallmark of an elementary particle: there are no neutrinos associated with the sub-elementary quarks. The
hypothetical leptoquark neutrino carries a single identity charge for all baryons; baryons must all return to the
leptoquark configuration to decay (the color charge must self-annihilate - "in the limit" of "asymptotic
freedom").
An analogous quantum spectrum or series characterizes the quarks; the quark series is of lesser significance
than the leptonic one, for just as quarks are sub-elementary, so the quark spectrum is sub-elementary, and has
no associated neutrinos. Because quarks can exist only as quark-antiquark pairs (the mesons), or triplets
wholly confined within the baryons, they either annihilate each other (the mesons) or their transformations
occur within the confines of the baryon. If their transformations require electric charge conservation, then a
lepton or a charged meson must be extracted from the virtual particle "sea" by the weak force "W"; flavor
transformations among the quarks of a baryon likewise require the services of the "W" IVBs to produce the
necessary flavor charges from the mesons of the virtual sea. (See: "The Role of the "W" IVB in Weak Force
Transformations".)

The decays of leptons are the simplest to understand (see reactions in "The Particle Table"). Suppose a tau
decays into a muon, a favorable symmetry-conserving reaction since the muon is much lighter and the tau can
convert a lot of bound energy to free energy in the process. One might think that this reaction would be fast
and easy: the tau simply jumps to a lower quantum slot and becomes a muon, shedding excess energy in a
flash of light.
But leptons are true elementary particles and their identities must be conserved, both for the tau, which must
be destroyed, and for the muon, which must be created. The "W" repackages the tau mass energy into the
muon, and produces a tau neutrino to conserve its identity charge. Likewise, a muon antineutrino must be
produced to conserve (balance) the muon's identity charge (when the muon decays, the neutrino it releases
will cancel this antineutrino). Apparently the "W" "bear hugs" both the tau and a muon-antimuon virtual
particle pair so tightly that the tau's mass energy can flow to and materialize the muon at the same time it is
annihilating with the antimuon, liberating both the tau's neutrino identity charge and the antimuon's neutrino
identity charge in the process. The reaction takes a (relatively) long time because the "W" is so massive and
therefore very difficult to produce.
Baryon Decays
A more complex weak force interaction occurs when a baryon decays from a neutron to a proton ("beta"
decay); here an electron must be produced to carry the electrical charge difference. The "W" produces the
electron and its antineutrino. The decay of a neutron to a proton is incredibly slow by the standards of particle
physics (a half-life of 15 minutes - a trillion times slower than many other weak force decays), because there
is barely enough energy difference between the neutron and proton to allow it, and the pathway is very
complex, involving a virtual alternative charge carrier meson for the quark flavor transformation as well as
the virtual electron-positron pair.
If no elementary particle is involved in a decay or transformation, if there is no leptonic identity to be
conserved and no quark flavor to be supplied from the virtual "sea", then the IVBs are not involved in the
interaction. There is one apparent exception: the "Z" (neutral) mediates weak force transformations in which
two particles swap identities, or simply scatter (bounce) off each other - an electron and its neutrino, for
example. In the case of the simple swap, a weak force interaction is nevertheless required because an
elementary particle has both disappeared and been produced. This is a dangerous transaction from a
conservation point of view, and so requires the safeguard of the structural confines of the IVB. In the case of
simple scattering, the point is that the neutrino simply has no other way of interacting with matter except
through the mediation of a weak force IVB - which is why it hardly ever does. What other types of particles
are "out there" that interact even less frequently or perhaps not at all? These are among the "dark matter"
candidates, known only by their gravitational influences, and the leptoquark neutrino may be one of them.
Summary
The derivation of quarks from the leptonic series via the "fractured lepton" model helps us to understand a
number of important concepts: 1) the relationship of baryons to leptons - baryons are fractured, expanded
leptons, which is why they carry exactly the same electrical charges as, and interact so freely with, leptons; 2)
the origin of color charge, a virtual field of quantum-mechanically modified photons which acts to keep this
"elementary" particle from coming apart, hence preventing a quantum-mechanical and symmetry
conservation disaster; 3) the nature of the leptoquark, a fractured elementary lepton whose quarks have not
yet expanded due to high external pressure, and consequently has no explicit color charge; 4) the nature of
"leptoquark decay" - having no explicit color charge, electrically neutral leptoquarks can undergo leptonic
decay via the "X" IVB, emitting a leptoquark neutrino; 5) the nature of proton decay, again via the "X" IVB,
which must follow the leptoquark model, its quarks compressed to "leptonic size" until the color charge
vanishes ("in the limit" of "asymptotic freedom"), then decaying with the emission of a leptoquark neutrino -

a process that probably can occur routinely only in black holes in the present Universe; 6) why no neutrinos
are associated with quarks - quarks are sub-elementary particles which have only a collective identity realized
in the leptoquark and conserved as the leptoquark neutrino; 7) the triangular relationship between the strong
force, weak force, and the leptoquark. Color and identity charge converge in the formation of the fractured
leptonic particle that is the leptoquark and the ancestor of both the baryons and the leptons (strong and
electroweak force unification at the GUT energy level).
Links:
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Section X: Introduction to Conservation
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIV: Causality
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs")
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D)
Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions
The Particle Table
The Tetrahedron Diagrams (Text)
The "Tetrahedron Model" Diagram
The Hourglass or "Grail" Diagrams
References:
Robert Oerter: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin (Plume) 2006.
James Trefil: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier) 1983.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. Oxford
University Press, NY.
Brian Hayes: "Getting Your Quarks in a Row"; American Scientist, Nov. - Dec. 2008, pages 450

- 454.
home page
(go to: "The Short-Range or 'Particle Forces': Part I")

