Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

The Unified Field Theory - Synopsis of a Personal Quest
John A. Gowan
June 2014
Home Page
The Charges of Matter are the Symmetry Debts of Light
Papers:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3 (Summary)
See also:
NY Times article on Emmy Noether 26 Mar 2012
Neuenschwander, D. E. Emmy Noether's Wonderful Theorem. 2011. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Part I: History
When I turned 40 (in 1977), I started to build my personal version of the Unified Field Theory. I did
so as a faithful disciple of Einstein, attempting to help the scientific hero of my youth reach his
unfulfilled goal. At that time the strong and weak forces were just becoming understood, gravity
remained where Einstein had left it (with some more recent help from Hawking, Wheeler, and
Bekenstein concerning black holes), and the electromagnetic force had long been solved by a parade
of many geniuses, beginning with Faraday and Maxwell, and culminating with Feynman, Schwinger,
and Tomonaga ("quantum electrodynamics"- QED). Because of limitations of time, intellect, and
energy, I decided not to work on those parts of the theory that others had already solved - so far as I
could tell - satisfactorily. Accordingly, I accepted most of what had been done with the
electromagnetic and strong forces (the Gell-Mann/Zweig colored-quark model for the latter:
"quantum chromodynamics" - QCD). I also accepted (most of) quantum theory and (most of)
Einstein's Special and General Relativity theories, remaining willing not only to learn from these
theories but to modify (or extend) them if I thought it necessary to complete a self-consistent picture
of all four forces.
For example, in the long-range "spacetime" forces, I found that, contra Einstein, light in free flight
cannot produce a gravitational field. I also recognized the electromagnetic constant "velocity c" as the
gauge of: 1) the "non-local" distributional symmetry of light's energy; 2) the metric symmetry of
light's energy (including banishing time); 3) the symmetric spatial entropy drive of light (creating,
expanding, and cooling space). Because we live in a universe composed chiefly of free and bound
forms of electromagnetic energy (matter and light), "velocity c" also regulates, among other things,
causality, Einstein's "Interval", and Einstein's relation between energy and mass (E = mcc), and the
magnitude of electric charge (virtual photons are the field vectors of electric charge). I also recognized
the "intrinsic" dimensional motions of light, time, and gravitation as extensions of (and foundations
for) the classical concept of entropy. In the strong force I saw quark confinement by the gluon field as
necessary protection for whole-quantum units of charge - since quantized charges are the primary
means whereby Nature creates exactly reproducible and balancing symmetry debts. In the short-range
"particle" forces, I recognized the weak force IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons) as actual examples

1 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

of the electroweak unified-force symmetric energy state (hence their great mass and mysterious
composition). Leptoquarks and proton decay (both hypothetical to date) are phenomena of an even
higher unified-force symmetric energy state joining the leptons and hadrons, and the electroweak and
strong forces (the energy level of the "GUT" or Grand Unified Theory of Georgi and Glashow).
Most of my effort has been expended on bringing gravitation into the fold with the other forces, and
on the details of the weak force mechanism. I think I have been successful in both these areas.
However, I only claim a conceptual qualitative unification, not a mathematical quantitative
unification. I have tried to understand unification from the perspective of the most general physical
conservation laws and inclusive principles (I have especially used General Systems ideas regarding
fractal patterns in nature).
Part II: Conservation Laws
I identify four basic conservation laws: Energy, Symmetry, Entropy, and Causality-Information.
Included in Energy Conservation is "rest mass", linear and angular momentum, and the usual
thermodynamic parameters (kinetic and potential energy, etc.); included in Symmetry Conservation
(Noether's Theorem) is charge/spin conservation (particles) and inertial/gravitational/metric forces
(dimensions); included in Entropy are the dimensional "intrinsic motions" of light, time, and gravity
(as well as classical thermodynamic principles); included in Causality is "Information", historical
"karma", Einstein's "Interval", Lorentz Invariance, etc. The role of Information - in its primordial form
of charge - is to provide a lawful, conserved ("straight and narrow") pathway for the asymmetric
material system to return to its symmetric origins in light. (See also: "Introduction to Information".)
All these laws, principles and their corollaries are interconnected as illustrated in the "Tetrahedron
Model" (diagram) (and see text: "Synopsis of the Tetrahedron Model").
These are the minimal concepts and theories that we need for a basic-level non-mathematical
conceptual unification comprehensible to most people of ordinary education and intelligence. After
Energy Conservation, the most important of these principles for unification is Noether's Theorem,
which I will paraphrase as: the charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. (Noether proved
mathematically (1918) that conservation laws are associated with symmetries and vice versa). In
bound forms of electromagnetic energy (matter/atoms), light's symmetry debts take the form of
charge/spin; light's energy debt takes the form of mass/momentum; light's entropy debt takes the form
of time/gravity. "One-way" causality is due to one-way time. Non-local light has no time dimension,
hence light is a-causal. Breaking light's spatial "non-local" (and timeless) symmetric energy state (as
when massless light is converted to massive particles) is the cause of (gives rise to) the symmetry
debts/charges of the gravitational force and gravity's "location" charge. Breaking the matter-antimatter
symmetry of the early universe (creating our "matter-only" universe via weak force asymmetric
decays of electrically neutral leptoquarks) gave rise to the symmetry debt of electric charge. Gravity
and electric charge are both long-range forces extending throughout the universe, still seeking
everywhere for the vanished antimatter universe, which in combination with our matter universe
would reconstitute the primordial pure light symmetry of our origin.
Because the conservation of light's various symmetries takes the form of charge/spin conservation in
the atomic realm (and inertial/gravitational/metric forces in the dimensional realm), the issue of
charge invariance in a world of relative (rather than absolute) motion and entropic

2 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

expansion/contraction of the spacetime metric becomes of major consequence. (Symmetry and charge
conservation would fail if the magnitude of conserved charges should vary through time or space
under the influence of external factors.) Field vectors (force carriers) of the four forces are uniquely
equipped to address such issues of "local gauge symmetry" by compensatory actions involving
magnetism (electromagnetic force), quark confinement via "sticky" gluons (strong force), massive
Intermediate Vector Bosons (weak force), and co-varying time and space parameters
(gravitational/inertial/metric forces ("Lorentz Invariance", including the invariance of Einstein's
"Interval').
The unifying concept in the "Tetrahedron Model" is that everything begins as light (during the "Big
Bang"), and eventually returns to light. Since light is the most symmetric of all energy forms, this is a
symmetry-conserving/restoring cycle. The symmetry of light is conserved no less than the energy of
light. The major mechanism for this cosmic-scale symmetry conservation cycle is charge
conservation. Light's symmetries are converted to charge/spin when light is converted to matter
during the "Big Bang"; these charges are held invariant through time (by the local action of the field
vectors of the four forces) until the symmetry debts they represent can be redeemed/repaid by their
return to light, via matter-antimatter annihilation reactions, particle and proton decay, or
gravitationally driven astrophysical processes (stars, quasars, Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes, etc.). Charges produce forces which universally and spontaneously act to return asymmetric
material systems to or toward their symmetric origins, light. This is what the stars are busy doing,
creating the heavy elements as by-products of their primary gravitationally-driven symmetryrestoration/conservation cycle - converting nuclear mass to massless radiation.
Part III: Unification
The unification program consists of identifying the symmetry debts of light associated with (giving
rise to) the charges of each of the four forces (including gravity). This makes for a very simple and
tight conceptual system, firmly grounded upon physical conservation law, with consequences readily
identifiable (in most cases), such as inertial/gravitational/metric forces, charge conservation, and the
symmetry-restoration activity of the sun and stars overhead. The notion of symmetry conservation
furthermore provides a consistent rationale for color charge and the gluon field of the strong force
("quark confinement", maintaining whole quantum-unit charge values); likewise, for the massive
weak force IVBs and the "identity" charges of the neutrinos (gauging, creating, and transforming
mass-invariant single elementary particles by using the large IVB mass to access the electroweak
unified-force symmetric energy state). Likewise also for the invariance of "velocity c" - gauging and
maintaining (among other essential parameters) the invariance of electric charge, the invariance of
light's "non-local" symmetric energy state and entropy drive (including the metric symmetry of space
in which time is banished), the energetic relation between free and bound forms of electromagnetic
energy (hv = mcc), and the invariance of Einstein's "Interval" and causality. Finally, the unification
program includes gravity with the other forces of nature as yet another example of light's symmetry
debts with its own unique charge: "location".
The reality of the spacetime metric as well as of Heisenberg/Dirac virtual particles in the spacetime
"vacuum" is assumed throughout. The spacetime metric is the foundation of energy conservation; time
is not only real, time is the entropy drive of matter, history, and the dynamical source of gravitation.
"Gravitons" are actually time "charges", pulling space after them into history. Space self-annihilates at

3 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

the center of mass (since it cannot follow time into history); space in its self-destruction creates more
time, the exact metric equivalent of the annihilated space. Thus gravity and time induce each other
endlessly, much like the electric and magnetic components of a light wave. A gravitational field is the
spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
The electromagnetic constant "c" is the spatial symmetry/entropy gauge of light's intrinsic motion; the
gravitational constant "G" gauges the conversion of space to time (per standard mass unit "Gm"), or
the conversion of light's symmetric "all-way" spatial entropy drive to matter's asymmetric "one-way"
historical entropy drive. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Part IV: Gravity
The "location" charge of gravitation has a double origin, arising as both a symmetry and an entropy
debt of light, consequent upon:
1) the breaking of the "non-local" symmetric spatial (and timeless) distribution of light's energy by the
conversion of massless, free forms of electromagnetic energy (photons) to massive, bound forms of
electromagnetic energy (atoms). Atomic matter consists of immobile (and hence undistributed) lumps
of concentrated mass-energy with no (net) intrinsic spatial motion (atoms have instead an intrinsic
motion in time, providing an alternative entropic conservation domain for bound energy forms history and historic spacetime).
Because bound energy forms are causal, they need an alternative entropy drive (time) and
conservation domain (history/historic spacetime), whereas massless, timeless, a-causal light does not.
Hence we see, as Einstein realized, gravity does more than simply cause things to fall down - it
provides a necessary conservation parameter - time - for the economic, entropic, and causal realm of
matter and all bound energy forms. And because gravity produces time directly from space, the
conservation domains and entropic drives of both free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy are
bound seamlessly together into historic spacetime.
2) the loss of light's symmetric "all-way" intrinsic (entropic) spatial motion when massless light is
converted to massive forms of energy (as in 1) above). Light's symmetric spatial entropy drive is
converted to matter's asymmetric "one-way" temporal entropy drive, causing the expansion/dilution of
history rather than space (an entropic component of space is converted to time when light is converted
to matter). These gravitational symmetry and entropy debts are linked, in that both arise
(simultaneously) as consequences of the loss of light's intrinsic, symmetric spatial motion (gauged by
the electromagnetic constant "velocity c"), when free electromagnetic energy (light) is transformed to
bound electromagnetic energy (mass/matter/momentum), during the "Big Bang", or subsequently, as
via the absorption of a photon by the electron shell of an atom, etc. This linkage manifests through the
gravitational creation of time via the annihilation of space, identifying in asymmetric 4-D
metric/inertial terms (= "warped" gravitational spacetime) the symmetry-breaking specific spacetime
"location" of matter (as distinct from the "non-local" 3-D symmetric space-only distribution of light).
Time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge. A "graviton" is a unit of negative spatial
entropy, causing the contraction and heating of space rather than spatial expansion and cooling - an
anomaly caused by the active presence of time moving from space into history, dragging space along
with it to the local center of mass. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)

4 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

The special position of gravity in physics is due to its relation to time: gravity creates time from space.
Hence gravity, like light (which creates, expands, and cools space), is a dimension-creating and
entropy-generating force. The spacetime metric and entropy are the foundations of energy
conservation, which in turn is the foundation of physical law. We have seen that the charges of matter
are actually symmetry debts held invariant through time (by the field vectors of the four forces) until
payment is demanded (for example) by antimatter. By contrast, raw energy debts must be paid
immediately (as in accelerating an automobile, for example). Symmetry conservation (through charge
conservation) makes the historical existence of the material universe possible. Gravity, itself arising as
one of the symmetry debts of light, provides an extended dimensional (and entropic) arena for charge
conservation by creating time from space. The intrinsic (entropic) motion of time carries on to create
history, matter's causal (and conserved) information field. At low field energy (such as on planet
earth), gravity simply "pays the interest" on matter's symmetry debt by creating the time dimension in
which the debt is held or deferred (the creation of time has a cost - the negative energy of gravitation).
This is gravity's entropy-conservation role/mode, creating an alternative entropic drive (time) and
conservation domain (historic spacetime) for causal bound energy - not necessary for massless,
timeless, a-causal light). At high field energy (such as on our sun), gravity begins (in addition) to
assert its symmetry-conservation role by actually "paying down the principle" of matter's symmetry
debt, converting mass back to light - reducing both the total mass of the Sun and its associated
gravitational field. (See: "Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics".)
The "black hole" theories of Hawking/Bekenstein/Wheeler confirm the notion of gravity as a
dimensional force which converts space to time: the "event horizon" of a black hole is thought to be a
time/entropy "surface" (see: Scientific American Aug. 2003, pp. 58-65). We see the asymmetric
neg-entropic gravitational/time metric of matter gradually taking over the symmetric pos-entropic
electromagnetic/spatial metric of light as undistributed lumps of concentrated mass energy (on the
astrophysical scale) become larger and denser (planets -> stars -> white dwarfs -> neutron stars), until
finally only time, gravity, and bound energy remain as a "black hole" - the spatial metric of free
electromagnetic energy having been completely replaced by the temporal metric of bound
electromagnetic energy (g = c). Yet even here, as Hawking has shown, symmetry conservation
eventually triumphs through the phenomenon of "quantum radiance", the total conversion of the black
hole's mass to light, completely repaying the gravitational symmetry debt and hence canceling the
hole's gravitational field (since the reconstituted light does not itself produce a gravitational field in
free flight). Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes is the ultimate triumph of Noether's
Theorem and symmetry conservation, conserving even the symmetry of light's spatial entropy drive,
and confirming the symmetry-conserving role of gravitation.
The loss of negative gravitational energy on the cosmic scale by the astrophysical conversion of mass
to light (by stars, supernovas, quasars, and other processes) is the cause of the recently observed
"acceleration" of the expansion of spacetime, and constitutes the observational evidence that light in
free flight does not produce a gravitational field. (See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
Symmetry principles as applied to the strong force are discussed (among other places) in the paper:
"The Strong Force: Two Expressions". For a comparison between the unification scenarios of the
"Tetrahedron Model" and the "Standard Model" of "establishment" physics, see: "The 'Tetrahedron
Model' vs the 'Standard Model' - a Comparison". For an explanation of technical terms and particle
names, see: "The Particle Table".

5 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

Part V: Weak Force
My first efforts on the weak force were directed toward uncovering the mechanism behind the "black
box" that was the standard model "W" IVB. I found I could explain all the published (CRC Handbook
of Chemistry and Physics) weak force decays by a simple model involving the exchange of virtual
particle-antiparticle pairs between the particle-to be-transformed and the Dirac-Heisenberg "vacuum"
of spacetime - a transaction mediated by the "W" IVB. This exchange amounted to a typical "local
gauge symmetry current" flowing between the decaying particle, the IVB, and virtual particleantiparticle pairs in the "vacuum". (See: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism.) The weak
force is the only force which can either create or destroy a single elementary particle (not a particleantiparticle pair). The weak force is therefore uniquely responsible for bringing our material universe
of matter-only atoms into existence.
The task the weak force must accomplish is daunting: every elementary particle created today must be
exactly the same as those (of its type) created in the "Big Bang", or at any subsequent time or place.
For reasons of energy, charge, and symmetry conservation, any elementary particle must be able to
"swap places" with any other of its kind without the exchange being noticed. I realized that the weak
force assures the invariance of elementary particles (within type) by recreating the original
environmental conditions in which they were first created. This is why the great mass of the IVB is
needed to create even a humble (single) electron - the IVB must recreate the original energy-density
of the electroweak unified-force era of the early micro-moments of the "Big Bang" in order to exactly
reproduce all the conserved parameters of charge, mass, and spin of every lepton or quark it
creates/transforms. Accessing the electroweak (EW) unified-force energy state allows the "W" IVB to
transform any quark to any other quark, or any lepton to any other lepton, as these "generic" quark or
lepton symmetry states are precisely what defines the electroweak force-unity symmetric energy level.
The Higgs boson gauges the unified-force symmetric energy state levels (and their associated IVBs).
There are apparently 3 such levels, one for each unified-force level: the electroweak (EW); the Grand
Unified Theory (GUT) incorporating EW plus the strong force; and the Theory of Everything (TOE)
or Planck Era unity state (incorporating gravity with the GUT). (See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".)
In our ordinary, cold, electromagnetic (EM) "ground state", all species of leptons and quarks are
separate and distinct. Photons and gravitons are part of extended and expanded spacetime, which they
have combined to create for reasons of energy conservation (including their own). In the high energy,
hot and dense EW unified-force symmetric energy state (the "genus" level of symmetry/unity for
leptons or quarks), all lepton "flavors" are equivalent and can be transformed one into another. Quark
flavors are likewise transformed, but leptons cannot be transformed into quarks. In the GUT
unified-force symmetric energy state (the "family" level of symmetry/unity for fermions), all leptons
and quarks (= all fermions) can be transformed one into another, leading to the possibility of proton
decay and the production of single matter-only baryons from electrically neutral leptoquark precursors
(due to the activity of the "X" class of IVBs). In the GUT however, fermions and bosons remain
separate. At the TOE unified-force symmetric energy level (the "order" level of symmetry/unity for
electromagnetic energy), in which gravity is combined with the other forces, all fermions and bosons
are united, and free electromagnetic energy is transformed into bound electromagnetic energy,
resulting in the production of particle-antiparticle pairs of leptoquarks, both electrically charged and
electrically neutral (the latter due to the activity of the "Y" class of IVBs).

6 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

The three levels of Higgs bosons gauge (fix the energy of) three levels of unified-force symmetric
energy states which the IVBs must access (energize) to perform their transformations. Hence the
Higgs determines the IVB mass indirectly, by setting the energy level to which it must rise. It is within
these unified-force symmetric energy states that the charge and mass parameters of the elementary
particles are fixed. (This is not the same as the "standard model" Higgs boson action mechanism. See:
"The Higgs Boson vs the Spacetime Metric".) The weak force "massive IVB" mechanism works
because the unified-force symmetric energy states (the energy levels at which the forces join or
separate from one another) are discreet, well defined, and invariant. They can therefore be accessed by
a quantized high-energy particle (the IVB) whose mass reproduces exactly the necessary unified-force
symmetric energy level for a specific transformation. As a typical example, the Higgs boson gauges
the energy level for the EW unified-force symmetric energy state; by virtue of their quantized
mass-energy, the "W"/"Z" IVBs recreate/access the EW energy level, transforming single elementary
particles via a "local gauge symmetry current" of virtual particle-antiparticle pairs drawn from the
Dirac/Heisenberg "vacuum". (See: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism".)
Other aspects of the weak force I have investigated include the "Big Bang" Origin of Matter and
Information. In the "Origin" study I surmise that high-energy, massive leptoquark neutrinos are likely
candidates for the "dark matter" of the Cosmos. Regarding the mysterious neutrinos and the essential
weak force "identity" charges they carry: "identity" charges (and the neutrinos which carry them in
alternative, explicit form), allow a (single) elementary particle to be created because they make it
possible for that particle to be known and recognized, exactly reproduced multiple times, or
annihilated by an exactly equivalent antiparticle (in either case making charge/symmetry conservation
possible) (see: "Identity or Number Charge of the Weak Force").
The neutrinos also function as alternative carriers of explicit leptonic "Identity" charge (which occurs
in "hidden" form in the massive leptons), making possible the conservation, cancellation, or balancing
of leptonic "number" or "identity" charges without the presence of antimatter. Neutrinos with their
explicit identity charges (which balance the hidden charges of the massive leptons) therefore allow
single leptons, leptoquarks, and ultimately baryons to create our universe without being destroyed by
the annihilating presence of antimatter. This is the signal importance of alternative charge carriers
(leptons, neutrinos, mesons) - they balance charges and preserve charge conservation without
requiring antimatter). The lowly neutrino, or "Identity" charge, is therefore the most important charge
in Nature - but how could it be otherwise?
Part VI: Cosmology and General Systems
Cosmology is another aspect of the Unified Field Theory which early-on claimed my interest. See the
paper: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe", which addresses several vexing questions in cosmology,
including "inflation" (an early rapid expansion of spacetime - Guth, Linde); the "horizon" problem,
and the "flatness" problem; "dark energy" (the "accelerating" universe), and "dark matter" (the
"missing mass" of the universe). The "Spacetime Map" paper, which was originally produced
independently of my other work, was eventually found to have great relevance, especially for the
unitary or causally-connected aspects of the theory.
Finally, there is the General Systems aspect of the work, which was my original point of departure and
chosen method of attack on the Unified Field problem (see: "Introduction to General Systems").

7 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

Although the "scientific" sections of the theory are my own responsibility, in the General Systems
portions of the theory, especially in relation to our human experience, I have been materially and ably
assisted by my colleague August "Gus" Jaccaci, and by the work of my late father, Dr. John Curtis
Gowan. (See: "Introduction to Fractals"; see also: "Nature's Fractal Pathway"; see also: "Trance, Art,
Creativity" (one of several books on the memorial website for Prof. John Curtis Gowan").
Links:
Introduction to the Papers
Section I: Unification
Section II: Gravitation
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
Section VII: Entropy
Section VIII: General Systems, Complex Systems
Section IX: Symmetry: Noether`s Theorem and Einstein's "Interval"
Section XIII: The Solar Archetype
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson
Weak Force Papers:
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D)
Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
The "Tetrahedron Model" in the Context of "Global and Local Gauge Symmetries":
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
General Topics:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3
(summary)
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)

8 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
About Gravity
Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Half-life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Cosmology
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (text - updated copy)
A Spacetime Map of the Universe (original gif diagram)
Tables and Diagrams:
Gravity
A New Gravity Diagram
The Gravity Diagram
The Three Entropies: Intrinsic Motions of Gravity, Time, and Light
The Tetrahedron Model of Light and Conservation Law
The Particle Table
Unified Field Table: Simple Form
Unified Field Table: "Bare" Form
References
Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. M. Dekker,
New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
de Chardin, Pierre Teilhard: The Phenomenon of Man. French: Editions du Seuil, Paris, 1955;
English: Harper and Row, New York, 1959.
Close, Frank: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212, 1221-8

9 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

Unified Field Theory Quest Synopsis

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/quest.html

(Nobel lecture).
Gowan, J. C. (Sr.) 1975. "Trance, Art, Creativity"
Greene, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
Greene, B. The Fabric of the Cosmos. A. A. Knoph, 2004, 569 + xii pp.
Gross, D. J. and F. Wilczek. 1973. Ultraviolet Behavior of Non-Abelian Gauge Theories. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 30: 1343.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who
Tamed Equations of Quark Theory."
Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical Physics
1975, 43 (3), 199-220.
Lederman, Leon with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Lederman, Leon and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
Lovelock, J. E. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Oerter, Robert: The Theory of Almost Everything. Penguin (Plume) 2006.
Pais, Abraham 1986. Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. Oxford
University Press, NY
Politzer, H. D.. 1973. Phys. Rev. Lett. 30: 1346.
Resnick, Robert: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Stewart, Ian. "Why Beauty is Truth". 2007, Basic Books
Trefil, James: The Moment of Creation. Macmillian (Collier) 1983.
Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
Wilczek, Frank. The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.
home page

10 of 10

6/3/14 8:04 PM

