Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II
(revised July, 2014)
John A. Gowan
home page
E-mail: johngowan@earthlink.net (or) jag8@cornell.edu
Gravity is Matter's Memory it Once was Light
Part II - Return to Part I
Table of Contents (part II)
Abstract
Matter
Conservation Consequences of the Creation of Matter
The Phenomenon of Gravitation
The Mechanism of Gravitation
Quantum Mechanics and Gravitation
Black Holes and Entropy
References
Links
Abstract
The "graviton" or field vector of the gravitational charge is a quantum unit of (negative) temporal
entropy, the transformed entropy drive or intrinsic motion of the photon, equivalent to a quantum unit
of time, whose intrinsic motion in history is the metric and entropic equivalent of the photon's
intrinsic motion in space. Indeed, the implicit time component in light from which the spatial photon
"flees" to conserve its non-local distributional symmetry is the self-same explicit time component
which pulls space into history, producing the self-feeding gravitational field of matter. This
gravitational field will also eventually conserve light's symmetry, via the conversion of bound to free
energy (in stars, supernovas, quasars, and via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes).
Matter
In contrast to the pure and simple "light universe", imagine now the beginning of a compound
universe such as our own, composed of both light and matter (free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy). In the beginning, the universe has its greatest capacity for "work", since its
energy is at its most concentrated, and its temperature is at a maximum. The "work done" at the
beginning of our universe is the creation of matter from light (this qualifies as "work" since an
asymmetric state is created from a symmetric one - the ensuing dispersal of material particles against
their mutual gravitational attraction conforms to the more usual definition of thermodynamic "work").
Never again will the universe be hot enough to create matter (unless it collapses in a "Big Crunch").
The creation of matter provides the storehouse of bound energy whose subsequent slow release fuels
the evolution of the material universe, including life. How does the creation of matter affect the
cosmic march of spatial entropy as manifested (in the "light universe") through the intrinsic motion of
1 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

light and the expansion and cooling of its spatial conservation domain?
It is my assumption that matter is created (during the "Big Bang") by the interaction of high energy
light with the metric structure of space, and by the combined action of the four forces of physics,
creating particle-antiparticle pairs which subsequently decay asymmetrically via the weak force,
producing a tiny residue of matter. (See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".) These asymmetric weak force
decays involve the "Intermediate Vector Bosons" (IVBs) of the weak force, as scaled or gauged by the
""Higgs" boson". But matter has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion, and therefore cannot participate in
the expansion of the universe and light's spatial entropic march, nor light's purely spatial conservation
domain. Nevertheless, like every form of energy, matter must have an entropy drive and conservation
domain appropriate for its energy type. In the case of bound energy, that entropy drive is the intrinsic
motion of time, produced by matter's intrinsic gravitational field (gravity annihilates space, extracting
a metrically equivalent temporal residue). (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) Matter's
conservation domain is historic spacetime, including the information network or web of matter's
time-dependent and temporally linked "causal matrix".
The conversion of light to matter breaks the symmetric state of the light universe both dimensionally
and energetically. Dimensionally, bound energy is not integrated with space, as it lacks intrinsic
spatial motion "c". Instead, matter's time dimension moves with an intrinsic motion that is the metric
and entropic equivalent of the intrinsic motion of light - as required by the conservation of energy.
Matter's time dimension: 1) allows the existence of bound energy and the interaction of bound and
free energy; 2) provides bound energy with an entropy drive and historic conservation domain; 3)
protects causality; 4) accommodates the energy accounts of matter in relative (rather than absolute)
motion. The "intrinsic motions" of light and time (as gauged by "velocity c" and "velocity T") are the
entropy drives of free and bound energy, respectively. Neither the intrinsic motion of light nor the
intrinsic motion of time has any dependence on the quantity of energy they happen to be associated
with. They are simply the entropy drives of their respective energy forms, creating the dimensional
parameters for the conservation domains of free and bound energy (space and history - historic
spacetime).
The primordial symmetry between matter and antimatter - light's particle-antiparticle form - is broken
by the weak force during the "Big Bang". But matter is very much more than a massive, inert lump of
concentrated, asymmetric light energy. Matter is created not only with a time dimension and
gravitational field, but with various other charges, intrinsic motions, and internal structures as well.
Time, spin, gravity, and the various charges of matter can all be characterized as symmetry debts of
light, the charge of interest here being time and the "location" charge, the source of the gravitational
field.
Gravitation is the most universal charge of matter, carried by any bound form of energy (including
antimatter), that is, any form of energy which lacks intrinsic motion c, or whose spacetime location
can be specified around a local center of mass, or which has a time dimension ("Interval" > zero). All
energy forms have either intrinsic motion c or a time dimension with intrinsic motion T; if they have a
time dimension, then they also have mass and an intrinsic motion G (gravitation). Time, charge, and
gravitation are the universal companions of mass or bound energy, and it is more than coincidence
that these four asymmetries (the asymmetric "gang of four") are always found together - indeed, they
are linked in a causal chain. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)

2 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

Conservation Consequences of the Creation of Matter
Let us return to the birth of our material universe and imagine again the initial expansion, beginning
with pure light (free energy). The expansion (driven by the intrinsic motion of light) is faithfully
obeying energy and symmetry conservation and the march of (positive spatial) entropy when suddenly
(due to weak force symmetry-breaking) some of its free electromagnetic energy is converted to bound
electromagnetic energy (atomic matter). This conversion of light to matter poses a number of
interrelated conservation problems for the Cosmos. I will try to enumerate and separate a few of them
as best I can in what follows.
First, there is the problem of raw energy conservation. This is resolved by storing the raw energy of
light in the form of the mass and momentum of particles. However, unlike light, a massive particle
requires an explicit time dimension to provide an entropy drive and an entropic (historic) conservation
domain, protect causality, and to balance its energy accounts - all problems related to relative (rather
than absolute) motion, as mentioned earlier. Since no explicit (local) time dimension exists in the light
universe, one will have to be created. However, the creation of a time dimension will require an
energy source - just as space requires the entropy-energy (intrinsic motion) of light for its creation,
and cools in consequence of its expansion. Dimensional conservation domains are the creations of
entropy-energy, whether space, history, or historic spacetime (as gauged by c, T, G). We will return to
this point.
Second, there is the problem of symmetry conservation. The symmetry of light must be conserved no
less than its raw energy (Noether's Theorem). This problem is addressed in two ways: 1) the matterantimatter symmetry of light's particle form is conserved through the creation of the conserved
charges of matter (including spin); 2) the non-local distributional, entropic, and metric symmetry of
light's wave or dimensional (spatial) form is conserved through gravitation and the inertial forces of
spacetime. Gravitational charge is the "location" charge engendered by the conversion of light to
mass, as atomic, immobile forms of bound energy break the symmetry of the "non-local" spatial
distribution of light's energy. The active principle of gravity's "location" charge is time, whose
intrinsic motion is the physical cause of gravitation; time also serves as matter's entropy drive. The
gravitational force is produced by the activity of a charge or symmetry debt, and therefore is related to
the other forces through the "conservation umbrella" of Noether's Theorem. Gravity is distinguished
from the other forces by the weakness and entropic nature of its charge (time), and its multiple
conservation roles (entropy, symmetry, causality, and energy conservation).
Third, there is the entropy problem referred to above. In the purely light universe, entropy had a
spatial expression (the expansion and cooling of space), produced by the intrinsic motion of light.
Matter has no intrinsic spatial motion, hence its bound energy form has no spatial expression of
entropy. Since entropy is a necessary corollary of the conservation of energy - creating dimensional
conservation domains and preventing the "misuse and abuse" of energy - the entropy of light must
also be conserved and transferred to matter, along with light's raw energy (as mass/momentum) and
symmetry (as charge/inertia). In matter, the alternative, conserved form of light's entropy is time
("intrinsic motion c" becomes "intrinsic motion T"): gravity is the dimensional force producing the
transformation of light's spatial entropy drive to matter's historical entropy drive. We have already
noted how the entropy drive and symmetry gauge of light are related through c, such that when one is
conserved, so is the other. To this combination, with the creation of matter, we can add causality, since

3 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

light and time are alternate forms of causal linkage, and time is the active principle of gravity's
"location" charge. Causality and entropy are simultaneous conservation roles for the intrinsic motion
of time in bound energy, just as symmetry and entropy are simultaneous conservation roles for the
intrinsic motion of light in free energy. Causality in matter is therefore an analog of symmetry in light
- a proportionality which we intuitively recognize through the notion of "fair play", "karmic justice",
or symmetry with regard to the evenhanded application of law and the suitability of reward or
punishment (the "Golden Rule" of social behavior and justice is the classic example).
Nature's solution to matter's entropy problem, which satisfies the requirements of causality, the first
and second thermodynamic laws, and Noether's Theorem all at a single stroke, is to create time from
space by means of the gravitational force. This "internal" metric solution also addresses the problem
of how to transfer light's entropic flow to matter's entropic flow (annihilate space, thereby converting
the implicit temporal entropy drive of light and space to the explicit temporal entropy drive of matter
and history), where the energy to create the time dimension will come from (subtracted from the
spatial expansion of the Cosmos), and how to equilibrate and connect the metric of the spatial (free
energy) and temporal (bound energy) conservation domains ("G" gauges the connection of mass to
space via the intrinsic motion of time, causing the annihilation of space and the transformation of
light's spatial entropy drive into the metrically equivalent temporal entropy drive of matter). The
intrinsic motions of time and light are metrically (and entropically) equivalent, conserving the spatial
entropy drive or intrinsic motion of light as the historical entropy drive or intrinsic motion of time:
"time flies". Time moves in history as fast as light moves in space. (See: "The Time Train".)
Gravity is the space-consuming, contractile (negentropic) step in the transfer process, in which an
implicit entropic component of time is taken from space (via the annihilation of space), and given to
matter as a "charge" of explicit time. The energy is supplied by the light-entropy or intrinsic motion
inherent in the space consumed; the consumption slows the expansion of the universe, reflecting the
energy transfer from space to history. The intrinsic motion of light creates space and the expansion of
space - the entropy drive of light is actually visible over great distances (through our giant telescopes)
as the "cosmological redshift" of distant galaxies. Space and light are linked, and it is light's entropyenergy or entropy drive hidden in space (as the implicit time or "frequency" component of its energy
content) that is revealed, laid "bare", or converted to explicit time via the gravitational (or quantum
mechanical) annihilation of space. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Implicit time, hidden as "frequency" in the entropy drive of free energy, is the source for explicit time,
the entropy drive of bound energy. The positive entropy drive of space becomes, by gravitational
conversion/conservation, the (metrically equivalent) positive entropy drive of time. Space is the only
source of temporal entropy, and by consuming space gravity ensures that it is only the entropy account
of space and light which is transferred to the entropy account of time and matter. The sign of G is
determined by the small energetic difference between the symmetric entropy drive (S) of free energy
(the intrinsic motion of light as gauged by "velocity c"), and the asymmetric entropy drive (T) of
bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time as gauged by "velocity T"), that is, the energy difference
between implicit (S) and explicit (T) time:
(S) - (T) = -G.
It takes energy to create one-way temporal entropy from "all-way" spatial entropy, because an

4 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

asymmetric, one-way temporal order must be imposed upon the symmetric, random spatial expansion
- moreover, an additional (4th) dimension must be created. This entropy-energy cost of time is the
origin of the "negative energy" characteristic of gravity and the negative sign of "G". The magnitude
of "G" gauges (determines) how much space must be annihilated (per given mass), to supply matter
with its requisite historical entropy drive (-Gm).
The symmetry losses (debts) of light are carried as the various conserved charges of matter, which
produce forces whose conservation function (in accordance with Noether's Theorem) is to return the
material system to its original state of light-symmetry. The conversion of mass to light by stars,
supernovas, and quasars are examples already cited, but others involving the complete conversion of
matter to radiation are known or presumed, including matter-antimatter annihilations, proton decay,
and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes [5]. The gravitationally driven processes
demonstrate gravity's double role as the conservator and restorer of both light's entropy drive and
light's non-local distributional symmetry. (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
The Phenomenon of Gravitation
The metric relation between space, time, and free energy (light) is gauged (regulated) by the
electromagnetic energy constant "c". The entropic relation between space, time, and bound energy
(mass) is gauged by Newton's universal gravitational constant "G". The quantity of temporal entropy
(the amount of time) allocated per given mass (m) is gauged by the strength of the universal
gravitational constant: -Gm. This temporal entropy requirement is satisfied via the gravitational
annihilation of space, extracting a metrically equivalent time residue from the collapsed space. "G" is
related to "c" through time and the primordial entropy drive of intrinsic dimensional motion.
The active, entropic component (the entropy "drive") of expanding history is the intrinsic motion of
time, just as the active, entropic component of expanding space is the intrinsic motion of light. These
intrinsic motions produce the dimensional domains (history and space) of their respective energy
types (bound and free electromagnetic energy). But since time is produced from space by gravitational
conversion, we see that time is derivative, space is primary, and the gravitational connection to space
is essentially parasitic, siphoning off the expansive energy component of space to create time and
history. Time is produced at the expense of space; gravity consumes space, producing a temporal
residue, and the energy of gravitation is just the entropic energy of time itself, borrowed from the
intrinsic motion of light.
Gravity is weak because gravitational energy is temporal entropy-energy derived from the spatial
expansion of the cosmos and used to produce the time dimension of matter and the expansion of
history (historic spacetime). The relative weakness of gravity tells us that it does not take much
energy to produce matter's time dimension - at least by comparison to the other forces. History is the
entropic conservation domain of matter's causal information network or "matrix". The weakness of
gravity is a direct consequence of the tangential or point-like connection between the "universal
present moment" of matter and "bulk" historic spacetime: gravity produces only enough time to
provide the temporal entropy drive for matter's tiny connection to history through the ephemeral
"present moment". In the case of the earth, the actual physical size of this temporal connection
corresponds to the size of the "event horizon" of a black hole containing the mass of the earth - about
the size of a ping-pong ball (!) In a black hole, gravity establishes a metric domain in which it is

5 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

equivalent in strength to the other forces (g = c), and assumes all their metric, energetic, and entropic
functions. (See: "The Half-Life of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
Matter, and matter's associated charges, exist only in the present moment of time, and do not
participate in the entropic expansion of historic spacetime (whereas light does participate in the
entropic expansion of its conservation domain, space). The energy content of matter is protected from
entropic enervation or dilution by the weakness of gravity and the tangential connection between
matter's "present moment" and historic spacetime. Atoms typically do not age ("diamonds are
forever"); when atoms do "age", it is through the all-or-nothing quantum leaps typical of radioactivity:
particle or proton decay. The charges of matter are symmetry debts, not energy debts as is atomic
mass; charges are therefore immune to the effects of either entropy or gravity.
Special Relativity also tells us that matter cannot move with the metric equivalent of "velocity c", and
that therefore the time dimension must move instead, while matter simply rides the "time train". There
are multiple reasons for matter's isolation in the "universal present moment", illustrating the seamless
interweaving of all natural law, and raising again Einstein's question: is there any latitude in the
construction of the universe? From the perspective of the "Anthropic Principle" (natural law must
allow human life), the answer seems to be "no".
With matter present, the entropic march of light continues via the spatial expansion of the universe,
but at a slower rate. Gravitation compensates this loss in exactly equivalent metric terms through
matter's entropic temporal march and the expansion of the historic conservation domain of matter's
"causal information matrix" (historic spacetime). If enough matter is present, gravity "eats up" space
faster than light creates it, and the universe collapses, reversing the "Big Bang".
Gravitational energy is entropy-energy subtracted from the spatial expansion of the cosmos and
transferred in metrically equivalent terms to the historic expansion of the cosmos (historic spacetime).
It is ultimately the intrinsic motion of light and the gravitational deceleration of the spatial expansion
of the cosmos which funds matter's time dimension and the expansion of history. History is the
temporal analog of space; historic spacetime is the entropic conservation domain of matter's causal
information network or "matrix". The causal nature of historic spacetime is in itself a rationale for
gravitation.
The gravitational conversion of space with its embedded drive of spatial entropy (S) (the intrinsic
motion of light), to history with its embedded drive of historical entropy (T) (the intrinsic motion of
time), may be symbolically represented by a (quasi-mathematical) "concept equation" as:
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
Because light does not produce a gravitational field, the conversion of mass to light by stars,
supernovas, quasars, black holes, particle and proton decay, will slowly reduce the total gravitational
energy present in the universe. Since no new matter is ever created to compensate this loss, the
universal expansion rate will appear to slowly increase over time. Assuming that "dark matter" also
obeys Noether's Theorem and the usual conservation laws, and hence is by some process also
converted through time from a bound to a free energy state, the recently observed "acceleration" of
the universe can be accounted for. Hence the expansive "dark energy" is just the attrition of the total
6 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

gravitational force of the cosmos. If we are going to postulate the existence of "dark matter", then
"Occam's Razor" suggests that "dark energy" is (at least partially) the product of "dark matter's" decay
in obedience to the known conservation laws. (See: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe".)
The gravitational force we feel at the earth's surface is the flow of space that is being consumed to
produce earth's time dimension. That flow is a measure of the negative energy differential between the
symmetric spatial entropy drive of the free energy which created earth's mass (the intrinsic motion of
light as gauged by "velocity c"), and the asymmetric temporal entropy drive of earth's bound energy
(the intrinsic motion of time as gauged by "velocity T"). The temporal entropy drive "costs" more to
produce than the spatial entropy drive, hence the "negative energy" character of gravity. Gravity is
essentially earth's "parasitic" umbilical connection to the spatial universe, "warping" symmetric space
by the creation of time and historic spacetime.
Gravity is weak for two reasons: 1) the tiny energetic difference between implicit and explicit time; 2)
the tangential nature of matter's connection to "bulk" historical spacetime via the point-like "present
moment". The spatial flow is never-ending because earth's intrinsic motion in time (earth's historical
entropy drive) is never-ending; the time dimension moves and, through its own movement,
continuously renews itself. The energy for the gravitational field is supplied by the expansive entropic
drive of space (the intrinsic motion of light), resulting in the deceleration of the cosmic spatial
expansion. Earth's bound energy content requires a continuous entropy drive, no less than does the
free energy content of space. Time and gravity induce each other in an endless loop - gravity is the
spatial consequence of time's intrinsic motion. The only way to get rid of gravity is to get rid of the
time dimension which causality, entropy, symmetry, and energy conservation all require for matter.
This can only be done by converting asymmetric matter to perfectly symmetric light, which has
neither a time dimension nor the gravitational field to produce one. (See: "A Description of
Gravitation".)
The Mechanism of Gravitation
We now come to the mystery surrounding the attractive principle of gravitation: space flows toward
the time charge of matter, but why? It is possible that symmetric space is (vainly) trying to neutralize
the dimensionally asymmetric temporal charge which has suddenly appeared in its midst; it is also
possible that space is (again vainly) trying to fill the asymmetric dimension (history) opened by the
time charge, analogously to air rushing into a vacuum; a third possibility is that the intrinsic motion of
the entropic time charge simply pulls space after it into history, since energy conservation will not
allow the connection between time and space to be broken, and if one moves, the other must follow.
This third possibility is the one I favor, as it readily explains Einstein's "Equivalence Principle".
Causality in the service of energy conservation is the theoretical principle responsible for "time's
arrow", while -G gauges the unidirectional, contractile force. As for the acceleration of gravity,
acceleration is due to the constant application of a force: in this case we have the constant, entropic
flight of the time dimension into history and "bulk" historical spacetime.
This reduces the attractive principle of gravitation, and the gravitational collapse of space, to artifacts
or consequences of the intrinsic motion of time. Gravity's spherically symmetric field is due to time
pulling on the three spatial dimensions equally. The spatial field collapses at the center of mass,

7 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

because it has to "squeeze down" into the zero-dimensional, point-like beginning of the
one-dimensional time line. When the spatial field collapses to a point, a new time charge (the metric
equivalent of the annihilated space) is extracted or revealed, which replaces the old, but then itself
rushes off into history, dragging and collapsing more space behind it, continuing the endless
self-feeding negentropic cycle. The gravitational collapse of space occurs at the locus of every atom
or point of bound energy, summing, in the case of a planet (as Newton proved), to a total field
effectively acting from the center of mass of the larger body.
As space is pulled toward a gravitational "location" or time charge (by the intrinsic motion of time,
and because time and space are connected), space moves symmetrically from all possible
3-dimensional positions (time is connected symmetrically to all three spatial dimensions), and at the
central time charge itself, space self-annihilates: +x cancels -x, +y cancels -y, and +z cancels -z,
leaving behind a new residue of +t (time and space are metrically equivalent and interchangeable in
the forward temporal direction). +t cannot cancel because there is no -t (time is one-way only,
conserving causality). The new time charge replaces the old, for it is the unique character of temporal
charge that it is transient (an "entropic" charge), continuously moving at "right angles" to all three
spatial dimensions into the historic domain where only information can follow. Time forever renews
itself by motivating the gravitational annihilation of space, thus producing the continuous one-way
flow of time, the continuous (and accelerated) one-way flow of gravitation, a spherically symmetric
gravitational field with a local "center of mass" where the field vanishes, and a temporal entropy
which is the natural metric equivalent of the space annihilated - a tidy package indeed, all springing
from the simplest and most natural interpretation of Einstein's own Equivalence Principle. Note that in
this representation of gravity we have symmetric space "chasing" asymmetric time, exactly the
reverse of the situation producing the intrinsic motion of light, in which symmetric space "flees"
asymmetric time. This is just the difference between positive and negative spatial entropy, or implicit
and explicit time. (See: "A Description of Gravity" and "Gravity Diagram No. 2").
Quantum Mechanics and Gravitation
Gravity is both a symmetry debt and an entropy debt of light, unique among the charges and their
forces. This double role, which stems from gravity's conservation of the double gauge role of
"velocity c", is reflected in two different mechanisms, both of which convert space to time, one at the
microscopic quantum level of charge - the entropy debt, involving one-way moving time, causality,
history, and energy conservation, and one at the macroscopic level of gravitational force - the
symmetry debt, involving immobile mass, "location" charge, spacetime, and symmetry conservation.
Time is the common factor in both roles, as time is the active principle of gravity's "location" charge.
In the microscopic, quantum mechanical transformation of free to bound energy, in the creation of
particles (or simply the capture of a photon by the electron shell of an atom), the collapse of an
electromagnetic wave confers a quantized time charge on a massive particle. The collapse of the
spatial component of the wave leaves behind a metrically equivalent temporal residue - just as in the
macroscopic gravitational process. At the microscopic level of quantum mechanics, however, we can
visualize this process as a "switching" or "flipping" of the "wavelength" or spatial aspect of the
moving electromagnetic wave to the "frequency" or temporal aspect of the stationary particle. This is
the "primary", "particle", or quantum mechanical process for producing the time charge and the
entropy-energy debt. Once this time charge is gauged and "set", the "secondary", "metric", or

8 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

symmetry aspect of gravitation comes into play, the cyclic, continuous flow of space as it is pulled
into the historic domain by the intrinsic motion of time, producing the macroscopic gravitational field.
The continuous secondary process simply copies or reproduces the time charge set and gauged by the
one-time primary process. In effect, the quantum mechanical process "kick starts" the macroscopic
process by providing the initial time charge.
Finally, we can visualize the ephemeral nature of the time charge as a manifestation of its actual
motion from the spatial dimensions, where it is "set" and begins, to the temporal (historic) dimension,
where only information can follow. It is the intrinsic motion of the time charge which "pulls" space
after it that produces the gravitational flow. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time. The collapse of space leaves a temporal residue whose intrinsic motion pulls
more space after it, in an endlessly repeating and self-feeding negentropic cycle.
The two mechanisms are distinct but both are part of the gravitational conversion of space to time,
connecting the quantum-mechanical aspect of gravitational charge (the temporal entropy-energy debt
of particles) to the macroscopic aspect of gravitational flow (the spatial "location" symmetry debt of
mass). Both are linked by time, their common gauge c, and Noether's Theorem requiring the
conservation of light's non-local metric and distributional symmetry. The gravitational charge,
"location", is unique among charges in that its active principle is time. The gravitational charge is an
"entropic" charge, a charge with intrinsic dimensional motion. "Location" charge not only identifies
the spacetime position, magnitude, and density of asymmetric (undistributed) concentrations of
mass-energy; the time component of location charge also supplies the entropy drive of bound energy.
Symmetry, entropy, time, space, free and bound electromagnetic energy (light and matter): all are
connected by gravity.
It is the concept of time as a charge ("location" charge) that allows us to connect gravitation to the
other charges and forces of physics (they are all symmetry debts of light), and to quantum mechanics
(the graviton is a quantum unit of negative temporal entropy or time).
It is the entropic nature of the gravitational charge which connects the quantum mechanical (chargetime-particle-entropy) and macroscopic (location-space-mass-symmetry) aspects of gravity. In turn,
the double nature of the gravitational charge gives gravity a double conservation role, on the one hand
conserving the entropy drive of free energy (the intrinsic motion of light) by converting it to the
entropy drive of bound energy (the intrinsic motion of time), and on the other hand conserving the
"non-local" metric and distributional symmetry of light by converting bound to free energy (as in
stars, supernovas, quasars, and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes). This duality extends
backwards in a conservation chain to the double gauge role of "velocity c", which regulates both the
"non-local" metric and distributional symmetry of light, and the spatial entropy drive of free energy
(light's intrinsic motion). By default, gravity must conserve both gauge roles of "velocity c" if it
conserves either one.
We have already noted that because of the universal energetic significance of the time dimension (in
our Cosmos of mixed free and bound electromagnetic energy), the conservation role of gravity
extends beyond entropy and symmetry to include causality and energy conservation. (See: "The
Tetrahedron Model".)

9 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

Black Holes and Entropy
See:
Bekenstein, J. D. Information in the Holographic Universe. Scientific American, August 2003,
pp. 58-65.
Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines. Scientific American/Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2012 (book).
Science vol. 337, 3 August 2012, pp. 536-547 (special section on black holes).
It is helpful to look at the entire spectrum of gravitational phenomena in terms of
the progressive invasion and domination of the spatial metric of light and space by
the temporal metric of matter, gravity, and time. These also present a series of
symmetry-conservation stages or phases. (See: "Nodes of the Gravitational
Metric".)
At first, for very small bits of matter and tiny gravitational fields, the symmetric
metric of light/space is hardly disturbed at all by the insignificant presence of
matter/time. However, as matter accumulates into astronomically significant
clumps, big enough to take on the spherical shape of its formative gravitational
field (celestial objects the size of planets), the temporal warpage of space becomes
distinctly noticeable as a powerful gravitation field with a metric or inertial bias
directed "downward" toward the center of mass. In such cases we see gravity
paying the "entropy-interest" on matter's symmetry debt, converting space to time
but nothing more. These are only "interest" payments in that the symmetry debt of
the planet (mass, charge) remains unchanged despite continuing payment/activity
by the field. The next stage in massive (single) gravitational systems is that of the
star, in which the gravitational field is strong enough to begin making payments on
the "principle" of matter's symmetry debt, converting mass to light and actually
reducing the total gravitational energy of the star as its mass is reduced. The series
continues with three successive "condensed matter" states, the white dwarf, the
neutron star, and finally the black hole, the end of the gravitational spectrum and
the ultimate state of the temporal metric in which the electromagnetic metric of
light and space are completely replaced by the gravitational metric of matter and
time.
Black holes present a mass series uniquely their own, from (hypothetical)
mini-holes perhaps produced during the "Big Bang", to stellar-mass holes of
various sizes, and finally to million- and billion-solar mass holes embedded in the
centers of (apparently) every large galaxy. Such central, super-massive black holes
apparently play a significant role in the evolution of galactic form and star
formation. (See: Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus
and Giroux 2012 (this is a book).)
We see an interesting progression in the condensed matter series, as the
gravitational force and temporal metric take over the regulatory functions of space
and the electromagnetic metric. First, the electron shells of atoms are crushed unto

10 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

an electron "sea", as the electromagnetic force is progressively overwhelmed
("white dwarf" stage). Second, the electrons are driven into the protons, forming a
neutron star, as the weak force is compromised (why don't those neutrons decay?);
thirdly, the strong force is overtaken as the spatial metric itself collapses and (as I
assume) proton decay converts the interior of a black hole into gravitationally
bound light. We also see a successive homogenization of matter throughout the
series - from the diversity of forms on planet Earth (for example), to the plasma
fields of the Sun; then to the electron "sea" of the white dwarf; thence to the baryon
desert of the neutron star, and finally to the "event horizon" of the black hole where
only time remains. This in itself is a symmetry series of sorts, as the great diversity
of matter and information is reduced to the monotony and sameness of a temporal
entropy plain (the opposite pole of light's empty spatial entropy plain). But of
course, the more significant symmetry conservation function of gravity is the
conversion of bound to free energy in stars and in the latter stages of the series
(supernovas, quasars, and "Hawking Radiation").
The black hole represents the extreme expression of the temporal, gravitational
metric of matter or bound forms of electromagnetic energy - the opposite pole of
the spatial and expansive metric of light or free electromagnetic energy. But
metrics, whether spatial/electromagnetic or temporal/gravitational, exist to
conserve energy and symmetry, and we expect nothing less from the temporal
metric, especially in its most extreme form.
During their formation in supernovas, and subsequently as matter falls into them,
black holes actually release a huge amount of light, converting gravitational
potential energy at a much higher percentage of the rest mass of in-falling particles
than is possible in the fusion process of the nucleosynthetic pathway of ordinary
stars (witness the quasars, supermassive black holes which outshine entire
galaxies). These are recent findings, so the significance of black holes with regard
to the conversion of mass to light on cosmic scales may have been greatly
underestimated in the past. Hence in the first instance we can regard black holes as
"superstars" in their ability to convert the potential gravitational energy of
in-falling matter to free energy - restoring/conserving light-symmetry. And we
know, thanks to Stephen Hawking, that back holes continue to shine - although
very dimly - eventually completely converting their entire mass to light via the
phenomenon of Hawking's "quantum radiance", in complete satisfaction of
Noether's symmetry conservation theorem.
At the "event horizon", where g=c, in-falling matter moves at the equivalent of
"velocity c", recapitulating the symmetric energy state of light. We know in the
case of light that motion at velocity c results in the distributional symmetry of
light's energy throughout its spatial conservation domain everywhere,
simultaneously, and in fact we see the same symmetry conditions satisfied for
matter within the boundary of the black hole. At or inside the event horizon, there
is no space and time is stopped, so indeed matter (or whatever energy form exists)
is necessarily distributed inside the black hole and over the surface of the event

11 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

horizon everywhere, simultaneously.
Finally, we fully expect proton decay to be commonplace inside the black hole,
because here matter is subject to the equivalent entropic erosion of its energy as
light is in space. Light is completely unified with its spatial conservation domain
and fully participates in the entropic expansion of space, which rapidly vitiates its
energy. Within the back hole matter is likewise fully unified with its temporal
conservation domain; hence we expect the interior of a black hole to be filled with
nothing but gravitationally bound light, the consequence of proton decay and the
entropic erosion of matter's stored energy content by time and the gravitational
metric of matter.
Hence both inside and outside, black holes are symmetry-conserving systems of the
temporal metric, whether as supernovas, superstars, or quasars; via Hawking's
"quantum radiance"; or through internal proton decay; - in all cases converting
bound electromagnetic energy to free electromagnetic energy, via the gravitational
fulfillment of Noether's symmetry conservation theorem, which is apparently why
Nature is so eager to create gravitationally bound systems, including her relentless
pursuit of black holes.
"The extremes meet". Both the temporal/gravitational metric of bound energy in
the black hole, and the spatial/electromagnetic metric of free energy in empty
space, conserve the symmetric energy state of their respective energy forms.
According to a theorem by Bekenstein and Hawking, the surface area of a black hole is
proportional to its entropy [5], [8]. The surface of a black hole is its "event horizon", the
location at which space finally is moving fast enough - equivalently to the intrinsic motion of
light - to "catch" and "neutralize" time, causing light and space to vanish and time to "stand
still". (As the extreme example of the co-variance of space with time ("Lorentz Invariance"),
"clocks stop" because seconds become "stretched out" to infinity, and consequently meter sticks
must become correspondingly (infinitely) short.) Temporal entropy becomes visible (again,
through our giant telescopes) as the gravitational red shift of condensed matter (neutron stars),
and in the even more extreme case of black holes, takes the form of the "event horizon". The
surface expanse of the black hole demonstrates that time is a dimensional reality (time is not
simply a human "mental construct"), and constitutes the physical demonstration and proof that
gravity converts space and the drive of spatial entropy (light's intrinsic motion) into time and
the drive of historical entropy (time's intrinsic motion). The theoretical, formal, or mathematical
proof is of course provided by Hawking and Bekenstein. (Observational evidence for the
existence of black holes is by now beyond dispute. See, for one example, Sky and Telescope
April 2005 page 43.)
As the mass of an object increases, its increasing temporal entropy requirement is supplied by a
greater spatial flow - either a stronger or larger (or both) gravitational field. But in the limiting
case of the black hole, a stronger field is not possible in terms of greater acceleration, because
space is already moving at its maximum (velocity c), so a larger field, expressed in terms of a

12 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

larger surface area, is the only accommodation available for the additional entropy needs of any
new mass inputs to the system. The situation is analogous to the flow of water through a pipe: if
the water flow is already at a theoretical maximum of velocity and pressure, the only way to
increase the flow is to increase the cross-sectional area of the pipe.
Usually we think of gravitation as converging to a central dimensionless point - the center of
mass, the point-like beginning of the time line, at which the in-flowing spatial dimensions
symmetrically annihilate each other, leaving the time-charge residue. The black hole surface
area is the expansion of this spatially dimensionless central point to accommodate a greater
gravitational flow. This surface is still dimensionless in that there is no spatial volume present only a "black hole" of time which displaces ordinary space somewhat (but not exactly) as a ship
displaces water.
Since time is matter's entropy drive, the surface area of the black hole also represents the
absolute "size" of the time dimension associated with the mass of the black hole. Hence if the
mass of a black hole doubles, its surface area (not its volume) must also double. Black holes are
therefore somewhat larger than we might otherwise suppose (this is where the ship
displacement analogy fails). (Reader take note: this result is controversial.)
Just as we can think of an ordinary rock as light's symmetric energy transformed to asymmetric
mass, brought to rest, and made visible, so we can think of a black hole's surface area as light's
symmetric entropy drive transformed to asymmetric time, brought to rest, and made visible.
The surface area or event horizon of a black hole is a "visible rock" formed of time - the
asymmetric temporal entropy drive of bound energy.
The "black hole" condition is just that in which spatial and temporal entropy drives are not only
metrically equivalent, they are fully physically equivalent in strength. At the "event horizon" of
a black hole, g = c, time stands still and meter sticks shrink to nothing (the extreme case of the
co-variance of space with time). If the mass of the earth were compressed to the condition of g
= c or a "black hole", the earth's event horizon would only be about the size of a ping-pong ball!
The surface area of this ball = the absolute size of the time dimension or temporal entropy drive
of the earth's entire "rest mass", as translated into the terms of an equivalent spatial entropy
drive (g = c). This illustrates dramatically just how small the temporal entropy drive of bound
energy really is - and how relatively little spatial entropy drive is required to create it - which is
why we find gravity to be so weak, comparatively. The gravity we feel on earth's surface is the
spatial pull caused by the intrinsic motion of that same time dimension, in effect, the tiny "black
hole" at the gravitational center of the earth, but the surface area of that "ping-pong ball", and
its associated gravitational force, is diluted over the surface area of the entire earth.
The time dimension exists at right angles to all three spatial dimensions. The black hole is the
central point of intersection between space and time, enormously magnified so that their
"tangential" point of contact becomes visible.
In the black hole, where space becomes time, we see demonstrated the fact that time moves
with a velocity that is the metric equivalent of c. We also see how small is the contact point
between the spatial and temporal dimensions, which is equivalent to the tangential contact point

13 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

between matter's "universal present moment" and historic spacetime. In contrast, light
completely occupies its entropic domain, space. Light and space are coextensive, but matter and
history are not. Gravity is weak (for one reason) because matter's tangential point of contact
between the "present moment" and its entropic conservation domain, historic spacetime, is so
small. This is similar to the argument made by P. A. M. Dirac when he compared the radius of
the universe to the radius of an electron, observing this was in the same proportion as the
strength of gravity to the strength of the electromagnetic field. (The fact that this contact point is
greater than zero means that the temporal entropy drive of matter will actually have a very
small vitiating effect upon atoms, perhaps as realized through "proton decay" and/or "Hawking
Radiation".)
On this view, we would expect gravity to be stronger if the unit of time (the "tangential touch")
were greater - which is exactly what General Relativity predicts. Time slows down (seconds
become of longer duration) in a gravitational field, and time actually stops at the event horizon
of a black hole, where the "present moment" becomes the "eternal now", the tangential point of
contact between matter and the temporal dimension becomes infinitely enlarged, and g = c. For
a further discussion of the weakness of gravity, see: "Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the
Universe".
It is likely that proton decay is commonplace in black holes; indeed, this may be one of the
"reasons" (in addition to Hawking's "quantum radiance") why gravity is so keen to produce
them - proton decay is one way to fulfill the mandate of Noether's Theorem to return bound to
free energy. If so, then a black hole may be nothing less than a gravitationally bound state of
light, light "transformed to rest", a "dark crystal" of light. This would solve the problem of the
infinite compressibility of matter at the central singularity, since there is no limit upon the
quantum mechanical superposition of photons. For an explanation of gravitationally induced
proton decay, see: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".
At the "event horizon" of a black hole, both clocks and light come to a halt, as the
electromagnetic metric is completely replaced by the gravitational metric. Within
the event horizon, all former functions of the electromagnetic metric are either
defunct or performed by the gravitational metric, including those of the the binding
forces between particles. But the black hole is not the final state, because
gravitation is also a form of (negative) entropy, and indeed we find, just at the
boundary between the electromagnetic and gravitational domains, gravitational
entropy operating to erode and convert the mass of the black hole entirely to light via the mechanism of "Hawking radiation". The "one-way" entropy drive of time
and gravity is not as symmetric as the "all-way" entropy drive of light and space,
and so the former must give way to the latter. "Hawking radiation" is the ultimate
expression of Noether's symmetry conservation theorem, the complete gravitational
conversion of bound to free energy, definitively revealing the final conservation
rationale for gravitation.
For more on gravity and entropy see: "A Description of Gravitation"; and "Spatial vs Temporal
Entropy". For a discussion of the interaction between gravitation, negative entropy, and biology,
see: "Newton, Darwin, and the Origin and Abundance of Life in the Universe".

14 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

References
[1] Encyclopedia Britannica 1968, 21, 1018.
[2] Noether, E. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. Brewer, J. W. and M. K.
Smith, eds. M. Decker, New York, 1981, 180 + x pp. + 10 plates.
[2a] John Keats. Ode on a Grecian Urn
[3] d'Abro, A. The Evolution of Scientific Thought from Newton to Einstein. Dover. 1950,
193-200.
[4] Weinberg, S. The First Three Minutes. Bantam. 1977, 177 + x pp.
[4a] Cronin, J. W. CP Symmetry Violation: the Search for its Origin. Science 1981, 212,
1221-8 (Nobel lecture).
[5] Hawking, S. W. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Communications in Mathematical
Physics 1975, 43 (3), 199-220.
[6] Green, B. The Elegant Universe. W.W. Norton & Co. 1999, 448 + xiii pp.
[7] Bohm, D. Wholeness and the Implicate Order. Routledge & Kegan Paul 1980, 224 +
xv pp.
[8] Bekenstein, J. D. Black Holes and Entropy. Physical Review D, 1973, 7(8), 2333-46.
[9] Shannon, C. and W. Weaver. The Mathematical Theory of Communication. Urbana,
University of Illinois Press 1949
Further Readings:
Bekenstein, J. D. Information in the Holographic Universe. Scientific American, August
2003, pages 58-65.
Albert Einstein, H. A. Lorentz, et. al. (1923). The Principle of Relativity. Dover, 1952.
Enrico Fermi. 1936. Thermodynamics. Dover Publications, Inc.
Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose. 1996. The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton
University Press.
Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers. 1984. Order out of Chaos. Bantam Books.
P. A. Schilpp, ed. 1959. Albert Einstein: Philosopher - Scientist. Harper Torchbooks.
Ian Stewart. 2007. Why Beauty is Truth. Basic Books.
Hideki Yukawa. 1973. Creativity and Intuition. Kodansha International Ltd.
J. A. Wheeler. 1999. A Journey into Gravity and Spacetime. W. H Freeman ("Scientific
American" Library)
Maudlin, Tim. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time 2012 Princeton Univ. Press.
Scharf, C. Gravity's Engines Scientific American/Farrar, Straus and Giroux 2012 (book)
Science vol. 337 3 Aug., 2012 pp. 536 - 547: special section on black holes.
Links:
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Unification
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 1
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3

15 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

Gravity, Entropy, and Thermodynamics: Part II

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/thermo2.html

(summary)
The Symmetry Groups of Light
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model"
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Gravitation
Section II: Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
About Gravity
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Nodes of the Gravitational Metric
Entropy
Section VII: Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
End of Part II - Return to Part I

16 of 16

7/1/14 4:42 PM

