Global and Local Gauge Symmetry in the "Tetrahedron Model": Part II
John A. Gowan
Homepage
(Revised Jan., 2013)
Related Papers:
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part I)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part II)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (Postscript)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in the Weak Force
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part IV)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part V)
Table of Contents
PART II
Abstract
Introduction
Electromagnetic Force
Weak Force
Strong force
Two Expressions of the Strong Force
Gravity
The Material Cosmos is no Accident
Links
References
PART II
Abstract
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem). These debts must be paid in full
to satisfy energy, symmetry, and charge conservation (as through matter-antimatter charge annihilation or its
equivalent). The function of local gauge symmetry, as effected by the field vectors of the four forces, is to
ensure, protect, and maintain charge invariance (serving charge and symmetry conservation) and the
invariance of the "Interval" and velocity c ("Lorentz Invariance" serving causality and energy conservation),
during and after the transformation of light (free electromagnetic energy) to matter (bound electromagnetic
energy), as in the "Big Bang" (or in any subsequent interconversion between bound and free energy forms).
Conservation must be observed in the "local" realm of matter no less than in the "global" realm of light - and
in their compound domain of historical spacetime.
Introduction: Rationale and Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries
The conversion of the absolute, "global", "non-local" realm of light and space, gauged by the electromagnetic
constant "c" and driven by the intrinsic motion of light (the spatial entropic drive of free energy), to the
relative, local realm of matter and history, gauged by the gravitational constant G and driven by the intrinsic
motion of time (the historical entropic drive of bound energy), requires the compensating mediation of local
gauge symmetry "currents" (derived from the field vectors of the forces), for reasons of energy, symmetry,
causality, and charge conservation, including charge invariance.

We find a distinct role for each of the four forces, ensuring the invariance of elementary particles plus the
invariance of charge magnitudes and whole quantum-unit charges in the realm of matter. Through the
creation of matter's time dimension and spacetime, gravity provides an historic domain for the long-term
conservation of matter's charges, including an entropy drive for bound energy and a means of accommodating
matter's variable energy accounts. The co-variance of time and space (the "Lorentz Invariance" of Special and
General Relativity) also ensures the invariance of velocity c, the "Interval", and causality in the
gravitationally compounded metric of spacetime.
1) Electromagnetic force: The invariance of electric charge and "velocity c". Absolute vs relative motion
and magnetism; magnetism and the magnetic force associated with the relative motion of electric charge.
Magnetic fields are epiphenomena of, or related to, the "Lorentz Invariance" of space and time (Special
Relativity), in which the co-varying and flexible dimensions form a "local symmetry current" simultaneously
protecting the invariance of electric charge, velocity c, Einstein's "Interval", and causality. Invariance of
electric charge despite the relative motion of massive charge-carrying particles - serving charge and
symmetry conservation. Example: magnetic forces ensure the electrical neutrality of ground-state atomic
matter despite the orbital motions of the electrons vs the (relatively) stationary protons.
All electrical charges are the same in magnitude (charge invariance), a global symmetry within the
electromagnetic force required by charge conservation and "Noether's Theorem". In atomic matter, charge
invariance requires the existence of magnetic forces (the "local symmetry current"), to achieve electrical
neutrality, while simultaneously balancing the energy accounts of electric charges in relative motion - such
that energy is conserved but without changing the invariant value of the electric charge. The photon is the
field vector, whose magnetic component constitutes the compensating factor of the "local gauge symmetry
current". The electrical neutrality of cold, "ground state" atomic matter is the evidence of the local symmetry
state, achieved despite the relative (rather than absolute) motion of electrical charges (orbital electrons) thanks to the compensatory action of magnetic force fields. The electromagnetic force provides a paradigm of
global-local gauge symmetries for the other forces - either by similarity or contrast.
2) Weak Force: Transformations of (single) elementary particle "identity", including the creation,
destruction, and "swapping" of single elementary particles and charges and associated mass-energy quanta.
Just as charge invariance is a critical issue for charge and symmetry conservation, so also must be the
mechanism of elementary charge carrier creation and transformation (creation and/or transformations of
single quarks and leptons). The role of the weak force and the massive Higgs boson and IVBs (Intermediate
Vector Bosons) is to ensure that charge invariance, charge conservation, and energy conservation are all
scrupulously observed in any creation or transformation of (single) elementary particle charge, mass, and
identity. To this end, the massive IVBs (as gauged by the Higgs mass scalar) reprise the original energy
density of the electroweak unified force symmetric energy state in which these particles and charges were
originally created and/or transformed (during the "Big Bang"). (See: "The "W" IVB and the Weak Force
Mechanism".)
Global symmetry: the invariant charge and mass of elementary particle-antiparticle pairs created during the
"Big Bang" in an era of force unification, as scaled or "gauged" by the universal energy constants of light and
the spacetime metric: c, e, h, G, etc. Local symmetry: the charge and mass of single elementary particles
created here and now. Local gauge symmetry current: the mass of the Higgs boson and weak force IVBs
recreate the energy level of the original electroweak unified force symmetry state in which these particles
were first created and/or transformed during the "Big Bang". Virtual particle-antiparticle pairs of elementary
particles drawn from the electroweak symmetric energy state constitute the transforming flow of a local
gauge symmetry "current".
The weak force IVBs are "metric" particles, catalytic particles composed entirely of a densely compressed
and (perhaps) convoluted metric, similar to the densely energetic and compressed primordial metric of the

early "Big Bang". The great mass of the IVBs consists of the binding energy required to compress and
maintain a volume of spacetime metric in the particular configuration and density that recapitulates the
electroweak era of the "Big Bang", a configuration which we recognize as a weak force IVB.
The most significant feature of the massive IVBs is that they recreate the original conditions of the energydense primordial metric in which particles were first created and/or transformed during the early micromoments of the "Big Bang". This recapitulation ensures that the original and invariant values of charge, mass,
and energy are handed on to the next generation of particles, even though they are "singlets" rather than
particle-antiparticle pairs. The IVB mass not only provides a "conservation containment" where charge and
energy transfers can take place, it simultaneously ensures that the appropriate alternative charge carriers are
present (in the form of virtual particle-antiparticle pairs derived from the Heisenberg-Dirac "vacuum zoo" of
spacetime and the electroweak symmetric energy state).
There is a crucial difference between the electromagnetic or strong force creation of particle-pairs via
symmetric particle-antiparticle formation, and the weak force creation or transformation of asymmetric
"singlet" particles to other elementary forms. ("Singlets" are matter particles without antimatter "mates".) In
the case of particle-antiparticle pair creation, there can be no question of the suitability of either partner for a
subsequent annihilation reaction which will conserve their original symmetry. Both particles are referenced
against each other and gauged or scaled by the spacetime metric (the "vacuum") and by universal
electromagnetic constants such as c, e, and h (resident and available everywhere in the global spacetime
metric). However, in the case of the weak force creation or transformation of a "singlet" elementary particle
to another form, alternative charge carriers must be used to balance charges, since using actual antiparticles
for this purpose can only produce annihilations. But how can the weak force guarantee that the alternative
charge carriers - which may be a meson, a neutrino, or a massive lepton - will have the correct charge in kind
and magnitude to conserve symmetry at some future date in some future reaction, or with an unknown partner
which is not even its antiparticle? Furthermore, quark charges are both partial and hidden (because they are
confined), and number charges of the massive leptons and baryons are also hidden (because they are implicit)
- they have no long-range projection (such as the magnetic field of electric charge) to indicate to a potential
reaction partner the relative condition of their energy state. Conservation of energy, charge, and symmetry
require that elementary particles created yesterday, today, or tomorrow, be exactly the same in all respects as
those created eons ago in the "Big Bang", and can seamlessly swap places with them if necessary. The
absolute and interchangeable identity of all elementary particles (of a given species) is a universal symmetry
which must be respected by all charges and forces everywhere and at all times.
These conservation problems are all solved by a return to the original environmental conditions in which
these particles and transformations were created, much as we return and refer to the Bureau of Standards
when we need to re-calibrate our instruments. The necessity for charge invariance in the service of symmetry
conservation therefore offers a plausible explanation for the otherwise enigmatic large mass of the weak force
IVBs. Weak force "singlets" can only be referenced against their original creation energy, as scaled by a
specific Higgs boson. The IVB mass serves to recreate the original environmental conditions - metric and
energetic, particle and charge - in which the reactions they now mediate first took place (the primordial
electroweak unified force energy level or symmetric energy state), ensuring charge invariance and hence
symmetry conservation regardless of the type of alternative charge carrier that may be required. (See: The
Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs.)
3) Strong force: partial quark charges and gluons. Invariance of whole, elementary quantum charge units
despite the partial charges of the quarks - serving charge and symmetry conservation. Strong force color
charges permanently confine quark partial charges to whole quantum unit charge values (baryons and
mesons), so they may be canceled, neutralized, balanced, or annihilated by other elementary, whole quantum
unit charges - such as those carried by the alternative charge carriers, the leptons and mesons.

Leptonic whole charge units represent the global charge condition; quark partial charge units represent the
local condition. The gluon field is the local gauge symmetry current which restores the local condition to
global invariance. The gluon field has the unusual property that it grows stronger with distance, hence
permanently confining quarks and their partial charges to whole quantum charge units ("asymptotic
freedom"). (See: Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three
Who Tamed Equations of Quark Theory.")
Global Symmetry: whole quantum unit charges.
Local Symmetry: partial charges of the quarks and their gluon field vectors; permanent quark confinement
and neutral ("white") color charge despite the partial charges carried by the quarks. ("White" color also sums
any other quark partial charges to whole quantum unit values.) (Color charges and their gluons are carried
only by quarks - hence this is an internal symmetry which applies only to composite "hadrons": baryons and
mesons.)
The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light and must remain whole to be payable on demand. But
quarks must carry partial charges so they can assume electrically neutral combinations (such as the neutron)
to allow symmetry-breaking (of electrically neutral leptoquark-antileptoquark particle pairs) during the "Big
Bang". Hence the strong force is a compromise between the demands of manifestation ("Big Bang" or
primordial symmetry-breaking), and symmetry conservation via whole quantum-unit charge conservation
(charges are symmetry debts). This compromise also allows non-leptonic composite particles (baryons and
mesons) to exist provided their partial components (the quarks) can never become individually free. Baryons
and mesons (the only allowed "white" quark combinations) must always express whole quantum unit charge
values to the external world (in essence, as "seen" by the long-range forces) for purposes of charge balance
(in atomic matter) and/or symmetry conservation (as via charge-anticharge annihilation).
"Gluons" are the field vectors of color charge, and the analog of the photon field vector of the
electromagnetic force. Gluons are massless and move at velocity c; they are composed of color-anticolor
charges in all possible combinations, and hence the field in total sums to zero or "white" color. Gluons have
been compared to "sticky" light (because in "white" combinations gluons attract each other). Just as quarks
may be the remains of fractured primordial leptons and hence carry fractional electric charges, gluons may be
fractured photons - the "split" field vectors of fractured electric charge. Various processes such as fusion, the
nucleosynthetic pathway in stars, Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes, and finally proton decay
with color charge self-annihilation ("asymptotic freedom" - summing the gluon field to zero color by
compression), and the cancellation of leptoquark identity charge via the leptoquark antineutrino ("proton
decay"), returns the bound energy of the quarks and hadrons to light and whole quantum unit charge
symmetry. (See: "Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos".)
(See: "The Strong Force - Two Expressions
4) Gravitation: Gravity is wholly a "local gauge symmetry current" (gauged by the universal gravitational
constant "G"), composed of the flow of space and time, which modifies the global, absolute metric of space
and light (gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c"). Gravity establishes a new, compound metric
containing a temporal parameter to accommodate the entropy, causality, and energy conservation
requirements of bound electromagnetic energy (mass-matter). This new compound metric containing both
temporal and spatial conservation/entropy parameters (historic spacetime) is produced by gravity through the
annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically equivalent temporal residue. The intrinsic motion of
time serves as bound energy's entropy drive and marches on to create history (historic spacetime), the
conservation domain of matter's causal information web, network, or "matrix".
Electromagnetic metric - gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c" (global electromagnetic
gauge) = spatial absolute metric - a perfectly symmetric metric.

Gravitational metric - gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G" (global gravitational gauge) =
historical, relative local metric (spacetime - an asymmetric metric due to one-way time and gravitation). The
gravitational metric is derived from and imposed upon the spatial metric (asymmetric time "warps" the
symmetric spatial metric).
"Little g" = local gravitational gauge; local gravity bends light but maintains the invariance of "velocity c",
due to the covariance of space and time, and despite variations in the strength of the local gravitational
metric.
Flow of space and time = "local gauge symmetry current", which controls the local rate of flow of time (clock
rate), maintaining the invariance of the "Interval", causality, and velocity "c" in the local, variable, historical
(gravitational) metric.
"Little g" on the Sun (and stars generally) begins to return some mass-matter to the symmetry of light and
light's absolute, spatial metric. When "g" = "c" (in black holes), then the local gravitational metric is
equivalent in strength and effect to the global electromagnetic metric: matter travels with "intrinsic motion"
of "velocity c"; time stands still and meter sticks shrink to nothing (at the "event horizon"); proton decay
(inside the event horizon) and Hawking's "quantum radiance" (outside the event horizon) return matter to
light, and likewise return the gravitational, historic metric to the electromagnetic, spatial metric. These
actions restore light's symmetry, paying all the symmetry and entropy debts of matter and bound
electromagnetic energy. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
The invariance of the "Interval" is due to the flexible nature of time and space, and their inter-convertibility.
Flexible metric scales and the invariance of the "Interval" are both necessary to rescue energy conservation
and causality from the fluid metric and dimensionality of General Relativity, and from the relative motion of
matter at less than "velocity c". Because of the invariance of the "Interval", energy conservation and causality
is observed in all local metrics (on Jupiter, the Earth, the Moon, the Sun, etc.), despite the fact that time runs
at a different rate on each, because length scales are also affected in a compensatory manner ("Lorentz
Invariance" of General Relativity). (See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
Gravity acts to conserve the "non-local" symmetric energy state of light, and light's primordial entropy drive
(light's intrinsic motion), by converting space and the embedded entropy drive of free energy (the expansive
properties of space and the intrinsic motion of light), to matter's primordial entropy drive (the intrinsic motion
of time and the expansive properties of history). (See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation".)
Time, the entropy drive of bound energy and history, is also necessary to matter's causal relations and energy
conservation accounts (because the energy content of matter varies with its relative velocity).
Gravity introduces local time (and hence local causality) with the gravitational "location" charge, converting
globally symmetric space to locally asymmetric time. This is a conversion from a global absolute metric and
entropy drive, to a local relative metric and entropy drive. The expansion of causal history replaces the
expansion of acausal space; aging replaces cooling; the intrinsic motion of time (the local entropy drive of
bound energy) replaces the intrinsic motion of light (the global entropy drive of free energy). Gravity is the
conversion force for the primordial entropy drives of global space vs local history, in either direction. (See:
"The Conversion of Space to Time".)
Because the gravitational charge specifies a particular place (holds space constant), it must introduce
movement in another dimension to satisfy entropy demands: matter's moving time dimension. Because matter
does not expand or move in space (matter has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion), matter's time dimension must
move instead - entropy increase is mandatory in some dimension, for all energy forms in our universe of free
and bound electromagnetic energy.
Time is the "local symmetry current" which adjusts the causal linkage and the energy accounts of matter in
relative (rather than absolute) motion from place to place in space. Energy conservation is accomplished in

systems of bound energy despite the relative (rather than absolute) motion of matter, and despite the variable
metric of gravitational spacetime. This is the conservation role of the local gauge metrical symmetry imposed
by the gravitational force, whose field vector is time, spacetime, or the "graviton". (See: "The Time Train".)
The function of the spatial metric in any situation is energy conservation, which requires a symmetry
parameter (inertial force) and an entropy parameter (the intrinsic motion of light as gauged by "velocity c").
This metric conservation function is globally gauged by c, and locally modified by G, which introduces the
asymmetric time parameter, necessary for matter's entropy drive, causal linkage, and energy conservation.
Time also indicates inertially (dimensionally/gravitationally) the spatial coordinates of the distributional
asymmetry of mass, including magnitude and density. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time. Time and gravity induce each other endlessly. (See: "A Description of Gravitation";
and "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".)
The Material Cosmos is no Accident
If there is one conclusion we should draw from the global-local force structure of our Cosmos, it is that the
appearance of matter in this Universe is no accident. The material Cosmos is a system of energy that was
destined to manifest in its current life-friendly form from its beginning. It is not only the weak force
asymmetry (creating matter) that is built into the laws of Nature, but the duality of the global-local structures
of all the other forces as well (as is especially evident in their field vectors). The magnetic field of the
electromagnetic force, the gluon field of the strong force, the embedded temporal metric of light
("frequency"), gravitation, and spacetime - all these anticipate the creation or existence of matter, and are in
addition to the weak force asymmetry parameter, the massive Higgs boson and the IVBs, and the alternative
charge carriers of the leptonic field. And this is still to say nothing of the "life-friendly" values of the physical
constants.
All these parameters are fixed at the level of the Multiverse, and once they are engaged as a self-consistent
and self-referent set, capable of internal energy conservation, and requiring no net energy or charge to
produce, the birth of our manifest Universe is assured. It is my assumption that our Universe is but one of
perhaps infinitely many created in a similar fashion, each with its own unique set of physical parameters, all
capable of conserving energy and requiring no net energy to produce. Any notion of "Divinity" thus resides
in the creative energies of the truly global Multiverse, of which our Universe is but one local example and
subset. We simply have no idea at all what creative possibilities are available to the Multiverse in this regard
- the multifaceted exploration of itself through the creation of myriad living universes.
For a summary of my own formulation of the force symmetries see:
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3 (summary).
Go to Part III: Postscript to this paper
Go to Part I
Links
Unified Field Theory
Section I: Introduction to Unification
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part I
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 2

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of Everything") - Part 3 (summary)
Principles of the Unified Field Theory: A Tetrahedral Model
(Postscript and Commentary on paper above)
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Spacetime
Synopsis of the Unification Theory: The System of Matter
Light and Matter: A Synopsis
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part I)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part II)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model":Postscript
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries: Material Effects of Local Gauge Symmetries (part IV)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries and the "Tetrahedron Model" (part V)
The "Tetrahedron Model" vs the "Standard Model" of Physics: A Comparison
Synopsis of the "Tetrahedron Model" of the Unified Field Theory
The Tetrahedron Model in the Context of a Complete Conservation Cycle (text)
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries in Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
12 Summary Points Concerning Gravitation
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
"Dark Energy": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Entropy
Section VII: Introduction to Entropy
Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics
Spatial vs Temporal Entropy
Currents of Symmetry and Entropy
The Time Train
The Halflife of Proton Decay and the 'Heat Death' of the Cosmos
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs")
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" Intermediate Vector Boson and the Weak Force Mechanism (pdf file)
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
Global-Local Gauge Symmetries of the Weak Force
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D) Reality
The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson Papers
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Parts II, III, IV
"Dark Matter" and the Weak Force
References:

Brewer, J. W. and M. K. Smith, eds. Emmy Noether: A Tribute to her Life and Work. 1981. M. Dekker,
New York.
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin: The Phenomenon of Man. 1959. Harper and Row, New York.
Frank Close: Lucifer's Legacy. 2000. Oxford Univ Press.
Books by my late father Prof. John Curtis Gowan
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical
Realm. A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Operations of Increasing Order" Further Investigations of the Numinous Element and the
Metaphysical Realm. A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Psychedelic Individual". A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Creative Individual". A Book by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
Gross, Politzer, Wilczek: Science: 15 October 2004 vol. 306 page 400: "Laurels to Three Who Tamed
Equations of Quark Theory."
Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi: The God Particle. 2006. Mariner Books.
Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008. Promethus Books.
J. E. Lovelock. Gaia. A New Look at Life on Earth. 1979. Oxford University Press.
Robert Oerter: The Theory of Almost Everything. 2006. Penguin (Plume).
Pais, Abraham Inward Bound: of Matter and Forces in the Physical World. 1986. Oxford University
Press, NY
Robert Resnick: Introduction to Special Relativity. 1968. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
James S. Trefil: The Moment of Creation 1983. Collier, Macmillan.
Frank Wilczek: The Lightness of Being. 2008. Basic Books.

