andreas.html

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/dimensions.html

Why There Are Three Spatial Dimensions
(added Aug., 2013)
Fundamentally, the dimensionality of spacetime is a matter of energy conservation: three dimensions
are sufficient to establish an entropic domain in which the basic thermodynamic requirements
necessary to conserve the energy of free forms of electromagnetic energy (light, EM radiation, etc.)
are present; likewise, four dimensions are necessary to meet the conservation requirements of bound
forms of electromagnetic energy (mass/matter).
Light is a 2-D transverse wave, with no time dimension and no space dimension in the direction of
motion (clocks stop and meter sticks shrink to nothing at velocity c - as per Einstein). Light requires
two dimensions to accommodate its alternating electric and magnetic fields, which induce each other
at right angles. The energy of light is encoded in its frequency (E = hv) with its implied (but
suppressed) time dimension. The intrinsic motion of light ("velocity c") "sweeps out" a third spatial
dimension, creating, expanding, and cooling a 3-D spatial volume. The energy component of light is
therefore 2-dimensional, while the entropy component corresponds to the 3rd spatial dimension. The
entropy "drive" of light (free electromagnetic radiation) is the "intrinsic motion" of light, as gauged by
the universal electromagnetic constant "c".
We see that three dimensions are sufficient for 2-D light to establish an entropy domain for its own
conservation needs, and therefore light has no need to explore additional dimensional possibilities.
Similarly, in the case of 3-D bound energy forms of electromagnetic energy (massive atomic "solids"),
one further dimension (time) must be added to establish the entropy domain for matter (history), in
which the "intrinsic motion" of time produces aging and decay (since atoms have no spatial form of
intrinsic motion they must resort to time - which also suggests that the 3rd spatial dimension is the
only possible higher-dimensional entropic option for light - if it is to remain in its free form). Gravity
combines these two electromagnetic entropy domains into our familiar spacetime, the composite
entropy domain of our universe of free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy. (See: "The
Conversion of Space to Time" .)
In the "black hole", the electromagnetic metric of light and space (as gauged by the universal
electromagnetic constant "c") is completely overwhelmed and replaced by the gravitational metric of
matter and time (as gauged by the universal gravitational constant "G"). The energy of the black hole
is encoded in its mass (hv = mcc), while the entropy is encoded in the two-dimensional "event
horizon" (as per Bekenstein and Hawking - see: Scientific American Aug. 2003 pp. 58 - 65.) The
entropy drive of matter and the black hole is the "intrinsic motion" of matter's time dimension, which
creates the spatial flow of matter's gravitational field. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence
of the intrinsic motion of time. The expansion of the black hole's "event horizon" is required (when
energy is added to the hole) since the gravitational intensity and material density of the hole is already
at a maximum (g = c); therefore the only way to increase the gravitational flow (which is necessary to
increase the temporal entropy encoding for the added energy) is to increase the size of the gravitating
mass, in other words, increase the boundary or surface area of the event horizon, which is the only
part of the hole in active/actual contact with the outside spatial universe. If the black hole has a
3-dimensional "volume" at all, it is permanently hidden behind the event horizon, which is in fact a
temporal entropy surface (see: "A Description of Gravity"). Hence the extreme temporal/gravitational
/material metric suppresses space just as the extreme spatial/electromagnetic/light metric suppresses
1 of 4

9/17/13 5:06 AM

andreas.html

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/dimensions.html

time.
Information is encoded in our ordinary universe in all four dimensions. Information requires the
one-way 4th dimension (time) for its entropy drive and for its historical conservation domain, due to
the causal characteristic of information. Because the black hole either destroys, suppresses, or hides
both the third and 4th dimensions, (time stands still at the event horizon and meter sticks shrink to
nothing), the black hole contains almost no information, or as John Wheeler says: "A black hole has
no hair". Information may live forever in the historical domain, but not in the black hole. Hawking
should have stuck to his guns. (See: Leonard Susskind: "The Black Hole War"; Back Bay Books,
Little, Brown and Co., 2008.)
The energy and entropy of information are encoded in the black hole's mass and the surface area of its
event horizon. The causal component of information ceases to form new linkages upon entering the
black hole and inside the event horizon distinguishable atoms are converted to "anonymous" photons.
Causal linkages created by information outside the black hole, however, continue to propagate forever
in historic spacetime. Entangled elements swallowed by the black hole are moot, since they remain
hidden forever, suspended or "frozen" in time at the event horizon.
Information is one-way (asymmetric) due to causality, as well as due to the absence of antimatter
("anti-information");
Gravity is one-way and asymmetric;
Time is one-way and asymmetric;
Entropy is one-way and asymmetric;
Matter is asymmetric - due to its time dimension, gravitational field, lack of intrinsic motion, mass,
and lack of an antimatter complement.

The black hole is the extreme case of the gravitational metric, as gauged by the universal gravitational
constant "G". The black hole is the ultimate contrast to a universe of light with no matter at all, the
extreme case of the electromagnetic metric, as gauged by the universal electromagnetic constant "c".
In the light universe, all forms of energy move at velocity "c', time does not exist, nor does space (in
the direction of a photon's motion). In the black hole also, all forms of energy move at velocity c, and
space and time are absent. In this comparison, we see "velocity c" acting in both cases as the "gauge"
of a symmetric energy state - specifically, a state of non-locality either outside or inside the black
hole. In the light universe, photons and their energy content are distributed equitably everywhere,
simultaneously - since there is no time parameter and no distance parameter (clocks stop and meter
sticks shrink to nothing in the direction of motion at "velocity c"). This same "non-local" symmetric
state with regard to the distribution of energy is achieved by the black hole within the boundary of its
"event horizon" - again because all forms of energy move at velocity c, time has stopped and space
has vanished, due to the action of a gravitational field whose strength is locally equivalent to the
electromagnetic constant "c" (g = c). Clocks stop and meter sticks shrink to nothing at the "event
horizon" of a black hole.
This discussion suggests that the conservation role of gravity is to pay the "location" symmetry debt
of matter. The "location" symmetry debt/charge arises in consideration of the spatially undistributed

2 of 4

9/17/13 5:06 AM

andreas.html

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/dimensions.html

(hence asymmetric) local concentration of immobile bound energy (matter), VS the spatially
symmetric "non-local" distribution of light's energy (due to light's intrinsic motion "c"). Because
matter is originally formed from light (bound electromagnetic energy is originally formed from free
electromagnetic energy), matter carries a gravitational "location" charge, among other symmetry debts
in the form of charges and spin, due to matter's formation from all-symmetric light. (See: "Symmetry
Principles of the Unified Field Theory".) The gravitational "location" charge is unique in that it
represents an entropy debt as well as a symmetry debt. Because the intrinsic motion of light is both
the entropy drive of light and the cause of light's non-local distributional symmetry, the gravitational
"location" charge must conserve both functions if it conserves either one. (See: "The Double
Conservation Role of Gravitation".) Gravity pays matter's "location" symmetry debt by creating black
holes, in which "Hawking Radiation" converts (eventually) the entire bound energy (mass) of the
black hole back to free energy (light).
Along the gravitational pathway leading to the creation of black holes, bound energy is also converted
to free energy via the nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, and by the even more efficient conversion of
gravitational energy and mass to light in other astrophysical processes such as supernovas and
quasars. But once the black hole condition is reached, conversions of bound to free energy (in any
appreciable quantity) essentially stop (so far as we know), if only because gravity prevents the escape
of any light produced by such processes, should any occur. In the event horizon, gravity creates a
temporal metric for matter which is the symmetric equivalent of the spatial metric of light - a metric
in which all forms of energy move with intrinsic motion c. What happens in the interior of the black
hole is moot, since we can never know. I suspect, however, that proton decay occurs at the singularity,
and hence the black hole is filled only with light - another way in which the gravitational "location"
symmetry debt is paid, also solving the problem of the infinite compressibility of matter. But nothing
else matters once the event horizon is formed (at g = c); a symmetric temporal metric has been
constructed in which all energy forms travel at c, and it would appear that no further conservation
concerns need be addressed. But is this really the final word?
What then of "Hawking Radiation"? We note, of course, that Hawking radiation is pitifully small for
any large hole, and tellingly, it gets smaller as the hole grows larger, not an encouraging sign for the
cause of symmetry conservation at least via this route, since the natural tendency of the black hole is
to forever increase in size, which means this symmetry conservation pathway is asymptotically
suppressed in the natural course of events. However, if the interior of the black hole is indeed filled
only with light, then some photons may escape the event horizon by quantum mechanical "tunneling",
and this process might increase with the size of the hole, counteracting the decrease in Hawking
radiation. Whatever the case, the amount of time available for this process (in a universe that does not
collapse) is essentially unlimited (assuming that other, unknown cosmological processes do not
intervene), so in the end the hole will completely evaporate its mass to light: bound, asymmetric
electromagnetic energy returns to free, symmetric electromagnetic energy. One rationale for this
scenario is that the temporal entropic metric of the black hole event horizon is less symmetric (being
one-way) than the "all-way" spatial entropic metric of light, driving the eventual and final conversion
of mass to light in complete satisfaction of Noether's Theorem. Nevertheless, the time required for this
conversion to go to completion is so immense that it suggests Natural Law is in fact rather
comfortable with this arrangement - the temporal metric of the black hole is stable, leaving little to be
desired either inside or outside the event horizon in terms of conservation issues. This is another

3 of 4

9/17/13 5:06 AM

andreas.html

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/dimensions.html

reason for suspecting that the interior of the black hole is filled with nothing but light, rather like a
superconducting medium in which photons have become heavy.
All this notwithstanding, a major conservation issue remains unresolved, as attested by the continuing
presence in the surrounding universe of the black hole's powerful gravitational field, even after the
event horizon has formed. So long as this field is present, the symmetry debt it encodes and represents
remains unpaid. One reason that gravity keeps working even after the formation of the event horizon
is that matter's entropy debt must keep being paid until matter's symmetry debt is completely paid,
and as far as the outside universe is concerned, the black hole still represents a grossly asymmetric
concentration of undistributed, immobile mass-energy, a severe affront to symmetry conservation in
terms of the equitable dispersion of energy throughout space - as was originally the case for the light
from which the black hole's matter was produced. The gravitational entropy debt of matter can be
thought of as an "interest" payment on matter's symmetry debt - just as on planet Earth, the interest
has to be paid until the symmetry debt is retired. But the Earth's gravitational field is too weak to
convert mass to light, so it never "pays down" the principle on its symmetry debt - that is, despite the
continuous working of Earth's gravitational field, it never gets weaker because it never converts any of
Earth's mass to light. In our Sun, however, we see gravity actually "paying down" the symmetry debt
of the Sun's mass by converting some of the Sun's bound energy to light, and hence reducing the Sun's
total mass and its associated gravitational field. Gravity will vanish completely when its symmetry
debt is well and truly paid, like any other charge (see: "Does Light Produce a Gravitational Field?").
So the black hole's gravitational field keeps working until the mass energy of the hole - whose entropy
is represented by the surface area of the event horizon - completely evaporates away.
Since it is the surface area of the event horizon which is in contact with the outside universe, it is the
surface area which generates the gravitational field. Hence the connection between time, gravity, and
entropy is especially evident in this example. A gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the
intrinsic motion of time (see: "The Conversion of Space to Time"). (See also: "The Destruction of
Information".)

4 of 4

9/17/13 5:06 AM

