CERN Higgs Announcement

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/mass.html

The Problem of "Mass" in the "Tetrahedron Model"
John A. Gowan
Dec., 2013
In my own work I have tried to simplify the "mass problem" to its barest bones. To begin with, I make
the assumption that all mass is the consequence of weak force symmetry-breaking during the "Big
Bang". Without weak force symmetry-breaking, the universe would have remained in its original state
of perfect symmetry, composed only of photons, space, and virtual particle-antiparticle pairs (of
leptons, neutrinos, quarks, etc.). Hence the proximate origin of mass is laid (in this view) directly to
the "precipitating action" of the weak force asymmetry, the IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons), and
the Higgs boson which, acting together, "condense" matter from the primordial symmetric state of
free electromagnetic energy (high-energy light). "Mass" is a conservation parameter for the raw
energy of bound electromagnetic energy (such as immobile atomic particles lacking "intrinsic motion
c"); particles of matter are created from photons and their associated virtual particle-antiparticle pairs
by the asymmetric action of the weak force during the "Creation Event". So a further question is: why
does free electromagnetic energy (light) exist in two forms - photons and virtual particle/antiparticle
pairs? I don't think there is any answer to this ultimate question - it's simply a "given" of
electromagnetic energy and our universe. Ours is an electromagnetic universe, and electromagnetic
energy has this dual nature, without which the cosmos as we know it could not exist. (I like to say that
our universe is an electromagnetic subset of the multiverse; however, perhaps we should say that our
universe is an "anthropic" subset of an electromagnetic multiverse - at least this is a scenario we can
actually imagine.)
We might also say that electromagnetic energy exists in two major phases, one symmetric and free
(light), and the other asymmetric and bound (atomic matter). The bound phase is derived from
("condensed" from) the photons and virtual particles of the free phase (via the asymmetric decays of
the weak force), and is interchangeable with it. The transition from one phase to another is
instantaneous or nearly so (as in the creation/annihilation of particle-antiparticle pairs via the
electromagnetic force, or the creation/annihilation of single particles via the weak force). Since light
is 2-dimensional and matter is 4-dimensional, the phase transition is inter-dimensional, involving most
significantly (in the 4-D case) the asymmetric one-way time dimension. This loss of symmetry
requires a conservation response: electric charge and the neutrino's spin combine to register the
symmetry loss of antimatter. Non-local light (with "intrinsic" (entropic) spatial motion "c") is
converted to local particles with no intrinsic spatial motion, but with a metrically and functionally
equivalent "intrinsic" (entropic) temporal motion. The raw energy of the converted photons is
conserved as the "mass" of the particles. The symmetry of the photons is conserved via the various
conserved charges of matter (as required by "Noether's Theorem - the charges of matter are symmetry
debts of light). Herein lies the conceptual union of the four forces of physics. One of these conserved
charges is the "location" charge of gravity, which registers the lost "non-local" spatial distribution
symmetry of the light which created the particles. This gravitational "location" charge is
dimensionally active, converting space into time. In fact, time is the active principle of the
gravitational charge: a "graviton" is a quantum unit of time. Herein lies the conceptual union between
gravity and quantum mechanics. (See: "A Description of Gravity".)
The gravitational conversion of space into time is the conversion of the fundamental spatial entropic
1 of 5

12/26/13 12:33 PM

CERN Higgs Announcement

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/mass.html

drive of light or free electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic spatial motion of light), into the historical
entropic drive of bound electromagnetic energy (the intrinsic temporal motion of matter). Gravity
introduces a temporal component into the spatial metric of light, which thereby becomes the
composite metric of spacetime, necessary to accommodate the conservation requirements of a
universe composed of both free and bound forms of electromagnetic energy. In the extreme case of
the "black hole", the gravitational temporal metric of matter completely overtakes and replaces the
electromagnetic spatial metric of light.
The conversion of symmetric light to asymmetric matter brings with it as conservation consequences
four new asymmetries: time, charge, mass, and gravity, all related and actively involved in the
conservation of light's original energy and symmetry, and the return of matter to its original symmetric
state (witness our sun, and the ultimate conversion of all mass to light via Hawking's "quantum
radiance" of black holes).
The gravitational field produced by mass is an asymmetric metric field (because of its temporal
component), which interacts with and distorts the symmetric electromagnetic metric field of space.
Recall these fields extend throughout the universe. Forcing the actively distorting gravitational field
through the symmetric spatial metric field (as during accelerated motion) produces a natural resistance
(since work must be done to distort the symmetric field), and yields the phenomenon of "inertial"
mass; inertial mass is equivalent to gravitational "weight", since the accelerated flow of metric
spacetime in the two cases is reciprocally equivalent (either we accelerate through spacetime or
spacetime accelerates through us). (Note that this "inertial mass via the metric distortion of
gravitation" hypothesis provides a universal inertial resistance to any kind of mass or bound energy, in
exact proportion, and is not the same mechanism as the "Higgs boson drag" proposed by the
"Standard Model", which apparently affects only elementary particles.) (See: "The Higgs Boson vs
the Spacetime Metric".)
This is how I understand mass in the "Tetrahedron Model", considering only the "forest" and not
looking at specific "trees", not overly concerning myself with the different kinds of bound energy. The
role of the "Higgs boson" in my view is to gauge (scale) the IVB mass, which in turn gauges the mass
of the particles they transform, whether quarks or leptons. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak
Force IVBs".)
For more (qualitative) details on my view of the weak force mechanism, see the various papers in the
weak force section of my website. But the quantitative detail I gladly (and perforce) leave to the
expertise of the mathematically gifted.
To summarize, in this conception I do not try to distinguish between various sources of "mass", but
recognize all mass as due to a universal conservation parameter for raw energy triggered by the
change of phase from 2-D symmetrically distributed and "non-local" light (with "intrinsic" (entropic)
motion in space ("velocity c"), to 4-D asymmetric and "local" (undistributed) matter with "intrinsic"
(entropic) motion in time. Time is the alternative and asymmetric (one-way due to causality) entropy
drive for bound electromagnetic energy (atomic matter), creating history, the information conservation
domain for causal matter. Light, being acausal, requires only space as an entropic domain for energy
conservation. Time is derived from the primary and symmetric "all-way" spatial entropy drive of free
electromagnetic energy (light's "intrinsic" motion), via the gravitational conversion of space to time,

2 of 5

12/26/13 12:33 PM

CERN Higgs Announcement

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/mass.html

creating historic spacetime. Historic spacetime is the compound metric and entropic conservation
domain of our universe, accommodating (as it must) both free and bounds forms of electromagnetic
energy. "Mass" is a property (conserving raw energy) of any energy form which is derived from light,
but does not itself move at velocity "c". Any energy form which has a time dimension also has mass
and a corresponding gravitational energy (Gm) - which creates the time dimension of mass via the
annihilation of space. Spatial annihilation leaves a metrically equivalent temporal residue which has
its own "intrinsic" (entropic) motion into history, continuing the self-feeding cycle of the gravitational
conversion of space into time, a cycle which ends only with the conversion of mass to light. A
gravitational field is the spatial consequence of the intrinsic motion of time. (See: "The Conversion of
Space to Time".
The absolute measure of (rest) mass (in terms of electromagnetic energy equivalent) is given by
Einstein's E = mcc. Relative or comparative measures of mass are provided by measuring an object's
resistance to acceleration or (equivalently) its gravitational "weight". These vary with the degree of
acceleration (or the strength of the gravitational field) and rely on additional calibration by an
established standard (the international kilogram, for example). This method also assumes acceleration
at low (non-relativistic) velocities. An advantage of the method is that we can safely assume that all of
the object's mass is included in the measurement - and we don't have to annihilate it. Another absolute
measure of mass, but in terms of gravitational rather than electromagnetic energy, is provided by the
total energy of an object's gravitational field. This is given as the product of the object's mass
multiplied by the universal gravitational constant (Gm). Finally, Newton's gravitational formula
allows us to calculate the mass of astronomical objects, including our own earth, if we know the
surface acceleration due to gravity, the gravitational constant, and the distance to the center of mass (F
= GMm/rr). (Google-search "Cavendish experiment" and see the Wiki article for technical details
regarding the determination of the gravitational constant (G) and the "weighing" of the Earth.)
Further thoughts on mass and gravity:
1) Massless light moving freely in the vacuum of spacetime does not produce a gravitational field.
Hence the conversion of mass to light in astrophysical processes such as stellar nucleosynthesis,
quasars, supernovas, etc., reduces the total gravitational field of the cosmos - resulting in a universal
"acceleration" of the spacetime expansion (recently observed). Hence the mysterious "dark energy" is
nothing else but the relaxation of the gravitational grip of the universe as its bound energy content is
converted to free energy (light).
2) "Dark Matter" is probably composed of a heavy neutrino - specifically, a leptoquark anti-neutrino
released during the asymmetric weak force creation of matter during the "Big Bang" - balancing the
"baryon number charge" of the matter produced. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".)
3) The negative energy of gravity exactly balances the positive energy of the "Big Bang" - allowing
the cosmos to be born in a symmetric state of no net energy or charge (the latter due to the presence of
antimatter). Absolute conservation of energy and charge follow as a natural consequence of this
original symmetric condition and "zero sum" charge and energy state. (See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade".)
CERN Higgs Announcement Citation
See: Discovery Announcement: Science Vol. 337 13 July 2012 pp. 141-143

3 of 5

12/26/13 12:33 PM

CERN Higgs Announcement

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/mass.html

See (article): The Discovery of the Higgs Boson
Science 21 December 2012: Vol. 338 no. 6114 pp. 1524-1525 DOI: 10.1126/science.338.6114.1524
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/338/6114/1524.full
See (article): The Higgs Boson
Science 21 December 2012: Vol. 338 no. 6114 pp. 1558-1559 DOI: 10.1126/science.338.6114.1558
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/338/6114/1558.full
See (article): "Origins of Mass" by Frank Wilczek
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1206.7114.pdf
See (book): "Beyond the God Particle" Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill, Prometheus Books,
2013
Links:
Gravitation
Section II: Introduction to Gravitation
Why Gravity? A Rationale for Gravitation
A Description of Gravitation
The Double Conservation Role of Gravitation: Entropy vs Symmetry
Extending Einstein's "Equivalence Principle"
The Conversion of Space to Time
The Problem of "Mass"
"Dark Energy" and the "Accelerating Universe": Does Light Produce a Gravitational field?
Information
Section VI: Introduction to Information
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
Negentropic Information
The Information Pathway (text)
The Formation of Matter and the Origin of Information
Nature's Fractal Pathway
The Destruction of Information
The Information Ladder (table)
The Phases of Matter
Weak Force, Intermediate Vector Bosons ("IVBs"); Strong Force
Section IV: Introduction to the Weak Force
The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism (html file)
The Weak Force: Identity or Number Charge
The Weak Force "W" Particle as the Bridge Between Symmetric (2-D) and Asymmetric (4-D)
Reality

4 of 5

12/26/13 12:33 PM

CERN Higgs Announcement

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/mass.html

The Strong and Weak Short-Range Particle Forces
Section XVIII: The Strong Force: Two Expressions
Section XVI: Introduction to the Higgs Boson (Part I)
The "Higgs" Boson and the Spacetime Metric
The "Higgs" Boson and the Weak Force IVBs: Part I
The Higgs Boson and the Evolutionary Eras of the Cosmos
The Particle Table

5 of 5

12/26/13 12:33 PM

