unified field scientific format table

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/science.html

METAPHYSICAL REALM - Expanded Form - Rational Mind: (4 Conservation Laws Connected in Triplets)

Jaccaci's Terms
--->
Gowan's Terms
--->

Gather
Unit

Repeat
Pair

Share
Group or Field

Transform
Emergent New
Unit

4 Forces of
Physics --->

Electromagnetism

Gravitation

Strong

Weak

3-D Space;
Suppression of Time by
"Velocity c";
Space is Created by
Light's
Entropy Drive
(intrinsic motion);
Expansion and
Cooling of Space;
Conservation/Entropy
Domain of Light;
Light's "Interval" = 0;
The Spatial Metric;
Gravitational Negative
Energy and Entropy;
Total Energy = 0

(virtual)
Composite and
Sub-Elementary
Particles; "Ylem";
Fractured Leptons;
Quarks; Gluons;
"Quark Soup";
ParticleAntiparticle pairs;
Leptoquarks;
Neutral Particles;
3 Energy "Families";
Particle Symmetry
Total Charge = 0

(virtual)
Elementary
Particles;
Neutrinos;
Leptons;
Leptoquarks;
Particle Pairs;
Higgs, "X" IVBs;
3 Families;
Neutral Particles;
SymmetryBreaking:
"Higgs Cascade";
Weak Force
Asymmetric
Decays;
Real Particles
(massive,
temporal)

Gravity;
Gravitational Creation
of Time from Space;
Historic Spacetime;
Conservation/Entropy
Domain of Information
and bound energy;
Mass Interval > 0;
Metric Asymmetry
Gauged by "G";
("intrinsic motion T" is
bound energy's
entropy drive);
General Relativity

Mass Carriers;
Hadrons;
Quarks,
Mesons,
Baryons,
Nucleons;
Atomic Nucleus;
(elements);
Whole Quantum
Charge Units

Alternative
Charge Carriers;
Leptons,
Neutrinos:
Electron Shell;
(atoms);
Higgs and IVBs
Mass Scale;
Elementary
Particle
Invariance

Gravitational Charge =
"Location" Charge;
"Location" Asymmetry
of Bound Energy;
Warped Metric; Graviton
= Time; Compound
Conservation/Entropy
Domain of Free and
Bound Energy;

Fractional Charges:
Color Charge
(partial charge
asymmetry);
Asymptotic
Freedom;
Quark Confinement;
Flavor Charge:
(least bound energy,

Comments on the
Energy State Rows:

FORCES

Free Energy:
massless
Light: E = hv (Planck);
electromagnetic
Invariant Motion "c";
(EM)
All Charges = 0;
radiation; space;
Symmetric
symmetric forms;
Free Energy
virtual particles;
("c" gauges light's
"global" symmetric
entropy drive
energy state
and "non-local"
followed by
distributional
symmetrysymmetry);
breaking;
Non-local, A-causal,
invariance of the
A-temporal Energy;
EM constant "c"';
virtual particle(reprising the
antiparticle pairs
"Big Bang");
E
(row 1)
N
E
Bound Energy: R
matter; history; G
Immobile Mass:
asymmetric energy; Y E = mcc; hv = mcc;
massive real
(Einstein-deBroglie);
particles
S Matter, Momentum;
(due to row 1
Asymmetric
T
symmetryBound Energy
A
breaking);
Carriers;
T
raw energy
Charges > 0;
E
conservation;
Local, Causal,
S
("money up
Temporal Energy;
front"),
"Lorentz Invariance"
"pay now";
Invariant "Interval";
temporal energy
Relative Motion;
forms;
Special Relativity
loss of antimatter;
(row 2)
Charges:
quantized
symmetry debts
(carried by
particles
of row 2);
symmetry (charge)
conservation;
(mortgage, credit),

1 of 5

Electric Charge:
Asymmetry:
Lost Antimatter
(The
Great Asymmetry);
Magnetism;
Electrodynamics;
Charge Invariance;

T
R
A
N
S
F
O
R
M

"Identity" Charge:
Neutrinos;
(neutrinos are
"bare"
identity charges);
("anonymity"
asymmetry distinguishable

5/28/14 4:31 AM

unified field scientific format table

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/science.html

"pay later";
symmetry carriers;
Noether's
Theorem;
Maintenance of
Charge Invariance;
(row 3)

Quantum Mechanics;
"The Charges of
Matter
are the
Symmetry Debts of
Light"

Field Vectors
(due to charges
of row 3);
(symmetry
conservation
via the conversion
of bound to free
energy); bosons;
(retiring the debt);
(row 4)

Photons;
Exothermic
Chemical Reactions;
Matter-Antimatter
Annihilation Reactions
("Big Bang" and
Suppression of
Virtual Particles)

("G" is the entropy
conversion gauge);
Entropy and Symmetry
Debt
(loss of intrinsic motion
and non-local gauge "c")

Gravitons:
Stars, Supernovas,
Quasars;
Nucleosynthesis;
Black Holes;
Hawking's
"Quantum Radiance";
Gravitational
Conversion
of Mass to Light

nucleon "isospin");
"Yukawa Mesons"

elementary
particles);
Neutrino Parity
Asymmetry
(due to lost
antimatter)

Gluons, Mesons:
Fusion,
Nucleosynthesis;
Proton Decay

Intermediate
Vector Bosons
(IVBs: W, Z, X);
Fission,
Radioactivity;
Particle and
Proton Decay

John A. Gowan and August T. Jaccaci May, 2014

This table may be read like an English paragraph.
Row one: recapitulates the the creation of matter in the "Big Bang". The universe begins with light,
free electromagnetic energy - a perfectly symmetric form of energy. The role of gravity at this stage is
to provide sufficient negative energy to counterbalance the positive energy of the "Creation Event",
such that the Cosmos is born from a state of zero net energy and charge. The intrinsic motion of light
(which serves as both the entropy drive and the symmetry gauge of light) creates space, the expanding
and cooling entropy/conservation domain of free energy. The interaction of (very) high-energy light
with the metric structure of spacetime creates virtual particle-antiparticle pairs of primordial
leptoquarks (leptoquarks are primordial leptons broken into three subunits, the quarks). (See: "The
Particle Table".) Symmetry is maintained so long as there are equal numbers of particles vs
antiparticles. Row one ends with symmetry-breaking of the primordial leptoquark pairs and the
production of single (matter) baryons and leptons by the action of the Higgs boson and the weak force
Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs). (See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".) (Although leptoquark
particle-antiparticle pairs are produced in equal numbers, electrically neutral antimatter leptoquarks
apparently decay at a slightly faster rate than their matter counterparts.) The sub-elementary quarks
carry fractional charges necessary to the production of electrically neutral leptoquarks, allowing the
neutrals to live long enough to undergo asymmetric weak force decays. These decays should also
produce leptoquark neutrinos, which are "dark matter" candidates. (See: "The Origin of Matter and
Information".)
We note here that the necessary connection between the leptons and hadrons is through the
leptoquarks - the heaviest member of the leptonic spectrum - so heavy, in fact, that it splits into 3 parts
under the self-repulsion of its own electric charge, finding a lower energy state in 3 partial charges of
lesser magnitude (hence terminating the leptonic spectrum). From the perspective of the "Anthropic
Principle" (the universe must be so constructed as to allow the existence of our life form), we need the
fractional charges of the quarks to provide electrically neutral mass carriers (heavy analogs of the
neutron), that can live long enough to undergo asymmetric weak force decays, and we need three
families of quarks to generate sufficient numbers of these neutral combinations so that asymmetric

2 of 5

5/28/14 4:31 AM

unified field scientific format table

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/science.html

decays will be generated with sufficient probability to produce our matter-only universe - the "Great
Asymmetry" to which we we owe our existence. Ours is an electromagnetic universe of free and
bound forms of electromagnetic energy (matter and light - as we learn from annihilation reactions),
and hence to the "Great Asymmetry" of stand-alone matter we may add the "Great Gauge" of the
invariant electromagnetic constant "c", and the "Great Charge" of the invariant electric charge. In this
regard, it should be noted that light itself (in the form of virtual photons) is the field vector or force
carrier of electric charge. We therefore see light protecting its own symmetric energy state through
electric charge and matter-antimatter annihilation reactions - especially including annihilations
between virtual particle-antiparticle pairs.
Row two: here we find the massive matter products of row-one symmetry-breaking. Row two
conserves the raw energy of row one. Atomic matter is an alternative, asymmetric, local, temporal,
causal, bound form of electromagnetic energy. Mass is the conserved form of light's raw energy (hv =
mcc); time is the conserved form of light's entropy drive (intrinsic motion); charge (of various types)
is the conserved form of light's various symmetries. "Velocity c" gauges the invariance of the
"Interval" and causality, including "Lorentz Invariance", the covariance of space and time in Einstein's
Special Relativity. Gravity creates time by the annihilation of space and the extraction of a metrically
equivalent temporal residue (General Relativity); the intrinsic motion of time goes on to produce
historic spacetime. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time".) Time is a necessary dimensional
parameter for massive objects because of their relative motion and causal relations. (See: "Entropy,
Gravitation, and Thermodynamics".) Atoms are composed of two classes of particles, the
mass-carrying quarks and the charge-carrying leptons. Gluons are necessary to confine the fractionally
charged quarks to whole quantum unit charge combinations. (See: "The Strong Force: Two
Expressions".) Leptons are necessary as alternative charge carriers for the massive quarks, balancing
their charges in place of antiparticles, thus avoiding annihilation reactions. Electrons are alternative
carriers of electric charge, neutrinos are alternative carriers of the weak force "identity" charge.
Mesons are alternative carriers of quark partial charges. The elaborate weak force Higgs and IVB
mechanism is necessary to reproduce single, invariant elementary particles anytime, anywhere.
Elementary particles created today must be the same in every respect as those created eons ago during
the "Big Bang". It is the creation of single invariant elementary particles that is the difficulty posed to
and overcome by the massive mechanism of the weak force. (See: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak
Force Mechanism".) (See also: "Identity Charge and the Weak Force".)
Row three: exhibits the charges carried by the massive matter particles produced by symmetrybreaking in row one. Whereas row 2 conserves the raw energy of row 1, row three conserves the
symmetry of row 1. The charges of matter are the symmetry debts of light. Noether's Theorem states
that the symmetry of light must be conserved, no less than the raw energy of light; the quality of light
is conserved no less than its quantity. Charge conservation = symmetry conservation. Charge
conservation allows the symmetry of light to be carried into the time dimension where it can be stored
in an alternative form (charge) and repaid at any future time through annihilation with an appropriate
anticharge - thus returning the material system to the symmetric state of light which originally created
it. Gravity pays the entropy-"interest" on the symmetry debt of matter by creating a time dimension
(via the annihilation of space) in which matter's charges can be stored and eventually repaid. (Gravity
pays the energy-"principle" on matter's symmetry debt in row 4.) The spatial expansion of the cosmos
is reduced as gravity annihilates space and converts the spatial entropy drive of light into the historical
entropy drive of matter. Time and history function for causal matter as alternative forms of light's

3 of 5

5/28/14 4:31 AM

unified field scientific format table

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/science.html

entropy conservation domain (space), just as mass is an alternative form of light's energy, and charge
is an alternative form of light's symmetry.
Each of the four forces of physics is produced by a charge which can be traced to a broken symmetry
- a "symmetry debt" of light. This is the conceptual unification of the forces: they all represent
symmetry debts of light (including gravity, which is both a symmetry and an entropy debt of light).
(See: "The Double Conservation Role of Gravity".) Electric charge is due to the absence of antimatter
(the "Great Asymmetry" - itself due to a rate-of-decay asymmetry in the weak force), and to light's
broken dimensional symmetry (2- and 3-dimensional symmetric space vs 4-dimensional asymmetric
spacetime). Gravity is due to light's broken spatial distribution symmetry (light's broken "non-local"
symmetric energy state), plus light's broken symmetric entropy drive (light's intrinsic motion), both
gauged by "velocity c", and both broken by the local, immobile, undistributed mass-energy of matter.
The strong force color charge is due to the fractional charges of the quarks, which threaten the
quantum currency (whole quantum charge units) of the symmetry debts themselves. The weak force is
due to light's broken "anonymity": all photons are alike, but elementary particles are not and therefore
have an "identity" charge (AKA "number" charge) (neutrinos are "bare" identity charges which carry
a "parity asymmetry" due to the absence of antimatter: all neutrinos have "left-handed" spin, all
anti-neutrinos have "right-handed" spin). Magnetism is a "local gauge symmetry" expression of the
electromagnetic force which protects the invariance of electric charge in relative motion. Analogs of
magnetism's local gauge function in the other forces include the covariance of time and space
("Lorentz Invariance") protecting causality, velocity c, and the "Interval" (Special and General
Relativity); quark confinement by gluons, protecting unitary quantum charges (strong force); and the
massive weak force IVBs, protecting the invariance of elementary particle "singlets", whenever or
wherever they are produced. Maintaining the invariance of matter's various charges (symmetry debts)
in 4-dimensional spacetime (against relative motion, variable gravitational metrics, and the erosion of
entropy) is the daily task of the field vectors of the four forces - in addition to actually repaying the
debts (as in matter-antimatter annihilations). (See: "The Tetrahedron Model of the Unified Field
Theory".) (See also: "Local vs Global Gauge Symmetry in the Tetrahedron Model".)
Row 4: in this row we list the payment modes of light's symmetry debts by the 4 forces - forces are
the demand for payment of the symmetry debts held by the charges of matter. Row four repays all the
symmetry, energy, and entropy debts incurred by symmetry-breaking in row one. Payments include
partial as well as complete payments. In the electrical force we have exothermic chemical reactions
and matter-antimatter annihilation reactions; in the gravitational force we find numerous astrophysical
forces converting bound to free energy, (nucleosynthesis, supernovas, quasars) culminating in
Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes. As high-energy gravity repays its symmetry debt
(converting mass to light), gravity reverses the effect of its own low-energy reaction, which paid
matter's entropy debt (by the conversion of space to time). This reversal reduces the total cosmic
gravitational field (due to mass reduction), allowing the spatial expansion to recover a portion of its
original acceleration (observed recently as the "acceleration" of the cosmos due to "dark energy").
Gravity pays the energy-"principle" of light's symmetry debt through the conversion of bound to free
energy, as in the stars. The vanishing of gravity as mass is converted to light is the vital clue regarding
gravity's symmetry-conserving role in the natural economy of today's universe - the force vanishes
only when its conservation role is accomplished. In the strong force we have fusion and the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, and ultimately proton decay; and in the weak force we find fission,
radioactivity, contributions to the nucleosynthetic pathway, and particle and proton decay. Presumably

4 of 5

5/28/14 4:31 AM

unified field scientific format table

file:///Documents/TheoryOfEverything/science.html

"dark matter" also participates in some type of symmetry conservation cycle. "Dark matter" may
consist of leptoquark anti-neutrinos, or some type of "metric particle" produced during the "Big
Bang". For more details, see: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory".
home page

5 of 5

5/28/14 4:31 AM

