Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

SECTION VI: INTRODUCTION TO INFORMATION
(revised Aug., 2014 and Oct., 2018)
JOHN A. GOWAN
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Abstract
The term "information" as used in physics or communication theory
has a very restricted meaning in terms of entropy and "bits" of
information, a definition which makes the term amenable to
mathematical formulation but which robs it entirely of its usual
significance in the human context of knowledge, meaning,
complexity, and consequence. This is equivalent to reducing the
human body to its chemical elements (for the sake of simplicity) and
ignoring its biological unity and function as a specific type of living
organism. In these papers I am only interested in "information" in the
latter complex sense. However, because the hierarchy is arranged by
increasing size, its increasing information content is recognized in
either case. "Information" is the most important concept connecting
physics and biology, or the abiotic and biotic realms, including
human spirituality. Information, the most mysterious and powerful
parameter of the Cosmos, manifests first in the Periodic Table of the
Elements, passes to carbon and DNA, evolving (locally) to an apex in
humanity and our creations, both abstract and material, individual
and social.
The "Information Pathway" was presented at "CPSI" in June 1999.
The "Pathway" paper and the table "The Information Ladder" is
simply the much older "Fractal Table" reinterpreted. Each realm of
the fractal table can also be considered as a realm of Information; it is
of considerable interest to note how far up this "ladder" of
1 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

Information human science, art, and philosophy have climbed.
Humans have physically explored all 8 of the "Microphysical" and
"Biophysical" levels, from particle physics to planet Earth. We are
now exploring the first level of the "Astrophysical" realm - with Earth
orbiting satellites, Moon landings, and robotic missions to various
planets/comets/asteroids of our Solar System, including the Sun itself
(level 9, Stars). Level 10 (Galaxies) remains in the domain of science
fiction and art ("Star Trek", "Star Wars"), and of our observational
and astrophysical sciences, (via telescopes and theory), as does level
11 ("Universe"). Level 12 ("Multiverse" or "First Cause"), is accessed
only through theory: cosmology, religion, philosophy. The
Metaphysical realms (human thought: levels 13 -16 and 17-20) are
represented by the principles of the Unified Field Theory and/or the
conservation laws of the Tetrahedron Model - in either case, the
natural laws which underlie the manifest Universe (rational mode). In
the intuitive mode, we find religious/mythological notions of Divine
Law, or Plato's philosophic notions of the Eternal Verities and Ideal
Forms which lie beyond, but are responsible for, the manifest
Universe; we also find occult notions of cosmic order expressed in
various "world systems" (the I Ching, Astrology, etc.). Some Eastern
religious categories of these higher metaphysical levels are delineated
in my late father's books: "Operations of Increasing Order" and
"Trance, Art, and Creativity".
Viewing the "Information Ladder" table as an evolutionary sequence
of information states, we see that each higher level necessarily
encompasses all the information contained in the levels below. In this
regard it is important to distinguish the planetary level information
state of "Gaia" (level 8) from that of a lifeless planet, as the "Gaia"
state would apply only to planets which support a biological
information realm. Whereas the complex "Gaian" state is the last
level (8) of the biotic realm, the simple abiotic or gravitational
planetary state is the first cell of level 9 (Stars) in the Astrophysical
Realm.
Humans seem to have "a foot on the rung" at every level of the
ladder, if only by means of theory or observation. We are at level 7 or
2 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

8, considered as separate individuals (7) or as a globally distributed,
"terraforming" species (8), just 2/3 up the 12 rungs of the physical
ladder. Yet we have extended our influence, investigations,
observations, and theories both upward and downward to the extreme
limits of the "Information Ladder". The ladder clearly suggests that
we will continue the upward physical climb, probably into level 10
(Galaxy) and possibly on into the Universe of level 11.
The "Information Ladder" reminds me of two things: 1) the Biblical
story of "Jacob's ladder", extending from Earth into the Heavenly
realms (Genesis 28:12); 2) Chardin's "Omega Point", a universal final
state of self-knowledge and unity. In Chardin's view, information, not
entropy, is the chief evolutionary vector of the Universe; entropy is
just the way the accumulation of information is paid for. (See:
"Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age"). In the "Tetrahedron
Model", information is seen as an intentional, purposeful by-product
of symmetry conservation (charge), providing the means whereby the
Cosmos achieves self-awareness and further explores and evolves its
creative energy and potentiality.
Causality and Information
Causality and Information share the 4th apex (matter, mass, bound
energy) in the Tetrahedron Model of the conservation principles and
natural laws underlying the unified field theory. Information is the
concept that most comprehensively and succinctly characterizes the
significance of matter; without matter, the information content of the
Universe is zero. Information requires an asymmetry to exist; perfect
symmetries cancel each other and so carry no net information - the
prototypical example is the particle-antiparticle pair which
self-annihilates (see: "The Origin of Matter and Information").
Due to genetics, genes, the conservation of heritable units of
molecular information (DNA) from one generation to the next, and
the neg-entropic mechanism of Natural Selection, biological systems
have become a major conservation domain of information, the
molecular analog of the abiotic conservation domain of information
and matter's "causal matrix", historical spacetime. Human abstract
3 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

information systems powerfully continue and extend this natural
biological accumulation of information - through memory, language,
writing, books, libraries, computers, educational institutions, social
systems, etc.
Life, humanity, and history are all conservation domains of
information. Spacetime itself is the ultimate storehouse and
repository of historical information. The ancients referred to this
aspect of spacetime as the "Akashic Record", and thought some of
the adept had occasional access to it (oracles, seers, soothsayers).
Science has likewise taught us that we are looking into history as we
look outward into space and backward into time. (See: "A Spacetime
Map of the Universe").
When we stand back a little and look at the reach of humanity into
every part, from bottom to top of the "Information ladder", it is
difficult to comprehend the view of some scientists that humanity is
not a special creature. I subscribe to the view of Teilhard de Chardin
that consciousness and intelligence and information are the principle
evolutionary axes of the Universe, and that on planet Earth, at least,
humanity is the point of this "evolutionary arrow", the apex or tip of
the evolving vector.
A human individual contains an enormous amount of information in
the trillions of cells, DNA, biochemical systems, and
interconnections of the nervous system. In terms of physical size, we
are puny and insignificant; but in terms of information content, we
are astronomical in magnitude, both as individuals and as a species. It
is on the information scale that the significance of humans must be
measured and compared to the other major players of the Cosmos planets, stars, galaxies, etc.
It seems that abiotic information conservation may be limited to the
historical component of spacetime. In terms of "hardware",
information begins with charge. Information is most reliably stored as
charge at the atomic level, but when charges annihilate, the
information they carried is gone, except for the historical component,
which is more durable, although evidently subject to the entropy of
4 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

"dilution" as its effects spread and divaricate, propagating throughout
spacetime. At a certain high level of dilution, these effects will
become subject to the operation of chaos and quantum uncertainty,
further eroding their information content. Hence even though the
effects of an action may remain forever in the Cosmos, it may after a
time become impossible even in principle to trace an effect back to a
single, definite original cause (in the absence of an "artificial"
conservation intervention requiring external energy inputs, such as
human record-keeping).
There seems to be no limit to the complexity or amount of
information systems can attain, if enough energy is available. The
primordial function of information (in the form of charge) is to lead
matter back to its original symmetric energy state (light), upon a
"straight and narrow path" of natural law via charge conservation.
Hence we see the natural tendency of all material systems to convert
bound energy to free energy, following the information pathway of
the charges they contain (stars, supernovas, quasars, the quantum
radiance of black holes, proton and particle decay, exothermic
chemical reactions, the nucleosynthetic pathway, fission, fusion,
matter-antimatter annihilations, etc.). Perhaps this is an explanation,
in terms of physics, for the self-destructive behavior of humanity,
which seems poised to end its evolutionary history in a flash of
nuclear fusion and fission, imitating the stars.
Gravity
Although gravitation is an abiotic force, it is nevertheless responsible,
directly or indirectly, for every level of the fractal hierarchy,
including the first: gravity provides balancing, complementary,
negative energy for the "Big Bang", and helps create bound
electromagnetic energy (matter, atoms) from light. Gravity creates the
elements in stars, creates planets to support life and the stars which
supply life's energy (including radioactive energy), and organizes the
various levels of the Astrophysical Realm. Newton's Gravitation
stands to the Fractal Hierarchy of Nature as Darwin's Natural
Selection stands to the Theory of Evolution - gravity is the
5 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

neg-entropic engine which produces all the material realms. The fact
that both these neg-entropic drives, and the 4x3 fractal algorithm,
intersect in the replicating molecule of DNA, has enormous
implications for the abundance of life in the Universe, amounting to a
theory of, and a prediction for, exobiology. Gravitation, chemistry,
and the operation of the 4x3 fractal algorithm are universal abiotic
forces which inevitably produce 4x3 molecular structures including
DNA whenever environmental conditions allow. The information
system of life is therefore not accidental, but a natural and
predictable outcome of the operation of physical law, because of the
universal presence and activity of the 4x3 fractal algorithm. (See: "
Newton, Darwin, and the Origin and Abundance of Life in the
Cosmos.")
The tendency of biological and material systems to create large and
interconnected information structures (such as the biological web or
matrix of Earth, and the dispersal of life into the galaxy) is apparently
due to matter's never-ending quest for antimatter, as driven by charge
and symmetry conservation, the long-range electromagnetic and
gravitational forces, and matter's attempt to recreate in material
systems the original connectivity, unity, and symmetry characteristic
of light. The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light
("Noether's Theorem"): atomic charges are matter's memory it once
was light. The unity and connectivity of light are evidently also
ultimately conserved correlates of light's state of perfect symmetry.
(See: "Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory"). The
emergence of "beauty" in material and biological systems is an
imperfect expression of symmetry conservation manifesting as best it
can in an intractable medium.
The problem posed to the Cosmos by the asymmetric creation of
matter is this: does asymmetric matter contain enough information, in
the absence of antimatter, to return to its symmetric origin as light?
Matter is only 1/2 of light's particle form, and so contains only
one-half of the original information contained in particle-antiparticle
pairs. The answer to this question is a provisional "yes": provided
another dimension, time, is added to space to allow the working
6 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

through of the difficult return path. During this return journey, the
information pathway develops as a consequence of matter's eternal
search for antimatter, and appears to be an attempt to recreate in
material form the original attributes and potentials of light, including
its unity, connectivity, symmetry, and creativity (light creates space
and helps create matter). The material realm is a parallel construction,
an alternative form, a conserved proxy, an analog in matter composed
of charge and information derived from the symmetric energy of the
Universe of light: Heaven reproduced on Earth, Chardin's "Omega
Point". The material universe is a laboratory in which the creative
potential of symmetric energy (light) is explored and realized,
through atomic charge and information, in material and specific form.
It is perhaps of special interest to note that it is the symmetry
component of the light universe which is conserved as charge and
information. (See also: " Comment on the Metaphysical Realm
(rational mode)".)
Our species' special position/power comes about through our
discovery of Natural Law and the scientific method. Natural Law is
the same everywhere in the Universe; hence a knowledge of the
information content of Natural Law is a necessary prerequisite for a
universal traveler, a galactic explorer and colonizer, a true Citizen of
the Cosmos. The human "niche" has evolved from its beginnings in
local Earth biology to a universal expression: the extraction of energy
via the social apprehension and application of Natural Law. Our
biological role is to be the seed of Gaia, dispersing earth-life into the
galaxy via our space programs and rocket ships. Nor is it likely that
Earth is the only planet in the Milky Way entering its dispersal phase.
We need to stop fighting among ourselves, protect our fragile motherplanet, and move on to the new frontier that beckons us from above
and is the evolutionary purpose, promise, and destiny of our species.
Language and Information
Terence Mckenna (True Hallucinations (1993) and The Archaic
Revival (1991) MJF Books) has said he believes the universe is made
from language - which is true enough of the biological realm, since
7 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

DNA is certainly a form of molecular/chemical language, by any
definition. The question remains, therefore, is the abiotic realm
similarly created by language, and if so: 1) is there an analog of DNA
for the creation of the abiotic (particle/atomic) realm? 2) Is there a
linkage between the language systems of the biotic and abiotic
cosmos? I think the answer to both questions is yes: for the first
question, the analog of DNA for the particle/atomic realm is the
spacetime metric or "vacuum", which serves as a template for the
production of elementary particles both during the "Big Bang" and
currently (via virtual particle-antiparticle pair creation). (See: "The
Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs".) For the second question,
the linkage is obviously through the carbon atom and its five levels of
4x3 fractal resonance, which also has its beginning in the 4-D metric
of spacetime. (See: "The Fractal Organization of Nature".) These
ideas resonate with notions such as "man created in the image and
likeness of God", "in the beginning was the word", and the
information potential stored in the "vacuum" of spacetime (as
particle-antiparticle quanta), and in the all-symmetric Multiverse.
Matter is an asymmetric, conserved form of light (one-half of a
matter-antimatter particle pair). (See: "A Short Course in the Unified
Field Theory".) The language spoken in the conversion of light into
matter is the language of conservation, which has three major modes,
spoken simultaneously like the notes of a musical chord. These three
conservation modes are 1) raw energy conservation (mass momentum); 2) symmetry conservation (charge - inertia); 3) entropy
conservation (spacetime - gravity - "intrinsic motion"). Light's primal
form is simply pure energy, symmetry, and entropy - free
electromagnetic radiation - manifesting as undifferentiated energetic
photons which create a hot, expanding and cooling spatial metric due
to their intrinsic (entropic) motion and symmetric (non-local) energy
state. This is not (at first) a language but a primordial roar of raw
power. The conversion of this primal thunder into atomic matter (via
the symmetric template of spacetime and the asymmetric mediation
of the weak force) produces a conserved set of elementary particles
(quarks and leptons, identical and invariant within type) which
combine with one another to form an alphabet of 92 letters, the
8 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

natural elements of the periodic table. These letters then combine into
the words of molecular chemistry and eventually create the poetic
language of life, with carbon and DNA as the connecting linkage
between the biotic and abiotic realms. The 4x3 universal fractal
algorithm regulates the formation and development of every level of
natural organization, from its inception in the 4 dimensions of the
spacetime metric and the 4 conservation laws of energy, symmetry,
entropy, and causality-information, to the majestic galaxies and the
evolution of life. (See: "The Tetrahedron Model".)
The periodic table is an abstraction, not a physical analog of DNA; so
is the nucleosynthetic pathway, which we might also name. The
physical object that creates the elements is of course a star, so
apparently it is the stars (and the actions of the nuclear strong and
weak forces) which are the abiotic physical analogs of biological
DNA. In this analogy, galaxies play the role of multicellular
organisms. Antecedent to the creation of the elements (and the
galaxies/stars) is the "Big Bang" itself, in which elementary particles,
including the first baryons (protons and neutrons) are created via the
mediation of the weak force and the asymmetric decay of electrically
neutral leptoquarks (see: "The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force
IVBs"; and: "The Origin of Matter and Information".) In this abiotic
part of the analogy, identical nucleons in different combinations
create 92 distinctly different letters (the elements); these letters are
then strung together in meaningful molecular words by DNA "genes" coding for amino acids and proteins.
Hence the conservation "word" which begins as light (pure
electromagnetic energy), passes through (at least) three major stages:
1) the "Big Bang", where light is transformed to baryons via the
template of spacetime and the asymmetric action of the weak force
(see: "The Higgs Cascade"; 2) stars (in galaxies), where baryons
(hydrogen gas) are converted to the 92 natural elements via the
actions of all the forces, but especially the strong and weak forces
(the nucleosynthetic pathway, including supernova explosions
necessary to create and disperse elements heavier than iron); 3) the
creation of DNA (on planets orbiting stars in galaxies) via the organic
9 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

chemistry of carbon. The 4x3 universal fractal algorithm is active at
all levels (see: "Nature's Fractal Pathway".)
The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light ("Noether's
Theorem"), and it is the charges (electric, color, identity, flavor, spin,
parity) that give the atomic letters and molecular words their
distinctive character and form. "In the beginning was the word", and
the word was a conserved form of light - an atomic word which
eventually became the flesh of Man, filling his mind with wonder. In
this context I also recall the story of Aslan, the magical lion of C. S.
Lewis' imagination, singing the world of Narnia into existence. This,
I submit, is the physical interpretation of Terence Mckenna's inspired
assertion that the Cosmos is constructed of language.
(Added July 2014)
Matter - Energy - Life (Teilhard de Chardin)
Bound electromagnetic energy (atomic matter) - free electromagnetic
energy (light) - Information ("Tetrahedron Model")
"Information" is the connecting idea between life and spirit - between
science (biology) and religion (metaphysics). Princeton physicist
John Archibald Wheeler famously characterized the ontological role
of information: "it from bit".
"Spirit in nature" is the "information" content of nature, as found in
the great repository of the 92 elements of the Periodic Table, and
elaborated by the living, reproducing molecules of RNA/DNA in
biological organisms. While the ultimate source of information is the
Multiverse (the scientific stand-in for "God"), in our cosmos
information begins with the asymmetric creation of matter via weak
force symmetry-breaking during the "Big Bang". Antimatter is
annihilated, while a residue of matter composed mostly of hydrogen
and helium atoms is left to form our stars and galaxies. Information
creation continues in stars and supernovas through the production of
all 92 natural elements (following a 4x3 fractal pattern - as embodied
in the "alpha particle" (helium nucleus), the "brick" or building block
10 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

of the nucleosynthetic pathway).
We revere the sun and stars not only for their heat and light, but
because they are also creators (factories) of information. Information
is stored in atoms primarily as charge and spin in two linked systems:
1) as orbital parameters of the electron shells (low energy information
useful to planetary life); 2) the configurations of its nuclear
constituents (protons and neutrons - high energy information useful to
stars). Even the geometry and shape of large molecules may contain
biologically significant information (as in the proteins). The concept
of "Information" allows us to produce a General Systems bridge
between a religious/spiritual vs a scientific/material view of the
Cosmos.
Teilhard de Chardin was the great expositor of this view, although he
did not use the concept of "Information" (he used "spirit" instead), as
"information" was only just coming into general use as a recognized
physical parameter during his lifetime.
What connects life and information? Life begins and evolves from
information contained in specific molecular forms (combinations) RNA/DNA - that "know how" to reproduce and maintain themselves,
and successfully compete with other living forms (even those of its
own kind), retaining this information for its own use and passing it on
to its offspring. While these complex chemical systems begin as
purely "mechanical" forms of information replication, storage, and
processing, competition and evolution (even at the molecular level of
organized chemical systems) soon favor "individuals" (specific
molecular combinations) with an aggressive "personal" agenda for
survival and reproduction - resulting in "self-interest", "identity", and
"personality" - even in very early living systems. (Later, social
organisms will find they must adhere to a more altruistic behavior.)
(See: "The Fractal Organization of Nature".)
A 4x3 fractal algorithm is involved in the evolution of information,
from helium to carbon to DNA to the genetic coding for the amino
acids of proteins, seamlessly connecting the atomic and biologic
11 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

realms. Finally, we note that the astonishing Biblical assertion that
Man is created "in the image and likeness" of God, is best understood
as a statement of the fractal organization of the Cosmos from top to
bottom. (See: "Nature's Fractal Pathway"; See: "Newton, Darwin, and
the Abundance of Life in the Cosmos".)
The universe explores, knows, and enlarges itself through the
"Information Pathway" of life and humanity. Our role is to help the
universe understand, explore, and appreciate itself, and further
develop its emergent, nuanced, creative powers and productions,
including higher expressions of symmetry, harmony, love, and
beauty.
Chardin - "Inner" vs "Outer" realm of atoms = information/spirit vs
force or energy field. What Chardin referred to as the "inner" essence
of the atomic world we would refer to as the "information" content of
atoms. It is this information content that eventually produces the
emergent property "Life". In religious terms, we might identify
information with the "Holy Spirit" and the information content of
humanity as the "Divine Essence" of humanity ("God incarnate" God is Life). The universal "vector" in evolution is
self-knowledge/self-awareness by the universe; locally, the vector
seems to include the evolution of creatures capable of building rocket
ships, both to protect Earth-Life from asteroid strikes (such as
destroyed the dinosaurs), and to disperse Earth-Life into the larger
galaxy.
Chardin saw man as the natural culmination of evolution. Man is
necessary to understand, explain, and control evolution - as well as to
see and review its whole history in the fossil record. Man's control of
evolution is the fractal iteration that demonstrates the end of one
fractal cycle and the beginning of another in the physical world natural selection giving way to artificial selection of various sorts not only plant and animal breeding but direct genetic
manipulation/engineering via gene splicing, etc.; encompassing not
only physical genetics/genes but also the abstract theory of genetics,
12 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

leading to the complete human control of biological evolution. We
are see a similar fractal iteration in the abstract information realm, via
computer language and digital simulations of reality. A new fractal
level of reality is evolving in the information domain. There should
be a 4x3 resonance at its core: (I recall reading something about the
significance of 64 bits (4 cubed), which is also the potential number
of amino acids.)
The most amazing emergent phenomenon is human consciousness
and creativity. But all life is an emergent phenomenon. What is an
"emergent" phenomenon? You can see a good example in a mirror.
You are "star stuff", you are composed of trillions of cells, myriad
species of bacteria, multiple organ and sensory systems of great
sophistication (although you lack one-half of a complete reproductive
system), you encompass incredibly complex biochemical pathways
and mechanisms, and yet (if you are a normal, healthy individual)
you have a single integrated body, identity, personality, agenda, and
action. You require a mate to complete your "agency", however (a
curious if not disconcerting aspect of our biology - useful for good
evolutionary reasons).
Beethoven (and other geniuses) are emergent phenomena of the
human species and human social organization (human level of natural
organization). Human intellectual abstract mental activity and
creativity is an emergent phenomenon of the human brain - language,
art, science, religion, etc. "Mind" is an emergent phenomenon of
brain. "Genius" is the ability of a single local brain/mind to contact
plural universal mind - even the information field of the universe.
This subtle feature of the electromagnetic realm is poorly understood
(communication via resonance?), but characterized symbolically as
the "muse" of the arts and sciences. (For more on this topic, see
"Trance, Art, and Creativity" and other of my late father's books
linked at the bottom of this page).
The atom, composed of a linked system of electron shells and nuclear
particles, presents a most remarkable example of hierarchical
13 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

information domains, the nucleus containing information useful to
stars and the process of element-building, the electron shell
containing information useful to biology and the process of speciesbuilding. Thus are the planetary and celestial domains united from
the beginning by the information architecture of their constituent
particles: the Microphysical, Biophysical, and Astrophysical realms
of physical reality. Human consciousness adds an emergent 4th level:
the Metaphysical realm. (See: "The Fractal Organization of Nature".)
(added Feb., 2015)
The "Information Pathway" of the Cosmos eventually leads to life,
humanity, language, abstract modes of consciousness,
communication, knowledge, imagination, thought, fantasy,
mythology, religious ideology, the arts, science, mathematics, and
technology. The Information Pathway is the means whereby the
Universe knows and experiences itself, enlarges and fulfills itself,
evolving a human co-creator who is capable of developing new forms
of beauty and exploring new modes and avenues of creativity - even,
perhaps, of providing companionship - or at least an interesting
evolutionary drama. While biology is firmly embedded within the
electromagnetic force, if we were to designate a 5th force of Nature it
would have to be the Life Force - born of information and propelled
by evolution - the information force of the Universe awakening to
itself and exploring a new mode of creative expression.
The Information Pathway begins with light (electromagnetic
radiation) which exists in two forms: a waveform consisting of
mutually induced electric and magnetic waves/fields, and a particle
form consisting of matter-antimatter pairs of many kinds of
elementary particles, such as leptons and quarks, neutrinos and
mesons, baryons and hyperons, leptoquarks, and various connecting
particles (field vectors) such as gluons, photons, gravitons, and
Intermediate Vector Bosons. This "zoo" of elementary particleantiparticle pairs (which may include the "Higgs boson" and other
high-energy particles as yet undiscovered), and their associated field
vectors and "co-workers", exists in the "void" or "vacuum" of
14 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

spacetime as an alternative (conserved) form of light waiting only for
enough energy to make itself manifest. Particle pairs continuously
form and annihilate each other (alternating between their light and
"virtual particle" forms) within the Heisenberg/Dirac time/energy
limit of the "Uncertainty Principle". This is the great primordial,
symmetric reservoir of information that exists with light from the
beginning of the Cosmos, manifest through the "Big Bang" as an
alternative, material, conserved-by-charges form of light. During the
"Big Bang" or "Creation Event" the symmetry of the primordial
particle-antiparticle charge pairs is broken by asymmetric interactions
within the weak force - probably asymmetric decays of electrically
neutral leptoquarks. The Universe is not born "stupid", but full of
information, waiting for symmetry-breaking by the weak force to set
it free on a cosmological evolutionary pathway. The "Big Bang" is an
explosion of charge-conserved information as well as of space, time,
matter, and light. Our Universe is apparently an electromagnetic
subsection of the "Multiverse", an asymmetric "breakout" engineered
by the weak force, made possible only because it is wholly conserved
(by charges) and can therefore, eventually but surely, "return to the
fold" of its origin (complete symmetry conservation as light).
The Information Pathway is seen explicitly in the Periodic Table of
the Elements, in the nuclear and electron shells of atoms, the
inorganic chemistry of the mineral world, and finally in organic
chemistry and the molecular architecture of DNA and the genetic
code of biology. It is elaborated through evolutionary time as the
plants and animals of living systems on planets such as our own
beautiful Earth, and makes a triumphant emergence from matter in
abstract form through the symbolism of human language and the
mental capacity of the human brain. Its proliferation in abstract form
is essentially without limit. The notion that Information is an actual
physical force (with energy content) can be seen from the effects of
life on our planet, including the works, mental and physical, of
humans (apparently this also is, or related to, the idea behind the
"Force" of the "Star Wars" movies). But we don't need science fiction
movies to convince us of the power of the "Information Force": we,
15 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

ourselves, and our technology are the existential proof of its potency
and efficacy. What the information age will bring to us next via our
computers is an issue of extreme importance, not just for us but for
life itself (with many books devoted to this subject). John Wheeler's
"It from Bit" is a succinct expression of the creative power latent in
the Information Force, as recognized by leaders of modern physics.
The Information Pathway is not a "random walk", but follows a 4x3
(sometimes 4x4) General Systems resonance, pattern, or algorithm
that begins with the elementary virtual particle-antiparticle pairs of
the "vacuum" (three families each of 4 elementary particles), passes
through the carbon nucleus and electron shell (4 nucleons each of
three quarks ("alpha" particle), four binding positions in the third
electron shell), and ends with the genetic code of biology (four
nucleotides code in triplets, producing amino acids). It can also be
seen in the foundation principles of Natural Law. The emergence of
life from inanimate matter is therefore programmed into the Universe
from the beginning, and we expect to find it abundantly wherever
environmental conditions permit. (See: "The Fractal Organization of
Nature"; see also: "The Information Pathway".)

Postscript
WEAK FORCE IVBs, NEUTRINOS, AND INFORMATION
(IVBs = "Intermediate Vector Bosons": the strange, massive field
vectors (force carriers) of the weak force)
In the domain of the weak force, we find two types of elementary
particles: 1) the (relatively) massive electrically charged leptons
(electron, muon, tau); 2) their associated "identity charges", the
(relatively) massless and electrically neutral neutrinos. Neutrinos are
the "bare" identity charges of their massive leptonic namesakes, one
for each type of massive lepton (the electron, muon, or tau neutrino).
Although the three types of neutrinos resonate from one identity to
16 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

another while in flight (apparently because their only distinguishing
characteristic is a slight difference in mass), they will only interact
with their own specific massive and charged namesakes, during
transformations or the creation/destruction of single leptonic
elementary particles. Neutrino "identity charges" (the characteristic
charge of the weak force) provide the foundation for the information
content of the cosmos - just as the weak force asymmetry provides
the matter surplus of the cosmos.
We have already noted the strange fact that the "W" IVB, which
weighs the equivalent of about 80 proton masses, is required to
regulate the creation, transformation, or destruction of single charged
leptons, even though an electron is lighter than a proton by a factor of
nearly 2,000. We have explained this enormous "overkill" of
available energy as due to the necessity to return to the original
environment in which electrons were created, in order to ensure that
every electron ever made - past, present, or future - is absolutely
identical (for reasons of energy and symmetry conservation - for
example, they must always be able to replace each other, or to
annihilate with an exact antimatter counterpart).
With respect to the neutrinos, whose mass is still unknown but may
be as little as one-millionth that of an electron, we find an even more
extreme mismatch between the" Z" neutral IVB and the particles
whose transformations it regulates: the "Z" neutral IVB weighs about
90 proton masses. As in the case of the "W" IVB, we explain the
huge mass of the "Z" as necessary to recreate the original energy
environment in which neutrinos were created, and for the same
reason: within type, every neutrino ever created - past, present, and
future - must be exactly alike. If this hypothesis is correct, it suggests
that the neutrinos were created before the massive leptons, in an
earlier, smaller, and hotter universe, closer in time to the actual origin
of everything.
But of course this only makes sense: the identity charge must be
ready before the arrival of the massive lepton it will delimit and
17 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

characterize. The mold must pre-exist the substance poured into it.
The massive leptons would not "know" what form to take without
the neutrinos to guide them. The presence of the neutrino precludes
potential chaos during the initial "packaging" of energy into discreet,
massive leptons during the Big Bang. Think for a minute, and you
will realize that "Identity" is, and must be, matter's most primitive
and basic charge (otherwise matter could not recognize and annihilate
with antimatter - energy, symmetry, and charge conservation would
be lost). How our matter-only universe manages to achieve
conservation despite this glaring asymmetry is the major subject of
this website.
In the spirit of General Systems in which this webpage is founded, I
wish to note the following concordance: neutrinos are evidently the
first elements of information to appear in our cosmos, and as we have
suggested above, necessarily pre-exist the massive elementary
leptonic particles for which they provide "identity charges" (implicit
in the massive leptons, explicit in the neutrinos). To use an analogy, it
is almost as if the neutrinos are the "souls" of the massive particles
they code for - presenting us with a natural example of Platonic
dualism. While the rational mind has only recently discovered
massive leptons, neutrinos, identity charges, and the scientific
concept of Information, the intuitive mind long ago recognized the
fundamental ontogeny of the cosmos in a single, simple statement:
"In the beginning was the word".
Further in the same vein: when Moses asks God what his name
(identity) is, God replies: "I am that I am". This is nothing less than a
statement of absolute identity, sufficient unto itself, underived from
any prior, higher, or more universal source. God simply IS, and
cannot be encompassed, captured, or otherwise diminished by a name
or category. When we refer to God, we refer to that which cannot be
named. God is simply the "Almighty", the "First Cause" or "Prime
Mover", the "One", the "Creator". We are all subdivisions of the
eternal "I AM", the everlasting, living, "Creative Principle".

18 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

And what are we to make of the notion that humanity is created in the
"image and likeness" of God? To me, this suggests the idea of God as
the central, single, all-encompassing "Identity" of the cosmos, from
which the souls (identities) of His creations are derived - much as the
"Big Bang" is the central single source of the neutrinos bearing
identity charges of the elementary particles they will characterize. We
are created in the image and likeness of our universe. This is
something Chardin understood.
References
Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver: The Mathematical
Theory of Communication. Univ. of Illinois Press, 1949.
Davies, P. and N. H. Gregersen: Information and the Nature of
Reality. 2010. Cambridge Univ. Press.
Terence Mckenna (True Hallucinations (1993) and The Archaic
Revival (1991) MJF Books)
James Gleick Chaos: Making a New Science, Viking Penguin
Inc., 1987.
James Gleick The Information Pantheon books, 2011.
Peter Denning and Tim Bell: "The Information Paradox"
American Scientist Vol. 100 No. 6 Nov.-Dec. 2012 page 470-477.
Frank Close, 2010. Neutrino Oxford University Press.
G. Gelmini, A. Kusenko, and T. Weiler, Scientific
American May 2010 pages 38-45: "Through Neutrino
Eyes".
Leon Lederman with Dick Teresi: The God Particle.
2006. Mariner Books.
Leon Lederman and Christopher Hill: Symmetry. 2008.
Promethus Books.
Cho, Adrian: "The Sterile Neutrino: Fertile Concept or Dead
19 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

End?" Science Vol. 334 21 Oct., 2011 page 304-6
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin: The Phenomenon of Man. 1959.
Harper and Row, New York.
Books by my late father Prof. John Curtis Gowan
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous
Element and the Metaphysical Realm. A Book by Prof. John
C. Gowan, Sr.
"Operations of Increasing Order" Further Investigations of
the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical Realm. A Book
by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Psychedelic Individual". A Book by
Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Creative Individual". A Book by Prof.
John C. Gowan, Sr.
(See also: Section 3: "Fractals"; Section12: " Man's Role in
Nature"; Section 14: " Causality")
Related Papers:
"The Information Pathway" with table "The Information Ladder";
"Nature's Fractal Pathway";
The Origin of Matter and Information;
The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs;
Chardin: Prophet of the Information Age
Newton, Darwin, and the Abundance of Life in the Universe

20 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

Information

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect6.html

email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

21 of 21

10/19/18, 10:33 AM

