Energy-Density or Force-Unification Eras of the Cosmos
including “wormhole” weak force IVB connections between eras
(John A. Gowan, Feb., 2015)

MULTIVERSE

] [
“BB”

`

Eternal, Conserved, Symmetric
All possible (conserved) electromagnetic universes — various physical constants
(? other energy types ?)
“Big Bang “wormhole”: a single EM universe (of zero net energy and charge)
randomly manifests (via quantum fluctuation?)

LEPTOQUARK ERA

TOE: Theory of Everything — all forces unified (Higgs 3)
Symmetric particle-antiparticle pairs — primordial leptoquarks
“Big Bang”: our universe with its unique physical constants
“Y” IVBs (Intermediate Vector Bosons of the weak force) convert electrically charged leptoquarks
to electrically neutral leptoquarks (heavy analogs of neutrons)

] [
“Y”

“Y” IVB “wormhole”: electrically neutral leptoquarks selected by “Y” IVBs

`

HYPERON ERA

GUT: Grand Unified Theory — strong and electroweak forces unified (Higgs 2)
Heavy baryons — particles containing three quarks — mass carriers
Symmetry-Breaking via the weak force “X” IVBs
Electrically neutral leptoquarks decay asymmetrically via “X” IVB to produce our matter-only
universe, including mass-carrying baryons and leptoquark anti-neutrinos

] [
“X”

] [

“X” IVB “wormhole”: colorless baryons selected by “X” IVB —“proton decay”

`

LEPTON ERA

EW: Electroweak force unification — electric and weak forces unified (Higgs 1)
Alternative Charge Carriers: (leptons, neutrinos, and mesons)
“W” IVB leptonic particle and quark transformations
“W” IVB “wormhole”: alternative charge carriers selected by “W” IVB — leptonic decays
and nuclear transformations; (lepton number = zero)

“W”

`

ATOMIC ERA

EM: Electromagnetic unification — all forces distinct (photon velocity “c”)
Periodic Table, chemistry, atoms, molecules, Life,
free photons, spacetime, macro-universe, history, causality
Ground State — stable, cold, asymmetric (no antimatter, no IVBs)
Electron-shell chemistry only — no nuclear reactions
All forces act spontaneously to return asymmetric atomic system to its original light symmetry.

Energy-Density or Force-Unification Eras of the Cosmos [page 2]
The role of the weak force is to produce single elementary particles but with a stringent qualification:
every elementary particle ever produced from the beginning of the universe (and onward into its future) must
be exactly the same as its fellows within type (all electrons must be identical, and likewise the muon and tau).
We have seen that the neutrino has a role to play in this process, allowing the creation of a single electron (for
example) in the absence of a positron (anti-electron), and in effect certifying that any newly created electron is
the genuine article in all respects.
See: “The Weak Force: ‘Identity’ or ‘Number’ Charge”. (http://www.johnagowan.org/identity.html)
But the actual mechanism of manufacture involves the hugely massive IVBs (81 proton masses) even
for the tiny electron, which weighs about 1/2000 of a proton. Why is this huge “overkill” of energy during the
creation process necessary? It is because the only way to circumvent the enervating effects of the entropy of a
constantly expanding and cooling universe upon the manufacture of identical elementary particles over eons
of time is to return to the original primordial energy density and creative phase of the Big Bang in which these
particles were first formed - every elementary particle forged in the original mold, as it were. Every weak force
transformation involving an IVB is therefore a recreation of a particular energy density of the Big Bang, but in
miniature. Only by such extreme measures is the exact similarity of every electron (past, present, and future)
guaranteed, and only these are given the neutrinos’ “certificate of authenticity”.
See: “The ‘W’ IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism”. (http://www.johnagowan.org/weakforce.html)
The energy-density recreated by the “W” IVBs is that of the electroweak unification energy density,
and all of the leptons and mesons of the “Standard Model” (the alternative charge carriers) can be faithfully
reproduced at this energy level. Hence we see the the “alternative charge carriers” (leptons and mesons)
occupy a special place both in the functional hierarchy of the cosmos, where they function as catalysts
facilitating the creation, destruction, and transformation of single elementary particles, and in the hierarchy
of cosmic force-unification energy levels (the electroweak force-unification energy level of the “W” and “Z”
IVBs). Baryons cannot be created or destroyed at this energy level, but their quark content can be transformed
(via mesons). Creating/destroying the baryons themselves requires the next higher energy level of the “Grand
Unified Theory” and the supermassive “X” IVB (unifying the electroweak and strong forces and allowing
lepton-quark transformations). The force-unification levels themselves demarcate specific energy-densities at
which elementary particles of various kinds can be created or destroyed: 1) leptons/mesons at the electroweak
(EW) energy level; 2) baryons/hyperons at the “Grand Unified Theory” (GUT) energy level; 3)leptoquarks at
the “Theory of Everything” (TOE) energy level.
One can think of the IVBs as “wormholes” to a younger, hotter universe, connecting our ground-state
cold electromagnetic universe with the universe as it existed a few micro-seconds after the “Big Bang”. What
comes through the “IVB wormhole” is a single elementary particle, newly minted in the original forge and
mold of the electroweak era from long ago, and hence identical to every elementary particle (of its type)
ever created, or that ever will be created. The “wormhole” connection effectively circumvents the enervating
entropy of eons of cosmic expansion that would otherwise make the exact replication of single elementary
particles impossible. After a little reflection it becomes obvious that this is the only method which can
possibly replicate elementary particles reliably. It is this “wormhole” connection between our ground state
electromagnetic and the primordial electroweak universe that frees the alternative charge carriers (leptons and
mesons), held in the electroweak symmetric energy state, to do (in our ground-state universe) their necessary
work of transformation, creation, and destruction of single quarks and leptons that allows atomic matter
to exist, the Sun to shine, and the information-rich Periodic Table of the Elements to be built. The universe
remains a single connected unit - not only in space, but in time and historic spacetime - a connectivity that is
essential to its proper functioning and conservation.
See also: “Table of the Higgs Cascade” (http://www.johnagowan.org/higgstable.html);
“The Higgs Boson and the Weak Force IVBs”. (http://www.johnagowan.org/higgs.html)

