Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

Alternative Charge Carriers and the Higgs Boson: Part I
(Revised August 2017)
John A. Gowan
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Abstract
A functional class of particles, the "Alternative Charge Carriers"
(ACCs), is recognized as characteristic of the Electroweak domain
and the Weak Force Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs).
The photon is the massless gauge boson of the electromagnetic force,
and its large, spatial, intrinsic entropic motion ("velocity c"), creates
the huge (and cold) "metric domain" of 4-dimensional spacetime. The
massive Higgs boson has no intrinsic spatial motion, but instead
regulates or "gauges" a spatially tiny high-energy "particle domain"
consisting of three species of massive "gauge" particles - the weak
force IVBs. Acting through the IVBs, the Higgs controls a
numerically huge functional class of virtual or potential particles: the
Alternative Charge Carriers (ACCs), which upon demand are made
"real" from the "virtual particle zoo" by the IVBs. The ACCs serve to
carry and transfer charges among and between baryons and leptons
during decays, transformations, and other interactions. Within our
asymmetric "matter-only" cosmos, the ACCs allow charge conserved
interactions despite the absence of antimatter, thus avoiding
annihilation reactions. The familiar proton-electron atomic pair is the
prototypical example. Our universe could not exist without the
services of the ACCs, as the original weak force asymmetric
interaction required a charge-conserving ACC to break its matterantimatter symmetry. The ACCs include leptons, neutrinos, and
1 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

mesons, all particles whose original (primordial) masses are regulated
by the Higgs through the IVBs, ensuring the invariant transformation
of elementary particle identities, mass, and other conserved charges
and parameters (especially single particle transformations, not just
particle-antiparticle pairs). The weak force IVBs (W+, W-, Z neutral )
are special (massive) mediating field vectors, which select the
appropriate ACCs from the primordial domain of high-energy
spacetime (the Higgs sector of the Heisenberg/Dirac virtual particle
"zoo"), and then effect its transfer. The great mass of the IVBs is
necessary to access any particle sequestered in the invariant,
primordial, Higgs sector energetic domain, but they are not
themselves an ACC. They are instead a high-energy, quantized,
invariant symmetric-energy state, maintaining the invariant symmetry
(sameness) of elementary particle charge and mass. (See: "The 'W'
IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism".)
The massive Higgs boson and its IVBs recreate the primordial
energy-density of spacetime in which the ACCs were first made
during the early moments of the "Big Bang". The Higgs-IVB
mechanism acts like a "Bureau of Standards" against which any new
ACC must be referenced or measured. Suppose you want to
transform a baryon, as in a neutron decaying to a proton? Very well,
you must go to the Higgs energetic domain and ask the appropriate
IVB for a "standard issue" ACC to do the job. Anyone who has
served in the military will recognize this analogy to the function of
the Quartermaster (Higgs), supply sergeant (IVB), and supply depot
(virtual particle "zoo"). In the case of neutron "beta decay", you will
need a meson to "swap out" the quark flavors/colors, an electron to
carry the electric charge, and an electron antineutrino to balance the
electron's identity (number) charge, since the electron is newly
minted. A negatively charged "W" IVB of about 81 proton masses
can access the appropriate energy sector of the primordial Higgs
energy domain and get the requisite ACCs. The bureaucracy and
record keeping may seem tedious, but only in this way can
elementary particles created today or tomorrow be exactly the same
as those created eons ago in the "Big Bang" - maintaining the
2 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

elementary particle symmetry of our universe, which ensures that any
elementary particle ever created can "swap out" with any other (of its
type), or annihilate at any time with an appropriate antiparticle - the
ultimate act of symmetry-restoration/conservation. Note that the
supply room of the electroweak Higgs primordial energy domain
does not contain any baryons (protons/neutrons). While there are
ACCs to effect the transformations of baryons (such as neutronproton transformations), brand new shiny (primordial) baryons are
only created during the earliest moments of the "Big Bang" in
reactions controlled by a different (heavier) Higgs and IVB. See:
"The Origin of Matter and Information"; See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade".
In a universe lacking antimatter - such as ours - ACCs serve to balance charges and preserve charge
conservation during particle interactions. ACCs enable the decay of heavy hyperons, quarks, and lepton
"families" to our familiar electromagnetic ground state through channels that obey charge conservation,
despite the lack of antimatter in our Cosmos. Hence the ACCs are yet another conservation consequence
of our "matter-only" Universe. The Higgs boson may be thought of as a gauge particle or "marker" for
the convergence of the weak and electromagnetic forces: the specific energy level necessary for the
weak force creation of single members (rather than particle-antiparticle pairs) of the ACC class of
particles.
Space is the entropic/energetic conservation domain of massless light (free electromagnetic energy);
historic spacetime is the entropic/energetic conservation domain of massive particles (bound
electromagnetic energy). While the photon establishes a dimensional "spacetime metric" (in which
300,000 kilometers of distance is metrically equivalent to one second of time), the Higgs boson
establishes an electroweak particle metric or "symmetric energy state" at 125 GEV (at which energy the
electric and weak forces are equivalent). Both are symmetry conditions, for at "velocity c" the
asymmetric time dimension vanishes, and at 125 GEV the specific identities of the leptons are subsumed
into a single "generic" leptonic identity, and likewise the specific flavors of the quarks vanish into a
single generic quark identity. It is these generic identities (symmetric energy states) which the weak
force IVBs "sample" to select specific quark/leptonic flavors for the purpose of identity transformations
among elementary particles. We may think of the Higgs boson as the gauge boson of the electroweak
ACC "zoo", or virtual particle "sea", of the Heisenberg/Dirac spacetime "vacuum".
The "Standard Model" of the "Higgs mechanism" of the electroweak force proposes four Higgs
particles - one each for the W+, W-, and Z neutral (the "Intermediate Vector Bosons" (IVBs) or field
vectors of the weak force), and a fourth scalar boson which gauges the intersection of the weak and
electromagnetic forces. This fourth Higgs is the one recently discovered at CERN. The W and Z were
also discovered - at CERN - in 1983. The math of this complex theory was worked out by Weinberg,
Salam, and Glashow, 1967. Peter Higgs (and others) proposed the "Higgs boson" in 1964, as the source
of elementary particle mass.`(See: "Most Wanted Particle" by Jon Butterworth, 2014, The Experiment
LLC, pages 96-99 and 237 - 238; see also: "The Large Hadron Collider" by Don Lincoln 2014, The
Johns Hopkins University press, pages 126 and 133 - 135. )

3 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

In the real world (as opposed to the theoretical/math world), how do we see these theories manifest?
Science has long noted that the electromagnetic force with its field vector (the photon of "light") is
evidently composed of two forms of energy, one the massless photon, and the other a virtual component
consisting of particle-antiparticle pairs (leptons and quarks), which materialize and annihilate one
another essentially instantaneously. Ordinarily, as this virtual particle component of electromagnetic
energy tries to materialize, it is kept in its virtual state by matter-antimatter symmetry, which causes the
annihilation of these virtual particles as soon as they appear. Such particles comprise a "vacuum sea" of
virtual particles, coextensive in our universe with spacetime. Given sufficient energy, this "sea" of virtual
particles is available for particle interactions, transformations, and even creation/destruction, and the
weak force makes use of it via the mediation of its IVBs.
The great mass of the Higgs and IVBs reproduces the energy density of the early universe when these
particle pairs were in abundant supply and essentially identical to each other (because the energy was so
extreme). The massive IVBs are thus enabled to "sample" or select particles from that portion of the
Higgs "sea" (domain) which its mass reproduces. Selected particles are then used to effect elementary
particle interactions/transformations. (See: "The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism"). This mode
of action allows the IVBs to exactly reproduce elementary particles from the original "sea" or primordial
source, preserving the necessary universal symmetry of elementary particle parameters of mass, spin,
charge, etc. Because the mechanism depends on mass to reproduce these primitive conditions, it is
unaffected by the entropic expansion of the spatio/temporal universe; hence electrons produced today
are (and must be) identical in all respects to those produced eons ago. With regard to the uniformity of
its productions, it is important to note that because the Higgs is a particle with mass, it is possible for the
Higgs energy domain to be very precisely defined. The universal and necessary symmetry among
elementary particles in terms of mass and other physical parameters is the reason why the weak force is
so strange, with its massive IVBs: the weak force must be able to reproduce single elementary particles
(not just particle-antiparticle pairs) - that are absolutely identical in every respect to all others (of its
type) that have ever been, or ever will be, produced - past, present, future. This is a tall order (which
only the weak force can fill), and it is one of the defining parameters, constraints, and peculiarities of our
"matter only" universe, responsible for the oddities of the weak force and the Higgs boson.
Let's put all this in terms of another familiar analogy (for those who don't care for the above
"quartermaster" analogy): the Higgs mechanism is like a government mint which must stamp out coins
in various denominations, but (naturally) of identical value within kind. It's easy to understand why all
one cent, five cent, and ten cent coins (etc.), must be of equal value within type (contain the same
quantity of precious metal), for the sake of the stability of the country's financial system and the public
trust. Here, money/precious metal is the analog of energy, the financial system represents conservation
law (such as the conservation of energy), and the various coin denominations represent the various
elementary particles. The Higgs mechanism represents the government mint, and the W and Z IVBs
represent the massive presses stamping out coins - some of positive value (W+) (positrons, positive
quarks); some of negative value (W-) (electrons, negative quarks); some of neutral value (Z zero)
(neutrinos).
This government mint serves a vast country called the Electroweak Domain, and the coins it stamps out
are the electron, muon, and tau, their corresponding neutrinos, and their antiparticles. This mint also
produces mesons of positive, negative, and neutral varieties, in various denominations depending upon
their quark content. The mesons are used as ACCs in baryon transformations, because they carry various
quark flavors (in addition to electric charge), and the leptons and neutrinos are used as ACCs (of electric

4 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

and identity charge) in transactions and transformations among and between leptons, mesons, and
baryons (see: "The 'W' IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism"). Within type, all these coins must be
identical, for obvious financial and energy conservation reasons. The total collection of coin dies and
precious metals available from the mint (the potential range of its particle productions) is a cosmic
parameter characterized/determined by a particular Higgs boson of unique mass/energy - in this case, the
electroweak Higgs scalar boson. The name of this mint is the "Electroweak Alternative Charge Carrier
Mint". It only produces ACCs.
The "heavy hitters" in our electroweak domain are baryons (protons and neutrons), as they generally
carry much more mass (value) than the leptons. But although the Electroweak Mint (Higgs mechanism)
can stamp out mesons with various quark flavor combinations and hence permit the transformation of
baryons (as in the decay of a neutron to a proton), the electroweak mint simply does not possess a press
(IVB) massive enough to stamp out (or destroy) baryons themselves. To obtain newly minted baryons
(or destroy them) we have to visit an entirely different country (smaller, hotter, and denser), the domain
of the G.U.T. (Grand Unified Theory). In the country of the GUT the electroweak and strong forces are
unified, allowing the minting of single, original baryons. (See: "The Origin of Matter and Information").
The GUT mint has a very heavy press (the "X" IVB), which can stamp out (or destroy) baryons
themselves. But this country is so far away that we will probably never be able to visit (at least not via
CERN and the LHC), although we know it exists because we are up to our ears in baryons (protons and
neutrons), and they have to come from somewhere. In the electroweak domain, we can transform
baryons but we cannot make or destroy them. Like Frodo's magic ring, baryons can only be destroyed in
the furnace where they were created. And there may be yet another country (smaller, hotter, denser),
further away still, the "TOE" ("Theory of Everything" or " Planck" domain), with another mint/Higgs
mechanism and an ultraheavy press ("Y" IVBs), which stamps out/destroys leptoquarks. But that domain
is so close to the "Big Bang" or "Creation Event" that nobody can get anywhere near it. (See: "The
Higgs Mechanism and the Weak Force IVBs"; See also: "Table of the Higgs Cascade").
We should note that there is no theory for the GUT that suggests it should include a symmetry-breaking
photon/IVB split, as in the electroweak domain. Consequently, the GUT mint may not exist within a
large spacetime domain; indeed, in our view, proton decay occurs mainly inside black holes. Likewise,
proton creation occurs so early in the development of the universe that there is no appreciable spacetime
to speak of, and certainly no freely traveling photons. Leptoquark creation is earlier yet (during the
TOE), within an even more opaque and spatially constricted arena.
We, obviously, can live only in the cold and low-energy electromagnetic domain, on Earth-like planets,
where only chemical interactions (electron shell interactions) are the rule. The nuclear transformations in
our Sun are the evidence of the activity of the electroweak IVBs creating leptons, neutrinos, mesons (the
ACCs), as well as photons, in the nucleosynthetic process producing helium from hydrogen. We find our
planetary chemical electromagnetic domain (which can only muster up, for example, a coal-burning
fire), dependent upon the solar energy of nuclear transformations and the IVBs of the electroweak
domain. (These same IVBs are also engaged in any "radioactive" nuclear transformations here on Earth.)
While the "mint" analogy may be appropriate in terms of energy vs finances, it does not tell us how the
presses (IVBs) actually make particles with mass (although compression is implied). I have assumed that
the great mass of the IVBs represents an example of the energy density of the early universe during the
time the "leptonic spectrum" of elementary particles was first created (electron, muon, tau, leptoquark).
Mass is a necessary feature of the Higgs mechanism because mass (as bound energy) is not susceptible

5 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

to the entropic enervation of cosmic expansion over the eons - ensuring an accurate reproduction of
particles whenever/wherever they may be replicated. Mass also suggests compression, and compression
may well have a large part to play in the conversion of freely traveling electromagnetic waves (photons)
into a bound and spatially stationary form of electromagnetic energy (matter). We know that both
massive particles and light are electromagnetic in character and are derived from one another, as matterantimatter annihilations unambiguously inform us, as do also the high-energy "atom smashers" or
colliders (such as the Large Hadron Collider or LHC) at CERN, etc. The exact means whereby light is
converted into particles - now or in the early Universe - is not known, but it must involve (at least) a
conversion from two to four dimensions and from intrinsic motion in space at "c" with no entropic
motion in time, to intrinsic motion in time with no entropic spatial motion; the acquisition of various
conserved charges, etc. Possibly a dimensional or topological "knot" is involved. (See: "The Higgs
Boson vs the Spacetime Metric".)
As for the mysterious Higgs boson itself, it acts as a boundary marker or "gauge" for the threshold of the
electroweak domain, the energy at which the electromagnetic and weak forces join, and (single)
Alternative Charge Carriers may be produced. At this high energy all the leptonic particles are
equivalent, and all the quark flavors are equivalent (but quarks vs leptonic particles are still separate they will join in the next higher energy level, in the domain of the GUT). The electroweak energy level
is the domain in which (single) Alternative Charge Carriers may be created, destroyed, and/or
transformed - mesons, leptons, and neutrinos. It is these ACCs that allow the transformation of baryons
(but not their creation or destruction), and ACCs are typical of the energy level of the electroweak force
and its usual activity (of which our Sun is the archetypal example). The electroweak energy level allows
(via the mediation of the IVBs and ACCs), the nuclear transformations which characterize the stars,
while the chemical (electron shell) energy level characterizes the planetary realm. Life utilizes even
weaker, specialized biochemical bonds - such as hydrogen bonds. (See: "The Fractal Organization of
Nature".)
Virtual IVBs "sample" the mass-energy domain of the Higgs boson, then faithfully reproduce single
examples of the ACCs: massive mesons (consisting of quark-antiquark pairs), leptons and neutrinos. In
this view, the Higgs itself does not confer mass directly upon the elementary particles, as in the standard
"ether drag" model, but only indirectly through the IVBs. The mass of an IVB is understood as the
energy density of a primordial era, and is not a permanent feature of any particle. Likewise, the Higgs
lives only at the intersection of the weak and electromagnetic forces, so it marks and "gauges" the
boundary of a symmetric energy state, in which all leptons are equivalent (among themselves), and
likewise, all quarks are equivalent among themselves.
In the "Standard Model", the Higgs and the photon separate at the threshold of the electroweak state, the
Higgs remaining massive and the photon remaining massless ("electroweak symmetry-breaking"). The
photon goes on to create universal spacetime, with the Higgs as a universal (but "virtual") feature of this
self-same spacetime. Stars everywhere and everywhen use the same electroweak Higgs and IVBs to
produce the same nuclear transformations. The Higgs presence must be virtual in our present-day cold,
"ground state" universe; the "real" Higgs is available on demand given enough energy - as at the LHC
(CERN). Presumably, there is a distinct Higgs-like boson distinguishing or "gauging" the boundary of
each confluent energy level (the EW, GUT, and TOE). (See: "Table of the Higgs Cascade".)
We live in an era of information-building in the stars (as the electroweak ACCs transform baryons and
build the elements of the periodic table), and life-building on the planets, as the universe awakens to
itself, using the information (from the Periodic Table) passed down from the stars and the electroweak

6 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

force to our cool electromagnetic/biochemical planetary domain.
Both the "Steady State" and "Big Bang" cosmologies can be simultaneously entertained: the
all-symmetric Multiverse is the "Steady State", mighty, eternal, immortal, and fertile, forever "budding
off" asymmetric universes similar (?) to our own, ephemeral and of explosive origin, but requiring no
net energy to create (because of the negative energy of gravity and the equal admixture of matter with
antimatter - at least initially). Our universe would therefore seem to be an exploration of the creative
powers of the Information Domain - perhaps one of infinitely many. In this case the Universe is what we
choose to make of it, to do with as we wish and are able - including committing suicide by abusing
ourselves and/or our planet. The responsibility is all our own, although Nature will help if we work with
her rather than against her.
The Enigma of Mass
Single elementary particles acquire "rest mass" (E = mcc) from the weak force IVBs, by revisiting the
original energy density of the era in which they were first created (the Higgs boson energy density).
"Rest mass" immediately acquires a gravitational field (and associated time dimension), which is exactly
proportional to its total rest mass (Gm), whatever the source of the mass may be, whether elementary
particle mass or "binding energy" (in composite particles like baryons). "Inertial mass", or "mass due to
acceleration" arises from forcing a particle's metric-warping gravitational field through the metric field
of spacetime (resistance of one metric field to the intrusion of another metric-warping field).
Gravitational "weight" (gm - as on the surface of planet Earth) is due to the reciprocal acceleration
process - the metric field of spacetime is accelerating through the warping gravitational field of the
stationary particle (f = ma). In this series, all the "m's" are equivalent, and derive from the same "rest
mass" source (Einstein's E =mcc). The Equivalence Principle is upheld and explained. Inertial mass of
acceleration is not due to "ether drag" by the Higgs field, but to the "ether drag" of a particle's metricwarping gravitational field as it is forced through another metric field (spacetime), which resists the
warping influence of the intruder. "g" forces are absent without acceleration, since in that case the fields
are not forcing or extending/expanding their "warping" influences into each other. Although
gravitational fields are weak, they extend throughout spacetime. Because the local metric field of
spacetime is influenced by the total gravitational effect of all stars/galaxies in the cosmos, this
mass-generating mechanism bears a distant relationship to "Mach's Principle" of inertial resistance. (See:
"The Higgs Boson vs the Spacetime Metric".)

Postscript I:
Let's take another look at "proton decay". Why is it so much harder for baryons to completely decay than
leptons? We find that at the electroweak energy level - energies found in the IVBs of our Sun - baryons
may be transformed but not created or destroyed, whereas leptons, mesons, and neutrinos can be both
transformed and created/destroyed. So far as we know, since the time of the "Big Bang", no new
(single) baryons have ever been created, and likewise, none have ever been destroyed
(particle/antiparticle pair creation sums to zero and doesn't count). The problem is one of a lack of
suitable Alternative Charge Carriers; baryons carry two conserved charges that leptons lack: 1) color
charge, carried by all quarks and gluons; 2) baryon number charge, the analog of lepton number
("identity") charge, the latter carried in "implicit" form by all massive leptons and in explicit form by
neutrinos. Neutrinos function as ACCs for the massive leptons with respect to lepton number or identity
charge, but a baryon neutrino has yet to be discovered, if it exists at all. (See: "Lepton Number or
Identity Charge".) Both color and baryon number charge are strictly conserved, so both must somehow
be canceled, neutralized, or otherwise balanced before a baryon may be created or destroyed.

7 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

The color charge of the baryon's strong force, which functions to keep the three quarks of a baryon
confined within the tiny region of the atomic nucleus, is carried by a field of 8 "gluons", massless field
vectors moving at velocity "c". Each gluon is composed of a color/anticolor charge pair. (There are three
color charges ("red, green, blue" - purely names of convenience with no relation at all to color in the
sense of a pigment). Quarks also carry color charges, and it is the round-robin exchange of color charges
between quarks (via gluons) that permanently confines quarks to the nuclear boundary (unlike photons
and electric charges, all gluons and color charges attract each other). The total color field of any atomic
nucleus always sums to zero color (or color neutrality - "white"), and this charge must be conserved.
There is no ACC available to carry the total color charge of the baryon - only an antibaryon can do it and herein lies a major sticking point for baryon creation/destruction (or "proton decay" as the problem
is generally known - the aforesaid missing baryon neutrino is another problem). (Mesons are always
color-neutral, carrying color-anticolor charges of the same color, and hence cannot function as an ACC
for the color charge of a 3-quark baryon.)
However, there is an "internal" solution to this color-charge conservation problem, not requiring an
anti-baryon, which stems from the origin of the quarks as three-way partitions of a primitive heavy
lepton (the "leptoquark"). The total color charge of a baryon must sum to zero ("white") - both because
their parent particles (the leptons) began with no color charge at all, and because (in consequence)
gluons carry color/anticolor charges in all possible combinations, summing to the original zero color
charge ("white") of the parent lepton. This means that if we can compress a baryon sufficiently and
symmetrically it will return to its original leptoquark state and the color charge will self-annihilate.
(Note that we are once again contemplating compressing matter to some earlier, more primitive, higherenergy state.) A leptoquark is a primordial, high energy lepton, the heaviest member of the leptonic
spectrum (the spectrum of true elementary particles - particles with no internal components and with
associated neutrino identity charges). A Leptoquark is split into three parts (quarks) by its own too-great
mass and electrical self-repulsion (and the action of the "Y" IVB?). (See also: "The Origin of Matter and
Information") . There is no color charge in this (leptoquark) state because the quarks are still nascent or
virtual rather than real (they have not yet separated from each other), but there is a lepton number
charge, and this can be carried by a neutrino ACC, the very heavy leptoquark neutrino whose presence
in the Cosmos today is registered as the mysterious "dark matter". Hence proton decay is possible if we
can sufficiently and symmetrically compress a baryon to its original leptoquark size, at which point a
leptoquark antineutrino can cancel its baryon number charge - or it can emit its own leptoquark neutrino
as an ACC, accomplishing in either case the same charge/symmetry conservation. (See: "Table of the
Higgs Cascade".)
As we have noted above, compressing a baryon sufficiently and symmetrically to cause its color charge
to self-annihilate requires the "X" IVB, which does not exist in the electroweak energy domain (nor its
"mint"). We must travel to the GUT energy domain to find such a heavy IVB, a special press stamping
out shiny new (electrically neutral) leptoquarks in some far-away country. These leptoquarks (analogs of
heavy neutrons) achieve electrical neutrality simply because their internal quark composition allows
such a configuration. It is these electrically neutral leptoquarks which go on to decay asymmetrically via
the weak force "X" IVB, producing the excess of matter-only baryons which comprise our asymmetric
matter-only universe. Hence we see the necessity for the partially-charged quarks (to form electricallyneutral leptoquarks which can live long enough to undergo weak force asymmetric decays), and the
relationship between the quarks, baryons, and leptons is explained. (The necessity for three energy
"families" arises because three families presents the possibility of many more (16) electrically neutral
three-quark combinations.) Although obviously necessary, the asymmetric weak force decay of

8 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything /alternative...

primordial electrically neutral leptoquarks remains a mystery, an unexplained or "given" parameter of
our Cosmos, perhaps attributable only to the statistical imperative - or anthropic fiat - of an abundantly
fertile Multiverse. With the excess of matter-baryons comes an equal excess of leptoquark antineutrinos,
exactly balancing the baryon number of the universe, and accounting for its "dark matter" content (these
are presumed to be very heavy neutrinos - perhaps as much as five times heavier than a proton).
Because the "X" IVB is so massive, in our present-day universe the only place proton decay can
reasonably be expected to occur is in black holes - where, unfortunately, the reaction cannot be
observed. In fact, insofar as proton decay is concerned, the main difference between a black hole and an
"X" IVB is simply size. Perhaps, at least in a functional sense, a black hole is a gravitational example of
a gigantic Higgs boson/IVB combination (a "gravity mint"). This would be just another instance of the
gravitational metric of black holes overtaking all functions of the electromagnetic metric. Even photons
become massive (since they cannot travel freely), the symmetry condition g = c means that time
vanishes (because the clock stops), and all field vectors of the electromagnetic domain are converted into
gravitational analogs. (See: "A Description of Gravity"). The "X" IVB is so prohibitively heavy that
proton decay would be rare indeed were it not for black holes. Perhaps this is the "real" cosmic function
of black holes - destroying baryons and converting them back to light (solving the "singularity" problem
at the center of black holes).
Heavy baryons ("hyperons") are born in the "Big Bang" via an asymmetric weak force process; decay
via ACCs to the nucleons of our ground state; join together gravitationally to form galaxies, stars, and
planets, producing in the process (via the strong force) the elements of the Periodic Table. Baryons
chemically create life via their electron shells and the electromagnetic force. Baryons die/decay in black
holes, where they are crushed into light, eventually escaping as "Hawking radiation", the final
symmetry-conserving interaction required by Noether's Theorem. "Information" is the "golden thread"
running through the conservation laws governing the evolutionary unfolding of the singular feature
giving significance and meaning to our universe, and providing its rationale: self-conscious life.
Links:
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
GO TO PART II
Go to Part 3
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

9 of 9

8/28/17, 7:39 PM

