Alternative Charge Carriers

8/8/16, 8:36 PM

Alternative Charge Carriers and the Higgs Boson
John A. Gowan
July 2016
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Abstract
A functional class of particles, the Alternative Charge Carriers (ACCs), is recognized as characteristic of the
electroweak domain and the Weak Force Intermediate Vector Bosons (IVBs).
The photon is the massless gauge boson of the electromagnetic force, and its intrinsic entropic drive
("velocity c") creates the metric domain of spacetime; the Higgs boson is the massive gauge particle of the
electroweak force, creating the "particle metric" or "zoo" of electroweak spacetime, the "Alternative Charge
Carriers" (ACCs) (leptons, mesons, neutrinos), in both virtual and "real" forms. In a universe lacking
antimatter - such as ours - ACCs serve to balance charges and preserve charge conservation during particle
interactions. ACCs enable the decay of heavy hyperons, quarks, and lepton "families" to our familiar
electromagnetic ground state particles through channels that obey charge conservation, despite the lack of
antimatter in our cosmos. Hence the ACCs are yet another conservation consequence of our "matter only"
universe. The Higgs boson may be thought of as a gauge or "marker" for the convergence of the weak and
electromagnetic forces: the specific energy level necessary to the creation of the ACC class of particles.
Space is the entropic/energetic conservation domain of massless light (free electromagnetic energy); historic
spacetime is the entropic/energetic conservation domain of massive particles (bound electromagnetic energy).
While the photon establishes a dimensional "spacetime metric" (in which 300,000 kilometers of distance is
metrically equivalent to one second of time), the Higgs boson establishes an electroweak "symmetric energy
state" (in which the electric and weak forces are equivalent at 125 GEV). Both are symmetry conditions, for
at "velocity c" the asymmetric time dimension vanishes, and at 125 GEV the specific identities of the leptons
are subsumed into a single generic leptonic identity, and likewise the specific flavors of the quarks vanish into
a single generic quark identity. It is these generic identities (energy states) which the weak force Intermediate
Vector Bosons (IVBs) "sample" to select specific quark/leptonic flavors for the purposes of identity
transformations during interactions among elementary particles. We may think of the Higgs boson as the
gauge boson of the electroweak particle "zoo", or virtual particle "sea", of the Heisenberg/Dirac spacetime
"vacuum".
The "Standard Model" of the "Higgs mechanism" of the electroweak force proposes four Higgs particles one each for the W+, W-, and Z neutral (the "Intermediate Vector Bosons" (IVBs) or field vectors of the weak
force), and a fourth scalar boson which gauges the intersection of the weak and electromagnetic forces. This
fourth Higgs is the one recently discovered at CERN. (See: "Most Wanted Particle" by Jon Butterworth,
2014, The Experiment LLC, pages 96-99 and 237 - 238; see also: "The Large Hadron Collider" by Don
Lincoln 2014, The Johns Hopkins University press, pages 126 and 133 - 135. The W and Z were discovered also at CERN - in 1983. The math of this complex theory was worked out by Weinberg, Salam, and Glashow,
1967. Peter Higgs (and others) proposed the "Higgs boson" in 1964, as the source of elementary particle
mass.`
In the real world (as opposed to the theoretical/math world), how do we see these theories manifest? Science
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/alternative.html

Page 1 of 6

Alternative Charge Carriers

8/8/16, 8:36 PM

has long noted that the electromagnetic force with its field vector (the photon or "light"), is evidently
composed of two parts, one the massless photon, and the other a virtual component consisting of particleantiparticle pairs (leptons and quarks), which materialize and annihilate one another essentially
instantaneously. Ordinarily, as this virtual particle component of electromagnetic energy tries to materialize,
it is kept in its virtual state by matter-antimatter symmetry, which causes the annihilation of these virtual
particles as soon as they appear. Such particles comprise a "vacuum sea" of virtual particles, coextensive in
our universe with spacetime. Given sufficient energy, this "sea" of virtual particles is available for particle
interactions, transformations, and even creation/destruction, and the weak force makes use of it via the
mediation of the IVBs.
The great mass of the IVBs reproduces the energy density of the early universe when these particle pairs were
in abundant supply and essentially identical to each other (because the energy was so extreme). The massive
IVBs are thus enabled to "sample" or select particles from that portion of the "sea" which its mass allows it to
reproduce and access. Selected particles are then used to effect the interactions/transformations at hand. (See:
"The "W" IVB and the Weak Force Mechanism"). This mode of action allows the IVBs to exactly reproduce
elementary particles from the original "sea" or primordial source, preserving the necessary universal
symmetry of elementary particle parameters of mass, spin, charge, etc. Because the mechanism depends on
mass to reproduce these primitive conditions, it is unaffected by the entropic expansion of the universe; hence
electrons produced today are (and must be) identical in all respects to those produced eons ago. This
universal and necessary symmetry among elementary particles in terms of mass and other physical
parameters is the reason why the weak force is so strange, with its massive IVBs - it must be able to
reproduce single elementary particles (not just particle-antiparticle pairs) - that are absolutely identical in
every respect to all others (of its type) that have ever been, or ever will be, produced - past, present, future.
This is a tall order, and it is one of the defining parameters and constraints of our "matter only" universe,
including the oddities of the weak force and the Higgs boson.
Let's put all this in terms of a more familiar analogy. The Higgs mechanism is like a government mint which
must stamp out coins in various denominations, but of identical value within each denomination. It's easy to
understand why all one cent, five cent, and ten cent coins (etc.), must be of equal value within type (contain
the same quantity of precious metal), for the sake of the stability of the country's financial system and the
public trust. Here, money/precious metal is the analog of energy, the financial system represents the
conservation of energy, and the various coin denominations represent the various elementary particles. The
Higgs mechanism represents the government mint, and the W and Z IVBs represent the massive presses
stamping out coins - some of positive value (W+), some of negative value (W-), and some of neutral value (Z
zero), but all useful and necessary for one or another economic transaction/interaction (because even the
neutrals have value as Alternative Charge Carriers, which we can understand as uncharged information
packets).
The government mint resides in a vast country called the electroweak domain, and the coins it stamps out are
the electron, muon, and tau, their corresponding neutrinos, and their antiparticles. This mint also produces
mesons of positive, negative, and neutral varieties, in various denominations depending upon their quark
content. The mesons are used as ACCs in baryon transformations, because they carry various quark flavors,
and the leptons and neutrinos are used as ACCs (of electric and identity charge) in transactions and
transformations among and between leptons, mesons, and baryons. Within type, all these coins must be
identical, for obvious financial and energy conservation reasons. The total collection of coin dies and precious
metals available from the mint (the range of its potential productions) is a cosmic parameter
characterized/determined by a particular Higgs boson of unique mass/energy - in this case, the electroweak
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/alternative.html

Page 2 of 6

Alternative Charge Carriers

8/8/16, 8:36 PM

Higgs scalar boson. The name of this mint is the Electroweak Alternative Charge Carrier Mint. It only
produces ACCs.
The "heavy hitters" here are baryons (protons and neutrons), as they generally carry much more mass (value)
than the leptons. But it turns out that although the Electroweak Mint (Higgs mechanism) can stamp out
mesons with various quark flavor combinations and hence permit the transformation of baryons (as in the
decay of a neutron to a proton), the electroweak mint simply does not possess a press heavy enough to stamp
out (or destroy) baryons themselves. To obtain newly minted baryons we have to visit an entirely different
(smaller, hotter, denser) country, the domain of the G.U.T. (Grand Unified Theory). In the country of the GUT
the electroweak and strong forces are unified, allowing the minting of single, original baryons. (See: "The
Origin of Matter and Information").
The GUT mint has a very heavy press (the "X" IVB), which can stamp out (or destroy) baryons themselves.
But this country is so far away that we will probably never be able to visit, although we know it exists
because we are up to our ears in baryons (protons and neutrons), and they have to come from somewhere. In
the electroweak domain, we can transform baryons but we cannot make or destroy them. Like Frodo's magic
ring, baryons can only be destroyed in the furnace where they were first created. And there may be yet
another country, further away still (smaller, hotter, denser), the "TOE" ("Theory of Everything" or " Planck"
domain), with another mint/Higgs mechanism and an ultraheavy press ("Y" IVBs), which stamps
out/destroys leptoquarks. But that domain is so close to the "Big Bang" or "Creation Event" that nobody can
get anywhere near it. (See: "The Higgs Mechanism and the Weak Force IVBs"; See: "Table of the Higgs
Cascade").
We should note that there is no theory for the GUT that suggests it should include a symmetry-breaking
photon/IVB split, as in the electroweak domain. Consequently, the GUT mint may not be surrounded by a
large spacetime domain; indeed, in our view, proton decay occurs mainly inside black holes. Likewise, proton
creation occurs so early in the development of the universe that there is no appreciable spacetime to speak of,
and certainly no freely traveling photons. Leptoquark creation is earlier yet (during the TOE), within an even
more opaque and spatially constricted arena.
We, obviously, live in the cold and low energy electromagnetic domain where only chemical interactions
(electron shell interactions) are the rule (on planets like Earth). The nuclear transformations in our Sun are the
evidence of the activity of the electroweak IVBs creating leptons, neutrinos, mesons (the ACCs), and photons
(in the nucleosynthetic process producing helium from hydrogen). We find our planetary chemical
electromagnetic domain (which can only muster up, for example, a coal-burning fire), dependent upon the
solar energy of nuclear transformations and the IVBs of the electroweak domain. (These same IVBs are also
engaged in "radioactive" nuclear transformations here on Earth.)
While this analogy may be appropriate in terms of energy vs finances, it does not tell us how the presses
(IVBs) actually make particles with mass (although compression is implied). I have assumed that the great
mass of the IVBs represents an example of the energy density of the early universe during the time the
"leptonic spectrum" was first created. Mass is a necessary feature of this mechanism because mass (as bound
energy) is not susceptible to the entropic enervation of cosmic expansion over the eons - ensuring an accurate
reproduction of particles whenever/wherever they may be replicated. Mass also suggests compression, and
compression may well have a large part to play in the conversion of freely traveling electromagnetic waves
(photons) into a bound, stationary, or "standing" electromagnetic wave. We know that both massive particles
and light are electromagnetic in character and are derived from one another, as matter-antimatter
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/alternative.html

Page 3 of 6

Alternative Charge Carriers

8/8/16, 8:36 PM

annihilations unambiguously inform us, as do also the high-energy "atom smashers" or colliders at Fermilab,
CERN, etc. The exact mechanism whereby light is converted into particles via the Higgs mechanism and
IVBs - now or then - is not known, but it does involve a conversion from two to four dimensions and from
intrinsic motion in space (at "c") to intrinsic motion in time with no intrinsic spatial motion, the acquisition of
various conserved charges, etc. Possibly a dimensional "knot" is involved. (See: "The Higgs Boson vs the
Spacetime Metric".)
As for the mysterious Higgs boson itself, it acts as a boundary marker or "gauge" for the threshold of the
electroweak domain, the energy at which the electromagnetic and weak forces join, and Alternative Charge
Carriers may be produced. At this energy all the leptonic particles are equivalent, and all the quark flavors are
equivalent (but quarks vs leptonic particles are still separate - they will join in the next higher energy level, in
the domain of the GUT). The electroweak energy level is the domain in which Alternative Charge Carriers
are created, destroyed, and/or transformed - mesons, leptons, and neutrinos. It is these ACCs that allow the
transformation of baryons (but not their creation or destruction), and ACCs are typical of the energy level of
the electroweak force and its usual activity (of which our Sun is a good example). The electroweak energy
level allows the nuclear transformations which characterize the stars (via the mediation of the IVBs and
ACCs), while the chemical (electron shell) energy level characterizes the planetary realm. Life depends upon
even weaker, specialized biochemical bonds - such as hydrogen bonds. (See: "The Fractal Organization of
Nature".)
The Higgs confers mass upon the weak force IVBs, the electroweak "W" and "Z", but exactly how we do not
know (see above). The IVBs then go on to faithfully reproduce the massive mesons, quarks, leptons and
neutrinos of the electroweak and electromagnetic energy levels. In this view, the Higgs itself does not confer
mass directly upon the elementary particles, as in the standard "ether drag" model, but only indirectly through
the IVBs, by an unknown mechanism. The mass of the IVBs is understood as the energy density of a
primordial era, and is not a permanent feature of any particle - that is, a new IVB must be created for every
interaction. Likewise, the Higgs lives only at the intersection of the weak and electromagnetic forces, so it
marks and "gauges" the boundary of a symmetric energy state, in which all leptons are equivalent and all
quarks are equivalent. The IVBs get what mass and particles they require from the symmetric energy state
distinguished by the Higgs.
In the "Standard Model", the Higgs and the photon separate at the threshold of the electroweak state, the
Higgs remaining massive and the photon remaining massless ("electroweak symmetry-breaking"). The
photon goes on to create universal spacetime, but the Higgs seems to also be a universal feature of this selfsame spacetime. Stars everywhere and everywhen use the electroweak Higgs and IVBs to produce the same
nuclear transformations. It seems the Higgs and photon must travel together. The Higgs is a permanent
feature of spacetime. But this presence must be virtual, at least in our current universe; nevertheless, the
Higgs is available on demand given enough energy - as at the LHC (CERN), but not otherwise. Presumably,
there is a distinct Higgs-like boson distinguishing or "gauging" the boundary of each confluent energy level
(the EW, GUT, and TOE); these several different symmetric energy states is one reason why these bosons are
necessary partitions within the mechanism surrounding the production of identical massive elementary
particles.
We live in an era of information-building in the stars (as the electroweak ACCs transform baryons and build
the elements of the periodic table), and life-building on the planets, as the universe awakens to itself, using
the information (from the periodic table) passed down from the stars and the electroweak force to our cool
chemical/biological planetary domain.
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/alternative.html

Page 4 of 6

Alternative Charge Carriers

8/8/16, 8:36 PM

Elementary particles acquire "rest mass" (E = mcc) from the weak force IVBs, by revisiting the original
energy density of the era in which they were first created. "Rest mass" immediately acquires a gravitational
field (and associated time dimension), which is exactly proportional to its total rest mass, whatever its source
(Gm), whether elementary particle mass or binding energy. "Inertial mass", or "mass due to acceleration"
arises from forcing the particle's metric-warping gravitational field through the metric field of spacetime
(resistance of one metric field to the passage of another metric-warping field). Gravitational "weight" (gm) is
due to the reciprocal acceleration process - the metric field of spacetime is accelerating through the warping
gravitational field of the stationary particle (f = ma). In this series, all the "m's" are equivalent, and derive
from the same "rest mass" source (Einstein's E =mcc). The equivalence principle is respected and explained.
Inertial mass of acceleration is not due to "ether drag" by the Higgs field, but to the "ether drag" of a metricwarping gravitational field as it is forced through another metric field (spacetime), which resists the warping
influence of the intruding field. "g" forces are absent without acceleration, since in that case the fields are not
forcing or extending/expanding their "warping" influences into each other. Although gravitational fields are
weak, they extend throughout spacetime. Because the local metric field of spacetime is influenced by the total
gravitational effect of all stars/galaxies in the cosmos, this mechanism bears a distant relationship to "Mach's
Principle" of inertial resistance. (See: "The Higgs Boson vs the Spacetime Metric".)
Links:
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
The huge, anomalous masses of the IVBs and the Higgs boson (80, 90, 125 proton masses) tells us that these
particles are not part of our ground-state electromagnetic world, not even part of our nuclear-energy world.
They come from an earlier, much more primitive era, smaller, hotter, and far more energy-dense than our
own, only a few micro-moments removed from the "Big Bang", during the time when massless, free waves of
electromagnetic energy were somehow being converted to massive, bound particles of electromagnetic
energy (leptons, quarks, leptoquarks). How this was done remains a mystery: massless, a-temporal, 2-D
photons with intrinsic (entropic) spatial motion "c" were converted to massive, temporal, 4-D particles with
no intrinsic spatial motion but with (instead) an alternative intrinsic/entropic motion in time. Whatever this
mechanism may be, it operated only in the very early universe at very high temperatures and energy density.
However, it can still be found today as a virtual weak force process, making real transformations and
creating/destroying single elementary particles.
The huge masses of the Higgs and IVBs reprise the energy-density of this early time, including the
mysterious mass-conferring mechanism. The Higgs "gauges" and recreates the electroweak "symmetric
energy state", the energy at which the weak and electromagnetic forces converge. At this energy, all lepton
species are merged into a single leptonic "genus", and likewise the quark species are merged into a single
quark "genus" (but these two "genera" do not mix at this level - they mix only at the next higher level, in the
"GUT" or "Grand Unified Theory", where the strong force joins the electroweak force in a three-way
convergence). The IVBs are able to make identity transformations among the elementary leptons and quarks
because individual species identity is fluid within the generic "symmetric energy state". The (virtual) Higgs
establishes a (virtual) particle "zoo" or "sea" (of Alternative Charge Carriers), and the (virtual) IVBs, because
of their similar mass-energy (as conferred by the Higgs), are able to access this particle pool and take what
file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/alternative.html

Page 5 of 6

Alternative Charge Carriers

8/8/16, 8:36 PM

they need to effect (real) transformations/interactions. These virtual interactions essentially connect the early
with the modern-day universe, ensuring that every electron (for example) created today is identical to those
created eons ago in the "Big Bang" - maintaining a necessary and universal symmetry among elementary
particles (within type). The same mechanism that made the first electrons make electrons today.

file:///Users/johnagowan/Desktop/TheoryOfEverything/alternative.html

Page 6 of 6

