something.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/something.html

Why there is Something rather than Nothing
(John A. Gowan May 2018)
Why is there something rather than nothing (an ancient philosophical
conundrum)? Science can now answer that "something" exists
(matter, atoms, rocks, galaxies, etc.) because our universe is
asymmetric, lacking antimatter. Antimatter was annihilated during
the "Big Bang" - the "Big Bang" was in fact an annihilation event
which did not quite go to completion, failing to destroy all the matter.
Everything else proceeds from this basic fact: our universe is
asymmetric, in that it consists only of matter, lacking its antimatter
complement. (Comparable to the religious notion of "original sin").
A much more difficult question for science to answer is: why is there
art, religion, philosophy, and science itself, why is there life and
consciousness in addition to matter? Excepting life itself, these
domains are all products of the human brain; including life, all are
emergent products of the information content of matter. How does the
human notion of an universal God, of a Heavenly realm, of Divine
Law and Justice, arise out of the information content of the periodic
table of the elements? The same question applies to Beethoven's
Ninth Symphony - and all great works of art. Like all the complexity
and beauty of the flora and fauna of our wonderful Earth, these can
only be emergent products originating in the information content of
atomic matter (the Periodic Table), created over aeons of time by the
evolutionary mechanism of Darwin's great theory.
The universe begins to understand itself, and develops a recursive
fractal structure, in that through evolution, we begin to understand
evolution and employ it to improve our domestic animals and plants evolution evolves a secondary (human) creator and sentient
evolutionary mechanism (human-directed selection and "genetic
engineering"). We are indeed created in the image and likeness of our
Creator - we are "mini-creators" but with greatly reduced powers.
The "sufficient reason" (or rationale) for the existence of our universe
is the phenomenon of life - a phenomenon that allows the universe to
1 of 2

5/31/18, 10:22 PM

something.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/something.html

know and experience itself in a specific, particular, and individual
mode as well as in the whole, and in fact (toward that end) to produce
little (fractal) versions of itself (as in humans). The creativeevolutionary drive/energy of the universe and its information content
are principle features of what we call "God". Evolution is directed
toward universal self-understanding and knowledge, much as Chardin
envisioned.
Science and Religion: Comparing the ancient intuitive religious
(Christian) formulation of the world order with the modern scientific
view, I suggest the following coordinate/parallel relations between
them. For the Holy Trinity: Father - realized as the material
multiverse/universe, including spacetime and history, atomic matter
(the Periodic Table of Elements), and the forces and charges peculiar
to each (including energy and symmetry conservation, entropy, etc.,
natural law and physical constants) - "atoms and the void"; Son manifesting as the biological domain (life anywhere in the universe),
and the forces peculiar to it (genetics, evolution), including emergent
neuronal properties of brains such as consciousness; Holy Spirit seen as information and metaphysics, including human mental
abstract creations such as language and symbology, art, science,
mathematics, technology, philosophy/religion and the self-awareness
and "intention" (developmental direction) of the universe, and
perhaps the "Akashic Record" and spiritual/karmic domain of
immortal souls ("Heaven"). It can be seen that this choice of scientific
parameters satisfies the "three in one" mantra of the Christian Trinity:
life arises from the information content of "atoms and the void".
Humans are fractal subsets of the universe, through whose agency the
universe is trying to understand itself and explore, experience, and
enlarge its own creative potential. The universe exists for us and we
exist for the universe. It may take a village to raise a child, but it
takes a universe to create one. As Tolstoy understood: "God is life,
and to love life is to love God".

2 of 2

5/31/18, 10:22 PM

