forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

Three Essays on A Summary of Forces
John A. Gowan
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

Essay I (August 2018)
Our universe is derived from the "Multiverse" costing no net energy
(the negative energy of gravity exactly balances the positive energy
of electromagnetism), and bearing no net charge (primordial matter antimatter balance). Our Universe is an asymmetric "breakout" from
the perfect symmetry of the Multiverse (see intuitive description in
Genesis) thanks to the Higgs boson(s) and its IVBs ("Intermediate
Vector Bosons"), and the "Leptonic Spectrum" (including
leptoquarks), and various Alternative Charge Carriers (which permit
charge conservation despite the absence of antimatter).
While the actual mechanism producing our "matter-only" asymmetry
is unknown, it clearly depends upon the ability of the partiallycharged quarks to form electrically neutral combinations such as
neutrons (this is the principle reason why we must have quarks and
their partial electrical charges). And this electrical neutrality is also
related to the reason why we have three energy levels of elementary
particles (electron, muon, tau, and the 3 quark families): there are
many more ways to form neutral baryons with three energetic
families rather than one (presumably 3 is just enough to create our
universe, or we would have more such families). (See: "Higgs
Table".)
Neutrons are essential for the weak force asymmetry mechanism 1 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

tri-partite quark charges allow the creation of electrically neutral
leptoquarks, which "live" long enough to decay via the asymmetric
action of the (notoriously slow) weak force, creating our "matter
only" Cosmos. Creation must be symmetric (as in particle-antiparticle
pairs), but decay may not be (if particles are electrically neutral).
The Weak Force = the "Information Force" ("identity" charge). Weak
force asymmetric decay of electrically neutral primordial leptoquarks
is the suspected cause of our cosmic "matter only" asymmetry.
Neutrinos are explicit "identity" charges. Massive leptons carry
"hidden" identity charges. Leptoquarks decay to baryons, which carry
hidden leptoquark identity charges. Heavy leptoquark antineutrinos
are the probable source of "dark matter". (See: "The Particle Table".)
The IVBs of the weak force are very massive (80 - 90 Gev) because
they recreate the primordial energy density of a specific "symmetric
energy state" of the "Big Bang", in which the single elementary
particles they transform were first created. This mechanism ensures
that all elementary particles are identical (within type), no matter
when or where they are created. Any electron can "swap out" with
any other electron, or annihilate with any positron (anti-electron).
This is just one example of symmetry in the service of conservation.
Massive IVBs are not subject to attrition via the entropic expansion
of the Cosmos; "identity" charge is crucial to the accurate replication
of elementary particles, and their antimatter annihilation partners.
The Electromagnetic (EM) Force = the "Action Force" (electric
charge - attraction and repulsion). Magnetic forces are the relativistic
effect of electric charges in motion; the conservation role of magnetic
force is to maintain the invariance of electric charge. (Charge
invariance is an essential adjunct of charge conservation). (See also:
Global and Local Gauge Invariance in the Tetrahedron Model).
The Electroweak (EW) Force = action + information (our "real
world" domain of the Periodic Table).
The Gravitational Force = a dimensional metric force converting
2 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

space into time (and vice versa as in stars) (a conservative and
negentropic force) ("location" charge). Time is a necessary metric for
energy conservation (and causality) in massive energy forms, due to
their variable relative motion. For the same reason, time is not
necessary for energy conservation (or causality) in light, whose
intrinsic motion at "velocity c" is famously invariant (Einstein). The
"black hole" is not just the triumph of gravity over light, but of time
over space. However, this victory is ephemeral, as Hawking's
"quantum radiance" has shown, and as Noether's Theorem leads us to
expect. Paradoxically, due to "Hawking radiation", black holes
represent the final triumph of symmetry and light over time, gravity,
matter, and asymmetry. This is why black holes are so common in the
universe - they are the "desideratum" - the final state of perfect
symmetry (and other than "proton decay", the only way to vanish the
stubborn "baryon number charge"). Recall that since time stops in the
black hole, the final explosion takes place instantaneously from the
viewpoint of an internal observer, even though many eons may pass
from our (outside) perspective.
The combination of entropy plus symmetry conservation is necessary
to understand the dimensional action of gravity. Entropy conservation
is seen in the "neg-entropic" character of gravity. Spacetime reduces
its expansive entropic dynamic via the inward flow of spacetime.
This reduction exactly compensates for the lost outward pos-entropic
force of the "intrinsic motion" associated with the light that was
converted into atomic bound energy, now composing any gravitating
mass. For example, the Earth's mass was once free light (during the
primordial era of the "Big Bang") before those photons were
converted into massive, asymmetric, "matter-only" atoms. During
that conversion, light's intrinsic, pos-entropic expansive dynamic was
lost, but since energy must always be associated with some form of
entropy, that loss was compensated by neg-entropic gravity, creating
time from space as the intrinsic driver of a new 4th dimensional
entropic conservation domain (karmic history) for all bound energy
forms. Symmetry conservation adds direction to the flow of space
(toward the center of the asymmetric mass), and eventually results in
3 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

the reconversion of bound EM energy to free EM energy, as in stars
and other spontaneous astrophysical processes, culminating in the
"Hawking radiation" of black holes and the final triumph of Noether's
Theorem, and light and space over matter and time.
"Velocity c" is the "gauge" of a symmetric state of free energy (light);
light has no time dimension, no spatial dimension in the direction of
motion (light is a 2-dimensional transverse wave - light's 3rd spatial
dimension is entropic); light has no mass, bears no charge, and
produces no gravitational field in free flight. (The "accelerating
expansion of spacetime" is the observational evidence for this latter
assertion).
Because light's "clock" is stopped, and light has no third or "distance"
dimension, light has forever to go nowhere in its forward "intrinsic"
(entropic) motion. This is the basis of light's so-called "infinite"
velocity, or light's "non-locality". Light is everywhere within its
entropic conservation domain simultaneously. This is a crucial
condition of symmetry, which gravitational charge ("location")
conserves when light is converted to bound energy of any description.
According to Noether's Theorem, the symmetry of light must be
conserved no less than its energy (quality as well as quantity).
This great theorem is the key to Einstein's long sought "Unified Field
Theory".
The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light. The "field
vectors" of the forces maintain the invariance of the charges; hence
they are adjuncts of charge/symmetry conservation.
History is the entropic conservation domain of bound electromagnetic
energy (atomic matter), created by "intrinsic motion t"; space is the
analogous entropic conservation domain of free electromagnetic
energy (light), created by "intrinsic motion c". These two entropic
domains are connected by negentropic gravity, which can create
either from the other.
Entropy is a necessary adjunct of energy conservation as it prevents
4 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

the same energy from being used twice to produce the same work (no
"perpetual motion" machine; energy cannot be produced from
nothing). Energy conservation itself is necessary because our
universe is "on loan" from the Multiverse, or from "the Void".
The Strong Force = the bound energy (nuclear) force ("color" charge)
creating stable, long-lived energy reserves (baryons) which can be
built into the 92+ atomic nuclei of the Periodic Table, providing a
permanent information base for Life (via the Evolutionary (or "Life"
Force) (Darwin x competition).
Charge conservation is one form of symmetry conservation. An
important feature of symmetry conservation is that repayment of a
symmetry debt (charge) can take place anytime in the future, unlike
raw energy debts, which must be paid immediately (such as thermal
energy debts). Charge conservation is the "credit card" of the
universe: "buy now, pay later". Hence charge/symmetry conservation
provides us with a (mostly) peaceful interval during which we can do
something other than "pay the piper" - live our lives constructively,
for example.
Life is the "sufficient reason" or rationale for the existence of our
universe. Life is the universe becoming aware of, experiencing, and
exploring itself on a local level. A possible global expression of this
"life force" is suggested by Chardin, and by the 4x3 fractal algorithm
of our "Tetrahedron Model". Life itself is the evidence for "God" in
the Universe: Information + Action + Conservation + Creativity. Life
is the runaway "computer computing itself" - the "Singularity",
compounded like a fractal in the case of human science/math
/technology and abstract thought/language/creativity. (See: "The
Human Connection"). (See: the "Tetrahedron Model").
The "work" of the cosmos is the return of "bound" asymmetric
atomic matter to its symmetric free state, light (as in our Sun and the
stars). (See also: http://www.johnagowan.org/higgstable.html).
Postscript to Essay I
5 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

When massless light is converted to massive matter during the "Big
Bang", the raw energy of that light is conserved in the mass of the
atoms so created (e = mcc). Any symmetry debts are conserved as
charge and spin; the "intrinsic" (entropic) motion of the light is
conserved as the gravitational field of the new atoms (Gm). The
expansive 3-D intrinsic motion of light (creating the entropic domain
of space) is conserved as the contractile 3-D intrinsic motion of
gravity (creating time and the entropic domain of history). Collapsing
space self-annihilates at the center of mass, leaving behind a temporal
residue which is the exact metric equivalent of the annihilated space.
This residual temporal entity contains negative entropy (time), which
has its own intrinsic motion in the historic domain of causal/karmic
relations among massive particles (only). (See: "The Conversion of
Space to Time by Gravity".) Just as free and bound forms of EM
energy have their own characteristic expressions (photons and
atoms), so they also have their own entropy "drives" (the "intrinsic
motions" of light and time) and their own entropic conservation
domains (space, history, and combined historic spacetime) as created
by those drives.
The entropic motion of gravity is due to the entropic motion of time,
which pulls space along behind it as it moves into the historic
domain. But 3-D space cannot follow time into 1-D history, and
self-annihilates at the historic threshold, depositing another metrically
equivalent temporal entity, repeating the cycle exactly and
indefinitely. Hence gravity and time create each other (a reciprocal
process on-going in our Sun); a gravitational field is the spatial
evidence for the intrinsic motion of time. (See: "A Description of
Gravity".)
The creation of the gravitational field is beautiful in its simplicity: all
that gravity is (Einstein's "warpage" of spacetime), is accomplished
by the simple exposure of an inherent temporal (asymmetric)
dimension embedded in space (spacetime). We furthermore envision
this revealed temporal element as also the source of the former
intrinsic spatial motion of light: photons flee from this element to
6 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

protect their own symmetry, which, however, they cannot escape as it
is embedded in their very nature (wavelength x frequency = c).
Paradoxically, the temporal element is therefore the cause of the
intrinsic motion of both light and gravity: it is only the difference
between the implicit vs explicit presence of time. (Time is a
necessary conservation parameter in the case of massive particles
which have no intrinsic spatial motion and whose energy varies with
their relative and variable velocity. Time is therefore inherently
present in the formulation of EM energy which can take either
massless or massive interchangeable forms: wavelength x frequency
= c. )
In this website, I use two semiotic models to illustrate (represent) the
elements of the theory as they interact.
The first is a 4x3 (or 4x4) grid or matrix, a sort of "periodic table" of
the elements/principles/laws of the Unified Field Theory. These
elements are the "bare bones" of the theory, physics in its most basic
form. The second model is the "Tetrahedron Model", in which these
same elements/principles/laws are arranged in the form of a
geometric tetrahedron, the most simple perfect polyhedron, in which
all lines, faces, and angles are equal. Both have their uses and both
should be studied. The intent is to discover the simplest set of
physical principles that is sufficient to describe the complete theory
(one would like to have a "mandala" of the theory). The four
principles that emerge from this study are the conservation of energy,
the conservation of symmetry, entropy, and information.
Biology and the "life force" (Darwinian evolution) emerge from the
information principle and the EM force, via the carbon atom and its
electron shell. The Periodic Table is the great example of information
in the physical sciences, as is DNA in biology. The 4x3 metric of the
General System Fractal welds these two information systems
indissolubly together: the alpha particle as the "brick" of the Periodic
Table; the amino acid as the coding unit of DNA. (four nucleons each
comprised of three quarks; four nitrogenous bases code in triplets).
Life is the rationale, the "sufficient reason" for our universe. One
7 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

could spin together a "spiritual" system out of the interaction between
the "trinity" of information, the physical forces, and the General
System Fractal, but I will leave that task (the union of Science and
Religion) to others younger and stronger than I. I will note here,
however, that the great import of Noether's Theorem for biology is
that beauty is a conserved property in our universe.
(Note: I have said nothing about the cosmology section of the
website, as this subject is so difficult conceptually as well as
observationally. Others are welcome to argue about it; I've had my
say. We are just entering a "golden age" of cosmology, when our
giant telescopes may yet reveal the final secrets of our Cosmos.)
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Essay II April 2019
John A. Gowan
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
Afterthought and Cosmology: (From: sect14.html)
Quantum mechanics is necessary because Nature (including energy
itself) is quantized at the structural level of elementary particles and
charges. Charges are necessary (especially alternative identity
charges), if an asymmetric universe full of information and life is to
manifest (via the Higgs boson and its IVBs) - from the all-symmetric
8 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

Multiverse. Our Cosmos exists in an asymmetric form which
nevertheless can be conserved through time (via the conservation of
"symmetry debts" (= "charges")), returning eventually (via charge
cancellation/annihilation) to its symmetric energetic origin, light.
Relativity is necessary (as in "Einstein's Interval" and "Lorentz
Invariance") for the universe to exhibit an extended (and seamless)
dimensional/metric network (3 space, 1 time). Our dimensional
expressions of spatial/temporal entropy (produced by the intrinsic
motions of time, light, gravity), allow energy to take a massive
asymmetric form ("matter" only, no "antimatter") comprised of
atomic, historic information with relative motion rather than absolute
motion at "velocity c". Our spacetime achieves conservation
(including causality) for both free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy (light/atoms), simultaneously. Time is
created from space via gravitational transformation. The historic
entropic domain of matter is therefore produced (and subtracted
from) the spatial entropic domain of light by gravitational conversion.
Black holes function as the final solution to the difficult problem of
symmetry conservation for "baryon number charge" (via the creation
of matter-antimatter particle pairs and "Hawking Radiation").
The (recently observed) acceleration of the expansion of spacetime is
due to the cumulative effect of universal symmetry conservation: the
conversion of matter to light in many astrophysical processes
(because free light produces no gravitational field). "Dark Matter"
likely consists of heavy leptoquark antineutrinos, produced during the
"Big Bang", which balance the "baryon number charge" of our
"matter only" Cosmos. The positive electromagnetic energy content
of our cosmos is exactly balanced by its negative gravitational
energy; charges are balanced by anticharges, originally by antimatter,
and today via alternative charge carriers. Our cosmos required no net
energy for its creation; charges exist as a strict conservation measure
(the "police" of the cosmos), required for its birth and subsequent
regulation/evolution, as it begins with nothing (neither energy nor
charge) in excess. The charges of matter (including gravity) are
symmetry debts of light ("Noether's Theorem").
The Higgs boson and its associated "IVBs" (Intermediate Vector
9 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

Bosons) lead the escape into asymmetric freedom from the
smothering embrace of the all-symmetric Multiverse. The Higgs
Boson identifies the exact energy at which a "lawful" (chargeconserving) escape is possible, complete with IVBs (particles which
perform quark and lepton identity transformations), electrically
neutral leptoquarks, and alternative identity-charge carrying
antileptoquark neutrinos (the probable source of "dark matter"). The
Higgs is the scientific analog of Eve's apple, opening the door to a
free-will (contingent), but temporal and karmic, universe. The Higgs
must be a massive particle to exactly reproduce this precise "escape
energy", circumventing the enervating effects of entropy in a spatially
expanding and temporally ageing universe.
Quark subunits are necessary because only through appropriate
arrangements of partially charged quarks can electrically neutral
leptoquarks and baryons (neutrons) be created, and only through
these electrically neutral particles can our cosmos be produced via the
operation of the asymmetric (and slow) weak force. Quarks are
subdivisions of primordial, very heavy leptons (leptoquarks). Three
energetic families of quarks are evidently required before enough
neutral leptoquarks and baryons are created, to permit the formation
of our "matter-only" asymmetric universe.
Essay III (revised May, 2014)
Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of
Everything")
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
The Charges of Matter are Symmetry Debts of Light
10 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

Abstract:
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory as presented in
these pages may be deduced from "Noether's Theorem": The charges
of matter are symmetry debts of light.
The "Big Bang" origin of the cosmos is the conversion of
pure, symmetric electromagnetic energy (light) into
asymmetric atomic "information" (our "matter only"
universe). "Noether's Theorem" states that in a
multicomponent field such as the electromagnetic field (or
the metric field of spacetime), symmetries are associated
with conservation laws and vice-versa. Hence the symmetry
of light (and spacetime) must be conserved. Noether's
Theorem provides the key to Einstein's dream of a "Unified
Field Theory" through the seminal concept that the symmetry
of light, no less than its energy, must be conserved.
(Questions such as "What existed before the "Big Bang"?"
(probably the Multiverse) and "Why is there something
rather than nothing?" (because of the possibility of life) are
questions for philosophy/religion, not science. In what
follows, I conceive of the "Big Bang" as a "breakout" from
the all-symmetric Multiverse into the asymmetric realm of
atomic matter, information, time, causality, gravity, entropy,
charge, etc.)
Our asymmetric "matter-only" Universe was created (in the
"Big Bang") from all-symmetric free electromagnetic energy
(light), via an unknown asymmetric weak-force interaction,
resulting in a loss of cosmic symmetry and a corresponding,
compensating gain in symmetry-conserving (chargeconserving) bound energy states ("atomic matter"). For
conservation reasons (energy/entropy/symmetry), matter is
furthermore embedded in a secondary entropic and causal
domain (historic spacetime), created by gravity from light's
primary entropic and a-causal domain (space). The negative
11 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

energy of gravity not only creates time from space, it also
balances the positive energy of the "Big Bang" such that no
net energy is required to produce our cosmos. Our
"matter-only" Universe is the original "light-only" universe
(still with us today as the universal spatial dimension with its
2.7 kelvin "cosmic background radiation"), plus a small
portion which (following primordial symmetry-breaking)
was "frozen" by symmetry conservation (charge
conservation) into various familiar material forms (present
today as atomic matter, gravity, and historic spacetime).
Today's (low-energy) "matter" atom is exactly one-half of an
original (high-energy) charge-balanced (neutral, symmetric)
"matter-antimatter" particle-pair, which somehow escaped
annihilation by its complementary member (see: primordial
symmetry-breaking by the weak force during the "Big
Bang"). Hence the charges of matter, originally intended to
conserve symmetry via matter-antimatter annihilations,
remain, due to the absence of antimatter, as unbalanced
symmetry debts of light. In matter, light's (broken)
symmetries are conserved by charge and spin; in spacetime,
light's metric symmetries are protected by the invariance of
"velocity c", inertial/entropic forces, Einstein's "Interval",
causality, "Lorentz Invariance" (phenomena associated with
the Special Theory of Relativity), and conserved (when
broken) by gravitational forces associated with "local" mass
("Gm" - phenomena associated with the General Theory of
Relativity).
All forms of energy originate (directly or indirectly) from
light; matter carries charges (including gravity) which are
the symmetry debts of the light which created it. Charges
produce forces which act to return the material system to its
original symmetric state (light), repaying matter's primordial
symmetry debts. Repayment is exampled by any spontaneous
interaction producing net free energy, including: exothermic
chemical reactions and matter-antimatter annihilation
12 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

reactions; radioactivity, particle and proton decay; the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, the gravitational
conversion of bound to free energy (as in supernovas and
quasars), and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes.
Identifying the broken symmetries of light associated with
each of the 4 charges and forces of physics (see below) is the
first step toward a conceptual "Unified Field Theory".
In weak gravitational fields (as on planet Earth), gravity only
pays the entropy "interest" on the spatial symmetry debt of
"local" matter (which is carried as "location charge": Gm),
converting space to time, in effect producing an alternative
entropic drive and dimension/domain (time/history) in which
charge conservation (and causality) are serviced by an
indefinitely extended temporal duration and consequential
("karmic") significance. In stronger fields (as in our Sun),
gravity additionally pays down the "principal" of matter's
spatial symmetry debt, converting asymmetric "local" mass
to symmetric "non-local" light. This latter conversion
continues in supernovas and quasars, and finally goes to
completion via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes. The conversion of mass to light reduces the total
gravitational field of the cosmos, resulting in the apparent
"acceleration" of cosmic expansion, recently observed (see:
Science 7 Oct. 2011 Vol. 334 Page 30). (See: "A Description
of Gravity".)
The symmetry-conserving requirement of charge invariance,
through time, despite entropy, and despite relative, variable,
and contingent forces of motion/acceleration, is the key to
understanding the rationale for the local action of the "4
forces" ("global/local gauge forces"), including quantization
of charge and the "Lorentz Invariance" and magnetism of
Special Relativity. In the mathematical terms of Evariste
Galois' "Group Theory", our "Tetrahedron Model" is a
description of the symmetry group of light, including its
destruction by asymmetric weak force decays (resulting in
13 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

our asymmetric "matter-only" Cosmos), and the on-going
spontaneous restoration of cosmic symmetry in obedience to
Noether's Theorem of symmetry conservation (as in the
conversion of bound to free energy in stars). (See:
Neuenschwander, Dwight E. Emmy Noether's Wonderful
Theorem. 2011. The Johns Hopkins University Press.)
Biology is included in our physical unification scheme
through the notion of "information": information charts a
"lawful" (charge-conserved) pathway for matter's return to
light's symmetry, while simultaneously producing a way for
the universe to achieve localized consciousness, know itself
in part as well as in whole, and diversify its experience and
creativity through a multitude of evolutionary forms. Life is
the rationale for the existence of the universe. While atomic
nuclei promote symmetry conservation through high-energy,
exothermic nucleosynthetic pathways in stars, their
associated electron shells create life through low-energy,
neg-entropic chemical pathways on planets. Using energy
and heavy elements ultimately provided by gravity, stars, and
the galaxy, the "Information Pathway" of planetary biology is
the means whereby the universe comes to life, awakens to
itself, achieves consciousness, experiences and elaborates
itself, explores new modes of creativity (including
abstract/symbolic modes), and evolves new forms of beauty
and symmetry. Carbon's electron shell is the crucial link
between the abiotic and biotic information systems of the
Cosmos; the concepts of Information and the Multiverse are
crucial links between our scientific and religious world
views. "We come trailing clouds of glory..."
(See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Alternative Charge
Carriers".) (See also: "The Information Pathway".
Addendum to the Abstract of Essay III:
Two outstanding (and connected) characteristics distinguish
14 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

our universe: 1) it is asymmetric, composed of matter only,
lacking its original, balancing complement of antimatter; 2)
it contains Life.
The connection between these two asymmetric states of
energy is Information. The atomic realm of matter left from
the "Big Bang" origin of our universe is a domain of material
information from which the biological realm (characterized
(so far as we know) only by molecular information chains of
RNA/DNA), arises by an unknown chemical concatenation,
crucially involving the carbon atom.
In essence, Life is a specialized state of information that can,
in "friendly" environments, reproduce and maintain itself,
and evolve new living forms. The dreaded "computer
apocalypse" (in which computers become capable of creating
and informing themselves) in fact has already happened
naturally eons ago in the form of the biologic genetic
material. Earth-life and humanity are the local consequence
of that original "information apocalypse", a natural
catastrophe foreseen by God (as recorded in Genesis in the
story of the "forbidden fruit"). We are witnessing a fractal
iteration of this story in humanities' control of evolution, and
control of abstract information itself through the computer
revolution. (The "zombie apocalypse" is also upon us; they
are walking the streets everywhere, staring into their "smart
phones". Who controls them?)
Equally mysterious as the journey from atoms to life is the
transition from "nothing to something", from the
"all-symmetric void" (the "Multiverse"), to the asymmetric
domain of atomic matter (absent antimatter) during the "Big
Bang". The transition apparently passes through several
energy levels regulated by "Higgs"-type "gauge" bosons and
their associated "intermediate vector boson" families (all
necessary for purposes of conservation). These transitions
15 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

begin with the creation (from high energy photons) of heavy
particle-antiparticle pairs of elementary leptons, followed by
the creation of electrically neutral leptoquarks (heavy leptons
subdivided into three quarks), and finally the asymmetric
weak force decay of electrically neutral leptoquarks into a
residue of familiar matter-only hyperons (heavy baryons) and
nucleons (protons and neutrons). Heavy higgs-like bosons
and their associated IVBs gauge and regulate all steps in the
transformation, ensuring the eventual possibility of
conservation (as via the creation of specific antiparticles).
The utility/necessity of "identity" charges for conservation
purposes (as carried in explicit form by neutrinos) becomes
evident when keeping track of all the possible particles and
antiparticles in these transformations. This is also where the
vital role of alternative charge carriers (leptons, mesons,
neutrinos) becomes evident, in that they allow charge
conservation despite the absence of anti-matter.
The "break-out" of our asymmetric universe from the
all-symmetric "Multiverse" is (apparently) possible only
because electromagnetic energy exists in two equivalent
forms, waves vs particle-antiparticle pairs (light vs virtual
particle-pairs); positive electromagnetic energy is exactly
balanced by negative gravitational energy; alternative charge
carriers exist to allow charge conservation despite the
absence of anti-matter; the subdivision of leptons into quarks
makes electrically neutral leptons ("leptoquarks") possible;
the weak force provides a slight but essential asymmetry in
the decay rate of electrically neutral leptoquarks vs
antileptoquarks (such that following the matter-antimatter
annihilations of the "Big Bang", sufficient electrically neutral
leptoquarks remain to produce (via their decay) the baryons
(hyperons, protons, and neutrons) comprising our current
universe. The significance of the Higgs boson is that this type
of "gauge" particle (apparently more than one exists) offers a
conserved pathway of escape from the all-symmetric
16 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

forces.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/forces.html

Multiverse into the manifest, asymmetric, 4-D realm of time
and gravity. The Higgs boson appears to be strictly analogous
to Eve's apple. If not the "God particle" itself, the Higgs is at
least the "creativity particle". (Abstract revised Nov., 2018.)
See: The "Tetrahedron Model" (diagram) "The Fractal
Organization of the Universe" (text)

Albert Einstein 1951 Letter to Maurice Solovine (From
Discover Special Issue Winter 2019 page 42):
"The Unified Field Theory has been put into retirement. It is
so difficult to employ mathematically that I have not been
able to verify it somehow, in spite of all my efforts. This state
of affairs will no doubt last many more years, mostly because
physicists have little understanding of logical-philosophical
arguments."

email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book

17 of 17

4/21/19, 11:21 AM

