abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

Symmetry Principles of the Unified Field Theory (a "Theory of
Everything") - Part I (revised May, 2014)
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
The Charges of Matter are Symmetry Debts of Light
Abstract:
The conceptual basis of the Unified Field Theory as presented in
these pages may be deduced from "Noether's Theorem":
The charges of matter are symmetry debts of light.
The "Big Bang" origin of the cosmos is the conversion of
pure, symmetric electromagnetic energy (light) into
asymmetric atomic "information" (our "matter only"
universe). "Noether's Theorem" states that in a
multicomponent field such as the electromagnetic field (or
the metric field of spacetime), symmetries are associated
with conservation laws and vice-versa. Hence the symmetry
of light (and spacetime) must be conserved. Noether's
Theorem provides the key to Einstein's dream of a "Unified
Field Theory" through the seminal concept that the symmetry
of light, no less than its energy, must be conserved.
(Questions such as "What existed before the "Big Bang"?"
(probably the Multiverse) and "Why is there something
rather than nothing?" (because of the possibility of life) are
questions for philosophy/religion, not science. In what
follows, I conceive of the "Big Bang" as a "breakout" from
the all-symmetric Multiverse into the asymmetric realm of
1 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

atomic matter, information, time, causality, gravity, entropy,
charge, etc.)
Our asymmetric "matter-only" Universe was created (in the
"Big Bang") from all-symmetric free electromagnetic energy
(light), via an unknown asymmetric weak-force interaction,
resulting in a loss of cosmic symmetry and a corresponding,
compensating gain in symmetry-conserving (chargeconserving) bound energy states ("atomic matter"). For
conservation reasons (energy/entropy/symmetry), matter is
furthermore embedded in a secondary entropic and causal
domain (historic spacetime), created by gravity from light's
primary entropic and a-causal domain (space). The negative
energy of gravity not only creates time from space, it also
balances the positive energy of the "Big Bang" such that no
net energy is required to produce our cosmos. Our
"matter-only" Universe is the original "light-only" universe
(still with us today as the universal spatial dimension with its
2.7 kelvin "cosmic background radiation"), plus a small
portion which (following primordial symmetry-breaking)
was "frozen" by symmetry conservation (charge
conservation) into various familiar material forms (present
today as atomic matter, gravity, and historic spacetime).
Today's (low-energy) "matter" atom is exactly one-half of an
original (high-energy) charge-balanced (neutral, symmetric)
"matter-antimatter" particle-pair, which somehow escaped
annihilation by its complementary member (see: primordial
symmetry-breaking by the weak force during the "Big
Bang"). Hence the charges of matter, originally intended to
conserve symmetry via matter-antimatter annihilations,
remain, due to the absence of antimatter, as unbalanced
symmetry debts of light. In matter, light's (broken)
symmetries are conserved by charge and spin; in spacetime,
light's metric symmetries are protected by the invariance of
"velocity c", inertial/entropic forces, Einstein's "Interval",
causality, "Lorentz Invariance" (phenomena associated with
2 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

the Special Theory of Relativity), and conserved (when
broken) by gravitational forces associated with "local" mass
("Gm" - phenomena associated with the General Theory of
Relativity).
All forms of energy originate (directly or indirectly) from
light; matter carries charges (including gravity) which are
the symmetry debts of the light which created it. Charges
produce forces which act to return the material system to its
original symmetric state (light), repaying matter's primordial
symmetry debts. Repayment is exampled by any spontaneous
interaction producing net free energy, including: exothermic
chemical reactions and matter-antimatter annihilation
reactions; radioactivity, particle and proton decay; the
nucleosynthetic pathway of stars, the gravitational
conversion of bound to free energy (as in supernovas and
quasars), and Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black holes.
Identifying the broken symmetries of light associated with
each of the 4 charges and forces of physics (see below) is the
first step toward a conceptual "Unified Field Theory".
In weak gravitational fields (as on planet Earth), gravity only
pays the entropy "interest" on the spatial symmetry debt of
"local" matter (which is carried as "location charge": Gm),
converting space to time, in effect producing an alternative
entropic drive and dimension/domain (time/history) in which
charge conservation (and causality) are serviced by an
indefinitely extended temporal duration and consequential
("karmic") significance. In stronger fields (as in our Sun),
gravity additionally pays down the "principal" of matter's
spatial symmetry debt, converting asymmetric "local" mass
to symmetric "non-local" light. This latter conversion
continues in supernovas and quasars, and finally goes to
completion via Hawking's "quantum radiance" of black
holes. The conversion of mass to light reduces the total
gravitational field of the cosmos, resulting in the apparent
"acceleration" of cosmic expansion, recently observed (see:
3 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

Science 7 Oct. 2011 Vol. 334 Page 30). (See: "A Description
of Gravity".)
The symmetry-conserving requirement of charge invariance,
through time, despite entropy, and despite relative, variable,
and contingent forces of motion/acceleration, is the key to
understanding the rationale for the local action of the "4
forces" ("global/local gauge forces"), including quantization
of charge and the "Lorentz Invariance" and magnetism of
Special Relativity. In the mathematical terms of Evariste
Galois' "Group Theory", our "Tetrahedron Model" is a
description of the symmetry group of light, including its
destruction by asymmetric weak force decays (resulting in
our asymmetric "matter-only" Cosmos), and the on-going
spontaneous restoration of cosmic symmetry in obedience to
Noether's Theorem of symmetry conservation (as in the
conversion of bound to free energy in stars). (See:
Neuenschwander, Dwight E. Emmy Noether's Wonderful
Theorem. 2011. The Johns Hopkins University Press.)
Biology is included in our physical unification scheme
through the notion of "information": information charts a
"lawful" (charge-conserved) pathway for matter's return to
light's symmetry, while simultaneously producing a way for
the universe to achieve localized consciousness, know itself
in part as well as in whole, and diversify its experience and
creativity through a multitude of evolutionary forms. Life is
the rationale for the existence of the universe. While atomic
nuclei promote symmetry conservation through high-energy,
exothermic nucleosynthetic pathways in stars, their
associated electron shells create life through low-energy,
neg-entropic chemical pathways on planets. Using energy
and heavy elements ultimately provided by gravity, stars, and
the galaxy, the "Information Pathway" of planetary biology is
the means whereby the universe comes to life, awakens to
itself, achieves consciousness, experiences and elaborates
itself, explores new modes of creativity (including
4 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

abstract/symbolic modes), and evolves new forms of beauty
and symmetry. Carbon's electron shell is the crucial link
between the abiotic and biotic information systems of the
Cosmos; the concepts of Information and the Multiverse are
crucial links between our scientific and religious world
views. "We come trailing clouds of glory..."
(See also: "The Higgs Boson and the Alternative Charge
Carriers".) (See also: "The Information Pathway".)
Addendum to Abstract:
Two outstanding (and connected) characteristics distinguish
our universe: 1) it is asymmetric, composed of matter only,
lacking its original, balancing complement of antimatter; 2)
it contains Life.
The connection between these two asymmetric states of
energy is Information. The atomic realm of matter left from
the "Big Bang" origin of our universe is a domain of material
information from which the biological realm (characterized
(so far as we know) only by molecular information chains of
RNA/DNA), arises by an unknown chemical concatenation,
crucially involving the carbon atom.
In essence, Life is a specialized state of information that can,
in "friendly" environments, reproduce and maintain itself,
and evolve new living forms. The dreaded "computer
apocalypse" (in which computers become capable of creating
and informing themselves) in fact has already happened
naturally eons ago in the form of the biologic genetic
material. Earth-life and humanity are the local consequence
of that original "information apocalypse", a natural
catastrophe foreseen by God (as recorded in Genesis in the
story of the "forbidden fruit"). We are witnessing a fractal
iteration of this story in humanities' control of evolution, and
control of abstract information itself through the computer
revolution. (The "zombie apocalypse" is also upon us; they
5 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

are walking the streets everywhere, staring into their "smart
phones". Who controls them?)
Equally mysterious as the journey from atoms to life is the
transition from "nothing to something", from the
"all-symmetric void" (the "Multiverse"), to the asymmetric
domain of atomic matter (absent antimatter) during the "Big
Bang". The transition apparently passes through several
energy levels regulated by "Higgs"-type "gauge" bosons and
their associated "intermediate vector boson" families (all
necessary for purposes of conservation). These transitions
begin with the creation (from high energy photons) of heavy
particle-antiparticle pairs of elementary leptons, followed by
the creation of electrically neutral leptoquarks (heavy leptons
subdivided into three quarks), and finally the asymmetric
weak force decay of electrically neutral leptoquarks into a
residue of familiar matter-only hyperons (heavy baryons) and
nucleons (protons and neutrons). Heavy higgs-like bosons
and their associated IVBs gauge and regulate all steps in the
transformation, ensuring the eventual possibility of
conservation (as via the creation of specific antiparticles).
The utility/necessity of "identity" charges for conservation
purposes (as carried in explicit form by neutrinos) becomes
evident when keeping track of all the possible particles and
antiparticles in these transformations. This is also where the
vital role of alternative charge carriers (leptons, mesons,
neutrinos) becomes evident, in that they allow charge
conservation despite the absence of anti-matter.
The "break-out" of our asymmetric universe from the
all-symmetric "Multiverse" is (apparently) possible only
because electromagnetic energy exists in two equivalent
forms, waves vs particle-antiparticle pairs (light vs virtual
particle-pairs); positive electromagnetic energy is exactly
balanced by negative gravitational energy; alternative charge
carriers exist to allow charge conservation despite the
6 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

abstract1.html

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/abstract1.html

absence of anti-matter; the subdivision of leptons into quarks
makes electrically neutral leptons ("leptoquarks") possible;
the weak force provides a slight but essential asymmetry in
the decay rate of electrically neutral leptoquarks vs
antileptoquarks (such that following the matter-antimatter
annihilations of the "Big Bang", sufficient electrically neutral
leptoquarks remain to produce (via their decay) the baryons
(hyperons, protons, and neutrons) comprising our current
universe. The significance of the Higgs boson is that this type
of "gauge" particle (apparently more than one exists) offers a
conserved pathway of escape from the all-symmetric
Multiverse into the manifest, asymmetric, 4-D realm of time
and gravity. The Higgs boson appears to be strictly analogous
to Eve's apple. If not the "God particle" itself, the Higgs is at
least the "creativity particle".
(Abstract revised Nov., 2018.)
See:
The "Tetrahedron Model" (diagram)
"The Fractal Organization of the Universe" (text)

7 of 7

11/20/18, 11:26 AM

