Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

Section 14: Causality
(revised Nov., 2010)
John A. Gowan
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
ABSTRACT
Causality as a major player in the evolving Tetrahedron Model is the
most recent of all the conservation principles to come into focus.
Causality has always been recognized as an important part of the
theory, but it was only in March of 2005 that I decided the principle
was of such major importance and carried such explanatory power
and connective significance that it should actually displace the
principle of "Information" as the central and primary descriptor of
matter in the Tetrahedron Model and associated diagram.
While "Information" is a good, necessary, and very general
characterization of the fundamental significance of matter, both for
the Tetrahedron Model and the Universe, it is not quite "active"
enough in its meaning to successfully complement and connect to the
other three conservation principles of the Tetrahedron Model.
"Information" is an asymmetric energy state, whereas Energy
Conservation, Entropy, and Symmetry are conservation principles.
Causality is also a conservation principle, and it seamlessly connects
with the other three in a profound and illuminating way, as we shall
hopefully see below. Meanwhile, although "Information" is to be
demoted to a secondary position in terms of activity or action among
the "Tetragrammaton" of conservation laws, it obviously remains of
first importance as regards the description of the significance of the
system in both its particulars and its entirety. Information, in the form
1 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

of charge, is strictly conserved; in its historical form, information is
subject to entropic enervation (age, decay, dispersion, dilution) but is
never entirely lost. It is in fact the potent combination of Causality
and Information that makes up matter's "causal matrix" within the
conservation domain of historic spacetime, the "Karma" and
"Akashic Record" of metaphysical systems of thought. It turns out
that neither Causality nor Information has any meaning without the
other (they are a mutually inclusive entangled pair - bridging the gap
between Relativity Theory and Quantum Mechanics), but the linkage
to the other conservation laws is clearer and stronger in the case of
Casualty - due to its temporal parameter. To an explanation of this
linkage I will now turn my efforts.
Afterthought and Cosmology (April 2019):
Quantum mechanics is necessary because Nature (including energy
itself) is quantized at the structural level of elementary particles and
charges. Charges are necessary (especially alternative identity
charges), if an asymmetric universe full of information and life is to
manifest (via the Higgs boson and its IVBs) - from the all-symmetric
Multiverse. Our Cosmos exists in an asymmetric form which
nevertheless can be conserved through time (via the conservation of
"symmetry debts" (= "charges")), returning eventually (via charge
cancellation/annihilation) to its symmetric energetic origin, light.
Relativity is necessary (as in "Einstein's Interval" and "Lorentz
Invariance") for the universe to exhibit an extended (and seamless)
dimensional/metric network (3 space, 1 time). Our dimensional
expressions of spatial/temporal entropy (produced by the intrinsic
motions of time, light, gravity), allow energy to take a massive
asymmetric form ("matter" only, no "antimatter") comprised of
atomic, historic information with relative motion rather than absolute
motion at "velocity c". Our spacetime achieves conservation
(including causality) for both free and bound forms of
electromagnetic energy (light/atoms), simultaneously. Time is
created from space via gravitational transformation. The historic
entropic domain of matter is therefore produced (and subtracted
from) the spatial entropic domain of light by gravitational conversion.
2 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

Black holes function as the final solution to the difficult problem of
symmetry conservation for "baryon number charge" (via the creation
of matter-antimatter particle pairs and "Hawking Radiation").
The (recently observed) acceleration of the expansion of spacetime is
due to the cumulative effect of universal symmetry conservation: the
conversion of matter to light in many astrophysical processes
(because free light produces no gravitational field). "Dark Matter"
likely consists of heavy leptoquark antineutrinos, produced during the
"Big Bang", which balance the "baryon number charge" of our
"matter only" Cosmos. The positive electromagnetic energy content
of our cosmos is exactly balanced by its negative gravitational
energy; charges are balanced by anticharges, originally by antimatter,
and today via alternative charge carriers. Our cosmos required no net
energy for its creation; charges exist as a strict conservation measure
(the "police" of the cosmos), required for its birth and subsequent
regulation/evolution, as it begins with nothing (neither energy nor
charge) in excess. The charges of matter (including gravity) are
symmetry debts of light ("Noether's Theorem").
The Higgs boson and its associated "IVBs" (Intermediate Vector
Bosons) lead the escape into asymmetric freedom from the
smothering embrace of the all-symmetric Multiverse. The Higgs
Boson identifies the exact energy at which a "lawful" (chargeconserving) escape is possible, complete with IVBs (particles which
perform quark and lepton identity transformations), electrically
neutral leptoquarks, and alternative identity-charge carrying
antileptoquark neutrinos (the probable source of "dark matter"). The
Higgs is the scientific analog of Eve's apple, opening the door to a
free-will (contingent), but temporal and karmic, universe. The Higgs
must be a massive particle to exactly reproduce this precise "escape
energy", circumventing the enervating effects of entropy in a spatially
expanding and temporally ageing universe.
Quark subunits are necessary because only through appropriate
arrangements of partially charged quarks can electrically neutral
leptoquarks and baryons (neutrons) be created, and only through
these electrically neutral particles can our cosmos be produced via the
operation of the asymmetric (and slow) weak force. Quarks are
3 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

subdivisions of primordial, very heavy leptons (leptoquarks). Three
energetic families of quarks are evidently required before enough
neutral leptoquarks and baryons are created, to permit the formation
of our "matter-only" asymmetric universe.
Interactions Among the 4 Conservation Principles of the
Tetrahedron Model
1) Energy Conservation regulatory interactions - all other principles
serve Energy Conservation ("first among equals"):
a) Entropy: the creation of the conservation domains of space,
history, and spacetime through the intrinsic, dimensional motions of
light, time, and gravity, allowing the simultaneous use,
transformation, and conservation of energy (as regulated by "velocity
c" and the laws of Thermodynamics).
b) Causality: time and raw energy conservation, including the
conversion of free to bound energy (as in mass, momentum, or
kinetic energy), and the conversion of space to time by gravity,
including the temporal sequence of cause and effect (as regulated by
Special Relativity).
c) Symmetry Conservation: charge conservation (including "spin"),
and metric symmetry conservation via the inertial and gravitational
forces of the metric (as regulated by Noether's Theorem).
2) Entropy (in its primordial forms: intrinsic motions c, T, G) creates
dimensionality: Entropy serves Energy Conservation by the creation
of dimensional arenas in which energy can be simultaneously used,
transformed, and conserved. The dimensions of spacetime are
entropy domains.
a) Space for free energy (created by the intrinsic motion of light as
gauged by "velocity c", expanding and cooling space).
b) History for bound energy's causal information matrix (created by
the intrinsic motion of time, as gauged by "velocity T", the metric
equivalent of c, aging and decaying matter and expanding and
diluting history, the temporal analog of space).
c) Spacetime for the mixture of light and matter (created by the
intrinsic motion of gravitation, as gauged by "velocity G",
4 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

decelerating the spatial expansion of the Cosmos as it increases the
temporal/historic component of spacetime. Gravity is the force which
converts space and the drive of spatial entropy (the intrinsic motion
of light), to time and the drive of historical entropy (the intrinsic
motion of time), and vice versa (the latter in the conversion of bound
to free energy in stars, etc.).
3) Symmetry Conservation serves Energy Conservation in obedience
to Noether's Theorem, primarily through:
a) Inertial forces of the spatial metric, including the intrinsic motion
of light, as gauged by "velocity c": maintaining spatial metric
symmetry requires the suppression of time by velocity c, while
simultaneously allowing the operation of spatial entropy (the
expansion and cooling of space; "velocity c" gauges both the entropy
drive and the "non-local" symmetric energy state of free energy).
b) Suppression of the virtual particle "sea": Symmetry Conservation
suppresses the devolution of light to matter by the continual
annihilation of matter-antimatter virtual particle pairs, primarily via
their opposite electric charges.
c) Charge Conservation: Symmetry Conservation allows "symmetrybreaking" by the weak force during the "Big Bang" (involving the
breaking of the symmetry of virtual particle-antiparticle pairs). The
conversion of light to matter is permitted only because charge
conservation guarantees the eventual return of bound to free energy
(as via matter-antimatter annihilations, particle and proton decay, and
the gravitational conversion of matter to light in stars, quasars, and
the "quantum radiance" of black holes). The charges of matter are the
symmetry debts of light.
The role of charge conservation and information is to provide a
conserved (guaranteed) pathway for asymmetric matter back to the
symmetric energy state of light. The role of the gravitational charge
("location") in this process is the creation of a new, 4th dimension
(time) in which charge conservation has meaning (the indefinite
storage of charge through time until it is repaid - usually by matterantimatter annihilations). The energy deficit of gravitation represents
the "interest" on the temporal symmetry debt of matter, which is paid
5 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

via the gravitational deceleration of the spatial expansion of the
Cosmos. Space and the spatial entropy drive of light is gravitationally
converted to, and funds, history and the temporal entropy drive of
matter.
4) Causality is the temporal, sequential ordering of energy,
information, interaction, and the spacetime metric (law of cause and
effect). Causality requires:
a) Special Relativity, including "Lorentz Invariance", the invariant
"Interval", and the invariance of "velocity c", to regulate the
interactions of the relative motions of matter with the absolute motion
of light. Causality is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the
conversion of free energy to bound energy.
b) The one-way intrinsic, entropic motion of time as an ordering
principle, including a gravitational field to create and sustain matter's
time dimension (time is the active principle of gravity's "location"
charge, and gravity is the spatial consequence of time's intrinsic
motion); causality is one among several rationales for gravitation.
c) Charge Conservation to create and preserve information in the
historic domain of spacetime (Noether's Theorem). Causality and
Information are a linked pair, each implying and requiring the other.
Causality serves Energy Conservation by insuring that there is always
a source for energy (causes must precede effects), an entropy drive
for bound energy (time); a spacetime center for the gravitational field;
and that massive objects may move and interact in space (at less than
velocity c) without violating energy conservation (momentum and
kinetic energy). Finally, causality orders information just as it orders
metric structure and energy flow, providing an evolutionary and
developmental route as well as a gravitational pathway for the return
of matter to light (for example, biology and the nucleosynthetic
pathway).
1) The Conservation of Energy and Causality
(ordering energy and interaction)
The temporal ordering of cause and effect is the major issue here.
Energy conservation demands that causes precede effects - otherwise
6 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

we have energy inputs without energy sources. This obvious and
simple rule, which should require no explanation, has nevertheless
become muddied by apparent (and much advertised) "breaches of
causality" in quantum phenomena. I will only say that these
"violations" are: 1) only apparent or "virtual"; 2) never observed in
massive macroscopic systems; 3) due to the well-known "non-local",
a-temporal, and a-causal nature of light, including Debroglie's
"matter waves".
We live in a joint dimensional conservation domain in which 2dimensional free electromagnetic energy (light) is mixed and
interacts with 4-dimensional bound electromagnetic energy (matter).
In order for light and matter to interact and yet conserve energy, some
special rules must be obeyed because they are of different
dimensionality and hence of different inertial status, obeying different
inertial rules. A special problem applies to causality in their
interactions because light has "intrinsic motion c", an absolute and
invariant spatial motion, and has no temporal motion at all (as
Einstein discovered, light's "clock" is stopped), while matter's inertial
status is just the reverse - matter's time dimension has "intrinsic
motion T", while matter has no (net) intrinsic spatial motion at all.
Finally, light's intrinsic spatial motion is the metric equivalent of the
intrinsic motion of matter's time dimension. Matter moves in time as
fast as light moves in space - indeed, "time flies" (See: "The Time
Train"). The metric equivalency between "velocity c" and "velocity
T" is the most basic and commonplace example (nevertheless,
generally unrecognized) of the accommodation between free and
bound energy necessitated by energy conservation due to their
different inertial and dimensional status.
But Einstein realized that more was necessary to fully accommodate
the dimensional interactions of these two very different energy forms
with respect to causality and hence energy conservation. To this end
the theory of Special Relativity and its central feature, the invariant
"Interval", is required to rescue causality from the shifting
perspectives of the relative motion of matter vs the absolute motion
of light. The dimensions themselves must give and take ("Lorentz
7 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

Invariance"), meter sticks become shorter while seconds become
longer, precisely in order to maintain causality and the invariance of
velocity c and the spacetime "Interval" in massive objects/systems in
relative motion. (See: "The Paradox of the Traveling Twins".)
The major connection then, between energy conservation and
causality, is the ordering of cause and effect, requiring Einstein's
theory of Special Relativity to sort out the dimensional interactions of
light and matter in absolute vs relative motion. Einstein's most
famous formula, E = mcc, arises from an analysis of the difference
between the absolute motion of light and the relative motion of
matter (kinetic energy of matter = 1/2 mvv). Matter's causal relations
must be satisfied if free energy is to be converted to bound energy.
2a) Causality and Entropy
(ordering the metric)
The intrinsic motion of time is both the entropy drive of bound
energy and its causal ordering parameter. Therefore the three entropy
gauges, c, T, and G, all have two linked functions: symmetry
conservation and entropy in the cases of c and G, entropy and
causality in the case of T. Light is linked by space; matter is linked by
time; all are linked by gravity (since gravity creates time from space).
Casualty is why the intrinsic motion of time must be linear, one-way,
and the metric equivalent of velocity c. All forms of energy require
an entropy drive or gauge; for free energy the entropy drive is the
intrinsic motion of light, gauged as "velocity c"; for bound energy the
entropy drive is the intrinsic motion of time, gauged as "velocity T".
Time is created by the gravitational annihilation of space, revealing a
temporal residue which is the metric equivalent of the annihilated
space. Time and gravitation induce each other endlessly: gravity is
the spatial consequence of time's intrinsic motion.
Causality, temporal entropy, and the conservation of symmetry are all
rationales for gravitation. The gravitational "location" charge, for
which time is the active principle, satisfies all three needs
simultaneously. (See: "Entropy, Gravitation, and Thermodynamics").
8 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

Because the gravitational production of time by the annihilation of
space decelerates the spatial expansion of the Cosmos, and because
this expansion is driven by the intrinsic motion of light, we see it is
ultimately the entropy drive of free energy which funds the entropy
drive of bound energy. The expansion of matter's historic domain (T)
takes place at the expense of light's spatial domain (S):
-Gm(S) = (T)m
-Gm(S) - (T)m = 0
(See: "A Description of Gravitation".)
2b) Information and Entropy
The connection between Information and Entropy is through time and
historical causality. The time component is necessary to link each
piece of information (each bit) into the causal matrix of matter. Time
is the entropy drive of matter and information, and creates the causal
linkage of matter's information matrix or historic causal domain.
Each quantum bit of information is associated with a quantum bit or
link of time (like a chain link), which integrates the information bit
into the general causal matrix or information field of matter. Entropy
is always associated with energy, in this case bound energy, so a
quantum unit of time or temporal entropy can be associated with a
quantum unit of energy as well as of information. The gravitational
conversion of space and the drive of spatial entropy into history and
the drive of temporal entropy reaches a natural limit in the "event
horizon" of a black hole where g = c. The surface area of a black
hole's event horizon is proportional to its entropy, in terms of time or
information (the Bekenstein-Hawking theorem).
A famous connection between Entropy and Information is between
Boltzmann's formulation of statistical thermodynamic entropy
(1870s), and Shannon's parallel formulation of information entropy
(1949). The two are computed by the same mathematical formula and
when calculated for the same degrees of freedom (the same variables)
are equal. The connection between elemental time and information in
the Tetrahedron Model applies equally to both types of entropy,
9 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

satisfying the condition that Shannon's (or Boltzmann's) entropy is
not associated with meaning or significance, which is context
dependent. The meaning or significance of information, with which
we are of course very much concerned, is a characteristic of higher
levels of the natural hierarchy, including information in the sense of
complex organizational states, such as the functioning human body or
society. See: Scientific American Aug. 2003 p. 58-65 "Information in
the Holographic Universe" by Jacob D. Bekenstein.
2c The Destruction of Information
Is information destroyed in a black hole? This question is debated in
Leonard Susskind's recent book: "The Black Hole War" (Little,
Brown, and Co., 2008). From the overview of the "Tetrahedron
Model" and Noether's principle of the conservation of symmetry, it
appears that information should be destroyed in a black hole. There
are several reasons to think so (contrary to the conclusions of
Susskind's book). First, on the premise that the universe begins as
light, devolves to matter, and finally evolves and resolves to light
again, conserving the original perfect symmetry of free
electromagnetic energy, information must be destroyed in any
physical process which returns matter (and the information which
matter contains) to light. Such final symmetry-restoring (conserving)
reactions and processes include: 1) (actual) matter-antimatter
annihilations due to the electromagnetic force; 2) (hypothetical)
proton decay due to the strong and weak nuclear forces; 3)
(theoretical) "evaporation" of black holes due to "Hawking radiation"
(gravitational force); 4) (possible) "Big Crunch" gravitational
collapse of the cosmos.
All four processes are driven by symmetry conservation acting
through the charges of the four forces of physics. The charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light (Noether's Theorem). Light, as
a perfectly symmetrical form of energy, does not contain any charge,
any time dimension, any gravitational field, nor any information.
Information is necessarily an asymmetric form or configuration of
energy, and hence must be destroyed with charge when charges are
10 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

annihilated and material energy forms are returned to their original
symmetric state, light (in obedience to Noether's Theorem). If the
universe begins with light (which contains no information) and
returns to light, then information must be destroyed in the process of
the final return. This is the long or generalized view of information
destruction during the process of symmetry conservation as
visualized in the "Tetrahedron Model".
A somewhat more detailed view of these same (above) processes
takes note of the fact that even though a particle or a system is
swallowed by a black hole, the prior history of that particle or system
remains extant (except in the case of the "Big Crunch"). So both
positions in the "black hole information war" may be correct - black
holes do indeed destroy particular information systems, but those
systems and the information they contain nevertheless survive in a
real historical sense - if not as actual records (external to the hole),
then as light visible to distant observers, and/or as influences and
"karmic consequences" which propagate endlessly in causal chains
and dendritic repercussions throughout spacetime.
This latter view is very similar to the "holographic boundary" vision
of information conservation as put forward in Susskind's book. For
example, light always travels in the "universal present moment",
which forms the spacetime boundary of our universe - the outermost
spatial line of the "Spacetime Map of the Universe". The boundary
2-D holographic surface which contains all the information necessary
to reconstruct the "bulk" 3-D universe (including its historical
development) is apparently stored in the 2-D light waves which
propagate forever throughout the "universal present moment" of the
cosmos (see: "A Spacetime Map of the Universe". Hence there is no
need to "rescue" Quantum Mechanics from a crisis caused by the
destruction of information in black holes - the information lives on
anyway in causal history and in the propagating light waves of the
"universal present moment" of spacetime.
Reconstituting the original information from such historical records
or from propagating causal effects or light rays is certainly no less
11 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

improbable or challenging than decoding the hidden messages in
Hawking radiation, as Susskind suggests is possible. Furthermore, if
the holographic principle is true to the model, then only a fragment of
the original hologram is necessary to reconstitute an image of the
whole, and such fragments should be abundantly present in the
historical record. For example, we have been able to reconstruct the
age of the dinosaurs from fossils, the evolutionary history of the
cosmos from starlight, and the ontogeny of humanity from DNA.
3) Causality and the Conservation of Symmetry
(ordering information)
Historic spacetime is the necessary conservation domain for
information, charge, and matter's causal matrix.
There is a metric component and a particle component to symmetrybreaking. The particle component produces charge and information,
the metric component produces time and gravitation. The metric
component of the symmetry pole (in the "Tetrahedron Model") yields
gravitation via the "location" charge, whose active principle is time.
The particle component of the symmetry pole yields charge and
fermions, or information, via the weak force IVBs.
Together, time, gravitation, and information create matter's causal
matrix, the long-range aspect of historic spacetime, the repository of
"karma" or consequences, the causal influence of actions. The trigger
for gravitation is the conversion from implicit to explicit time,
creating gravity and the asymmetric spacetime metric. This
transformation can only occur if a massive, immobile particle (mass)
is present to provide a center for the time or gravitational charge.
Gravity, time, mass, charge, and information therefore always go
together, and the causal relation applies to information as well as to
action. (See: "The Conversion of Space to Time.")
Charge conservation is the symmetry principle which allows weak
force "symmetry-breaking" during the "Big Bang", because it
guarantees the return of bound to free energy via charge annihilation
in a future provided by the time dimension. The charges of matter are
12 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

the symmetry debts of light: "Noether's Theorem". Beyond the
creation of the time dimension itself, the creation of information by
charge conservation and the fermions of matter is the next most
obvious connection between Causality (in the sense of "karmic
information") and Symmetry Conservation. One must have
information at some level to have an effect linked to a cause.
Causality requires at a minimum time and gravitation, bound energy,
and information.
History is the temporal analog of space, produced by the intrinsic
motion of time, just as space is produced by the intrinsic motion of
light. Gravitation and electromagnetism are the long-range forces
which bind together, order, and organize the cosmos at large, the
orbits of the planets, the structure of the galaxies, the scale of the
universe. But information itself also requires a causal or temporal
ordering component, no less than raw energy, and for the same
reason, energy conservation. In the case of information, the route is
through the conservation of symmetry. The essential purpose of
information is to provide a pathway back to symmetry and light for
bound energy and matter in the absence of antimatter: the charges of
matter are the symmetry debts of light and their purpose is to pay
these debts by returning bound to free energy. Gravitation is one of
these charges ("location") as we have seen, converting bound to free
energy in stars, etc. Information must be time-ordered no less than
energy if it is to fulfill its role of energy and symmetry conservation:
causes must precede effects. The non-commutative rule of matrix
multiplication in quantum mechanics is one basic example of the
essential importance of order and sequence in both energy and
information. The nucleosynthetic pathway in stars is another
example. (See: "The Information Pathway".)
We have multiple obvious examples of the importance of the
sequential ordering of information: the letters of a word, the words of
a sentence, the grammar and syntax of a language. Language properly
ordered produces poetry and literature; mathematics properly ordered
produces equations and rational or at least quantitative understanding;
notes properly ordered produce music; DNA properly ordered
13 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

produces butterflies, birds, and humans; ideas properly ordered
produces science and technology, etc. The sequential development of
an individual human from fertilized egg through to adulthood is a
prime example of why it is important to order information in time, no
less than ordering simple energy or action. The evolutionary process
itself is a further example of the sequential ordering of information
through time. (See: "The Fractal Organization of Nature".)
Applying this example to the evolution of the universe, the problem
posed by the creation of matter is this: can matter find its way back to
its original symmetric energy state (light) in the absence of
antimatter? The answer is yes, but it requires the extra dimension of
time to work the problem through with the information provided by
the charges of matter - which is only half the information contained
in the original particle-antiparticle pairs. The problem can be solved
either gravitationally and "socially" by the conversion of mass to free
energy in stars, quasars, and the quantum radiance of black holes, or
"individually" by the nuclear forces through particle and proton
decay.
"Karma" - the notion of causality extended to include a historic chain
of events that returns to affect the initiator, is an ancient metaphysical
recognition of cause and effect in human affairs. Its basis in fact is
that the past remains as an active influence in the effects we
experience in the present. There could be no present at all without the
active support of the past - the "Universal Present Moment" depends
for its reality upon the continuing reality of "Universal Historic
Spacetime", the conservation domain of Information and matter's
causal matrix.
From our material point of view, once matter enters the Cosmos, time
and the causality relations time imposes become the dominating
features of experience. This is why time, mass, and charge are the
central organizing features of the Tetrahedron Model (in terms of
bound energy) and comprise the three "internal" lines of the diagram.
Time controls energy conservation through the ordering of cause and
effect, the relative motion of massive objects and the invariant
14 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

"Interval", including the extraordinary dimensional flexibility
(covariance) of Special Relativity. The intrinsic and one-way motion
of time produces the entropy drive of bound energy. Finally, time is
the active principle of gravitation's "location" charge, leading on the
one hand to the inertial and gravitational ordering of spacetime and
the galaxies, and the conversion of mass to light in stars
(restoring/conserving light's non-local distributional symmetry); and
on the other hand ordering information in meaningful sequences that
conserve and restore symmetry through nucleosynthesis and
evolution, producing beauty in nature, and through humanity, science,
art, and "enlightenment".
Although elsewhere we have noted (with Chardin) that information
and consciousness are the significant evolutionary vectors of the
Cosmos (life is how the Universe becomes self-aware and knows
itself), from the narrow perspective of pure physics the evolution of
information is seen as an auxiliary pathway, a sideshow, a tangent to
the main work of the Universe, which is simply to return matter to its
original symmetric state of light. Biology is an incredible elaboration
of this neg-entropic information pathway. The principle drive is
simply the abiotic and eternal search of matter for antimatter, realized
through the long-range electrical and gravitational forces of matter.
The evolution of information proceeds along the fractal pathway, and
the production of beauty and enlightenment is the equivalent of
symmetry conservation in this neg-entropic medium. Humanity has
even learned to directly convert bound to free energy, reproducing the
solar fusion process, a most curious evolutionary convergence
between the abiotic and biotic neg-entropic information pathways
leading toward symmetry restoration in the universe. Hence if we
manage to destroy ourselves in a nuclear holocaust, we can always
blame the immutable forces of symmetry conservation, rather than
our own truculent stupidity.
In a less technically developed age, and on a more positive and
humanistic note, Socrates had this to say concerning the ordering of
information and its relationship to symmetry conservation and beauty
(in Plato's Symposium):
15 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

Causality

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect14.html

"This is the life which man should lead above all others in
the contemplation of beauty absolute ..... Dwelling in that
realm alone, he will bring forth not images of beauty, but
Beauty itself, and so would become immortal and be the
friend of God."
Link
Related Papers:
Causality vs Information
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
References
Books by Prof. J. C. Gowan, Sr. "Trance, Art, Creativity" and
"Operations of Increasing Order"

16 of 16

4/16/19, 12:15 PM

