A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

THE FRACTAL ORGANIZATION OF NATURE
JOHN A. GOWAN
(revised Jan., 2011)
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
Part 4. The Metaphysical Realm - Intuitive Section (4 Living
Creatures x the Holy Trinity)
Preliminary Discussion: Evolution and Social Context of Religion
(See: The Fractal Organization of Nature (Table))
For an organism that is divided into two sexes, nothing could be more
natural than the concept of duality in Nature. We see many other
natural forms of duality: the cycles of day and night, summer and
winter, birth and death. The daily, seasonal, and lunar cycles have all
been widely interpreted as analogs of the human cycle of life and
death. For the intuitive, abstracting mind, it is but a small leap of faith
to evolve in addition the duality of body-spirit, and all hominids we
would care to classify as truly human have done so. What, after all, is
the physical difference between the antelope which was alive and
running a moment ago, and the one which now lies dead at our feet,
impaled on a spear? Only an indefinable essence called life, a fleeting
energy or spirit which animates the body and which can evidently be
separated from it by violence in an event called "death".
The human foreknowledge of death, confronting the instinct for
survival and the intense sense of personal identity developed by the
1 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

self-reflecting mind, provided powerful psychological motives to
develop (from the observations above or their analogs) the duality of
body-spirit, the afterlife, and the survival of individual identity (in the
form of a "soul"). From this basis, the intuitive notion of the
"spiritual" life of humanity (and the animals) was primitively
evolved. This vision was enlarged to include the awesome forces of
inanimate nature: storms, volcanoes, mountains, sea and Earth gods,
and especially the overwhelming spectacle of the sky - the Sun,
Moon, planets, and starry heavens. The spirits associated with these
super-animate forces were presumed to control successively grander
aspects of nature. We can indeed wonder what form human
spirituality would have taken if our planet, like Venus, were
permanently enshrouded in clouds, denying us a view of the "celestial
realms".
(Note to readers: for a scholarly treatment of the intuitive section of
the Metaphysical Realm, with an investigation of transpersonal
psychology and the nature of reality (including a 40 page
bibliography of pertinent literature), see the memorial webpage of
Prof. J. C. Gowan (Sr.) and his book "Trance, Art, Creativity".)
Contents:
General Discussion
Traditional Supernatural
Level 13: Soul
Level 14: Angel
Level 15: Archangel
level 16: Divine Being
The question of how morality and other aspects of human social
behavior became associated with the spiritual realm is a separate
issue, but in a world full of calamities, both natural and man-made, it
is easy to see how troubles could be associated with "evil tempered"
humans and animals (predators, poisonous snakes) and the spirits
they presumably contained, and also with inanimate "trouble makers"
such as storms and volcanoes. "Evil spirits" could be opposed by
2 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

"good" spirits, whose favor could be won by "good" behavior, gifts,
or sacrifices. Through the evolution of such notions religion became
the royal road to the social control of human behavior. The other
contenders for this role, the chief, the secular lawmaking body
("parliament"), and the warrior group or military, would usually make
common cause with the priesthood, and when all four united, that is,
when the king was also the head of the church (or thought to be an
actual god, or relative of the gods) as well as the commander of the
army and the head of parliament, the social grip of this arrangement
was generally unshakable. Society is at its most stable (and
immobile) in this 4-square configuration.
Dissension within or between any of these four power centers risked
loss of control and social instability, and when the rational mind
began to question religious dogma the very foundations of the state
were seen to be at risk. The influence of the rise of the rational mind
has not been, could not be, restricted to religious authority alone.
Because of the intimate connection between religion and government,
the intrusion of the rational mind weakened the link between them
and changed government forever. It is the weakening or actual loss of
this powerful link to government that religion resists so mightily, for
with the loss of this link its authority, security, and revenue is vastly
reduced.
Government has evolved from the personal leadership of the Chief or
Shaman, to the leadership of ruling and privileged families preserved
through a genetic royal line and aristocratic class, to the control of
society through elected officials (the "people's" government), and
finally to international rule through the United Nations (an evolution
still in progress). The rational mind and the rise of science has greatly
influenced this progression, especially the shift from royal family to
socially elected government, which may leave the church "out of the
loop".
To achieve an ideal situation in the modern scientific world probably
will require that religion find a new spiritual and ethical base which
both the people and the government can endorse.
3 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

This possibility is actually being manifested today in the
environmental movement, which all parties can embrace - even the
military. Governments as well as the people have become very
concerned about the environment: global warming, ozone depletion,
pollution control, population control, endangered species and
ecosystems, acid rain, clean water and air, erosion, deforestation,
overfishing, resource depletion, ocean pollution, and a host of related
environmental issues. The natural and physical sciences have already
engaged the problem and "green" industries of many kinds are
developing. Military technologies such as the GPS and "Earth Watch"
satellites, Navy ships and ocean listening systems are being put to use
for environmental monitoring. The Peace Corps, the Army
Engineering Corps, and CCC-type paramilitary organizations in this
and other countries are being used to protect endangered species and
ecosystems, monitor pollution, and to otherwise protect, police, and
restore the environment.
If religion will go back to its roots, embrace the "Spirit of the Earth",
the animals and plants, life itself, and give up its exclusive focus on
man, an environmental morality and ethics can arise which is both
spiritual and scientific, which can save the Earth and humanity with
it. Religion will have to face up to the painful issue of population
control; the welfare of the Earth will have to be placed before the
welfare of humankind - rather, they will have to be seen as
indistinguishable. Religion can regain its link with government by
leading the people in a new ethics, morality, and social behavior
dedicated to developing an ecologically sensitive mutualism between
humans and the natural world. If the traditional religions cannot do
this, then the people will create a new one, as in fact they are busily
doing today (new-age "green" religions). Chief Seattle would seem to
be a natural role model, the ready-made legendary, semi-mythical
leader for this new coalition and age.
(An attempt to map (some) of the most general features of the
Metaphysical Realm in both its intuitive and rational modes in a
single 4x4 table is presented in the General Systems Combined
Metaphysical Table.)
4 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

Traditional Supernatural Religious Hierarchy
The metaphysical realm appears to have originated as the intuitive
mind's attempt to discover the underlying ground of law which orders
the natural world of physical phenomena. In recent times the rational
mind, dissatisfied with the results of this intuitive effort, has through
the agency of "science", taken over this quest. The intuitive mind,
however, unwilling to deny the validity of thousands of years of its
own accumulated wisdom, has reformulated its results in more purely
spiritual terms. "My Kingdom is not of this World" says the intuitive
mind, but it is real enough and the physical world is but a shadow,
metaphor, projection, or product of ultimate spiritual reality. The
rational mind has become inclined to believe just the reverse.
Having begun with a common goal (to gain power and control over
the environment (including other humans)), a control gained either
through the discovery of the physical laws of the Universe or by
currying the favor of the gods, rational and intuitive thought in
modern times have reached a compromise on their contributions to
this quest: the rational mind is best for describing the physical
Universe; the intuitive mind is best for giving life and the cosmos
meaning and significance. As soon as science tries to give meaning to
its findings, it collapses into philosophy, which is just the intuitive
mind in a white lab coat; as soon as the intuitive mind tries to
describe natural phenomena, it collapses into dogma and doctrine,
which is just the rational mind in religious gowns. We need the
"Copenhagen Solution" of quantum physics, which admits the
simultaneous validity of two different descriptions of reality. Toward
this end I offer both an intuitive and rational hierarchy of ordering
principles in the Universe. One is a spiritual and the other a physical
description, but they concern the same Universe. Both descriptions
are equally metaphysical in that both are but the fabrications of our
minds. The parallel construction of these realms is natural and
spontaneous. This in itself is testimony to their common goal and
ground. I find them mutually reinforcing, rather than destructive, with
each enhancing the significance of the other.

5 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

Constructing the Table
The metaphysical realm encompasses an absolutely enormous range
of human thought and experience, from individual psychic
experiences to worldwide religions of ancient origin. In my attempt
to organize such an immense data base I have had to adhere strictly to
the goals of this project, and they are admittedly narrow: 1) can we
demonstrate the operation of a 4x3 general system within human
metaphysical thought? 2) Can a general hierarchical structure, similar
in form to the 3 physical realms, be constructed in a natural way
without doing violence to the data base? I believe the answer is yes to
both questions and I will consider the problem of the hierarchy first.
Within the Judao-Christian-Islamic religions there exists for the most
part (and we are interested here only in general tendencies, as being
the most reliable) a simple 4-level hierarchy of spiritual beings, with
the human soul at the bottom and the Supreme Being at the top.
Between these extremes lie two intermediate levels, angels, of which
there are many, and archangels, of which there are few. We discern in
this hierarchy a pyramid of numbers, with humankind in its billions at
the bottom, a heavenly host of angles above humanity, a few
archangels (7) above that, and the single Supreme Being at the apex.
This 4-part spiritual hierarchy is easily and naturally related to that of
the material astrophysical realm: man, at the bottom of the spiritual
realm, inhabits Earth, also at the bottom of the astrophysical realm.
God, at the top of the spiritual realm, inhabits the entire Universe (or
Multiverse), the top of the astrophysical realm. This leaves the solar
system for the angelic order and the galaxy for the archangels, an
intuitively reasonable fit, and accessible to the naked-eye
observations of the ancients.
This correspondence is not coincidence: mankind has always equated
celestial bodies with gods; the heavens are the traditional abode of
mankind's deities. Hence we have a simple and meaningful basis for
constructing a metaphysical hierarchy of spiritual beings that is by its
own tradition correlated to the astrophysical hierarchy of celestial
bodies. I accept this internal correlation between the intuitive
6 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

metaphysical system and the rational astrophysical system as a
sufficient justification for the parallel construction of their
hierarchies. Accordingly, all metaphysical entities which by tradition
or fact inhabit the Earth, including its interior regions (Hades), are of
the 1st order: humans, their souls, demons, giants, earth spirits, nature
spirits, ghosts, etc. All spiritual entities associated with the
extraterrestrial solar system (Sun, Moon, planetary gods, and angels),
are of the second order; all entities associated with the fixed stars and
constellations of the galaxy are of the third order (signs of the zodiac,
archangels); God(s) associated with the Universe in its entirety are of
the 4th and highest order.
The structure of the hierarchy being established, the next task is to fill
in the positions of duality and 4x3 group function for each level with
appropriate examples. The examples I have chosen come from a data
base which I have purposely narrowed to include only the major
metaphysical traditions: the Judao-Christian-Islamic faiths;
Hinduism, Buddhism, and Taoism; the Greco-Roman and Teutonic
mythologies, the astrological tradition, and the I-Ching of Confucius
and ancient China. I do not doubt that examples can be found from
many other sources, but I prefer to err conservatively by choosing
familiar examples from established, ancient, widely held, and thus
"successful" belief systems.
Level 13: Soul
Level 13 is that of the Earth and all things living on (or in the case of
Hades and the "Underworld"), in it. While my focus here is on
mankind and the human soul, this is the level of all Earth-dwelling
deities, whether they be human heroes or saints, nature spirits, giants,
demons, or deities of wind, water, mountains, etc. One of the
difficulties in assigning deities to this level is that some heroes and
prophets begin life on Earth but are elevated at death to higher levels,
while others seem to have a dual residence (the Olympic gods), and
still others (Lucifer and his angelic host) have moved downward to
Earth from higher levels. Such incongruities only serve to illustrate
the important notion that movement within the hierarchy is possible;
7 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

indeed upward evolutionary motion within the hierarchy is the
promise and goal of almost every religion and spiritual practice. All
levels of the hierarchy communicate with each other through the
spiritual medium (the Holy Ghost; messenger angels; prophets;
visions & revelations). The hierarchy itself is a unity of motion,
evolution, "karma", and communication. (Light, gravitation,
neutrinos, and historic spacetime serve similar communicative and
causal linking functions in physical spacetime.)
On this 1st level the human soul is born and developed. The general
scheme is that awareness of the soul begins with the development of
a "conscience", (good me, bad me), goes through extensive
development during mature life (the labors of Hercules), and either
matriculates at death to the angelic level (enlightenment) or is
recycled (reincarnated) through level 13 (possibly with a Karmic load
of misdeeds) for another try at salvation.
The body-soul is the natural dyad of level 13, the soul being the
necessary link with all higher spiritual levels. Without the soul, the
remainder of the intuitive hierarchy is meaningless to human life as
no opportunity for communication with or growth into the upper
levels of spiritual life would be possible. The same principle is seen
in physics: the electron shells of atoms can interact with light only
because both are electrical in character. This pairing is essentially a
manifest-unmanifest dyad, a characteristic which reappears in one
form or another at all higher dyad levels. Again, in physics we find a
similarity between the manifest-unmanifest body-soul pair of the
metaphysical realm, the lepton-neutrino pairs of the microphysical
realm, the particle-wave duality of light, the gravitational field of
matter, and the electric-magnetic duality. Psychologically, the good
me/bad me pairing may represent the dawn of soul-awareness
("conscience") within the individual. It is a type of constructivedestructive pairing which is again related to the manifest-unmanifest
motif.
For the group position of level 13, I suggest the 12 apostles, the 12
labors of Hercules, the 12 houses of Israel, the twelve stations of the
8 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

Cross, and the twelve houses of astrology. All have been interpreted
as developmental stages or attributes of the soul. In Buddhism 12
causal states of the individual are recognized. In Hinduism the 3
upper casts (casts in Hinduism are considered Divinely ordained) are
thought to pass through 4 developmental stages. This is the
developmental experience of the soul, culminating (at death) in either
ascension to the angelic level, or recycling through level 13.
Level 14: Angel
Level 14 is the abode of angels, and all deities and spiritual entities
associated with the extra-terrestrial solar system - Sun, Moon, and
planetary gods. The Greco-Roman pantheon of planetary deities (the
Olympic gods) belong here as do most of the angelic host of the
Judao-Christian-Islamic faiths. These spirits have broad powers over
earthly events (consider the influence of the Sun & Moon) and
spiritually represent the next evolutionary stage of the human soul.
Being only 1 level removed from human life (and as members of our
own solar system), these deities are more familiar to humans than the
higher powers, visit us more often, and share (according to classical
tradition) some human characteristics including foibles. The notion of
angelic or godly failings at level 14 may derive from observations of
the wandering motion of the planets, the phases of the Moon, and
seasonal motions and eclipses of the Sun. It is a reasonable
assumption that most spiritual visions and "muses" perceived by
humans originate from this secondary level, although a celebrated
few seem to have come from the archangelic and even Divine level.
Several types of pairings can be suggested for the dyad position of
this level. Perhaps the most appropriate is the spirit-soul pairing, in
which the individual soul is seen as a "specification" of the larger and
more general "spiritual sea", or "Spirit of Man" (in the human case).
This is also the classic anima-animus duality, the spirit the animus,
the soul the anima, converted in personality theory to a male-female
pairing within the individual psyche. Astrology is replete with
pairings at the planetary level. Co-rulerships, negative-positive and
male-female characteristics of the planets are all featured.
9 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

Angel/demon pairings continue the good/bad theme.
For the group position of the angelic level we find the Biblical vision
of New Jerusalem, the angelic city surrounded by 4 walls each with 3
gates. The ancient "Altar of Heaven" in Peking consists of a
hierarchy of 3 concentric platforms with 4 stairways oriented in the
cardinal directions, expressing this same 4x3 form, an Eastern
commentary on the structural pattern appropriate to the higher
realms. The Greco-Roman pantheon of the 12 Olympic gods also
belongs here, since they were generally recognized as planetary
deities of our solar system (including the solar deity). Many of the
Norse gods can also be placed at this level, but I am only trying to
sketch a plausible framework here, not attempting a complete survey.
Level 15: Archangel
The level of archetype and archangels: here are placed all deities
associated with the stars and constellations of our galaxy, those
whose powers and purview are of the broadest scope, but not yet of
the Divine level. Deities whose powers exceeded those of the
Olympic gods belong here, such as the Fates, Destiny, or Norms of
Teutonic legend, and possibly the "4 Horsemen of the Apocalypse".
The signs of the zodiac, associated with the constellations, belong
here, as do the 7 Christian archangels. Archetypical processes of
inexorable domain, such as time, evolution, cycles of destruction and
regeneration (the Hindu Goddess Shiva), the battle between good and
evil, are of this level. The seven virtues and seven deadly sins are
also placed here. It is traditionally upon this level that the archangel
Michael overthrew the proud Lucifer, casting him into the infernal
regions of Earth. Hence the common foibles of mankind may extend
even into the archangelic ranks, a reminder that the hierarchy is a true
evolutionary sequence, requiring work at all levels. Not only men,
but angels and archangels as well are subject to temptation and
failure, and all must continue to work to achieve a crystalline
perfection and union with the Divine realm.
The dyad at the archangelic level is more abstract.
10 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

Constructive/destructive and causative/receptive force pairs seem
appropriately placed here, as are manifest/unmanifest opposites. The
good-evil duality represented by the combat between Lucifer and the
archangel Michael is a prime feature of this level. The "evil"
component of this pairing may simply represent the natural interplay
between the manifest and unmanifest worlds. The transition from
unmanifest symmetry, or grace, into manifest asymmetry, the world,
is easily conceived as a destructive fall into damnation. The signs of
the zodiac are divided into male/female, dynamic/receptive pairings,
as well as complimentary opposites.
At the archangelic level the group position is occupied by the 12
signs of the zodiac, constellations of our galaxy. These are further
arranged in a 4x3 pattern, comprising the combinations of the 4
elements and 3 qualities of astrology. The 3 Fates of classical
mythology, and their counterparts, the 3 Norms of Teutonic legend
and the 3 Gunas of Hindu tradition, also belong here, powers of
destiny beyond the control of mere planetary gods. Christian theology
recognizes 7 archangels. The seven virtues and seven deadly sins are
placed here, continuing the good-evil theme and the battle between
Michael and Lucifer. The seven virtues are divided into a classical set
of four (prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude) and a Christian set
of three (faith, hope, charity).
Level 16: Divine Being
Level 16 is the ultimate level of unity of the Supreme Being and its
attributes and representations. Only symbols of the Universal Deity
are recognized here, or of the creation and destruction of the Cosmos
itself. The Cherubim and Seraphim are nevertheless placed here, as
they are always represented as surrounding the throne of God. They
evidently represent aspects of the Divine Nature, as does the Trinity.
In the dyad position of the Divine level we find again male-female
pairings in the conception of the Divine Father-Mother, and manifestunmanifest pairings in the Alpha-Omega symbols and the Yin-Yang
symbols of Taoism (beginning and ending - at the cosmic level, the
11 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

Big Bang and Big Crunch). Cherubim and Seraphim, evidently
Divine powers representing centrifugal and centripetal flows of force
to and from the Celestial Throne itself (light and gravitation, positive
and negative entropy drives, male and female energies) are also
placed here.
The group position at the Divine level is represented as the Christian
Trinity and the 4 Living Creatures surrounding the throne of God.
This is a Biblical vision which seems to have penetrated to the
highest level. The Creatures evidently represent aspects of Divine
power. 7 Elohim (4 + 3, rather than 4 x 3), are also represented as
modes of activity or spirits emanating from the Divine Being. The
Cross and the Tetragrammaton (YHWH) are both 4-part
representations of the Divinity. The Hindu Trinity (Trimurti) of
Brahma, Siva, and Vishnu (creator, destroyer, preserver) also belong
here.
In the I-Ching, the representation of the flow of Divine Order begins
with a unitary state of First Principle. This is then divided into the
male - female polarities of Yin-Yang, then further divided into two
complete 4x3 representations of these male and female energies.
These in turn are united, and from the fertile embrace of the resulting
hexagrams flows the elaboration of Divine Order into the manifest
world. A study of the Chinese "Book of Changes" (the "I Ching")
and its relationship to the human genetic code has recently been
brought to my attention, and is appended here. The I Ching is an
important Eastern example of the 4x3 fractal pattern so abundantly
expressed in Western human thought.
References:
Books by my late father Prof. John Curtis Gowan
"Trance, Art, Creativity" An Investigation of the Numinous
Element and the Metaphysical Realm. A Book by Prof. John
C. Gowan, Sr.
"Operations of Increasing Order" Further Investigations of
the Numinous Element and the Metaphysical Realm. A Book
12 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

A General System Model Of Natural Organization: Part 4. The Intu...

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/intuit.html

by Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Psychedelic Individual". A Book by
Prof. John C. Gowan, Sr.
"Development of the Creative Individual". A Book by Prof.
John C. Gowan, Sr.
Stewart C. Dodd's 4x4 Mathematical General System Matrix
Elizabeth Culotta: "On the Origin of Religion" Science Vol. 326, 6
Nov., 2009 Pages 784-787
Links:

home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net

13 of 13

6/23/19, 10:32 AM

