Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

SECTION III: FRACTALS: PATTERNS IN NATURE
(revised May, 2011)
JOHN A. GOWAN
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net
Abstract
The discipline of General Systems (as I understand and practice it)
assumes the existence of, and searches for, repeating patterns, cycles,
or processes of natural phenomena, law, and/or organization, and
"nested" or "self-similar" (fractal) hierarchies of structure throughout
nature. Biology is especially full of examples, but repeating patterns
are also found in all the physical sciences (the "Periodic Table of the
Elements" is the classic atomic example). The cause of this pattern
formation is thought to be the very narrow base of physical law (for
example, conservation laws associated with the metric structure of
spacetime), which heavily constrains, influences, and is reflected in
the form of every higher natural system built upon it. (See also: Sect
VI: Information, and "Sect VIII: Introduction to General Systems")
Introduction
Working in the biological sciences at Cornell University for 20 years
as a research technician for a world-class ecologist in a world-class
academic/scientific environment, I quite naturally acquired, both by
training and osmosis, a deep appreciation for natural organization,
especially in biology, but also as revealed in science generally.
In 1980, my late father, Prof. John C. Gowan, invited me to
participate in the annual meeting of a creativity institute in Buffalo,
NY (the "Creative Problem Solving Institute" - "CPSI"), and join the
1 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

discussion group on General Systems. For the occasion I decided to
try my hand at producing a "Table of Natural Organization", which I
did as a hierarchy of 12 levels, 4 levels each in the atomic, biological,
and astrophysical realms. The table has been with me in essentially
its original form ever since, although it has been enlarged to include
two parallel metaphysical levels of human thought, one intuitive and
spiritual, the other rational and scientific. I have never been satisfied
with my modeling of the metaphysical realm, and several versions
have been tried, as for example the "Sun Sign Model", which
attempts to address the entire range of human thought.
My father's investigations into the spiritual and psychological aspects
of the metaphysical realm have been far more extensive and
successful than my own, which is actually the major reason I have
not been at pains to develop my own synthesis in this area, since I
regard his as definitive. For similar reasons I don't expend much
effort on electromagnetism, because that force is now so thoroughly
understood (Feynman's quantum electrodynamics). (See: "Trance,
Art, Creativity: An Investigation of the Numinous Element and the
Metaphysical Realm", a book by Prof. J. C. Gowan Sr. available on
his memorial website) (http://www.johnagowan.org/TAC.zip).
It was at the 1980 CPSI meeting (see above) that I first met Gus
Jaccaci, who took an immediate liking to my table, and we have
remained colleagues, friends, and collaborators ever since. Gus and
George Land (the latter one of the luminary leaders of the Institute)
had a General Systems dynamic of their own which happened to fit
perfectly with the structural elements of my table, and a natural
wedding of theory, structure, and dynamics ensued. Eventually
(1986) the General Systems label was replaced by the fractal
designation, but the two are practically interchangeable. I prefer the
fractal characterization because it seems to more accurately reflect
the nested, self-similar hierarchies of natural organization, and
suggests a pathway (evolution), a dynamics (resonance), and a
mathematics (fractal geometry), which might help explain and/or
model these recurring patterns. Finally, there seems to be an emergent
linkage between fractal geometry and "chaos" theory. For example, a
2 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

General Systems or fractal algorithm might be characterized as a
"strange attractor" or "fractal basin" in chaos theory. (See also: the
mathematical concept of "algorithmic compressibility" in John D.
Barrow's book: "New Theories of Everything", Oxford Univ. Press,
2007, page 10.)
In 1986 Gus developed his "Metamatrix® table", a wholly abstract
form derived from the fractal table, in which the same dynamic
element runs both vertically and horizontally.
The fractal table has been published twice, first in Nov. 1989 in the
"Training and Development Journal", and again in Sept. 1998 in the
SSCC'98 symposium volume of the Durban South Africa
"International Conference on Systems, Signals, Controls,
Computers". In the symposium volume, the summary (section 6) of
the series of fractal papers was published with the table. My copy of
this symposium volume is in the Engineering Library, Carpenter Hall,
of the Cornell University library system. Of course, the table and
associated paper have also been published on the internet for as long
as I have had my website (since Autumn, 1996).
The core "metric" or algorithm of the fractal pattern is 4x3, but is
usually elaborated in complex systems to a 4th level (4x4) of
emergent phenomena and system expression or resolution. The 4x3
pattern is pervasive and fundamental throughout nature. It appears in
all three General System models in these pages, as the central
dynamic of the 4x4 grid and fractal table, as the 4 triangles of the
"hourglass" or "Grail" diagrams, and again as the 4 triangular faces of
the tetrahedron models. There is no longer any doubt in my mind that
the 4x3 pattern is the basic fractal algorithm, system iteration, or
resonating pattern of the Cosmos - the fundamental "quantum unit" or
structural element of natural organization. In the tetrahedron models
it forms the "Word" of natural law or the "Tetragrammaton" that
initiates Creation; in the hourglass diagrams it forms the "Grail", the
relationship between the forces and particles of spacetime and matter;
and in the nested hierarchies of the fractal table it elaborates all the
material phenomena of the Cosmos.
3 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

The General System dynamic of Land and Jaccaci, derived originally
by Land from biological data and published in his book "Grow or
Die", consists of 4 parts, described as "Accretive, Replicative,
Mutualistic, and Transformative" (Land's terms), or as "Gather,
Repeat, Share, Transform" (Jaccaci's terms). It was Jaccaci who
distinguished the "Transformative" stage as a separate 4th stage; in
Land's model this 4th stage was joined with the third. My own
structural hierarchy: "Unit, Pair, Group, Emergent New Unit" (or
"Compound New Unit") neatly reflected the 4 operations of the
Land-Jaccaci dynamic. Soon, perhaps in 1983 (?), Jaccaci realized
that this dynamic ran vertically as well as horizontally in my 12 level
table (which meant a 4th "Metaphysical" level had to be added to the
original 3-part table). From this discovery Jaccaci later developed his
abstract "Metamatrix"® table (1986).
Below is Jaccaci's description of the historical development of what
we may call the "Land-Jaccaci-Gowan Table of Natural
Organization":
"George Land (1973) has characterized the growth dynamic
of this structural series in the sequential progressive terms of
"Accretive, Replicative, and Mutualistic" behavior with
which he defined the stages of what he called
"Transformation Theory". Later he renamed his dynamic
stages "Formative, Normative, and Integrative". In 1980
August Jaccaci added a distinct final stage of
"Transformation" to the sequence of stages showing that the
"Emergent Compound New Unit", [Gowan's] fourth stage in
the structural series, was in fact the Transformation dynamic
stage itself. Jaccaci then renamed the series of dynamics
"Gather, Repeat, Share, and Transform". These dynamics of
growth he then found to be isomorphic with and assigned
them to [Gowan's] sequence of stages as: "Unit - (Gather
(G)); Pair - (Repeat (R)); Group or Field - (Share (S)); and
Compound new Unit - (Transform (T)).
"Once this matching of general systemic discoveries between
4 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

structure and dynamic was made by Jaccaci, he soon found
[1983?] the "Organization in Nature Chart" progressing from
four lines of order each in "Microphysical, Biological, and
Macrophysical", had the same order of GRST running
vertically throughout the whole chart, the "Microphysical"
being the "Gathering" phase of the Universe story, the
"Biological" being the "Repeat" phase, and the
"Macrophysical" being the "Share" phase, with the invisible
dynamic archetypes of emergent ordering being the
"Transformative" phase [Gowan's "Metaphysical" level].
"With this fractal order running both horizontally and
vertically throughout the organization chart, Jaccaci
discovered what he called the "General Periodicity of Natural
Order". He went on to apply this 16 stage matrix of natural
order in a mapping he called the "Metamatrix"® [1986] to
many varied stories and domains of growth and evolution
showing both the descriptive and predictive nature of
General Periodicity".
Readers familiar with the theory of "Chaos" may recognize a familiar
pattern in the model: beginning with a "linear" or simple input (cell
1), passing to a stage of bifurcation (cell 2), progressing to a stage of
greater complexity including secondary bifurcations (cell 3), and
finally a "chaotic" stage (cell 4) which predictably settles in the
"fractal basin" of a 4x3 (or 4x4) "strange attractor" (the precise
physical nature of the attractor, however, is unpredictable). Like a
true fractal algorithm, the output of one level becomes the input of
the next, the self-feeding iterations producing new self-similar
expressions at ever-higher levels of information and system
complexity. The model is scale-invariant, not only vertically with
each row, but also with respect to the four major realms. (See:
"Chaos: Making a New Science" by James Gleick, Viking Penguin
Inc., 1987)
The Fractal Universe
The fractal "Table of Natural Organization" grew out of my attempt
5 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

to validate a personal suspicion that the pervasive 4x3 patterns in
religion, mythology, and occult metaphysical systems of thought
were simply intuitively recognized forms of a General Systems
"operator", or fractal algorithm of the Cosmos. If true, the Unified
Field Theory should also have this same form, corresponding to the
same fractal algorithm, but in its rational mode. The Unified Field
Theory and various metaphysical "World Systems", in this view, are
all examples of the same cosmic ordering principle, fractal algorithm,
or General Systems "metric", but one is seen with the intuitive mind,
the other with the rational mind. If this viewpoint has any validity,
then we should be able to find many significant examples of the
operation of this fractal algorithm in nature.
Once I began looking for 4x3 systems in nature, I found so many
examples I decided to arrange them in a table, itself constructed as a
4x3 matrix (later 4x4), in order to effectively tabulate the examples
so their significance (or lack thereof) could be carefully accessed in a
systematic fashion. The result is the large, 4-part "Table of Natural
Organization", which I believe effectively demonstrates the existence
of a 4x3 fractal order in Nature expressed structurally, dynamically,
rationally, intuitively, physically and metaphysically.
Originally in three parts, the fractal table was expanded to a 4th,
metaphysical level (sometime around 1987), largely due to the
repeated requests of Gus. The 4 parts are: Microphysical,
Biophysical, Astrophysical, and Metaphysical - the latter interpreted
as wholly the abstract product of the human mind, in two modes,
intuitive and rational. (Although conservation is a physical, natural
phenomenon characteristic of energy, the "law of energy
conservation" and the "1st Law of Thermodynamics" - are rational,
"metaphysical" constructs of the human mind. The notion of the
conservation - "salvation" - of the human soul, or of "Heaven" as a
conservation domain of spirit, is similarly an intuitive metaphysical
construct of our thought.)
Once I had discovered that the Cosmos did indeed have a fractal
structure, I was as amazed and puzzled by its existence as anyone
6 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

else. 30 years later, I am still amazed and puzzled. However, lately it
has occurred to me that this is by far the simplest and most
economical way to build a Universe: the elaboration of a self-similar
fractal structure - so similar in principle to "resonance" - is clearly the
path of symmetry, "least energy", and least resistance. The fractal
structure of Nature is essentially the "rolling thunder" of the
primordial "Word" of natural law resonating through the eons in
successive self-similar hierarchies of evolved and elaborated material
phenomena.
The Fractal Structure of Nature
(4 Conservation Laws Connected in Triplets)
The physical ground from which the 4x3 fractal algorithm or
structural element originates and resonates is evidently the
4-dimensions of spacetime interacting (via the mediation of the
asymmetric weak force) with light (free energy) to produce the three
kinds of particles necessary to create matter: hadrons (the composite
quark mass carriers), leptons (the elementary alternative charge
carriers), and bosons (the field vectors or force carriers of the
charges). We see the first expression of the fractal in the 3 families of
four elementary particles - 3 quark pairs and 3 corresponding pairs of
leptons. These resolve (decay) to the ground state baryon, the single
nucleon of the hydrogen atom (the proton), itself a 4x3 structure - 3
quarks carrying four charges (color, flavor, electric, spin). Another
4x3 characterization of this fundamental material level is: 3 classes of
particles (hadrons, leptons, bosons) with four forces of physics
(electromagnetism, gravitation, strong, and weak). Antecedent to any
material expression, we recognize a 4x3 structural dynamic of
physical law and principle, as formulated in the "Tetrahedron Model".
The fusion of 4 hydrogen nuclei forms the "alpha particle" or the
helium nucleus, 4 nucleons each of 3 quarks, a particle so stable it
becomes the "brick" of the nucleosynthetic pathway. Next is formed
carbon, 3 alpha particles each of 4 nucleons. Hence the carbon
nucleus is a triple 4x3 resonance, beginning with the baryon (baryons
are the class of hadrons composed of 3 quarks, such as the proton and
7 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

neutron (the "nucleons")). (Significantly, oxygen 16, the next alphaparticle step in the nucleosynthetic pathway beyond carbon 12, and of
such importance for our life form, represents the 4x4 expression of
the General Systemic pattern - 4 alpha-particles each of 4 nucleons.)
From the carbon nucleus we move to the carbon electron shell and
the organic chemistry of life. The electron shell of carbon is also a
4x3 resonance; 4 valence (bonding) electrons in the 3rd electron shell
(1S2, 2S2, 2P2). Furthermore, the molecular bonding pattern of
carbon is tetrahedral - 4 triangles (the crystal form of diamond). No
other atom in the periodic table has anything like this combination of
nuclear, electronic shell, and crystal 4x3 resonances - 5 in all. (Of
consequence for the rapid evolution of Earth-life, water also has a
tetrahedral molecular bonding pattern.) (See: Newton, Darwin, and
the Evolution of Life".)
Beyond the tetrahedral bonds of molecular carbon, we find that DNA
is itself a 4x3 chemical structure - 4 nucleic acids (adenine, guanine,
thymine, cytosine) each composed of 3 molecular groups (sugar,
phosphate, nitrogenous base). Finally, the genetic code is another 4x3
structure: the 4 nucleic acids code in triplets, producing the amino
acids that comprise proteins. Hence we see how thoroughly the 4x3
cosmic fractal algorithm is embedded in biology. This is the clue to
how the ancients could have intuited the 4x3 fractal structure of the
Cosmos: they were intuiting the structure of their own genetic and
physical constitutions. At higher levels of biological organization, we
lose sight of the molecular thread, but the dynamic and gross
structural elements of the 4x3 fractal remain evident - as discovered
by Land, Jaccaci, and myself.
Each of the 4 major realms of the "Table of Natural Organization"
can be characterized by a dominant 4x3 expression of the fractal: in
the biological realm, this is obviously the molecular structure of
DNA-RNA and its genetic code. In the microphysical or atomic
realm, it is the 3 quarks and 4 charges of the atomic nucleus, plus the
4 quantum numbers of the electron shell (n, l, m, s) and the 3
components of atoms (electron, proton, neutron). At the astrophysical
level, it is Kepler's 3 laws of planetary motion in 4 dimensional
8 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

spacetime, and the 4x3 force field of gravity - in Einstein's words four 3rd order equations (the changing rate of gravitational
acceleration in x, y, z, t). Maxwell's 4 equations of electromagnetism
are another example in the long-range or spacetime forces (gravity
and light). A major expression in the short-range or nuclear forces at
the astrophysical level is found in the nucleosynthetic pathway, which
depends upon the stability of the alpha particle or helium nucleus, the
structural "brick" of element-building in stars. The 4x3 nuclear
resonance of the nucleosynthetic pathway proceeds from helium to
carbon, and upwards beyond oxygen in alpha-particle steps (with the
consequence that elements with even atomic numbers are more
common than elements with odd atomic numbers), but finally fails
with chromium 48, which is highly radioactive, requiring 4 extra
neutrons to achieve stability (chromium 52). The resonance settles at
iron 56, one alpha particle beyond chromium 52, after which no more
energy can be extracted from nuclear fusion. When the 4x3 resonance
fails, so does the release of excess binding energy in nucleosynthesis.
We should note there is a "miraculous" energetic resonance of the
carbon nucleus, predicted by Fred Hoyle, which allows the formation
of carbon from 3 alpha particles in the nucleosynthetic pathway of
stars. Our hypothesis of a 4x3 cosmic fractal algorithm gives the
same prediction.
Finally, at the metaphysical level of human thought, we find
numerous examples from the intuitive "world systems" of religion,
mythology, and occult traditions, including (in religion) the 4 sacred
creatures which surround the throne of God (the Trinity); (in
mythology) the 4 riders of the apocalypse and the 3 fates; (in the
occult) the 4 elements and 3 qualities of astrology and the 4 trigrams
of the I-Ching. In the rational mode we have the four forces of
physics combined with 3 energy states in the Unified Field Theory
(light, matter, charge - free energy, bound energy, and the symmetry
debts of matter), the Tetrahedron Model of 4 conservation laws
combined in triplets, the 4x3 Higgs boson hierarchy of the weak
force, and numerous examples in the fractal hierarchy table
previously cited. It is reflected in the body plan of humans and most
terrestrial vertebrates - 3 major body divisions and functions
9 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

(cephalic - perception; thoracic, metabolic; pelvic, reproductive) x 4
limbs; and even in our calendar of 4 solar seasons x 3 lunar months.
The many striking correspondences between the classical astrological
interpretation of the Sun Signs and the rational or "scientific"
meaning assigned to those same matrix cells is stunning, for those
who can walk in both realms - raising again the question of the power
and extent of human intuition and the "ancient wisdom". (See:
"Physical Correlates of the Astrological Sun Signs".)
Conclusion
In view of the demonstrated "fractal organization of nature", we can
reasonably expect the Unified Field Theory to have a 4x3 core
element, and probably a 4x4 expression as well: my original intuition
regarding the probable correspondence between intuitive and rational
cosmologies, systems, and representations seems justified.
The "Tetrahedron Model" is a set of 4 interacting conservation laws
and fundamental principles which underlie and constrain the
operation of the 4 forces. This set of conservation laws are truly
metaphysical in that not only are they idealizations of the human
mind, but they all have "spiritual" as well as physical interpretations
and correspondences. We have already observed that the notion of
"conservation" applies not only to energy but also to the "salvation"
of souls and the spiritual conservation domain of "Heaven".
Likewise, the principle of "symmetry" is found not only in the
aesthetic example of beauty, but in the ethical notion of fair play, the
"Golden Rule" of social interaction, the equality of all souls before
God, etc. In the notion of "causality" we also find the principle of
"karma" or divine justice and retribution/reward, and personal
responsibility for the consequences of our actions. In "entropy" we
have a concept expressing the principle of eternal change, motion,
evolution, and the gradual perfecting of a "fallen" or material
universe.
It is a simple task to map the 4 conservation principles against the
four forces in the "grid" or "matrix" format. (See: "The Tetraforce
10 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

Table".) When we do this, however, we find this is essentially the
same mapping and gives the same result as when we used the 4
energetic parameters: "free energy, bound energy, charge, force". This
is apparently because we have reached the "bottom" of this line of
generalization; there is no deeper abstraction characterizing this set of
energetic parameters: energy and spirit are either equivalent or
complementary. We have in both cases a mapping of "spiritual" or
metaphysical parameters against the 4 physical forces, which is
analogous to the astrological mapping of "Qualities" vs "Elements".
We have essentially a matrix illustrating the impregnation of matter
with energy, "spirit", or natural law, in either case a mating of the
divine with the secular, the metaphysical with the physical; it is the
energetic/spiritual component that "breaths fire into the equations"
and sparks life from the dust of the Earth. And only such a mixture
could suitably represent the Unified Field Theory, the fundamental
note of the fractal, resonant hierarchy of our amazing and beautiful
Cosmos.
Other phenomena of note suggested by inspection of the fractal
hierarchy include the emergence of life from the replicating ability of
the 4x3 structure of a molecule of RNA/DNA (See: "Darwin,
Newton, and the Origin and Abundance of Life in the Cosmos".)
Also, the notion that the biological function of humanity is to serve as
the reproductive cells of Gaia, dispersing Earth-life into the galaxy.
(See: "The Information Pathway".) The fractal hierarchy originates in
the "rebound" from the electromagnetic ground state of the "Higgs
Cascade". The purpose of the rebound is to return matter to its
symmetric form as light, using the information conserved as charge to
accomplish this goal (required by "Noether's Theorem" of symmetry
conservation), as in the nucleosynthetic pathway of stars. The charges
of matter are the symmetry debts of light, and charges act to repay
those conserved obligations. But the fractal hierarchy also serves as
the information pathway by which the cosmos creates life and
acquires the ability to know itself. Through humanity the cosmos
explores new modes of creativity, new domains of knowledge, new
forms of beauty; the universe experiences itself and evolves through
living forms. We are the Cosmos in its human form, become
11 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

self-aware.
Postscript: (added Dec., 2019)
(In the following, I assert the privilege of an old man who knows his
prime is past, his time is short, and who wants to leave nothing of
importance unsaid.)
The Language of God
Terence Mckenna thought that the universe is composed of language
(True Hallucinations; The Archaic Revival 1992-4). This is certainly
true of our biological universe, insofar as we are willing to recognize
DNA as the molecular language of life, heredity, and biochemical
information. This connection between language and reality is
presaged in the ancient biblical assertion that "in the beginning was
the word" (John 1:1). DNA is the molecular language by which the
biological realm and humanity are created, so we may consider DNA
to be the divine/fractal language of a creative God. The language of
God brings living beings into existence. When God says "tree" in the
language of DNA, a living, actual tree comes into existence (through
the usual natural channels). Our own human speech is but a pale
reflection of this divine creative potency, but we do have a little that
is uniquely our own (beyond our animal power of sexual
reproduction): when we say "airplane" our civilization can actually
bring an airplane into existence.
Machines, however, are not alive. The creation of life is the special
province and miracle of God, although in this respect also, we are
learning to participate and assist, through agriculture, plant and
animal breeding (and finally through scientific understanding and
genetic engineering) in the creation of living creatures, both diverse
and new (but all within the DNA biochemical paradigm).
The divine speech of God has other powers, beyond and anterior to
biology, simpler and more powerful, as when God says: "let there be
light" (Genesis 1:3). The atoms, elements, stars, and the galaxies are
likewise brought into being by some divine language we do not yet
12 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

fully understand. It appears that the "Periodic Table of the Elements"
is constructed bit by bit from alpha particles (helium nuclei), and
single protons and neutrons, within the centers of stars. These
elements are subsequently dispersed throughout the universe by
supernova explosions (the heaviest elements are evidently made
during such events, or even during the collisions of massive, dense
stars). Elementary particles are the letters, elements are the words,
molecular combinations are the sentences that produce the chemistry
(and ultimately the biochemistry) of the cosmos. All of it, from the
beginning (following Chardin), is divine substance derived from the
energy of light, protected by energy and charge conservation, the
metric of spacetime (which provides gravitationally conjoined
entropic conservation domains of space, history, causality, and
information).
Life is in the atoms when they are created; life is not simply the
consequence of some peculiar molecular combination capable of
self-replication. Life is the divine energy of God inherently contained
within and born with each atom. Life is the grand miracle of, and the
rationale for, our universe. As Tolstoy concluded in his great novel
"War and Peace": Life is God in the universe.
We are struggling to understand higher-level conservation languages,
much of which is mathematical, trying to build a "Unified Field
Theory" or "Theory of Everything" (which may include a
"Multiverse"). The numinous nature and source of the Creative
Energy itself is the ultimate "Mysterium Tremendum". To this
mystery we can only bow and offer our reverence.
N.B. Although I have been using the word "God" in the traditional
Christian sense, I have no specific idea what that word refers to. I use
it to indicate the primordial creative energy that produced our
universe (and perhaps our "multiverse"). This energy exists in every
elementary particle (including light), and fills the "vacuum" of
spacetime with virtual particle-pairs. It is responsible for all "natural
law". But does it have a moral compass? Does it care about
humanity? As Blake questioned in his immortal poem "Tiger": "Did
13 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

He who made the lamb make thee?" Since both tiger and lamb are
part of the same DNA fractal creation, maybe it just doesn't matter perhaps only the creative energy of the fractal itself matters, and
whether it produces lambs or tigers is a non-issue. But from the
perspective of the flourishing/flowering of the creative fractal energy
itself, one would have to suppose that human creativity, both
scientific and artistic, so long as it is "life affirming and enhancing"
(i.e., advancing the growing/replicating/dispersing/evolving agenda
of life), would find a helping harmonic resonance ("good vibrations")
within the universal fractal energy and spirit that produced and
sustains our universe.
There will always be some experiences (emotions like the merger of
personal identity in love, or our awe before nature's majesty,
grandeur, and beauty), which are beyond scientific understanding or
rational description. That is why we have art, poetry, music,
philosophy, and even religion, to help us process, embrace, and
reproduce such feelings - emergent emotions arising from the
surpassing complexity and resonant depth of humanity entangled in
the cosmos.
The existence of a 4x3 fractal algorithm operating at every level in
nature is one of the more astonishing discoveries in all of General
Systems. The series of fractal papers linked below are not technically
challenging and are generally self-explanatory; hence readers should
have no trouble understanding them, and I will let them speak further
for themselves.
References
[1] Ludwig Von Bertalanffy, General System Theory, George
Braziller, 1968, 295p. + xxiv
[2] Teilhard de Chardin, The Phenomenon of Man, Harper and
Row, 1959, 318p.
[3] John Curtis Gowan, Trance, Art, Creativity, Privately printed,
14 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

1975, 448p. + xxvi
[4] August T. Jaccaci, In: Patricia A. Galagan, "Growth: Mapping
its Patterns and Periods", Training and Development Journal,
November 1989
[4a] Jaccaci, A. T. General Periodicity: Nature's Creative
Dynamics. 2000. Unity Scholars Media PO Box 333 Thetford
Center, VT 05075
[4b] Jaccaci, A. t. and S. B. Gault. CEO: Chief Evolutionary
Officer. 1999. Butterworth-Heinemann
[5] George T. Lock Land, Grow or Die: The Unifying Principle
of Transformation, Random House, 1973
[6] Benoit B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, W.
H. Freeman Co, 1983, 468p.
Ervin Laszlo, The Relevance of General Systems Theory, George
Braziller Inc., 1972
J. D. Barrow and F. J. Tippler. The Anthropic Cosmological
Principle. Oxford University Press 1986.
Armand Delsemme, Our Cosmic Origins. Cambridge University
Press 1998.
Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, 1997. Microcosmos: 4 Billion
Years of Microbial Evolution. University of California Press,
Berkeley
J. E. Lovelock, 1979. Gaia: A new look at life on Earth. Oxford
University Press.
James Gleick, 1987, Chaos: Making a New Science. Viking
Penguin Inc.
Davies, P. and N. H. Gregersen: Information and the Nature of
Reality. 2010. Cambridge Univ. Press.
See also: "A Simpler Origin for Life" by Robert Shapiro.
Scientific American, June, 2007, pages 46-53 (and on
www.sciam.com).
See also: "The Origin of Life" by James Trefil et. al. American
Scientist May-June 2009 Vol. 97 No. 3 pages 206-213.
See also: Paul Davies, 1988: The Cosmic Blueprint. Simon and
Schuster.
15 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

Fractals

file:///Users/johnagowan/Documents/sect3.html

See also: Terrence McKenna: Archaic Revival
Related Papers:
"The Fractal Organization of Nature";
"Nature's Fractal Pathway"
"The Information Pathway"
(See also: "The Human Connection"; "Comments on the
Metaphysical Realm, Rational Mode"; the "Information" table)
home page (page 1)
home page (page 2)
E-Book
email:
jag8@cornell.edu
johngowan@earthlink.net

16 of 16

12/22/19, 10:31 AM

