After studying philosophy and psychology by myself for a little less than a year. I'd like to share with you my views on life. If I were to gave myself labels for my ever-changing and evolving philosophy of life, at this moment I'd consider myself as a mix of the following philosophies: 1. Absurdism Finding meaning in the pursuit of meaning . Laughing at the comedy of existence, because behind it all, there is nothing. Recognising that the universe is at large indifferent. This is not a cause of conflict as I do not expect to seek meaning from the universe, neither do I believe in a God that can help me find meaning in it, there is no ultimate truth. The contrary would be philosophical suicide, that is, shutting down one's mental faculties believing in something that isn't true but is easy and convenient for us to believe in. This would project us into a supernatural realm, undermining the value and grandeur of this life. We must strive to love this life as much as possible, as it is the only shot we get. 2. Nietschean Creating value out of the abyss of life, through sheer will to power, which is the inherent condition of all life. Striving to the figure of the Ubermensch while knowing it never to be an end-goal. There is no end, other than Death. Death is something to be embraced, not something that causes anxiety and paralyses us. To recognise what to value in life in the context of the reality of death and of the suffering inherent to life, ultimately to love our fate (amor fati). 3. Stoicism The stoics are often misunderstood. It is not meant to mean facing pain or hardship without the display of feeling and without complaint. That would be prejudicial as eliminating one's emotions is bound to end in chaos. It is rather the domestication of your emotions, not the elimination of them. It is not cold-hearted or lacks empathy but rather deals with life as it is, without illusions. Focusing on everything we can control and not the things we cannot control. Achieving excellence through the virtues of wisdom, justice, courage and temperance (self-control). Not becoming a slave to your vices. 4. Jungian psychology The psyche is composed of the conscious and the unconscious. We must accept that we have no control over the unconscious and strive to reach individuation or self-realisation, knowing it to be a life-long process. Avoiding as much as possible having a persona (a mask that conceals our true self), and integrating our shadow (the unknown dark side of the personality). Having a solid foundation in our psyche can help us become much more aware of who we truly are, and that there are elements in our psyche beyond our control. 5. Nihilist Realism Nihilist realist in the sense that things are meaningful in themselves, it is not an add-on to existence but a phenomena of our mind, it does not exist without our Being as we are embedded in meaning, and there is no exit from making sense of one's life. Therefore, there cannot be a lack of meaning as we are &#8220;condemned&#8221; to the pursuit of meaning which is inherent to life. Thanks for reading. I would love to hear your comments on your particular views of life. NOTE: This post is outdated, new post can be found here: Sign up with your e-mail to get a notification of the latest posts! Enter your email address Sign Up Liked it? Take a second to support Eternalised on Patreon! Related Related Posts: The Inner Work Archive Essays in Psychology, Spirituality & Philosophy Favourite Quotes (Patrons Only) Artwork in videos (Patrons Only)