. “Know how to appear the fool. The wisest sometimes play this card, and there are times when the greatest knowledge consists in appearing to lack knowledge. You mustn’t be ignorant, just feign ignorance.” Baltasar Gracian , How to Use Your Enemies While many people openly flaunt possessions such as wealth, status, beauty, and power, when it comes to the greatest human good, wisdom, those who possess the most of it are careful to conceal it. In his book Beyond Good and Evil, the great 19th century philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche wrote: “Every profound spirit needs a mask: moreover, around every profound spirit a mask is continually growing, thanks to the constantly false, that is, shallow interpretation of every word, every step, every sign of life he gives…now and then even foolishness is a mask.” Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil In this video, we examine some of the benefits of concealing wisdom beneath the appearance of foolishness. The philosophers who advocated for this strategy did not mean that we should behave stupidly, but rather that we should appear less intelligent, insightful, or wise than we are. Or as Montesquieu, the 18th century French judge and philosopher, wrote: “I have always observed that to succeed in the world one should appear like a fool but be wise.” Montesquieu, Pensees The first reason for concealing our wisdom is that many people are uncomfortable around those who can see through the illusions, deceptions, and distractions that capture others. In the work of fiction, Flowers for Algernon, a novel scientific experiment transforms an intellectually handicapped man into a genius, and this leads him to the following observation: “I’m beginning to think that with intelligence…you don’t just see more—you see through things. And that makes people uncomfortable.” Daniel Keyes, Flowers from Algernon One of the reasons superior wisdom makes people uncomfortable is because it exposes the superficiality and limits of their understanding. “To show your intelligence and discernment is only an indirect way of reproaching other people for being dull and incapable&#8230;Intellectual superiority offends by its very existence, without any desire to do so.”, wrote the 19 th century German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer. And because most people believe themselves intellectually competent, and derive much of their self-worth from this belief, being confronted with the naïveté of their own thinking wounds their vanity and awakens feelings of inferiority. As a result, wise people often evoke the resentment and hostility of those with more mediocre minds. And as Schopenhauer continues: “…there is nothing of which a man is prouder than of intellectual ability, for it is this that gives him his commanding place in the animal world”.…It is an exceedingly rash thing to let any one see that you are decidedly superior to him in intelligence and wisdom, and to let other people see it too; because he will then thirst for vengeance.” Arthur Schopenhauer, Counsels and Maxims As the wise understand how their wisdom can threaten the self-esteem others, they often downplay or conceal their superior insight behind simplicity, modesty, humor, or silence. They also understand that people rarely change their opinions when confronted by superior ideas; more often, they become defensive and hostile. Thus, little is gained by openly displaying our wisdom and inadvertently exposing the limitations of other people’s understanding. “With fools, being wise counts for little.” Baltasar Gracian , How to Use Your Enemies For this reason, Friedrich Nietzsche, one of the profoundest thinkers in history, advised the superior mind to disguise itself beneath an appearance of mediocrity. Or as he wrote in an aphorism titled “Mediocrity as a Mask”: “Mediocrity is the happiest mask which the superior mind can wear, because it does not lead the great majority — that is, the mediocre — to think that there is any disguise. Yet the superior mind assumes the mask just for their sake — so as not to irritate them, nay, often from a feeling of pity and kindness.” Friedrich Nietzsche, Human, all too Human In addition to avoiding resentment and hostility, and unintentionally wounding the vanity of smaller minds, there are practical reasons for concealing the profound depths of our understanding. When attempting to influence people or gain their favor, it can be counterproductive to appear too insightful or profound. For be it in business, politics, academia, a career, or social life, most people are more inclined to cooperate with and favor those who they perceive to be intellectually inferior. Or as Arthur Schopenhauer wrote: “For just as warmth is agreeable to the body, so it does the mind good to feel its superiority; and a man will seek company likely to give him this feeling, as instinctively as he will approach the fireplace or walk in the sun if he wants to get warm. But this means that he will be disliked on account of his superiority; and if a man is to be liked, he must really be inferior in point of intellect.” Arthur Schopenhauer, Counsels and Maxims When interacting with those who occupy positions of authority and power &#8211; individuals who can open doors for us and advance our ambitions &#8211; it can be prudent to veil, at least to some degree, our superior insight. For openly outshining people whose favor we seek can stimulate their insecurity and be counterproductive to our goals. This does not mean we should pretend to be stupid, for we must display competence if we wish to attract the attention and respect of those above us. But we should be careful not to appear wiser, more perceptive, or more insightful than they are. “Avoid outdoing your superior. All triumphs are despised, and triumphing over your superior is either stupid or fatal. Superiority has always been detested, especially by our superiors.” Baltasar Gracian, How to Use Your Enemies In his book Power: Why Some People Have It and Others Don&#8217;t, Jeffrey Pfeffer, a Professor of Organizational Behavior at Stanford University, points to studies which show that job performance plays far less of a role in career advancement than is often assumed. Promotions are determined more by one’s likability and one’s relationship with superiors. And part of being likeable involves flattering the ego of those in positions of authority by making them feel as if we depend on, and value, their superior guidance, wisdom, and insight. As Jeffrey Pfeffer writes: “So great job performance by itself is insufficient and may not even be necessary for getting and holding positions of power. You need to be noticed, influence the dimensions used to measure your accomplishments, and mostly make sure you are effective at managing those in power — which requires the ability to enhance the ego of those above you.” Jeffrey Pfeffer, Power: Why Some People Have it and Others Don&#8217;t Or as Robert Greene echoes in The 48 Laws of Power: “Always make those above you feel comfortably superior. In your desire to please and impress them, do not go too far in displaying your talents or you might accomplish the opposite and inspire fear and insecurity. Make your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain the heights of power.” Robert Greene, The 48 Laws of Power Some may argue that truly wise individuals should not care about the opinions of others. For the height of wisdom is to cultivate independence from society and an indifference to what others think. This argument is valid in the case of the individual who has cultivated enough self-sufficiency that he depends on no one for advancement, favors, or support. Yet the fact is that most of us remain dependent, to some degree, upon the cooperation and goodwill of other people. Yet even for the completely self-sufficient wise man, there remains another reason to occasionally play the fool: it serves as an exercise in humility, reminding him that, like all human beings, he too is ultimately a fool. For in the presence of the great mysteries of life, even great heights of human knowledge and wisdom are trivial. When it comes to the big questions of life and death, we are all equally ignorant. This admission of ignorance is a central component of wisdom. In fact, one of history’s wisest men, Socrates, did not even consider himself to be wise. In Plato’s Apology, Socrates’ friend, Chaerephon, visits the Oracle at Delphi, where the priestess Pythia declares that no man is wiser than Socrates. But when Chaerephon reports this pronouncement to Socrates, he is confused, or as he states: “What is the interpretation of this riddle? For I know that I have no wisdom, small or great.” Plato, Apology Unsettled by the oracle’s words, Socrates sets out in search of men he assumes to be wiser than himself &#8211; politicians, poets, and craftsmen renowned for their intelligence and expertise. Yet he discovers that while these men believe themselves wise, their wisdom does not hold up under questioning. Beneath their supposed knowledge lies confusion, contradiction, ignorance, and unexamined assumptions. As Socrates explains: “I went to one who had the reputation of wisdom&#8230; and the result was as follows: When I began to talk with him, I could not help thinking that he was not really wise, although he was thought wise by many, and wiser still by himself. Plato, Apology It eventually dawns on Socrates that the Oracle pronounced him the wisest man in Athens not because he possessed a lot of knowledge, but because, unlike others, he recognized the limits of his understanding. While other people mistake their opinions for truth, Socrates alone was conscious of his great ignorance. Or as Plato wrote: “This man, O men of Athens, is wisest, who, like Socrates, knows that his wisdom is in truth worth nothing.” Plato, Apology By exposing the ignorance of people who had the reputation of being wise, Socrates made many enemies. Eventually, he was charged with corrupting the youth and impiety, and sentenced to death. This is a powerful reminder that it can be rash and even at times dangerous to publicly expose our superior wisdom and insight. Reflecting on the events that led to his sentencing, Socrates explained: “I went and tried to explain to the one who had the reputation of wisdom, that he thought himself wise, but was not really wise; and the consequence was that he hated me, and his enmity was shared by several who were present and heard me…This investigation has led to my having many enemies of the worst and most dangerous kind.” Plato, Apology Or as Arthur Schopenhauer observed: “A man may be as humble as possible in his demeanor, and yet hardly ever get people to overlook his crime in standing intellectually above them.” Arthur Schopenhauer, Counsels and Maxims As there is little to gain, and much to lose, by openly displaying superior wisdom, it is wise to strategically wear the mask of foolishness to avoid the envy and hostility of others, ingratiate ourselves with those whose favor may help us achieve our goals, and most importantly, to remind ourselves that genuine wisdom begins with wonder and the recognition of how little we truly know. “The wisest of all, in my opinion, is he who can, if only once a month, call himself a fool &#8211; a faculty unheard of nowadays.” Fyodor Dostoevsky, Bobok Or as William Shakespeare observed: “The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.” William Shakespeare, As You Like It