LAYAYOGA
THE DEFINITIVE GUIDE TO THE CHAKRAS
AND KUNDALINI

Shyam Sundar Goswami
Foreword by Georg Feuerstein, Ph.D., Founder-Director of the Yoga Research Center
and author of The Shambhala Encyclopedia of Yoga

$25.00

Yoga

LAYAYOGA
"An extraordinary volume . . . the last word on the chakras and kundalini."
Georg Feuerstein, Ph.D., Founder-Director of the Yoga Research Center
and author of The Shambhala Encyclopedia of Yoga

Tantra - a spiritual tradition centered on the use of the body to find
enlightenment - has become extremely popular in the West, but at the
heart of Tantra is the little-known practice of Layayoga. Layayoga focuses
on the Tantric process of transforming the ordinary human body into a
divine body in which every cell is awakened with consciousness. T h e
fundamental aspect of Layayoga is the arousing of kundalini - dormant
energy within the b o d y - through concentration and breath exercises,
and the movement of this energy through the chakras.
In Layayoga the adept learns not only to raise kundalini power from
the base of the spine up through each chakra to the crown of the head,
but also to then skillfully guide this power back to its home at the base
of the spine. In the process the body becomes suffused with consciousness in a way not found in other types of Yoga. T h e result of the author's
lifetime of yogic experimentation and Sanskrit scholarship, Layayoga corrects many misconceptions about the chakras and nadis. Complete with
meditations and mantras to accompany each chakra, it will allow serious
students of Yoga to realize a previously unimagined level of enlightenment in which they are one with the supreme consciousness.
SHYAM SUNDAR GOSWAMI (1891-1978) was the founder of the Goswami
Institute of Yoga in Sweden, the first Indian institution of its kind in that
country. He was a disciple of the great yoga master Balak Bharati and also
wrote Hatha Yoga: An Advanced Method of Physical Education and Concentration.

Inner Traditions
Rochester, Vermont

Cover design by Peri Champine
Cover illustration by D. Ramstedt

Note: Theo riginal book this scan was made of was missing pages 273-320

LAYAYOGA
THE DEFINITIVE GUIDE TO THE CHAKRAS
AND KUNDALINI

Shyam Sundar Goswami

Inner Traditions
Rochester, Vermont

Inner Traditions International
One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.InnerTraditions.com
Copyright © 1999 by Karin Schalander
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Goswami, Shyam Sundar.
Layayoga : the definitive guide to the chakras and
kundalini / Shyam Sundar Goswami.
p.
cm.
Originally published: Boston : Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980.
Includes index.
ISBN 0-89281-766-6 (alk. paper)
l.Yoga, Laya. 2. Chakras. 3. Kundalini. I. Title.
BL1238.56.L38G67
1999
294.5'436
dc21
99-10266
CIP
Printed and bound in the United States
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To Wani
Goddess of Words

'uttishthata jagrata prapya waran nibodhata'
-Kathopanishad, 1.3. 14
Arise, awake and seek a teacher;
First know 'Who art Thou'.
This Upanishadic saying reverberates in
the Greek maxim

engraved in the temple of Apollo at Delphi.

Foreword to the Second Edition
Foreword
Preface
Acknowledgments
My initiation into Layayoga
Introduction
Part 1
Fundamentals of Layayoga

1

Layayoga and Ashtahgayoga

xiii
xv
xvii
xxi
1
13
43

Yoga from the Mantra Viewpoint Control - First and Second Stages of
Yama (Control) - T h i r d Stage of Yama
(Control): Asana- Fourth Stage of Yama
(Control): Pranayama - Fifth Stage of
Yama (Control): Pratyahara-Sixth,
Seventh and Eighth Stages of Yama
(Control): Dharana, Dhyana and
Samadhi - Yoga Defined and Explained
2 Layayoga - Its Significance and
Method

68

Laya Process - Tantrika Form of
Layayoga - Limbs of Layayoga Muscular Control Process - Breath
Control Process - Concentration in
Layayoga
3 Kundalini - the Coiled Power

78

Adamantine Control - K.undalini Kundalini-rousing Waidika Process of
Kundalini-rousing - Tantrika Process of
vii

Contents
Kundalini-rousing - Pouranika Exposition
of Kundalini
4

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

98

Sound - The Sound Phenomenon - Four
Forms of Sound - Para-sound - Pashyanttsound - Madhyama-sound - Matrikasounds - Waikhan'-sound - Mantra Mantra in Waikhari-form
5 Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory
Thought-concentration

118

Purusha and Prakriti - Evolution of
Creative Principles - Tamasa Evolution
Bhutashuddhi - Absorptive Thoughtconcentration
6 Bhutashuddhi Pranayama Purificatory Breathing

133

Sahita Breathing
Part 2
The Chakra System

7 Introduction to the System of
Chakras

143

Pouranika Fragments on the Chakras The Pouranika System of Chakras

8

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

152

Nadi-system - Chakras - Systems of the
Chakras (Chakra System as Explained by
Narayana; As Exposed in the
Yogachua'amanyupanishad; As Expounded
by Maheswara; As Explained in the
Yogarajopanishad) - Waidika Chakra
System
9

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

Tantrika Nadi-system - Tantrika Systems
of Chakras (The Chakra Systems as
viii

166

Contents
Expounded by Shiwa; The Chakra
System as Expounded by Bhairawi; As
Explained by Rishi Narada; As Explained
by Mahidhara; As Explained by
Brahmananda; As Explained by
Jnanananda; As Explained by Lakshmana
Deshikendra; As Explained by
Brahmananda Giri)
10

Exposition of the Chakras

182

1 Muladhara (Terminology, Position,
Description, Explanation) - 2 Shthanash.tha.na (Terminology, Position, Description, Explanation) - 3 Manipura
(Terminology, Position, Description,
Explanation) - 4 Hrit (Terminology,
Position, Description, Explanation) -5
Anahata (Terminology, Position,
Description, Explanation) - 6 Wishuddha
(Terminology, Position, Description,
Explanation) - 7 Talu (Terminology,
Position, Description, Explanation) -8
Ajna (Terminology, Position, Description,
Explanation)
11 Exposition of the Chakras
(continued)

243

Ajna System - 9 Manas (Terminology,
Position, Description, Explanation) - 10
Indu (Terminology, Position, Description,
Explanation) - 11 Nirwarna (Terminology,
Position, Description, Explanation) Sahasrara System - 12 Guru
(Terminology, Position, Description,
Explanation) - 13 Sahasrara
(Terminology, Position, Description,
Explanation) - The Chakra Table
12

Location of the Chakras

285

The Vertebral Column - The Cranial
Cavity-The Spinal C o r d - T h e Filum
Terminale - The Central Canal - The
Brain - The Medulla Oblongata - The
Pons - The Midbrain - The Interbrain ix

Contents
The Cerebrum-The Ventricular System
of the Brain-The Blue Line-The Course
of the Sushumna-Ida and Pingala-Positions in the Chitrini-Surface and Vertebrocranial Relations-Chakra-location Table
Part 3
Concentration Practices

13 Physical Purification and
Vitalization

297

Purification - Internal Cleansing - Diet
Sexual Dynamism - Functions of Food Food Selection - Muscular Exercise Pranayamic Breathing
14 Mental Purification and
Rejuvenation

309

Discipline - Mental Rejuvenation
15 Posture, Breath-control and
Sense-withdrawal

312

The Practice
16

Practice of Dharana

314

The Practice (Dharana, First Form;
Dharana, Second Form; Dharana, Third
Form)
17

Practice of Dhyana

317

Dhyana Process
18

Practice of

Bhutashuddhi

319

Bhutashuddhi Process - Kundaliniyoga
Note on the Pronunciation of Sanskrit
Words and Mantras
Glossary
Bibliography
Index

328
329
335
339

Illustrations

between pages 12 and 13
I The Author (at the age of 87)
II Wani
III Acharyya Karunamoya Saraswati
IV Master: Sreemat Dwijapada Raya
V An Ancient Picture of the Chakra System
(belonging to the Author's library)
between pages 140 and 141
1 Muladhara Chakra
2 Deities in Muladhara (A)
3 Deities in Muladhara (B)
4 Swadhishthana Chakra
5 Deities in Swadhishthana (A)
6 Deities in Swadhishthana (B)
7 Manipura Chakra
8 Deities in Manipura (A)
9 Deities in Mampura (B)
10 Hrit Chakra

11 Anahata Chakra
12 Deities in Anahata (A)
13 Deities in .Anahata (B)
14 Wishuddha Chakra
15 Deities in Wishuddha (A)
16 Deities in Wishuddha (B)
17 Ajna Chakra
18 Hakini
19 Ajna system
20 Indu Chakra
21 Nirwana Chakra
22 Sahasrara Organization
23 Guru Chakra
24 Sahasrara Chakra (A)
25 Sahasrara Chakra (B)
26 The Ida-Pihgala Course, (i) Bow Position,
(ii) Half-coil Position
27 Location of Chakras in the Chitrini; The
Surface - Vertebro-Cranial Relations
28 Concentration

Foreword to the Second Edition
by Georg Feuerstein, Ph.D.
Founder-Director of the Yoga Research Center
and author of The Shambhala Encyclopedia of Yoga

This unique volume focuses on one of the most recondite aspects of Tantra: the esoteric process by
which the ordinary human body is transmuted into
a "divine body" (divya-deha). In such a body, every cell is suffused with consciousness, and it is
endowed with extraordinary capacities (siddhi).
At the heart of Tantra is Kundaliniyoga, and at
the core of Kundaliniyoga is Layayoga. Tantra, or
Tantrism, is a spiritual tradition that crystallized in
the opening centuries of the first millennium C.E.
and reached its zenith around 1000 C.E. It represents a remarkable synthesis and understands itself
as the teaching for the present age of darkness
(kali-yuga). Among its central tenets is the notion
that the body is not, as taught by more ascetical
schools, an obstacle on the path to enlightenment.
Rather, it is a manifestation of the ultimate Reality and hence must be fully integrated into one's
spiritual aspirations. The early Tantric adepts
(siddha) developed an approach that is body-positive and epitomized in the concept of "body cultivation," or kaya-sadhana, which in due course led
to the creation of Hathayoga with its many
purificatory practices (sadhana), postures (asana),
and techniques of breath control (pranayama).
The purpose of these practices is not merely to
acquire physical fitness and mental health, but primarily to awaken the body's dormant psychospiritual power called kundalini-shakti. When this
power, which is a form of conscious energy, is fully
aroused it begins to transform the body. It leads to
the ecstatic realization of one's true identity as the
pure, universal consciousness (cit), and it also pro-

gressively renders the body transparent to that supreme consciousness.
This alchemical process of transmutation of the
very constituents of the body is the domain of
Layayoga. Laya refers to the absorption of the elements (tattva) constituting the body, which occurs
when the kundalini power rises from the
psychoenergetic center (cakra) at the base of the
spine toward the center at the crown of the head.
In its ascent along the spinal axis, it must pierce a
series of psychoenergetic centers, each of which relates to specific psychosomatic functions and also
anatomical structures. As it passes through each
center, the kundalini absorbs each center's elements
and correlated function. This induces a deepening
state of mental concentration and conscious lucidity, but at the same time decreases physical animation. Thus the outside observer would notice a drastic decrease in metabolism and spontaneous suspension of breathing. In a way, the ascent of the
kundalini amounts to a consciously undergone death
process.
If the yogin remains long enough in this state
of suspended animation, the body simply dies. But
this is not the intended outcome of Tantra. Rather,
the successful practitioner of Tantrayoga must next
skillfully guide the kundalini from the crown center back to its home at the base of the spine. This
restores all the bodily functions, yet brings a new
element into play: the gradual suffusion of the
body with consciousness. For the Tantric adept, enlightenment is nothing unless it includes the body.
Thus the delicate process of Layayoga is designed

Xlll

to bring enlightenment down to earth, into the
body - a quite literally breathtaking adventure.
Shyam Sundar Goswami, who was an adept of
Layayoga, sifted through no fewer than 282 Sanskrit texts to gather all the relevant information
about the process of absorption (laya-krama) into
one volume. This book is a testimony to his spiritual stature and tremendous scholarship, but also
to the yogic heritage of India. Nowhere else on
earth can one find such profound knowledge about
esoteric anatomy and the subtle energetic work

XIV

necessary to achieve full enlightenment.
I hope this volume will help correct prevalent, especially New Age, misconceptions about the cakras
and nadis. The information locked away in the Sanskrit scriptures and presented here comprehensively
for the first time is based on actual yogic experimentation and realization, which makes Shyam
Sundar Goswami's compilation an extremely valuable gift to genuine Yoga practitioners. I would like
to commend the publisher for reissuing this book,
which has been out of print for many years.

Foreword

It has been expounded in the wedamantra:
'yogeyoge tawastarang wajewaje hawamahe.
sakhaya indramutaye' ( - Rigweda-sanghita, 1.
30.7). T h a t is, with our hearts attuned, we
worship with deepest love Indra (Supreme
Power-Consciousness) so as to be able to practise
samprajnata yoga (with all its parts successfully,
by removing all obstacles that distract the mind),
and then
(by developing supreme unaffectedness) asamprajnata yoga.
This worship is zshwarapranidhana, that is,
concentration in deepest love for God. Loveconcentration causes samadhi. Patanjali has
also said: 'ishwarapranidhanad wa' (samadhi
is also attained by love-concentration on God)
( - Yogasutra,
1.23)
and
'samadhisiddhi
rishwarapranidhanat' (the accomplishment of
samadhi is effected by love-concentration on
God) ( - ibid., 2.45).
There are Oupanushada explanations of the
Waidika 'yogeyoge'. It has been stated: 'yogena
yogo jnatawyo yogo yogat prawardhate'
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 2.1). T h a t is,
yoga is to be known by yoga, and yoga develops
from yoga. This means that the attainment of
asamprajnata yoga is accomplished by samprajnata yoga; asamprajnata yoga develops from
samprajnata yoga. Again, 'yogena yogang
sangrodhya . . . ' ( - ibid., 2.12). T h a t is, controlling yoga by yoga. This means that samprajnata yoga is controlled by asamprajnata yoga.
In other words, samprajnata samadhi is transformed into asamprajnata samadhi when control
develops to its highest degree.
The nonappearance of the absorbed writtis

(linawritti) is the limit of control ( - Adhyatmopanishad, 42). At this stage, natural mental
absorption, leading to mind-transcendent state,
occurs ( - Akshyupanishad, 2.3).
Yoga means samadhi. So it has been stated:
'sa gha no yoga a bhuwat . . . ' ( - Rigwedasanghita, 1.5.3), that is, the yogi is established
in yoga. Here, yoga is samadhi.
Waidika
'yogakshemah'
( - Maitrayan-sanghita, 3.12.6; Shuklayajurweda-sanghita, 22.22;
Taittiriya-sanghita, 7.5.18) means the preservation of samadhi. It has been stated that yoga
is the attainment of that which is otherwise
unobtainable. W h a t is that thing? It is that
which is beyond the senses and mind. It is
Brahman (Supreme Consciousness). T h e attainment of Brahman is not possible without recourse to samadhi ( - Nrisinghatapinyupanishad,
Part 2,6.4;Atmopani.yAad, 4;Annapurnopanishad,
4.62; Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, 161-2; etc.). All this indicates that yoga
is samadhi. T h e word kshema means preservation. So 'yogakshema' is the preservation of
samadhi. This is why it has been stated: 'yogang
prapadye kshemang cha kshemang prapadye
yogang cha' ( - Atharwaweda-sanghita, 9.8.2).
T h a t is, I may attain yoga (samadhi) and
kshema (preservation) and kshema and yoga.
T h e attainment of samadhi and its preservation
is the aim of the practice of yoga.
Yoga is hidden in the wedamantra ( - Rigwedasanghita, 10.114.9) as bijas which are its original
form. T h e bijas are four: 'yang' 'ung', 'gang',
and 'ah'. Again, 'yang' is composed of two
bijas, 'ing' and 'ang'. When the powers locked
xv

Foreword

in the bijas are roused and harnessed, the nadabindu factor is absorbed into the bi]a aspect,
and then the bijas, being arranged in order,
constitute the shrouta word 'yogah', which in
that form, as well as in its complex spiritual
forms, occurs frequently in the Sanghitas of the
Weda.
T h e two matrika-letters ing and ang represent
agni (fire) and soma (moon), or pingala and
ida. Pingala and ida cause respiratory motions
which are based on yang bija. When yang is
roused, respiration is suspended because of the
absorption of pihgala and ida in the sushumna,
and as a result kumbhaka is effected. At this
stage, the yang-fbrce is transformed into yama
(control). T h e emergence of yama occurs in
three stages: physical control in relaxation in
asana, vital control in kumbhaka, and sensory
control in pratyahara. At the pratyahara stage,
the bija ung is roused and radiates udana force,
by which concentration develops in three stages
in the mental field: dharana, dhyana and
samprajnata samadhi. At the samadhi stage,
yama (control) becomes sangyama (supercontrol) .
In samprajnata samadhi, the bija gang is
roused as concentration-knowledge-light (prajnaloka). Associated with gang is wisarga (ah);
it is represented by the sign:. Wisarga is Kundalini.
Kundalini
is
samadhi and
illuminates the whole superconcentrated mind
by her splendour. T h e n , Kundalini absorbs superconsciousness by her absorptive power to effect
a mind-transcendent stage in which samprajnata
samadhi is transformed into asamprajnata samadhi. Finally, Kundalini herself is absorbed into
and united as one with Parama Shiwa - Supreme
Consciousness. This supreme absorptive yoga is
layayoga. Rigweda calls it the attainment of the
state of Indra in yoga ( - Rigweda-sanghita,
4.24.4).
T h e r e is a clear indication of the layayogic
absorptive process in the Atharwaweda-.sanghita,
9.8.2. It has been stated there 'ashtawingshani

XVI

shiwani shagmani sahayogang bhajanta me',
that is, all the cosmic principles together
become beneficial and pleasant when they are
devoted to yoga. This means that the cosmic
principles, after being roused from the absorptive
state of yoga, become propitious. This yoga
is absorptive concentration. It is layayoga.
T h e nature of layayoga has been expounded
in the following m a n t r a :
'jyotishmantang ketumantang
trichakrang sukhang rathang
sushadang bhuriwaram.
chitramagha yasya yoge 'dhijajne
tang wang huwe ati riktang pibadhyai'
( - Rigweda-sanghita, 8.58.3)
T h a t is, ordinarily, this luminous and living
force is latent in the body with its three sheaths
(matter-life-mind), and is capable of becoming
quiescent. When, by absorptive concentration,
this highest, splendorous, and omnipotent power
is in union with Supreme Consciousness, a
'deathless substance' (amrita) starts to flow.
It is then necessary, by purificatory and vitalizing
exercises, to prepare both body and mind for the
utilization of this substance. This splendorous
power is Kundalini.
This is Waidika layayoga. Its successful practice
and accomplishment can be achieved only
under the direct instruction of a teacher (guru).
In this book, Waidika layayoga and its Tantrika
and Pouranika interpretations are clearly and
elaborately elucidated. T h e author is a renowned
teacher of yoga, whose work is based not only
on his lifelong study and practice of yoga, but
also on direct instruction by advanced layayogis.
T h e book will prove especially useful to all
serious readers who feel the need for attaining
mental control and concentration in their everyday life.

Calcutta

Acharyya K a r u n a m o y a Saraswati

Preface

This book aims to present layayoga authentically
and elaborately. For this purpose it was necessary
to investigate and study the immense number
of ancient documents of the rishis who expounded
yogaThe present work is essentially based on the
Rigweda-sanghita, containing 10,589 mantras;
179 Upanishads; 67 Tantras having over 10,000
pages which contain innumerable verses, and
9 Tantrika manuscripts having 386 pages;
23 Puranas, containing 451,000 verses; the
100,000-verse Mahabharata of Wyasa, which
includes
the
Bhagawadgita;
the
29,000verse Yogawashishta-Ramayana of Walmiki;
and Yoga-darshana of Patanjali, containing 195
aphorisms.
From these sources, 4,122 mantras and verses
have been quoted in this work. T h e mantras
and verses had to be translated. They contain
1, 2, 3 or 4 lines each. All this was necessary in
order to find out - rather rediscover - the original form of this yoga - the form which was
given by the rishis of ancient India, who were
the exponents of yoga. T h e rishis introduced a
system of technical terms to interpret the hidden
meaning and various processes of yoga to their
pupils. It is our purpose to paint a genuine picture
of layayoga - layayoga as it was known and
practised in ancient India.
With regard
to the English translation of the Sanskrit texts cited in this work, I
wish to say that an attempt has been made to.
give, in many cases, the secret and yogic meanings in preference to the literary translations.
However, in each case, a complete reference

has been given which includes the title of the
book or manuscript, number of the mantras
and verses whenever possible, chapters, etc.
This may be helpful to research students of
yoga. T h e edition and the author's or editor's
name have been given in the bibliography.
For explanation of transliteration of Sanskrit
terms the reader is referred to the Note on
Pronunciation at the end of the book (p. 328).
Moreover, it was absolutely necessary to have
the guidance of competent and well-experienced
layayoga gurus for the right understanding of
the Sanskrit texts and a practical knowledge
of the various processes of layayoga. This has
been specially utilized in the part dealing with
Concentration Practices (Part 3 of this book),
and to which my guru's contribution is the
greatest. My own personal experiences also
have been helpful.
An important question may be raised in
connection with this study: W h a t is the significance of layayoga and its utility in our lives?
T h e whole book gives the answer. Still it can be
added here, that a serious student, determined
to make experiments by undergoing the layayoga
practices, will discover the tremendous power
of thought and concentration which usually
remains hidden. Concentration becomes so real
and forceful that at a certain stage it rouses a
latent power which is at zero level in our ordinary
state of existence; now, he is in contact with that
power which becomes the gigantic powerreality in his life. This power no longer exists
in imagination, but becomes such a powerful
force that it is able to alter the vital functioning
xvii

Preface

of the body to a state of suspension, and transmute mental consciousness into a mindtranscendent form; and, in the ordinary state
of existence, it causes perfect vital functioning,
and makes the mind forceful, constructive,
attentive and tranquil. All this means that an
unknown aspect of our existence begins to
manifest itself on the surface stratum of our
lives which illuminates our mind from within,
and vitalizes our body through an established
vital control. This unsuspected power has been
termed Kundalini, and layayoga has demonstrated the possibility of rousing it. Layayoga has
also shown that these practices can be successfully carried out without abandoning the 'worldpath'. M a n y accomplished layayogis are examples of this.
Kundali-power operates in the chakra-system.
There is no possibility of tracing the chakras
in the nervous system or any other part of the
body. T h e y are not material but dynamic
graphs of power operations. This does not mean
that they are fictitious. There is a definite
relation between the chakras and certain
vertebro-cranial points. These points in the
medulla spinalis and the brain are also related
to certain points on the surface of the body.
T h e nervous points can be determined approximately through the surface points. T h e nervous
points are closely related to certain positions
where the replicas of the chakras appear in
deep thought-concentration and certain physical
effects are also produced. This is the first time
that an interrelation between the chakra-system
and the cerebrospinal system has been demonstrated on a scientific basis.
Owing to the failure in understanding the
principles of yoga, there have been many
misconceptions and illusions about the chakras,
and especially about Kundalini. As for example,
the theosophical interpretation of them. To
start with, the theosophists acquired their knowledge of Kundalini and the chakras from the
Sanskrit works dealing with the subject. But
then the original accounts were distorted, either
on purpose or due to a lack of understanding,
which needs, first, the technical knowledge,
and second, the guru's direct instructions.
H e r e is an example: C.W. Leadbeater (Leadxvii

beater, C.W., The Chakras, T h e Theosophical
Publishing House, Adyar, Madras 20, India,
1952, p. 20) says that the crown chakra (that
is, the sahasrara), described in Indian books as
thousand-petalled, which is really not very far
from the truth, has 960 radiations (i.e., petals)
of its primary force in the outer circle. This
means that the sahasrara has only 960 petals
instead of 1,000. This indicates a complete
lack of understanding of the organization of the
sahasrara. T h e sahasrara is the expansion of the
pranic bindu which is in a supremely concentrated state when prana becomes patent and
causes an emission of 50 power-units, and each
of these units becomes potentized 20 times to
manifest its full creativity. This means 50 x 20 =
1,000, and so, the sahasrara has exactly 1,000
petals, neither less nor more.
O n e cannot have anything against a personal
or a group experience, but when such recently
acquired experiences are presented to challenge
the age-old yogic experiences, which have been
verified by the yogis from time immemorial, it
becomes like a 'frog in a well challenging a frog
of the ocean'.
T h e r e is another important point which I
want to make clear. It has been stated (Arundale,
G.S., Kundalini, T h e Theosophical Publishing
House, Adyar, Madras, India, 1947, p. 17)
that there is a danger of sexual stimulation in
relation to the rousing of Kundalini. T h e yogic
experiences are quite the contrary. T h e rousing
is indispensably associated with the fully controlled sex urge. It has also been stated (Leadbeater, C.W., The Chakras, T h e Theosophical
Publishing House, Adyar, Madras, India, 1952,
p. 64) that there are dangers in rousing Kundalini
prematurely. U n d e r certain conditions, Kundalini may be roused automatically, without
the knowledge of the person concerned. But this
does no h a r m . A practitioner cannot rouse Kundalim if he is not prepared for it. In fact, there is no
such thing as prematurely rousing Kundalini,
and there is no danger when Kundalini is roused.
It has also been supposed that Kundaliniyoga
is materialistic yoga. Is there any such thing
as materialistic yoga? Ramakrishna says that
real spiritual knowledge cannot arise if Kundalini is not roused. Is he mistaken? W a m a says

Preface

that without the awakening of Kundalini, liberation is not possible. Is he wrong? Tailanga has
stated that the rousing of Kundalini leads to
yoga. Shankaracharya himself was an accomplished yogi in Kundaliniyoga. Arawinda has
called K.undalini the divine force. Did all these
spiritual leaders and yoga masters follow materialistic yoga? We understand that Kundalini
is the spiritual dynamism which remains
latent when coiled, but becomes real in life
when it is roused. T h e real spiritualization
of h u m a n life occurs through dynamic Kun-

dalini.
T h e author does not claim that this work is
a complete exposition of layayoga. It cannot
be so, because many layayoga manuscripts

appear to have been lost during the course of
time. It may be that there are manuscripts dealing with layayoga lying in the private libraries
of yogic scholars in India, and one day they may
become generally accessible.
T h e author is also quite conscious of the
limitations of his knowledge, capacity and time.
T h e only remedy is if an advanced layayogi,
who possesses more extensive material, undertakes to make a complete work on layayoga.
Last, the author hopes that the present
work may inspire women and men all over
the world to introduce concentration, as an
indispensable practice, into their lives.
Stockholm

Shyam Sundar Goswami

xix

Acknowledgments

First, I wish to thank the great authority on
the Weda, Acharyya Karunamoya Saraswati,
Calcutta, for his kindness to write a foreword
to this work.
The Plates II and 28 are photographs of my
pupil Mrs Karin Schalander, Stockholm; Plate
III is reproduced with the permission of
Acharyya Karunamoya Saraswati himself;
Plates 1-26 have been made under my guidance,

by my pupil Mrs Dea Ramstedt, Stockholm,
and Plate 27 by Mrs Ramstedt and Dr Ulf
Jansson, Stockholm. The Plates II and 28
have been taken by Mr Leif Persson, Grasmark,
Sweden.
I wish to thank them all.
Shyam Sundar Goswami

xxi

My Initiation into Layayoga

'Layayoga has assumed an intermediate position
between hathayoga and rajayoga. T h e most
complicated processes of hathayogic pranayama
and the very advanced and difficult rajayogic
processes of concentration have been simplified
in layayoga. T h e essence of mantrayoga has also
been introduced in layayoga. So it is a most
practical form of yoga suited to nearly all
persons desiring to develop concentration' said my Master after my initiation.
It had not been an easy matter for me to
penetrate deeply into the subject of layayoga
and understand its fundamental principles.
Even prolonged study was not enough. I felt
the necessity of having instructions directly
from a master of layayoga. It seemed absolutely
imperative to learn many unknown aspects
of this yoga and its various hidden practices
from a guru.
T h e first meeting with my Master occurred
in this way. O n e day a friend of mine came and
asked me whether I would be interested in
seeing a great yogi who happened to be in
Calcutta. I was rather surprised - such a yogi
in such a noisy city! When I expressed my
thoughts to my friend, he said: 'A yogi can be in
the forests of the Himalaya or in a big city;
a real yogi is as unconcerned with his own
environment as he is with himself.' I realized
that what he had said was true. I accepted his
invitation and accompanied him.
We entered a spacious clean room. A dignified
middle-aged m a n was sitting on a couch and a
number of men - I presumed them to be his
disciples - sat on a carpet on the floor. My

friend immediately bowed his head to the
yogi's feet and received his blessing. I followed
my friend's example, who then introduced
me to the yogi. He received me in a very kindly
manner. He asked us to sit down. This was in the
evening. However, I did not ask about anything.
I only looked at him continuously. I sensed in
him a very serene, internally joyous, and kindly
person, and also that his inner being was all
purity and full of power. I had never had such
an experience before in connection with anyone.
T h e thought came to m e : W h a t makes a m a n
like this. Was it a sign of awakened spirituality?
W h a t mode of life does he lead? I resolved to
investigate all these things. T h e first meeting
ended in this way. I spent some hours there. My
friend and I bowed to his feet and said good-bye
to him. T h e Master left Calcutta after some days.
When he returned to Calcutta next year I
visited him more often, almost every day. I
wanted to know more about him in my own way.
So one day I asked: 'Is it necessary to accept
God as the ultimate reality?' O t h e r disciples
who were there appeared to be amazed at my
question. Perhaps they thought that the question
indicated atheistic tendencies. Smiling, the
Master replied: 'It is not a question of necessity;
you can neither accept nor reject it. This is the
position.'
His statement was not clear to me. I pondered
over it again and again. M a n y thoughts came
into my m i n d : Does the Master want to avoid
the subject? If so, why? My thoughts were
continuing in this way when the Master suddenly
interrupted them by saying: 'It is not that the

1

My initiation into Layayoga

subject needs to be avoided.' I stared at him.
Did he read my thoughts? T h e Master continued : 'It is avoided in a life that is not spiritually
illuminated. Mere intellection is inadequate
for the purpose.'
I said: 'If our intelligence and our thoughts
and our reason are unable to find God, then
He cannot be found, and, consequently, there
will always be speculation.'
Master: 'For you, the senses and intelligence
are the only criterions - the only instruments
for acquiring knowledge. You are normally
endowed with them and have learnt how to use
them. You have no other means. But the Supreme
God is beyond intelligence, and the senses cannot
reach Him. This is why the senso-intellectual
means are inadequate.'
I said: 'When we have no other means than
the senses and intelligence for the acquisition
of knowledge, how can we know G o d ? '
Master: ' T h e senses and intelligence are
only partially suited even for knowing the
external world, and that is their limit.'
I said: 'Partially suited?'
Master: 'Yes. T h e senses have limitations.
First of all, the power of the senses varies in
different species and also in different individuals
of the same species. T h e differences in power
may also be due to age, the state of health,
heredity and other factors. Even supposing
that a normal, healthy young person has
very good sensory powers, they are still limited.
There are three fundamental limits in relation
to sensory objects - minute objects, concealed
objects, and far distant objects. If the normal
senses are unable to overcome these barriers,
then it is quite possible that they do not perceive
certain objects at all.'
I said: 'But the range of the senses can be
enhanced by the use of sensitive instruments.'
Master: ' T h a t is true. But the material
instruments, however refined they may be,
are still material. T h e y cannot reach what is
beyond the material. There is no possibility of
"seeing" the mind with the help of these instruments. Even a most sensitive instrument has
its limits, which it cannot surpass. T h e three
sensory barriers can be modified by the use of
appropriate instruments, but the limitation
2

is still there.
'Therefore, the knowledge acquired through
the normal senses is limited; and the enhanced
sensory power due to the use of sensitive
apparatus is also limited, and, consequently,
imperfect. H o w can you acquire perfect knowledge of a reality which is perfect through
imperfect sensory means?'
I said: 'The imperfections of our senses are
made up for, at least to a great extent, by
intelligence if it is highly developed. This is the
reason why it is necessary to utilize our senses
together with our intelligence so as to know
the world.'
Master: 'We must not forget that our intelligence is also limited.'
I continued: 'According to the degree of
development, the power of intelligence varies.
But h u m a n intelligence has reached very far.
It has discovered many hidden laws of nature,
and created things that are almost unbelievable.
It has altered the face of our earth. It has
revolutionized our thoughts and mode of living
and has tremendously increased our knowledge.'
Master: 'All this is true. But still that very
highly developed intelligence of ours has failed
to know God. God has not been found in the
various forms of energy that are active around
us; or in inert matter; or in molecules, atoms
and elementary particles; or in radiation; or
in the earth or in the atmosphere. O u r intelligence has tried to explore matter in every
possible way, and found nothing else but matterenergy and energy-matter. Are not all these
indicative of its limitations? Even our intelligence
in the so-called scientific field has failed to know
mind, and scientific attempts are being made to
demonstrate that mind is an unknown form of
matter, or that it derives from matter; an
attempt is being made to restrict the mind to
the cranium.'
I said: 'But the philosopher's intelligence
appears to have sensed that there is something
which is beyond matter. Even the h u m a n mind
is considered to be too small. There has been
talk of a cosmic mind or greater intelligence, and
also of God. Anyhow, everything appears to
be uncertain, speculative. What can we do?
Master: 'So long as the highest spiritual

My initiation into Layayoga

truth is left to the j u d g m e n t of those who think
that what is obtained through h u m a n intelligence
aided by instruments is the real truth, and anything else is not truth but superstition and
nonsense; so long as God is sought for in terms
of philosophic thought and reasoning alone,
He will appear to be far way from us.'
I said: 'In that case, even religion does not
help us very much. T h e priests have worshipped
God ritualistically for hundreds of years in the
temples, but how many of them have known God.
The One-God conception has been the ideal
of many who go to the churches for the absolution
of their sins and to be in contact with G o d ;
but they hear only words - empty words, and
come back with that. Those who join in the
mass prayers in the mosques, tell us the same
story. How many of them have real love for
humanity? All these things show the failure
of religion.'
Master: 'We have to go deep to understand
the role of religion in h u m a n life. First of all,
the rishis of ancient India have declared that
Dharma - you may call it religion if you like is perpetual. It is not made by m a n but remains
as an intrinsic part of the cosmic world and in
the lives of all beings - eternally. It is the grand
support of the universe and all beings. It is
Brahman - God who sustains everything. T h e r e fore, the awakening of God within us and seeing
God in the universe is religion.'
I said: 'How can religion be perpetual when
a particular religion originates from a spiritual
leader? And in all such religions there are great
diversities. O n e says God is o n e ; the other says
God is many. O n e thinks God is without form,
while the other thinks God has forms. O n e is
of the opinion that love for God is the means,
while others consider that divine wisdom leads
to God. There are also prayers, ritualistic worship
and many other means. Where does the solution
lie?'
Master: 'First of all, you have to understand
that religion in its real spiritual form cannot
be created by a man. Religion is the natural
spiritual principle, divine in character, which
operates along with the principle of "cosmosity"
in which the original creativity is manifested.
It is the spiritual aspect of the Supreme Power

which is all God. Therefore, it is perpetually
existing without any interruption. Consequently,
it cannot be m a n - m a d e . T h e rishis did not make
any religion, but explained different aspects of
religion which are always in existence. Neither
did any " i n c a r n a t i o n " found any individual
religion, but expounded and strengthened religion which is eternally existing.'
I said: 'But what about Buddhism, Christianity or Islam? Were they not founded by
men?'
Master: 'Long time after Krishna left our
earth, Goutama Buddha came to this world.
He can be considered as the first spiritual
leader in India whose name has been associated
with the introduction of Buddhism. Buddha
revived yoga by his own example - yoga which
had become corrupted and abused by that
time. In his life, he showed how to reach the
final stage of spiritual yoga. He showed how,
by making our consciousness void - free from
all mundaneness, we could realize directly the
ultimate reality where everything else is nonbeing. This is nirwana.'
I said: ' W h a t about Jesus Christ? About
Mohammad?'
Master: 'Jesus Christ was a great spiritual
leader in Western Asia at that time and is
regarded as an incarnation. He manifested his
spirituality in that high degree, where his
consciousness, raised above all worldliness, and
in a state of concentratedness which contained
God alone, became godly, and finally, the
divine consciousness was reabsorbed in God. It
was possible for his intimate disciples, who
realized God in Christ and in themselves, to
develop Christianity, through which, being
spiritually inspired, they wanted to give the
essence of spiritual truth to m a n for his salvation.
' M o h a m m a d also realized God within, in
concentration, and wished to communicate
the spiritual truth to man.'
I said: 'If such great spiritual persons as
Buddha, Christ and M o h a m m a d are the founders
of the great religions, why are they not effective?'
Master: 'So long as the spiritual currents
flow in a religion or in one of its forms or doctrines
by the tremendous spiritual impetus of a great
religious leader, religion remains alive and,
3

My initiation into Layayoga

consequently, becomes fruitful. But as soon as
spirituality ebbs, religion becomes mere words
without life.
' W h e n the spiritual force imparted by Buddha
in his doctrine began to be diminished as time
passed distortion a n d corruption came, and
spirituality was replaced by the dead words of
theory. At a certain time Shahkara, who realized
Brahman in samadhi, was able to destroy the
Buddhistic doctrine of lifeless words as then
preached by the followers of Buddha, and to
establish the Oupanishada One-and-All Brahman
doctrine. This was possible because of his great
spiritual power combined with the extraordinary brilliance of his intellect. But when
Sharikara's spirituality began to ebb in his
followers in later times, the Brahman doctrine
likewise assumed wordiness without spiritual
life. In this condition it was unable to stand
against the bhakti doctrine of the great bhaktiyogi Chaitanya, who was immersed in the deepest
love of God, both in concentration and in daily
life.
'A religion or a doctrine when not strengthened by spirituality, cannot meet the spiritual
needs of m a n . But even when a religion deteriorates through the withered spirituality of its adherents, there will always be some silent spiritual
persons who uphold that faith or religion - the
real yogis, otherwise the religion would become
extinct. This is true of all religions.'
Now I recollected the three great silent yogis:
a Buddhist yogi who attained a very high level in
samadhi; the well-known Christian yogi, Saint
J o h n of the Cross, from whose heart intense love
ascended towards God in deep concentration;
and a great Muslim yogi, Abdul Gafur, who was
endowed with great spiritual power.
I said: 'It seems strange that God is not reflected in the unusually brilliant intelligence of a
genius; the scientists do not know G o d ; the
philosophers only speculate about G o d ; and God
appears to remain hidden even to most followers
of religion. W h y is God very far away from
us! Is religion superfluous for m a n living in
the modern world?'
Master: 'God is far away when the "sight" is
submerged in the materiality of our existence;
it cannot go beyond the sensory boundary; and
4

hence God is so far away that he is not seen at all.
'God is very far and also very near. When God
is "seen" within, he is ever present in our consciousness; the contact is never lost. When God
is seen within, he is also seen without; and he is
also seen in what is beyond both within and without. God is within and also outside and is what
is neither within nor outside. No one can say
" I t is this, it is not t h a t " . It is an infinite ocean of
Being and Consciousness.
A n d also God cannot be denied. To deny
God means to accept the permanent limitation
of our beingness. In our being also lies the
substance of infinity which becomes illumined
in the Beingness of God. God is our being in its
supreme stratum.'
I was highly impressed by the profundity of the
Master's knowledge; and not merely that, I
began to feel a real spiritual foundation upon
which his knowledge was based. I began to
appreciate that something deep and powerful
was utilizing his intellect as an avenue for the
outward expression of inner truth. I was proud
of my learning and I devoted fifteen or sixteen
hours a day to my studies. My pride began to
be demolished; my arguments began to fail.
However, I put one more question, and that
was the last of its kind.
I asked: 'Why is this "cosmosity" which is the
root of all our sufferings?'
Master: 'It can as well be said that because of
the "cosmosity" we are given a chance to enjoy
so much.'
'Why has the universe been manifested?
W h o can answer that, and if it is answered,
who can understand it? W h e n h u m a n power
cannot produce it, when h u m a n intelligence
cannot penetrate into it, how can that question,
as such, be helpful. H u m a n intelligence is too
small to solve the mystery of the appearance
of the universe. But there is the possibility of
the h u m a n mind being in a state in which the
image of the universe is not recorded, and the
mind is in tune with something which is neither
material nor mental, but the non-material-nonmental reality. In this reality there is no trace of
the universe, of mind or of matter. Its realization
is both mental a n d nonmental. T h e mind of our
everyday life, which perceives the world, desires,

My initiation into Layayoga

feels pleasures and pains, thinks and wills, is not
all, but only one aspect of our being, represented
by I-consciousness around which is whirling
the sensory world. Again, the mind in its other
aspect completely closes its doors to the world
and does not desire, think, and will, but realizes
the Supreme Reality which is all, and besides
which there is nothing else. Ultimately this
unitary experience merges into a beingness
which is itself the beingness of Supreme Consciousness.
'The Infinite Power Principle is the being of
the Infinite Supreme Consciousness. In its
purely power aspect, that is, power isolated from
Supreme Consciousness, it is no longer infinite
as it is no longer the being of the Infinite Consciousness. T h u s it is as if a finite section of the
infinite being in which the Infinite Consciousness
appears as a finite being. This finiteness in
infinity is the phenomenon of the mental and
material universe. T h e universe is real when the
Infinite Consciousness is veiled, but unreal
when the finite being is no being as is "seen"
in the Supreme Being.
'The finite being manifesting as the I-consciousness is nil at the infinite point, but this
nothingness appears to be something when the
supremeness of the Being is veiled. In other
words, a phenomenon of Godlessness, which is
in reality a nonbeing, emerges as a being.
But there is a possibility of arousing spirituality
amidst mundaneness, which leads to liberation.
Spirituality is the awakening of Godliness in
consciousness. So spirituality is not something
engrafted into m a n ; it is in the highest aspect
of his nature, through which m a n can manifest
his God-being, which is his own being in its
supreme aspect. Without spirituality m a n is a
hopelessly restricted being moving aimlessly,
with his lust and greed, in the m u n d a n e ocean.
'Religion is the means to the spiritual realization of God. Without this realization, religion
is mere words, or an order of no value. T h a t is
dead religion. Real life comes to religion through
yoga. Yoga is the intrinsic part of religion. Without yoga religion is no religion; without yoga
religion is lifeless. All the great spiritual leaders
and many of the adherents of a religion have
made yoga the basic spiritual practice.

' T h e natural transformation of sense-consciousness, which is perceptive in character,
and in which uncontrolled thoughts are constantly arising - and these thoughts are often
tinged with unrestrained and unspiritual affectiveness - into a nonoscillatory concentrated
form, in which is held what is spiritual and divine
- is yoga. Yoga is the highest order of the h u m a n
mind. And still in its supreme aspect, yoga is the
supreme spirituality in which beingness is only
of God. T h e r e is nothing else, all is God.'
T h e Master stopped. It was very late at night.
So I bowed to him and left with a 'heart' full
of deep thoughts.
I began to ponder over what the Master h a d
said in our long discourse. M a n y thoughts
came to my mind. W h a t is this life! We find
that living is associated with desiring, willing,
thinking and emoting. These activities usually
have two modes of expression. In one, we see
that m a n desires and experiences pleasure in
enjoyment and also suffers pain and sorrow.
In pleasure-seeking, he does not hesitate to
commit excesses. He becomes sensual and greedy.
We all see that, in spite of his sexual, alimentary
and other excesses, he is able to manifest his
other qualities. He thinks brilliantly and constructively. He becomes an educationist, scientist,
artist, and philosopher.
But do we find in him spirituality as a mode
of being in his life? Does he not live without
God ? M a n y people may talk of God and religion,
but mostly it is mere talk. Of course, there are a
limited n u m b e r of people who think of religion
seriously, who search for God sincerely, and are
moral and spiritual by nature. Therefore, it is
possible for m a n to manifest his spiritual qualities
despite his sensuality, greed, and all excesses.
Is it possible to make spirituality a living
factor in life when there is so much strong worldly
desire for the satisfaction of which the whole
being is involved? If we are advised to renounce
all worldliness, it would be impossible to achieve,
because of our supreme attachment to sensory
objects; if we are asked to reject sexual and other
pleasures, it will not work, because they are as
deeply ingrained in us as if they were parts of
our organism.
Does initiation help? This thought came into
5

My initiation into Layayoga

my mind. Is it not necessary to be spiritually
prepared? Am I really qualified for it? I also
thought the opposite. Will not initiation release
spiritual qualities in my nature? It m a y be that
a certain degree of preparedness is necessary
for a pupil; but will not initiation itself sow the
spiritual seeds in him ? This is how my thoughts
continued for some months.
O n e day the friend who first introduced me to
the Master came to my house and told m e :
'The Master has fixed the date of your initiation
which will take place outside Calcutta in a
lonely place; so be ready for it.' I was very
surprised to hear this news. T h e thought came
into my m i n d : 'Has the Master seen something
in me of which I am unconscious myself?' I
do not know. I could not speak for some time.
My friend smiled and said: 'Everything will be
all right.' He was himself an initiate.
However, my initiation took place on the
date fixed. In initiation, the guru gives to a
faithful and serious disciple a specific mantra.
T h e mantra is a great aid to concentration.
Initiation was rather sudden in my case. I also
heard from our mother (the Master's wife)
that the Master's initiation also happened
suddenly and that in connection with it a miracle
occurred.
T h e Master began to feel spiritual thirst
when he was young. Day by day it grew more
and more intense and ultimately it drew him
to a great Tantrika and layayoga master,
Bholanatha. He told my Master: 'Your spiritual
aspiration will be consummated through the
Tantrika form of yoga.' T h e n he gave some
instructions to the Master and asked him to
come back after a few months.
T h e Master went back home and started to
carry out the instructions given him. He then
began to feel a very great desire for initiation,
and this continued to increase. He became
restless, and one day he ran to the Tantrika
yogi Bholanatha.
T h e guru said: 'It is just the time for your
initiation. I will perform it to-day. Go and take
your bath.' After doing this the Master returned
to his guru. T h e n the guru said to h i m : 'Now
you have to bring the bilwa leaves (Aegle
Marmelos - wood-apple) for worship a n d

6

oblation. T h e leaves should be new and not
spotted or torn.' T h e n he pointed to a bilwa
tree situated at a little distance from the place,
and said: ' T h a t tree is very big, and good leaves
are only on a thick branch which is very high.
It may even be impossible for you to reach the
branch with a long bamboo pole. You need not
worry. Go and stand under the branch calmly
a n d the branch will come down to you by itself.
Do not be afraid: go!' T h e Master was very
much surprised to hear this. However, he
went there a n d saw the enormous bilwa tree.
He also found the huge branch bearing good
leaves, but it was so high that he could not reach
it even with a very long pole. Then he stood
under it calmly. After a while the Master saw that
the immensely thick branch was bending slowly
downward and it came down so much that it
was possible for the Master to take some leaves
with his hands. He came back with the leaves.
T h e guru initiated him, and also taught him
more spiritual practices. At that time the
Master was about nineteen years old.
After my initiation the Master instructed me
in the first stage of concentration according to
layayoga. He said: 'Concentration should be
practised every day and regularly. T h e morning
is the best time for it. Concentration may be
divided into two parts: preliminary and regular.
As soon as you get up, sit on the bed in a yoga
posture, facing towards the north and concentrate on a white divine form, as advised,
in the white twelve-petalled lotus just above
the head. T h e n think that the amrita - the
immortal life-substance - is flowing from the
divine form by which you have been completely b a t h e d ; then think that "I have been
energized and immortalized by amrita; I have
no disease, no senility, no death, no sorrow"
T h i n k deeply, make your thinking vital. T h e
regular concentration can be done either after
this, or after your bath, which should be taken
after the evacuation of the bowels and oral
cleansing. Better do this part of the concentration after your bath.'
O n e day the Master talked about the purification of the body. He said: 'The purification
of the body is an intrinsic factor in concentration.
We know that food, water and air are absolutely

My initiation into Layayoga

necessary for maintaining life in the body. T h e
functioning of the life-energy in relation to the
body causes two phenomena: keeping the body
alive and making the mind perform its sensory
functions.
'The life-energy is composed of two factors one is fundamental and the other is secondary.
T h e fundamental factor is involved in exhibiting
developmental functions which maintain growth,
development, vitality, and bodily health. T h e
secondary factor is concerned with the reproduction of the species, the sexual function.
Associated with the functioning of the lifeenergy in the body is the manifestation of senseconsciousness. In other words, the mind is
manifesting its sensory functions in relation
to the developmental and sexual functions.
'The developmental and sexual energy each has two principles, activation and restraint. But the activation factor is more powerful and predominant in a living body; and, as
the mind is closely linked to the living body it is
manifesting its sensory functions along with the
developmental and sexual functions. T h r o u g h
its sensory functions the mind is cooperating
with the living body in its functions.
'In sensory functions, the control factor of the
mind is recessive, very weak. This is why the
multiformity of the mind is associated with the
living body at its common level. T h e sensory
mind is utilizing its intelligence mainly in
creating uncontrolled thoughts, and its will is
restricted merely to the phenomenon of conation.
The sensory mind, through its conative function,
is playing a dominant role in the living body,
and exercising its influence directly on the
muscles, and indirectly on the internal organic
functions.
'The conative functions of the mind are
principally five. They a r e :
(1) speech,
(2) prehension, (3) locomotion, (4) excretion,and
(5) reproduction. T h e developmental function
is helped by the sensory mind through prehension
and locomotion which directly influence the
muscular system, and through it the organic
system. T h e mind is directly helping the organic
system by the process of excretion. T h e mind
is playing a great role in sexual function through
its involvement in the process of reproduction.

However, on the one side, the sensory mind is
aiding the developmental and sexual functions,
and on the other side, it is utilizing these functions to serve its own purposes.
' T h e m a i n object of the sensory functions of the
mind is to experience pleasure in enjoyment by
establishing a direct sensory contact with a sense
object. Without this sensory contact enjoyment
is incomplete, pleasure is partial. O n e cannot
get full satisfaction by merely thinking of food,
it must be tasted. T h e full sexual enjoyment
is not possible by sexual thoughts alone; it
. requires sensory contact with the object.
' T h e pleasure-pattern, which is an intrinsic
mode of the mind, excites it to experience
pleasure often to a degree which causes excesses,
a n d consequently sexual functions are carried
on beyond a normal point. T h e pleasurepattern which is based on pleasure impressions
acquired through previous experiences, develops
as affection in the sense-consciousness, which
causes desires. Desires excite three phenomena
in the m i n d : the rousing of strong passion,
volition and
conation,
and
uncontrolled
thoughts. T h e pleasure-desires drive the mind
to establish sense connection with the objects
in order to experience great satisfaction by
enjoying them again and again, and to an
increasing extent. In this way the excesses are
committed willingly and with great pleasure.
'So the mind manifests its sensory functions
to give a material shape to its pleasure-desires
to fulfil the enjoyment of the " I " , and, in this
enjoyment, there is a sensory relation with an
appropriate object in the material field. T h e
constant penetration of the sense objects, as
images, into the sense-consciousness causes an
oscillatory state in which the intellective and
volitive aspects of the mind also take part.
T h e pleasure-pattern, which is the basis of the
sensory mind, creates a pleasure-loving tendency
and the mind exhibits it in thoughts, feelings
and actions. In the mind all sensory images,
all thoughts, all feelings and the impressions
of all actions are recorded, and that makes
it multifarious. It is a state of anti-concentration.
'Deconcentration is the mode adopted by the
sensory mind. It is mainly due to the recessiveness
of the control factor of the mind. Unless the

7

My initiation into Layayoga

control factor is awakened, it is not possible to
transform the oscillatory consciousness into a
state of concentratedness. In yoga, the process
of yama (control) has been prescribed for this
purpose. T h e yama process consists of eight
stages, and the power of control develops stage
by stage, and at the final stage control reaches
its highest limit and becomes supercontrol
leading to samadhi.
' T h e control of the sensory mind is impossible,
unless not only the sense-consciousness itself,
with its thoughts, feelings, and volitions, but
also the body, which is used by it as its apparatus,
and the sense objects are taken in consideration.
This means that a state common to the mind,
body and objects, and anti-oscillatory in
character, is established. According to yoga,
it is a state of purity, in which the mind, the
body, and the sense objects undergo purification.
' T h e sensory phenomenon is in the nature
of thought-word form. Unless it is changed into
a form in which the control factor, that is almost
dormant, is awakened, real concentration is
not possible. T h e thought-word form of the
mind is neutralized step by step by a process
of purification effected by the introduction of
suprasound power in word-form, that is mantra.
T h e word-form of mantra does not create
thoughts in the mind, but it neutralizes the
sensory mind when the power residing in it is
awakened, and develops the power of control.
So mantra develops yama (control) by effecting
a purification of the mind.
'But as the sensory mind is in relation to the
body and sense objects, they also should be
purified by mantra. T h e sense objects in effect
are parts of the mind. T h e purification of the
mind is not complete without the purification
of the sense objects. A purified mind will be
polluted by contact with the sense objects
when they are not purified. This means that
purification, only at the - mental point, does
not work satisfactorily. Even the purified mind
in relation with the sense objects manifests
pleasure-pain feelings and the control power
becomes ineffective. But it will be different
when the purified mind comes in contact with
the purified objects. In the purified objects the
pleasure-giving factor begins to be more and
8

more submerged, so the control influence of the
purified mind is not hindered when the mind
comes in contact with a purified object.
'Similarly, the body, which is the instrument
of the sensory mind, should be purified for the
right functioning of the purified mind. The
control factor of the purified mind cannot be
aroused fully when the mind utilizes an impure
coarse apparatus. T h e impurified sense objects
stimulate the sensory aspect of the mind and thus
an anti-concentration state is created in senseconsciousness. T h e impure body becomes a
hindrance to concentration by facilitating the
sensory functions of the mind. Therefore, the
purification of the mind, the body and the sense
objects should be achieved simultaneously.
'There is a difference between the ordinary
purification and the refinement by mantra,
that is, the mantra purification. For health, it
is necessary to eat pure food. Pure food helps
the developmental function of the body. But
the enjoyment factor in relation to food will
remain the same. To control this, the mantra
purification is absolutely necessary. But the
ordinary purification is far from worthless,
rather it is very necessary, because the mantra
purification works most satisfactorily in pure
foods.
' T h e general purification of the body is
effected by taking pure and well-balanced food,
drinking pure water, breathing pure air, maintaining vigorous circulation by appropriate
exercise, internal cleansing, baths, and sleep,
rest a n d relaxation. Such a body maintains
its developmental function at a high level. But,
even such a purified and vitalized body has not
been purified enough to be utilized as an apparatus by the mind, purified by mantra, for the manifestation of its spiritual qualities. This indicates
that the body also needs mantra purification.
' T h e mantra purification of the body is done
by the use of food and water purified by mantra,
by the practice of the purificatory breathing
process, and by the mantra nyasa (touching)
process. T h e purificatory breathing process is
very important. A specific pranayamic breathing, in conjunction with mantra, causes an
internal deep purification of the life-force and
the body. W h e n the body is purified in this

My initiation into Layayoga

manner, the mental control a n d concentration
work without much interruption a n d more
effectively. But the purificatory breathing process
and nyasa do not work in a satisfactory m a n n e r
unless the body undergoes general purification.
So the ordinary purification of the body is also
important and it is closely connected with the
mantra purification.
'The body is externally cleansed by bathing.
But when the baths are taken in conjunction
with mantra the purificatory effects will be
increased. T h e internal cleansing as prescribed
in hathayoga causes internal purification of the
body and this is very important. In addition to
it, clean water purified by mantra is used for
deep internal purification.
'There is a process, called achamana (watersipping) in which water purified by mantra
is drunk for deep internal purification. T h e
process consists of the following: first hollow
the right palm by making a shape like a cow's
ear in which the forefinger, middle finger and
ring finger are conjoined, and the little finger
and the t h u m b are free; now place a very small
quantity of clean water in the hollow; purify
the water by mantra and drink it. T h e drinking
should be done three times. Every morning
it should be done. T h e quantity of water should
be so small that it does not add to the contents
of the stomach but is immediately absorbed.
'There is another process called aghamarshana
(pharyngonasal deep purification). T h e essential
part of it is as follows: a handful of clean water
purified by mantra should be drawn through
the left nostril and then, after washing away
the internal impurities, the water should be
expelled through the right nostril. It is a difficult
process.'
I asked: 'The subject appears extremely
complex: where should one start ?'
T h e Master replied: 'The method of concentration consists of three fundamental parts:
purification of body and mind by mantra,
purification of the sense objects by mantra,
and concentration practice.
'The purification of body and mind is effected
by the right application of purificatory pranayamic breathing, comprising the processes of
drying, burning, renovating and strengthening

with mantra. This creates" a favourable condition
for concentration.
'Second, the sense objects should be purified
by mantra. This creates a state in which the
control factor of the mind works in relation to
the purified objects without being ineffective.
Experience teaches us that, in the beginning,
we have to start with those objects which are
related to the alimentary and sexual functions.
Most of the abuses and excesses come through
these channels, and m a n experiences greatest
pleasure in relation to them. M a n has not selected
only those foods which make the body vital,
strong and healthy. He has included in his diet
many foods which m a y be unnecessary; he
prepares many dishes mainly for their palatability, and eats in excess of his need for enjoyment. Similarly, clean water is enough for
health and quenching thirst. But m a n has
introduced alcoholic drinks for creating an
artificial exhilaration which goes very well with
other excesses.
'The pleasure-feeling rises to its highest point
in sexual gratification which is often carried to
excess. It is of no use merely to say "control
this passion". Behind the passion lies the strongest
force - we call it sexual energy - which is an
intrinsic part of the life-force and with which
is associated the perpetuation of the h u m a n
race. It is not easy to "kill" or suppress sexual
passion. To absent oneself from the object of
sexual attraction or to apply artificial control
does not work. If the control is to be successful,
it should be developed normally and in relation
to sexual objects. As the sensory mind normally
tends to establish a sensory relation with the
sexual objects because of the influence of its
pleasure-desires, and, as, under this condition,
there are experiences of greatest pleasure, all
these should be accepted as a fact and control
should start here. Control should be natural,
not artificial and ineffective.
'The normal control power begins to develop
when the body-mind purification by mantra
is accomplished. This is the first requisite. As the
sensory mind flows naturally and constantly
towards the sense objects, no premature attempt
should be m a d e to withdraw the mind from the
objects, but the connection should be made
9

My initiation into Layayoga

through mantra. T h e control power of the mind
develops through mantra. Foods and drinks
should be purified by mantra. T h e sensory
relation with the sex objects should also be made
through mantra. In this manner, the control
power over sexual passion will develop step
by step, not by withdrawal, but through contact,
and at a certain point the sexual passion will
normally disappear.
'Last - the concentration practice. Concentration is holding in consciousness an image which
occupies the whole conscious field, and there is
no stain or dark spot, and the holding is continuous, not interrupted, and not replaced by anything else. Concentration is only possible when
consciousness is uniform in character and,
consequently, one-pointed. But the sense-consciousness which is our consciousness in everyday
life is oscillatory; in it undulations are constantly
going on, owing to the sensory projections and
senso-mental radiations to consciousness. This
is an unsuitable state for concentration. T h e
students of yoga know this. Some sort of mental
focusing can be attained by much effort in
such a state, but it is extremely difficult to
develop real, natural and deep concentration
on such a substratum.
' O u r position is this. For the practice of
concentration we need nonundulatory consciousness as the background. But our consciousness
is undulatory, so how can we concentrate
successfully? This is the greatest problem.
Theoretically, concentration itself can transform
the oscillatory consciousness to a state of uniformity. But the difficulty is that concentration
does not go well in a diversified consciousness.
'Hathayoga solves this problem by controlling
the sensory projections and senso-mental radiations by making the body-apparatus sensorially
inoperative by kumbhaka. But this is a very
difficult method. In rajayoga this problem does
not arise. T h e rajayoga process of concentration
starts when a student is already established in
concentration. Rajayoga aims at purifying consciousness to the highest degree and transforming
it in the state of samprajnata samadhi (superconscious concentration) which will be effortless
and the normal mode of the mind. T h e final goal
of rajayoga is to get this super-purified and super10

illuminated consciousness absorbed completely
into Supreme Consciousness in asamprajnata
samadhi (non-mens concentration). Layayoga
achieves this goal by arousing Kundalini (the
spiritual aspect of the Supreme Power) and
gets all the cosmic principles absorbed into it.
But the awakening of Kundalini requires deep
concentration. So a modified method, termed
bhutashuddhi, has been introduced to develop
concentration.
'Mantrayoga presents a unique method which
is extremely helpful for making concentration
deep, real and normal. This method has also
been adopted in layayoga. T h e method consists
of the following factors:
'First, the consciousness is moulded into the
mantra-form through the mental transformation
of the waikhari (gross, sensory) sounds of the
mantra. By the mantra-practice, the mantraform will gradually be changed to living mantra
when consciousness is in a state of concentratedness. T h e n , ultimately from the living mantra,
living God, in an appropriate form, emerges,
and concentration now becomes deep, real and
automatic. T h e living God in form is called
I shtadewata, that is God who appears in a form
from the mantra-sound by his will.
' I n order to make the mantra-work successful,
it may be necessary to apply certain specific
processes which are as follows: (1) Achamana;
(2)
Kaminitattwa;
(3)
Mantrashikha;
(4) Mantrachaitanya; (5) Mantrarthabhawana;
(6) Nidrabhanga; (7) Kulluka; (8) Mahasetu;
(9) Setu; (10) Mukhashodhana; (11) Karashodhana; (12) Y o n i m u d r a ; (13) Pranatattwa;
(14) Pranayoga; (15) Dipani; (16) Ashouchabhanga; (17) Utkilana; (18) Drishsetu; (19)
Special d h y a n a ; and (20) Kamakaladhyana.
'These processes are highly technical and
are executed with appropriate mantras and
with concentration. They should be learned
from a guru.
'It is not an easy thing to make Ishtadewata
appear from the mantra. It is also not an easy
thing to make the mantra living. So long as it
is not possible to achieve this, an easier means
has been adopted in mantrayoga for the development of concentration. It is this: a replica of I shtadewata as an object of concentration is made.

My initiation into Layayoga

For this purpose, a gross image from some suitable material is made. This image is not an
imaginary representation of lshtadewata., but
a close copy of the real form. It is a tangible
form easy for the sense-consciousness to hold.
It is not idolatry. This is a wrong term, only
used by those who are ignorant of the subject.
'By seeing the gross image of lshtadewata
again and again, a clear picture is formed in
the sense-consciousness. T h e gross image is made
life-like by mantra, and in certain cases quite
living, and then it begins to be steady in the
consciousness, and gradually fills the whole
consciousness, and no other objects penetrate
consciousness. Now concentration becomes very
deep. This state can only be reached when the
body and mind are purified by mantra, and
the life-impartation to the image is done by
mantra. In this manner, concentration becomes
real and deep.
'Ishtadewata is God in form. T h e form arises
from the living mantra and is created by God
himself. So it is not imaginary. God appears in
form, otherwise the mind will not be able to
receive it. It is absolutely necessary to have a
form which can be held in consciousness in
concentration.
'There is also mental worship which helps
to establish concentration. In the muladhara
chakra, I shtadewata is worshipped with the
smell principle; in the swadhishana centre,
with the taste principle; in the manipura centre,
with the sight principle; in the anahata centre,
with the touch principle; in the wishuddha
centre, with the sound principle; in the hrit
chakra, with all the five principles; and in soma
chakra, with spiritual qualities. T h e n a student
is able to hold in his consciousness the pure
luminous form of I. shtadewata in concentration.
'Thereafter, concentration develops into
samadhi in which the most subtle form of
I shadewata is held naturally in superconsciousness. This is the last stage of form. T h e n comes
the realm of formlessness. Here, I shtadewata
is without form; he is now the Supreme God.
This is the stage of asamprajnata samadhi.'
Now I had a better opportunity, because of
our intimate relation, to observe the mode of
life the Master was leading, his actions in every-

day life. I learned from his teachings as well as
from his life. I found that yama and niyama
were fully established in him. Truthfulness was
the cornerstone of his life. He did not touch
any thing which was acquired in an immoral
way. He was content, and, usually, he remained
absorbed in himself and silent, even when there
were people around him. He had superpowers,
but he rarely used them.
T h e Master observed brahmacharya (sexual
control) up to the age of twenty-eight years.
During this period, he led a continent life for
eight years while with his wife. Thereafter,
he had children. T h e n he devoted himself to
perfect the process of Adamantine Control.
I have learnt from his teachings and life that
premature continence does not help in controlling the sex urge. Sexual excesses are also enervating. To be away from the sex objects also does
not help. Senseless sexual gratification decreases
power. Sexual efficiency demands control while
alone as well as in contact.
Sexual efficiency is closely related to physical
vigour, mental creativity and concentration.
It should be developed by appropriate means.
Its component parts a r e : (1) sexual passivity
while alone and also together; (2) sexual creativity at will; (3) sexual purity; (4) adamantine
control.
On one occasion, the Master talked about the
four great systems of yoga. He said: 'There
are four great systems of yoga: mantrayoga,
layayoga, hathayoga and rajayoga. Each has its
own characteristic feature, each has its specific
practices. Each aims at the attainment of
samprajnata yoga, and through it asamprajnata
yoga. This is the final form.
'Mantrayoga is that form of yoga, in which
word-thought forms, associated with the multiform consciousness, are transformed into supraword form, that is mantra. Mantra effects the
concentrated form of consciousness which leads
to samadhi.
'Mantra is the suprasound power in word
form. W h e n the mantra is rightly worked upon,
it becomes a living power from which arises
the living Ishtadewata - God in form. Now
concentration becomes very deep.
'Layayoga is that form of yoga in which

11

My initiation into Layayoga

concentration is developed through the absorption of all cosmic principles, leading ultimately to
samadhi.
'Hathayoga is that form of yoga in which dynamic livingness, with which is associated the
oscillatory form of consciousness, is transformed
by the pranayamic process into a passive form
of existence which effects concentratedness of
the consciousness, leading to samadhi.
'By the pranayamic breath-control, a nonrespiratory state is gradually developed in
which a natural cessation of respiration occurs.
This is called kewala kumbhaka. In kewala
kumbhaka concentration becomes the normal
mode of consciousness.
' T h e control of the inspiratory and expiratory
acts is done by sahita pranayama. An internal
purification is necessary for making the pranayama work. For this purpose, internal cleansing,
purificatory diet and control exercise are instructed in hathayoga. By the pranayamic process,
the body begins to be refined normally, all the
vital activities are normalized and brought
to a new level and normal health is established.
This super-purification is called nadishuddhi.
'At this state, health, vitality, absence of
unpleasant body odours, wholesome breath,
appearance of a pleasing, slightly fragrant
smell, cheerfulness and calmness and concentratedness of the mind - all these arise.
'Rajayoga is that form of yoga in which concentration is developed to non-mens concentra-

12

tion - asamprajnata samadhi which is rajayoga the highest form of yoga.'
I have seen the Master in a state of samadhi.
He usually assumed the corpse posture
(shawasana) in which he lay on a bed with his
face upward, and arms by his sides. T h e body
remained completely motionless, without breathing, without pulse, and, apparently, without
signs of sense activities. In this death-like
condition he would stay for long periods.
He also used to go into very deep concentration in a sitting posture. It was his common
practice to sit outside in the sun with a newspaper, supporting his elbows on a small stool,
placed in front of him, as if he were reading.
He might perhaps read the paper for a short
time, but very soon he became still and his eyes
closed. He remained in this position for hours.
Shouting often could not make any impression
on him. M a n y times it was necessary to awaken
him for his lunch by shaking him vigorously.
After being aroused, when he first opened his
eyes, his look appeared meaningless, as if he
was not of this world. After some time, he came
back to his worldly self.
O n e day I asked the Master: 'Is the mind
unconscious and dark while the body remains
death-like in samadhi?'
T h e Master replied: 'No. T h e mind is superconscious and super-illumined.'
S. G.

I The Author (at the age of 87)

II Wani

III Acharyya Karunamoya Saraswati

IV Master: Sreemat Dwijapada Raya

V An Ancient Picture of the Chakra System
(belonging to the Author's library)

Introduction

It is the discovery made by yoga that mind is
the repository of prodigious power - mental
dynamism - which manifests itself when mental
consciousness is transmuted into a concentric
form. It is the process of centralization of
consciousness when it is reduced to a 'point'.
This means that consciousness enters the bindu
state. Bindu is a state in which power is
at maximum concentration. When mental
consciousness is in the bindu state, diversified
mental powers are collected and highly concentrated as mental dynamism. The greater
the concentration of power, the less are the
dimensions, but the more increased the potency.
Bindu - the power point - is a natural and
indispensable condition associated with power
in its operation. Bindu occurs both in the mental
and material fields. The atom is the bindu of
matter; the nucleus the bindu of a protoplasmic
cell; and samadhi consciousness the bindu
of the mind.
The reduction of the diversification of mental
consciousness is the process of concentration
leading to the bindu stage. The inner nature
of the mind is to tend towards bindu, though
it is rather unobservable when mind exhibits
its multiform functions. At this state, the higher
mental-energy system remains almost dormant;
but it is fully activated in concentration. Even
in diversified mental states, towards-the-bindumotion operates fragmentarily. An example is
the function of attention in relation to physical
sensory perception and intellection. Physical
sensory perception and associated intellection
are due to the limiting influence on the mind.

Pragmatically, it is important and indispensable
for determining the individual's position in
the world around him and to see the world
in a practical manner. But it is not the whole
picture of the mind, it is only a fragment. It is
a great mistake to think that the whole mind is
what is represented by perception, intellection
and will at the physical sensory level. One
may even go so far as to assume that the mind
is identical with the brain. The brain is important
when, and as long as, mind exhibits physical
consciousness. But when mind in its supramental
aspect functions as superconsciousness the brain
is not important to it; the brain then, practically
remains a passive non-mental apparatus.

Principles of Chakra
The ancient yogic interpretation of mind and
concentration is fundamentally based on the
chakra organization and its function. Kundalini
is indispensably connected with it. Kundalini
is vitally connected with the chakra system and
the whole body system as their static background.
Kundalini also plays a most important role in
the spiritualization of mind and the development
of absorptive concentration. The chakras indicate the levels of spiritual consciousness and of
absorptive concentration. The chakra system
is actually a system of subtle power operations
around some centralized force. The chakra
is a natural dynamic graph, exposing the exact
13

Introduction

picture of the constituent powers operating
in it.

Chakras as Myth
There is a viewpoint according to which the
chakras are not real but imaginary. It is essentially based on the evidence that the chakras are
seen neither when dissecting the body nor on
its microscopic examination. This indicates
that the chakras are beyond the range of both
normal sight and extended sight. In other
words, they are beyond our physical senses
both normal and instrumentalized. But this
does not prove their nonexistence.
Sensory perception is a sense-section by which
only a segment of the whole is mentalized.
Physical sense has four fundamental limitations,
namely, size, obscurity, distance and time.
This limited sensory power can be enhanced to a
certain extent by the use of sensitive instruments.
First of all, what we see with our eyes in the body
are bones, muscles, blood vessels, nerves, organs,
etc., which form the gross aspect of the body.
W h e n a bone is covered by muscles, or an
organ is enclosed in its cavity, we do not see
them, we only see the outer covering. This is
the limitation by obscurity. So the gross structure
of the body can be partially seen by the sense
of sight. It is a very superficial observation
of the body, a larger part of which remains
hidden. For the observation of the minute
structure of the body, it is absolutely necessary
to magnify the small objects. For this purpose a
powerful microscope is used. It is now possible
to study the ultrastructure of the cells through
the electron microscope. This has disclosed the
molecular constituents of the living organisms.
At the molecular level, the chakras are not seen.
Does the molecular study of the living
organisms reveal its whole organization? Is
that all, what we see by means of the microscope?
T h e molecular structure is based on atoms,
and the atoms are built up of what are known as
elementary particles. So we find that there are
two levels above the molecular level: atomic
14

and subatomic. We have also been able to see
atoms, but not elementary particles. They are
so minute that they are not observable even
with the most powerful instrument. They are
inferred. However, the chakras are not seen
at the atomic and subatomic levels. Are they
inferred? Before an answer is given, we want
to discuss another viewpoint about the chakras.

Anatomical Interpretation of
Chakras and Nadis
There are viewpoints according to which the
chakras are nerve plexuses, and the nadis are
nerves or blood vessels. Dr Bamandas Basu 1
has expressed the opinion that a more accurate
description of the nervous system has been given
in the Tantras than in the medical works of
the ancient Hindus. T h e Tantrika nomenclature has been regarded as anatomical terms,
and an attempt has been made to explain them
accordingly.
According to Professor Brajendranath Seal, 2
the adhara (muladhara) chakra is the sacrococcygeal plexus; the swadhishthana chakra
is the sacral plexus; the manipuraka (manipura
chakra) is the lumbar plexus; the anahata
chakra is the cardiac plexus; the bharatisthana
(wishuddha chakra) is the junction of the spinal
cord with the medulla oblongata; the lalana
chakra lies opposite to the uvula, and is supposed
to be concerned with the production of egoaltruistic sentiments and affections; the ajna
chakra belongs to the sensory-motor tract, and
the afferent nerves to the periphery rise from this
chakra; the manas chakra is the sensorium,
and receives the afferent nerves of the special
senses; the soma (indu) chakra is a sixteenlobed ganglion in the cerebrum above the
sensorium; it is the seat of the altruistic sentiments and volitional control; and the sahasrara
chakra is the upper cerebrum with its lobes
and convolutions.
T h e anatomical interpretation of the chakras
is basically wrong. First of all, an accurate
knowledge of both the chakra system and

Introduction

Western anatomy is required to correlate them.
Usually, even a good Sanskrit scholar does not
possess all the necessary information on the
chakras, and so he is not in a position to make a
comparison between the two systems. On the
other hand, a Tantrika yogi is generally not
well versed in modern anatomy and physiology,
and is therefore unable to correlate them.
(The form 'yog;' has been preferred to 'yogin',
and is used throughout in this book.) T h e yogi
utilizes the knowledge of the chakras in his yoga
practices; and to do this no anatomical knowledge of the chakras is really necessary. But a
person who has a knowledge of anatomy and
physiology as well as a correct understanding
of the chakras, and utilizes his knowledge of the
chakras in his yoga practice, finds that there
cannot be any real identification of the chakras
with the nerve plexuses. But this lack of
identification does not interfere with his yoga
practice. T h e yogis have been continuing their
practices in this way from time immemorial, the
teaching being imparted by the gurus to their
disciples, who also become proficient in time.
The yogis, in absorptive concentration, when
the outer world and along with it their own bodies
are completely forgotten, experience a new
inner world in each chakra. To them the chakras
are inner power phenomena; they are vivid
and 'seen'. It will not serve any purpose of
theirs to identify the chakras with the nerve
plexuses.
This study has been undertaken not so much
to understand this yoga better, but to find out
whether the Tantrika terms can be used to name
some physical organs or structures having no
clear-cut names in the ancient Indian books
on anatomy. Firstly, the main reason for this
shortcoming is not due to a lack of knowledge,
because even in what we have, we find that they
had great anatomical and physiological knowledge, but because most of the works on the
subject have been lost. Secondly, if we think
that the Tantrika terms are merely anatomical
terms, then they lose their essential character
and specificality. But, first, we have to see
whether or not this identity is possible.
Professor Seal has identified the muladhara,
swadhishthana, manipura and anahata chakras

with the coccygeal, sacral, lumbar and cardiac
plexuses respectively. This identification is based
on a lack of the right knowledge of the real
locations of these chakras. T h e chakras are in
the sushumna, and the sushumra. is inside the
vertebral column. These nerve plexuses are
situated outside the vertebral column. So there
cannot be any identification. Professor Seal
says that the bharatisthana (wishuddha chakra)
is the junction of the spinal cord with the medulla
oblongata. T h e upper end of the spinal cord
is continuous with the medulla oblongata.
T h e upper border of the spinal cord is at the
level of the foramen m a g n u m . It is the upper
border of the atlas vertebra. He appears to
indicate that the point where the upper end
of the spinal cord and the lower end of the
medulla oblongata meet is the bharatisthana,
that is, the wishuddha chakra. Actually, this
description does not name the chakra, but merely
gives its location. He has also stated that 'This
also comprises the laryngeal and pharyngeal
plexus'. If he means that these two plexuses
are included in the wishuddha chakra, then
it must be pointed out that these two are the nerve
plexuses; the laryngeal plexus is situated on the
external surface of the inferior constrictor muscle
of the pharynx, and the pharyngeal plexus,
called plexus pharyngeus ascendens, lies on the
ascending pharyngeal artery in the wall of the
pharynx. In that case, the wishuddha chakra
would have to extend to the outside of the
vertebral column. If the chakra were stripped
of the plexuses and pushed upward into the
medulla oblongata, it could be made a nerve
centre there. T h e medulla oblongata has a
n u m b e r of centres which include the respiratory
and the vasomotor centres. However, in that
case the functional identification should be
made.
There is still another difficulty. T h e wishuddha
at the medullary level may clash with the lalana
(talu) chakra. He has not identified the lalana
with any specific anatomical structure, but
only says that it is 'supposed to be the tract
affected in the production of ego-altruistic
sentiments and affections'. According to him
the lalana lies opposite the uvula. This means
that the lalana is situated in the palatine region,
15

Introduction

above which is the ajna and below which is
the wishuddha. T h e palatine region roughly
corresponds to the medulla oblongata. It has
been clearly stated that the wishuddha is
situated in the neck region which corresponds
approximately to the middle of the cervical
vertebrae.
Professor Seal says that the sensory-motor
tract comprises the ajna and manas chakras.
This statement is not clear. Moreover, he says
that the manas chakra is the sensorium. Seal
also asserts that it is the sensory tract at the
base of the brain. According to him the manas
chakra receives the sensory nerves of the
special senses, coming from the periphery.
T h e sensorium generally is any nerve centrum;
broadly speaking, it is the sensory apparatus
of the body as a whole. It is the seat of sensation.
More clearly, it can be said that the manas
chakra is the seat of perception. But in what
part of the brain is it actually situated? Seal
has, of course, roughly indicated that it is at the
base of the brain.
T h e r e are a number of events that take place
during the centripetal passage of nervous impulses from the periphery to the brain, namely,
stimulation of the receptors, transmutation of
the stimuli into nerve impulses, conduction of
sensory impulses to the neurons in the brain,
and neuronal transmission and projection on
the sensory areas of the cerebral cortex. T h e
whole chain of events is physicochemical,
not psychical, in character. Recently, it has been
postulated that the cerebral cortex is a way
station from which sensory impulses are finally
relayed to what has been termed centrencephalic
system consisting of the mesencephalon, diencephalon and part of telencephalon. It has
no clear-cut anatomical boundary, but, functionally, forms an integrated unit. It appears
that both the cerebral cortex and the higher
brain stem serve as the neuronal background
for sense consciousness. However, it is here
that a superphysicochemical event occurs, following or accompanying the nervous events. We
can place the manas chakra somewhere in the
higher brain stem.
If the manas chakra is identified with a
particular area or centre of the higher brain
16

stem, then the chakra itself cannot be regarded
as the seat of consciousness. There is no possibility of finding consciousness in the brain substance. We cannot detect the mentative energy
factor in the chemical and electrical energy
systems of the brain. We cannot say that the
neural activity itself produces consciousness,
as it is not known how the change occurs.
T h e findings that lesions in the higher brain
stem cause the loss of consciousness do not
indicate that consciousness permeates through
the brain. T h e brain stimulation activates
the subconscious mechanism which relays impulses to the mind, and as a result consciousness
is evoked. Consciousness, which is nonspatial
in character, cannot be located in the threedimensional brain.
It has also been postulated that an intense
dynamic neuronal activity, different from the
low level activity of sleep, elicits an interaction
between brain and mind, and under this
condition perception occurs. How is this dynamic
brain activity caused? T h e sensory impulses
are not the cause, because they also come into
the brain during sleep when no consciousness
is evoked. T h e cause appears to be intrinsic.
T h e specific dynamic brain activity can be
explained as the neural counterpart of subconscious activity, roused subconsciously to
receive sensory messages. T h e unconscious neural
mechanism is, so to speak, bridged by the subconscious mechanism to consciousness. T h e
brain-mind interaction indicates that mind
is an entity lying extraencephalically, but when
a relation between it and the brain is established,
the brain exhibits specific dynamic activity,
and is evoked subconsciously. Consequently,
it is a mistake to regard a chakra as a nerve
plexus or a brain centre or substance. If it is
possible to demonstrate that the chakras are the
different levels of consciousness and the subtle
dynamic graphs, then, it will at once be clear
that the brain is only a gross outline of the
inner power operation.
Professor Seal states that the ajna chakra
is the centre of command over movements.
Hence, it is a motor centre. T h e motor centres
are in the cerebral cortex. But, according to
some current notions, the motor impulse

Introduction

originates somewhere in the higher brain stem
and is radiated to the cerebral cortex. In that
case, the ajna is situated below the manas
in the higher brain stem. T h e external locationpoint is the space between the eyebrows, which
corresponds roughly to the caudal part of the
third ventricle of the brain.
Seal maintains that the soma (indu) chakra
is a sixteen-lobed ganglion comprising the
centres in the middle of the cerebrum, above
the sensorium; it is the seat of the altruistic
sentiments and volitional control. These qualities are mental and cannot be a function of any
brain centre. It may be that the physical counterpart of the mental functioning is a certain brain
centre or area located in the telencephalon.
He identifies the sahasrara chakra with the
cerebral cortex. This is a mistake. T h e sahasrara
is not in the sushumna, but is situated extracranially. It is more correct to say that the
convoluted surface of the cerebral hemispheres
is the material replication of the subtle nirwana
chakra, which has 100 petals.
T h e well-known author of the Aryashastrapradipa, 3 a scholastic work on ancient H i n d u
religion and thought, and a great sanskritist,
has identified the maladhara, swadhishthana,
manipuraka and anahata chakras with the ganglion impar or coccygeal plexus, hypogastric or
pelvic plexus, solar or epigastric plexus, and
cardiac plexus respectively. It is astonishing
that he has also made the same mistake. T h e
coccygeal plexus is connected with the ganglion
impar, situated at the union of the two sympathetic trunks at their caudal ends. T h e
other plexuses are sympathetic. However, these
plexuses are situated outside the vertebral
column, whereas the chakras are in the smaumna, which is inside the vertebral column.
So these chakras cannot be identified with the
nervous plexuses.
T h e identification has been carried out still
farther. Purnanananda Brahmachari 4 has identified
the sahasradala lotus (sahasrara chakra) with
the telencephalon; dwadashadala lotus (guru
chakra) with the diencephalon; chandramandala
(moon-circle), amakala and nirwana-kala with
the upper part of the corpus callosum; samana
(samani) and unmana (unman;) with the middle

part of the corpus callosum; nirodhini (nirodhika) and wyapika with the lower part of the
corpus callosum; and mahanada with the fornix.
He also says that the seat of bindu is in the
pineal gland (body) and that of the ajna in the
pituitary body.
It has already been mentioned that the
sahasrara is an extracranial chakra, so it cannot
be identified with the telencephalon. As the
dwadashadala (guru chakra) is a part of the
sahasrara, and, consequently, is situated extracranially, it cannot be identified with the diencephalon. T h e chandramandala, amakala and
nirwanakala are inside the sahasrara, hence, they
cannot be identified with the upper part of the
corpus callosum. Samani and unmani are two
forms of subtle power roused in deep concentration, when dhyana is about to be transformed into
samadhi. Therefore, they cannot be identified
with the material brain structure. Nirodhika
and wyapika are also power-forms operating
at the lower level, and cannot be identified
with the brain structures. Mahanada is the
power-station where pranic motion almost stops
in deep concentration. It is situated between
the nirwana chakra above, and the indu chakra
below. Its corresponding physical point is in the
corpus callosum. Consequently, it cannot be
identified with the fornix. Similarly, it is a
fallacy to make bindu and ajna identical with
the pineal and pituitary bodies respectively.
Dr Vasant G. Rele 5 has identified the muladhara chakra with the pelvic (inferior hypogastric) plexus. Similarly, the swadhishthana
has been identified with the hypogastric
(superior) plexus; the manipura chakra with the
plexus of the coeliac-axis (coeliac plexus);
the anahata chakra with the cardiac plexus;
the wishuddha chakra with the pharyngeal
plexus; the taluka (talu) chakra with the
cavernous plexus; and the ajna chakra with
the naso-ciliary extension of the cavernous
plexus. We have already noted that this identification is baseless. First, the chakras are situated
within the vertebral column, whereas these
nervous plexuses are lying outside it, and,
consequently, there cannot be any identification
between them. Second, the chakras are subtle
force-centres, but the nervous plexuses are gross
17

Introduction

structures. It cannot be demonstrated that the
powers residing in the chakras are also in the
nerve plexuses. By concentration and pranayama, these latent powers lying in the chakras
can be roused; but these processes have no
such effects on the aervous plexuses. So the
correspondences can neither be ascertained
scientifically nor are they in agreement with
the technical description of the chakras.
Moreover, Dr Rele has identified the shaktis
(powers) residing in the chakras with the efferent
impulses exercising an inhibitory influence generated through the subsidiary nerve centres
in the spinal cord. T h e shaktis are conscious
powers; they act directly on any physical
organs, and unlike the nervous impulses they
never act unconsciously. They control the
chakra organizations, and the yogzs arouse them
to develop their concentration to the dhyana
level to be able to do dhyana on the deities
situated in the chakras. T h e chakras are also
the centres of pranic forces and specific sense
principles. An alteration in the functions of the
body can be made by pranayama and concentration. T h e nervous impulses are physicochemical phenomena whereas the shaktis are
subtle and conscious.
Swami Wiwekananda 6 has vaguely stated
that the different plexuses having their centres
in the spinal canal can stand for the lotuses.
T h e chakras cannot be explained physiologically
as they are subtle centres, and the nervous
plexuses are gross structures. Swami Sachchidananda Saraswati7 presents this in a more
sensible way. He says that the nervous plexuses
are not the chakras, but they are the gross
indicators of the inner regions where the chakras
are. According to him, the ganglion impar or the
coccygeal plexus is the indicator of the maladhara chakra; the hypogastric plexus, solar
plexus, cardiac plexus, carotid plexus (plexus
caroticus internus), and cavernous plexus are
the indicators of swadhishthana, manipura, anahaw, wishuddha and ajna chakras respectively.
But this is also misleading. T h e better method
to determine the locations of the chakras has
been presented in Section 12 of this book.
Arawinda 8 says that the centres (chakras)
are in the subtle body, not in the physical body;
18

but as the subtle body is interfused with
the gross body, there is a certain correspondence
between the chakras and certain centres in the
physical body. So the real nature of the chakras
has been disclosed by him.
Dr G a n a n a t h Sen 9 has used the terms ida
and pingala to mean the two sympathetic
chains of ganglia, and the sushumna for the
spinal cord. He has named the spinal cord
sushumnakanda, and the medulla oblongata
sushumnashirshaka. Dr Rele 10 has also identified
the ida pingala nadis with the two gangliated
sympathetic trunks, one on each side of the
vertebral column, and the sushumna nadi
with the spinal cord. Professor Brajendranath
Seal 11 has identified the ida and pingala with the
left and right gangliated sympathetic trunks,
but the sushumna nadi with the central canal
of the spinal cord. According to Parnananda
Brahmachari 1 2 the sushumna is the spinal cord
and brahmarandhra (brahma nadi) is identical
with the central canal.
Wiwekananda 1 3 says that the ida and pingala
are the sensory and motor fibres in the spinal
cord through which the afferent and efferent
currents travel. So the sensory and motor
impulses in the spinal cord have been identified
with the ida and pingala nadis respectively.
About the sushumna, he says that it is a hollow
canal, running centrally through the spinal
cord, and the canal is continuous within the
fine fibre which starts at the end of the spinal
cord and goes downward to the lower end,
situated near the sacral plexus. This fibre is
clearly the filum terminale. From this description
it appears that he has identified the sushumna
with the central canal within which there is no
nerve matter, but it contains the cerebrospinal
fluid. According to him, the mind is able to
send messages without any wire (that is, without
passing through the nerves), and this is done
when the yogi makes the current pass through
the sushumna.
Now, let us first consider whether we are
justified in identifying the sushumna with the
spinal cord. First, the sushumna nadi has been
described as extremely subtle and spiralled;
but the spinal cord is a gross nervous structure,
measuring in width at the level of the cervical

Introduction

enlargement 13-14 mm, of the lumbosacral
enlargement 11-13 mm, and of the thoracic
portion about 10 mm. Consequently there
cannot be any identification between the two.
Second, the sushumna nadi arises from the
nadi centre called kanda-mula, lying just below
the muladhara chakra, which corresponds approximately to the point below the inferior
end of the filum terminale. It ascends through
the filum terminale, central canal, fourth ventricle, cerebral aqueduct, third ventricle, telencephalon medium, anterior commissure, fornix,
septum pellucidum, corpus callosum and longitudinal fissure, to reach the central point of
the cerebral cortex. On the other hand, the
spinal cord extends from the lower border of
the first lumbar vertebra, or the upper border
of the second lumbar vertebra to the upper
border of the atlas, and ends in the lower part
of the medulla oblongata at the level of the
foramen magnum. From this it is clear that the
sushumna cannot be identified with the spinal
cord.
There is another important point which
needs our attention. Inside the sushumna are
three more nadis. Within the sushumna is
wajra, within the wajra is the chitrini and within
the chitrini is the brahma nadi. If the sushumna is
the spinal cord, how are these three nadis to be
explained? Can the wajra, chitrini and brahma
nadis stand for the white matter, grey matter
and central canal respectively; or, should these
three nadis be identified with the meninges,
white matter and grey matter? T h e meninges
also consist of three layers, d u r a mater, arachnoid
mater and pia mater. Here we really do not know
what to think. T h e nadi can stand for the white
or grey matter. But it cannot be identified with
either the meninges or the central canal, neither
of which are composed of nervous tissue.
Dr Gananath Sen 14 has exclusively used the
word nadi to signify nerves. He also says that
probably the Greek word neuron (a nerve)
is derived from the Sanskrit word nadi. Professor
Brajendranath Seal 15 appears to have the same
opinion. Dr Rele 16 also has the same opinion.
He says: 'Wayu-nadis, i.e., nerves of impulse.'
He has clearly identified wayu with nervous
impulse.

T h e Greek word neuron means sinew, cord,
and nerve. Now this word is used to mean a
nerve cell with its axonal and dendritic processes,
and it is considered to be the structural unit of the
nervous system. T h e word nerve has many
meanings. But from the medical viewpoint,
a nerve is a tubular elongated structure consisting
of bundles of nerve fibres or axons of nerve
cells, which convey impulses, and a connective
tissue sheath, called epineurium, which encloses
these bundles. T h e word nerve may also mean
energy, force, vitality.
Now, let us consider the meaning of the word
nadi. Nadi has been derived from 'nada' (or
nala) to mean motion or regulated motion.
In other words, nadi is energy in motion, or
activated energy. When the energy in motion
is vehicled in a material structure, nadi is a
nerve. Otherwise, nadi is 'wireless' force-motion.
T h e word wayu has been derived from 'wa' to
mean motion, that is, energy in motion. So the
word wayu can stand for nadi. There is another
word in Sanskrit - 'snayu' which has been
used for nerves. According to Dr G a n a n a t h
Sen 17 this is a mistake. He maintains that the
meaning of the word snayu is fibrous tissues
generally, and ligaments particularly. But it
appears that the word 'snawa' has been used in
the Atharwawedasanghita to signify very slender
threadlike structures. Can they not be nerves?
Now, let us come to our point. We are not
justified in using the word 'nadi' exclusively
for the nerve. In yoga, the term nadi has been
used in a technical sense. T h e nadi-chakra
or nadi organization is not the nervous system.
In the nervous system, energy is propagated
through the medium of the nerves, and the energy
itself appears to be electrical in nature, functioning on the physico-chemical basis. This 'wired'
energy is restricted in its functions. T h e r e is
another aspect of the energy which is free
from this material bondage. This means that
its function is not restricted by the nerves,
and, consequently, it is conducted in a 'wireless'
m a n n e r to produce deep effects. This energy
works in a supramaterial field having unbounded potency, and it also glides into matter
to reinforce the nervous energy. This field is
subtle, and the energy is subtle. T h e word

19

Introduction
'subtle' (sukshma) has been used technically to
indicate what is not material. It is Patanjali's
third form of matter (bhuta). This subtle aspect
of energy has been termed prana wayu which
operates without nerves. This non-nervous
operation is, therefore, only pranic force-motion
lines of direction, technically termed nadis.
To avoid confusion and make the nadis distinct
from the nerves, it has also been termed yoga
nadi. It is now also clear why we cannot identify
wayu with nervous impulse. A nervous impulse
is a wave of negative electrical force based on the
chemical energy system. Its activities are limited
by the nerves. Wayu is the patent form of latent
prana - the basic energy. Wayu is in constant
motion and creates subtle lines of direction,
called nadis.
Arawinda18 states that the pranic energy is
directed through a system of numerous channels,
called nadi, - the subtle nervous organization
of the psychic body. The nadis, or the system
of nadis, have been described as the subtle
nervous organization of the psychic body. The
nervous organization he mentions here is not
the gross nervous system. It is the 'subtle'
nervous system, and this is clear by his using
the word 'subtle' nervous organization. We
already know the meaning of the word subtle.
To avoid confusion we would prefer to use
'the nadi organization' instead of the subtle
nervous organization. But the nadi organization
is not only of the psychic body, but essentially
of the pranic body (pranamaya kosha); on the
one side, the pranic body extends to the material
body (annamaya kosha), and on the other,
to the mental body. The 'channels' mentioned
here are not actually some tubular substance,
but the subtle lines of direction caused by the
pranic energy.
Now we come to the nadis ida and pingala.
The origin of the ida and pingala is the same as
of the sushumna. But they extend beyond the
vertebral column and ascend to reach the
ajna chakra, about the level of the caudal part
of the third ventricle of the brain, where they
are united with the sushumna. The ida and
pingala are also subtle nadis, otherwise there
cannot be any union with the sushumna. Though,
anatomically the two gangliated sympathetic
20

trunks extend from the base of the skull to the
coccyx, they are too gross to be identified with the
subtle ida and pingala. The functions of the
ida and pingala are not those of the sympathetic
nervous system. The ida and pingala have also
been identified with the sensory and motor
impulses in the spinal cord. This cannot be,
because they are not the gross nerve fibres
carrying nervous impulses. They are subtle
nadis which are themselves force-motion lines,
conveying pranic forces to the mind and body.
Moreover, they are not within the vertebral
column, but outside it.
Here it is not a question of deciding whether
the ancient Indian medicine has presented
sound anatomical and physiological knowledge;
and it is unnecessary to explain here the Waidika
and Tantrika chakra system and Kundalini in
terms of modern anatomy and physiology. To do
so means to limit the energy-confining only to the
physical field, ignoring its supramaterial manifestation. As physiology is understood today,
we cannot go farther than the molecular level.
Even this does not explain the whole matter.
It will be very helpful if we remember what
Arawinda19 has said: 'I am afraid the attempt
to apply scientific analogies to spiritual or yogic
things leads more often to confusion than to
anything else - just as it creates confusion if
thrust upon philosophy also.'
Enough has been said to indicate that neither
can the chakras be identified with the nervous
plexuses, nor the nadis with the nerves.

Yogic Exposition of the Chakras
There are no indications of the chakras either
in the gross aspect of the body or at the molecular
and atomic levels. Are we then forced to conclude that the chakras belong to the realm of
nonentities? Another important question is
linked with the answer given to this question,
namely, is the modern scientific conception
of matter the borderland of our knowledge?
At one level matter is seen in its gross form,
and at another level it is constituted of minute

Introduction
particles and energy. Here we find the conversion
of matter into energy, and energy into matter.
This may explain how the materiality of matter
is maintained, but it is not enough to account
for the manifestation of life in matter and the
connection of mind with the brain. We cannot
escape by saying simply that protoplasm is
the living matter and mind is the function of
the brain.
The elementary particles are very minute;
they are so small that they are not seen even
with the help of the most sensitive instruments.
But they still have mass; and theoretically it is
possible to reduce mass step by step to a point
where there is no longer any mass. According
to Kanada, this is the stage of anu - a nonmagnitudinous point. The nearest approach
to anu is seen in the neutrino, which has no
mass, no charge and a very slight interaction
with matter. This indicates that there is a
possibility of energy becoming free from the
bondage of the particles in a graduated manner.
In this transition period, certain particles may
pass into the stage of anu where they are only
energy - energy without any material form and
free from matter-bondage. This is subtle energy.
Where does it go? It does not return to the
material field, as it cannot function there;
it is not destroyed; then it must have a field
of operation. This has been termed by the
yogi's the subtle power-field.
The yogis explain this in the following
manner. The decentralized subtle forces,
technically termed mahabhutas (metamatter)
pass to a level, called subtle elliptical body
(kanda-mula), where they are equalized to
form an undifferentiated metamatter force.
At this point, metamatter force tends towards
grossness and materialization on a descending
scale, and finally, it is transformed into material
energy which operates in the material field.
Material energy undergoes fragmentation. It is
the process of transformation of energy, first,
into just a trace of minute matter-fragments
which, at a certain stage on a descending scale,
appear as elementary particles, and second,
into atoms and molecules, and finally into
gross matter. At the gross level, matter
exhibits specific sense qualities, derived from

five forms of tanon (tanmatra) associated with
metamatter forces, which react on the physical
senses. On the other hand, when energy becomes
free from particles at the energy level of matter,
a part of it may break the bondage of matter,
due to the activation of the latent metamatter
force, the outer expression of which is material
energy, and becomes transformed into metamatter force to function in the subtle powerfield. Hence, matter does not end at the level
of the elementary particles, but is continuous
with metamatter in the subtle power-field. The
yogic explanation gives an answer to Hoyle's
statement that matter comes from nowhere.
This nowhere is the subtle metamatter field
which is beyond all observations, even with the
aid of the most sensitive instruments.
The yogis say that pranic dynamism releases
three forms of energy which give rise to the
three phenomena: laghiman (rarefaction),
animan (subtilization), and mahiman (magnification), which cause the emergence of life
force, mind, and matter respectively. The
supremely concentrated prana as bindu (powerpoint) becomes expanded and active at a
certain 'critical' moment, and is expressed as
radiant dynamism. Radiant dynamism is transformed into petaline dynamism consisting of the
centrally situated massive mental consciousness,
around which is the circular pranic forcemotion, and surrounding it is a petaline formation of an extraordinary character. The whole
organization has been technically termed the
sahasrara chakra. Below the sahasrara, the three
basic forms of pranic energy coalesce to form a
central power-flow, termed the sushumna. The
suskmra retains the threefold nature of pranic
energy, and so there are three power-flows in it.
The outer flow is the sushumna itself; internal
to it is the wojra-flow; and the third, which is
inside the wajra, is the chitrini'-flow.
The sushumna power-flow exhibits two fundamental characters: vertical force-motion, expressed
as
centrifugal
and
centripetal
force-motion lines, and spiral force-motion.
The chitrini energy tends to be centralized in a
circular form at certain points throughout
its course, due to the influence of the spiral
force-motion. The centralized circular power
21

Introduction

follows the pattern of the sahasrara and presents
three aspects: a central pericarpial formation, a
circular force-motion around it, and a peripheral
petaline formation. T h e whole circular organization is called chakra. There are nine main
chakras in the chitrini, namely nirwana, indu,
manas, ajna, wishuddha, anahata, manipura,
swadhishthana and muladhara.
Thus, the chakras are in the subtle powerfield which comprises the mental and metamatter realms. Is this yogic explanation based
on pure inference? No, the chakras are 'seen'
with the 'mental eye'. This requires an
explanation.
Perception is the process of receiving and being
conscious of an object. Perception has several
strata. At its lower stratum, physical sense
apparatus is involved in perception and there
is the awareness of a sense quality in a modified
form. T h e r e are five main sense qualities:
smell, taste, sight, touch and sound. These
qualities are an aspect of matter. T h e awareness
of the sensory form of matter occurs in consciousness. This indicates that sense qualities are
outside the boundary of consciousness, and they
are to be brought into consciousness by some
appropriate means. This implies that there is a
distance factor. Moreover, the penetration of
sensory forms into consciousness and their
recognition are based on the principle of selection
and rejection. If the distance and selectionrejection principle were not operating, then all
sense qualities would be the simultaneous content of consciousness.
T h e r e are five classes of receptors, each endowed with the power of receiving only a
particular form of sense quality. After the
sense qualities are received by the receptors,
sensory paths are created from the receptors,
first through the sensory nerves and then through
the neuronal connections in the brain, to the
cerebral cortex, and thence to an area of the
higher brain stem. Nothing more is known about
sensory path in its nervous aspect, and there is
no further trace of it in the brain. This has resulted
in too much speculation. For instance, that the
end point of the sensory path is in a certain area of
the brain which is in connection with consciousness. But this connection does not necessari-

22

ly indicate that this particular brain area itself
is the seat of consciousness. It may mean that
the area is in some way connected with consciousness; and when this area is damaged or
removed, the connection is cut off. If this brain
area is the seat of consciousness then is consciousness distinct from brain, or is it identical
with the brain, that is, brain = consciousness?
But, actually, consciousness has not been
traced to that area or any other part of the brain.
T h e sensory path which has been created is
observable up to the brain; it is observable
because it is a physicochemical process. But how
the physicochemical process in that brain area
causes the appearance of consciousness is not
known. H o w the metamorphosis of physicochemical energy into consciousness occurs
has not been explained. How physicochemical
events in the brain suddenly occur as psychic
events cannot be explained. Consequently, it is
not easy to make mind = brain.
There may be another possibility. Psychical
events may accompany or immediately follow
the physicochemical events in the brain. If
this is accepted, then it will mean that brain
and consciousness are not identical, but are two
separate entities, and their interconnection is
experienced in a particular brain area. To
explain this, it has been postulated that certain
specific dynamic actions of the brain, in which
certain areas of the cerebral cortex and the higher
brain stem are involved, are the essential conditions for the relation between the brain and
consciousness. H o w the specific dynamic actions,
which are physicochemical in nature, can
establish a relation with consciousness which lies
beyond the brain itself, is neither known nor
explained.
Molecular, atomic, and subatomic activities
are all disconnected from consciousness, and
are not a fact in consciousness. It is certainly
a suggestion that a relation is established between
brain and consciousness when the former exhibits specific dynamic actions. If we accept
consciousness as something which is neither a
physicochemical phenomenon nor explainable
in terms of matter, then we think of consciousness
as something which is outside the sphere of
chemical and electrical energy, something which

Introduction

is neither bound by nor composed of molecules,
atoms and elementary particles. In that case,
the brain-consciousness relation is deeper and
more complex.
There is an important query regarding the
specific dynamic action of the brain. H o w is it
caused? If we say that neural-neuronal, centripetal conductions are the cause, then we have
to accept that this brain state is continuous,
without any interruption, because these conductions are continuous. It has not been demonstrated that there is some controlling mechanism
in the brain to exercise control over these
conductions. In that case, how is sleep-unconsciousness produced? T h e specific dynamic
actions certainly disappear during sleep. W h a t
makes them disappear? Here is a clear indication that the specific dynamic action of the
brain, if there is any, is not caused by neuralneuronal conductions, but by something else
which operates from outside the brain.
Now, let us consider two important factors:
distance and sensory capacity. Taste and touch
operate in direct contact with the receptors in
the tongue and skin respectively. T h e distance
factor operates in smell, sight and sound. This
means that the receptors and sense-objects are
not situated in direct contact with each other,
but are separated by a certain distance. T h e
distance varies, but there are certain upper
and lower limits of perception, beyond which
no perception takes place. Between the upper
and lower limits sensory capacity varies in
different species and also in the same species.
Apart from distance, there is another factor,
size or magnitude of the sense-objects. If the
size of an object diminishes below a certain
point, it is not perceptible. Here, the sense
capacity also varies in both different species
and the same species. There is still another
factor. If a sense-object remains within the
range of the right distance, and its size is also
suitable for perception, then there will be no
perception if it is obscured. As an example, if
a certain object is placed inside a closed box
situated within the range of vision, then only the
box will be seen, not the object inside the box.
That object has been obscured by the box,
which the eyes cannot see through. Other

examples a r e : bones covered by muscles, brain
covered by the skull, etc.
T h e time factor is also operative in perception.
Events which occurred in the past are only
remembered, but not 'seen'. Only present events
are perceived directly. There is no direct
knowledge of future events.
All this indicates that sensory capacity is not a
fixed thing, but relative, variable, conditional
and temporal. T h e sense qualities themselves
are also variable. If this is so, we can postulate
that there is a possibility of ultimately attaining
a perfect and absolute sense capacity; and that
the most subtle sensory forms may exist. Can
this be actually demonstrated?
Let us say that normal sensory capacity is X.
Now, the question is whether we can perceive
sense-qualities beyond X or not. O u r experience
is that by using appropriate instruments we can
perceive those sense-qualities which are imperceptible at X. T h e instrumental observations
indicate that the barriers of distance, size and
obscurity have been overcome to a considerable
extent, and that certain details and factors
which are never seen at X have become visible.
Symbolically we may call this instrumentalized,
extended sense capacity Y. This shows that
the sensory capacity can be increased beyond
the normal limit by instrumental aid. But future
events are not revealed by these instruments.
Now, the question is whether X can be
extended to Z without Y. Z stands for supranormal sensory capacity. It has also gradations.
Its existence has been demonstrated by the
yogis. Yogic experiences may be divided into
three categories. First, there is an extension of the
normal limit of power without any instrumentation. This may be called extended, normal
sensory capacity, XA. Those yogis who have
been established in pranayama are able to exhibit
X A . As, for example: there is a tree in front of us
at a distance when the normal eyes can see its
trunk, branches and leaves, but not in greater
details. If a swarm of ants moves upward
on the surface of the trunk, the ants will not be
seen from that distance by the normal eyes.
But a yogi can see them very clearly. This has
been demonstrated. In a similar manner smell
and sound are experienced.

23

Introduction

Second, there can emerge an uncommon and
new pattern of sense-qualities which is never
experienced by normal sensory power. This
specific sense capacity may be called XB.
A yogi has the capacity XB. He experiences
supersmell, supersight and supersound.
T h e following are instances in my own experience. I was in a sitting position on my seat
in a very dark room on a dark night, fully awake
but calm. There was no notion of seeing or
hearing anything uncommon. I spent about an
hour like this. T h e n , suddenly I saw a beautiful
light of vermilion colour, by which the whole
room was lit up. I got up amazed and looked
at the light for some minutes. T h e light was very
beautiful, cool and localized, and the room was
beautifully illuminated. I went outside to see
if anything had happened there, but found
nothing. I hastened into the room and saw that
the light was still glittering. After 10 minutes
or so, the light gradually became dim and
finally disappeared. T h e room was again dark.
I saw this light with my eyes, which were neither
closed nor covered. In my j u d g m e n t it was a
superlight.
T h e other experience was t h a t : I happened
to be in a place where a room was given me to
sleep in, which had on the wall a beautiful
picture of Sri Chaitanya, the great bhaktiyoga
master. O n e dark night, the room being also
very dark, I was in a sitting attitude, calm,
but awake. W h e n about 30 minutes had passed,
I suddenly saw, to my great surprise, that very
bright yellow rays were radiating from the body
of Chaitanya in the picture. T h e whole picture
was beautifully illuminated, and even part of
the room was lit up. Before this occurrence,
I had not thought at all of the picture. I was
fully awake at the time. T h e light phenomenon
continued for about 4 or 5 minutes. In those
days I was able to see clearly and minutely
things in deep darkness, without the help of light.
Third, there are real supranormal sensory
perceptions, Z perception, in which the barriers
of distance, size, obscurity and time are completely overcome. A yogi can perceive a happening occurring far away from him and barriered
by mountains, buildings, etc. He can correctly
foretell future events. All this has been

24

demonstrated.
So the position is this. T h e gross aspect of
matter presents sense-qualities in a form which
may be termed sensory form 1. It is perceived
by normal sensory capacity (X-capacity). T h e
range of normal sensory capacity can be increased to a degree when the perception of
sense-qualities lying beyond the normal sensory
limit occurs. T h e sense-qualities do not change
at this stage, but are barriered, which is overcome by extended, normal sensory capacity
(XA-capacity).
We also find that the pattern of the sensequalities perceived by normal sensory capacity
and extended, normal sensory capacity is associated with a new, or an altered form of
sense-qualities, which is only perceived by
specific sensory capacity (XB-capacity). Above
all these is the sensory form 2 which is perceived
by instrumentalized, extended sensory capacity
(Y-capacity). Thereafter, there is a gap in the
perception of sense-qualities at the subatomic
level. There are no records of any sensory
experience at this stage known to me. But
theoretically there is no reason why this should
be impossible.
T h e supranormal sensory experience develops
after the specific sensory experience. In this
experience, sensory form 1 is perceived. But
sensory form 1 is concealed by the barriers of
distance, size, obscurity and time. In this perception, these barriers are overcome by developing supranormal sensory capacity (Z-capacity).
W h a t is the mechanism which is brought into
play in the above forms of perception? In normal
sensory perception, the receptors are stimulated,
and sensory nervous paths are created which
join the appropriate brain areas. In extended,
normal sensory perception, specific sensory perception, and instrumentalized sensory perception, the same receptor-brain nervous paths
are used. But in supranormal sensory perception, the nervous paths are not used, because
the receptors cannot be stimulated by sensory
form 1, which is obscured by the barriers of
distance, size, obscurity and time. In that case,
how does this form of perception take place?
It indicates that the 'wired' nervous paths are
too gross for this kind of perception; and since

Introduction

this perception is a fact, there must be some subtle
'wireless' conduction-system for this purpose.
These nonnervous, subtle conduction-lines are
technically termed nadi-paths. When the pranic
forces are roused and become more concentrated
by pranayama and concentration, they can
be made so sensitive that they receive the
vibrations, motions, or radiations of the sensequalities even when these are obscured. T h e endpoints of pranic forces in the head and skin of the
body receive the refined sensory vibrations and
transmit them to the chakras, from where the
sense-qualities are transmitted to the subconscious mind in the ajna chakra. Precognition
is only affected by the subconscious mind.
The subconscious mind is also able to receive
directly all sense-qualities when it is sensitized
by pranayama and concentration.
Supranormal perception indicates the existence of subtle nadi-paths. It also shows that
consciousness is outside the boundary of the
brain. Most people are unable to utilize these
paths, because their powers in this direction
are undeveloped. T h e neural-neuronal paths
of conduction, occurring in common sensory
perception, stop at certain points in the brain.
These are the end points of the gross, brain
paths. T h e sensory qualities conveyed by sensory
conduction are released from the nervous envelopment at these brain points and are received
and conveyed by pranic forces to the nadi-field,
and then to the subconscious mechanism, from
where they are radiated to consciousness. It
appears that brain dynamism is an aspect
of pranic dynamism, and mental dynamism
extends through pranic dynamism to the brain.
The sensory forms are a series of graduated
forms. On the lower scale the sensory forms
are gross, and as they ascend the scale they
become more and more minute. Sensory capacity
also changes and becomes increasingly powerful
in the perception of more minute sense forms.
Our normal sensory capacity can be extended
to perceive not only sense-qualities lying beyond
the normal but also a new type of sense-qualities.
Minute sensory forms, existing in the internal
form of matter as molecules and atoms are
perceived by the electron microscope. But
sensory forms existing at the subatomic levels

are so minute that they cannot even be perceived
by the use of the electron microscope. This does
not indicate that the sensory forms are nonexistent here. T h e sensory forms continue from
the atomic-subatomic level and extend to the
subtle metamatter state.
At the metamatter stage, sensory forms are
subtle and exist as subtle smell, taste, sight,
touch and sound, isolated from each other.
T h e y are the fundamental aspects of metamatter. T h e mahabhutas are reducible to the
most concentrated forces called tanmatras. At
the tanmatra level, sensory forms are the subtlest, and these are the perfect and final forms.
Beyond this point, there are no sensory forms.
It is the borderland of sense-form. For the
perception of these subtle phenomena, it requires perfect 'nose', 'tongue', 'eye', 'skin' and
'ear'. This means that it is the final and most
perfect sensory experience which can only
be achieved by yogic 'mental eye'. It is the
superconscious perception, and consciousness
elevated to the concentration level is the only
apparatus for its attainment. This perception
has two levels: dhyana-perception and samadhiperception. T h e former develops into the latter.
Dhyana is that state of consciousness in which
the body becomes completely motionless like
a m o u n t a i n ; the senses of smell, taste, sight,
touch and sound become inoperative, and,
consequently, the outer world is no longer
the content of consciousness; consciousness remains unaffected by intellective functions and
thoughts; such consciousness, thus being empty,
coils to a point in which all its power is in full
concentration. In this state, concentration exhibits the power of holding only one object fully.
W h e n such a concentrated consciousness is
exposed to an object, it penetrates into the deeper
aspects of the object and gets its inner subtle
power-graph properly imaged in consciousness,
and the image is fully illuminated because
the revealing quality of consciousness is now
maximally roused; then consciousness expands
to a certain degree for the magnification of the
image of the power-graph which, finally, is
transferred to highly rarefied thought. In this
way, a perfect and complete knowledge of the
unknown and the subtle aspect of an object
25

Introduction

is attained. Samadhi is the full extension of
dhyana when the perception is absolute and
automatic. T h e chakras have been 'seen' in
this manner.
Is the mental 'vision' of subtle phenomena
a fact? Are the subtle phenomena real? O u r
answer is, that the chakras are subtle, but not
imaginary. Each chakra contains specific power
phenomena which can be made to manifest
physically by appropriate means. This fact
clearly indicates that the chakras exist and
their powers can be made to manifest themselves
on the physical plane. Let us take the muladhara
chakra as an example. T h e power apana residing
there can be roused, controlled, and made to
exhibit a strong upward motion by dhyana
and pranayama. When this upward apana
motion is most forceful, the physical body rises
off the ground and begins to levitate by itself
without any mechanical aid. There is no form
of energy operating in the body which is able to
do this. Consequently, it definitely manifests
the existence of the chakra, the pranic power
and its influence on the body.
There are other forms of power in the chakras,
and they can also be roused by dhyana. Dhyana
in the muladhara develops natural health and
strength of the body and intellective power,
and prolongs life. Dhyana in the swadhishthana
chakra develops a diseaseless and vital body
and intellectual power. Dhyana in the manipura
chakra develops the natural immunity of the
body, the attainment of long life, and the
release of certain uncommon powers. Dhyana
in the anahata chakra develops an inner beauty,
and makes the body highly attractive; there is
also an intellectual development above normal
and an acquisition of uncommon sensory powers.
Dhyana in the wishuddha chakra develops a
body adamantine in hardness and strength,
and absorptive mental concentration. All these
phenomena indicate that the chakra powers
can be made to manifest in the body.

Experiences of the Yogis
Kundaliniyoga forms a highly important part of
the yoga practices; and it has been practised
26

by the yog gurus and their disciples from time
immemorial in India. This is indicated by the
fact that the great yogi Shahkaracharya, 20
who became famous by expounding the monistic
doctrine of Brahman in his well-known commentary, 'Sharirakabhashya', on the Brahmasutra (Wedanta-darshana) of Wyasa, had experience in this yoga, and gave an account of this
in two of his unique works, Ananda Lahari
(Wave of Bliss) and Yogatarawali. In the
Ananda Lahari, the essence of Shankara's direct
experience in Kundaliniyoga is presented. T h e
Ananda Lahari is considered to be such an
important document that there are now known
to be thirty-six commentaries on it. T h e work is
an elaboration of the principles of this yoga
contained in the Subhagodaya, a stotra by the
celebrated Goudapada. It indicates that Gouo'apada himself practised Kundaliniyoga, and presented certain principles of this yoga in the
Subhagodaya. Goudapada, who was almost
certainly taught this yoga by his guru Shuka,
the son of the famous Krishna Dwaipayana
Wyasa, was expected to teach it to his disciple,
the famous yogi Gowindapada, and Shankara
must have obtained his knowledge of it from
the latter. This shows the great antiquity of
Kundaaliniyoga.
Shankara has clearly stated what happens
in Kundaliniyoga when Kundalini, being roused,
passes through the brahma nadi and pierces
all the chakras and reaches the sahasrara to be
in union with Parama Shiwa; and then returns
again to the muladhara. He says 21 : Having
pierced all the principles (situated in the chakras)
- 'earth' in the muladhara, 'water' in the swadhishthana, 'fire' in the manipura, 'air' in the heart
(that is, anahata), 'void' (akasha) above it
(that is, wishuddha), mind (manas) between
the eyebrows (that is, ajna), and having thus
passed through the kulapatha (that is, the path
through which Kulakundalini, or Kundali-power,
passes; it is the brahma nadi which starts from
the muladhara and terminates in the nirwana
chakra where the sushumna also terminates),
you (Mother Kundalini) are in union (in mindtranscendent concentration) with your husband
(Parama Shiwa) in the secret aspect of the
sahasrara chakra (that is, the all-absorbing
path leading to infinity; it is beyond the sahasrara,

Introduction

and consists of Bindu, Nada, Shiwa-Shakti,
Sakala Shiwa, and then Parama Shiwa where
the union in yoga occurs). T h e life-essence flows
like a stream from your feet ('feet' symbolizes
union in yoga) by which the whole body is
sprinkled; and then you again return to your
own abode, and in doing so, you cause the
chakras to become manifest. There (in the
muladhara) you assume your own form, like a
coiled serpent (that is, 3 1/2 coils around
Swayambhu-lihga), and sleep (become latent
in samadhi) in the cavity of the kulakunda
(the triangle in the muladhara).
Shankara has also mentioned the names of
the following chakras in the Ananda Lahari:
muladhara in verse 41, swadhishthana in verse
39, manipura in verse 40, wishuddha in verse
37, and ajna in verse 36. There is no clear mention of the anahata chakra, but in verse 38, the
word sangwit-kamala (knowledge-lotus) occurs,
and it has been interpreted as referring to
anahata chakra. But Shankara has clearly used
the word anahata in verses 3 and 9 of the Yogatarawah.
Shankara has disclosed the contraction process
which is a part of the mantra process in rousing
Kundalini in Kundaliniyoga. T h e contraction
process comprises locks (bandhas) in conjunction
with pranayama.
Shankara says that by the application of the
anal-lock (mulabandha), navel-lock (uddinabandha = uddiyanabandha) and neck (or chin)lock (jalandharabandha) (in conjunction with
sahita kumbhaka) Kundalini is roused and enters
into the sushumna. (that is, the brahma nadi
lying within the sushumna). Moreover, he states
that sahita kumbhaka, practised in conjunction
with anal-, navel-, and chin-locks, finally
develops into kewala kumbhaka (automatic
breath-suspension) 22 .
Tailanga Swami 23 , the great yoga master,
has also mentioned the contraction process.
He says 24 : By the application of the contraction
process (consisting of different locks) the door
of Kundalini should be opened, and the passage
leading to liberation (that is, the chitrini nadi
in which the chakras are strung) should be
pierced (by Kundalini). This yoga (that is,
Kundaliniyoga) should be practised after hearing the Wedanta (that is, purifying the mind

by hearing and thinking of Brahman).
T h e well-known Tantrika yogi Ramaprasada 2 5
has recounted his experiences of Kundaliniyoga
in some of the spiritual songs (Padawali) he
composed. He relates 26 that the muladhara
contains 4 petals in which are situated the
'earth' principle and Power Dakini, and here
lies Kundalini in 3 1/2 coils round Shiwa
(Swayambhu-linga); the swadhishthana has 6
petals where the deities Wishnu and Waruna,
and Power Rakini reside; the manipura has
10 petals and a triangular region containing the
bija of Wahni, and Power Lakin; resides here;
the anahata has 12 petals and a hexagonal
region in the pericarp containing the wayubija; there resides Power Kamini (Kakini);
the sixteen-petalled lotus wishuddha contains
vowels (the first 16 matrika-letters) and there
the Deity Wishnu is seated on naga (the celebrated serpent) or on an elephant, and Power
Shakini; the dwidala (the two-petalled, that
is, ajna) is situated in the space between the
eyebrows; on its petals are the matrika-letters
'hang'' and 'kshang'; there is situated chandrabija {thang"), from which nectar oozes; here
are also Shiwa-linga (Itara-linga), a circle and
a triangle; it is the seat of the mind. This is the
clear picture of the chakras. Ramaprasada
also states 26 that Kulakundalini is in the malad h a r a ; she is also in the sahasrara and the
chintamani-pura (hrit chakra); concentration
(on chakras, deities, etc.) is to be done in the
interior of the body according to the instructions
of the g u r u : there is Brahma, and four other
deities; Dakin;' and five other Powers; the lord
of elephants (gajendra), makara, ram, black
antelope and the second elephant, the realization of these occurs when there is automatic
breath-suspension (in deep concentration).
Ramaprasada's own chosen place for concentration is the hrit chakra (Padawali, Nos 126, 142,
161); his own experience is that Kundalini is
in the muladhara as well as in the sahasrara
(No 107); he says that there are four Shiwas
residing in the muladhara, swadhishthana, throatregion (wishuddha) and the eyebrow space
(ajna) (No 104); Srinatha (Supreme Shiwa)
is in the thousand-petalled lotus (No 104);
a yogi always does concentration on K.undalini
in form in the muladhara and sahasrara (No 156).

27

Introduction
All these statements indicate that he had full
knowledge of the chakras and realized Kundalini
and the chakras directly in yoga.
Ramakrishna27, the great yogi, spiritual teacher
and prophet, has expressed his own experiences
of Kundalini and the chakras28. He 'saw' how
Kundalini, being roused, ascends through the
sushumna (in fact, through the brahma nadi),
and as Kundalini enters into a chakra, the chakra
turns its face upward and 'blooms'. He saw that
the roused Kundalini passes from the muladhara
to the swadhisthana and then to the manipara
and the other chakras, and finally, to the sahasrara. He says that the chakra system is like a plant
with branches and flowers all made of wax,
but actually they are in the nature of life-force
(chinmaya). He speaks of one of his experiences,
when he saw that a youthful person resembling
himself, had entered the sushumna and made
each chakra turn upward and open by a 'deep
contact' with the tongue, one after another,
from the bottom to the top. In this manner, he
saw that the muladhara, swadhishthana,
manipura, anahata, wishuddha, ajna and
sahasrara had turned their heads upward and
bloomed.
Ramakrishna has described the movements
of Kundalini as supreme-force (mahawayu)
motions. He experienced five forms of motion
leading to samadhi: ant-like, frog-like, monkeylike, bird-like and snake-like; when these motions
reach the sahasrara, samadhi is attained. In
deep thought, he perceived Kundalini. He says
that real spiritual knowledge does not arise if
Kundalini is asleep, and when Kundalini passes
through the different chakras, various spiritual
experiences occur. According to him, Primordial
Supreme Power (Adyashakti) resides in all
beings (in the muladhara) as Kulakundalini,
sleeping like a coiled serpent.
The celebrated Wama 29 , generally known as
Wama Kshepa, an accomplished Tantrika yogi,
had direct perception of Kundalini and the
chakras. He says30 that the first practice in yoga
for the initiated Tantrikas is the rousing of
Kundalini. This yoga process is very ancient
and highly scientific. In Kundaliniyoga, the
practitioner experiences how Kundali'-power
is working in different chakras and what is
28

happening there. There are specific experiences,
associated with blissfulness, in each chakra,
when Kundalini passes through it. These experiences are characteristic of the Tantrika method.
In other religions there must also be some means
of arousing Kundalini, otherwise it is impossible
to proceed beyond the lower mental plane.
Kundalini may be automatically roused in
intense love, intense happiness, intense sorrow,
intense pain and intense fear. But she may
again return to a dormant state. This is why the
guru's guidance is so important.
From his own experiences in Kundaliniyoga,
my guru has said that Kundali-power becomes
dynamic in the muladhara by intense thoughtconcentration in combination with the mantras,
pranayama and bandhas, and passes upwards
through the brahma nadi, by piercing chakra
after chakra, and finally reaching the sahasrara.
When Kundalini reaches a chakra, the head
of the chakra turns upward and the whole
contents of the chakra - mahabhuta, tanmatra,
Deity, Power, everything - first becomes fully
illuminated by the light from Kundalini, and
then are absorbed into Kundalini. When Kunaalim is roused, real concentration starts, and as
she goes upward, it deepens more and more.
Thought-concentration of the bhutashuddhi
process becomes transformed into real concentration through roused Kundalini. When thoughtconcentration on Kundalini becomes most
intense, the chakras automatically appear in
consciousness. This is the indication that Kundalini is about to be roused.
My guru has said that after the union of
Kundalini with Parama Shiwa in thought-concentration in bhutashuddhi, Shiwa-Shakti should
then be transformed into Ishtadewata, and is
to be brought first to the sahasrara, and then to
the hrit chakra, where concentration should
be done. Thought-concentration on Ishtadewata
is a very efficient means of transforming thoughtconcentration into real concentration. It is
a great help in making bhutashuddhi more
effective and preparing the practitioner for the
practice of Kundaliniyoga.
It appears that thought-concentration on
Shiwa-Shakti in form, as Ishtadewata, is also
an ancient practice and part of bhutashuddhi,

Introduction

though usually omitted; and this is indicated
in Shahkanr's Ananda lahari, Verse 8.

Kundalini
Kundalini
has
been
called
Kundali-shakti
(-power), that is, power in coil. T h e basic
word is kunda or kundala meaning what is
spiral or in coil. T h e term Kundalini or Kundali
has been used in yoga in a technical sense, and
can be called the spiraliform power, or energy.
So Kundalini may be called 'spiraline'. We
will elaborate the technical meaning of it
later.
Kundalini has been called Spirit-fire, Serpentfire, Serpent-power, Serpentine Power, Annular
Power, Cosmic Electricity, and so on. This does
not help very much in understanding the
real nature of Kundali-power.
On the physical plane, all energy appears as
chemical, mechanical and electrical. Can we
find any trace of Kundali-energy in muscular,
nervous, glandular, respiratory, cardiac, alimentary and eliminative functions of the
body, in cellular activities, at the atomic and
subatomic levels? Is it possible to find this
energy playing a part in the mental field, in
perception, intellection and affectivity?
Kundali-energy cannot be identified with the
energy operating in the body at all its levels,
or with the tissues and structures of the body.
The energy functioning in the body is physicochemical in n a t u r e ; it is derived from food,
and when food is not supplied, it comes from
the tissues of the body. So this energy is actually
food-tissue energy. Food is converted into energy
and tissues in the body on the one side, and
on the other, the tissues are converted into
energy to maintain the more vital parts of the
body, as in inanition. If Kundalini is identified
with the chemical energy, then it is also the
tissues of the body. Such a gross transformation
of Kundalini is contradictory to its real nature.
Is it possible to identify Kundalini with special
forms of energy in the body? As, for example,
muscular energy? Here, also the same objection

arises. Muscular energy is essentially chemical
energy derived from food. Food also becomes
a part of muscle. T h e energy is involved in
muscular contraction. Contraction is initiated
by motor nervous impulses. T h e nervous control
is not purely a nervous factor; with it the chemical factor is also involved, because at the nerve
endings acetylcholine is also released.
Muscular contraction causes muscular movements. A large part of skeletal, muscular movements is carried out automatically, and it is
said that they are controlled by the spinal
cord and the lower brain. In everyday life we
execute innumerable movements in this way.
But also a very large part of skeletal muscular
movements is done by volition. Over and above
those willed actions which are indispensably
necessary in our daily life we can execute
movements for muscular growth and development. By systematic application of physical
culture, an extraordinary muscular growth can
be attained, and strength, speed and endurance
can be developed to a very high degree. These
are isotonic muscular work. But skeletal muscle
can be made to exhibit a very powerful isometric contraction, which enables an expert
to support on his chest a weight of 5 tons, and on
his throat 1/2 a ton. This isotonic and isometric
muscular work is of a conscious type. This great
muscular power also depends on food. T h u s ,
in fact, food energy is the basic part without
which the body will collapse. Food, combined
with muscle training, causes the development
of such muscular power. We find that there is
really no scope here for Kundalini.
But there are instances which indicate that
there is also a possibility of attaining unusual
muscular power without specific muscular training and 'athletic' diet. T h e author knows a
number of hatha yogis who have demonstrated
extraordinary strength and endurance. Their
bodies are not of the athletic type, but graceful.
How has this been possible? We cannot introduce
Kundalini here, as the basic energy part is
still chemical. T h e question is whether 'will'
can do so, and if it can, whether Kundalini
is involved in it.
By the application of will on skeletal muscle,
a particular muscle or a particular group of

29

Introduction

muscles can be isolated and controlled; different
degrees of contraction can be attained; contraction can be made hard as stone; controlled
movements of the diaphragm, control of sphincter muscles, and full relaxation of muscles are
achieved. This voluntary control 3 1 can be developed to an extent when it is possible.to attain
the following: the passing of the fluid contents
through the alimentary canal, urethral suction
of fluid and air, voluntary ejaculatory control
and very powerful voluntary vaginal contraction.
It is generally thought that this muscular
control indicates mental influence on muscles.
But it is not so simple. Mind cannot be in
contact with the muscle. T h e brain and mind
are
bridged
by nadi and
subconscious
mechanisms. T h e will, being patterned into a
definite thought and purpose, develops as conation. This is the extreme mental border. Thereafter, conative impulses are generated and pass
in an unconscious form the bridge mechanism
and are finally transferred to an appropriate
brain area. T h e n they take the usual course the motor impulses to the muscles. This 'will'
is not effective without the help of the nerve
force. Such a weak will cannot be the seat of
Kundalini, and as the will is associated with
chemical energy for its final effectiveness, it
cannot be identified with Kundalini; and without Kundalini the will, combined with nerve
force, can do extraordinary things in the body.
W h a t about extraordinary muscular strength
demonstrated by the hatha yogis without physical
culture? T h e yogis are able to concentrate
pranic force by pranayama and to direct it
through the nervous mechanism to the skeletal
muscles. We shall come to this factor later.
Can Kundalini-energy be identified with nerve
energy? T h e energy system operating in the
nervous system is not different from the other
systems of the body. Basically, it is physicochemical, but the metabolism in the brain is
slight in comparison with other parts of the body.
This is why the brain is extremely resistant to
the effects of inanition. Though its loss of mass
is very slight, there is still some loss, which
indicates its dependence on chemical energy.
T h e electrical power, exhibited especially in
nerve impulses, functions on the basis of chemi30

cal energy, and not without it. Nerve impulses
are intrinsically associated with the nerve structure. T h e electrical phenomena in the nerves
may be a replication of the particles-energy
system at the atomic level. Here too, the energy
is unconscious in nature, and is associated with
extremely minute matter and these are interchangeable. So Kundalini cannot be identified
with the brain or any nerve structure or nerve
energy.
Dr Rele 3 2 has identified Kundalini with the
right vagus nerve. This means first, that Kundalini is a nerve impulse limited to the right
vagus nerve and secondly that it is physicochemical energy.
T h e vagus nerve, which is the most widely
distributed of the cranial nerves, passes from
the medulla oblongata through the neck and
thorax into the abdomen. It is a mixed nerve,
containing essentially three groups of nerve
fibres: branchiomotor, efferent parasympathetic
and afferent. If Kundalini is the vagus, or the
right vagus, is Kundalini then identified with
all three groups or only one, possibly parasympathetic? In any case, Kundalini appears to be
fragmented and materialized. Moreover, its
power becomes very limited. T h e parasympathetic portion of the vagus exerts an inhibitory
influence on the heart, coronary arteries and
bronchi, but accelerates the activities of the
smooth muscles of the alimentary canal. On
the other hand, the sympathetic stimulation
produces just the opposite effects. Then, for
the efficient functioning of these organs, both
the harmonious parasympathetic and sympathetic activities are absolutely necessary. By making
Kundalini the vagus nerve, its power has been
very much restricted, and it is made to depend
upon the sympathetic functioning in a state
of normal health. This Kundalini cannot exercise
full control over these organs alone. First, the
limitation on Kundalini comes by making it
the nerve force which is physicochemical in
n a t u r e ; and second, it has been more restricted
by making Kundalini the right vagus nerve.
Is it this material Kundalini that the yogis
strive to realize in deep concentration? Is the
yogi's Kundalini so fragmented and limited?
Is Kundalini a chemical phenomenon?

Introduction

Perhaps, the identification can be explained
in a different manner. Kundali-energy may reside
in the vagus nerve (or the right vagus) ordinarily
in a latent form when the normal nerve function
goes on; but when it is roused by some processes,
it exercises control over the vagus nerve when
the ordinary nervous function is transformed
into an extraordinary control power by which
the heart is completely stopped and a prolonged
breath-suspension occurs; and all these things
are done voluntarily. U n d e r ordinary conditions,
our will does not act directly on the autonomic
nervous system; however, it can be stimulated
electrically. T h e exhibition of this unusual
control power may be explained in two ways:
Kundali-energy, when roused, exhibits this
control and at the same time it becomes reflected
on the mind, and this results in its becoming
a conscious phenomenon; or, the will is directly
infused by Kundali-energy when it is able to
cause such an extraordinary control power.
However, it appears that Kundali-energy is
different from the nervous energy which is
linked to the nerve structure and is physicochemical and unconscious in nature. Kundalienergy either functions directly through the
will or it works independently and at the same
time influences the mind to become involved
in it. If Kundalini is not nervous energy, then
it is unnecessary to make it the vagus, or right
vagus, nerve. Kundalini is also different from
will-power, because the ability of the will to
control the autonomic nervous system and
the involuntary organs is due to Kundalini.
Even this explanation of Kundalini does not
reveal its real nature. It is also our assumption
that Kundali-power is involved in the control
of the autonomic nervous system. Yogis have
demonstrated that this control can be achieved
by pranayama and concentration. In pranic
and mental control Kundalini is indirectly
involved. But in the conscious application of
the control power over the autonomic nervous
system and involuntary organs, Kundalini is not
involved. Rather, when Kundalini is roused,
an absorption of pranic forces occurs stage by
stage, and as a consequence basal metabolism
is progressively decreased. So there is no point
in making Kundalini the right vagus nerve.

It is a fallacy to think that the sleeping Kundalini resides in the solar plexus. Kundalini does
not lie in a gross nervous plexus, as it has been
called by the yogis supremely subtle. T h e
yogis say that Kundalini is situated in a coiled
form in the subtle muladhara, lying within the
vertebral column. T h e solar plexus is outside
the vertebral column. T h e roused Kundalini
rises upward and pierces all the chakras which
are subtle power-centres lying inside the vertebral column. These chakras cannot be identified
with the gross nervous plexuses lying outside
the vertebral column. So, Kundalini neither
resides in the solar plexus nor passes through
the nervous plexuses.

Nature of Kundali-energy
Up to now we have said what Kundalini is not.
This neti-neti (not this - not this) deliberation
is very helpful in understanding the real nature
of Kundalini. It can be prefaced with a brief
consideration of the energy-system operating
in the body, even at the risk of some repetition.
T h e characteristic of the living body is to
exhibit activities, viz., cellular, nervous,
glandular and muscular, which are associated
with livingness. T h e energy which supports
these activities is derived from the tissue-substances (carbohydrates, fats and proteins) by
catabolic process. On the other hand, the decay
of the tissue-substances is prevented by the
anabolic utilization of food. This energy release
is a chemical process. This energy-cum-tissue
is material in character, and perhaps it may be
sufficient to explain physical activities. But
really it is not very simple. T h e phenomenon of
consciousness is intermingled with the physical
activities. Of course, in most of the vital activities
of the body consciousness is not involved.
But conscious actions are also an integral part
of the bodily functions. Perception, intellection,
thought, attention and willing are not possible
without consciousness. But in the body, only
physicochemical events are observable in perception. How consciousness is evoked or linked
31

Introduction

with the unconscious physicochemical process
is not known. We cannot say that consciousness
is located in a certain area of the brain and is
'ignited' by the neuronal conduction, because
the same process does not cause consciousness
to appear in sleep. T h e observed fact that the
damage of a certain brain-spot produces unconsciousness, may not really indicate that
it is the seat of consciousness. It may mean
a lack of interaction or an effacement of the
material replication of consciousness. T h a t the
whole nervous paths and brain are not utilized
in the subconscious (generally known as extrasensory) mode of perception (which definitely
occurs), clearly shows that consciousness is
beyond the brain.
If this is so, then there must be some form of
energy which is not based on the physicochemical
system of the body, but is operative in its superphysical character. This subtle energy-system
is the 'wireless' system which operates without
being vehicled by the nerves. Technically, it is
called the nadi system. T h e 'wired' or the nervous
system is an extension of the 'wireless' or the
nadi system into the material field.
In the nadi-field, dynamic prana energy is
in constant motion. W h a t is the static counterpart
of dynamic prana? Take an atom for example.
It is the composite of two forms of energy:
energy in motion and energy in static form,
called the nucleus. If we regard nadi-chakra
(-field) as similar to an atom, then prana is
its electrons, but what is its nucleus? This is
the first time we are compelled to enquire
what is the static form of energy as the background of the dynamic prana.
We find that there are three states of pranic
operation: a control influence exercised on
pranic forces, pranic concentration, and pranic
latency, that is, a state of suspension or nearsuspension of prana. U n d e r the control influence,
pranic energy functions powerfully and harmoniously, and the force-motions take right directions. These effects are shown both in the body
and mind. T h e body becomes purified, healthy,
vigorous and diseaseless, the mind becomes
clear, forceful and better controlled. This is
in itself a great achievement in one's life.
T h e method consists in developing a 'sushumnite'
32

force-motion to act successfully on the static
force which must have been polarized with
dynamic prana. We experience a transference
of control element to the active pranic energy,
and it is due to the static source, because there
are no other sources. This process is technically
termed nadishuddhi - normalization of pranic
activities. This fact also indicates that dynamic
prana functions both in the body and in the mind.
It regulates in a specific manner the functions
of the body.
Pranic concentration is the transformation
of the diversified pranic activities to a highly
concentrated state when pranic potency is
increased to an extraordinary degree. An
example of the increased pranic potency is to
levitate the body. This fact also indicates that
pranic forces can operate in the body directly.
Thirdly, a state of pranic latency or suspended
animation is produced when pranic energy
is absorbed, step by step, into an unknown
power. So we find that an influence of an unknown power is completely hidden from our
observation and its presence unsuspected under
ordinary conditions of life, whereas under certain
unusual circumstances it is exercised on pranic
dynamism, and ultimately there is a possibility
of a complete withdrawal of pranic functions.
This unknown power has been called in yoga
Kundalini. Ordinarily, it is latent, but under
certain special conditions, it becomes patent.
W h a t is the real nature of Kundalini? It
has been argued that energy polarizes itself
as static and dynamic, and the dynamic form
is the pranic force, and its static support is
Kundalini. Can we trace this relation between
prana and Kundalini? T h e sum total of the
activities in which the body, the life-force and
the mind are involved is the dynamic aspect of
our existence, and the whole phenomenon may
be called pranic dynamism. This is observable.
But can prana function alone, without a static
background? In its normal functioning there
is no indication of what is the static aspect of
prana. But if there is the polarization of energy,
the dynamic form must have a static form, and
consequently, prana must have its static form.
This static form has been considered as Kundalini.
T h a t there is an intimate relation of Kundalini

Introduction

with prana is indicated specially in pranic
concentration and suspended animation. These
two phenomena definitely show the influence
of Kundalini on prana. In a state of normal
pranic function, no relation between them is
observable. It is because prana functions by
its own power, and these energy-functions are
supported by static Kundalini silently. But
there are instances when Kundalini acts on
prana, and this active influence of Kundalini
changes the character of the normal function
of prana. In this case, Kundalini is expected to
be dynamic, at least partially. T h e n what would
be the static support of the dynamic Kundalini?
The active influence of Kundalini on prana
can be explained by assuming that it is due to an
emanation of force from Kundalini which itself
remains static, or partly static. But when prana
is absorbed by Kundalini, does it still remain
static?
The following are the signs of gradual pranic
absorption: first, a motionless body; second,
the decrease of metabolism lower than basal
metabolism; third, stoppage of vital functions
of the body; fourth, inoperation of the sensory
system. It appears that pranic absorption is
associated with a corresponding change in
Kundalini, from its static to its dynamic form.
The experiences of the yogis support this. T h e
yogis experience directly that Kundalini is
roused in the maladhara centre and passes
upward through the brahma nadi, piercing all
the chakras, to the sahasrara. This means that
static Kundalini becomes dynamic in Kundaliniyoga, and exhibits motion - the Kundali-force
motion. Consequently, Kundalini leaves the
muladhara and goes to the sahasrara.
Some objections have been raised against
the actual rousing and passing of Kundalini
from the muladhara to the sahasrara. T h e
muladhara has been considered as the static
pole in relation to the whole organism. In the
muladhara, Kundalini as static power maintains
the dynamic form of energy which is the sum
total of the activities of the living organism.
So Kundalini cannot be made dynamic, it always
remains static in the muladhara. T h e rising of
Kundalini has been interpreted as sending forth
an emanation or ejection in the likeness of

Kundalini which passes through the various
chakras and become united with Mahakundalini
in the sahasrara, and in this process the coiled
Kundalini does not actually move from the muladhara. It has been further stated that if Kuna'alini leaves the muladhara and goes upward,
then it means that Kundalini ceases to be Kundalini. In this case, dynamic Kundali-power will
enhance the vital vigour instead of causing the
suspension of animation. And so it has been concluded that, ordinarily, prana is diffused over
the whole organism, and the pranic dynamism
is supported by static Kundalini in the mulad h a r a ; in Kundaliniyoga, prana becomes
converged, and this is also supported by static
kundalini in the muladhara.
T h e theory of the nonascent of kundalini'
and kundalini-emanation has been specially
advanced by Professor Pramathanatha Mukhopadhyaya 3 3 . Wiwekananda 3 4 has clearly said
that Kundalini, the coiled-up energy, can be
roused and made active and consciously made
to pass upward through the sushumna when it
acts upon centre after centre. He further says
that the rousing of kundalini is the only means of
attaining divine wisdom; and when it passes
from centre to centre, layer after layer of the
mind opens up. He also admits that a minute
portion of kundalini energy can, as a small
current, be set free and may pass through the
sushumna.. However, according to Wiwekananda,
the rousing of kundalini and its passing through
the chakras are facts, and are intimately associated with the lighting up of the dormant layers
of the m i n d ; but, under certain conditions,
some currents from kundalini may pass through
the sushumna..
Arawinda 3 5 recognizes the actual passing of
kundalini to sahasrara, and also an ejection
from kundalini as the ascending current going
up to the sahasrara. He also says that a mere
ejection from kundalini cannot cause a radical
change. In other words, the full release of spiritual force and the growth of superconsciousness
are linked to the rousing of kundalini and its
ascent through the chakras.
It is not necessary to assume that all along the
muladhara is the permanent static centre. T h e
muladhara has been evolved last, after all other

33

Introduction

chakras came into being. Pranic dynamism
in the form of prananation (pranic radiation)
has caused the emergence of the chakras. Before
the formation of the muladhara, pranic dynamism started to operate. In that case, its static
polarity could not be static Kundalini in the
muladhara, but some other static power centred
somewhere. T h e yogis say that it was the 3 1/2coiled kundalini, residing in the sahasrara,
which was the static support of pranic dynamism
at the beginning; and after the emergence of
the muladhara, the 3 1/2-coiled Kulakundalini became the static support of the dynamic prana
whose activities now have been more diffused
and diversified to maintain animation in the
gross body. Also there is 8-coiled Kundalini
lying throughout the sushumna with 1 coil in
each chakra.
So the rousing of Kundalini in the muladhara
and its ascent will not cause the total collapse
of the living organism. T h e rousing of Kundalini
is the dynamization of Kulakundalini. This will
not cause an excess of pranic force, because the
ascent of Kundalini is associated with the withdrawal of prana, causing the suspension (to a
varying degree) of animation. When Kulakundalini is roused, it becomes uncoiled without
being non-Kunaalim, and its dynamization causes the absorption of prana, and its motion
becomes uninterrupted and highly concentrated.
It is not necessary to interpret the ascending
Kundalini as the dynamic counterpart of the
static Kundalini in the muladhara. Kundalini
is actually dynamized, and only when this
prodigious power is fully and wholly roused,
does the whole power, in concentration and
motion, transform the mind in the sahasrara
into a supermind - a mind in samadhi. W h e n
Kulakundalini is
dynamized,
the muladhara
ceases to be a static centre, and Kundalini in
3 1/2 coils in the sahasrara becomes the static
support. This is not to deny that under certain
circumstances the static Kulakundalini sends
forth emanations to exercise its control influence
on prana.
When
Kulakundalini
becomes
dynamic,
Kundalini in the sahasrara becomes the static
support. T h e eight-coiled Kundalini is absorbed,
step by step, into Kulakundalini when it passes
34

through the different chakras, thus strengthening the Kulakundalini-motions. When Kulakundalini reaches the sahasrara, it becomes united
as one with the sahasrara kundalini, and the
whole Kundalini becomes dynamic, and its
static support is Kundalini lying beyond the
sahasrara and extending from the Supreme
Bindu to Sakala Shiwa. Again, when the united
Kundalini as Nirwana (all absorbing) power
enters into the beyond-sahasrara-kundalini, it
(Kundalini beyond the sahasrara) becomes dynamic and the static support is Parama Shiwa Supreme Consciousness. Kundalini is finally
absorbed into Supreme Consciousness.
These Kundaalinis - Kundalini in the muladhara, the eight-coiled kundalini in the other
chakras, Kundalini in the sahasrara, and Kundalinz beyond sahasrara - are not different
entities, but the different aspects of the same
Kundalini. Dynamization of kundalini takes
place step by step. T h e dynamization is essentially the unfoldment of spiritual consciousness
and associated yoga power stage by stage.
Prana is the dynamic counterpart of the coiled
Kundalini. Prana is the energy-whole which
creates mind, life and matter. T h e yantra the real dynamic graph of the pranic o p e r a t i o n is the chakra system. T h e chakras and associated
nadis form the nadi organization. Only a part
of pranic energy is at play in the body and mind,
which is required for the maintenance of vitality
and mentation according to one's capacity
and possibility. T h e pranic function at the
common level is an unconscious radiation of
pranic energy from the chakras into the body,
and that aspect of the mind which is functionally
connected with the brain. T h e chakras are the
reservoirs of prodigious powers, which are
ordinarily latent. They can be unfolded by
pranayama and concentration. These powers
can manifest in the body as great vital, nervous
and muscular strength, and in the mind as
various unknown secret forces. They can also
be manifested in the body in a wireless manner
as superpowers. But still deeper, there is the
coiled central force, remaining as static support
of the central dynamism (prana) which maintains all dynamic expression of energies.
T h e uncoiling of the coiled central force is an

Introduction

extraordinary occurrence in the h u m a n mind
and body, in thoughts and actions. It is like a
flood of splendorous divine force from which
is being released a new form of consciousness
which is not modified by what is called matter
at all its levels, and is not dependent upon the
mind which mentalizes consciousness. Because
of the coiling, this latent central force is called
kundalini. But the meaning of coiling or Kunda\i is much deeper than its superficial significance, 'latency'. kundalini is in 3 1/2 coils in the
muladhara, in 8 coils, one coil in each of the eight
chakras, in 3 1/2 coils in the sahasrara and in 3 1/2 coils
beyond sahasrara. T h e first uncoiling of Kunda\mi takes place in the muladhara. Second,
the uncoiling of the eight-coiled kundalini,
third the uncoiling of the sahasrara Kundalini,
and finally kundalini beyond sahasrara takes
place. The uncoiling is the process of dynamization of K.undalini occurring in four stages.
When kundalini is uncoiled it becomes the sole
dynamism. This dynamism reaches a stage of
bodilessness and mindlessness and again becomes
static in the form of infinite, whole supreme
consciousness.
Kundalini as Kulakundalini is in 3 1/2 coils in the
muladhara. T h e 3 coils indicate that Kundalienergy is latent in the material, nadi and mental
fields, and the half coil shows that Kundalini
is in a static form. O n e coil in each chakra indicates that the chakra is inactive and dark, and
its powers remain unmanifested. Of the 3 1/2 coils
in the sahasrara, the 3 coils indicate that Kundalienergy remains inoperative at the amakala,
nirwanakala and nirwana shakti points. This
means that samprajnata samadhi has not been
developed, prakriti has not been absorbed,
and Kundalini has not manifested all-absorbing
power. T h e 1/2 coil is indicative of its static state.
Beyond the sahasrara, the first coil is at Para
Bindu, the second coil is at Para Nada, the third
coil is at Shiwa-Shakti, and the half coil is at
Sakalashiwa. All this means that asamprajnata
samadhi has not been attained.
But the significance of the coils goes further.
The latency of kundalini indicates that it is the
static support of the prana as dynamism. T h e
dynamic prana is the creative energy, supremely
concentrated at the Bindu, and is about to be

manifested. At a certain critical moment, the
Bindu ejects its dynamic counterpart in the form
of an expanded circle within which the pranic
energy becomes more concentrated and assumes
a triangular form from which power emanates.
This triangle-imbedded circle is the first form of
pranic-energy radiation in which lie three power
components, technically termed 'a', 'u' and 'm'
in coiled forms which constitute the radiant first
mantra 'ong'. T h e coiled factor is the replication
of kundalini itself which is in 3 1/2 coils and the
static support of prana. Prana exhibits the
characteristic Kundali-coil in its motion which
becomes spiral.
T h e pranic impulse consists of two principal
factors which are exhibited in pranic motion.
T h e y are spiral and vertical. T h e spiral motion
creates subtle dynamic graphs in the form of
circles, called chakras; and the vertical motion
causes the emergence of the sushumna field in
which the chakras are systematically arranged.
So the 'coil' is a fundamental factor which remains in static kundalini as well as in dynamic
prana. T h e coil is the actual potency which is
released both in coiling and uncoiling.
When kundalini begins to be uncoiled, the
spiral pranic energy loses its dynamism and
begins to be absorbed step by step into dynamic
Kundalini. In this way, the chakras are absorbed
into kundalini. When kundalini is in coils,
pranic dynamism essentially manifests as pranic
radiations through the sushumna. as centrifugal
and centripetal motions without any cessation;
and its spiraline aspect goes to the pranic
chakras and activates the centralized pranic
forces. T h e pranic main currents and centralized
pranic forces become more efficient functionally
by nadi-shuddhi, when greater control influence
is exercised on the body and mind.
But when kundalini begins to be uncoiled,
the central 'sushumnaite' prana currents begin to
ebb and the centralized pranic forces are
gradually withdrawn into the main pranic
current. This is shown by the gradual decrease
of the basal metabolism of the body and the
cessation of the undulations of mental consciousness. T h e uncoiling of the 1/2 coil causes kundalini
to enter into the brahma nadi. T h e uncoiling
of the 3 coils produces control effects on the
35

Introduction
pranic forces, body and mind. The effects on
the pranic forces are two: the absorption of the
central pranic currents and the initiation of the
Kundalini motion through the brahma nadi;
and secondly, changing of the Kundalini motion
to Kundalini radiation which causes the
revitalization of the pranic forces and produces
the nadishuddhi effects. The effects on the body
are also two: first, the body undergoes a state
of motionlessness in a natural manner, and
second, the body functions healthfully and
more efficiently, when it goes back to the ordinary state. The mental effects are also two:
development of deep concentration and natural
unfoldment of spiritual qualities. All this indicates the interrelation between Kundalini and
prana.

When kundalini is in coil, prana force exhibits
its spiral motion by which the body is vitalized
and mental dynamism operates. When Kurcdalini is uncoiled, the spiral energy of prana
first becomes coil, and then is withdrawn into
dynamic Kundalini. This causes the body to be
naturally in a state of motionlessness and the
slowing of the vital functioning. In this state
the mind functions above the perceptive and
intellective levels as real concentration. Before
being really dynamic, Kundalini emits radiations
through the sushumna. Under this condition,
the mind becomes spiritual in nature, and an
urge is felt to make and keep the body purified
and vigorous.
Kundalini is roused consciously as in Kundaliniyoga, or unconsciously as in various religious and spiritual practices involving deep
godly feeling. There are certain circumstances
in life when Kundalini is also roused unconsciously. In intense fear of death as in severe
diseases or some great danger; in deepest
unbearable pain; or in intense happiness, an
unconscious rousing of Kundalini may happen.
If sexual desire is conjoined with intense love
for each other, then Kundalini may be roused
unconsciously. When the heightened sexual force
in deep love is under restraint in visual experiences or in close contacts, deep concentration
at a certain point develops, which rouses
Kundalini. But the sexual desire itself has no
influence on Kundalini. When Kundalini is
36

roused, sexual desire is fully under control.
The rousing of Kundalini is never connected
with sexual indulgence. But when an intense
mental depression is caused by excessive sexual
enjoyment, Kundalini may be roused. But if
this unconscious rousing is utilized spiritually,
then this unconscious rousing becomes highly
beneficial, otherwise, Kundalini goes back to
'sleep' again. On the other hand, highly intensified godly love (bhakti) in which there is
no tinge of sexuality in any form, is a most
powerful factor in rousing Kundalini.
In consciously rousing of Kundalini, it is felt
and 'seen'. The passage of Kundalini through
the different chakras is felt and seen. When the
roused Kundalini passes through the chakras,
they are at first fully illuminated, and then
concentration becomes deeper, and finally they
are absorbed into Kundalini. In this way,
all principles located in the different chakras
are absorbed step by step. Ultimately, a stage
is reached when there is nothing but kundalini
in its subtlest, splendorous and mind-transcendently conscious form. The meaning of the
subtlest is that Kundalini is subtler than anything else. In the material field, elementary
particles are the minutest. But prana wayu is
subtler than elementary particles. As prana
wayu is absorbed into Kundalini, so the latter
is subtler than the former. In a similar manner,
the most refined mind is also absorbed into
Kundalini, so it is subtler than mind. The
subtler the power, the more forceful it is, and by
its forcefulness it is able to absorb what is grosser
than it. So, kundalini cannot function in the
material, vital and mental fields, but it tends
to absorb them, to create a nonmaterial, nonvital and nonmental stratum where it is in full
power and in illumination.
kundalini is splendorous. Kunaalini-'light'
has three aspects: sunlike bright light by which
subtle phenomena are illuminated and experienced in concentration; moonlike 'cool'
light which deepens concentration; and firelike
burning light which exhibits great absorptionpower and develops absorptive concentration.
Kundali-power is in the nature of illumination.
It first illuminates appropriate objects and then
they are absorbed into it. When everything is

Introduction

absorbed, kundalini as Supreme and splendorous
power remains, and this power is all consciousness. This is not mental consciousness, as mind
is fully absorbed into it. It is mind-transcendent
consciousness - kundalini'-consciousness. W h e n
mental consciousness operates in chitta, its
material replica is found in the brain, and
certain physical activities become conscious.
Otherwise, nervous impulses, neuronal activities,
organic and muscular actions, all are unconscious. T h e power that is capable of absorbing mind and radiates nonmental consciousness
light is Kundalini. Kundalini in its fullest
manifestation is supreme consciousness.
The Kundalini-emanations exercise a control
influence on the body and mind, and as a
result, the physical and mental activities are
fully regulated and forceful. T h e roused Kundalini withdraws prana in stages. T h e first sign of
pranic withdrawal is the natural establishment
of asana in which an assumed body posture is
held still, painless and effortless. Second, a
gradual decrease of animation, which is accompanied by a decrease of metabolism below the
basal metabolic level, a diminution of vital
activities and a prolonged breath-suspension
occur. This is the stage of pranayama. Third, a
complete suspension of sensory functions occurs.
This is pratyahara. Thereafter, the fully internalized consciousness undergoes the stages of
dharana, dhyana and samprajnata samadhi.
When Kundalini comes to the sahasrara, samprajnata samadhi takes place. T h e n Kundalini
absorbs superconsciousness and its root, prakriti,
and thus being in a mind-transcendent state, it
remains alone in asam prajnata samadhi. Finally,
Kundalini, in the final stage of asamprajnata
samadhi, is entirely supreme consciousness, and
its power aspect supports the infinite supreme
beingness as real.
The roused Kundalini-energy is actually yama
(control)-power which develops stage by stage
as asana, pranayama, and pratyahara, and
becomes sangyama (supercontrol) when dharana,
dhyana and samprajnata samadhi are attained.
Finally, sangyama is transformed into asamprajnata samadhi, the supreme control power.
So kundalini may be termed samadhi force,
or yoga power. Arawinda 36 has aptly called

kundalini yoga-shakti (-power). Yoga power
actually operates in kundalini'-yoga.
After the union with Supreme Shiwa, Kundalini goes back to the muladhara, and in its
descent, the chakras, their powers and divinities
- all are restored. This recoiling process is
essentially the spiritualization of consciousness
which functions in everyday life. T h a t is, it is
a transference of spiritual reality, developed in
concentrated consciousness, to sense-consciousness to be able to realize spiritual truth in our
daily life. In the uncoiling and recoiling of
kundalini', the practitioner of kundaliniyoga
experiences the Divine in its formless aspect
in supreme concentration as well as in form in
post-concentration waking consciousness. So
Arawinda 37 calls kundalini a divine force.

Concentration
Concentration is not focused thought (bhawana)
but is the process consisting of dharana, dhyana
and samadhi. It does not come into being unless
pratyahara is first established. In focussed
thought, though mental efforts are m a d e to
centralize thought on a chosen object, yet it is
often diversified; an automatic and uncontrollable penetration of other objective images
occurs, and consequently the whole thought
system is shaken.
Concentration is a mental process of reducing
multiform consciousness to a point, termed
bindu. T h e development of this mental power
is dependent upon the transformation of the
diversified pranic forces into a state of pranic
concentration and withdrawal by which the
vital and sensory functions become internalized.
These are the processes of pranayama and pratyahara. Thereafter, and on the basis of pratyahara,
pranic dynamism functions in the mind and
rouses the slumbering mentative energy which
expresses itself as dharana-power, the immensely
strong power to hold the one-pointedness of
consciousness in the form of only one object, for
a sufficiently long time to be effective. This power
grows step by step, and it is then possible to
37

Introduction

continuously maintain single-objectiveness of
consciousness uninterruptedly and for a prolonged period of time. This produces very deep
concentration; and from that deep concentration
a 'mental light' comes into being which can be
focussed on any object, inner or outer. This
state of consciousness is called dhyana.
Prolonged and repeated dhyana deepens concentration so that it reaches the bindu state.
This is the highest point of mental concentration
in which consciousness is maximally concentrated to a point and the truth-exposing concentration-light shines forth. This is samprajnata samadhi. Ultimately, samprajnata samadhi consciousness is coiled into bodiless and mindtranscendent supreme consciousness in asamprajnata samadhi.
T h e general principles of concentration have
been modified, specialized and elaborated in
different systems of yoga to suit the particular
needs of the practitioners. In the hathayoga
method of concentration, an attempt has been
made to obliterate the mental reaction effects
from the brain by the pranic withdrawal by
pranayama. It is necessary first to elevate
pranayamic breathing to the nadishuddhi level
for this purpose. For the effectiveness of the
nadishuddhi pranayama, the body needs to be
purified and vitalized by the practice of posture
exercise, internal cleansing and right diet.
In rajayoga, centralized thought, combined
with spiritual reflection, is applied for the
attainment of pratyahara. T h e intensified
thought causes pranic withdrawal and sensory
control. Thereafter, the dharana power is roused
and gradually dhyana and samadhi are attained.
In mantrayoga, concentration is attained by
the use of mantra. Mantra is an aspect of Kundalinz, and it is in sound-form. So mantra is actually
Kundalini in mantra form. T h e mantra sound
cannot be heard by the physical ear. T h e replication of mantra on the physical plane is the
lettered waikhari sound which is audible. T h e
waikhari mantra, in conjunction with pranayama and other special processes, is utilized,
according to the direction of a guru, to enliven
the mantra. In other words, it is the rousing of
Kundalini in mantra form. When the mantraKundalini is roused, it exhibits its absorptive
38

and control powers by which, step by step, the
control of prana and the senses is attained. T h e
influence of the outer objects on the mind is
neutralized by the mantra power. Consequently,
it is a great help in the attainment of pratyahara
and self-control.
T h e n mantra-kundalini is transformed into
Ishtadewata - the metamorphosis of subtle Kunoalin? through the mantra power into an appropriate divine form. At this stage, dharana and
dhyana are attained. After this, Ishtadewata. is
again transformed into subtle kundalini when
samprajnata samadhi is attained. Finally, Kuna'alim absorbs the mind and all other things and
remains alone, and is then absorbed into
Supreme Consciousness in asamprajnata samadhi.
In kundaliniyoga, which is the fundamental
part of layayoga, concentration is attained
through the roused kundalini. So in this yoga,
the rousing of Kundalini is the essential process.
This rousing is only possible in the muladhara
chakra. Focussed thought is the main factor
of the rousing process. T h e intensified thought,
in conjunction with pranayamic breathing,
mantras and bandhas, becomes so forceful that
ultimately it makes static Kundalini dynamic.
If the centralized thought is imbibed with
intense godly love, thought power is much
enhanced. T h e roused kundalini exhibits higher
control power by which dharana, dhyana and
samadhi are attained.

Notes
1 Sarkar, Professor Benoy K u m a r , Hindu
Achievements in Exact Science, Longmans,
Green, London, 1918, p. 59.
2 Seal, Brajendranath, MA, PhD, The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus, Moti Lal
Banarsi Dass, Delhi, 1958, pp. 2 1 9 - 2 1 .
3 Manawatattwa, by the author of the
Aryashastrapradipa, N . C . Mookerjee,
Mahalakshmi Press, Barahanagar, 1901,
p. 158.
4 Brahmachari, Purnananda, Sarala Yoga

Introduction

Sadhana, a treatise in Bengali on yoga
Mitra Brothers, Calcutta, 1926, Preface,
p. 12.
5 Rele, Vasant G., FCPS, LM & S,
The Mysterious Kundalini, DB. Taraporevala
Sons, Bombay, 7th edn, 1928, pp. 2 3 - 7 .
6 Wiwekananda (Vivekananda), Swami,
Raja- Toga, Ramakrishna-Vivekananda
Centre of New York, Inc., New York,
1946.
7 Sachchidananda, Swami, Saraswati,
Gurupradipa, Shyambal Chakrabarti,
Calcutta, 2nd edn, 1930, pp. 2 2 5 - 6 .
8 Aurobindo, Sri, On Toga II, vol. 1, Sri
Aurobindo International University Centre,
Pondicherry, India, 1958, pp. 369, 373.
9 Sen, Gananath, M a h a m a h o p a d h y a y a ,
Kaviraj, M.A., L.M.S., Saraswati,
Pratyaksha- Shariram ( H u m a n Anatomy in
Sanskrit), 3rd edn, Kaviraj Charu C h a n d r a
Bisharad, Kalpataru Ayurvedic Works,
Calcutta, 1924, Introduction, p. 14; Third
part, p. 3.
10 Rele, op. cit.
11 Seal, op. cit.
12 Brahmachari, op. cit.
13 Wiwekananda, op. cit.
14 Sen, op. cit.
15 Seal, op. cit
16 Rele, op. cit.
17 Sen, op. cit.
18 Aurobindo, Sri, On Toga I, The Synthesis
of Toga, Sri Aurobindo International
University Centre, Pondicherry, India,
1957, p. 611.
19 Aurobindo, Sri, On Toga II, op. cit., vol.
2, p. 259.
20 Shankaracharya was born in the village of
Kaladi, in Kerala, South India. His date
has not been finally determined, but AD
788 has been generally accepted. But
according to an old register of the Gurus,
mentioned by Swami Sachchidananda in
his work entitled Guru Pradipa, op. cit., p. 3,
footnote, the latter was born in AD 130.
21 Shankaracharya, Ananda Lahari, Verses 9

and 10.
22 Shankaracharya, Yogatarawali, Verses 6
and 8.
23 Born in Holia, near Vizianagram, South
India, in 1608. He left his body in Waranasi
(Benares) in 1888.
24 Tailanga Swami, Mahawakya-Ratnawali,
1.13, 14, ed and trans. Umacharana
Mukhopadhyaya, Yogendranatha
Mukhopadhyaya, Calcutta, 1917.
25 Born in Halisahar (near Calcutta) in 1723.
He was a celebrated member, known as a
'gem' of the court of Maharaja Krishna
Chandra of Nadia (West Bengal, India).
26 Sena, Ramaprasada, 'Rampasad Sener
Granthabali', Padawali, Nos 215 and 216,
n.d., Basumati-Sahitya-Mandir, Calcutta.
27 Born in the village of K a m a r p u k u r in
Hooghly district, West Bengal, India, on
18 February 1836.
28 (a) M ( M a h e n d r a n a t h G u p t a ) ,
Shrishriramakrishnakathamrita, 5 vol, Anil
G u p t a , Kathmrita Bhaban, Calcutta, India.
(b) S a r a d a n a n d a , Swami, Shrishriramakrishnaleelaprasanga, 2 vol, Swami
A t m a b o d h a n a n d a , U d b o d h a n Office,
Calcutta, India, 1957.
29 W a m a (Wamachararna) was born in a
village named Atla in the Birbhum District,
West Bengal, India, in 1835.
30 Essentially based on Chattopadhyaya,
Pramode K u m a r , Tantrabhilaseer
Sadhusanga, Part I I , Mitra and Ghosh,
Calcutta, n.d.
31 Cf Shyam Sundar Goswami, HATHAYOGA An advanced method of physical
education and concentration, 2nd edn, L.N.
Fowler, London, 1963, pp. 104-6.
32 Rele, op. cit.
33 Avalon, Arthur (Sir J o h n Woodroffe), The
Serpent Power, 5th edn, Ganesh, Madras,
1953, pp. 297-313.
34 Wiwekananda, op. cit.
35 In Aurobindo, On Toga II, vol. 2, op. cit.
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.

39

PART 1

FUNDAMENTALS
OF
LAYAYOGA

CHAPTER 1

Layayoga
and
Asktahgayoga

Layayoga is one of the four great systems of yoga,
the other three being mantrayoga, hathayoga
and rajayoga. T h e Great Yogi Wishnu said to
Brahma: 'Yoga is in many forms because of its
different practices; of these, the main four are mantrayoga, layayoga, hathayoga and rajayoga'
( - Yogatattwopanishad, 19). It indicates the
Waidika origin and the antiquity of layayoga.
The four great systems are the four forms of the
original yoga termed
Mahayoga - Supreme
Yoga. Maheshwara said: 'Mahayoga is the
fundamental yoga having four main forms mantra, hatha, laya and raja yogas' ( - Yogashikopanishad, 1. 1 2 9 - 130). So, layayoga is an
elaboration of the fundamental yoga on a specific
line to meet the spiritual needs of those disciples
who are specially suited to it.
The eight practices, namely, yama (abstension), niyama (observance), asana (posture),
pranayama (breath-control), pratyahara (sensory control), dharana (holding-concentration),
dhyana (deep concentration) and samadhi
(superconcentration), technically known as ash/arigayoga (eightfold yoga), are the constituent
elements of the general structure of mahayoga.
Suta said: 'I am giving an exposition of mahayoga with its eight parts' ( - Garudapurana,
1. 230.1). Consequently, layayoga as well as
mantrayoga, hathayoga and rajayoga, each has
eight parts. In other words, the basic pattern of
layayoga consists of eight parts.
Layayoga has two fundamental forms Waidika and Tantrika. Waidika yoga is the
original form of yoga found in the Wedas in a
concise version; it was explained by the rishis

(seers) in the Upanishads. Shiwa gave Waidika
yoga a new character, and his explanations are
collected in the Tantras. Consequently, it is
called Tantrika yoga. In fact, the Tantrika
yoga is not a different form of yoga but a modification of Waidika yoga. T h e various difficult
processes of Waidika yoga were simplified and
new processes incorporated, thus making it
more adaptable to a larger number of persons.
So, the Tantrika form of layayoga came from
Shiwa. It is also very ancient and is based on the
Waidika form. It is said that Shiwa expounded
twelve forms of yoga, namely, mantrayoga, hathayoga, bhaktiyoga, layayoga, kriyayoga, lakshyayoga, jnanayoga, uroyoga (rajayoga), wasanayoga, parayoga, amanaskayoga and sahajayoga.
These are the Tantrika forms of yoga. Wishnu also
said that yoga had many forms. Here Waidika
yoga is indicated. So, both Waidika and Tantrika
yoga have many forms. Of the many forms of yoga,
mantra, hatha, laya and raja yogas are considered
the foremost in the Waidika as well as in the
Tantrika system, Ishwara said: 'There are four
main forms of yoga - mantrayoga, hathayoga,
layayoga and rajayoga' ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.17).
But before we proceed further, it is absolutely
necessary to have a clear picture of the term
yoga.

Yoga from the Mantra Viewpoint
T h e technical term 'yoga' belongs to those
fundamental groups of letter-arrangements con-

43

Fundamentals of Layayoga
stituting word-formations which are unconnected with thought-language patterns, but arise
from the sound-radiating power form called
mantra. The mantra-form of yoga is 'Y-ang' 'U-ng' - 'G-ang' - 'Ah', which being modified, constitutes the shrouta word 'yogah' and
then it assumes the language form 'yoga'.
The basic part of yoga is 'ya', which, at the
mantra level, is 'Y-ang'. It is the centre of the
concentrated energy in the form of control
which is technically termed 'yama'. The yama
(control)-energy is aroused and developed,
by udana force, represented by 'U-ng', and
becomes finally transformed into sangyama
(supercontrol). At this stage, sarhadhi consciousness, represented by 'G-ang', develops
and Kundali power is revealed. This is yoga.

Control
There are eight distinct stages of development of
the control power. The great yogi Dattatreya
said: 'I will explain to you the science of yoga
having eight stages of practice' ( - Darshanopanishad, 1.4). The great yoga master Ribhu also
said: 'Yoga has eight stages of practice' ( - WarahopanuAad, 5.10). Ishwara said: 'Yoga consists
of eight parts' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 25).
Shiwa also said: 'Yoga consists of eight practices
( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 11). So, both in
Waidika yoga and Tantrika yoga the eight stages
of practice have been accepted.
What is the nature of the control? It is a
process by which an action or function, either
of the body or the mind, is volitionally restrained
with a view to reach a deeper aspect, which
remains generally dormant, and bring into play
a higher form of power and consciousness.
An unknown inner power is released when the
body is made quiescent by the control process,
which keeps the body in an excellent state of
health and vitality, either when the body is in
motion or is immovable. The motionlessness of
the body also exercises a great influence on the
mind. In fact, it is an indispensable condition
for the application of the control, directly and
44

effectively, to the mind. When the inner part of
the mind is reached by control, the mind exhibits
a trend toward tranquillity and shows better
restraint when functioning at the sensory level.
This control either causes an alteration in a
common action or function to a desired pattern,
or stops the action completely to bring about a
state of motionlessness. To indicate the control
the terms 'bandha', 'bandhana', 'rodha',
'nirodha', and 'nigraha' are used. There are
other terms also.
The eight stages of control have technical
names: yama (abstention), niyama (observance),
asana (posture), pranayama (bio-energy-control
or breath-control), pratyahara (sensory control),
dhararna (holding-concentration), dhyana (deep
concentration) and samadhi (superconcentration). Atharwana said: 'The eight stages of
yoga are abstention, observance, posture, bioenergy control, sensory control, holding-concentration, deep concentration and superconcentration' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.2). These
eight stages of control have also been accepted
in Tantrika yoga. It is said: 'Abstention, observance, posture, bio-energy control, sensory control, holding-concentration, deep concentration and superconcentration are the eight parts
of yoga' ( - Tantrarajatantra, 27. 54-5).

First and Second Stages of Yama
(Control)
The first two stages of control are yama and
niyama. This yama (first stage of control) is the
same word which stands for the original yama,
that is control. The second yama (abstention)
has been used in a technical and limited sense to
indicate only the first stage of control. In
niyama 'ni' has been prefixed to yama. 'Ni'
indicates certainty. However, this strengthening
of yama does not mean very much, as niyama
has been used here in a restricted and technical
sense, and stands for the second stage of control.
It is more convenient to consider the first and
the second stages of control together.
Abstention and observance constitute the

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

elementary regulation of thoughts, emotions
and actions. But even these rudimentary control
factors do not function in a satisfactory manner
if the spiritual nature of m a n is completely
dormant. In such a state, various unspiritual
qualities arise and not only become so strong
that a man forgets his innermost being almost
completely, but also urge him to be externally
minded. His unspiritual nature makes him
passionately inclined to external objects he likes
for enjoyment. Sensuality, greed, excesses and an
inclination to softness are the predominant
factors in his thought. Strong lustful desire and
the feeling of satisfaction and pleasure in connection with it, and wickedness, pride, anger and
the like make a m a n almost dead spiritually.
He is completely disinclined to practise abstention
and observance. He is unwilling and unable
to abandon his mode of enjoyment because
of his strong attachment to pleasure-giving
objects.
Unless even a slight awakening of a man's
divine nature takes place, it will not be possible
for him to undertake the practice of abstention
and observance. But how is this awakening
possible, as he is antispiritual in nature? In a
mode of life which is completely dedicated to
excessive sexual gratification and other excesses,
there cannot be only pleasures, but also sufferings,
pain and sorrow. This is true not only in extreme
cases, but in all other cases. Both pleasure and
pain encircle our lives. In sensual pleasure, our
spiritual nature sleeps, but in pain things change.
In intense suffering, intense pain, intense sorrow,
severe disease and fear of death the whole being
is shaken, a deeper feeling awakens, a need for
help from an unknown and invisible power is
felt, some discernment is aroused. This is the
right moment. Without waiting, just try to be
in contact with that unknown and invisible
being through prayer - deep and silent, and
sincere prayer, with full belief and with full
effort. This prayer is not asking for any material
gain but for arousing the dormant spiritual
nature. And at the same time try your best to be
in contact with a saintly person. His understanding, his genuine sympathy, his kindness and
his willingness to help will do you very much
good. His mental purity and tranquillity, his

physical cleanliness and vitality, his emotional
calmness and control will exert tremendous
influence on you. And above all, his spiritual
personality, his depth of inner knowledge and
his very forceful and truthful expression - all
these will be exceedingly helpful to you.
It is the moment when you should start a
new life with a new programme. Your first
programme is - ritualistic worship, spiritual
study, ascesis and internal and external physical
cleanliness. You are not expected at this stage
to get your thoughts and emotions under your
control. But you can control your actions very
much by doing regularly the above four practices.
Whatever happens do not stop but go on with
them. Whatever thoughts, emotions and desires
arise in your mind, without paying any attention
to them, go on with the four practices. You will
find that you are gaining in spiritual strength
more and more and day by day. T h e n it will be
your experience that you are manifesting a
natural tendency to spiritual qualities, and have
enough inner strength to do what is spiritual
and not to do what is anti-spiritual. In this way,
your spiritual endeavour will bring success.
T h a t association with a saintly person is very
helpful has been widely recognized. It is said:
'There are four door-keepers who are guarding
the doors leading to liberation; they are control
of the mind, reflection, contentment and the
company of a spiritual person' ( - Mahopanishad,
4.2). T h e importance of worship is shown by the
saying which runs thus: 'When the Supreme
Spirit is directly known in concentration, all
sins are destroyed, afflictions become attenuated
and immortality is attained' ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 1.11). Spiritual study plays an
important role for a person who intends to lead
a religious and virtuous life. It is said: 'The
teacher instructs his pupils not to be inattentive
to spiritual study' ( - Taittiriyopanishad, 1.11.1).
T h e importance of ascesis as an agent for the
purification of the mind and as a necessity for
the attainment of divine knowledge has been
stressed. It is said: 'Ascesis, sensory control,
spiritual actions, spiritual study and the like are
the means of attaining the divine knowledge'
( - Kenopanishad, 4.8) About cleanliness it has
been said: 'He who is endowed with spiritual
45

Fundamentals of Layayoga

knowledge, established in concentration and
purified by cleanliness, attains God' (Kathopanishad, 1.3.8).
In leading such a life, he will be able to develop
enough power of control to practise regular
abstention and observance. He should practise
them volitionally in his thoughts, emotions and
actions. These practices also develop his spiritual
nature to such an extent that normally he will
be able to manifest his spiritual qualities, at
the right moment and in the right circumstances.
T h e most important but most difficult practice
is brahmacharya, that is, sexual control. Now
it will be possible for him to practise it successfully. Sexual control is of two forms: complete
and partial. T h e partial form is for married
people. However, the complete form should
first be practised for a sufficient length of time
before undertaking the partial form.
Yama said to Nachiketa: 'I will explain briefly
to you that truth for the attainment of which the
spiritual students practise sexual control'
( - Kathopanishad, 1.2.15). Once Sukesha, Satyakama and others - all were the sons of the
rishis and devoted to God - went as pupils to
the great spiritual teacher Pippalada to know
about the Supreme Being. Pippalada said to
t h e m : 'All of you practise sexual control,
and ascesis, and devotedness for a year and then
come back; I will try to answer your questions'
( - Prashnopanishad, 1.2). Here the importance
of sexual control and ascesis for the right understanding of the highest spiritual knowledge has
been clearly shown.
In regular abstention and observance, each
consists of ten practices. Abstention consists
of the following:
1 Ahingsa - Harmlessness; love for all
2 Satya - Truthfulness
3 A t e y a - Non-theft
4 Brahmacharya - Sexual control
5 Daya - Mercy
6 Arjawa - Honesty
7 Kshama - Forgiveness
8 Dhriti - Firmness
9 Mitahara - Moderation in eating
10 Shoucha - Cleanliness

46

Observance contains the following practices:
1 Tapas - Ascesis
2 Santosha - Contentment
3 Astikya - Faith
4 Dana - Charity
5 Ishwara-pujana - Worship of God
6 Siddhanta-shrawawa - Spiritual study
7 H r i - Modesty
8 Mati - Reflection
9 Japa - Mantra-practice
10 Wrata - Vow
These tenfold abstentions and tenfold observances were declared by the great yogi
Dattatreya to his disciple Sangkriti ( - Darshanopanishad, 1.6 and 2.1). So in the Waidika form
of yoga ten practices constitute abstention
and ten practices are also the constituents of
observance. In the Tantrika form exactly the
same number of practices constitute abstention
and observance. Not only the same number
but the same practices compose abstention and
observance, with one exception. Vow, the tenth
practice of observance has been replaced by
homa (oblation) in the Tantrika form, Ishwara
(Shiwa) expounded this tenfold abstention and
observance to Dewi ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p . 25).
T h e shortened forms of abstention and observance were also introduced. Agni said: 'Abstention consists of harmlessness, truthfulness, nontheft, sexual control and non-acquisitiveness,
and observance contains cleanliness, contentment, ascesis, spiritual study and worship of
God' ( - Agnipurana, 372. 2-3). These shortened
forms were also widely accepted.
Sexual control and cleanliness were elaborated
in hathayoga. T h e Wajroli - adamantine control
process - was developed from brahmacharya,
and a system of internal baths (done without
instrumental aid) from shoucha. Ascesis and diet
also formed an important part of hathayoga.
The
mantra-practice
was
elaborated
in
mantrayoga. T h e worship of God was elaborated
and developed into higher forms of concentration in layayoga and rajayoga. In rajayoga, the
practice of asamprajnata samadhi (non-mens
concentration) was specially developed.

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

Third Stage of Yama (Control):
Asana
Now we come to the third stage of control, that
is asana - posture. When 'yama' (control) is
used in connection with the body, it usually
takes the form 'ayama' to mean control. As
for example, sharira (body) + ayama (control)
form the term shanrayama (body-control). T h e
nature of control here is either to regulate the
activities of the body to a desired pattern,
or to stop all voluntary activities to make the
body motionless. When regulated activities are
desired the term 'wyayama' is used. Here the
prefix 'wi' indicates something specific. So
wyayama means the specific application of
control to regulate the voluntary movements
of the body to a desired pattern. Wyayama,
therefore, is a controlled movement system of
the body. However, it has been generally used
to mean physical education, and in a more
restricted sense, muscular exercise.
When the stopping of all motions of the body
is done in order to make the body motionless
volitionally, as is required in yoga, by the
application of control, a special technical term
has been used in yoga. It is asana, that is, posture.
It is an arrangement or placement of the body
to assume a particular position or posture.
The posture may be of the static or dynamic
type. But for the purpose of yoga, the posture is
of the static type in which the body is maintained
in a motionless state by a special arrangement of
the limbs in an appropriate sitting position.
When the body is made to assume such a motionless attitude in a sitting position it is called asina,
that is, in a state of sitting position by the special
arrangement of the body and limbs. This special
alignment of the body and limbs in a static
posture is asana, in which control is applied to
stop all motions with a view to make the body
motionless.
On the other hand, posture has been connected
with the dynamic posture exercise in hathayoga.
Here, the body is made to undergo appropriate
movements to assume a final posture, either in

a sitting, standing or lying position. T h e original
meaning of asina has been extended, and the
body now assumes many different asanas,
through appropriate movements. However, in
the word asana, the term yama in any form does
not occur, but a new form asa, to mean a special
arrangement of the body in a sitting posture,
has been introduced in yoga. From asa, asana
has been formed.
T h e body should be cultured and made
efficient and under control for spiritual development. It is said: ' M a y my body be efficient
(for the attainment of spiritual knowledge)'
( - Taittiriyopanishad, 1.4.1). For the attainment of the highest spiritual stage both the
body and the mind should be controlled. It is
said: 'Only physical movements are not helpful,
nor concentration alone is successful. He who
knows how to practise physical control in
combination with concentration, attains immortality' ( - Ishopanishad, 9 and 11). Here is
a clear indication that the body should be purified, vitalized and well-controlled by hathayoga,
and in that state of the body concentration will
develop in a satisfactory manner. More clearly
it is said : ' T h e yogi making his body as the lower
piece of wood and the pranawa (the first mantra)
the upper piece of wood (used for kindling the
fire), should do the churning which is in the form
of concentration again and again until he realizes
the Supreme Being' ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 1.14). This means that in a purified body
and with the help of the mantra, concentration
develops to its highest limit and as a result God
is revealed.
A yogi can attain such a purified and vitalized
body that it is free from disease, senility, and
is long-lived. It is said: 'When a yogi develops
a highly purified body by yoga-fire, he becomes
free from disease, his youth is prolonged and his
life is extended; and the experience of supersmell, super-taste, super-sight, super-touch and
super-sound occurs'
( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 2.12). So, it is possible to attain a yogafire body of super-purity.
T h e body should be trained to be in a state
of motionlessness for a prolonged time without
discomfort or pain. It is said: 'In samadhi all

47

Fundamentals of Layayoga

senses cease to function and the body remains
motionless like a piece of wood' ( - Nadabindupanishad, 3.3.2). T h e motionlessness of the body
is developed by the practice of static posture.
Moreover, by the practice of processes contained
in hathayoga, not only the body is vitalized and
controlled but also the mind is controlled and
brightened.
T h e assumption of a folded-leg concentration
posture is necessary for the practice of sensory
control and concentration. As, for example:
'Once upon a time, the great yogi Mandawya,
being desirous of withdrawing his senses into
the manas-chakra - the subtle centre of the mind,
assumed the lotus posture' ( - Annapurnopanishad, 3.3-4). T h a t the static posture to be assumed for the practice of yoga should be a yogasana
(concentration posture) has been stated : 'Assuming rightly a yoga posture, such as lotus posture,
auspicious posture or happy posture, and facing
towards the north' ( - Amritanadopanishad, 18).
T h e concentration postures when well mastered
will be suitable for the practice of yoga. Aditya
said: 'The three worlds are conquered by him
who has mastered posture' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, 52). Dattatreya
said: 'Assuming a yoga posture, one should
always practise breath-control' ( - Darshanopanishad, 3.14).
W h e n a posture is fully controlled, then it
is to be assumed for concentration. Narayana
said that there were two indications when the
posture is fully controlled; the natural feeling
of ease and comfort when a posture is assumed;
and the ability to prolong the posture
without discomfort ( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.1.5). T h e r e are also other indications
when posture is mastered. It is said: 'Disease is
eliminated by posture' ( - Yogachudamanyupanishadi 109). Also, 'All diseases of the body
are destroyed by posture, even poisons are
assimilated. Any one of the postures selected
should be made comfortable, if it was not possible for one to master all of them' ( - Shanadilyopanishad, 1.3.12-13), and 'The yogi being
still in a posture (because of his mastery), wellcontrolled' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.1).
In an impurified body, mind is usually restless. This is why Shiwa has said: 'How will it
48

be possible to practise concentration without
purifying the body? . . . A purified body is full
of vitality and is fit for concentration' ( - Brihannilatantra, ch. 6, p. 41). T h e assumption of
a concentration posture for spiritual practice
requiring concentration is absolutely necessary.
So it is stated: 'The mantra-practice, worship
and other spiritual works should be done while
assuming the lotus posture, auspicious posture,
hero posture (wirasana) or other postures;
otherwise there will be no success' ( - Kularnawa,
ch. 15, p. 74). Bhairawi said: 'I am explaining
different postures to those who are desirous
of attaining success in yoga. Without the assumption of an appropriate posture breath-control
and other practices are not successful'
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 23. 23). It is also said:
'By the practice of postures life is prolonged.
. . . For the purification of the body and for
attaining success in yoga, posture is absolutely
necessary' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 24. 38-39),
and 'Posture helps to make the mind calm'
( - Tantrarajatantra, 27, 59). 'By the practice
of posture the body becomes disease-free, firm
and efficient' ( - Grahayamala, ch. 12, p. 85).
So, the importance of posture has been recognized in the Waidika as well as in the Tantrika
form of yoga. It has been recognized that a
purified and vitalized body is necessary for
concentration; that posture plays an important
role in making the body purer, healthful,
youthful, efficient and long-lived; and also that
a concentration posture is absolutely necessary
for the practice of breath-control, sensory control
and concentration; a posture should be fully
controlled.
Posture has been fully elaborated in hathayoga.
Innumerable postures were introduced and
various scientific processes were developed in
relation to postures ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
24. 3). M a n y postures were also developed in
Waidika yoga. So it is said that many postures
were explained in the Weda ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 11). In hathayoga, postures have
been divided into three groups: dynamic posture
exercise, static posture exercise, and concentration postures. Dynamic posture exercise has
been designed to exercise all the muscles of the
body in conjunction with charana (contraction-

Layayoga and Ashtahgayoga

control exercise). Static posture exercise trains
the body to be still in different positions and
develops vital endurance and the power of
concentration. Concentration postures are for
the practice of breath-control, mantra and
concentration.

Fourth Stage of Yama (Control):
Pranayama
The fourth stage of control is prarcayama breath-control. When 'yama' (control) is applied
to control prana-wayus (different forms of bioenergy) the form 'ayama' is frequently used.
The words nigraha, rodha and nirodha are
also used to indicate control.
Pranayama is actually the process of controlling prana, the central bio-energy; and as this
control is achieved through the process of the
regulation of breath, it is usually called breathcontrol. It is said: 'He who is well-restrained in
all his actions, should control bio-energy carefully through the breath-process; as a result of
this the bio-energy becomes so rarefied as to
increase the power of breath-suspension. Thereafter expiration should be made through the
nostrils. This process makes the restless mind
fit for concentration' ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 2.9). Here is a clear indication that the
control of bio-energy is intrinsically associated
with breathing. Furthermore, the rarefaction
of the bio-energy causes a diminution of the
internal organic activities to a very low level
and this is helped by the decreased voluntary
muscular activities in a static concentration
posture. This physical state is an anti-oscillatory
state of the mind. T h e rarefied bio-energy
flow becomes very much less through the idapingala paths (the white and red energy lines),
but is enhanced considerably through the sushumna path (the central energy line). This creates
a state in which concentration becomes easy,
prolonged and deep.
R i b h u , the exalted knower of Brahman, said:
'When the throbbing of all the bio-energies

ceases by the practice (of breath-control), the
mind becomes non-mens, and what remains is
the liberation' ( - Annapurnopanishad, 2.33).
When the bio-energy is rarefied by the practice
of breath-control, it ceases to throb and becomes
calm. This causes the mind to be free
from oscillation.
A complete control of respiration is associated
with that state of the mind which is beyond the
perceptive, intellective, affective and volitive
phenomena. It is said: 'The yogi will practise
the absorption process in conjunction with the
control of respiration and concentration; in
this way when the respiration stops, the mind
goes beyond the perceptive-intellective-affective
states' ( - Tripuratapinyupanishad, 5.10). By
the process of breath-control respiration can be
controlled to the point when it will automatically
stop. It is the state of what is technically called
kewala kumbhaka - automatic breath-suspension. At this stage the mind is also automatically
in deep concentration. However, the breathcontrol should be regularly practised. It is
stated: 'A student of yoga who is well-controlled
in sleep and activities and lives on an abstemious
diet, being in a lonely place with his mind without
any thirst for wordly things and when the
previous meal has been completely digested
(that is on an empty stomach), should practise
breath-control according to the process shown
by his teacher' ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
2.2).
T h e importance of the control of the breath
a n d the mind for the development of superconcentration has been fully recognized. It is
said: 'The yogi should control the breath and
the mind to accomplish superconcentration'
( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section,
22). Breath-control, practised regularly, develops
intelligence and the power of concentration.
So, the great yogi Dattatreya said: 'The regular
practice of breath-control develops intelligence.
. . . By breath-control that spiritual knowledge
which leads to liberation arises (through superconcentration)' ( - Darshanopanishad, 6.10-12).
Respiration is one of the intrinsic factors that
causes the perceptive mind (chitta) to function,
and hence the control of the mind is related to
the control of respiration. It is stated: 'There
49

Fundamentals of Layayoga

are two causes which make the perceptive mind
to oscillate; they are the latent impression of
feeling (wasana) and respiration; if one is
controlled, the other also becomes inoperative.
Of these two, first respiration should be controlled' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.1-2). T h e control of bio-energy means the control of respiration, as the former is inseparably associated
with the latter, and through the latter the former
control is achieved. So it is said: 'The control
of prana is this: prana means physical respiration, and ayama means kumbhaka (breathsuspension)' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.19).
T h e respiratory movements which are associated with the movement of air in the lungs, is
a great factor in producing the oscillation of the
mind. T h e diversification of the mind can be
regulated by breath-control. It is stated: 'The
respiratory movements cause the multiformity
of the m i n d ; when the former is motionless, the
latter also becomes calm' ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, 89). It is also stated that the control
of respiration causes both physical and mental
development
( - Warahopanishad, 5.46-49).
Further, 'When the subtle energy line system
(nadichakra) is purified by breath-control, done
in a right manner, the bio-energy enters easily
into the central energy line (sushumna.) by bursting through its entrance and, as a result, the
mind becomes absolutely calm' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.9-10).
T h e process of breath-control consists of
three acts: inspiring the atmospheric air into
the lungs, expiring the air from the lungs, and
the suspension of breath, either at the end of
inspiration or of expiration. We have very
ancient Waidika terms for the three respiratory
acts, which are based on the Chandogyopanishad,
1.3.3. T h e word 'prana' is used to denote the
action of expiring the air from the lungs. T h e
actual process of expiring the air is 'prana' or
'pranana', that is, expiration. Similarly, the
word 'apana' is used to denote the action of
inspiring the air. T h e process of inspiring the
air is 'apana' or 'apanana', that is, inspiration.
T h e connection between the prana and apana
is 'wyana'. This means that at the end of inspiration and at the beginning of expiration, or at the
end of expiration and at the beginning of inspira50

tion, is the period in which the action of prana
and apana has stopped. T h e cessation of prana
or pranana (expiration) is 'aprana' (that is
no expiration), and that of apana or apanana
(inspiration) is 'anapana' (no inspiration). During the interval between the two processes there
is neither inspiration nor expiration. This is
wyana or 'wyanayana', that is, breath-suspension. So, we have the following terms:

Apana or Apanana
Prana or Pranana
Wyana or Wyanayana

= Inspiration
= Expiration
= Breath-suspension

T h e interval at the end of apana and before
the commencement of prana is 'kumbhaka'.
This is antah-kumbhaka (inspiratory breathsuspension). Again, the interval at the end of
prana and before the commencement of apana
is kumbhaka. This is bahya-kumbhaka (expiratory breath-suspension). Here, prana is expiration and apana is inspiration. These two terms
are the same as older ones mentioned above.
Here the term kumbhaka is used to denote
breath-suspension, instead of wyana or wyanayana. This is based on the Muktikopanishad,
2,51-52.
T h e n we find that the term 'ruchira' was
used synonymously with kumbhaka, that is,
breath-suspension. And the terms 'rechaka'
and 'puraka' for expiration and inspiration
( - Amritanadopanishad, 9).
Pranayama (breath-control) has been defined
as: 'Pranayama is that in which the Gayatri
mantra, combined with seven wyahritis to which
the pranawa ("Ong") is prefixed in each, and
"shiras" (the last part of the mantra) are said
mentally with controlled respiration' ( - Amritanadopanishad, 10). This is the basic Waidika
breath-control in which the measures of inspiration, breath-suspension and expiration are
the same. T h e mantra used in this breath-control
consists of about sixty units. This means that
the duration of inspiration is sixty units of time,
let us say 60 seconds. T h e time of breath-suspension and of expiration is also 60 seconds in each
case.
T h e three respiratory acts have been explained
as: 'The air should be expelled outside so as to

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

make the lungs as if empty; this emptying is
called expiration.
'When the air is inhaled like the sucking in of
water through the stalk of a lotus, it is called
inspiration.
'To be in a state when there is neither expiration nor inspiration and the body is completely
motionless is called breath-suspension' ( - Amritanadopanishad, 11-13).
So, during breath-suspension the body should
be maintained absolutely motionless. In other
words, breath-control should be practised when
the static posture has been mastered.
The preliminary practices of breath-control,
when a student of yoga assumes a sitting posture,
are as follows: 'First a yoga posture should be
assumed with the body erect, eyes non-moving,
the upper teeth not touching the lower, the
tongue retroverted (only in special cases), with
chin-lock, the (right) hand on the nostrils to
make breath-flow through a desired nostril,
body motionless, and the mind at ease and
concentrated, and then practise breath-control'
( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section,
92-94).
The order of breath-control is as follows:
'First is expiration, then inspiration, then breathsuspension, and finally expiration; this is breathcontrol' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra
Section, 9 4 - 9 5 ) . This means that the inspiratory
part of breath-control should start after a preliminary expiration.
The actual breath-control process is as follows:
'First exhale the air from the lungs through the
right nostril by closing left nostril with the
fingers of the right h a n d ; now inhale through
the left nostril, counting 16, and then suspend
the breath for 64 measures, and then exhale
through the right nostril, counting 32. In this
manner continue the process [both] in the
inverse and [in] direct order' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, 9 5 - 9 8 ) .
Here, the relative measures of inspiration,
suspension and expiration are 1 - 4 - 2 . So the
1-1-1 measures are modified in this process.
It is clearly said t h a t : 'Pranayama (breathcontrol) is composed of inspiration, breathsuspension and expiration. These three respiratory acts are in the form of " A " , " U " and " M " ,

that is, pranawa, so the pranayama is of the nature
of pranawa' ( - Darshanopanishad, 6.1-2). Inspiration, breath-suspension and expiration are
done in the following m a n n e r : 'Inspire through
the left nostril slowly, counting 16 and at the same
time doing the sound-process (japa) with " A "
of the pranawa and with concentration; then
suspend the breath for 64 measures and at the
same time make the sound-process with " U " of
the pranawa and with concentration; and,
finally, expire the air slowly through the right
nostril and at the same time count 32 and along
with it make the sound-process with " M " of
the prarcawa and with concentration' ( - Darshan o p a n i ^ a d , 6 . 3 - 6 ) . So, the relative measures
of inspiration, breath-suspension and expiration
are 1 - 4 - 2 , and the sound-process and concentration are added to the respiratory acts.
T h e breath-control process has two fundamental forms: sahita (inspiratory-expiratorysuspension) and kewala (noninspiratory-nonexpiratory-suspension). T h e sahita is that form
of breath-suspension which is done in conjunction with inspiration and expiration. T h e kewala
is that form of breath-suspension in which there
is no inspiration and no expiration, but only
automatic breath-suspension. So it is said:
'Breath-suspension is of two kinds: sahita and
kewala. Sahita should be practised until the
yogi is able to do the kewala. Sahita breathcontrol includes suryabheda (right-nostril breathcontrol) ujjayz (both-nostrils breath-control),
shitali (lingual breath-control) and bhastri (thoracico-short-quick breath-control)' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.20-21).
During breath-control three forms of muscular
control should be adopted. They are mulabandha
(anal-lock), uddi'yana (abdomino-retraction) and
jalandhara (chin-lock). So it is said: 'During
the four forms of breath-suspension, the three
forms of control should be executed; they are
anal-lock, abdomino-retraction and chin-lock'
( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.40-41).
T h e r e are other measures in inspiration,
breath-suspension and expiration. It is said:
'Breath-control is that in which the measure
for inspiration is 12, for breath-suspension 16,
and for expiration 10, along with the soundprocess with "Ong". T h e measure in the elemen51

Fundamentals of Layayoga
tary type is 12 (in inspiration), in the middle
type 24, and in the highest type 36' ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, 103-104).
When breath-control is accomplished, certain
signs appear. It is said: 'Thence the yogi's
body becomes free from excessive fat and
disease, eyes bright, countenance cheerful, sexual
urge well-controlled and energy increased'
( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.13 :6).
So far we have talked about Waidika breathcontrol. Now, we shall consider the Tantrika
form. It is said: 'Pranayama is that in which the
breathing movements, due to the throbbing
of the bio-energy, are controlled. During pranayama one becomes conscious of the divine power'
( - Gayatritantra, 1.205).
By the control of breath the mind and the
senses are spiritually purified. It is said: 'Breathcontrol is of many kinds. . . . By breath-control
the mind and the senses are purified' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 15, p. 75). It is also said: 'The internal
impurities are removed by breath-control. It
is the best yoga practice. Without its help
liberation is not possible. The yogis attain
success through breath-control' ( - Gandharwa
tantra, ch. 10, p. 47). The throbbing of the bioenergy causes the oscillation of breath. By
breath-control the throbbing of the bio-energy
is controlled and the mind becomes calm. It is
also said in the Gandharwatantra that the
uncontrolled respiratory movements cause the
mind to oscillate; when the breath is controlled,
the mind becomes calm. Breath-control makes
all forms of bio-energy calm. So it is said: 'The
ten forms of bio-energy, such as prana, apana,
etc. are made to stop their throbbing by breathcontrol' (Mundamalatantra, ch. 2, p. 3).
He who desires to control his breath should
be moderate in eating, healthy, clean and sexually well-controlled. So it is said: 'One who is
healthy and eats moderately can control breath
and becomes a yogi. . . . He who is clean and
doing sexual control is able to control breath.
Regular practice is absolutely necessary. Yoga
is not possible without breath-control'
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,17.40-43).
In the Tantrika form the general terms for the
three respiratory acts in breath-control - puraka
(inspiration), kumbhaka (breath-suspension)
52

and rechaka (expiration), have been generally
accepted. It is said: 'The inhalation of the
atmospheric air into the lungs is termed puraka.
The holding of the inspired air within, and without any inhalation or exhalation, is termed
kumbhaka. Then the suspended breath should
be expelled outside. This is termed rechaka'
( - Phetkarinitantra, ch. 3, p. 4).
The process of breath-control and its measures
are explained thus: 'Assuming the hero posture
with the body erect, inspire the outer air through
the left nostril for the measure of 16; then suspend
the breath for the measure of 64, and thereafter exhale the air outside through the right
nostril for the measure 32' ( - Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 25). Here the general measures 16-64-32 - have been discussed. It is further
stated: 'The measure for breath-suspension is
four times the measure of inspiration, and the
measure of expiration is half the measure of
breath-suspension' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 10,
p. 47). So, the general measures are: 1-4-2.
For the control of the nostrils during breathcontrol, it has been said: 'The thumb, ring, and
little fingers should be used to control the nostrils,
leaving the forefinger and the middle finger'
( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 2, p. 6). About the
forms of breath-control it is said: 'There are
two forms of breath-control: one is with the
mantra and concentration, which is called
sagarbha, the other is without them and is
called agarbha or wigarbha' ( - Sharadatilaka,
25. 20-21). About the stages of breath-control,
it is said: 'The early or first stage is that in which
perspiration occurs due to the practice of
breath-control. In the middle or second stage
the body shakes (due to the arousing of inner
power). In the highest or third stage the body
levitates. The breath-control should be regularly
practised until the third stage is reached'
( - Sharadatilaka, 25. 21-22). It has been further
stated: 'Breath-control consists of three stages:
the highest, the middle and the first. At the
highest stage, the body becomes light and
levitates and the mind becomes calm. At the
first stage perspiration is produced in the whole
body, and at the second stage the body shakes.
These signs appear after long practice. By
regular practice the third stage is reached from

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga
the first and through the second stage. The
breath-control should be regularly practised
in the morning and evening' ( - Tantrarajatantra,
27.64-66).
The usual Tantrika terms for inspiration,
suspension and expiration are puraka, kumbhaka
and rechaka respectively. The terms ahara,
dharana and apasara for inspiration, suspension
and expiration respectively have also been
used ( - Tantrarajatantra, 27. 67-68).
The usual measures in breath-control are
16-64-32, on the basis of 1-4-2. But the
relative measures of 1-4-2 change according to
the different forms and the nature of the mantras
used. In one of the forms of breath-control,
inspiration is done through the left nostril for
the measure of 16 with the first 16 matrikaletters; then breath-suspension for the measure
of 32 with the matrika-letters 32 from 'Ka' to
'Sa'; thereafter expiration through the right
nostril for the measure of 16 using the letters
from 'Ka' to 'Ta' ( - Gayatritantra, 1. 203-204).
Here the relative measures are 16-32-16 at
the ratio of 1-2-1, and the matrika-letters
(sound-units) are used as mantra.
In another form, the 50 matrika-letters as
mantra, said in regular order, with concentration
together with initiation-mantra are used for
inspiration; the 50 matrika-letters, first in the
reverse order and then in the regular order with
concentration and the initiation-mantra are
used for breath-suspension; finally, the 50
matrika-letters in the reverse order with concentration and the initiation-mantra for expiration ( - Kamadhenutantra, ch. 9, p. 10). The
relative measures of inspiration-suspension- expiration are 50 + initiation mantra - 10 + initiation mantra - 50 + initiation mantra. This form
of breath-control is for advanced pupils.
There is another Tantrika breath-control
in which 'A' to 'Ksha' - the 50 matrika-letters are used in inspiration, 'Ka' to 'Ma' - the 25
matrika-letters - are used in breath-suspension,
and 'Ya' to 'Ksha' - the 9 matrika-letters - are
used in expiration ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1,
p. 10). It is a special breath-control in which the
relative measures of inspiration, suspension
and expiration are 50-25-9.
There is also a special breath-control process,

called brahmamantra pranayama, in which a
different technique has been used. Sadashiwa
says: 'In this breath-control the brahmamantra
(consisting of 7 matrika-letters) or only pranawa
(Ong) should be used. Closing the left nostril
with the middle and ring fingers of the right hand,
inspire through the right nostril and at the
same time do sound-process (japa) with brahmamantra or pranawa for 8 times; then closing the
right nostril (the left nostril is already closed)
with the thumb, suspend the breath for 32
measures with the mantra or pranawa; and
finally, open the right nostril and expire through
it slowly by counting the mantra or pranawa
16 times; in this manner inhale through the
left nostril counting 8, suspend counting 32,
and exhale through the left nostril counting
16; and again, inhale through the right nostril
counting 8, suspend counting 32, and exhale
through the right nostril counting 16. This is
the brahmamantra pranayama' ( - Mahanirwanatantra, 3. 44-48). The measures of this breathcontrol are 8-32-16, the same ratio as 1-4-2.
The characteristic feature of this breath-control
is that the inspiration and expiration are done
through the same nostril. In this respect it
differs from both sarya pranayama (right-nostril
inspiratory
breath-control)
and
chandra
pranayama (left-nostril inspiratory breathcontrol).
The regular measures for inspiration, breathsuspension and expiration are 16-64-32.
But one who is not able to use these measures
should adopt lower measures. It is stated:
'He who is unable to use the measures of 16-6432, should reduce them to 4 - 1 6 - 8 ; even one
who is unable to use these reduced measures
should use the measures of 1-4-2' ( - Shaktanandatarangini, ch. 7, p. 16).
In the Tantrika form of breath-control, the
three forms of special muscular control - chinlock, abdomino-retraction and anal-lock, have
also been introduced. It is stated: 'At the end of
inspiration, chin-lock should be done. At the
end of expiration, abdomino-retraction should
be done, and during breath-suspension anallock, chin-lock and abdomino-retraction should
be executed' ( - Grahayamala, ch. 13, p. 102).
As in Waidika breath-control, Tantrika breath53

Fundamentals of Layayoga

control also has two fundamental forms: sahita
and kewala. It is said: 'Breath-suspension is of
two kinds: sahita and kewala. T h e sahitasuspension is that in which suspension is done
with inspiration and expiration. T h e kewalasuspension is that in which suspension is automatic and effortless and where inspiration and
expiration are completely absent' ( - Grahayamala, ch. 13, p. 101).
It has been said: 'The body of a resolute
yogi, who has mastered kewala-suspension, is
as swift as the mind, and is diseaseless and without senility' ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3,
p. 10).
About the signs which appear when the
breath-control is accomplished, it is stated:
' T h e signs which appear after the perfection
of breath-control are aroused internal powers,
joy and satisfaction, purity of mind, calmness,
bodily lightness, gracefulness and brightness'
( - Tantrarajatantra, 27. 69). Further, 'When the
breath-control is perfected, these signs a p p e a r :
lightness of the body, cheerful countenance,
brightness of the eyes, good digestion, internal
purification and control, and joy' ( - Grahayamala),ch. 13, p. 102).

Fifth Stage of Yama (Control):
Pratyahara
Now we come to the fifth stage of control which
is the control of the senses. T h e terms ayama,
nigraha, rodha and nirodha are used for control.
But in yoga, a special term 'Pratyahara' has
been introduced for the control of the senses.
This new term explains the nature of yama
(control) involved in the control of the senses.
T h e word pratyahara is derived from ' h r i ' :
to take away, to remove, to prevent, to disjoin,
to withdraw, and to which 'prati' ( = against)
and 'a' are prefixed. So, the meaning of the
term is to take away, remove or withdraw the
senses from the objects, to prevent the senses
from being in contact with the objects. T h e
main point is that the nature of the control,
in relation to the senses, is that which keeps the
54

senses from being in contact with the objects,
that is, a process of abstraction or withdrawal.
Therefore, the technical meaning of the word
pratyahara is the sensory withdrawal, which
can simply be termed sensory control.
It is said: 'The senses and the organs of
action should be controlled in the manas (the
sense-mind or the sixth sense), and the manas
in the j n a n a t m a n (perceptive consciousness
or m i n d ) ' ( - Kathopanishad, 1. 3.13). Here the
process of the actions of the senses and its control
have been technically explained. T h e sensory
impulse at the cerebral point is transformed into
the udanic (pertaining to the udana - a form of
bio-energy exhibiting upward radiation) radiation and is conducted to the sense-mind. The
sense-mind is stimulated by the radiated udanic
energy and creates and conducts manasa-radiation (highly rarefied subconscious radiation)
to the perceptive consciousness where objective
knowledge is formed. In the text two phases of
control have been pointed out. During the
first phase, the rousing of the sense-mind in
response to the udanic radiation is controlled,
and, as a result the sense-mind is neutralized.
During the second phase, this neutralized sensemind is withdrawn into the perceptive mind.
This two-phased control process is technically
termed pratyahara - sensory control. In the
above text the word 'yama' has been used
as a verb, meaning to control the senses. So,
the term is 'indriya-yama' which stands for
pratyahara.
A different technique of sensory control
has also been expounded. It is stated: 'The
senses should be controlled by the manas (willmind) in the hrit (here, sense-mind)' ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 2.8). This means that the
transformed sensory impulse into udanic radiation should be neutralized in the sense-mind
by will-mind, that is, before the creation of the
sensory image in the perceptive consciousness.
It can also be explained differently: 'By the
concentrated mind the senses should be controlled in their particular seats in the chakras
(subtle centres).' This process of sensory control
has been specially adopted in layayoga. Here the
term 'indriya sanniwesha' (sense control) has
been used for sensory control in place of. pratya-

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

hara. This form of sensory control has been
more clearly expounded by the great yogi
Mandawya in his own practice. It is stated:
'Once upon a time Muni Mandawya desired
to withdraw his senses to the manas-chakra
(a subtle centre which is the seat of sense-consciousness), and for that purpose he assumed
the lotus posture with his eyes half-open and,
stage by stage, disjoined his senses from the
internal and external objects' ( - Annapurnopanishad, 3. 3 - 4 ) . T h e process described here
consists of the withdrawal of the senses, from
all objects, into the manas-chakra. It is a layayoga
process. Here, a more direct term 'indriya
sanghararna', that is, sense-withdrawal, has been
used for pratyahara.
There was an ancient form of yoga practice
consisting of prana-apana sangyama, that is,
breath-control, and the disjoining of the senses
from their objects and other processes ( - Kundikopanishad, 2 4 - 2 5 ) . Here, the word 'sangshraya'
in the verbal form and in the negative sense has
been used. To denote negation it can be constructed as 'asangshraya' to mean disjoining.
About a special process of sensory control
it has been stated: 'By the concentrated mind
the senses should be withdrawn from their
objects and the apana-energy should be drawn
upwards into the abdominal region and held
there' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra
Section, 115). It appears that the reverse
apana-action is associated with the process of
sense-withdrawal. Here, the term 'karana-samaharana' has been used to mean sense-withdrawal.
However, the process of sensory control has
been elaborated in this m a n n e r : ' O n the eighteen
vital points of the body, the mind should be
concentrated, from one point to the other, with
breath-suspension. This is sensory control. T h e
eighteen points a r e : (1) big toe, (2) ankle,
(3) calf, (4) thigh, (5) anus, (6) genitals, (7)
heart, (8) abdominal region, (9) navel, (10)
neck, (11) elbow, (12) root of the palate, (13)
nose, (14) eye, (15) space between the eyebrows,
(16) forehead, (17) knee, and (18) wrist'
( -Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section,
129-133).
Dattatreya defined sensory control as: 'The
senses naturally are in contact with the objects;

the withdrawal of the senses from the objects
by the application of the power of control is
termed sensory control' (Darshanopanishad, 7.
1-2). Here, the process involved in sensory
control has been termed 'indriya aharana',
that is sense-withdrawal, and this is to be effected
by the well-developed power of control. T h e
control process has been more fully described
by Dattatreya. He says: 'According to the process
of breath-control, breath should be suspended
with concentration applied to the following
points in succession: (1) root of the teeth, (2)
neck, (3) chest, (4) navel region, (5) region of
Kundali (coiled power), (6) muladhara (intracoccygeal subtle centre), (7) hip, (8) thigh,
(9) knee, (10) leg, and (11) big toe. This is called
pratyahara by the ancient yogis who were
masters of sensory control' ( - Darshanopanii^ad,
7. 5 - 9 ) . T h e processes involved in sensory
control are two-fold: breath-suspension and
holding the mind, that is, mental concentration,
on certain vital points in the body in a particular
manner and order. T h e concentration should
be done along with breath-suspension. This is
a very ancient method of sensory control.
Dattatreya expounded a higher process of
sensory control in which mind is concentrated
on the different subtle centres of the body.
This is the layayoga method. He says: ' T h e
yogi should assume the swastikasana (auspicious
posture) and should be completely motionless;
then he should inhale the atmospheric air and
suspend the breath. During breath-suspension,
the following points should be held in consciousness in succession: (1) feet, (2) muladhara
(the intra-coccygeal subtle centre), (3) navel
point
(manipura - the
intra-lumbar
subtle
centre), (4) heart point (anahata - the intrathoracic subtle centre), (5) neck point (wishuddha - the intra-cervical subtle centre), (6)
palatine point (talu - the intra-medullary subtle
centre), (7) eyebrow point (ajna - the intracerebral subtle centre), (8) forehead point
(manas and indu, which belong to the ajna
system), and (9) head point (sahasrara - void
centre)' (- Darshanopanishad, 7. 10-12).
In explaining sensory control, Narayana said:
'The control of the mind in respect of sensory
objects is pratyahara'
( - Mandalabrahman-

55

Fundamentals of Layayoga

opanishad, 1.7). T h a t is, the sense-mind should
be so controlled as to cease all conduction to
the perceptive consciousness. Here the term
'manas-nirodhana' (sense-mind control) has been
used to explain the nature of the control.
It is said: ' T h e withdrawal of the senses from
their objects, towards which they are naturally
flowing, is called pratyahara'
( -Yogachudamanyupanishad,
120). Here the word 'pratyaharana' (withdrawal) has been used to indicate the nature of the control, and from which
the term 'pratyahara' originated. T h e great
yogi Wishnu also said: 'It is evident that pratyahara is the process in which the yogi, being
in kumbhaka, (breath-suspension) withdraws
his senses from their objects' (Yogatattwopanishad, 6 8 - 6 9 ) . Here also, the word 'pratyaharana' (withdrawal) has been used to explain
the nature of the control. It is also stated that
the control process is conjoined with breathsuspension.
Atharwana expounded five forms of sensory
control to Shandilya. He said: ' T h e withdrawal
of the senses from their objects by well-developed
control-power is pratyahara; (the second form
is) whatever sensory image shines forth in
consciousness should be thought of as God, this
is sensory control; (the third is) the abandonment
of the fruits of all actions which are to be done
everyday, this is sensory control; (the fourth is)
the turning away from all objects, this is sensory
control; (the fifth is) the holding (in consciousness) the eighteen vital points (of the body)
in succession, this is sensory control. T h e vital
points a r e : (1) foot, (2) big toe, (3) ankle,
(4) leg, (5) knee, (6) thigh, (7) anus, (8) genitals,
(9) navel, (10) heart, (11) neck, (12) larynx,
(13) palate, (14) nostrils, (15) eyes, (16) the
space between the eyebrows, (17) forehead,
and (18) head. On these points the process of
holding should be done on the ascending as
well as on the descending scales' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 8. 1-2).
All these are the Waidika sensory control.
Now we come to the Tantrika sensory control.
Shiwa said: ' T h e senses are constantly in
contact with the objects; they should be withd r a w n from their objects in a graduated manner'
( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 8). Ishwara defined
56

pratyahara as: 'The withdrawal of the senses
from their respective objects, with which they
are normally in contact, by well-developed
control power is called pratyahara' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 25). It is said: 'The perceptive mind, because of the influence of desires,
is in an oscillatory state; when the desires are
controlled by pratyahara, it becomes concentrated on God' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 24. 137).
Further, 'The perceptive mind is irresistible,
firm, difficult to control and unwilling to obey;
the withdrawal of it by the strength of control
is called pratyahara. By pratyahara, the yogi
becomes calm and is able to concentrate deeply
and that leads to yoga' (Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27. 2 8 - 3 0 ) .
A new and highly technical definition of
sensory control is as follows: 'With the suspension
of breath the mind should be concentrated on
the muladhara centre and from there on all
other subtle centres, step by step; this is pratyahara' ( - Tantrarajatantra, 27.70). This is the
form of sensory control which is specially adopted
in layayoga.
T h e word 'yama' in the form of 'sangyama'
has been used for the control of the senses. It
is said: ' T h e sangyama (control) of the senses
from their objects into the hrit centre by the
will-mind is called pratyahara; this fifth process
of control should be regularly practised by the
yogi' ( - Satwatatantra, 5.14). Sensory control
has also been defined as: 'Even when the senses
are in contact with the objects, the non-reception
(in the sense-consciousness) of those (objects)
is pratyahara' ( - Paranandasutra, final section,
1. 42). Here, it is indicated that the sense-mind
should be so controlled that it does not receive
the dematerialized sensory impulses and, consequently, will not conduct sensomental impulses
to consciousness.

Sixth, Seventh and Eighth
Stages of Yama (Control):
Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi
T h e sixth, seventh and eighth stages of control
are exercised in relation to the mind. In other

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

words, the control of the mind is practised in
three main steps, and each one has a technical
name denoting the nature of the control. These
names are Dharana, Dhyana and Samadhi,
which will be explained.

1 Dharana (Holding-Concentration)
Dharana is the sixth stage of yama (control)
and the first phase of mental control or concentration. Dharana is derived from 'dhri' meaning holding. Holding is a process of maintaining
a particular form of consciousness without its
transformation into another form. Therefore,
holding is the process of concentration in which
only one form of consciousness is maintained.
This monoform consciousness is beyond perceptivity, intellectuality, affectivity, and volitionality.
Perception effects the oscillatory state of
consciousness because of the constant sensomental radiations into it. T h e radiated energy
in the conscious field is transformed into conscious forms or images which, in relation to
the I-consciousness, are apprehended as what
we call the external objects. According to the
experiences in relation to the objects a conscious
feeling of passion or aversion may be aroused.
This is determined to a great extent by the
desire-pattern which is based on pleasure-pain
impressions, acquired before. T h e desire (kama)
itself which is born of preformed impressions,
when combined with the will-principle (manasyana) develops finally into conation (kriti).
Conation may, or may not, be associated with
affectivity.
On the other hand, intelligence plays an
important role in perception. In a general way,
it is a component part of apprehension. However,
intellectuality becomes a predominant factor
in certain types of apprehension. An apprehension can be so refined that higher and deep
thinking and deliberation form its major part.
Thinking and reasoning are the main functions
of the intellective mind (buddhi).
Perception is the basis of consciousness at the
sensory level. In this consciousness, not only
perception, but also affection and volition and,

to a certain extent, intellection are components.
It is called the perceptive (sangjnana) field.
When the intellective mind predominates in the
perceptive field, clear thinking and sound reasoning become elements of consciousness. These
are the functions of the intellective mind as
mati (thought) and manana (reasoning). T h e
intellective mind at a higher level, such as
manisha. (superintellect), exhibits a higher form
of intelligence as deep thinking and deliberation.
T h e intellect and superintellect modify the
perceptive consciousness to a specific form called
intellective consciousness (wijnana).
Both the perceptive and intellective forms
of consciousness are multiform in character,
though the latter is much more refined. T h e
constituent elements of the perceptive consciousness are the knowledge-forms, principally
of five varieties created by the five kinds of
sensomental radiations in the conscious field.
Each knowledge-form is a knowledge-unit which
is termed writti (an imaged consciousness).
By the appropriate combination of different
knowledge-units a conscious pattern is formed
which is associated with the phenomenon of
the awareness of the objects. It is manifold in
character and is constantly changing. Intelligence also radiates from the intellective
aspect of the mind into the conscious field,
and is manifested as conscious thoughts and
intellectual creativity. When conscious thoughts
are of a high order and intensive in character,
consciousness assumes a new pattern called
intellective consciousness, which is composed
of thought-intelligence-units, also termed writtis.
At the sensory level the knowledge pattern is
the awareness of sensory objects. Either the
awareness, or the thought associated with it, is
composed of knowledge and intelligence units
so coalesced as to give a complete meaning.
Each unit is a writti which is the knowledge
minimum. Consciousness in the sensory or
intellective field is maintained by the continuous
arising of the writtis, one after another. It is
like this, writti 1 - pause - writti 2 - pause writti 3 and so on. T h e pause is so brief that it
cannot be apprehended, and so there is an
apparent continuity. A writti-chain creates a
knowledge pattern of which a single writti may
57

Fundamentals of Layayoga

manifest a knowledge of an object or the part
of the knowledge of an object or objects. Therefore, our knowledge is a compound of writtis.
T h e writti-form of consciousness, the seat of
which is either the perceptive or intellective
field, has been termed 'sarwabhawatmabhawana'
( - Annapurnopanishad, 1. 32) - the multifarious
consciousness - manifesting manifold perception-thought phenomena. Unless the writtis are
controlled, it is not possible to attain uniformity
(samata) of consciousness. It is the background,
or the actual state, of the concentratedness
(ekagrata) of consciousness. This state should
be developed from the state of deconcentration
by the application of control.
T h e uniformity of consciousness is not an
abnormal, unintelligent, unaffectionate and
unillumined state. On the other hand, it is a
supernormal, superintellective, superaffectionate
and superillumined state. So it has been called
prajnana - superconsciousness. It is not based
on perceptive-intellective knowledge phenomena, but on the dhi - concentrative mind
which causes consciousness to assume the concentrative form. Superknowledge arises from
concentration - not from perception and intellection. Superknowledge has two levels inward and outward. At the outward level,
superknowledge reveals the supermatter field,
and thus the range of knowledge is increased
to a very high degree. At the inward level,
superknowledge manifests as spiritual light or
divine knowledge.
In the intellective field, the concentrative
mind manifests as attention (awadhana) and
genius (pratibha). When the writtis flow in the
conscious field, the specific function of the concentrative mind is almost hidden. Unless an
appropriate condition in consciousness is created,
concentration will not be possible. Concentration
is essentially the development of that form of
consciousness in which writtis cannot arise, and
intellective, affective and volitive phenomena
are not recorded, and the form itself does not
change. A writti indicates a knowledge of an
object or a part of the knowledge of an object.
This is why writti 1 is not the same as writti 2,
or writti 3. This shows the oscillatory character
of the consciousness undergoing writtis. On the
58

other hand, the consciousness in concentration
shows that any point, measured by time, is
that conscious form which is without manyness
in character, but uniform. This is due to the
influence of the concentrative mind.
In yoga, a unique method is introduced to
raise our consciousness from the perceptiveintellective levels to the concentration level. The
multifarious consciousness is intimately related
to the body. T h e summation of all the activities
of the body, which is indicated by the respiratory
frequency and depth, may be regarded as an
approximate index.
In normal, quiet breathing, the number of
breaths is from 12-16 per minute. Let us take
16 respirations per minute in a resting state.
Assume a cross-leg concentration posture as
advocated in yoga. T h e n make your body completely motionless by passive conscious effort.
When you have mastered the physical stillness,
link your consciousness to the physical motionlessness. When this is controlled, any slight motion
of the body, or even a tendency to movement will
be recorded in your consciousness. However,
by prolonged practice, a state of undisturbed
consciousness, in conjunction with the motionlessness of the body, can be maintained for a
desired period. This is posture control.
W h e n the concentration posture is controlled
in this m a n n e r and the mind made calm at the
same time, the respiration rate of 16 per minute
may decrease to 10, 8, or even less. This is due to
the stillness of the body and calmness of the
mind in which the suspension factor has been
brought into play, which influences the respiratory rate. T h e respiratory rate of 16 per
minute means that there are 16 inspirations
and 16 expirations and a pause between them
which is equal to zero. In other words - inspiration 16, expiration 16, and a pause between
t h e m ; the pause = 0. If the pause 0 is raised to
the inspiratory or expiratory value 16 and the
inspiratory and expiratory values are reduced,
then suspension will be a predominant factor
in respiration. In yoga, the usual proportion
has been fixed at the ratio of 1-4-2. If inspiration
is 4, suspension will be 16, and expiration 8.
If we make suspension equal to 64 seconds, then
inspiration is 16 seconds, and expiration 32

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

seconds, that is, 4 counts inspiration in 16
seconds, suspension for 64 seconds, and 8 counts
expiration in 32 seconds. Here, the value of
1 respiratory unit is 4 seconds. This is high
R. unit. When a R. unit is reduced to 2 seconds,
it is medium, a R. unit of 1 second is a low unit.
In a grade using a low unit, the suspension
is 16 seconds. In the medium grade, it is 32
seconds, and in the high grade 64 seconds.
A student should start at the low grade and
gradually proceed to the high grade.
The student should sit in a concentration
posture and remain motionless and calm. Then
he should practise breath-control in the following
manner: inspire and concentrate on this in a
passive way; then suspend and link the consciousness to the suspension and be conscious
of that; and finally, expire with passive concentration. The counting of the number of units
and the measure of each unit should be done
consciously along with passive concentration.
When the suspension is well-controlled, it will
be easy and cause no disturbance.
After the suspension has been made easy by
practice, matrika (supersound) units should be
introduced in suspension. T h e 16 matrikaletters from 'Ang' to 'Ah' should be used in
suspension. If the suspension is for 64 seconds,
then each letter has the value of 4 seconds. This
value is reduced to 2 seconds in suspension 32,
and to 1 second in suspension 16. T h e increased
or decreased time value is obtained by a slow or
less slow mental sound-process essentially obtained by increasing or decreasing the nasal factor
connected with each matrika-letter. During
suspension, concentration should be made on the
sound-process. T h e inspiration and expiration
should be done with passive concentration and
should be regulated by the respiratory units.
When the mental sound-process is fully established in suspension, the next step in practice is as
follows: concentration should be done so deeply
on the mental sound-process that the suspension
time limit is totally forgotten. In this case, the
suspension may be unconsciously prolonged or
the expiration-inspiration is carried out unconsciously. Now, the 16 matrika-letters should
be used in inspiration, suspension and expiration,
thus making the ratio 1 - 1 - 1 . W h e n this is

mastered, the 50 matrika-letters from 'Ang'
to 'Kshang' should be used in inspirationsuspension-expiration as if one continuous act
without any interruption in the mental soundprocess at the junction between inspiration and
suspension, suspension and expiration, and expiration and inspiration, and so on. In this manner,
a monoform consciousness is created in which
are held only the matrika-letters, flowing one
after another but linked with one another by the
nasal factor in mental sound-process, and the
concentration is so deep that the respiratory
phases do not break the concentration but
remain in the background.
This is the process in which the specific
function of the concentrative mind is fully
activated. T h e nature of concentration is the
holding of consciousness in a form which does
not change, and to which perception, intellection, affection and volition do not reach. As the
consciousness does not receive anything from
the perceptive-intellective field but remains
concentrated, in what is beyond perceptiveintellective, and unchanging, it is called the
holding process. T h e first step of the process is
dharana - the holding-concentration. T h e holding of consciousness in that form in which the
50 matnka-letters flow uninterruptedly is the
dhararca unit.
It is said: 'A well-controlled student should
control the five forms of bioenergy by breathsuspension; (inspiration should precede suspension) and expiration through the nostril should
follow suspension. W h e n the throbbing of the
bioenergy is controlled by breath-control, the
mind, which is naturally restless to an extreme
degree becomes fit, and should be made to undergo the process of dharana which should be done in
the right way by the student who knows the secret
of doing it' ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 2.9).
Here it is stated that breath-suspension is an
intrinsic part of holding-concentration.
Holding-concentration has been defined as:
'By controlling the desiring mind, a wise yogi
should hold the Divine Spirit in his consciousness
in concentration; this is dharana' ( - Amritanadopanishad, 15).
It has also been said: 'A student of yoga,
being prepared by abstention and other practices,
59

Fundamentals of Layayoga

should hold in his mind the five forms of supermatter (in their respective centres) within the
body; this is the holding-concentration' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, 133 134). Narayana said: 'The withdrawing of
consciousness from the perceptive field and
holding it in the superconscious field is dharana'
( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.1.8). In other
words, the elevation of consciousness from the
sensory level and its transformation by holding
in it superconscious forms should be done.
Atharwana said: 'Dharana is of three kinds:
the holding-concentration on the divine aspect
of self; holding-concentration on the void in the
hrit-centre; and holding-concentration on the
five divine forms in the five intra-spinal subtle
centres' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.9.1).
An advanced form of holding-concentration
was expounded by Wishnu. He said: 'Whatever
is seen with the eyes should be thought of as
Divine Being; Whatever is heard with the ears,
whatever is smelt with the nose, whatever is
tasted with the tongue, and whatever is touched
with the skin should be thought of as Divine
Being. In this manner the objects of the senses
should be transformed into Divine Being and are
held in consciousness'
( - Yogatattwopanishad,
6 9 - 7 2 ) . Here, the sensory objects are given a
divine form by thinking and are held in the
consciousness in concentration.
About the Tantrika form of holding-concentration, Ishwara said: 'Concentration on the
following points with breath-suspension is termed
dharana; the points a r e : great toe, ankle, knee,
scrotum, genitals, navel, heart, neck, throat,
uvula, nose, eyebrow-space, breast, and head'
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 25). So holdingconcentration should be done while doing
breath-suspension.
It is said: ' T h e knowers of yoga say - the
holding in the consciousness of certain vital
points along with breath-suspension is dharana'
( - Prapanchasaratantra, 19. 2 1 - 2 2 ) . T h e mind
should be concentrated on a certain vital point
with breath-suspension. It is further stated:
'The experts in breath-control say that those vital
points through which one can leave one's own
body and can enter another's body and can
reenter one's own body are suitable for dharana;
60

they a r e : great toe, ankle, knee, anus, perineum,
genitals, navel, heart, neck, uvula, nose, and eyebrow-space' ( - Prapanchasaratantra, 19.51-53).
Shiwa said: 'The holding of the mind, with
breath-suspension, on the great toe, ankle, knee,
thigh, genitals, navel, heart, neck, uvula, nose,
eyebrow-space, forehead, and top of the head
is termed dharana' ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2,
p. 11). Further, 'Concentration on the six subtle
centres . . . (and) the Coiled Power (Kundali)...
is termed dharana' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27.34-35).
T h e distinction between holding-concentration and deep concentration (dhyana) has been
explained. It is said: 'Concentration on the whole
divine form is dhyana, while only on one part
at a time is dharana' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra,
ch. 9, p. 8). T h e matrika-letters are very
suitable for holding-concentration. Only in deep
concentration, can a divine form be the object.
In fact, an appropriate divine form arises from
mantra in deep concentration. Now we come to
dhyana.

2 Dhyana (Deep Concentration)
Dhyana is the seventh stage of yama (control)
and the second phase of mental control or
concentration. T h e word 'dhyana' is derived
from 'dhyai', to concentrate. Concentration is
the holding of an image in consciousness continuously and without interruption by the
penetration of any other images. When this
concentration becomes very deep by an uninterrupted and continuous holding of an image
in consciousness for a sufficiently long time, it is
called dhyana. It is the specific function of that
aspect of the mind, called dhi - the concentrative
mind. T h e uninterrupted and continuous holding is the process of concentration. So the new
term dhyana has been used in the seventh stage
of control to mean deep concentration.
It is said: 'Eyes cannot receive the Supreme
Spirit, nor can words express it, nor can it be
reached by other senses and conative faculties
or by ascesis or any other actions. T h e Supreme
Spirit is revealed in dhyana; dhyana is only
possible when consciousness is spiritualized by

Layayoga and Ashtahgayoga

the purity of knowledge' ( - Mundakopanishad,
3.1.8). Knowledge at the sensory level is manifold in character - a writti-form. T h e realization
of Supreme Spirit is not possible through such
knowledge. This is why it has been said that the
senses cannot reach it. A mind which is only
conscious because of perception, intellection
and volition cannot reach the Supreme Spirit.
When the manifoldness of knowledge is transformed into uniformness, consciousness becomes
purified and spiritualized. In such a state of
consciousness dhyana develops into its highest
point in which Supreme Spirit is revealed. It is
the development of dhyana into samadhi (superconcentration). However, to attain such a state
of consciousness the practice of concentration
is absolutely necessary.
It is said: 'As the two pieces of wood are used
in kindling the sacred fire by attrition, so the body
and the pranawa (first mantra) are as if two
pieces of wood, and they should be used by
dhyana for the realization of the luminous
Supreme Spirit' ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 1.
14). This means that the body should be m a d e
motionless by posture and breath-control and
then concentration should be practised in conjunction with mantra.
T h e hrit-centre is a very suitable point for the
practice of deep concentration. So it has been
said: 'Controlling the senses . . . concentrate
on the Divine Being who is quiescent, luminous,
pure and blissful and in the hrit-centre' ( - Kaiwalyopani-rAad, 5). Here is a particular mode of
concentration for the students of yoga: 'Having
assumed a (folded-leg) concentration posture,
and with the hridayanjali m u d r a (a mode of
alignment of hands and fingers to make them
hollow) placed in the region of the heart, and
with the eyes retracted from the world, applying
pressure on the rima glottidis with the tip of the
retroverted tongue, not allowing the upper teeth
to touch the lower, keeping the body erect, and
with the mind concentrated, control the senses.
Then with the purified and spiritualized mind he
should concentrate on Wasudewa (a divine
form - Krishna) who is the Supreme Spirit.
When concentration is so deep that the whole
consciousness is moulded into the Wasudewa
form, then that concentration will lead to libera-

tion. All sins of worldliness are destroyed by the
concentration on Wasudewa with breath-suspension for three hours' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanunad, Mantra Section, 145-9).
Concentration on the universal form of God
has been advised ( - Darshanopanishad, 9. 1-2).
But it is not possible until the Deity is realized
by the mantra way of concentration. T h e final
stage of dhyana is the concentration on Brahman
(God) without form ( - Darshanopanishad, 9.
3-5).
Narayana says: 'When concentration reaches
the phase of "ekatanata", monoformity (of consciousness) of the Divine Being abiding in all,
that is dhyana' ( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad,
1.1.9). Ekatanata is that form of consciousness
in which a chosen image is held continuously
and without any interruption. T h e consciousness
is in the form of a chosen image and this form
continues without any change. So, ekatanata is
very deep and continuous concentration. This
deep concentration is dhyana.
There are two main types of d h y a n a : saguna
(with form) and nirguna (without form). Wishnu
says about concentration on form: 'Dhyana
should be practised while concentrating on the
Deity . . . and at the same time breath-suspension
should be done (in a natural m a n n e r ) . This is
saguna-dhyana' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 104105). Here breath-suspension is the first stage
of kewala kumbhaka, that is, normal suspension
without inspiration and expiration. However,
it is an advanced form of concentration. After
the saguna-dhyana (concentration on form)
is mastered, a yoga student should start with
the nirguwa-dhyana (concentration without
form). Wishnu said: 'Nirguna-dhyana leads to
samadhi (superconcentration)' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 105).
Now we shall consider the Tantrika form of
dhyana (deep concentration). Sadashiwa said:
'Dhyana is of two forms: sarupa (with form)
and arupa (formless). T h e object of the formless
concentration is the Supreme Power-Consciousness which is beyond mind and speech, unmanifest, omnipresent, and unknowable; it cannot
be identified as this or that; the yogis with
great difficulties and through the processes of
control attain it. I will now speak of concentra61

Fundamentals of Layayoga

tion on form in order that the mind may be able
to concentrate and the yoga practitioner may
get the desired results quickly in concentration,
and to develop the power of concentration of
the subtle type. Actually, the Supreme PowerConsciousness, who is above time, is formless
and splendid; this reality manifests itself by
will in relation to mind-matter phenomena'
( - Mahanirwanatantra, 5. 137-140).
T h e above statement clearly indicates that
formless concentration is extremely difficult
to obtain. A yogi can attain it only when he has
been able to develop the power of concentration
to a very high degree through the prolonged
practice of concentration on form. So, concentration on form is the first step to formless
concentration. Formless concentration is very
near to superconcentration. When consciousness
becomes highly rarefied and illuminated by
spiritual light through the practice of concentration on form, the formless aspect of the Supreme
Power-Consciousness reflects on, and shines
forth in, that consciousness. T h e sarupa and
arupa dhyana are the same as the Waidika
saguna and nirguna dhyana respectively.
Concentration on form has been defined as:
'Experts on yoga say that dhyana is to make the
form of Deity held (continuously) in consciousness' ( - Prapanchasaratantra, 19. 2 2 - 2 3 ) . T h e
holding process is concentration. So it is said:
'Dhyana is the concentration on the Deity of
mantra' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 17, p. 83). It is
clearly explained here: 'Deep concentration on
the conscious form of the Deity of mantra in
your consciousness is dhyana' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 26).

3 Samadhi (Superconcentration)
Samadhi is the eighth or the final stage of yama
(control). T h e word samadhi is derived from
' d h a ' to mean dharana, that is holding. To
maintain in the consciousness an image of an
object without letting it slip or disappear from
the consciousness is holding. It is the specific
function of the concentrative mind (dhi) to
hold an object in the consciousness without
having it loosened and escaping from the

62

consciousness. This action of holding is in the
nature of binding or restraining, because, without
being bound or fastened together, the object
may be lost. Therefore, the mental action of
holding is an action of binding (bandhana),
which means yama (control).
Let us explain it in greater detail. Dharana
or holding is a process by which only one object
is retained in consciousness, or consciousness
is shaped only in one form - the form of one
object only, which is held in it; or holding the
consciousness fixed on only one object; or, in
other words, to bring or concentrate consciousness on one form or into one-pointedness. So
the process of holding is the process of concentration. It is the process by which the multifarious
consciousness is transformed into a monoform,
and is in a state of concentratedness. T h a t the
holding is concentration, is indicated by the
fact that the word, 'dhyana' has been used for
complete dharana, that is, uninterrupted and
continuous holding, or deep concentration.
Holding consists of three phases according
to the depth of concentration. In the first phase
concentration is not very deep and so it is
interrupted now and then. This form of concentration has been technically called dharana
or holding-concentration. In the second phase,
concentration becomes so deep that it does not
break at all but continues uninterruptedly.
This is called dhyana or deep concentration.
In the final phase, holding reaches its maximum
point of development. In other words, at a
point when dhyana reaches its highest development, the process of holding is so firm that
consciousness, which is in a most rarefied state,
is only in the form of the object held, in its
subtle aspect; and concentration is so deep that
even I-ness is lost. This is what is technically
called samadhi. Now, dharana has reached its
m a x i m u m point, and 'sam' to denote super has
been prefixed to 'dha' with 'a' between, and thus
the word samadhi is formed. Therefore, samadhi
is superconcentration.
T h e action of holding is intrinsically associated
with binding (bandhana). Binding restrains an
object held in the consciousness from leaving
it. It also restrains the penetration of other
objects into consciousness. Therefore, holding

Layayoga and Ashtahgayoga

is in the nature of yama (control). There are
other terms which have been used to mean
control. Bandha, bandhana, nigraha, nirodha,
niyamana and ayama are synonymous with
yama and all of them mean control. Control
also develops stage by stage and at the eighth
stage it reaches its highest development. To
indicate this, 'sam' has been prefixed to yama
to form sangyama, to denote supercontrol.
Holding has also another aspect. During
holding, there is a union between the consciousness and the object. If consciousness remains
united with the object, the object is restrained
from escaping from consciousness. At the point of
superconcentration this union is complete. To
denote this, the term sangyoga, meaning superunion, has been used.
Now let us study the Waidika form of samadhi.
About the accomplishment of superconcentration it has been said: 'By controlling the senses
(through sensory control), by controlling the
outwardly directed tendency of the mind (by
concentration), by controlling the desires of
the mind, and by ascesis, a yogi will be in samadhi. In samadhi all love is directed to the
Supreme Spirit, and one is fully attached to
him, fully absorbed in him and experiences all
bliss in him. From samadhi arises divine knowledge by which God, whose power-in-word-form
is pranawa, is revealed and the yogi is in him'
( - Nrisinghatapinyupanishad, 2.6.4).
Samprajnata samadhi (superconscious concentration) has been defined as: 'The continuous
flow of consciousness in the form of Brahman God in which the I-ness has been dissolved is
samprajnata samadhi. It is attained by prolonged practice of dhyana' ( - Muktikopanishad,
2.53). Samadhi is of two forms: Samprajnata.
and asamprajnata. When the term samadhi is
used, it usually refers to the samprajnata type. In
samprajnata samadhi mental concentration has
been developed to its highest point and, consequently, through such concentration consciousness is only in the God-form and nothing else, and
this form of consciousness flows normally, uninterruptedly and continually, and even the
I-ness is not a part of consciousness. T h e I-ness,
illuminated, godly consciousness, in a state of
concentration at its highest degree, is the

superconscious concentration.
It has been said: 'The mind operating at the
sensory level is the root-cause of all the wordly
knowledge. If the mind is dissolved, there will
be no wordly knowledge. Therefore, keep the
consciousness fixed on the Supreme Being
in deepest concentration' ( - Adhyatmopanishad,
26). In superconcentration, God is held by
concentration, and consciousness becomes godly.
T h e form of consciousness attained in superconcentration has been described as: 'Samadhi
is that state in which consciousness is only in
the nature of the object concentrated on, and
is still like the flame of a l a m p in a windless
place, and from which gradually the feeling of
the action of concentration and I-ness has
disappeared' ( - Adhyatmopanishad, 35). T h a t
is, consciousness in superconcentration assumes
the form of an object concentrated on, and is
without I-ness, and does not change but continues to be in that form only.
T h e nature of superconscious concentration
has been more clearly stated here: ' T h a t state in
which consciousness is in concentration and is
illuminated by the divine light, and without
any desire - that superconscious state is samadhi'
( - Annapurnopanishad, 1.48). It is further stated :
' T h a t state in which the mind is devoid of
restlessness, I-ness is absent, mind is unconcerned
with worldly pleasures and pains, and consciousness is absolutely motionless like a rock,
in deepest concentration, is samadhi. T h a t state
in which all desires have been completely
eliminated, there is no liking or disliking, and
consciousness is free from waves, and absolutely
tranquil, that is samadhi' (Annapurnopanishad,
1.49-50).
T h e form of consciousness developed in superconcentration, is not void or nothing, though it
is object-less and I-nessless, but there is that
bliss which is beyond any worldly pleasure,
and is full of power. So it is asserted: ' T h a t
state of consciousness in which there are no
objects, no passion or aversion, but there is
supreme happiness and superior power, is samadhi' ( - Mahopanishad, 4. 62).
T h e process of transforming the multiform
consciousness into a uniform state is superconcentration. It is said: 'When consciousness

63

Fundamentals of Layayoga

reaches a state in which it becomes uniform,
it is samadhi' ( -Amritanadopanishad, 16).
About the consciousness in superconcentration,
Dattatreya said: 'Samadhi is that in which
consciousness is in deepest concentration associated with the knowledge of the union
between the embodied spirit and the Supreme
Spirit' ( - Darshanopanishad, 10.1). Dattatreya
further said: ' T h a t concentrative consciousness
in which arises the knowledge of being only in
Supreme Consciousness is samadhi' ( - Darshanopanishad, 10.5). When consciousness is in the
deepest concentration, there is the realization
of only Supreme Being in which there is no
feeling of the body, no perception, no intellection,
and this is superconcentration.
Now with the Tantrika form of samadhi.
Shiwa has defined samadhi as: 'According to all
Tantras, samadhi is that concentration in which
the sameness (samata) of the embodied spirit
and the Supreme Spirit is revealed' ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 11). Here, the word 'bhawana' has been used to indicate deepest concentration. Shiwa has also explained the nature
of the sameness. He says: 'Samadhi is that in
which arises the consciousness of oneness (ekata)
between the embodied spirit and the Supreme
Spirit' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 26).
This means that in superconcentration, consciousness is in the deepest concentration and
is fully illuminated by the divine light in which
the realization of the oneness between the
embodied spirit and the Supreme Spirit occurs.
We have already stated that samadhi consists
of two forms: samprajnata and asamprajnata
(non-mens concentration). When superconscious
concentration develops to its highest point,
non-mens concentration is achieved. It is said:
'As salt thrown into water becomes the same as
water, so the state in which the oneness between
consciousness and the Supreme Spirit occurs
is called samadhi' ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 2.14). This means, that, when all the
writtis (objective images) disappear and, consequently, consciousness is in the form of the
Supreme Being in concentration and nothing
else, this is the state of samadhi. This samadhi
is superconscious concentration. Because consciousness in the concentrative form still exists,
64

though highly purified and illuminated by divine
light. Again it is said: 'When the vital activities
are under full control and the mind is in deep
concentration, consciousness becomes uniform;
this is samadhi' ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
2.15). This is also superconscious concentration.
About the non-mens concentration it has
been said: 'When all desires and thoughts
disappear and the sameness between the embodied spirit and the Supreme Spirit occurs, it is
samadhi. When the senses and the intellective
mind and even the concentrative mind are
absorbed, and, consequently, the entire mind
undergoes a phase of negativity, (and, therefore, the whole existence is only the beingness
of Brahman, and that Brahman is without
mind and matter), this is samadhi' ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 2 . 1 6 - 1 7 ) . In this samadhi, there are no desires, no sense action, no
intellection and no thought, and even the highly
spiritualized concentrative consciousness has
been completely absorbed; in this grand 'nonentity' there remains only Brahman - Brahman
in its supreme state which is without mind and
matter, and consequently in this state the embodied spirit, as an individualized being, is
nonexistent; the embodiment has been completely dissolved and the spirit has been united
with the Supreme Spirit and has become one
and the same. This is asamprajnata samadhi non-mens concentration, in which, at the highest
point of concentration, the concentrative consciousness, which is merely in the form of
divine knowledge-light, is transmuted completely into Supreme Consciousness. By this highest
concentration a state is reached in which everything else has been absorbed, and only Supreme
Consciousness shines in its supreme aspect.
This is supreme concentration - asamprajnata
samadhi.
Wishnu has also said : 'Samadhi is the sameness
between the embodied spirit and the Supreme
Spirit' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 107). Atharwana has said: 'Samadhi is that state in which
the oneness (aikya) between the embodied spirit
and the Supreme Spirit occurs. It is without
I-ness, without objects and without the knowledge of objects; it is a state full of bliss and in
it there remains only Supreme Consciousness'

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga

( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.11.1). So the words
'samata' (sameness) and 'aikya' (oneness) indicate the same thing. It is a state of oneness
between the embodied spirit and the Supreme
Spirit. Moreover, the non-mens concentration
is not the insensate, gloomy metamorphosis
of the human mind, it is not a state of being
dead-alive, but a borderland of h u m a n development, the highest possibility of m a n in his
spiritual endeavour; it is a state of becoming
Supreme Spirit, with supreme bliss and supreme
power; it is to be free from the bondage of the
body and mind, to become liberated-alive.
This has been pointed out by Atharwana.
Narayana said: 'When concentrative consciousness is lost, it is (mind-transcendent)
samadhi' ( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.1.10).
When the penetration of the objective world into
consciousness is prevented by sensory control,
then the Supreme Spirit in its divine form is
held in consciousness in concentration. At the
beginning, concentration does not go very
deep, so it breaks and the one-pointedness of
the consciousness is interrupted. But concentration quickly regains its power. This is holdingconcentration.
When concentration grows
deeper, and interruption does not occur, it
continues; consciousness is now only in the
divine form which is continually being held.
This single-pointedness of consciousness is deep
concentration. When the deep concentration
becomes deepest, I-ness is lost, the whole world
is lost, what remains is only the spiritually
illuminated consciousness of divine form, it
is the state of superconscious concentration.
When the light-like concentrative consciousness
is absorbed into Supreme Consciousness in
supreme concentration, there remains solely
the Supreme Spirit, and nothing else. This is
non-mens concentration.
Ribhu said: 'When the uniform concentrative
consciousness is dissolved by the most intensified
concentration, there remains only the being of
Supreme Consciousness' ( - Annapurnopanishad,
1.23). In other words, through the deepest
concentration the final form of consciousness
disappears and only Supreme Consciousness
as a whole remains. This is the state of non-mens
concentration. Now we come to yoga.

Yoga Defined and Explained
From a linguistic point of view, the word
'yoga' has been derived form the root 'yuja',
denoting: (1) sangyama, that is, control developed to its highest degree - supercontrol;
(2) samadhi, that is, concentration developed to
its deepest form - superconcentration; (3) sangyoga, that is, union in its complete form superunion.
We have already considered the control
factor. Yama (control) is the basic form of yoga.
It (yama) develops through eight stages. At
the eighth stage yama develops into its highest
form and this is called sangyama, that is, supercontrol. T h e yama power, as we have noted,
is intrinsically associated with the process of
holding, that is, concentration. T h e control is
in the nature of concentration. So, as yama
develops stage by stage, concentration also
develops along with the control. At the eighth
stage, control reaches its highest point of development and becomes supercontrol, and concentration also reaches its highest degree of intensity
and becomes superconcentration. Unless the
mind is at the state of supercontrol, it is not
possible to attain superconcentration. So it is
said: 'It is impossible to attain samadhi when the
mind is attached to worldly objects; but it is
easy to attain samadhi for the mind undergoing
sangyama' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 26).
T h a t samadhi is intimately related to sangyama
has been disclosed here.
Yoga has been defined as: 'A non-oscillatory
state of the senses, sense-mind and sense-consciousness, developed by dharana, that is, deep
concentration, is termed yoga' ( - K.athopanishad,
2.3.11). Dharana is the process of holding in
deepest concentration the mono-form consciousness which, in other words, is superconscious
concentration; and this is yoga. So it appears
that yoga here is defined as superconscious
concentration.
Yoga has also been defined as: " T h e state of
real absorption of consciousness, which is beyond
all knowledge, is termed yoga' ( - Akshyupanishad, 2.3). Here the non-mens concentration
has been defined as yoga. It has been said:
65

Fundamentals of Layayoga

'When the deepest concentration on Supreme
Brahman (attained at the final phase of superconscious concentration) also disappears by
itself within, there arises nirwikalpa samadhi
in which all latent impressions of feeling are
eliminated' ( - Annapurnopanishad, 4. 62). Nirwikalpa samadhi and asamprajnata samadhi
are synonyms, i.e. for non-mens concentration.
Here it is said that superconscious concentration
ultimately leads to non-mens concentration.
T h a t both forms of samadhi are the stages
of yoga has been stated here: 'By yoga (that is
non-mens concentration) yoga (that is superconscious concentration) should be controlled,
and the multiformed consciousness by the onepointed consciousness in which God is held;
thus being in Supreme Consciousness, which
is beyond all knowledge, the yogi becomes that'
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 2.12). T h a t
yoga is non-mens concentration has been stated
by Sadashiwa. He says: 'That which is merely
being, changeless, beyond mind and speech, and
the only truth in the transitory worlds of mindpower-matter, is Brahman in its real n a t u r e ;
that Brahman is realized directly in yoga in the
form of nirwikalpa samadhi (non-mens concentration) by those who have developed the
equanimity of the mind, who are beyond all
contraries of the world and without the feeling
of my-ness about the body' ( - Mahanirwanatantra, 3. 7 - 8 ) .
T h a t yoga is also superconscious concentration
has been said by Shiwa in the Wishwasaratantra.
So it is clear that superconcentration is yoga.
We are, therefore, justified in concluding that
both superconcentration and non-mens concentration are yoga.
So far we have considered the concentration
aspect of yoga. But yoga has also the control
aspect, as concentration is intrinsically related
to control. Atharwana said: 'Yoga is the control
of the writtis (mentimultiformity)' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.24). Here the control aspect
of yoga has been clearly stated. Consciousness
may become free from the wnttis by the control
of the perceptive, intellective, volitive and
affective aspects of the mind, and becomes
monoform and single-pointed, in which only
the Supreme Being is held in concentration.
66

This is the state of writtiless superconcentration.
It has been said: 'When the constantly changing
consciousness is free from wnttis, it becomes nonoscillatory and concentrated, in which is revealed
the infinite and whole Supreme Spirit' (Annapurnopanishad, 1.55). This is adhyatma-yoga spiritual yoga. It is said: 'That Supreme Spirit
which is unknowable, invisible and eternal,
lying in all beings, and hidden, but shines forth
in consciousness, is attainable by spiritual yoga'
( - Kathopanishad, 1.2.12).
Yoga is the state of deep concentration, so
superconcentration is yoga. It has been stated:
'Deep concentration arises in yoga' ( - Sharadatilaka, 25.1). Without concentration yoga is
not attainable, so it was said: 'A yog! attains
yoga only in superconcentration' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.43).
T h e non-writti state has another aspect. When
consciousness itself is absorbed, along with
the disappearance of all the wnttis, it is the nonmens concentration. It is said: 'The real absorption of consciousness which is beyond all knowledge is termed yoga' ( - Akshyupanishad 2.3).
From this it is clear that the non-mens concentration is also yoga. So it is stated: 'The state in
which consciousness, which normally undergoes
wnttis, is completely absorbed and there is
supreme bliss, is termed non-mens concentration;
it is the favourite of the yogis' ( - Muktikopanishad, 2.54). /shwara has also said: 'Samadhi is
that in which consciousness is completely absorbed into Supreme Being' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 9,
p. 42).
Now we come to the third aspect of yoga sangyoga, that is, union. T h e word sangyoga
is derived from 'yuja' to which is prefixed
'sam', meaning super. Yuja has three meanings:
(1) concentration, (2) control, and (3) union.
Therefore, sangyoga means - (1) superconcentration, (2) supercontrol, and (3) superunion.
We are now going to consider the superunion
aspect of yoga.
Maheshwara says: 'The union (sangyoga)
of the embodied spirit and the Supreme Spirit
is called yoga' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.68-9).
It is also said: ' T h e embodied spirit that possesses
a mind, appears to be different from the Supreme
Spirit; the union (yoga) between them is yoga'

Layayoga and Ashtangayoga
( - Tantrarajatantra, 27.53). Here the word
'yoga' is used to indicate union. Shiwa says:
'The union (yojana) between the embodied spirit
and the Supreme Spirit, or between Supreme
Consciousness and Supreme Power is yoga'
( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 11, p. 22). Here the word
'yojana' has been used for sangyoga (union).
The sangyoga is aikya (oneness). So it is
said: 'According to yoga experts, oneness between the embodied spirit and the Supreme
Spirit is yoga' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 9, p. 43).
This oneness in union occurs in samadhi. It
has two stages of development. At the first
stage when the union occurs the knowledge of
the oneness shines forth in superconcentration.
It has been stated by Dattatreya ( - Darshanopanishad, 10.1.). At the final stage, even the knowledge of oneness disappears along with consciousness, and the oneness becomes real in
non-mens concentration Atharwana explained
this (Shandilyopanishad, 1.11.1).
Samadhi is intimately related to union. It is
said: 'On the accomplishment of sangyoga
(union) one can be in a state of samadhi'
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.42). Therefore the
union is associated with the deepest concentration. In the deepest concentration the sameness
between the embodied spirit and the Supreme
Spirit occurs. So long as consciousness remains,
it is in the deepest concentration which is saturated with the knowledge of the sameness. This is
why it has been said: 'That deepest concentration in which arises the knowledge of the sameness between the embodied spirit and the
Supreme Spirit is samadhi' ( - Sharadatilaka,
25.27).

From the above study we come to the following conclusion.
Yoga is fundamentally based on yama control. Yama develops stage by stage and
finally reaches its highest limit and becomes
sangyama - supercontrol. Yama is intrinsically
related to concentration, and at the sangyama
stage, concentration develops into samadhi superconcentration. Concentration is also related
to union and when concentration is deepest,
the union becomes sangyoga - superunion. At
the supercontrol level, concentration develops
into superconcentration and union into superunion. And this state is yoga. So, yoga has three
aspects - supercontrol, superconcentration and
superunion. They are interrelated and inseparable from yoga. At the final stage in yoga, superconcentration is transformed into non-mens
concentration because of the absorption of the
consciousness, and, consequently, the superunion becomes the real oneness between the
embodied spirit and the Supreme Spirit through
the absorption of the embodied spirit into the
Supreme Spirit; at this stage supercontrol also
disappears. Now yoga becomes Mahayoga the supreme yoga in which only Supreme
Consciousness remains.
To reach this final yoga, it is absolutely necessary to develop the power of control and concentration, stage by stage. The stages are eight.
They are: yama, niyama, asana, pranayama,
pratyahara, dharana, dhyana and samadhi.
These eight practices constitute Ashtangayoga eightfold yoga. Layayoga is based on the eightfold
yoga.

67

CHAPTER 2

Layayoga Its Significance and Method

Layayoga is that form of yoga in which yoga,
that is samadhi, is attained through laya. Laya
is deep concentration causing the absorption
of the cosmic principles, stage by stage, into
the spiritual aspect of the Supreme PowerConsciousness. It is the process of absorption
of the cosmic principles in deep concentration,
thus freeing consciousness from all that is not
spiritual, and in which is held the divine luminous
coiled power, termed Kundalini.
Wishnu says: 'Layayoga is that in which chitta
(sense-consciousness) undergoes laya, that is,
becomes absorbed in deep concentration; there
are many methods for achieving this: but the
most effective is dhyana (deep concentration)
on God in form, which can be done also while
walking, standing, eating, and resting. This
is layayoga' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 23-4).
Sense-consciousness which is the field where
sensory images are constantly being formed,
becomes transformed, through the process of
concentration, into a form where the penetration of sensory images stops and, consequently,
consciousness is free from image-undulations and,
therefore, in a state of concentration. This state
of consciousness is termed superconsciousness.
So, sense-consciousness is transformed into superconsciousness by deep concentration. To achieve
this end, concentration is practised by taking the
divine form as the object of concentration. The
divine form is made living in lshtadewata, who
appears from the living mantra. Under this
condition, concentration becomes real and deep.
Maheshwara says: 'When one is established
in layayoga, there is the union between the
68

embodied spirit and the Supreme Spirit; and
because of this, consciousness becomes completely absorbed and along with it the cessation of
respiration takes place' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1. 134-5). Here the final stage of layayoga
has been explained. In the first stage of laya,
all sensory images from the consciousness are
eliminated and, therefore, the sense-consciousness becomes highly refined and is transformed
into superconsciousness. This is the stage of
samprajnata samadhi (superconscious concentration) . Thereafter the real union of the embodied
spirit and the Supreme Spirit takes place when
superconsciousness is absorbed. It is the stage
of asarnprajnata samadhi (non-mens concentration). This is the final stage of layayoga. At this
stage, the normal cessation of respiration occurs.
This is kewala kumbhaka (normal cessation of
respiration). It clearly indicates that when
consciousness undergoes complete absorption
in layayoga kumbhaka arises automatically.
In hathayoga, deep concentration is attained
through the process of kewala kumbhaka, and,
in Jayayoga, through deep concentration, kewala
kumbhaka is normally attained.

Laya Process
In the Waidika laya process, the conative faculties, namely, speech, prehension, locomotion,
excretion and reproduction, are to be controlled
by the will-mind in concentration, stage by

Layayoga - Its Significance and Method

stage. These actions become unmanifested owing
to their tranquillization by control. T h e stages
of control are as follows: (1) reproduction,
(2) excretion, (3) locomotion, (4) prehension,
and (5) speech. These control processes are
carried out in the lower five subtle centres. In
this way the body becomes motionless and the
mind becomes free of all thoughts about the
body.
Smell, taste, sight, touch, and sound are the
senses. They are controlled in concentration
in the lower five subtle centres, stage by stage,
while the sense-mind, residing in the sixth subtle
centre, is also controlled. Consequently, the
sense-mind does not radiate the object-substance
to. sense-consciousness. This results in senseconsciousness becoming free from objective
images. This is the state of pratyahara (sensory
control). When this is established, consciousness
undergoes dharana and dhyana and finally
samprajnata samadhi. T h e n samadhi consciousness is completely absorbed into the power
aspect of Supreme Consciousness in time. This
is the stage of asamprajanata samadhi (non-mens
concentration).
By the process of control, the cosmic principles,
namely, conative faculties, senses, sense-mind,
sense-consciousness and superconsciousness, become unmanifested and are absorbed into the
spiritual Power-Consciousness in deep concentration. The absorption of the cosmic principles
in deep concentration, which is associated with
control, is \aya. So, laya is that control process
which causes absorption in concentration. T h e
\aya has two stages. First, the absorption of
sense-consciousness and, secondly, the complete
absorption of the superconsciousness into
Supreme Power-Consciousness.
It has been said: 'Mind has two forms impure and p u r e : the impure mind is full of
desires, and the pure mind is free from desires.
Mind is the cause of both our bondage and our
liberation; the mind which is attached to sense
objects causes bondage, and when it becomes
free from objects it leads to liberation; . . .
therefore, he who desires to be liberated should
make his consciousness free from all objective
images' ( - Brahmabindupanishad, 1-3). By the
laya process all objective images are eliminated

from consciousness, which becomes pure. T h e
purified consciousness becomes transformed into
superconsciousness in a state of samadhi, arising
from \aya. Laya develops into samadhi.
It is stated: 'The non-rising of the absorbed
multiforms of the consciousness is the limit
of the control' ( - Adhyatmopanishad, 42). This
requires explanation. T h e term 'laya' is derived
from li meaning 'be absorbed in'. Laya, in the
technical sense of yoga, means absorption in
deep concentration. W h e n the multiforms of
consciousness undergo absorption in concentration and do not arise again to interrupt it,
concentration develops into samadhi. This process of absorption consists of various stages.
T h e first of these is concerned with the absorption of the sensory images and all conative
impulses. T h e next stage is the absorption in
concentration of intellection and thoughts. In
this way, when the perceptive, volitive, and
intellective functions of the mind are fully
controlled by absorptive concentration, senseconsciousness begins to be transformed into
superconsciousness.
When
concentration
becomes deepest, samadhi is attained. Samadhi
in the superconscious field is termed samprajnata
samadhi, that is, superconscious concentration.
T h e control power has now reached its highest
degree of development. It is then termed
'nirodha' or sangnirodha, that is, supercontrol.
This is the limit of mental control.
'Speech should be controlled in manas,
manas in jnana-atman, jnana-atman in mahan,
and m a h a n in Supreme Atman' ( - Kathopanishad, 1.3.13). Here speech stands for all organs
of voluntary action and the senses. T h e organs
of action are controlled in manas, that is, willm i n d ; the senses are controlled in manas, that
is, sense-mind. J n a n a - a t m a n is sense-consciousness and intellect, and mahan is the I-less supermind, that is, superconsciousness. T h e senses
are controlled in the sense-mind; that is, in
concentration, the power of control is developed
which causes absorption of the senses in the
sense-mind. In a similar manner, the sensemind, the will-mind, the sense-consciousness
and the intellect are absorbed in concentration.
So, by the power of control manifested in concentration, the senses and the sensory aspects of
69

Fundamentals of Layayoga

the mind are absorbed. After this, the supermind is manifested. Now concentration is
developed into samadhi. Finally, the supermind
is absorbed in supreme concentration into
Supreme Spirit. This is the state of non-mens
concentration.
Yama said: 'Manas is higher than the senses,
intellect is higher than manas, mahan is higher
than the intellect, the unmanifested, that is
prakriti, is higher than the mahan and the
infinite and supreme Purusha, that is, Supreme
Consciousness, is higher than prakriti; one who
knows him (in samadhi), becomes free from
bondage and immortal' ( - Kathopanishad, 2.3.
7 - 8 ) . T h e different aspects of the sensory
mind, the supermind and what remains beyond
mind, have been stated by Yama. He also indicated the stages of absorptive concentration.
Here manas is the sense-mind. T h e senses,
sense-mind and intellect are the main aspects
of the sensory mind. When these are absorbed
in concentration, mahan (supermind) is reached.
For attainment of non-mens concentration the
supermind should be reduced to prakriti (primus)
by the absorptive concentration. Praknti is
that fundamental principle in which the supermind undergoes negativity. T h e n prakriti itself
is absorbed into purusha (disembodied consciousness principle).
T h e various principles, which are to be
absorbed in concentration by stages, have
been explained here: 'The " e a r t h " , " w a t e r " ,
"fire", " a i r " and "void" principles; subtle earth,
water, fire, air and void principles; the principles
of smell and its objects, of taste and its objects,
of sight and its objects, of touch and its objects,
and of hearing and its objects; the conative
principles, viz., reproduction, excretion, locomotion, prehension and speech; sense-mind and
its functions; intellect, I-ness and sense-consciousness and their functions; supermind and its
function; and the creative aspect of infinite
energy - all these are to be absorbed'
( - Prashnopanishad, 4.8).
T h e five forms of metamatter (mahabhutas)
and five 'tanons' (tanmatras), five senses and
their objects, five organs of volitional actions
and will-mind, intellection, I-feeling, senseconsciousness, supermind and the energy aspect

70

of Supreme Power-Consciousness, which is the
source of all creative phenomena, are to be
absorbed in deep concentration in order to
reach Brahman.
When all principles are absorbed in concentration, what remains is Brahman - Supreme Spirit.
It has been stated: ' T h a t (Brahman) is infinite,
being by itself, beyond mind, subtler than the
subtlest (that is, without form), far away and
still near (that is, beyond any position); that
Brahman is hidden in what has been manifested
as
life-mind-matter'
( - Mundakopanishad,
3.1.7). Unless all the creative principles are
absorbed, the realization of Supreme Consciousness is not possible. T h a t Supreme Being is
to be realized by superknowledge arising in
samadhi. It is said: 'That formless Spirit should
be realized by superconscious knowledge in
the body in which the vital processes are operative, (that is, the living body); sarwa chitta
(that is, consciousness exhibiting multiformity)
is vitalized by the bio-forces; when this senseconsciousness is purified, the Supreme Spirit
shines forth in it' ( - Mundakopanishad, 3.1.9).
Here, it is said that, when sense-consciousness,
which is associated with the living body, is
spiritually purified, it is transformed into superconsciousness, and samadhi is attained. In
samadhi, superknowledge arises by which the
Supreme Spirit is realized. T h e spiritual purification of the sense-consciousness is achieved
by the absorption of various principles in
concentration.
Brahman - Supreme Consciousness, in the
creative aspect, manifests consciousness in three
forms. T h e first form is the sensory, and it
functions in cooperation with the physical body.
Consciousness is awakened by perceiving external objects through the senses. At this stage
the experiences of the I are essentially based
on perception. T h e I has seven main supports
from where all its experiences are effected.
T h e means of the experiences are nineteen, viz.,
five senses, five organs of volitive actions, five
bio-energies, sense-mind, intellect, I-ness and
consciousness. In the second form, consciousness
is awakened by thoughts and dreams based on
impressions and desires. In the third form,
consciousness is not awakened, so it is a state of

Layayoga - Its Significance and Method

nonconsciousness ( - Mandukyopanishad, 1. 3 - 5 ) .
T h e I feeling is awakened and maintained
by intellection and willing, the site of which is
the soma centre, and perceptivity, which has
its sites in the five lower subtle centres. I
functions through the instrumentation of five
forms of bio-energy, five organs of volitional
action, five senses, will-mind, sense-mind, intellect and sense-consciousness. Consciousness
is brought into being sensorially; the living body,
sense-mind, and I-feeling take part in this.
It is the sensory form of consciousness, that
receives external impressions through the sensory
channels. Now, I enjoys the external world.
When the senses become inoperative, as in
sleep, the sense-mind may still function without
the help of the senses. This function of the sensemind is stimulated by the post-conscious impressions and desires. T h e usual example of
this is dreaming. In deep thinking, the senses
may be inoperative to a great extent. But when
the senses are absorbed in deep concentration,
the sense-mind becomes free and can acquire
knowledge extra-sensorially. This knowledge
falls under three categories: the same type of
sensory knowledge acquired without the help of
the senses; that form of sensory knowledge which
cannot be acquired by the senses; and a suprasensory form of knowledge.
When the senses and the sense-mind become
inoperative, sense-consciousness becomes masked, giving rise to apparent nonconsciousness.
It happens normally in deep sleep. But in
layayoga concentration, sense-consciousness is
absorbed, and sense-mind, will-mind and intellect are also absorbed, and the undifferentiated
conscious 'Substance' of the sense-consciousness
is spiritually transformed into highly rarefied
superconsciousness. This is the stage of superconscious concentration. T h e Supreme Spirit
is 'seen' through superconsciousness. When
superconsciousness is also absorbed in supreme
concentration, what remains is infinite Brahman.
At this stage, there is neither sense-consciousness,
nor nonconsciousness, nor superconsciousness;
it is neither a conscious state, nor an unconscious
state, nor any intermediate state. T h e reality
remaining in this state 'cannot be seen, as it is
beyond the senses; it cannot be "taken", as it is

beyond the reach of the volitive faculties; so it is
hidden in everyday life; it is without any attributes, and beyond thoughts and, therefore,
unidentifiable; it is only the being of Supreme
Consciousness where all creativity and the
manifested universe have come to nothingness;
it is that Supreme Reality which is one and the
whole; that is to be known' ( - Mandukyopanishad, 1.7).
T h e absorption of sense-consciousness in concentration is the principal part of layayoga,
as the attainment of samadhi entirely depends
on it. Aditya said: 'The real chittakshaya (that
is, the complete absorption of sense-consciousness), which is superconscious in nature, is
yoga' ( - Akshyupanishad, 2.3). T h e absorption
of sense-consciousness is associated with the
absorption of the senses, sense-mind, will-mind
and intellect. This absorption is not the dark
state of the mind. It brings into being that
consciousness which is divinely illuminated.
This is superconsciousness.
T h e process of absorption, technically termed
here apanchikarana ('dis-quintuplication') has
been described as follows: T h e 'earth'-form is
absorbed in the 'water'-form (in concentration);
'water'-form in 'fire'-form, 'fire'-form in 'air'form, 'air'-form in 'void'-form, 'void'-form in
I-consciousness (which includes sense-consciousness, intellect, will-mind and sense-mind), Iconsciousness in the mahan-principle (superconsciousness), mahan in awyakta, that is prakriti (primus) and awyakta in purusha (disembodied consciousness principle) ( - Paingalopanishad, 3.6).
It has been said: ' T h a t Brahman in the
creative aspect is Indra, that is, endowed with
the great yoga power, and is Prajapati - the
first being with attributes; all the dewatas super-beings, the five mahabhutas (metamatter)
and all beings, including those which are
produced from eggs, which are viviparous,
insects, plants, other animals and men - and
their sources - all are absorbed in the superconscious knowledge; superconsciousness is the
centre of the absorption of all these and lokas
(worlds). Superconsciousness is illuminated by
Brahman' ( - Aitareyopanishad, 3.1.3).
Here the secret of absorption has been dis71

Fundamentals of Layayoga
closed. In relation to mind-matter phenomena,
Brahman, with its Supreme Power, is in the
creative aspect. The universe and all beings are
the manifestation of the creative force of Brahman. The lokas are the chakras - the sites of
sensory and mental functions. The mahabhatas
and tanmatras and the sense-principles are in the
lower five centres. Consciousness and mental
functions are in the upper centres. Consciousness
becomes limited when it is a field of perceptivity,
intellection and volition. This consciousness is
nurtured by the penetration into it of the
objective substances lying outside it. When
the sense-principles and sense-mind are absorbed
in concentration, this consciousness becomes a
non-being, not by becoming non-consciousness
but by being transformed into prajnana, that is,
superconsciousness. When the sense-consciousness becomes inoperative, the picture of the
external world vanishes. Therefore, the absorption of sense-mind, sense-consciousness, intellect
and will-mind creates a state of consciousness
which is beyond all these. It is now prajnana superconsciousness which is super-refined and
illuminated by divine light.
There is a Waidika process of absorption,
termed 'Ekadhanawarodhana', meaning, Prana
(bio-energy) -Control ( - Koushitakyupanishad,
2.2). The sensory functions of the mind are
based on the functioning of the bio-energy in the
body. The concentrated state of consciousness is
difficult to attain without the control of bioenergy. It is the process of developing concentration causing absorption of cosmic principles in
which bio-energy-control plays an important
role.
First, the five sensory forms should be reduced
to their right mantra-forms with which are
linked appropriate dewatas (deities). With
the help of the mantras, the senses should be
absorbed in concentration in the deities. Thereafter, the deities are dissolved in the central
dewata in the form of kundalini, aroused by the
absorption of pranic forces in pranayama, while
in concentration. After this, the sense-consciousness and, finally, superconsciousness are absorbed
into kundalini.
It has been said: 'From mind void-form,
from void-form air-form, from air-form fire72

form, from that water-form and from that
earth-form, and from that in turn the entire
universe and all beings have been manifested.
(Beyond all there is) Brahman - the undecaying,
immortal, immutable and whole reality. By
controlling the prana-apana bio-forces, spiritual
light should be ignited in the mind in deep
concentration; this will lead to the attainment
of Brahman' ( - Sannyasopanishad, 4.6).
At the sensory level, our consciousness is in
union with the sensory objects through the
functioning of the senses. This contact is completely broken when consciousness is in union
with that luminous Kundalini, radiating spiritual
knowledge. This union is effected in stages.
By appropriate practice, in which pranayama
forms an intrinsic element, the consciousness is
irradiated by the Kundalini-light and the mind
is spiritually strengthened. Such a mind is able
to display desireless will, by which concentration
is maintained and developed to a deep form.
Now it is possible to get the senses and sensory
objects absorbed in deep concentration. When
all the the senses and sense-mind are absorbed,
consciousness is transformed into superconsciousness. Finally, infinite supreme Brahman is
reached by getting superconsciousness absorbed
into Kundalini. It is an ancient Waidika process
of absorption in concentration.
It is stated: 'There is in the void of the mind
a reality which is birthless, one and eternal.
That Narayana - the Supreme Spirit, takes the
forms of earth, water, fire, air and void and lives
within them as a living being, but they do not
know him; he is in the forms of sense-mind, senseconsciousness, intellect and I-feeling, abiding
in them as a living being, but they do not
know him; he is in the forms of awyakta (prakriti)
and akshara (Supreme Being with attributes),
and is in them as a living being, but they do not
know him; and he is in the form of dissolution,
lying in it, but it does not know him. He is the
Supreme Spirit, lying within all beings; he is
without impurities; he is divine being and
one and luminous by his own splendour; he is
Narayana - Supreme Consciousness' ( - Adhyatmopani5«ad, 1-1).
Here the process of absorption has been described. Unless all the cosmic principles are

Layayoga - Its Significance and Method

absorbed, Narayana is not reached, though he is
in everything in his supreme aspect. T h e
first part of the process consists in the absorption
of the sensory principles by stages. T h e second
part is the absorption of sense-consciousness
with sense-mind, intellect and I-ness. T h e third
part is the absorption of prakriti and God in
divine form. And finally, there is the recoiling
of that grand power - Kundalini, who has
absorbed into her everything, into Narayana Supreme Being.
About the process of absorption it has been
stated that: 'The earth-form is the heart of all
smell (that is, the smell principle); water-form
is the heart of all tastes; fire is the heart of all
forms; air is the heart of all touch; void is the
heart of all sounds; awyakta (primus) is the heart
of all mental powers; mrityu (that is, the central
spiritual power causing absorption) is the heart
of all beings; (after absorption of all principles)
mrityu becomes one and the same with the
Supreme Being. Thereafter, there is neither
being of anything nor nonbeing of anything, nor
anything which is beyond being or nonbeing of
anything. This is nirwana - liberation' ( - Subalopanishad, 7.13.2).
The smell principle is intimately related to
and supported by the earth form. T h e
centre of the earth-form is the right place for
the absorption of the smell principle. Similarly,
the appropriate centres for the absorption of
the taste, sight, touch and sound principles are
the centres of the water, fire, air, and void forms.
The senses should be absorbed in these centres
stage by stage. T h e n the mind with all its powers
or faculties should undergo negativity. Thereafter, mrityu (death) which is the heart of all
beingness becomes united, as Kundalini, with
Supreme Consciousness.
This is the picture of the Waidika process of
absorption. T h e essential part of this process
has been adopted in Tantrika layayoga.

Tantrika Form of Layayoga
The outer objective world is the effect of the
materialization of the cosmic metamatter energy,

existing in subtle form, which has its centres
of operation in the individual organizations, and
there is a senso-mental process which connects
the external world with the individual inner
world. T h e original cosmic energy principle
in its inertia aspect is the root of the manifested
phenomenon we call matter. Through the sensomental process the outer world is brought into
consciousness and is known. T h e price of acquiring senso-mental knowledge is the masking of
spiritual knowledge. T h e latter arises in consciousness when it is not impurified and diversified by the penetration of sensory objects.
T h e spiritualization of consciousness means the
development of one-pointed consciousness. U n less the sensory principles are made inoperative
by appropriate means, this cannot happen.
T h e spiritual power is anti-multifarious and,
consequently, is in the nature of concentratedness. T h e whole source of spiritual power in the
individual organization is Kundalini - the coiled
power.
Kundalini is the Supreme Power in her
spiritual aspect. But when the eternal energy
of the Supreme Power is directed towards
assuming a finite form, Kundalini remains
coiled, and mundaneness arises in consciousness.
T h e method of arousing Kundalini and uniting
her with Parama Shiwa - Supreme Spirit - is
the essential part of layayoga. First of all,
the aroused Kundalini moves towards the
Supreme Spirit. This creates a spiritual flow to
God in the consciousness, and, stage by stage,
the various cosmic principles are absorbed into
Kundalini. T h e n the spiritual consciousness
itself is absorbed into Kundalini, and ultimately
Kundalini herself is absorbed into Supreme
Spirit. T h e awakening of kundalini and the
spiritualization of consciousness through the
absorption of various cosmic principles stage
by stage is the process of concentration of
layayoga. T h a t form of concentration, in which
consciousness is completely free from nonspiritual elements by absorption, and is fully
illuminated by the luminous Kundalini, is the
highest stage of samprajnata samadhi (superconscious concentration). Thereafter, kundalini
absorbs the spiritual consciousness and finally
she herself is absorbed into Supreme Spirit;
73

Fundamentals of Layayoga

it is the stage of asamprajnata samadhi (nonmens concentration). This is the Tantrika form
of layayoga.
Angira said: 'Knowing the intimate relation
between the cosmic objective phenomenon and
the individual consciousness, the conduction
of kundalini towards the Supreme Being and her
absorption in that in concentration is the third,
that is layayoga' ( - Daiwmimiangsadarshana,
3.32). T h e unspiritual mutation of consciousness
is due to the senso-mental radiations of the
objective substance into consciousness, thus
producing a state of mundaneness. T h e unspiritualization of consciousness comes to an end
when the central coiled spiritual power is
aroused and absorbs into itself, in deep concentration, all the senso-mental principles; and
ultimately the aroused spiritual power is absorbed into the Supreme Spirit. T h e absorption
process of concentration, first developed to a
state of superconcentration, and finally to
supreme concentration, is layayoga.
Shiwa has disclosed innumerable absorption
processes for the attainment of layayoga. It has
been stated: 'Krishna-dwaipayana and other
yogis practised layayoga through absorptive
concentration in the nine subtle centres'
( - Yogarajopanishad, 4 - 5 ) .
Deep concentration is in the nature of absorption in which all the creative principles are
absorbed stage by stage as concentration
becomes deeper, Ishwara said: 'A yog; should
try to attain, in concentration, union between
the embodied spirit and the Supreme Spirit.
In concentration, all the cosmic principles
should be absorbed, from the effect to the cause,
in a reverse order, in Supreme Spirit. In this
manner, the earth principle should be absorbed
in the water principle, water in fire, fire in air,
air in void, void in sense-mind, sense-mind in
I-consciousness, I-ness to supermind, and supermind to prakriti (primus), and prakriti to
Supreme Spirit in concentration' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 11, p. 50).
As the fundamental part of layayoga is the
arousing of kundalini; and the absorption of the
various principles in kundalini during her course
through the different subtle centres, so this
yoga is also called Kundaliyoga ( - Rudraya74

mala, Part 2, 41.42), and Kundaliniyoga ( - Shaktananda-Tarangini, ch. 4, pp. 21, 28). This
yoga has also been termed shatchakrayoga
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 29.9), because the
six subtle centres become involved in it.

Limbs of Layayoga
Tantrika layayoga consists of nine limbs or parts:
1 Yama, abstention.
2 Niyama, observance.
3 Sthulakriya, muscular control process.
4 Sukshmakriya, breath control process.
5 Pratyahara, sensory control.
6 Dharana, holding-concentration.
7 Dhyana, deep concentration.
8 Layakriya, absorption process (absorptive
concentration).
9 Samadhi, superconcentration.
T h a t layayoga is essentially based on the
eightfold yoga, is clearly seen from its parts.
T h e specific characteristic of layayoga is the
absorption process. T h e other eight parts have
been dealt with in chapter 1. But, from the
layayoga viewpoint, some of these parts need
special consideration.

Muscular Control Process
T h e muscular process consists in asana, i.e.
posture, and m u d r a , i.e. control exercise. In
layayoga, lotus posture (padmasana), auspicious
posture
(swastikasana),
and
accomplished
posture (siddhasana) have been adopted for
the practice of concentration and breath-control.
Eight control-processes (mudras) have been
adopted in layayoga, namely, shambhawi, that
is internal gazing; pancha-dharana, that is
five forms of holding-control; shaktichalana,
that is internal power-conduction; and yonimudra, that is anogenital control. Shambhawi
is practised, especially in relation to sensory

L a y a y o g a - Its Significance and Method

control. T h e chief feature of shambhawi is
concentration of the mind internally in the
ajna centre, while the eyes can be kept open,
but without seeing, or closed. By the practice
of shambhawi, sensory control becomes easier.
The five forms of holding-control are practised
for the mastery of dharana - holding-concentration. In this control, concentration is done with
breath-suspension (kumbhaka) in the five lower
centres on the earth-water-fire-air-void principles (one at a time) with the associated bijamantras and deities. Shaktichalana and yonimudra are practised in connection with concentration in layayoga. Shaktichalana is the
first part of the control exercise which culminates
in yonimudra. Shaktichalana comprises the
following factors: application of pressure on the
perineal region by the heel of the left leg by
assuming the accomplished posture (siddhasana),
or by the heels of both legs by assuming the
adamantine posture (wajrasana), anal lock(mulabandha), abdomino-retraction (uddiyana-bandha),
breath-suspension
(kumbhaka)
and
thoracico-short-quick breathing (bhastrika). T h e
execution of pressure and control in a definite
order and at different points with breath-control
helps much in the rousing of kundalini and in
her ascent. In hathayoga, shaktichalana has been
combined with great control-posture (mahamudra), great-lock (mahabandha), great piercing control (mahawedha), and chin-lock (jalandhara-bandha). In layayoga shaktichalana is the
first stage of control and it assists yonimudra.
Yonimudra is performed as follows: assume
the accomplished posture, with pressure on the
perineum by the left heel and a pressure on the
hypogastric region of the abdomen (the median
region of the abdominal wall), by the right
heel; now concentrate your mind on the
muladhara centre, and inspire through both
nostrils or through the mouth by making the
lips resemble the beak of a crow, and at the same
time contract the anus and genitalia forcefully
and do abdomino-retraction; at the end of
inspiration suspend the breath with chin-lock;
during suspension of breath maintain the genitoanal contraction and abdomino-retraction, and
hold in consciousness the luminous form of
kundalini in concentration; suspend as long as

you can without too much strain, and then
slowly expire and relax the neck muscles,
abdominal muscles, and genito-anal region.
Repeat. Yonimudra is practised to rouse
kundalini.

Breath Control Process
Breath control process is pranayama (breathcontrol). In layayoga sahita (breath-suspension
with inspiratory-expiratory phases) has been
specially adopted and developed into bhwtashuddhi pranayama - internal purificatory breathing. This is the main breath-control in layayoga.
Ujjayi (both-nostrils breath-control) and shitali (lingual breath-control) are also practised.
Another important breath-control practised in
layayoga. is kewala (automatic breath-suspension) achieved by concentration. Purificatory
breath-control will be discussed in chapter 6.

Concentration in Layayoga
In layayoga there are three main forms of
concentration: thought-concentration, binduconcentration and absorptive concentration.
Thought-concentration is generally practised
in the bhatashuddhi process. There are also
five special forms of thought-concentration which
help in bhutashuddhi concentration. T h e y a r e :
First Form - Concentration in the muladhara
centre. This concentration has three forms concentration on the earth principle with its
colour and shape; concentration on the earthbija; and concentration on Deity Brahma. This
concentration is done with breath-suspension.
Second Form - Concentration with breathsuspension in the swadhishthana centre on
(1) water principle, (2) water-bija, and (3) Deity
Wishnu.
T h i r d Form - Concentration with breathsuspension in the manipura centre on (1) fire
principle, (2) fire-bija, and (3) Deity Rudra.
75

Fundamentals of Layayoga

Fourth Form - Concentration with breathsuspension in the anahata centre on (1) air
principle, (2) air bija, and (3) Deity Isha.
Fifth Form - Concentration with breath-suspension in the wishuddha centre on (1) void
principle, (2) void-bija, and (3) Deity Sadashiwa.
Bindu-concentration is actually the concentration on the aroused super-luminous Kundalini.
Concentration-on-bindu consists of two phases:
first, the rousing of Kundalim by concentration
combined with shaktichalana and y o n i m u d r a ;
and second, concentration on the roused Kundalini. When K.undalini is first aroused, it appears
as if she were 'shaking' and consequently concentration is interrupted. By applying specific
concentration on kundalini in the ajna centre,
she then appears steady and concentration
becomes deeper and deeper. In deep concentration, Kundalini may assume the divine form of
Ishtadewata - Supreme Being in form. When
Ishtadewata is 'seen' in concentration, it becomes
so deep that absorption follows.
Those who are not able to arouse K.undalini
in bindu-concentration, should first practise
thought-concentration in the following manner.
T h e object of concentration should be held
in consciousness in concentration without any
interruption and an attempt should be made to
prolong concentration. Either assume the accomplished posture or the lotus posture for concentration. T h e objects of concentration are
as follows:
1 Deity Brahma in the muladhara centre.
2 Deity Wishnu in the swadhishthana centre.
3 Deity Rudra in the manipura centre.
4 Deity Isha in the anahata centre.
5 Deity Sadashiwa in the wishuddha centre.
6 Deity Parashiwa in the indu centre.
7 G u r u in the twelve-petalled centre under the
thousand-petalled centre.
8 Extremely rarefied, lightning-like, luminous
Kundalini in three and a half coils round Swayambhulinga in the muladhara.
T h e third is the absorptive concentration.
This is the vital part of concentration in layayoga. W h e n the aroused Kundalini is made
steady by bindu-concentration, concentration
76

develops into absorptive concentration, that is,
concentration becomes so deep that it causes
absorption of various creative principles. In
this manner, consciousness is freed from all
senso-mental activities, and consequently reaches
a stage which is beyond all mentation. So,
consciousness is transformed into superconsciousness by absorptive concentration and
samadhi is attained.
In absorptive concentration the senses, sensemind, sense-consciousness, and intellect, are
absorbed step by step, into Kundalini, and
consequently the cosmic strata of consciousness
vanish. Now consciousness assumes a new character in which perceptivity, intellection, volitiveness and affectivity are not recorded. It is now
in a divine form and in deepest concentration.
It is the state of samadhi - superconcentration.
T h e following are the levels of absorptiveconcentration.
First, absorption of sex and smell principles;
absorption of earth principle with its bija; and
absorption of Deity Brahma and Power Dakim all into kundalini in the muladhara centre.
Second, absorption into Kundalini of excretion
and taste principles; water principle with its
bija; Deity Wishnu and Power Rakim in the
swadhisthana centre.
Third, absorption into kundalini of locomotion and sight principles; fire principle with its
bija; Deity R u d r a and Power Lakini in the
manipura centre.
Fourth, absorption into kundalini of prehension and touch principles; air principle with
its bija; Deity isha and Power Kakini in the
anahata centre.
Fifth, absorption into Kundalini of speech
and sound principles; void principle with its
bija; Deity Sadashiwa and Power Shakini in
the wishuddha centre.
Sixth, absorption into kundalini of Power
H a k i n i ; and sense-mind in the ajna centre.
Seventh, absorption into Kundalini of senseconsciousness in the manas centre.
Eighth, absorption into Kundalini of intellect
in the indu centre.
T h e absorption of sense-mind, intellect, and
sense-consciousness into Kundalini occurs in
the ajna, manas and indu centres. This is the

Layayoga - Its Significance and Method
last phase of absorption at the senso-mental
level. Thereafter K.undalini passes into the
thousand-petalled centre and consciousness becomes Mahan - superconsciousness in which
superconscious concentration arises and the
whole consciousness is lighted by the luminous
Kundalini. There is nothing but kundalini.
This is the stage of samprajnata samadhi. At
this stage absorptive-concentration is trans-

formed into superconscious concentration. It
is the fourth stage of concentration.
At the highest stage of superconscious concentration, superconsciousness is absorbed into
Kundalini. Then Kundalini unites with Parama
Shiwa - Supreme Consciousness and becomes
one and the same with that. This is the state of
asamprajnata samadhi. In layayoga, it is called
Mahalaya - supreme absorptive concentration.

77

CHAPTER 3

Kundalini the Coiled Power

It is not possible to say that T r u t h in its supreme
form, which is the ultimate reality, 'is this and
not that'. But through memory, the revealed
truth can be transferred to the highly rarefied
intellectual level where it takes a meaningful
sound form - the spiritual language; and through
this language, the seers have said:
Parama Shiwa - Supreme God - is Nishkala,
that is, in which Shakti (Power) remains unmanifested. At this stage, Shiwa is not separate
from Shakti and Shakti is not separate from
Shiwa. In other words, when Shakti has been
completely united with Shiwa, she has no separate entity, Shakti is all Shiwa, it is the stage
of Nishkala Shiwa. T h e beingness of Shiwa is
maintained by Shakti and Shakti belongs to
Shiwa. This indicates the beingness of Shakti
is in the beingness of Shiwa. So Shiwa is alone,
one and without a second. This means that in
Supreme Shiwa there is nothing but Shiwa;
there is no universe but only Shiwa; even the
Supreme Power does not exist as a distinct
entity, her beingness is in Shiwa.
Is Shiwa then void - nothing? N o ! It is not.
Shiwa is all, there is nothing else but Shiwa.
Shiwa is full, perfect; how can there be anything
else in the being of Shiwa? Shiwa is the only
being, because he is all; anything else is null in
the beingness of Shiwa. Because of this, anything which is limited does not exist in Shiwa,
and so he is infinite, and in infinite Shiwa
there cannot be anything but he.
W h a t is the nature of the beingness of Shiwa?
It is beyond the senses and intelligence; it is
even beyond superknowledge arising from super78

concentration. When the functions of the senses,
sense-mind and intelligence completely stop
owing to the operation of supercontrol, superconscious knowledge arises from the calm and
one-pointed consciousness. Even this knowledge
appears to be too gross in relation to supreme
knowledge of Shiwa; so it does not reach Shiwa.
T h e supermind (mahan manas) which is superpurified and illuminated by super-light of samadhi, appears to be much coarser than Supreme
Consciousness. When superconsciousness is dissolved by the control developed to its highest
point, then a state of mental negativity arises.
This non-mental state is neither darkness nor
nothingness. It is the state of Supreme Consciousness - the disembodied Consciousness at its highest level.
Knowledge of the world cannot penetrate
into concentrated superconsciousness, because
this knowledge is associated with the oscillatory
form of consciousness. Also the most rarefied
concentration-knowledge (samadhi prajna) is
below the non-mental supreme knowledge which
exists only in the form of Shiwa. T h e highest
stage of one-pointedness of consciousness is
samadhi - superconcentration. In this state,
prana (power principle), functioning in relation
to mind, becomes concentrated and, as a result,
mind is transformed into supermind. T h e supermind is illuminated by superconscious light
(prajnaloka) arising from superconcentration in
which pranic concentration by supercontrol
has reached a very high degree. This is the state
of superconscious concentration. But when this
pranic concentration reaches its supreme limit,

Kundalini - the Coiled Power

then prana assumes a form technically called
Bindu. At this stage superconscious knowledge
disappears and along with it, mind becomes a
negative factor. This non-mental and supremely
concentrated state of Power develops from
supreme control. At this stage, power, as
Supreme Power, is in supreme union with Shiwa.
In the real nature of the being of Shiwa is
supreme control which, in turn, is non-mens
supreme concentration, and this is in the nature
of supreme union. This supreme control, supreme
concentration and supreme union constitute
Mahayoga - supreme yoga. Shiwa is in the
nature of Mahayoga. T h e knowledge of Shiwa
is beyond the superconscious concentrationknowledge, and, therefore, it is ultra-superconsciousness-knowledge, or non-mens supreme
knowledge. It is the state of non-mens supreme
concentration.
In the supreme union of Shiwa and Shakti,
the being of Shakti is the being of Shiwa, as
Shakti is an intrinsic part of Shiwa. This supreme
union is in the nature of love and bliss. This love
is supreme love and the bliss is supreme bliss.
So, mahayoga (supreme yoga) is in the nature
of supreme love-bliss. Shiwa in union with his
Shakti is in supreme concentration through
supreme control. Shiwa is in supreme yoga.
This is Nishkala (power absorbed in) Shiwa
and the Supreme Power is one and the same
with him. This is the fifth (final) stage of supreme
concentration (asamprajnata samadhi).
Nishkala Shiwa also appears as Sakala Shiwa
when the power aspect is more pronounced,
though Power remains as the being of Shiwa.
At this stage, the beingness of Shiwa, which is
the beingness of Supreme Power, is experienced
as non-minded full consciousness and full bliss
in supreme concentration. T h e yogi with the
experience of full bliss-consciousness is established in non-mens concentration. This is the fourth
stage of supreme concentration. This stage of
full bliss-consciousness merges into supreme
oneness of Shiwa and the Supreme Power as
Nishkala Shiwa in supreme blissfulness and
consciousness in Supreme concentration. This
is the final stage of non-mens concentration.
The third is the Shiwa-Shakti level. At this
stage Shakti - Supreme Power, is without her

specific powerfulness being manifested, but remains as yoga-power of Shiwa in his being.
And still there is a suggestion that Supreme
Power is also the source of specific power over
and above the yoga-power. This is the third
stage of supreme concentration. At this stage,
the yogi experiences the full expression of the
yoga-power of the Supreme Shakti in the beingness of Shiwa with, as it were, a faint trace of
specific power in the form of destruction of
anything which is not non-mind-non-matter
consciousness, in supreme concentration. Here
is a suggestion that Shakti (Power) has two
aspects: first, the yoga-power which is in full
expression in the being of Shiwa when Shakti
is Shiwa; second, the specific power which flows
away from Shiwa and manifests in creativity.
In the Shiwa-Shakti phenomenon, there is an
expression of yoga-power and the unmanifestation of creativity, but there is a faint trace of
this.
T h e fourth phenomenon is Nada. At this stage,
the specific power of Shakti, which was latent in
the Shiwa-Shakti phenomenon, is aroused. T h e
Nada-power is the germ of that great power
which manifests as divine creative power to
effect the universe of mind and matter. T h e
specific power aspect of Shakti, which remains
as non-being in Nishkala and Sakala Shiwa and
hidden in the Shiwa-Shakti phenomenon, is
aroused at the nada stage as prana, which is the
origin of the great creative power. T h e pranic
force is concentrated to its supreme degree in
what is called Bindu, in which the supreme
creative power is about to manifest. Bindu is
the fifth phenomenon.
From the yoga viewpoint, the yogi being at
the highest level of superconscious concentration,
causes absorption of the highly purified supermind and super-knowledge, and reaches the
bindu level. It is the first stage of non-mens
concentration. This non-minded concentration is
not a state of deepest darkness. It is a stage in
which prana is free from the 'cover' of the mind
and supremely purified and concentrated to its
highest degree. This concentration is so immense
that, as it were, at any moment, prana might
burst out and become scattered. T h e pressure
of this motionless pranic power is so great

79

Fundamentals of Layayoga

that it seems as if the yoga-power is forced into
Shiwa, where it remains and shines. But, in
reality, the yoga-power is awakened at the bindu
level and, step by step, its unfoldment occurs.
T h e yogi at first experiences great difficulties
in becoming established on the bindu level.
T h e tremendously powerful pressure of the
concentrated pranic force, causes him to descend.
But, at the right moment, he is able to obtain
the support of the yoga-power, which grows
step by step and, at a certain point, exhibits
supreme control, by which prana is controlled.
W h e n this occurs, the yogi reaches the nada
level. This is the second stage of supreme concentration. Prana, being controlled by supreme
control, is transformed into the nada form.
Now the yoga-power develops to such an extent
that the nada form is absorbed into Supreme
Power. At this point the yogi reaches the ShiwaShakti level. This is the third stage of supreme
concentration. Now the yoga-power develops
to the supreme degree by which the yogi reaches
the final stage of supreme concentration and his
being is nothing but the being of Nishkala
Shiwa.
Shiwa-knowledge is beyond the mind in any
of its forms, and so it is non-mental, supreme
consciousness. It comes into being at the bindu
level. Its arousing is caused by the control of
prana, which is supremely purified and without
the contact of mind. This control is effected by
the yoga-power in the form of supreme control.
At the nada level, Shiwa-knowledge reaches its
second stage of development. Supreme Power,
due to the predominance of Shiwa-knowledge,
absorbs prana in the nada form and begins to
express yoga-power. Supreme Power in which
prana has been absorbed exposes Shiwa by its
yoga-power. This is the third stage of Shiwaknowledge. T h e expression of full yoga-power
is only possible when Supreme Power withdraws
completely its specific aspect of power, and is
established in the being of Shiwa as Shiwa.
It is the fourth stage of Shiwa-knowledge
revealing the sakala aspect of Shiwa. Finally, the
sakala Shiwa-knowledge is transformed into
Nishkala Shiwa-knowledge. This is the last
stage. It is supreme control, supreme concentration and supreme union. This is supreme yoga.
80

Prana is a complex phenomenon. It is the
principle of eternal energy embedded in Supreme
Power. It is said: 'Dewatamayi Aditi came into
being as prana and with the mind-matter'
( - Kathopanishad, 2.1.7). Aditi is the unlimited
Supreme Power who is dewatamay;, that is,
whose being is the being of Shiwa - Supreme
God. T h e specific power of Supreme Shakti
(Power) is seen in the expression of that aspect
of her power which is prana, and the mindmatter phenomena arise from pranic creativity.
This is why it has been said: 'The entire universe,
everything, arises from prana and is maintained
by prana' ( - Kathopanishad, 2.3.2). So 'All
are established in prana' ( - Prashnopanishad,
2.6).
T h e Supreme Power has two modes of existence. First, Supreme Power as Supreme Consciousness, when its power is expressed as supreme
yoga-power and prana is coiled in Supreme
Power-Consciousness and remains as Shiwa.
So it is said: 'Prana is Brahman - Supreme God'
( - Chandogyopanishad, 4.10.4). Second, Supreme Power in its specific power aspect, expresses its power as prana, which in highest
concentration is bindu. It is in such concentration
that, as it were, power will flow out of it. Here
Supreme Power expresses its specific powerfulness. At this stage prana in the form of bindu
is endowed with creativity. T h e manifestation
of the creative phenomenon is the specificality
of Supreme Shakti.
When the creative energy of prana is manifested, three primary attributes (gunas) are
exhibited. T h e first is the primary energyprinciple. This is rajas. T h e second is that
principle which exhibits sentience in the form
of concentration, knowledge, intelligence and
thought. This is called sattwa (primary sentienceprinciple). T h e primary energy-principle as
force-motion undergoes an inertial transformation. This is tamas (primary inertia-principle).
The
supremely
concentrated
pranaforce which occurs at the bindu level may, as
it were, manifest itself at any moment. Before
this manifestation, the three primary attributes energy-principle, sentience-principle and inertiaprinciple - are zero factors. This is called prakriti
(primary creative principle) - a state of negati-

Kundalini- the Coiled Power

vity. But along with the first manifestation of
creative energy the three fundamental principles
undergo a state of relativity 'desired' by Supreme
Power-Consciousness. Supermind arises from
the primary sentience-principle; I-ness, intellective mind, sense-consciousness, will-mind, sensemind and five senses from sentience-energy
principles; conative faculties from inertia-energysentience; and tanons, supermatter and matter
from the inertia-principle.
Now the point is this: how can the universe
of mind-matter arise from infinite and supreme
Shiwa in which there is nothing but Consciousness, and even the Supreme Power of Shiwa
is in the being of Shiwa as Shiwa-Consciousness
How can a finite phenomenon be present in
what is infinite? On the one hand, Supreme
Power in the form of yoga-power, is in the being
of Shiwa as Shiwa; on the other hand, Supreme
Power possesses that energy which is specific
in nature - the prana-energy endowed with
creativity. The Supreme Shakti has the capacity
of manifesting the creative energy as the universe;
and when she is doing so, she is also expressing
her specific power Maya (negato-positivity),
by which the appearance of the universe has
been possible. Maya exhibits an unusual power
by which a phenomenon which is unreal is
made to manifest in infinite Shiwa; but, in
reality, this does not exist in Shiwa. In other
words, the universe does not exist in the being
of Shiwa; the universe is not a fact in the ShiwaKnowledge. T h e universe exists only in the
knowledge of an embodied being (Jiwa). T h e
embodied being is an accomplishment of M a y a
who is capable of making the impossible possible.
It is that power of maya by which a limitedness
has been attributed to what is limitless. In this
way the universe has been made possible.
Prana, which is endowed with the power of
creativity, is first aroused at the nada level.
It becomes supremely concentrated in the
bindu-form. This concentrated bindu-power
is in the nature of Kamakala - the power of
actualizing the 'desire' to create; and consists
of fifty sound-emitting energy-units in substance.
At a certain moment, prana unfolds and its
energy is manifested as pranawa-nada (the sound
of Ong), in which there is a summation of fifty

manifested mantra-sound units (matrika), and
from which the universe of mind and matter
emerges.
Now from the yoga viewpoint - the yogz
who has been established in the superconscious
field through superconscious concentration is
endowed with that consciousness which is without sensory objects and without I-ness. When
this concentration develops to its highest level,
the yogi's superconsciousness is absorbed in
prakriti, and as a result a stage of mental negativity is reached. T h e n the yogi passes from this
stage to the bindu-level. Here the yogi first
experiences non-mens supreme concentration.
T h e phenomena of mind and matter are the
expression of the great creative power of Ishwara
- God. Shiwa - the supreme God who is with
both yoga-power and prana-energy at the bindulevel, appears as supremely powerful Ishwara
in creation. In him yoga-power and pranaenergy are in harmony. He is in samadhi because
of his yoga-power, and also the creator of the
universe because he is endowed with prazzaenergy. Prana-energy is fully under his control
by his yoga-power. T h e embodied being does
not play any role in the creation of the universe
of mind-matter, because he has no Godly power
of creativity. T h e prana-energy is uncontrolled
and yoga-power is almost dormant in him. He
is the possessor of only small power.
W h a t is the nature of the embodied being?
It is that organized life-sentience which is
supported by I-ness with the help of sensomental and intellectual consciousness in which
perceptivity and intellection are the main forms
of knowledge, and that knowledge is limited;
and in that organized life-sentience, pranaenergy is limited and yoga-power is feeble, and,
consequently, it is without super- or non-mens
knowledge; and all knowledge appears as nonShiwa; this is the embodied being.
Ishwara manifests his great creative power as
Brahma (God as creator), sustains the universe
as Wishnu (God as sustainer), and absorbs
the universe as Rudra (God who absorbs the
universe). And that Ishwara, remaining beyond
the manifested universe, is in samadhi as
Narayana (God in his supreme aspect). As the
embodied being is endowed with small power,
81

Fundamentals of Layayoga

he can create only very limited things. He cannot
create mind-matter but can play a little in the
mental and material fields. Because of his limited
knowledge, the embodied being is unaware of
his Shiwa-being, and even Ishwara remains
unknown to him. T h e prana-energy is functioning
in him in a very limited manner, and it is
uncontrolled and wastes away before its appropriate time.
From bindu to matter, the flow of power has
two forms - the prana-flow and the yoga-powerflow. In creation, the prana-flow is very strong
and away from Shiwa, and the yoga-powerflow, which is directed toward Shiwa, is very
feeble.
T h e embodied being is controlled by the
Kanchukas (the powers of limitation). T h e
kanchukas are the specific powers of maya.
T h e y are five in n u m b e r : Kala (time principle),
Niyati (regulatory principle), Raga (pleasure
principle), Widya (knowledge principle) and
Kala (life principle). T h e prana-energy which
is functioning in the embodied being is limited
by time, and controlled by the regulatory
principle. His mind is full of desires due to the
influence of the pleasure principle, and his
knowledge and power are limited. His knowledge
is essentially based on worldliness, and in it
God remains unknown. T h e love-feeling which
is flowing in him is a restricted and perverse
expression of supreme blissfulness which is in
Supreme Power, and is experienced by him
as pleasure, which is often associated with pain
and is the source of desires. T h e prana-energy
in the form of life-force makes him a living
and conscious being. By the influence of time his
life is only of short duration.
Life in the embodied being is a limited expression of prana-energy, and is maintained by the
five-fold function of prana. These a r e : pranana,
which supports the other four functions; apanana,
causing
energy
to operate centrifugally;
udanana, causing energy to operate centripetally; samanana, which causes equilibrium
among other force-motions; and wyanana, which
causes energy to move in all directions. Life
in the body and sentience of the mind depend
upon these functions. Prana as wayu has three
fields of operation - the force-field where the
82

different forms of bio-energy are in operation;
the matter-field where bio-energies operate in
relation to the body; and the mind-field where
the operation of bio-energies results in different
mental functions.
In the force-field, the fundamental action of
bio-energy occurs through ida and pingala.
These two force-motion lines are not like tubes
or wires through which bio-energy passes.
Force-motion lines are not material things.
They are merely directions, forming, as it were,
invisible lines. Bio-energy flows mainly through
white and red lines. Activities and consumption
of energy occur through red line; and control
of activities and accumulation of energy take
place through the white flow. In the body,
the red flow causes catabolism, and the white
flow anabolism. In the mind, the red flow causes
mental diversity and restlessness, and the white
flow makes the mind calm, attentive and
reflective.
Pleasure which we experience in everyday
life is the semblance of supreme bliss associated
with the being of Shiwa. M a n experiences
pleasure in his creative activities, even though
they are limited in nature. In the mental field,
m a n creates material and spiritual sciences.
He also experiences much pleasure in the
building of his body. T h e life-force, having
limited expression in the body due to the influence of the time and regulatory principles, causes
growth and development of the body only for
a certain limited time, and thereafter gradual
decline and finally death. It is possible for
m a n to develop great physical strength and
prolong youth by appropriate methods, but
senility cannot be altogether prevented, and
death is inevitable. This is why eternal youth
and life remain as dreams.
Begetting a new being is the highest form of
creativity of the embodied being, by which the
race is perpetuated. T h e procreative power is
usually plentiful in all beings. Great intelligence
plays no part in it, though there is room for
constructive thoughts in this matter for man.
For procreation it is not necessary to have a
highly developed and strong body, though
health and vitality are very helpful. And above
all, the highest pleasure is experienced in the

Kundalini - the Coiled Power

enjoyments of this kind. Procreation is a natural
fact in life; but the enjoyment, which is inseparably associated with it, is also a natural fact.
It appears that in the procreative act enjoyment
is the primary factor and begetting children is
secondary. Experience shows that hunger for
this enjoyment persists after the loss of procreative power. We also find that conception
usually occurs after many such enjoyments. T h e
object of creativity is fulfilled by having one
child through many enjoyments. T h e pleasure
experience drives the two sexes again and again
to perform this act, and under all circumstances.
Is this natural enjoyment of pleasure ugly,
shameful and unspiritual? We also find so many
artificially continent persons.
The most intensified desire, and the love
associated with it, in sexual enjoyment cause
violent agitations of the mind and body. T h e
infatuated mind finally becomes absorbed in
deep lust-love in enjoyment; and the whole
body takes part in it and helps the mind to experience the greatest pleasure by bringing about
consummation. Thereafter, there is contentment and relaxation.

Adamantine Control
The yogi sees that the yoga-power is involved
in sexual enjoyment. He sees that the highly
excited mind becomes fully absorbed in deepest
pleasure by abandoning other thoughts. This
mental absorption has been possible by the
aroused powers of control and concentration
through intensified lust-love in enjoyment. In
the body, the retentivity aroused by control
plays an important role in enjoyment. According
to yoga, yoga-power is expressed naturally in
enjoyment to a certain extent, and it is possible
to utilize it for developing concentration. T h e
yogi is able to get sexual desire absorbed in the
mantra 'Kling' by a special process, and to be in
a state of concentration.
The yoga-process consists in two main forms sight-process and touch-process.
Sight-process - Concentration with sound-pro-

cess (japa) while seeing the desire-provocative
points.
Touch-process - Concentration with sound-process while in contact with desire-provocative
points. It has several stages: (1) with close
contact; (2) with slight contact; (3) with direct
contact - passive; (4) with direct contact dynamic.
Dynamic contact becomes effective when
ujjayi kumbhaka (both-nostrils breath-control)
in combination with uddiyana (abdomino-retraction) and mulabandha (anal lock) is incorporated. At the final stage of enjoyment, the sexual
desire, concentrated to its highest degree, is
absorbed in the mantra-sound 'Kling' in the
triangular process of the muladhara by concentration combined with sound-process; and
this results in the development of a state of
deep concentration. In this state, kundalini,
who is in yoga-sleep (superconcentration) in
the triangle, is aroused and extends herself
from muladhara to ajna. Then kundalini comes
to the sahasrara, and superconscious concentration is attained. Finally, Kundalini proceeds
still further and is absorbed in Parama Shiwa Supreme Being in non-mens supreme concentration.
This adamantine control process is extremely
difficult and many practitioners are unable to
execute it successfully. Unless the force aroused
in the strongest desire is converted into spiritual
concentration by control, Kundalni will not be
aroused. This is why it is very necessary to prepare oneself by bhutashuddhi (purificatory
thought-concentration). Now we have to study
the nature of Kundalini.

Kundalini
'kundalini' and 'Kundali' are both Waidika
and Tantrika terms. They have been used
extensively and are widely known. They are
synonyms. kundalini has one thousand and
eight names ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 36.6-192),
and each name signifies her specific character.
T h e word Kundalini is from kundala, meaning
83

Fundamentals of Layayoga

circular or spiral or coil. kundalini is that power
which is circular, or spiral, or lies in coils. T h e
meaning of Kundali is the same.
It is stated: 'kundali' is a power' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.7). Also, 'kundali power
lies in eight coils above the Kanda point' ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad,
36); 'Here, i.e., in the
triangle in
muladhara,
lies kundalini - the
supreme power' ( - Yogashikhopanunad, 1.169);
'the yogis attain liberation when Kundalini
power rises above the Kanda' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.55); 'here is kundalini - the supreme
power' ( - Warahopanishad, 5.51); 'kundalini
power is in eight forms and in eight coils'
( - Shandilyyopanisha, 1.4.8). So, according to
the Waidika viewpoint, expressed in the Upanishads, kundalini or kundali is the power. T h e
Tantrika viewpoint is also the same.
It is stated: 'Shiwa (Supreme Being) is like
a corpse without Kundali power' ( - G a y a t n tantra, 3.131); 'Here lies Kundali power in a
latent state, and is without form' ( - Brihannilatantra, ch. 8, p. 62); 'kundalini power is
the Mother Goddess and lies in one hundred
coils' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 16, p. 14);
'Pinda (basic force of the body) is kundalini
Power' ( - Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 10).
Now, the nature of kundalini power should
be investigated. It is stated: 'Lightning-like
luminous and subtle kundalini lies within it
(muladhara); she is 'seen' in concentration, and
as a result all sins are destroyed and liberation
is attained' ( - Adwayatarakopanishad, 5). So,
kundalini is subtle, that is, she has no material
form, and she is super-luminous. Consequently,
she is beyond the senses. But she is 'seen' or
realized in concentration. This means, when the
sense-consciousness is transformed into concentrated superconsciousness, it becomes illuminated by the luminous kundalini'. At this
stage all worldliness vanishes and the yogi
ultimately attains liberation. This indicates
the spiritual nature of Kundalini.
It is stated: 'kundali' is in the form of eight
coils around the eight cosmic principles. She
remains veiled by encircling completely the
entrance to brahmarandhra (passage to the
sahasrara centre). When kundali' is coiled in this
manner, the functioning of the life-force is

84

maintained, and, consequently, alimentary and
other functions of the body are carried out.
When the dormant and supremely splendorous
kundali' is aroused by the control of bio-energy
in combination with supra-heat-energy, she
appears in the Hrit centre' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopani.$«ad, Mantra Section, 63-65).
This means that kundali power remains in eight
coils around each of the eight subtle centres
from the muladhara to the indu, causing the
manifestation of knowledge arising from the
activation of five senses, sense-mind, senseconsciousness and intellect. This coiled state
of kundali also causes bio-energy and all organs
of the body to function. T h e coil indicates the
dormant phase of kundali in which the spiritual
consciousness remains unmanifested and the
sense-consciousness is aroused. In this way, eight
great creative principles are in operation. They
are the five sense principles located in the lower
five centres and the sense-mind, sense-consciousness and intellect in the upper three centres.
In each centre there is a coil, and this makes a
creative principle situated in an appropriate
centre manifest in consciousness. So, kundali'
is the spiritual power-consciousness. When she
is in coils, spirituality remains hidden and
worldliness comes into being. When kundali
is aroused from her coiled state, spiritual power
and spiritual consciousness are manifested.
It is further stated: 'Very bright like ten million
lightnings and extremely subtle like a lotusfilament, kundalini' is in that (i. e. the muladhara). There is the cessation of unspiritual
knowledge. T h e "seeing" of Kundalini causes
the destruction of all sins' ( - Mandalabrahmanopanunad, 1.2.6). Here also kundalini' is described as supremely luminous and subtle (without form). She is the central spiritual powerconsciousness. When she is aroused, unspiritual
knowledge and worldliness disappear.
About the coils of Kundali-power it is said:
kundali'-power is of the form of eight coils above
the K a n d a ; she is the cause of bondage for those
who are unspiritual, and of liberation for the
yogis' ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, 44). The
coils of kundalini cause bondage. The coils are
the unmanifested spiritual power and consciousness. Consequently, eight coils release the senso-

Kundalini - the Coiled Power
intellectual knowledge of an unspiritual
character. This is the cause of bondage. But a
yogi', by concentration, arouses Kundalini by
causing her to uncoil and, ultimately, attains
liberation. So, when Kundalini is coiled, spirituality is blocked, and when she is uncoiled,
spirituality is manifested.
The two phases of kundalini have been more
clearly stated here: 'When the power in the
muladhara (that is, kundalini-power) is asleep
(that is, coiled), the knowledge of the objective
world appears due to sleep (that is, spiritual
unconsciousness). When the power inherent in
Kundalini is aroused, the true knowledge of the
three worlds (that is, the spiritual knowledge at
the three levels of mind, power and matter) is
attained. He who has gained the knowledge of
the muladhara (and Kundalini) goes beyond
darkness' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.23-4).
When Kundalini is in coils, the senso-intellectual
knowledge is manifested, and when she is roused,
spiritual knowledge appears. These are the two
phases of Kundalini - coiled and aroused. The
power aspect is intrinsic to Kundalini.
Highest spiritual knowledge arises when
Kundalini-power is roused. It is said: 'The
knowledge coming from the arousing of Kundalini and (the associated) state of actionlessness
bring about automatically the sahaja state
(samadhi)' ( - Warahopanishad, 2.77). The
arousing of Kundalini is associated with that
spiritual knowledge which leads to samadhi.
Therefore, Kundalini knowledge is the superconscious spiritual knowledge which culminates
in superconscious concentration.
It is said: 'Lightning is Brahman; as lightning
removes the darkness in the sky, so LightningBrahman destroys the darkness of sins; he who
knows Lightning-Brahman is able to remove
sins which prevent the acquirement of Brahman'
( - Brihadaranyakopanishad, 5.7.1). The lightning-like luminous kundalini is Brahman, that is,
the power of Supreme Being by which worldliness is removed. The luminous power inherent
in kundalini is in the nature of absorption. When
Kundalini is aroused, her absorptive power is
released in concentration, and all the creative
principles are absorbed.
It is stated: 'Where (in the triangle of the

muladhara) lies the supreme power called Kunaalinf ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 5.6). So, Kundalini is the Supreme Power. In other words,
Kundalini is the spiritual aspect of Supreme
Power, which is different from the creative
aspect of Supreme Power. When Kundalini
is manifested, the creative aspect is withdrawn
and Supreme Power as kundalini becomes united
with Parama Shiwa and remains one and the
same.
Let us now consider the Tantrika exposition
of Kundali. It has been stated: 'Within the body
is the muladhara and within the latter is a
triangle which is the abode of luminosity (i. e.
kundalini).... Within the void of the triangle
which is as bright as ten million moons, lies
Kundali - the Supreme Power-Consciousness
(paradewata) who is splendorous like ten million
suns, and as subtle as the lotus-filaments, and
lies in three and a half coils' (Gayatritantra,
3.44-6). And also, 'The Supreme (para) Kundali is the only means to the attainment of
Supreme Brahman; without Kundali all the
universes are like a corpse (without spiritual
life), and even Shiwa (Supreme Being) is like a
corpse. She is eternal, and the fifty mantrasound units are in her and she is Supreme
Consciousness (purnawidya)' ( - Gayatritantra,
3.130-1).
So kundalini is formless and splendorous and
lies in three and a half coils in the triangle of
the muladhara. She is eternal, because she is with
eternal Shiwa; she is Supreme Consciousness as
she is supremely united with Shiwa and is one
and the same with him. This is why it is said
that Shiwa is like a corpse without her, that is,
Shiwa is never without his power kundalinii.
And through kundalini only Supreme Being is
reachable. Unless the human consciousness
becomes fully illuminated by the spiritual light
of kundalini, Supreme Being is not realized.
This is why she is called Parakundali - Supreme
Kundali.
The Kundali power when unmanifested is in
coils. So it is said: 'That power (i. e., Kundali)
which is in the muladhara is coiled like a serpent'
( - Matrikabhedatantra, ch. 3, p. 3). When
kundalini power is coiled, she is in a latent
phase. It is stated: 'kundali' power is in a dormant
85

Fundamentals of Layayoga

state and without form' ( - Brihannilatantra, ch.
8, p. 62). Kundalini remains coiled, that is, in a
latent form, so long as our consciousness remains
in an oscillatory state. Kundalini light is not
reflected on the sense-consciousness. When Kuna'alinz is not registered in our consciousness,
owing to its being impure and multiformed, she
remains coiled. When our consciousness is
purified
and
in
concentration, kundalini
power makes it spiritually illuminated by being
uncoiled.
About the nature of kundalini, it has also
been stated t h a t : 'Kundalini shines like ten
million lightnings and is without form; she is
with fifty mantra-sound units and mantras;
she is endowed with thirty-eight forms of
superpower (kala); she pierces the three knots
(Brahma, Wishnu and Rudra granthis) and is
in Muladhara; and she is all spiritual knowledge'
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 29, p. 112). kundalini
is formless, because she is not gross; she is only
known in concentration as something very
luminous. This luminosity is the spiritual knowledge-light which shines forth fully in concentration as the nature of kundalini is all spiritual
knowledge-power. She is the source of mantra
power and through mantra she assumes an
appropriate form and exhibits thirty-eight kinds
of superpower.
Further exposition of kundalini has been made
in the following statements: 'kundalini is as
bright as ten million suns and as cold as ten
million moons; . . . she is without form and her
being is the being of Supreme Being; . . . she
is in the nature of supreme yoga' ( - Tararahasya,
ch. 1, Shaktisara, p. 2). A n d : 'Sadashiwa
(Supreme Being) is united with Supreme Kundalini' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 14, p. 12);
'Kundali is the root of all beings; she is divine and
subtle, and she is all bliss and in the nature of
consciousness; consciousness is she in the universe
and is in the form of yoga' ( - Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 2 6 . 3 7 - 8 ) ; 'In the fire-light in the mzzladhara lies that living power Kundali, who is
supremely luminous and endowed with eternal
force; she is in a latent form in three coils'
( - Tantrarajatantra, 3 0 . 6 4 - 5 ) ; 'In subtle form
of dhyana (deep concentration), the knowledge
of shakti (power) arises; the shakti is Supreme
86

Kundali who is in the nature of Supreme Consciousness' ( - Shadamnayatantra, 5.388).
These statements have clearly expounded
the nature of kundalini. kundalini is very
luminous, but this luminosity is without heat,
as she is also very cool like ten million moons.
T h e implication is, that in deep concentration
when consciousness, being free from restlessness
and infatuation, becomes calm, uniform and
one-pointed, it is then illuminated by splendorous
kundalini. T h e luminosity is not indicative of
having any form, as she is formless. T h e luminosity is the spiritual light from Kundalini, glowing
in concentration, by which consciousness is
spiritualized. kundalini is in the nature of
eternal, living, spiritual power and consciousness.
At the highest concentration of spiritual power,
kundalini becomes one and the same with
Supreme Consciousness. kundalini is the living
spiritual power; not intellective or imaginative,
but a real and most powerful entity in spiritual
life. Consciousness is purified and completely
spiritualized by the spiritual radiations from
kundalini. At the highest level of superconscious
concentration, consciousness becomes wholly
of kundalini.
kundalini is in supreme yoga, that is, in nonmens supreme concentration. This means that
kundalini as Supreme Consciousness is also in
supreme concentration; Supreme Consciousness
in any other form is an impossible phenomenon.
It is a sealed book to those who are not in a
state of supreme concentration. T h e nature of
kundalini is yoga, because consciousness associated with her is concentrated superconsciousness
in which her form, as concentrated spiritual
light, penetrates, and by which it is superilluminated. At the highest level of superconscious concentration, the spiritually illuminated superconsciousness is finally absorbed
into kundalini herself, who is then in non-mens
supreme concentration. This is why it has been
said: 'Kundali is eternally the master of yoga'
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 26.41). kundalini
power is the yoga-power. She is the source of
yoga; so it is stated: 'We concentrate on kundalini . . . who is in the muladhara and all bliss
and all yoga and the yoga-mother' (Rudrayamala, Part 2, 26.21). It is also stated that:

Kundalini - the Coiled Power

'Kundali is the bestower of yoga' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 29.22). Yoga is attained through
Kundalini.
Kundalini is called Mahakundalini. It is stated :
T r i p u r a is the primordial power; she is the
Supreme Power; she is Mahakundalini; she also
is in the triangle of the muladhara' ( - Tripuratapinyupanishad, 1-9). When Supreme Power is
in her supreme spiritual aspect, she is Mahakuwdalini. In this aspect, Supreme Power as Mahakundalini is united with Supreme Shiwa; so it is
said: 'Sadashiwa (Supreme Shiwa) is united
with Mahakundalini (in the thousand-petalled
lotus)' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 14, p. 12).
She has
been
called
Mahakulakundalini
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 6.23), because Mahakundalini is also in the muladhara as Kulakundalini ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 36.181) and Kulakundali ( - Kubjikatantra, 1.54). kundalini lies
in the triangle within the muladhara, so she is
called Trikonashakti (triangular power) ( - Tripuratapinyupanishad, 1.10). Mahakundalini is
also called Mahakundali ( - Rudrayamala, Part
2,36.6).

Kundalini-rousing
Kundalini lies in three fundamental forms. It is
stated: 'Kundali is in three forms, viz., eternally
conscious, latent, and in concentration ( - Shada.mnayatantra, 4.189). Kundalini as supreme
spiritual power is also Supreme Consciousness;
this is why she is never without consciousness.
But Kundalini appears as unconscious when her
spiritual power is not manifested and her
spiritual consciousness does not penetrate into
sense-consciousness, because of its impurity and
many-pointedness. This is the latent form of
Kundalini and she is in that form in the muladhara when consciousness is oscillatory owing
to constant senso-mental radiations into
it. But she is perpetually conscious in the
sahasrara.
The latent form of Kundalini is actually the
state of yoga-nidra ( - sleep) in which all her
power has been withdrawn into herself and she

is supremely conscious of herself as Supreme
Consciousness. T h e great rishi Atharwana said:
'From the practice of k h e c h a r i mudra (an
advanced control exercise) arises unmani (consciousness without oscillation) and from that
yoga-nidra; when a yogi attains yoga-nidra,
he goes beyond time' ( - Shand'ilyopanishad,
1.7.17-1). U n m a n i is that state in which
consciousness is free from all oscillations. It
is the highest state of superconscious concentration which ultimately leads to yoganidra, that is, non-mens supreme concentration.
Nidra means sleep, that is, a state in which
consciousness becomes nonconsciousness. When
sense-consciousness is transformed into superconsciousness, samprajnata yoga (superconscious
concentration) is attained. Whensuperconsciousness is coiled into Supreme Consciousness, it is
the state of asamprajnata yoga (non-mens
supreme concentration). As in sleep senseconsciousness is coiled into non-consciousness, so
in asamprajnata yoga superconsciousness is completely coiled into Supreme Consciousness;
therefore it is called yoga-sleep.
T h e only possibility of approaching Kundalini
is when she is in a latent form in the muladhara.
Only in muladhara, is it possible to arouse
kundalini from her yoga-sleep (samadhi) and
get our consciousness illuminated with spiritual
light. Her supreme conscious aspect is beyond
sense-consciousness. But when she is in a latent
form, sense-consciousness is not at all influenced
by her. Because sense-consciousness is so impurified and diversified by pleasure-seeking
desires and enjoyments and all forms of worldliness, it is unable to receive spiritual light from
Kundalini. T h e sensory mind is so strongly
tied by various worldly principles that it cannot
free itself unless those principles are removed
by some other power. It has been so powerless
by its strong attachment to worldly things that
one cannot even think of abandoning t h e m ;
rather one feels pain in being passionless. So
long as this decontrolled mental state continues,
kundalini is naught. This state of affairs can only
be overcome by the purification of the mind
by abstention and observance and by the
arousing of kundalini.
T h e arousing of Kundalini is the process of the
87

Fundamentals of Layayoga

spiritualization of consciousness. T h e aroused
kundalini manifests absorptive power by which
all worldly principles are absorbed, and causes
spiritual radiations into consciousness. In this
way, the formation of all sensory pictures and
thought-forms in consciousness are controlled
and consciousness is illuminated by the spiritual
splendour of Kundalini. Ultimately, consciousness becomes wholly of Kundalini, and then
the spiritualized consciousness is absorbed into
K.undalini, and kundalini into Supreme Shiwa
when supreme yoga is attained. So it is said:
'Bringing Kundalini power in the consciousness,
and (then) consciousness (lighted by Kundalini)
getting absorbed into kundalini - in this manner
transforming the multiform consciousness into
a state of concentration, Shandilya, be thou
h a p p y ' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.18). When
consciousness becomes fully of Kundalini by
the absorption of all senso-intellectual forms
by Kundalini, it is a state of superconscious
concentration. T h e n , this superconsciousness
is absorbed into Kundalini. This is the first
stage of non-mens concentration. Finally, when
Kundalini is absorbed into Supreme Consciousness, supreme yoga is attained.
T h e process of rousing Kundalini has two main
forms - Waidika and Tantrika. Let us first
consider the Waidika process.

Waidika Process of kundalinirousing
T h e process of rousing Kundalini mainly consists in concentration, breath-control (prarcayama) and certain control exercises (mudras).
Concentration is also done on aroused Kundalini
in different chakras (subtle centres), the most
important of which is the hrit centre at the region
of the heart. It is stated: 'Hridaya (hrit
centre) is like a lotus, hanging with its face
downwards, and there is some sound phenomenon associated with the flow of life-energy.
Within this centre is shining super-light, which
appears vast and unrestricted. Within this superlight is luminescence which is subtle and aroused.
88

Within this luminescence lies Supreme Being'
( - Mahopanishad, 1.12-14).
T h e hrit centre normally lies with its head
downward. When the awakened Kundalini
reaches it, the centre opens upward and is
illuminated by a vast light within which is the
formless and aroused luminous Kundalini. Within kundalini is Supreme Consciousness. The
rousing of Kundalini and its conduction into the
hrit centre is the process of concentration. At
the first stage, only a vast light is realized. At the
second stage, when concentration becomes
deeper, Kundalini is realized within that light.
And, finally, when concentration is deepest
Supreme Being is realized within Kundalini.
T h e seat of Kundalini in latent form is termed
Kundali-sthana (seat of Kundali). It has been
stated that the middle of the body is what is
called kanda-sthana (perineal region), which is
oval-shaped and the central part of which is
called nabhi (centre). Therein lies a chakra
(centre) having twelve spokes. Above the twelvespoked centre which is above the horizontal
line of nabhi is Kundali-sthana (Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra section, 58-62).
T h a t is, at the central part of the perineal region,
there is a twelve-spoked subtle centre (inside the
coccyx), above which lies the seat of Kundalini
(that is, in the muladhara).
It has been further stated: 'In the perineal
region is the seat of light (shikhi-sthana),
triangular in shape and shining like molten
gold. . . . It is situated two digits above the
anus and two digits below the genitals. Two
digits below from the centre is the seat of Kuno'ah'. T h a t Kundali is in eight coils in relation
to eight
creative
principles'
( - Darshanopanishad, 4 . 1 - 2 , 11). T h a t is, the seat of
Kundali is within a very bright triangle. The
triangle is situated at the middle point of the
perineum. T h e triangle containing the seat
of Kundali is within the muladhara. This
is why Kundalini is called Adhara-Shakti (Power
in muladhara) ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.23).
T h e shining triangle at the perineal region is
within the muladhara. It is stated: 'Muladhara
is situated in the region (perineum) between
the anus and the genitals and in it lies a
triangle; . . . where (in the triangle) lies

Kundalini- the Coiled Power

Supreme Kundalini Power' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.168-9). Therefore, the seat of Kundalini is within the triangle situated in muladhara.
In this seat, Kundalini is in a latent form.
It is stated: 'In the posterior aspect of adhara
(muladhara), the three nadis (pranic powerlines) (ida, pihgala and sushumna) are united. . . .
In adhara is Pashchima-Linga (that is, Linga
situated behind in the triangle of muladhara
and is called Swayambhw; Swayambhu-lihga
is Supreme Consciousness in a spiritual form)
where lies the door (to the brahma nadi); one
becomes free from all worldliness when this
door is opened. In the posterior aspect of adhara,
if the moon and sun (the ida and pingala flows)
become still, there stands the Lord of the
universe; the yogi becomes absorbed into Brahma
in concentration. In the posterior aspect of
adhara, there are different aspects of God in
form. When inspiration and expiration through
the left and right nostrils are controlled, the
sushumna (central force-motion line) flow starts,
and Kundalini is aroused and passes through the
six chakras situated within the sushumna, and
ultimately goes beyond brahmarandhra (the
end point of brahma nadi, and consequently
sushumna, to reach Sahasrara). Those who enter
the brahmarandhra attain the highest spiritual
state' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.30-4).
Here the arousing of kundalini and her
passing through the subtle centres have been
described. In the posterior aspect of muladhara
lies sushumna (fire-like central force-motion
line) and there ida (white force-motion line)
and pingala (red force-motion line) have been
united with sushumna. There is the specific
form of Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness) termed
Pashchima-or Swayambhu-Linga, around which
Kundalini is in coils. T h e door to brahma nadi
is there. The entrance to sushumna is, as it
were, in a collapsed state when kundalini is in
latent form. At this stage, the pranic force
currents are creating ida and pingala flows,
and as a result inspiration and expiration
continue through the nostrils. By controlling
inspiration and expiration by kumbhaka
(suspension), the ida-pingala flows are stopped;
and with the development of kumbhaka the
entrance to sushumna is opened. Kundalini

is also aroused by kumbhaka and enters smAumna, and, step by step, passes through all the
chakras lying within the sushumna, and ultimately, passing through brahmarandhra - the
end point of sushumna, reaches sahasrara.
Breath-control plays an important role in
rousing Kundalini. When breath-suspension is
developed to its highest point, it normally
becomes non-inspiratory-non-expiratory suspension (kewala kumbhaka).
kundalini
is
awakened by this form of suspension. So it is
stated: 'By kewala kumbhaka kundalini is
aroused'
( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.13-15).
But non-inspiratory-non-expiratory suspension
is only possible when a yogi has ascended to the
highest level of breath-control. T h e easier
method is bhastra kumbhaka (thoracico-shortquick breath-control with suspension). It is
stated: 'Bhastra kumbhaka causes the arousing
of Kundali . . . and removes impurities and
other unfavourable conditions in relation to the
entrance to brahma nadi' ( - Yogakundalyupani.shad, 1.38). Moreover, 'The arousing of kundali
is effected by bhastra kumbhaka. . . . It also
helps (Kundalini) to pierce the three knots;
this breath-control should be specially practised'
( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.99-100).
To make breath-control effective, it is necessary to create a purified state in the force-field
(nadi-chakra) for the forceful operation of prana.
It has been stated: 'A yogi who is perfectly
motionless in posture and is well-controlled
and habitually taking a moderate and healthful diet, should practise left-inspiration-suspension-right-expiration
and
right-inspirationsuspension-left-expiration breath-suspension in
the lotus posture to get the impurities in the
sushumna nadi (central fiery red force-line)
absorbed' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.1). Here,
sahita breath-control has been advised for its
internal purificatory effects. T h e force-motion
system (nadichakra) is purified and the sushumna
flow occurs. So it is stated: 'When the force-motion system is purified by the right application of
the control of prana (breath-control), bio-energy
passes freely through sushumna; when this
central vital flow occurs, the mind becomes calm
and this leads to the state of deep concentration'
( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.9-10). T h e central
89

Fundamentals of Layayoga

vital flow is very important for arousing and
conducting Kundali power through sushumna.
This is why sahita breath-control is the basic
practice.
T h e control of apana is intimately related to
the rousing of kundalini. T h e apanic control is
effected by anal-lock. It is stated: 'When the
downward motion of apana is reversed by the
powerful anal contraction, which is called
mula-bandha, the apana-force reaches the heatenergy centre, heat-energy is stirred up, and
then apana and heat-energy stimulate prana
and the body is full of heat-energy. T h e coiled
kundalini, being excited by this heat-energy,
is aroused and, like a beaten serpent, becomes
uncoiled and animated, - and through the
entrance passes into the brahma nadi' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad,
1.42-6).
T h e entrance to sushumna., called kundalinikapata (door of Kundalini), is opened by anallock. It is stated: ' T h e yogi should pass through
brahmarandhra by opening the door of kundalini
by (anal) contraction. T h e entrance to the
sushumna path, through which the yogi has
to pass, is covered by the sleeping and coiled
kundalini (that is Kundalini in latent form).
He who is able to arouse that power (kundalini),
will attain liberation. If kundalini sleeps above
the throat (that is, if aroused Kundalini goes into
the state of samadhi in Sahasrara), the yogi
will be liberated; but it will cause bondage
for spiritually ignorant persons, should Kundalini sleep below the throat (i.e., it is not possible
to attain spiritual knowledge, if kundalini
remains in a coiled state in muladhara)' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.36-1-36-3).
T h e process of arousing kundalini consists
mainly in breath-control, anal-lock and concentration. It is stated: 'A yogi endowed with
the power of concentration can get senseconsciousness absorbed in sushuma and respiration under control. When impurities in the
force-field are eliminated (by sahita breathcontrol) the pranic force flows towards the
right directions (and with full strength); (under
this condition) if the centrifugal bio-energy
(apana) is made to flow upwards by forceful
(anal-) contraction, termed mula-bandha, it
radiates into the centre of central bio-energy
90

(prana wayu), and then both these forces (prana
and apana), together with heat-energy, radiate
into the seat of kundalini who is in a coiled form;
Kundali is excited by fire-energy and aroused
by the two forms of bio-energy (prana and apana),
and passes into the sushumna. Then Kundali
passes through the Brahma-knot arising from
force-motion principle, and suddenly flashes
like a streak of lightning in the sushumna.
'Then Kundalini passes upward and reaches
the Wishnu-knot situated at the heart region
(that is, the anahata centre); then (after passing
through this knot) Kundali goes still higher and
reaches the Rudra-knot situated in the space
between the eye-brows (that is, the ajna centre),
and then piercing through it, she goes into the
moon-sphere (shitangshu-mandala) where the
anahata centre lies with sixteen petals. (According to the Tantras, this centre is called indu
and has sixteen petals.)
'Then Kundali absorbs the eight creative
principles arising from the negativity principle
(prakriti) and goes to her own abode (that is
sahasrara), and finally becomes united with
Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness) and is absorbed
into him. At this stage prana and apana, which
are functioning together, are neutralized, and
breathing is normally suspended' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.62-69, 74-75).
Here, the process of arousing kundalini and
her conduction through sushumna and her
absorption into Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness)
has been explained. It is a highly complex
process. T h e first part of the process consists in
the control of apana by kumbhaka (breathsuspension) in conjunction with anal-lock and
concentration. T h e controlled apana ceases
its normal activities and exhibits its superfunction by which the fire-principle represented
by 'Rang' (mantra) is excited, thus causing
radiations of subtle fire-energy. T h e fire-energy
and reversed apana-force stimulate prana to
exhibit its hidden power. Now, the apana and
prana forces under the power of control are
transformed into a concentrated energy, and
are represented by the mantra 'Yang'. By the
right application of 'Rang' and 'Yang' in kumbhaka, these forces radiate on the coiled kundalini,
and are absorbed into her, who is then aroused.

Kundalini - the Coiled Power

The kumbhaka will not be forceful enough
unless it operates in a purified force-field. This
force-purification (nadi shuddhi) is effected by
sahita breath-control combined with internal
cleansing and purificatory diet.
The aroused Kundalini, who appears splendorous, passes through the sushumna, first by piercing the Brahma-knot situated in muladhara,
and then breaking through the Wishnu-knot
in anahata and, finally, passing through the
Rudra-knot in ajna, reaches the moon-centre.
When Kundalini passes through different centres
in the sushumna., she exhibits her absorptive
power by which the main creative principles,
viz., five sensory principles, sense-mind, senseconsciousness and intellect are absorbed. After
the absorption is complete, kundalini reaches
sahasrara and, finally, is united with and absorbed into Shiwa - Supreme Consciousness. This
is the stage of asampranata samadhi - nonmens supreme concentration. At this stage
there is a natural suspension of animation.
This supreme state is supreme bliss. So it is
stated: 'This is the supreme state, full of supreme
bliss' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.87).
It has further been stated: 'Kundali who is in
eight coils should be aroused by breath-suspension carried to a high level according to the
process of shakti-chalana (power-conduction).
The arousing of Kundali is done while performing
anal-contraction
(during
breathsuspension) . . . Assuming the wajrasana (adamantine posture), the upward contraction (i.e.,
anal-contraction) should be practised regularly.
The fire-energy ignited by bio-energy (that is,
the upward apana stimulates the fire-energy
in breath-suspension with anal-contraction) radiates into Kundali'; thus being "heated", she
becomes awakened. Then she enters into
chandra-danda (brahma nadi) lying within the
sushumna, and pierces through the Brahma-knot
with (concentrated) bio-energy and "fire". T h e n
Kundali passes through the Wishnu-knot and
reaches where the Rudra-knot is, and there she
stays. The Rudra-knot is pierced through by
repeated sahita breath-suspension carried to a
high level' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.82-7).
After the Rudra-knot is passed through,
kundalini assumes more the nature of Shiwa

(Supreme Consciousness). T h e n inspirationexpiration is neutralized and non-inspiratorynon-expiratory suspension (kewala kumbhaka)
follows. Normally, at this stage, the supreme
union of Shiwa and Shakti (Kundali) takes
place in supreme concentration ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.115-17).
T h e process, by which Kundali power is
conducted from her seat - muladhara - to the
space between the eyebrows, that is ajna, is
called shakti-chalana - power-conduction. This
process essentially comprises breath-suspension
and a special process termed saraswati-chalana
(-motion). Kundalini is aroused by breathsuspension and saraswati-motion. T h e following
is the saraswati-motion process: Assuming the
lotus posture, breath-suspension is done after
inspiration through the left nostril, and at the
same time throat-contraction (i.e. jalandharabandha - chin-lock), abdominal retraction and
anal-contraction are executed. During breathsuspension, the central abdominal muscle (rectus
abdominis) should be rolled (in nauli form)
from the right to the left and from the left to the
right again and again. Expiration should be
done through the right nostril ( - Yogakuna'alyupanishad, 1.7-16). T h e saraswati-motion is
an extremely complicated process and should be
learnt directly from a guru.
There is an advanced Waidika process of
awakening Kundalini. It consists, first, in the
execution of throat-contraction (chin-lock),
powerful anal-contraction and the pressing of
the laryngeal region with the fully elongated
and retroverted tongue (that is, tongue-lock),
assuming the siddhasana; and then the awakened Kundali should be conducted by wajrakumbhaka (the special form of breath-suspension
used for the conduction of Kundali in different
centres and to pierce through the knots) until
she passes through the moon-sphere (indu
centre) and reaches sahasrara ( - Brahmawidyopanishad, 7 2 - 5 ) .
T h e great yogi Dattatreya expounded to his
disciple Sankriti an advanced Waidika process
of awakening Kundalinni. He said: 'Pressing the
perineum with the right or the left heel and
placing the opposite heel on the other ankle
(that is, assuming the siddhasana with a heel
91

Fundamentals of Layayoga

set against the perineum to exert strong pressure
on it), (being seated in this manner) the yogi
should draw in air through the urethra (by
special pranayama), using the pranawa mantra,
and then he should concentrate the force
(developed from the most powerful ano-perineal
contraction, thus causing the strong upward
motion of apana) on (the triangle of) muladhara.
Fire, being kindled by wayu (apana), arouses
Kundali' ( - Darshanopanishad, 6.38-42).
Here, a special pranayama (breath-control)
has been explained. This pranayama causes the
urethral suction of air when applied in conjunction with very powerful anal and perineal
contraction. T h e pranayama together with anoperineal contraction causes the upward motion
of apana and is concentrated in the triangle of
muladhara. T h e concentrated apana stimulates
fire-energy there, and fire-energy, together with
apana, arouses kundalini.

Tantrika Process of K.undalinirousing
Real spiritual knowledge does not arise if
kundalinii is not aroused; the mantra-flame is
not ignited if Kundalini remains coiled. It has
been stated: ' I n muladhara lies that power
(Kundali) which is in the form of a serpent
(that is coiled). W h e n that power is aroused,
(its coil is changed into) circular motion and
then with radiating mantra-sound she goes to
her own abode (that is sahasrara) through
brahmarandhra . . . where
the
absorption
of mind takes place' ( - Nilatantra, ch. 10,
p. 28). T h e coiled Kundalini is kundalini in
latent form. T h e coil is uncoiled in a circular
motion when she is aroused. T h e roused Kundalini passes through brahma nadi to the sahasrara
where the absorption of mind takes place in
samadhi.
kundalini is in samadhi in sahasrara. It has
been said: ' I n the innermost part of the great
lotus (centre) sahasrara Kundalini in the form of
a garland of fifty matrika-units lies round Shiwa'
( - Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 17). This is the
92

samadhi state of Kundalini. This state of Kundalini is only realizable in samadhi. A yogi, conducting kundalini to sahasrara, attains samadhi in
which the super-knowledge of oneness with
God arises. So, it has been stated: 'After conducting kundalini (to sahasrara), one realizes in
concentration one's being as the being of Shiwa'
( - Todalatantra, ch. 4, p. 8).
T h e aroused kundalini; manifests the power
of absorption by which all creative principles
are withdrawn. It has been stated: 'The divine,
coiled kundalini, arising from muladhara, passes
through the sushumna path to the void-centre
(wishuddha) and absorbs all creative principles,
and then comes to her own abode (sahasrara)'
( - Phetkarinitantra, ch. 14, p. 39).
P a r w a t i said: 'It is not possible to effect
kundali-motion ( - changkrama) (that is, arousing Kundali and conducting her through the
sushumna. to the sahasrara) without yoga. So long
Kundalini is sleeping (that is, in a latent form)
in the mula-lotus (muladhara), mantra, yantra
(special diagrams) and worship are not fruitful'
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 24). This means
that deep concentration is the fundamental
factor in arousing kundalini, and concentration
is done on coiled kundalini in muladhara with
pranayama and ano-perineal contraction. It
has been stated: ' I n the triangle which is in
the nature of will-knowledge-action and is
situated within the muladhara, Swayambhwlinga is shining like a million suns. Above, is
Kundali, red in colour, as the flame of Swayambhu-linga, supremely subtle, and the sentience
of all beings is derived from her; and she is
Supreme Power and is called Goddess in the form
of mantra (shabda-brahma); she, in a coiled form,
is within all beings. . . . First, concentrate your
mind on muladhara with inspiratory control
and arouse that power (kundali) by the execution of ano-perineal control' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch.5, p. 2 7 - 8 ) . So, in the arousing of
kundalini, concentration, pranayama and anoperineal contraction are used. It is practically
the same type of process as that used in the
Waidika process.
More about kundalini: 'In the muladhara,
lies kundalini, who is spiritual consciousness,
very bright-shining like a million lightnings,

kundalini - the Coiled Power
in the form of mantra with fifty matrika-units,
endowed with thirty-eight forms of superpower,
supremely subtle and capable of passing through
the Brahma-, Wishnu- and Rudra-knots'
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 29, p. 112). It is
extremely difficult to hold in consciousness
such a subtle form of kundalini. At first, her
lustrous form should be taken for concentration.
Gradually, as concentration goes deeper, her
subtle form emerges from her splendorous form.
In time, her other aspects also arise in concentration in consciousness. That concentration should
be done on kundalini' in muladhara has been
stated: 'Concentrate on divine kundalini who
is in the nature of spiritual knowledge and in
the form of matrika-units, lying in the triangle
of muladhara, where resides the shining linga
which is named Swayambhu; here mental japa
should be done' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 29,
pp. 108-9).
Shiwa has explained the process of concentration on kundalini. He has also stated that
pranayama (breath-control) is absolutely necessary for deep internal purification ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 10, p. 47). About concentration,
he stated: 'Concentrate every day on kundalini
. . . who is red and shining like a million suns
and subtle; she is that Supreme Power who also
creates, maintains and dissolves the universe;
she is beyond the universe in her spiritual form
. . . ; by the mantra "Hung" this supreme power
of Shiwa will be aroused and led through the sixchakras to Parama Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness); then kundalini who is in the nature of
supreme bliss is made to unite and be one and
the same with Shiwa in deep concentration;
. . . and then kundalini should be brought back
to muladhara; concentrate on kundalini who
is very bright like a thousand rising suns and
extremely subtle and in the form of mantra
and extends from muladhara to brahmarandhra
(end of sushumna.). Kundali is in three forms . . .
- Supreme (turiya) Kundali in sahasrara as
Supreme Power (Mahatripurasundari); in muladhara, she is like molten gold and is in the nature
of mantra, and she extends from muladhara
to anahata and is called Fire (Wahni) kundalini;
concentration should be done on her; in anahata,
she as Sun (Surya) kundalini' is as lustrous as

a million suns and full of love, and extends from
anahata to wishuddha; one should concentrate
on her in calmness. In ajna, kundalini' is shining
like a million moons and radiating "immortality"; she extends herself from ajna to the end of
brahmarandhra and is called Moon (Chandra)
kundalini. . . . Supreme Kundali is in the form
of supreme consciousness. Concentration should
be done on her. Her complete spiritual form
should be contemplated. . . . Concentration
should be done again and again. . . . This is
the process called antaryaga (mental worship)
which leads to liberation' ( - Gandharwatantra,
ch. 10, pp. 47-8).
This is a specific Tantrika process of arousing
and conducting kundalini to sahasrara. The
process consists of the following factors:
1 Concentration should be done on kundalini
as shining red and extremely subtle in
muladhara.
2 kundalini should be aroused by the mantra
'Hung' (with pranayama and concentration).
3 kundalini should then be conducted to
sahasrara to unite herself with Parama
Shiwa.
4 Special concentration should be done on
Fire kundalini who is shining like molten
gold, and extending from muladhara to
anahata.
5 Special concentration should be done on
Sun kundalini, very bright like many suns
and extending from anahata to wishuddha.
6 Special concentration on Moon kundalini,
shining like the moon and extending from
ajna to the end of sushumna.
7 Special concentration on Supreme
kundalini in the form of supreme spiritual
consciousness with all divine power in
sahasrara.
This is the concentration on different aspects
of kundalini.
kundalini in latent form has two aspects:
kundalini in three and a half coils around
Swayambhu-linga, lying" in muladhara, called
Kulakundalini; and kundalini in eight coils,
lying in sushumna from muladhara to indu,
each of her coils being in each chakra (subtle
centre) - muladhara, swadhishthana, manipara,
93

Fundamentals of Layayoga

anahata, wishuddha, ajna, manas and indu.
These two aspects of kundalini have been
explained in both Waidika and Tantrika forms
of layayoga. T h a t aspect of kundalini, lying in
the entire sushumna, has again been subdivided
into three forms, each having a Tantrika name.
kundalini, extending from muladhara to anahata,
shining like molten gold, is called Fire kundalini.
kundalini who extends from anahata to ajna is as
bright as one million suns and is called Sun
kundalini. kundalini, extending from ajna to
the end of sushumna and lustrous like a million
moons, is termed Moon kundalini. T h a t aspect
of kundalini, which is beyond sushumna, being
in sahasrara, and is always in super- and supreme
conscious states and all spirituality, has been
termed in the Tantra, Turiya (Supreme)
kundalini.
There are six forms of concentration on
kundalini in the Tantrika process. T h e y are as
follows:
1 Concentration on Kulakundalini as extremely
subtle and shining red, or shining like
lightning.
2 Concentration on shining molten goldcoloured Fire kundalini.
3 Concentration on sun-like very bright Sun
kundalini.
4 Concentration on moon-like lustrous Moon
kundalini.
5 Concentration on very subtle and bright
like the rising sun kundalini inside sushumna,
extending from muladhara to the end of
brahma nadi.
6 Concentration on Supreme kundalini in
sahasrara.
However, for the rousing of kundalini, concentration should be done on Kulakundalini
in muladhara. It should be done in conjunction
with pranayama (breath-control). At a certain
stage of kumbhaka (breath-suspension), the
sushumna -flow starts by which the blockage is
removed that is caused by kundalini who is
in eight coils. It has been stated: 'Worldly
consciousness and activities are due to the diverse
forms of bio-energy; for this reason the yogis
practise bio-energy-control. kundalini power,
which is in eight coils in the sushumna, causes
94

the blocking of the entire p a t h ; by the control
of bio-energy, an internalization and concentration of prana-energy occurs within the sushumna,
which causes kundalini to uncoil herself
( - Shiwasanghita, 5.168-71). Kumbhaka in
conjunction with concentration effects the
sushumna flow and the uncoiling of Kundalini
and her absorption into Supreme kundalini.
At this stage, the aroused Kulakundalini passes
through the sushumna to reach the sahasrara.
When
Kulakundalini is aroused by concentration and pranayama, the eightfold coiled
kundalini becomes uncoiled and is absorbed into Supreme kundalini. Now, the entire
brahma nadi is free and the aroused Kulakundalini passes through it to sahasrara.
Mantra plays a most important role in the
Tantrika process of arousing kundalini. But mere
letter-form mantra is ineffective. Therefore,
mantra should be made living by appropriate
processes. T h e enlivened mantra, technically
termed Prana-mantra, is applied in conjunction
with pranayama and concentration. Purananda
says: ' T h a t divine Kulakundalini who is in the
nature of the highest spirituality, and flashes
like a million lightnings, who is very subtle and
in a latent form with three and a half coils,
situated in the muladhara, should be aroused
by prana-mantra' ( - Shaktakrama, ch. l , p . 1).
T h e r e is a special process of concentration
in conjunction with japa (sound-process) which
is done in arousing and conducting kundalini
through different chakras (subtle centres). About
this Shiwa says: 'Directing his mind to mzdadhara, the yogi should concentrate on divine
kundali who is in the nature of Brahman (Shabdabrahman - Brahman in mantra form), and make
japa of four-lettered matrika-mantra ten times.
. . . T h e n kundali should be conducted to
swadhishthana . . . where japa of six-lettered matrika-mantra with concentration should be done'
( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, pp. 1-2). In this
manner, japa and concentration should be done
in manipura, anahata, wishuddha, ajna, indu
and sahasrara ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2,
p. 2).
T h e importance of anal-lock in conjunction
with tongue-lock in rousing kundalini has been
emphasized. It is said: 'According to the Meru-

Kundalini - the Coiled Power

tantra, kundalini should be aroused by inspiration through the left nostril, along with anal
contraction to a moderate degree, and the
tongue pressing on the palate (tongue-lock)
from muladhara and united with Parama Shiwa
in the thousand-petalled lotus' ( - Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 3, p. 191). It has been stated in
the Tripurasaratantra that kundalini and Swayambhu (-linga) are aroused by pranayama
when they appear in their real forms ( - Sarwollasatantra, 15.16).

Pouranika Exposition of kundalini
Lastly, let us study what the rishis have said
about kundalini as recorded in the Puranas.
/shwara says: 'The Shakti (that is, Kundalinishakti), should be aroused from muladhara
by mula-mantra (the mantra imparted to the
disciple by the guru) while suspending breath
through the pingala p a t h ' ( - Shiwapurana,
3.5.21). Here, mula-mantra in conjunction with
breath-suspension has been used in rousing
kundalini. T h e pingala path indicates that surya
kumbhaka (right-nostril inspiratory breathcontrol) should be adopted.
Wayu has said: 'The principle of Shakti
(Power) from which arises all forms of energy,
is the root of the manifested worlds. She is
Kundalini (in her pure spiritual aspect); she
is maya (in her creative aspect); she is pure
and only in union with Shiwa (in her supreme
aspect)' ( - Shiwapurana, 5 a, 25.6-7). From
this it is also clear that Supreme Shakti in her
spiritual aspect is kundalini and is in supreme
union with Parama Shiwa (Supreme Being) at
the highest level of spiritual yoga; and that
Supreme Shakti in her creative aspect is maya,
by which a finite phenomenon has arisen from
an infinite reality.
Shankara has expounded the real nature of
kundalini. He said: 'It is stated that Kundali,
coiled like a serpent, is unknown; and though
she is in the apana region (that is in muladhara),
she is not seen; that Kundali is also in the summit
(that is sahasrara), and is glorified in the Wedas;

that she is the root of all spiritual knowledge,
and is the secret spirituality in the form of
G a y a t n (the Goddess of mantra-sounds); that
eternal Kundali is in all beings and endowed
with the power of moving upward (when arouse d ) ; that she is seen and unseen, moving and
unmoving, manifested and unmanifested, perpetual; that she is both beyond the matrika
sound-units and also with the garland of letters;
that the yogis "seeing" her constantly become
contented
for
ever'
( - Shiwapurana,
6.48.13-16). So, kundalini is the eternal, unqualified, supreme, spiritual power lying dormant in all beings, and in that state she
is unrealized. She is aroused by yoga and then
'seen'.
/shwara says: ' T h a t power which is like the
lotus filament (that is, subtle), is to be aroused
by pranayama in which inspiration and expiration are done through the right nostril, and
then that aroused power should be conducted
through the void-path (that is, sushumna) in
concentration' ( - ; 4 g n i p u r a n a , 96.106-7). Here,
Surya Kumbhaka (right-nostril inspiratory-expiratory breath-control) and concentration are
applied for arousing kundalini and for her
passage through sushumna.
Agni has said: 'The Ajapa Gayatri is conjoined
with moon, fire and sun, and is called primary
kundalini. She is in the region of the heart as
a sprout' ( - Agnipurana, 214.27). Ajapa is the
automatic repetition of the Hangsah mantra the natural sound phenomenon connected with
respiration - along with inspiration and expiration. When inspiration and expiration are changed to suspension (kumbhaka), the sound-emitting
divine power known as Gayatri is awakened.
This aroused power in muladhara is called
primary kundalini. She passes through sushumna.
to the hrit centre where she is realized in
concentration.
T h a t the Supreme Shakti (power) is Kundaalinz is clear from the statement made by King
Himawan when glorifying Supreme Shakti
( - Kurmapurana, Part 1, 12.125). kundalini
is the spiritual aspect of Supreme Power. In
explaining the nature of yoga-knowledge (knowledge arising from and in relation to yoga)
Krishna said: 'Organic control, such as of
95

Fundamentals of Layayoga

hunger and thirst, internal purification, naoYshodhana (pranic purification), piercing through
the chakras (power-centre), sensory control
and mental control - being prepared by all
these things the yogi should concentrate on
kundalini power united with /shwara - Supreme
Being' ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana, Part 4, 110.
8 - 9 ) . First a disciple should prepare himself
by internal purification and control of the body,
pranayamic super-purification,
and
sensecontrol, and then arouse kundalini and cause
her to pass through all the chakras and, finally,
concentration should be done on kundalini
united with Shiwa.
According to Shiwa, as quoted by rishi Ourwa,
Kundali shakti (power) is in the form of 'ou'
( - Kalikapurana, 57.95). This means that
kundalini in muladhara is in the form of 'ou' three and a half coils around Swayambhuliriga. It is the modified form of 'Ong'. In glorifying Shakti (Power), Brahma said: 'she is
straight as well as Supreme kundalini' ( - Sourapurazza, 25.16). kundalini is coiled in muladhara,
but when awakened, she becomes straight and
passes through the sushumna and reaches the
sahasrara where she is Supreme Kundalini.
Rishi Wyasa also glorified Shakti in the form of
Gouri by saying: 'You are straight and you are
kundalini (coiled), you are subtle and the
bestower of success in yoga' ( - Sourapurana,
8.16). So, kundalini exists in two forms: the
coiled, when she is latent, and the straight,
when she is aroused.
Parwati explained the process of rousing
kundalini and conducting her to sahasrara.
She said: 'First with inspiration concentrate
your mind on adhara (muladhara); then the
region between the anus and external genitals
(that is, the perineum) should be contracted to
arouse the Power (kundalini power). T h e n the
(aroused) Power should be conducted to binduchakra (sahasrara) by piercing through the
three lingas. Now concentration should be done
on the Supreme Power who has become one with
Shambhu (Shiwa) in union. From this union
arises red-coloured life-substance, full of bliss,
and the yogi satisfies the maya power (here:
the power in the form of the mantra Wring,
that is, kundalini) - the bestower of success
96

in yoga, and all the deities in the six-chakras
( - power-centres)
with
that
life-substance
(amrita), and then he brings back kundalini
through that path (sushumna) to the muladhara'
(--Dewi'bhagawata, Part 7, 35.48-51). The
process of the awakening of kundalini is
as follows : at first, inspiratory breath-suspension
with concentration should be done, and along
with it ano-perineal contraction (yoni-mudra)
should be executed. T h e ano-perineal contraction when executed during inspiratory suspension causes the apana and prana forces to operate
in the muladhara on the coiled kundalini, by
which she is ultimately aroused.
T h e concentration form of Kundalini, as
stated by Narayana, is: 'kundalini, who is in
the red-coloured muladhara, is all red, like
lotus filament (that is subtle), and is designated
by the mantra Hring; her face is radiating sunpower, and her breasts are fire and moon powers
(these are technical terms)' ( - Dewibhagawata,
Part 11, 1.44). And, 'When kundalini passes
first (that is, from the muladhara to sahasrara)
she is splendorous like lightning and when she
comes back (to muladhara), she is wet with lifesubstance (amrita). When kundalini passes
through the sushumna, she is all bliss' ( - Dewibhagawata, Part 11, 1.47).
It has been stated that A spiritual disciple
who is vital, sound in mind and body, and calm,
attains God when he is able to bring Atman
(here: I-consciousness merged in kundalini)
to the head (sahasrara) through the yogipath (sushumna)' ( - Mahabharata, 3.179.17).
T h e great rishi Washishta stated: 'As strong
streams in circular motions fill the river Ganga,
so all the pranas fill the internal kundalini
(that is, kundalini situated in muladhara)
through the process of pranayama in combination with pranawa mantra and concentration)'
( - Yogawashishta-ramayana, 5, 54.26). This
process was adopted by Uddalaka. T h e externalization of prana forces are controlled by
pranayama. T h e n they coil themselves into
kundalini when she is aroused.
About kundalini Washishtha says: 'Within
the tender plantain bud (muladhara), situated
in the sushumna., lies that Supreme Shakti
(power) having lightning-like splendour and

Kundalini- the Coiled Power

speed. T h a t power is called Kundali, because
she is coiled. She is the Supreme Power lying
in all beings and the source of all forms of energy.
The pranic functions are due to that coiled
power, but when she is aroused pranas cease
to function. . . . She is the seed of all conscious-

ness (sangwid), ( - Yogawashishtha-ramayana,
6 a, 80.41-8). So, Kundalini is the basic power
which supports livingness and consciousness
in the embodied beings, when she is in a coiled
state, and when she is aroused, she becomes the
basis of spiritualized superconsciousness.

97

CHAPTER 4

Mantra Supra-sound Power

We are living in a world of sounds. As fish move
through water, we move through sounds. Sounds
are producing very many kinds of impressions
on us. Some sounds are agreeable, others are
annoying; some are sweet, others are harsh.
Sounds are produced in nature - thunder in
the sky, sounds from storm, from rainfall,
breaking of the waves in the ocean, flowing of
rivers; and innumerable other sounds occurring
in nature. T h e r e are also the sounds made by
birds and other creatures; the sounds of the
h u m a n voice - language, even sounds within
our bodies. T h e n , there are artificially created
sounds - from planes, trains, cars, and machines.
We hear all these, but we do not hear mantrasounds amidst them.
Is it because these sounds destroy the mantrasounds? If we go to a lonely place - a
mountainous region, a deep forest, or some very
solitary place where all these sounds are absent,
and we feel calmness there, do we hear the
mantra-sounds? No, we do not. Are we then
to conclude that the mantra-sounds are merely a
fiction? No, this is not the case. T h e h u m a n ear
is only able to perceive sounds of certain frequencies, beyond that it cannot go. Therefore, because
of these limitations the h u m a n ear cannot be
taken as a criterion of the authenticity of the
mantra-sounds.
yogis say that the mantra-sounds are heard
by a 'perfect ear'. T h e y also say that the 'perfect
ear' develops when sense-consciousness is transformed into non-undulatory, one-pointed consciousness by the process of concentration.
When concentration becomes so deep that it
98

continues without any interruption at any point
and, finally, the sense-objects and the everyday
I-ness vanish from the conscious field; and a
'super-I' is awakened, the mantra-sounds arise
and are 'heard'.
If we accept the experiences of the yogis
as facts, then we have to accept that sounds
exist in three forms - audible, inaudible and
audible in concentration. But this simple statement does not explain the sound phenomenon;
it requires further clarification.

Sound
Sound is regarded as a disturbance or wave,
produced by a vibrating object in a material
medium, usually air, in which one molecule,
when it collides with another, transmits sound.
In this manner, the sound waves travel in the air,
at an approximate speed of 1100 feet per second,
and are perceived by the auditory mechanism
as sound. T h e transmission of sound waves
through the external aspect of the auditory
system occurs in this way: T h e sound waves
are collected by the external ear and are transmitted through the external auditory meatus
to the tympanic membrane, and thence through
the ossicles to the cochlea of the inner ear where
the auditory receptors are located. Sound vibrations are converted into nerve impulses in the
cochlea, and pass as waves of electrical negativity
along the acoustic nerve to the temporal cortex.

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

The capacity of the h u m a n ear to receive
sound vibrations is limited. O u t of practically
an infinite range of vibrations occurring in
nature, the human ear perceives sounds only
from 16 to 20,000 complete vibrations per
second. Below 16, only discontinuous pulsations
are perceived and above 20,000 nothing is
heard. But there are some animals, especially
bats and dogs, who are able to perceive sounds
of frequencies higher than 20,000.
The brain is not the seat of consciousness,
nor do brain functions effect consciousness.
The brain is a quantity of matter consisting of
molecules, atoms and elementary particles,
where no trace of consciousness is found. But
when it is vitalized by the functioning of bioenergies, it becomes a highly sensitized instrument for the operation of consciousness.
Neural-neuronal impulses, which are electrical
by nature, are converted into a non-material
force - the wayu-energy - at a certain area of the
brain and are conveyed to the sense-centres and
then through the ida-path to the sense-mind.
The sense-mind finally radiates it to the senseconsciousness where it develops into a conscious
form and the T feels it as a sensory object.
In this way sound is experienced. This is the
internal aspect of the auditory system. T h a t
this aspect is not merely a fanciful appendage,
but a more intrinsic part of sensory phenomena
is indicated by the following facts. T h e sensemind, elevated to the Dhi level, is able to perceive
a sensory object directly without using the
external sensory mechanism. There are many
instances of this. Moreover, in pratyahara (sensory control), all sensory impulses are normally
stopped and none of them penetrate into senseconsciousness. T h e external mechanism remains
intact, only the connection is severed. Sense
factors from the outer world may penetrate
through the nervous paths and reach the brain,
but no sensory perception is experienced in this
state.
Let us now return to the consideration of
sound.

The Sound Phenomenon
A vibrating object emits vibrations which in
turn set up vibrations - waves of sound - in the
surrounding air. T h e range of air-vibrations is
wide. But only a limited number of air-vibrations (10 or 11 octaves) can produce vibrations
in the mechanism of the h u m a n ear; the other
vibrations do not affect it. These vibrations are
transformed into nerve impulses in the cochlea
and pass through the acoustic nerve to the
cerebral cortex and thence to a certain area
of the brain. Thereafter we experience a conscious sound form - the perception of sound - in
the sense-consciousness through a complex
power-line system in which sense-mind plays
a dominant role.
An object, when vibrating, produces sound
waves in the air. But when the object is not
vibrating it cannot emit any sound. This
indicates that an object in a quiescent state
ceases to emit sound. This can be interpreted
to mean that the sound power is inherent in
an object and remains in it in a latent form;
when an object is made to vibrate by striking,
the latent sound power becomes sound vibrations. Or, sound vibrations are simply a gross
manifestation of subtle vibrations of sound
which are not registered in a material medium.
O u r recognition of an external world is
essentially due to sense-impressions radiating
to our consciousness. We know the objective
world mainly through our senses. Objects which
were outside consciousness penetrate through
the sensory channels into it, where they develop
into conscious images. T h e senses of smell,
taste, and touch operate when they are in direct
contact with objects. T h e sense of hearing is
activated by the sound waves in the air; and
sight is due to light falling on the retina from the
objects in the environment. Knowledge of an
external world, acquired sensorially, is incomplete and only meaningful in a desire-bound
existence.
T h e senses are limited in their power. First
of all, they cannot receive any impressions from
the outer world if these fall below the threshold
of sensation. This refers to both size and distance.
99

Fundamentals of layayoga
The perception of smell is not effected by a single
molecule of a fragrant object or the perception
of taste by a single molecule of sugar; we can
neither hear nor see, if the objects are situated
at a far distance. We also fail to establish sensory
contact with an obscured object. These are the
limitations of our senses. These limitations can
be overcome to a certain degree by extending
the range of our senses with the help of supersensitive instruments. We have been able to
see objects very far from us with the aid of a
telescope, to see minute objects through a
microscope, and to see what is obscured by
X-rays. But scientific instruments have also
their limits. The objective world appears to
be larger and more complex than what we
experience through our senses even when their
range is greatly extended by the use of
instruments.
So, our knowledge of the outer world is
restricted because of the sensory limitations.
When 'seeing' through the senses, objects appear
to be linked with space-time. Perhaps this
incomplete seeing gives rise to space-time phenomena. A material object can be seen in three
dimensions in space. There is no possibility of
the senses receiving any impressions of more than
three dimensions. In our seeing of objects, time
also becomes a factor.
The space factor appears to arise in our
'seeing' the outer world through the senses.
The material objects are seen in space, at rest
or in motion. Space is that which affords the
possibility of the existence of material objects to
be perceived by us. But consciousness, in which
the images of the objects are formed and
apprehended, does not know space. It has no
length, breadth or thickness; it cannot be
measured quantitatively; it is not located in
space. But images in consciousness are seen in
space. The time factor operates both in consciousness and with regard to objects outside
consciousness. Time indicates changes which the
object of the outer world are undergoing constantly. Some changes are very rapid, some are
slow. The influence of time on consciousness
is not exactly like that exerted on material
objects. The changes which are going on in
consciousness can only be assessed by the
100

rising and disappearing of the writtis (images
in consciousness) in succession. So, the influence
of time on consciousness is not exactly on consciousness, but on the writti-flows; on the
other hand, time puts permanent marks on the
material objects.
Space exists in relation to objects. Space
by itself amounts to nothing. Space forms
a part of the knowledge of an object. But without
this objective knowledge space is zero. Time
is also a factor in objective knowledge. Time
by itself if interpreted as that moment when
there are no forms in consciousness, is also zero.
So, the space-time phenomenon is a relative
truth, only applicable when the objective forms
flow in consciousness.
How does the writti-consciousness arise? It
is a mode of our being and is maintained by
sense-functioning. Sense-impressions originate
not in the senses but in events in matter. These
impressions are received by the senses and are
transformed into sensory impulses which are
conducted to the cerebral cortex and thence
to a certain area of the brain, where they are
converted into matter-free energy and passes
the body-mind bridge and reaches consciousness
where objective knowledge develops. This consciousness is chitta - sense-consciousness. The
sensory knowledge, as writtis, is continually
flowing in sense-consciousness. The writtis flow
in succession, and may be termed - writti 1,
writti 2, 3, 4, etc. The duration of one writti
at a time in consciousness is generally short and
the continuous flow causes an undulatory form
of consciousness.
When writti 1 flows in consciousness, the
knowledge of writti 1 arises, and this knowledge
is only of that particular writti. When writti
2 comes, writti 1 has been obliterated from
consciousness, and the knowledge of only writti
2 shines forth in consciousness. This indicates
that only one writti and its knowledge is possible
at one time. But as the writtis flow in succession,
our knowledge pattern is also in the nature of
flowing, consisting of many forms. Usually our
thoughts are composed of many forms fused
together to constitute a more complete knowledge of certain things.
However, connected with the writtis or 'know-

Mantra - Supra-sound Power
ledges' is an entity which knows what is flowing
in consciousness as writtis. In fact a writti is a
form of knowledge due to the knowingness of
that entity. If the knower disappears, writtis
or 'knowledges' disappear. This entity, which
establishes a conscious relation with objective images in consciousness, becomes the
knower of the objects. This knowingness presents
three facts: an objective form in consciousness,
a conscious exposition of that object, and the
presence of something which exhibits its quality
as selfhood. This gives rise to the phenomenon of
I-ness expressing 'I am this, I am that' feelings.
This is abhimana (I-feeling). These feelings are
intrinsically associated with I-ness. All these
feelings originate from and are supported by the
I-ness in relation to objective images. There are
three main forms of these feelings: I as knower,
I as doer, and I as supporter (as of the body).
Sensory perception is the basic knowledge
pattern appearing as 'I know this object, that
object', etc. This may be associated with
thoughts, feelings or volition.
There is another aspect of I which is expressed
on rare occasions. I has the possibilities of
knowing, thinking and doing unusual things
which are not possible at the sensory level.
This phenomenon is due to a conscious contact
between I and some post-conscious impressions
(sangskaras) stored in the nonconscious aspect
of mind, called hridaya. In fact, all knowledge,
thoughts, actions and feelings which have been
experienced by the I are transformed into
post-conscious impressions and stored in hridaya,
and can be brought back to consciousness by
memory. However, the 'I' which knows what
is arising in consciousness remains always in the
same form and maintains its I-ness in all experiences. So, the objective forms are multifarious
and transitory, whereas the I-ness is unchanging
and stable.
Does the complete picture of the outer world
penetrate into consciousness through the sensory
channels? It is only a part - a superficial layer that known through the senses. We know the
solidity, liquidity, luminosity and airiness of
matter. We experience the material world in
smell, taste, colour, touch, and sound forms.
But all these are in the superficial stratum.

Material substance is reducible to molecules,
molecules to atoms, and atoms to elementary
particles, such as electrons, protons, etc. It is
now considered that the particles are the
ultimate constituents of matter. However, in
addition to the particles, there is also energy
in matter. Energy may exist either in association
with matter, or may make itself free from matter
to become radiation. These particles are considered to be exceedingly small, indivisible and
ultimate units of matter. But these particles are
not minute pieces of hard matter of permanent
size. They have two aspects - particles and
waves. Electrons, which are negatively charged
particles, and protons, the positively charged
particles - both may appear as particles at
one moment and as waves at another. Both
particles and waves appear to be the same thing,
or two aspects of the same thing.
Have we any direct experience of all these
phenomena in relation to matter? No, they are
beyond our senses, and also beyond the reach
of the sensitive instruments. How then are
they known? They are known indirectly from
the experimental evidence obtained in
laboratories and by the mathematical interpretation of the results of these experiments.
In other words, it is an intellectual interpretation
in which inference plays an important role, and
which is based on knowledge acquired through
the senses, instrumental observations, and other
experimental evidence.
However, what escapes our observation is
that the energy which is active in the superficial
material field is continuous with that subtle
energy system which is operative in the substratum where our senses do not reach, into which
material instruments do not penetrate, and which
our intellect does not grasp. This substratum
is the subtle power-field over which is superimposed the gross material field. The subtle
power operation is the basic part which sustains
matter. Mainly two kinds of forces are active
in the power-field: mahabhuta (metamatter)
as forces and pranic forces. There are five
mahabhata forces and five pranic forces. Mahabhata forces are reducible to highly concentrated
sense forces, termed tanmatras, or tanons. The
tanons are intrinsically associated with the
101

Fundamentals of Layayoga

phenomenon of the emission of lifeful ultraminisound - Swanana, or Swanon. Swanana is
derived from swana, meaning sound, to which
is suffixed ana, meaning life. Swanon is the
abbreviated form of swanana. Swanon is the
germ-mantra.
M e t a m a t t e r forces in combination with pranic
forces constitute a subtle energy organization,
arranged in five levels. T h e y a r e :
1 Smell-energy organization, in which the
fundamental aspect is the 'earth' metamatter
which assumes a particular form and around
which is a circular wave-motion. When the
earth metamatter is reduced to its smell
tanon, it emits a specific swanon.
2 Taste-energy organization, containing 'water'
metamatter, a circular wave-motion and the
taste tanon, emitting a specific swanon.
3 Sight-energy organization, containing 'fire'
metamatter, a circular wave-motion and the
sight tanon, emitting a specific swanon.
4 Touch-energy organization, containing 'air'
metamatter, a circular wave-motion around it,
and the touch tanon, emitting a specific
swanon.
5 Sound-energy organization, containing 'void'
metamatter, a circular wave-motion around
it, and the sound tanon, emitting a specific
swanon.
T h e sound tanon (shabda tanmatra) is the
subtlest and perfect form of sound which can be
'heard' only by a perfect ear. It is here where
swanons are formed. T h e sound swanon becomes
transformed into the radiant (pashyantt) sound
beyond the sound tanon level, and finally into
sound-principle (para shabda).

Four Forms of Sound
Sound exists in four forms. It has been stated:
'Sound is in four forms; the Brahmanas (the
seers of Shabdabrahman) who have controlled
their minds fully, know these four forms. Of
these, the first three are hidden and unknown;
the fourth form of sound is used by h u m a n
102

beings' ( - Rigweda-sanghita, 1.22.164.45).
T h e four forms of sound are Para (supreme),
Pashyantt (radiant), Madhyama (subliminal)
and Waikhan (acoustic). T h e human beings
hear only a part of acoustic sounds. The yogis
'hear' the other three forms in samadhi.
About the four forms of sound it has been
stated: 'Sound is about to sprout in para
(supreme) form; it becomes two-leafed (that is
first manifested) in pashyantt (radiant) form;
it buds in the madhyama (subliminal) form;
and it blooms in the waikhan (acoustic) form.
Sound which has been developed in the abovementioned manner, will become unmanifested,
when the order is reversed' ( - Yogakunaalyupanishad, 3.18-19). Here, the stages of development of sound, from the supreme form to the
acoustic form, and in reverse order, have been
described.
Maheshwara said: 'What is called Shabdabrahman, the nature of which is nada (causal
or unmanifest sound), is an aspect of Supreme
Infinite Being. Shabdabrahman as shakti (power)
is in the form of bindu (supremely concentrated
conscious power), and being in muladhara
that shakti becomes kundalini. From that arises
nada (sound), like a sprout from a minute seed,
called pashyantt by means of which the yogis
see the universe. In the region of the heart
(that is, in anahata), it becomes more pronounced, resembling thunder in the atmosphere.
It is called madhyama. Again it (madhyama)
becomes swara (voice) by the expiratory help
and this is called waikhan' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 3.2-5).
It has been disclosed above that Shabdabrahman is the source of sound. Shabdabrahman
is in the form of sound which is unmanifest.
So it is called para. T h e power in Shabdabrahman is bindu, from which issued the universe
that is in the nature of pranawa (the first manifested sound). T h e cosmic bindu in an individual
being' resides in muladhara as Kulakundalini
who is the source of all sounds. From Kundalini
arises pashyantt nada. Pashyantt becomes more
pronounced and particularized in anahata and
is called madhyama. T h e madhyama sound is
expressed as voice, and this is waikhan.
This Waidika exposition of sound has been

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

adopted in the Tantras with explanations in
greater detail. Shiwa says: 'The source of nada
(sound) which is called para (causal) arises in
muladhara; that sound being in swadhishthana,
becomes manifested and is called pashyanti;
that sound going up to anahata, becomes reflected
in the conscious principle and is called madhyama; then going upwards in wishuddha in the
region of the neck, by the instrumentation of the
larynx, palate, the root and tip of the tongue,
teeth, lips and nasal cavities . . . it becomes
waikhan' ( - Tantrarajatantra, 2 6 . 5 - 9 ) .
Further, 'That eternal kundalini; in her
Shabdabrahman aspect is the source of power
in which is dhwani (power as supremely rarefied
sound) that develops as nada (sound), then
nirodhika (fire-energy expressed in control),
ardhendu (the crescent moon), bindu (point)
and para (supreme); and from para arise
pashyanti, madhyama and waikhan sounds'
( - Sharadatilakatantra, 1.108-9).
Kundalini as Shabdabrahman is endowed with
power which is in the nature of sound-substance,
having the possibility of developing as soundpower (nada), which is associated with fireenergy in the form of control-power, that is,
higher spiritual energy. T h e sound-power assumes a semilunar shape with which is connected
concentrated divine power-consciousness. This
is the latent sound which is unmanifest. This is
para sound. From para arises pashyanti, and then
madhyama and finally waikhan.

Para-sound
Kundalini has two aspects - supreme and sound.
In her highest aspect kundalini, as Supreme
Kundalini (Mahakundalini), is united with
Supreme Consciousness and is one with that. At
this level there is a complete absence of sound
in any form - ashabda (non-sound). kundalini;
in this aspect is Infinite Supreme Consciousness,
having no attributes. But in her specific powerfulness, Supreme Power is able to produce a
power phenomenon from which emerges the
universe of mind and matter. At this stage

Kundalini is Shabdabrahman and her power is in
the nature of sound-substance (dhwani). Soundsubstance is not manifested sound, it is the lifeenergy principle (prana) which creates and
operates in what has been created. This living
sound-power is the causal sound and is called
para-sound.
Supreme Brahman appears as Shabdabrahman
when Supreme Power, which is one and the
same with Brahman as Mahakundalini, 'wills' to
express the kinetic counterpart of the static
quiescent eternal reality. This aspect of Brahman
is called Shabdabrahman, because the power
which is going to be expressed is in the nature of
nada - a phenomenon in which willing is imbued
with effectivity in the form of pre-sound which
becomes Supreme Bindu - the supremely concentrated power. T h e concentration is such as is
fully ready to actualize the 'willing' of Supreme
Power in her purely power aspect. This
concentrated power is Bindu, because it is nonmagnitudinous and non-positional power, which,
when magnified, appears as splendorous and
permeated with sonority without manifested
sound. This power is Kundalini as Shabdabrahman. Here lies the principle of sound sound unmanifested and undifferentiated but
power in m a x i m u m concentration and in the
nature of sound-substance. This power-sound is
para-sound.
In Shabdabrahman there is an arrangement
in a latent phase, termed kamakala - the principle of the actualization of the power as sound.
Supreme Bindu (supreme power-concentration)
before the manifestation of creative power
assumes a threefold character - the three specific
power-points (bindus), termed bindu (second)
(consciousness-point), nada (sound-radiating
energy-point), and bija (sound-specificalitypoint), which constitute a triangular process.
Each power-point emits a number of soundpotentials - the would-be sound units - arranged
in a line, and the three lines form the triangle.
All these are in a latent phase and unmanifest.
This triangular process is kamakala (triangular
process of power-points).

103

Fundamentals of Layayoga

Pashyanti-sound
At a certain point of concentration of energy,
Supreme Bindu bursts, as it were, and a great
concentrated power in the form of sound emanates. This power-sound is Pranawa Nada
and is 'heard' by the yogis in concentration.
T h e power aspect is concentrated prana-energy
from which the name pranawa is derived. T h e
prana-energy in motion creates a series of forcemotion-lines, consisting of four phases. On its
first emergence from Supreme Bindu it creates
'A' line - the A-phase - which is transformed
into ' U ' line, called U-phase. It is then changed
into ' M ' line - the M-phase. Finally, it assumes
' O ' (Tantrika letter 0 ) - s h a p e d line in which
' M ' is changed into nada-bindu and ' O '
becomes the bija to form ong, as it is 'seen' by
the yogi's in concentration. In this power-form
the sound factor is inseparable. T h e power is
sound and the sound is power. This is the first
manifested power-sound phenomenon - pranawa. This is called pashyantt-sound - the first
manifested radiant sound.
Pranawa is the first manifestation of parasound; Para-sound is the source of pranawa. So,
pranawa is the first manifested sound. From
this arise all forms of sounds - mantras,
Weda, language and all other sounds. All
sounds are finally absorbed in pranawa and
pranawa into para-sound. Para-sound is Shabdabrahman.
Pranawa is a complex organization of powers
in which a basic power supports various powers.
T h e prana-force, which is in motion in Pranawa,
makes the three bindus (power-points), which
are in a latent form in kamakala, operate, and
the sound-potentials begin to be actualized as
matrika-warna (sound-units). In Supreme Bindu,
which is consciousness-power reality, there are
concidynamism potentials in a massive concentrated state, that now begin to develop. T h e
consciousness factor arises from kundalini and
power from Prana. Of the three bindus (powerpoints), nada is the centre of pranic force, which
is the fundamental sound-factor and from which
occurs an emission of a super-refined ray
(rashmi) of red colour. This is termed Rajas104

guna (primary energy-principle). T h e red-power
at the bindu becomes yellow radiant conscidynamism, termed Sattwa-guna (primary sentience-principle). T h e sound factor of the redray becomes a specific sound at the bija. The
red-power is changed here into black-power
which is termed Tamas-guna (primary inertiaprinciple).
T h e red-ray emission creates a red-line rajas-line, which releases sixteen sound-units.
In a similar manner, yellow- and black-lines
are created, and are called sattwa- and tamaslines respectively. From each of them sixteen
sound-units are released. These three lines form
and equilateral triangle standing on its apex.
T h e left side of the triangle is the red-line, the
base is the yellow-line, and the right side is the
black-line. These three lines are the three forms
of power, termed W a m a , Jyeshtha. and Roudn.
W a m a is the red-line and consists of sixteen
sound-units from A to Ah; Jyeshtha is the yellowline, consisting of sixteen sound-units from Ka
to T a ; and Roudri is the black-line, consisting
of sixteen sound-units, from T h a to Sa. In the
three angles of the triangle are three soundunits, named Ha, between the red-line and the
yellow line, K.sha, between yellow-line and
black-line, and La (Rhha) at the apex within
the triangle between the black-line and red-line.
Ha is the moon-point, Ksha is the sun-point, and
La is the fire-point. Wama-power is associated
with the Brahma-Consciousness; Jyeshtha. with
Wishnu, and Roudr with Rudra. The redenergy in the yellow field creates mind and
senses, and in the black field it creates tanmatras
and mahabhutas. Sound-units operate in
madhyama-sound.
T h e emerged prana-force begins to throb in
pranawa in its characteristic manner, causing
to be emitted what is called pranawa sound. The
sound-motion is in the nature of what has
been termed samanya spanda - basic infinitesimal motion almost uniform in character,
which shows insignificant change in form. It
is more quiescent than motional. It is the
motional totality without having any specificality. T h e prana-throbbing and sound-motion
are the same thing, or two aspects of the same
thing. Sound is the exact nature of throbbing

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

pram. The manifestation of prana-force is in
the nature of sound. Sound is the mode of
apprehension of power which is in motion.
The sound pattern of the motion is Ong - the
poshyanti-sound. Ong is the whole sound. Sound
is also the mode - the only mode - of the uncoiling of the coiled power.

Madhyama-sound
The pranawa power-sound-motion changes from
its vast and vague character to a clearly defined
specific pattern in which limitedness and change ableness are more and more marked. T h e one
pranawa-sound now becomes many particularized sounds. Hence, they have been termed
wisheswa spanda - particularized motion. T h e
singularity of sounds arises from the bija which is
'0', as there is only one sound which is Ong.
Now the plurality of the bija develops. But the
nada-bindu factor of pranawa is retained, which
becomes an intrinsic part of the newly developed
bijas. This
manifold
specialized
sound
phenomenon is madhyama-sound developed
from
pranawa.
Pashyantt-sound
becomes
madhyama-sound.
pranawa is the original sound which is one
and without parts and represents the manifested
power as a whole. In detailed manifestation
of power which occurs at the madhyama level,
there is an expression of specialization and
plurality. The original sound homogeneity existing in pranawa begins to change into sound
heterogeneity existing in madhyama. Here matrika-warnas or matrika-arnas (primary soundunits) come into being. T h e word 'matrika'
usually means mother, but here it is used in a
technical sense. It stands for the warnas (particularized sound-forms) as a whole. Warna is
usually translated as a letter of the alphabet.
But the technical meaning of it is a particular
sound-form. There are fifty warnas or soundforms. Collectively, all fifty sound-forms are
called matrika. So it is called a garland of
fifty (mala panchashika).
The fifty sound-forms are from A to Ksha.
The sound-forms from A to Ksha are collectively

named Matrika. As there are fifty matrika letters
from A to Ksha, matrika is also called fiftymatrikas (panchashanmatrikah). These soundforms (from A to Ksha) are the bijas, that is,
specialized sounds. So it is stated: 'A to Ksha
sounds which are matrika are in the nature of
bija' ( - Kamadhenutantra, ch. 1, p. 1). These
sound-forms are not lifeless letters; they are
in the nature of consciousness and power. It
is stated: ' T h e warnas (letters) from A to Ksha
are Shiwa (Consciousness) and Shakti (Power);
these warnas are (Shabda-) Brahman and exist
always' ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 1, p. 1).
Matrika is living power and forms mantra.
It has been stated: 'Matrika is living power and
in the form of mantra' ( - Kamadhenutantra,
ch. 10, p. 12). Matrika is that power which leads
to yoga. So it is stated: 'These are matrikawarnas (letters) which are within the sushumna
and are in the nature of yoga; without the help
of akshara (letter) spiritual yoga is not attained'
( - Kamadhenutantra, ch. 12, p. 14). T h e matrika sound-forms are the detailed manifestation
of praraawa-sound. It has been stated: 'Fiftymatrikas arise from nada (here pranawa-sound)
in a regular order' ( - Wishwasaratantra,
ch. l , p . 4).
Matrika-power is Kundalini It is stated:
'The sound Ka is Kundali herself; kundali is
in the form of fifty-sounds matrika' ( - Gayatritantra, 3.148). Further, 'Kundali' is in the form
of 50 sounds; she is nada and bindu; she is in
the nature of consciousness; she is prakriti
(primus)' ( - Gayatritantra, 3,132), and 'Kundali who is in the form of fifty-sounds is eternal
and the embodiment of highest spiritual knowledge. T h e attainment of Supreme Brahman
is only possible through her; she is Supreme
Kundali' ( - Gayatritantra, 3.130).
It has been stated: 'The thread of what has
been called a garland of fifty is in the nature
of Power and Consciousness; Kundali-power
(that is, the power in sound-forms) has (in this
manner) been strung' ( - Shaktanandatarahgina, 8.8). This matrika-garland is also called the
garland of spiritual knowledge. So it is stated:
'Fifty-matrika-power has been termed jnanamala (a garland of spiritual knowledge)'
( - Gayatritantra, 3.149).
105

Fundamentals of Layayoga

kundalini has two aspects: one is subtle
which is beyond sound, and the other is the
sound-form. There are fifty sounds and they are
collectively called matrika. Sound is power.
This power is in the nature of life-energy principle
and manifest as sound. T h e sound-power is an
aspect of Kundalini. Kundalini in her sound
aspect is the principal Dewata (embodied divine
consciousness) arising from appropriate mantra.
T h e matrika-warnas are primary sound units.
Matrika-sounds arise from kundalini and are
embedded in her. So, Kundalini is the root of
matrika and in whom again matrika dissolves.
After the dissolution of matrika into Kundalini,
she remains in her subtle form.

Matrika-sounds
Matrika-sounds are primary sound-units, and
each unit exhibits a specific form of sound.
A sound-unit is composed of three fundamental
parts: bija, nada and bindu. T h e bija part
represents a specific sound of one kind, without
being mixed with other sounds. Through the
instrumentation of nada the bija-sound is rarefied, concentrated and conducted to bindu
where the sound is transformed into spiritual
consciousness. So a bija is always with nadabindu. T h e bijas of matrika are fifty and therefore there are fifty forms of specialized sound.
So, we have fifty primary sound-units.
Matrika-sound can be classified into two
groups: principal and subordinate. T h e principal
sound-forms are endowed with powers to activate
or inhibit the powers of the subordinate soundforms and to make the subordinate forms operate
and cooperate with them or other subordinate
forms. T h e subordinate matrika-sounds uncoil
their powers with the help of the principal forms.
T h e subordinate forms are able to exhibit
great power when combined with appropriate
principal matrika-sounds. T h e
controlling
mechanism lies mostly in principal forms. T h e
subordinate forms cannot be successfully combined with each other without the help of the
principal forms.
106

Principle sound-units are of two kinds - short
and long. Short-power units inhibit the specific
power of a subordinate sound-unit at short intervals in order to activate the specific power
of another subordinate unit. Long-power
matrika-units are able to activate a subordinate
unit to its limit. T h e combination of matrikaunits may be of the short-power type, the longpower type, or both types. In the short-power
type, different units operate with short intervals
between, and in the long-power type, the units
operate at longer intervals. T h e nature of the
combination of matrika-units determines the
nature of the specific sound-motion. Tables
4.1 and 4.2 are the two tables of matrika-units:
In all, there are fifty matrika sounds.
Table 4.1 Principal matrika-units - sixteen in
number
Short type

Long type

a
i
u
ri ri
lri

a
i
u
lri
e
ai
o
ou

common
ang
Table 4.2
number
k
kh
g
gh
n

ch
ch
j
jh
n

ah

Subordinate matrika-units - thirty-four
1
t
th th
d
d
dh dh
n
n

p
ph
b
bh
m

y
r
1
w

sh
sh
s
h
ksh

Matrika-units exhibit certain general and
specific characteristics. T h e following are the
general characteristics:
1 Matrika-units contain three gunas (primary
attributes) - sattwa, rajas and tamas. The

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

centre of sattwa is in bindu, of rajas in nada,
and of tamas in bija.
2 Matrika-units may go beyond gunas when
they are reduced to the principle of sound
and become Kundalini.
3 Matrika-units are endowed with three
forms of power - sentience-power, willingpower and action-power.
4 Matrika-units consist of bindu, nada, and
bija.
5 Matrika-sounds are transformed into five
forms of dewata (embodied divine consciousness) at the five tanmatra levels. T h e five
dewatas a r e : Brahma, Wishnu, Rudra,
isha, and Sadashiwa.
6 Matrika-sounds are endowed with five
forms of pranas. They a r e : prana, apana,
samana, udana, and wyana.
7 Matrika-units constitute four forms of
knowledge at four levels. They a r e :
(a) Highest spiritual knowledge at the
sub-bindu level.
(b) Knowledge of tanmatras and mahabhutas.
(c) Super-sensory knowledge.
(d) Sensory knowledge.
Another important point is the colour phenomenon of matrika. Colour is an indication of
the nature of energy predominating in a soundunit. The bija-power when in motion creates
a power-line which is seen in colour. T h e three
fundamental colours are yellow, red and black.
Sattwa predominates in yellow, rajas in red and
tamas in black. Yellow indicates that bindu
has greater influence on bija; red indicates the
greater influence of nada on bija; and black shows
the power of bija itself. T h e original colours are
also changed to show the mixed character of
the power-motion. T h e Table 4.3 shows the
normal colours of the matrika-units.
When the matrika-units exhibit creative
power, all of them become red at the sahasrara
(thousand-petalled centre) level. But when they
show the power of absorption or when they are
going to be absorbed into Kundalini, they
become white, that is transparent. From an
evolutionary point of view, whiteness indicates
a trace of the finest form of sattwa, and from the
point of view of absorption, a white matrika

T a b l e 4.3
a
a

i
i
u
u
n
ri

lri
lri

e
ai
o
ou
ang
ah
k
kh
g
gh
n
ch
ch

j
jh

T a b l e of matrika colours

moon-white
white
white
shining yellow
yellow
shining yellow
shining red
shining yellow
shining yellow
moon-white
deep red
moon-white
shining red
shining red
shining yellow
shining red
vermilion
deep red
orange
orange
smoke
white
shining yellow
moon-white
shining red

n
t
th
d
dh
n
t
th
d
dh
n

P
ph
b
bh
m

y
r

1
w
sh
sh
s
h
ksh

shining red
shining white
shining yellow
shining yellow
shining red
shining yellow
shining yellow
orange
shining red
shining yellow
shining red
moon-white
shining red
moon-white
orange
orange
smoke
shining red
shining yellow
shining yellow
red
white
white
shining red
white

N.B. All the matrika units are connected with nadabindu and give the sound 'ng', except 'ang' and 'ah'.

is in a state where it is reducible to Kundalini.
At the ajna level, the normally red 'h' becomes
white and 'ksh' retains its normal white colour.
At the wishuddha level, the matrika 'h' becomes
the sound-form of the sound tanon. T h e soundform is called the bija of sound tanon. As a
bija of sound tanon, 'h' with nada-bindu
becomes 'hang' and its colour is white. In this
centre there are sixteen matrika-units, from 'a'
to 'ah', and all of them are red.
At the anahata level, the matrika 'yang'
becomes the bija-sound of touch tanon and is
in smoke colour. So it retains its original colour.
It is in this colour that 'yang' is reducible to
'hang'. In this centre there are twelve matrikaunits, from 'k' to 'th'. They are red. At the
manipura level, the matrika 'rang' becomes the
bija-sound of sight tanon and retains its original
red colour. There are ten matrika-units in this
centre, ranging from 'd' to 'ph', and they are blue
in colour.
107

Fundamentals of Layayoga
At the swadhishthana level, the matrika 'wang'
becomes the bija-sound of taste tanon. It changes
its yellow colour to white. In this centre there
are six matrika-units which are golden in colour.
At the muladhara level, the matrika 'lang' is
the bija-sound of smell tanon. This matrikasound retains its original yellow colour. There
are four matrika-units in this centre. They are
of a golden colour.

Waikhari-sound
Madhyama-sound
becomes waikhari-sound
(gross aspect of sound) which operates as soundenergy in the material field and is transformed
into sound (gross), a part of which is audible to
the human ear. The audible part of sounds may
be classified according to the following groups:
1 Language form (a) spiritual and philosophical forms;
(b) scientific forms;
(c) common forms,
2 Music (vocal and instrumental).
3 Sounds from animals.
4 Sounds in nature.
5 Artificially created sounds.

Mantra
Mantra is in the nature of kundalini and Consciousness. It has been stated: 'Mantra is in
the nature of Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness)
and Shakti (kundalini power); mantra arises
from the muladhara. Those who are able to hear
mantra or to expound it are rare' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.5). Mantra comes into being
from Kundalini who is in muladhara. kundalini
manifests herself as mantra. As kundalini is
never without Shiwa-consciousness, so mantra
is of kundalini and Consciousness.
Mantra is endowed with the power of transforming thinking into deep concentration and
108

causing the life-power motion to be absorbed
into sushumna., thus effecting effortless breathsuspension. It has been stated: 'Because of the
power of concentration, of the conduction of
central bio-energy into sushumna, of arousing
divine consciousness, and of its being based on
Supreme Consciousness, it is called mantra'
( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.7-8). Mantra which
originates from kundalini in muladhara is also
called mula (basic) - mantra. Mala means root
or basis. The mantra which originates directly
from kundalini in muladhara and is the root of
all other mantras is called mulamantra. So it is
stated: 'That which is the root of all mantras,
which arises from muladhara, and because of
the real form of the root (that is kundalini) in
its subtle nature is embedded in that (muladhara), it is called mulamantra' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.8-9).
It has been further stated: 'Through the process of concentration spiritual protection is
effected; this is why it has been termed mantra.
In all mantras power-in-sound-form (wachakashakti) is inseparably linked with power as
Consciousness (wachya-shakti)' (Ramatapinyupanishad, 1.1.12). Therefore, mantra is endowed
with the power of protecting the practitioner
spiritually through the process of concentration.
Thinking develops into concentration by mantra,
and this mantra-concentration offers spiritual
protection.
ishwara stated: 'It is called mantra, because
deep concentration on the true form of the
immensely lustrous dewata (embodied divine
consciousness) and protection from all fear are
effected by it' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 17, p. 84).
Mantra, technically, is derived from 'man'
and 'tra'. 'Man' means manana, that is, concentration, and 'tra' means trana, that is, protection. This means that our consciousness
becomes free from worldly thoughts and goes
into a state of concentration by mantra. Or,
'man' = mana to mean consciousness, and 'tra'
to mean protection, that is, as consciousness
at the sensory level is multifarious in character,
so its higher aspect is hidden. Mantra is that
process by which superconsciousness is preserved by controlling oscillations of consciousness and developing concentration. Mantra

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

is that sound-power by which the uncontrolled
mind becomes controlled and concentration is
established.
There is still another factor. In pranawa,
the final sound-power of 'm' is transformed into
nada-bindu, that is, the sound 'ng' on which the
effectivity of 'Ong' as a mantra depends. T h e n
the matrika-sounds and all mantras formed by
matrika are endowed with 'ng' sound-power
as an intrinsic part. As 'ng' sound is the inmost
constitution of mantra, and as 'ng' sound has
developed from the 'm' factor, so the soundphenomenon has been termed mantra, the
'm' factor being used at the beginning of the
word. Moreover, the bija-sounds of mantra
are finally reduced to nada-bindu, therefore,
the nada-bindu is the vital part of mantra, and,
as this vital part develops from 'm', so 'm' has
been used as the first letter in mantra. This is
why 'm' is called mantresha - the lord of mantra;
that is, the supercontrol-power of mantra lies

in m.
So we find that mantra is that form of powersound which arises from Kundalini, first as
concentrated, uniform single sound, termed
pranawa, which develops as multiform specialized sounds - matrika - and their complex combinations that can be transformed into waikhari
(gross)-sounds. To put it in another way,
mantra is the uncoiling of kundalini as soundpower from her subtle state. So Kundalini
has two forms - the subtle luminous form, and
the mantra-form. When the luminous form is
aroused in muladhara, Kundalini absorbs mantra.
On the other hand, when mantra is aroused,
kundalini manifests herself as a Divine Being
in an appropriate form, and that finally leads to
luminous form.
When pranawa-sound first issued from
Supreme Bindu, there was an agitation in
prakriti by which the minus gunas imbedded
there became plus factors. At the sattwa point,
mantra-sound-power has created mahan manas
(superconscious mind), and at the tamas point
shabda tanmatra (sound tanon) has been created.
Pranawa develops into fifty matrika-sounds,
and matrika creates bija(germ)-mantra, other
forms of mantra and Weda-mantra. Bija-mantra
is that form of mantra in which sound-power is

in great concentration and from which dewata
arises. It is that concentrated sound-power
which makes kundalini manifest as dewata.
Bija-mantra may be a simple matrika-sound,
viz. 'Gang' - the bija-mantra of Dewata Ganesha.
On the other hand, a bija mantra may consist of a
combination of two matrika-units, viz. 'Houng' the bija-mantra of Dewata Shiwa. A bijamantra may be a combination of more than two
matrika-units. A bija-mantra may have more
than one bija and one or more sound-forms
constituted by a number of appropriate matrikaunits without nada-bindu to increase the power
of the bija. In Weda-mantra, different matrikaunits, generally without nada-bindu, constitute
word-forms. Certain word-forms are used as
mantra, while others present thought-knowledgeforms which are received and understood by
one who has purified his mind and raised the
level of intellection to the spiritual level. M a n y
such minus nada-bindu word-forms are masked
forms of matrika-units with nada-bindu. As,
for example, the word 'yama' is the masked form
of matrika-unit 'yang'.
Pranawa is the first mantra. It has been stated:
' W h a t all the Weda declares to be attained, what
all ascesis is directed towards, and for what
thought-emotion control is practised, is, in
brief, that sound which is called 'Ong'. This
Ong is Shabdabrahman and also Supreme Brahman. . . . This spiritual practice is the best and
highest. . . . ' ( - Kathopanishad, 1.2.15-17). At
first, by the practice of the pranawa mantra,
Shabdabrahman is attained. T h e n the pranawasound recoils into kundalini. Thereafter, by
deep concentration on luminous kundalini,
non-sound Supreme Consciousness is reached.
Pranawa is a combination of three sounds
which arise from 'a', 'u' and 'm'. As long as
'a', 'u' and 'm' form three separate sounds, the
yogi will not be able to reach the Shabdabrahm a n level. Each separate sound does, of course,
produce results, but this does not lead to kundalini. When the three sounds become one sound,
it is the pranawa-sound as it is manifested in
Ong. It is an extraordinarily grand sound, which
contains the germ of the summation of all
fifty matrika-sounds. It is called pashyantzsound. When concentration is not deep, the
109

Fundamentals of Layayoga

penetration of outer objects into consciousness
cannot be completely eliminated. W h e n concentration is interrupted the one sound appears
as three sounds. But in deep concentration the
three sounds become one a n d inseparable.
This is possible when the external, the internal
and their connecting links are under control.
This has been termed bahyabhyantara-madhyama-kriya
(externo-interno-median
process)
( - Prashnopanishad, 5.6). By the external is
meant the outer objects, and by the internal,
consciousness, and the middle is their connecting
links - the senses. This is the process of sensomental control.
At the sensory level, the three sounds are
actually two sounds - that of 'a' and ' u ' ; the
' m ' sound disappears after the 'u' sound. T h e
'a' and 'u' sound-powers are transformed into
pingala and ida power-lines which maintain
inspiration and expiration. T h e silent 'a' sound
expresses itself as inspiration, and the silent
'u' sound as expiration. T h e third sound 'm'
disappears at the interval between expiration
and inspiration. T h e 'a' ceases because the
ida-flow causes expiration. T h e 'u' ceases
because inspiration is induced by the pingalaflow. So 'a' and 'u' can never be united unless
the pihgala-ida flows are transformed into
sushumna-Row. In sushumna-flow inspiration and
expiration are changed into kumbhaka (breathsuspension). In sushumna-flow 'a' and 'u' are
united to effect 'o' which is a long sound starting
from the muladhara and passing through the
swadhishthana, manipura, anahata, and wishuddha, where the genuine 'o'-sound is heard.
T h e n 'o' passes the ajna and thereafter the
subdued 'm'-sound appears as nada-bindu and
becomes linked to 'o' and effects one sound.
T h e one sound now passes the sushumna and
enters the sahasrara a n d is absorbed into Shabdabrahman, and samadhi is attained.
From the pranawa-sound matrika-sounds arise
at the madhyama level. T h e r e are 50 matrikasounds, from 'ang' to 'kshang'. T h e matrikasounds can again be transformed into prarcawasound, and pranawa-sound into Kundalini by the
mantra-process. In this process the matrikasounds are combined with ong, viz., ong ang,
ong ang, ong ing, etc. By this process, the matrika110

sounds are gradually absorbed into pranawasound.
However, matrika-sounds possess specialized
powers which are aroused by the mantraprocess. T h e matrika-sound 'ang' has the deathconquering power; at the spiritual level it
gives immortality by bringing the disciple beyond
matter-mind, and, at the material level, it
promotes health and longevity. It is present also
in all sounds; it is all-pervading. T h e 'ang'sound is all-pervading, and in the nature of
attraction. It creates affection in the mind
and the disciple becomes the centre of attraction. T h e 'ing'-sound promotes growth of the
body and general welfare, but it also causes
great disturbance and pain to those who slip
from the spiritual path. T h e 'zrag'-sound develops
the power of higher speech and is in the nature
of purity. T h e 'ung'-sound imparts vital vigour
and is the essence of strength. T h e 'ung'-sound
causes spiritual strength through unbearable
pain and sorrow. T h e 'ring'-sound is the power
causing agitation and is tremulous in character.
T h e 'ring'-sound presents charming splendour.
T h e 'Iring'-sound causes enmity and bewilderment. T h e 'Iring' -sound is also bewildering.
T h e 'eng'- and 'aing'-sounds are pure sentience
and charming. T h e 'ong'-sound is in the nature
of all speech and purity. T h e 'oung'-sound is
all speech and is endowed with the power of
subjugation. T h e 'ang' (that is 'ng') -sound has
the power of control over animals and is bewildering. T h e 'ah'-sound prevents death and is violent
in nature.
T h e 'kang'-sound gives happiness and prosperity. T h e 'khang'-sound causes agitation. The
'gang'-sound removes all obstacles and is great.
T h e 'ghang'-sound gives good fortune and stops
what is not good. T h e 'hang'-sound is mighty.
T h e 'chang'-sound is destructive in nature.
T h e 'chang'-sound is formidable. T h e 'jang'-sound
destroys all evil and causes fear. T h e 'jhang'sound destroys unspirituality. T h e 'nang'-sound
is the conqueror of death. T h e 'tang'-sound is
endowed with superpower and is the destroyer
of all diseases. T h e 'thong'-sound is moon-like
and is helpful in concentration, and bestows
pleasure. T h e 'dang'-sound is very powerful and
splendid. T h e 'd'hang'-sound gives wealth and

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

good fortune. T h e 'nang'-sound is the bestower
of all success and causes infatuation. T h e 'tang'sound is kindly disposed and a wealth-giver. T h e
'thang'-sound leads to religious attainment and
to purity. T h e 'dang'-sound is pleasing and promotes growth. T h e 'dhang'-sound is great a n d
the conqueror of disease. T h e 'nang'-sound
develops tranquillity and gives enjoyment and
liberation. T h e 'pang'-sound is auspicious and
the remover of all obstacles. T h e 'phang'-sound
is lustrous and leads to superpowers. T h e 'bang'sound is the destroyer of all evils and splendid.
The 'bhang'-sound is frightful and the destroyer
of worldliness. T h e 'mang'-sound causes temptation and enmity. T h e 'yang'-sound is all-pervading. The 'rang'-sound causes pain and sickness.
The 'lang'-sound is splendid and all-sustaining.
The 'wang'-sound promotes welfare and gives
purity. T h e 'shang'-sound is pure and bestows
success. The lshang'-sound is pure and leads to
virtue and causes wealth and the fulfilment of
desires. T h e 'sang'-sound is the root of knowledge.
The 'hang'-sound is pure and bestows knowledge. The 'kshang'-sound gives spiritual and
worldy knowledge and is splendorous. It is, as
it were, a crest-jewel.
We find that a matrika-unit is a specific power
operating in its individual characteristic m a n n e r .
The power-line created by the operation of the
power is called a specific warm, which is at the
same time emitting specific sound. So, a matrikaunit is a specific power in specific sound-form.
Each matrika-unit is a mantra. Some of these
matrika-units, when combined in a definite
manner, create specific sound-power in a highly
concentrated form. These are the bija-mantras concentrated powers in sound forms. O t h e r
mantras are also created. And finally, the Weda
has been created. All spiritual potentials and
creative elements contained in the matrikaunits grow through the G a y a t n mantra and
culminate in the Weda. Here the arrangements
of the matrika-units have taken a characteristic course to form words a n d , at the same
time, they become mostly minus nada-bindu.
These words appear to be more like a language
at the sensory level. T h e mantra-power of
matrika has been transformed in the Weda
into a rarefied form of sentience containing

the knowledge patterns of both cosmic and
spiritual phenomena by specialized letterarrangements. Here, mantra-power has lost
its specificity, and is changed into cosmic and
spiritual knowledge patterns. T h e real meanings
of these knowledge-buds cannot be deciphered
with the help of mere linguistic knowledge.
T h e highly technical letter- and word-combinations are only known to the yogis who have
realized mantra and its power transformation.
Mantra has two forms of power: wachakapower and wachya-power. Wachaka-power is
Kundalini in sound-form. Kundalini herself is
mantra. It is in this power that mantra exists
as a vital force. By the mantra-process the
mantra-sounds are reduced to kundalini-power;
and then kundalini assumes the appropriate
divine form - dewata - and is revealed to yoga
disciples in that form. So mantra-sounds can be
transformed into kundalini when she appears
as dewata. W h e n a disciple is able, at this
stage, to transform concentration on the dewata
form into superconcentration, and is fully established in it, dewata will, step by step, be recoiled into kundalini; and kundalini will be
Mahakundalini and will shine forth as attributeless Supreme Consciousness. This is the wachyapower of m a n t r a - Mahakundalini as Supreme
Brahman.
If the mantra is bija-mantra and is imparted
by a guru directly to his disciple, it will produce
quicker and better results. A bija-mantra is the
depository of immense power in a most concentrated form which remains latent in it.
This latent power is aroused by the mantraprocess disclosed to the disciple by his guru.
T h e sound aspect of the power gradually becomes
more and more rarefied and, ultimately, is
absorbed into kundalini. At this stage Kundalini herself assumes the form of Ishtadewata.
Ishtadewata. is that divine form which arises
from the bija-mantra when it is absorbed into
Kundalini. W h e n the latent mantra-power in
the bija is aroused by the mantra-process, the
sound is absorbed at a certain stage of concentration into kundalini; and kundalini manifests
herself as the dewata linked to the bija. So
Ishtadewata. is the divine form of mantra.
Ishtadewata is the manifested kundali-power in
111

Fundamentals of Layayoga

form. This divine form is intrinsically related
to the bija.bija is dewata.
Dewata - the divine form - is not an imaginary
form, but a form which Kundalini herself has
assumed. It is the form which arises frombijamantra. In deep concentration, mantra-sounds
are recoiled into kundalini and Kundalini
appears as Ishtadewata. In the sound-process,
concentration gradually becomes uninterrupted
and deep. In this manner, holding-concentration
is transformed into deep concentration. At a
higher stage of deep concentration lshtadewata.
arises from mantra. Ishtadewata. is not a passive
phenomenon. Ishtadewata becomes living when
concentration reaches the stage of samadhi.
W h e n this superconscious concentration is fully
established lshtadewata is seen also in a deconcentrated state. T h e devotee, who is in the
dewata-consciousness, sees, hears and feels Ishtadewata in a post-concentration state, and is
absorbed into that divine form in concentration.
Ishtadewata finally leads the devotee to his or
her formless infinite Supreme Being experienced
in non-mens supreme concentration. This is
wachya-power. T h e wachya-power is Mahakundalini (Supreme Kundalini) as Supreme
Consciousness.
Bija-mantra is a very specialized mantra.
If bija-mantra does not harmonize with the
birth-bzja, it will not be fruitful. The birthbija is the germ of the substance that causes
the repeated births, growth, activities, decline
and death of embodied beings. It creates a natural tendency toward spirituality or worldliness,
morality or immorality, constructiveness or
destructiveness. T h e birth-bija is a miniature
mirror upon which the whole being is reflected.
A guru should know all this by close contact
with his disciple for a long period, so as to be
able to choose the right bija-mantra for him.
W h e n the right mantra is chosen it will produce
remarkable results within a short time. All bad
and unspiritual tendencies will begin to change
toward spiritual development, strength will
replace weakness, disease will be displaced by
health. T h e r e will be more and more happiness
and less and less pain. If these things do not
happen, either the wrong mantra has been
chosen or the disciple is stone-hearted.
112

There is another unusual factor in relation
to bija-mantra. When a yoga disciple first
ascends to non-mens supreme concentration,
he is unable to stay there and descends. When
the ups and downs go on again and again,
Mahakundalini, who is one with Parama Shiwa
(Supreme Consciousness), exhibits her spiritual
creativity, unlike the creativity of prana by which
the universe has been evolved. Mahakundalini,
masking everything that is not Consciousness,
and only being in Consciousness, manifests
herself through Supreme Nada and Supreme
Bindu as bija-mantra and Ishtadewata. at the
sahasrara l e v e l . b i j a - m a n t r a arises from the
Supreme Nada aspect of Mahakundalini and
from the Supreme Bindu aspect. At one point
bija-mantra becomes Ishtadewata, and at another
point Ishtadewata becomes bija-mantra. It is
Mahakundalini who shows her two aspects - bijamantra and Ishtadewata. There is no difference between bija-mantra and Ishtadewata. The
disciple at the sahasrara level, through bijamantra, develops deepest concentration in which
the entire consciousness is of Ishtadewata. When
concentration is less deep, mantra-sound is
heard and the mantra-sound makes concentration deeper and, at a certain point, it is transformed into Ishtadewata when concentration
becomes deepest. In this manner, superconscious
concentration becomes established in the disciple.
He gradually becomes master. T h e n it becomes
easier for him to pass through Supreme Bindu
and Supreme Nada to Mahakundalini' in her
supreme spiritual aspect, and to attain stable
non-mens supreme concentration.
There are two power-flows in mantra: one
is the prana-flow and the other is the kunda
lini flow. Kundalini exercises control over prana,
both partially and completely. In partial control,
the general creative activities of prana are
restrained and the pranic energy is utilized in
exhibiting superpowers. When prana is fully
controlled, spiritual power arises in mantra
by which kundalini is aroused and her spiritual
yoga power is released. This causes the absorption
of all creative principles. So in mantra lie both
spiritual yoga and wibhuti (superpower). In
one aspect, mantra is a means to acquire superpowers; and in another aspect, mantra leads

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

to spiritual yoga. This is why it has been stated:
'When the principle of mantra is known, a person
becomes freed-alive and attains animan power
(the power of transforming the material body
into subtle body) and other superpowers'
( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.6-7).

Mantra in Waikhari-form
Mantra does not normally occur in the material
field. Mantras are formed at the madhyama
level where they exhibit their creative omnipotence under the full control of /shwara - Supreme
Being in his aspect of supreme powerfulness. On
the other hand, mantras retain their basic spiritual
power of arousing kundalini. T h e mantra-sounds
are heard at the shabda tanmatra level. Shabda
tanmatra is all sound. Shabda tanmatra itself
has its sound form. It is the bija 'Hang'. When
Shabda tanmatra evolves akasha (void) mahabhuta and sparsha (touch) tanmatra by its
sound-power, it becomes more specialized. In
this sound energy-organization there are 16
matrika-units with the central bija 'Hang'. In
a similar manner, there are 12 matrika-units
and the central bija 'Yang' in the touch energyorganization, 10 matrika-units and bija 'Rang'
in the sight energy-organization, 6 matrikaunits and bija 'Wang' in the taste energy-organization, and 4 matrika-units and bija 'hang' in
the smell energy-organization. Neither matrikaunits nor bijas occur beyond this point. This
is the borderland of the madhyama. So beyond
madhyama there are no mantras. Matrika
has progressively decreased in size and, at the
'Lang' level, there are only 4 matrikas. And thereafter there is nothing.
When this point is reached, there is no creation
of new principles; the mahabhutas are combined
with each other in a complex manner to form
material energy and matter. Shabda tanmatra
together with akasha mahabhuta produce soundenergy in the material field, which effects gross
sounds. In a similar manner, sparsha tanmatra,
rupa tanmatra, rasa tanmatra and gandha tanmatra together with wayu mahabhata, tejas

mahabhuta, ap mahabhuta and prithiwi mahabhuta produce respectively the sensory phenomena of touch, sight, taste, and smell in the
material field. However, Shabda tanmatra
is the only source of sound-energy which
produces all kinds of sound in the material field, and only a part of it is audible.
These are waikhan sounds. They are without
nada-bindu. So they are non-mantra sounds.
T h e non-mantra waikhan sounds cannot go
beyond the senso-intellectual consciousness, so
they are unable to reach the tanmatra level.
These waikhan sounds, when arranged in certain forms, become the avenues of the expression
of mental ideas. It m a y also be said that nonmantra waikhari sounds are elements which
contribute in the formation of that aspect of
mind which functions through the senses and
exhibits intellectual, volitional and affective
phenomena. These sounds only operate in the
material field. Mantra-sounds operate at the
superconscious level. T h e non-mantra waikhari
sounds are the elements causing distraction
of the mind. This means that consciousness
at the sensory level exhibits multiformity and
is limited in its power. T h e sense-consciousness
is only able to picture the outer world as smell,
taste, sight, touch and sound. On the other hand,
mantra-sounds develop concentration.
At the sensory level, one does not hear the
mantra-sound nor see Ishtadewata. T h e n how
is it possible to develop concentration through
mantra? It indicates the necessity of having
a guru who has heard the mantra-sound and
seen Isktadewata. T h e mantra-sound is that
sound which is unmodified, natural, pure sound
arising from a power having both aspects pranic creativity and spirituality; and this
perfect sound is 'heard' at the shabda tanmatra
level.
T h r o u g h a process of concentration the guru
reaches the shabda tanmatra level. T h e process
consists of five stages. He first reduces smell
tanon in deep concentration to taste tanon,
and then taste tanon to sight tanon, sight
tanon to touch tanon and, finally, touch tanon
to sound tanon - shabda tanmatra. At this
level mantra-sounds are reflected, registered,
and 'heard' by his highly purified and concen113

Fundamentals of Layayoga

trated consciousness. He first hears the Wedasounds, then Gayatri, then bija-mantras, then
matrika and, finally, pranawa-sound. W h e n he
is established in concentration at the shabda
tanmatra level, he follows the course of the
sounds in a reverse way so as to reach their
origin. At a certain level of concentration the
Weda-sounds arise. W h e n concentration becomes still deeper, the Weda-sounds vanish and
the Gayatri-sounds arise. In this manner when
Gayatri vanishes,bija-mantras arise and then
bija-mantras merge into matrika. At this stage,
the fifty specialized sounds are heard separately.
T h e n there is a summation of these fifty sounds
from which arises the sound 'ong'. T h e n through
'ong' the source of the mantra-sound is reached.
T h e sound 'ong' is finally absorbed into kundalini
in muladhara, and the guru experiences only
kundalini in her lightning-like splendorous
form. Again he comes back to the sound-form
of kundalini and follows the course of the
mantra-sound - pashyanti and then madhyama
through sushumna., and reaches the shabda
tanmatra level. In this manner, by going up
and down through sushumna again and again
he becomes established in mantrayoga.
Now the guru desires to give mantra a waikhari
form. Mantra is the seat of both prana and
kundalini. When prana is operative, the yogasuperpower is manifested, and kundalini becomes
coiled; but when prana is controlled, kundalini
is aroused and spiritual concentration becomes
a normal mode of being. To give mantra a
Waikhari form it is necessary to add elements
to the mantra-sound which will impart audibility.
These elements come from prana. When the genuine mantra-sound is altered in this way both
prana and kundalini become coiled. T h e genuine
mantra-sound is first transferred to the rarefied
thought-intelligence level where mantra gets
its sensory form and is reflected in the purified
sense-consciousness. From sense-consciousness it
passes to the will-mind and then it becomes
conative impulse, then cerebral energy and,
finally, motor impulses which activate the
apparatus for voice production to produce a
replica of the mantra-sound in a new sensory
form - the waikhari mantra. T h e guru is able to
reduce the waikhari mantra to its original sound114

form. T h e guru utters the waikhari mantra
to his chosen disciple who hears it; the guru also
imparts the prana and spiritual powers to his
disciple to make the waikhari mantra work. The
guru does not wish to utter the mantra to those
who are not prepared for it, because to them
mantra appears as meaningless sounds. Even if
a person hears a mantra and tries to work on it,
he will achieve very little unless guided by a guru.
T h e mere sound-form of the waikhari mantra
is without spiritual power and superpower.
Consequently it is possible to think that such
a mantra is useless. But it is different when a
well-prepared disciple hears a mantra from his
guru. T h e guru knows how to arouse both
prana-force and kundalini-power, which reside
in the mantra in coiled forms, by applying
appropriate processes. This is the arousing of
the mantra - imparting life to the audible mantra.
According to the direction of the guru, the
disciple is able to make the mantra live. A guru
of a very high order is able to impart to his
thoroughly trained disciple an enlivened mantra,
called siddha mantra, which does not require
any process of awakening.
T h e auditory sound factor of the mantra
is not useless at the sensory level. First of all,
it is the only form in which the mantra can be
used by a disciple who is unable to reach the
tanmatra level by deep concentration. But it
must come from a guru. T h e powerlessness of
the waikhari mantra is mainly due to the transformation of its genuine normal sound to audible
sound. But there are processes by which the
audible mantra is made powerful and its spirituality is awakened. If this is not done, the
mantra will remain as dead. But when it is
made living, it exhibits various powers. On the
spiritual side, Kunadalini-power is awakened and
in a right moment kundalini manifests in an
appropriate divine form linked to the mantra as
Ishtadewata.. Ishtadewata is also made to appear
in a living material form by the mantra.
By ritualistic worship, pranayama (breathcontrol) and japa (sound-process), the spiritual
power of the mantra begins to be aroused and as
a result concentration becomes uninterrupted
and deep. In this way, first dharana (holdingconcentration) is mastered, and then dharana

Mantra - Supra-sound Power

begins to be transformed into dhyana (deep
concentration). When mantra is made fully
enlivened by japa, dhyana and worship, Kundalini residing in the mantra in latent form is
aroused and finally she appears in a divine form
as Ishtadewata.
Except in case of an enlivened mantra, all
waikhari mantras should be aroused by certain
specific processes. They are complicated and
cannot be successful without the help of guru.
These processes consist in japa of certain specific
waikhari mantras in a certain order with a number of nyasa (a special method of purification
by placing hands on certain parts of the body
with mantras), pranayama, and certain modes
of concentration. T h e most important is the
arousing of real sound-power in a waikhari
mantra in which it has been latent due to an
alteration of sound-form. T h e natural mantrasound has been changed to the vibrational gross
sound effected by the action of a vibrating mechanism. This is waikhari-sound. T h e
mantra-sound is the pure normal sound intrinsically associated with power which is capable
of exhibiting superpower and spiritual power.
In creating the waikhari-sound, the normal
mantra-sound which is apprehended without
any modification in superconsciousness, has
to be transmitted to intellect and sense-consciousness, where a process of modification takes
place. This modification is necessary to give the
sound a shape which can be reproduced as a
vibrational waikhari-sound. In this process,
the power emitting mantra-sound becomes latent,
and its sound factor is reproduced, in a modified
form, as waikhari mantra-sound. T h e original
natural mantra-sound is called anahata-mantra
( - Nirwanopanishad, 3.13). T h e mantra-sound
is not produced through instrumentalization,
but arises normally from Kundalini-power, this
is why the sound is anahata, that is, not produced
by a vibrating body, but unmodified and normal.
Our object is to retransform the waikhari
mantra-sound to anahata mantra-sound by arousing the sleeping power. W h e n the power is
roused, the anahata-mantra-sound will arise
normally.
There is a highly complicated Waidika method
of transforming the waikhari-mantra by a special

prawayama in conjunction with a sixfold-process
by which the real mantra-sound is released
from the gross sound and penetrates through
sense-consciousness to the sound realm which
is shabda tanmatra, where the natural mantrasound arises; and all these things should be done
according to the advice of guru ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.13-14). T h e non-mantra
waikhari-sounds give an intellectual interpretation in the conscious field or are reduced to
mere impressions in the nonconscious field.
They have no possibility of reaching the superconscious field. But the waikhari mantra-sound
can be made to release the power, coiled in it,
by special processes of breath-control and concentration, which then pierces through senseconsciousness and reaches the shabda tanmatra
level, where this power becomes mantra in
perfect sound-form.
Ishwara says: 'When the power of the mantra
(waikhari-mantra) remains hidden, that mantra
does not produce any effects. When the mantra
is made living, it gives all results. T h e mantra
without life is mere letters. Such a lifeless mantra
does not produce any result even if one makes
millions of japa' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 15, p. 75).
Therefore, first of all the coiled power of a
waikhari-mantra should be aroused. This is
what is Mantra-chaitanya - the life-impartation
to mantra.
T h e waikhari-mantra is made efficacious by
the purification of the nadis (power-lines) and
concentration. This super-purification is attained by breath-control and internal purification
of the body. It has been stated: 'An excellent
means to make mantra efficacious is concentration on divine Kundalini, residing in muladhara
at the end of sushumna, along with the purification of the nadis' ( - Mundamalatantra, ch. 6,
p. 12). In a general way, the purification of the
nadis is necessary, and is attained by pranayama
and internal purification of the body. But more
specifically the purification of sushumna is the
most important. It is effected by kumbhaka
(breath-suspension). It is also possible to make
mantra work by deep concentration alone. So
it is stated: 'The mantra becomes effective by
concentration alone, without any physical process. Concentration should be done in the hrit115

Fundamentals of Layayoga
centre on Kundalini in form. The power developing from concentration will make mantra efficacious' ( - Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 12).
The waikhari-mantra should also be purified.
Otherwise japa will not be effective. An advanced
process of mantra-purification is as follows.
First, assume siddhasana (accomplished
posture) with the left heel set tightly against the
perineum, and the right heel against the root
of the genitals; the body is kept perfectly straight
and motionless. Then the apana-wayu should
be raised by anal contraction with breathsuspension. By deep thinking, make all the
letters of the mantra one by one enter through
the sushumna-path into muladhara and transfer
them to Kundalini who is in the nature of divine
consciousness; then make the mantra-letters,
one by one, enter into swadishthana, then into
manipura, anahata, wishuddha, ajna and sahasrara. Think deeply that in the moon-sphere of
this centre, the mantra-letters are fully saturated
with life-substance (amrita). Again, by deep
thinking, bring the mantra to ajna through
sushumna., and then to wishuddha, anahata,
manipura, swadhishthana and muladhara. Thereafter perform rishi-nyasa and other nyasas and,
then make japa of the mantra one thousand and
eight times. By this method the mantra should
be purified ( - Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 2,
p,90-l).
A mantra which has been purified and aroused
by life-impartation, and strengthened by secret
processes of japa produces astounding results.
Mantra becomes effective by japa. Japa of a
living mantra should be done to get the desired
effects. Japa is of three forms; wachika (verbal),
upangshu (muttering) and manasa (mental).
When a mantra is clearly uttered and is heard
by others, it is wachika; when a mantra is uttered
in voice so low that only the person himself
and nobody else hears it, it is called upangshu;
and thinking of or concentrating on the letters
of mantra is called manasa. Japa is that process
by which a chain of the waikhari mantra-sounds
is formed in consciousness. Sounds should first
be correctly produced and a clear picture of the
correct sound should be established in the mind.
The guru utters the correct sounds of the mantra
and the disciple hears them. By hearing again
116

and again from his guru, he learns how to
produce correct sounds. He himself then utters
the mantra in an audible manner. When he has
mastered the correct sound production, he
practises the production of correct sounds in a
low voice. He concentrates on the sounds of the
mantra when he utters the mantra. Mantrasounds uttered in this manner develop concentration. He then practises to produce very low and
rhythmic mantra-sounds, concentrating on
the sounds. This develops the power of concentration to such an extent that he is able to make
mental japa.
In mental japa, a faultless sound-form of the
mantra is created in consciousness by thinking
of the mantra-sounds. These sounds are of
thought-forms based on correctly uttered sounds.
One thought-form of sound follows another.
There should be concentration on one thoughtform of sound, and consciousness must hold it
without letting it disappear. This is the mantra
unit of concentration. At the end of one soundthought-form there is a brief interval, and then
the second form is created. In this way, when
one-hundred sound-thought-forms are created,
and the intervals are almost zero, and concentration is such that this whole chain of onehundred sound-thought-forms without any break
anywhere is held in consciousness, the concentration is called holding-concentration (dharana).
The concentration of one-hundred units is the
lowest type. Concentration of 10,000 units is
of the medium type; and above it is the higher
type. In any type of holding-concentration,
the image of the sound-form should be firmly
held in consciousness; the second image will
replace the first, but it will occupy the whole
consciousness, similarly with the third, fourth,
fifth, etc., until 100 are completed. Concentration should not be broken off between the intervals of image formation, but pass from one to
another, until the whole chain is complete.
First, 100 chain-formation should be practised.
Then 1,000, 10,000 and upwards, should be
done in a graduated manner.
To explain it more clearly: one mantra
unit concentration is this: concentration on the
sound unit when uttered once or, concentration
on the thought-form of the same when not

Mantra - Supra-sound Power
repeated. When concentration is done on fifty
mantra units, one after the other, that is, on
the first unit, the second unit, the third unit
to the fiftieth unit in succession, they constitute
the unit of holding-concentration. Concentration
consisting of twenty holding-concentration-units
raises holding-concentration to the first level;
200 holding-concentration units make the second
level, and above it is the third level. In one
mantra unit concentration, the sound-form of
the entire mantra should be held without any
other objects impinging on it or replacing it
partially or completely. In other words, the
sound-form should occupy consciousness fully
and without moving. This is the mantra unit of
concentration. When fifty mantra units are
linked to each other, they form a holdingconcentration unit. The fifty mantra units
are linked in this manner: the first unit is held
in consciousness; when the final phase of the
mantra-sound is thought, a new sound-form of
the same mantra is to be created and held in
consciousness in place of the first. When the
third is created, the second will disappear.
But the intervals between the units are so brief
that there is no complete break in the soundforms in the consciousness, and each soundform is exactly the same. Still it goes on in
succession, one form is replaced by another of
exactly the same form. In this manner holdingconcentration continues.
At a certain point, concentration becomes so
deep that the successive formation of mantrasound is changed into one continuous mantrasound without any intervals, without any break

at any point; there is no changing of form, no
replacement, no penetration of any other objects
- this long continued sound-form held in consciousness firmly and fully and without the
manifested I-ness and without any other objects
- is termed deep concentration (dhyana). Here
is only one sound-form and nothing else. At
a certain point of deep concentration, the sound
factor of the mantra is transformed into a
divine form. That is, the mantra-form of Kundalini is transformed into a divine form of Kundalini, which is called Ishtadewata. Now,
kundalini as mantra becomes kundalini as
Ishtadewata. With the arising of Ishtadewata,
concentration becomes deeper and deeper, and
finally it is transformed into superconcentration
(samadhi).
In superconscious concentration
(samprajnata samadhi), Ishtadewata becomes living.
Deep love of God (bhakti) arises and flows
toward Isatadewata. Love becomes most intensified and flows only toward Ishtadewata by
the strength of concentration, and concentration
becomes deepest and prolonged by intense love.
In this state, the whole consciousness is of
Ishtadewata; any separate I-ness is absorbed
into Ishtadewata. Finally, lshtadewata changes
into formless luminous Kundalini, into which
superconsciousness is gradually absorbed, and
kundalini as Mahakundalinit enters Parama Shiwa
(Supreme
Consciousness)
and
becomes
supremely united with him to be one with
Shiwa in non-mens supreme concentration
(asamprajnata samadhi).

117

CHAPTER 5

Bhutashuddhi Purificatory
Thought-concentration

Bhatashuddhi is a process of deep thinking, of the
rousing of Kundalini and of the absorption of all
creative principles, stage by stage, into kundalini
and, finally, kundalini into Parama Shiwa supreme consciousness. Deep thinking gradually
develops into concentration through this process.
T h e thought-forms, that is what are thought
of in this process, are exactly what actually
happens in kundaliniyoga. So that it is not by
any means fanciful thinking, but thinking of what
is a fact; it is a series of phenomena which
occurs when Kundalini is actually aroused in
kundaliniyoga, and the same phenomena are
imitated in thought by a disciple in the process
of bhatashuddhi.
W h e n concentration is not deep enough and
often interrupted by the penetration of sensory
objects into consciousness, this thinking process
will be very helpful. T h e thinking will gradually
become deeper by practice; and deep thinking
will be changed into concentration in time. At
this stage, control-power is developed to the
extent that only one object is held in consciousness up to a certain time without any interruption. This is holding-concentration (dharana).
Holding-concentration will gradually be transformed into very deep continuous concentration
(dhyana) and, at a certain point, the thinking
of rousing Kundalini will become a fact Kundalini will be actually aroused. From now,
the whole absorption process is accomplished
automatically, that is, no thinking of absorption
is necessary, Kundalini herself will absorb all
principles, and this fact will be reflected in
consciousness which is in a state of concentration.
118

When concentration develops into superconscious concentration (samprajnata samadhi) the
whole consciousness is of Kundalini, and there
is a complete absence of anything but kundalini.
Finally, divinely illuminated consciousness is
absorbed into kundalini and Kundalini into
Parama Shiwa in non-mens supreme concentration. Therefore, bhatashuddhi leads to kundaliniyoga.
This thought-concentration process is purificatory. Consciousness is purified of all objective
thoughts. W h e n consciousness becomes free
from thoughts, the I-ness also becomes unexpressed. T h e I-nessless and object-less consciousness is super-purified superconsciousness
which is illuminated by splendorous kundalini.
Unless there is a complete elimination of all
objective thoughts from consciousness, it will
not be able to receive any light from Kundalini.
T h e objective phenomena are due to the creative
principles. When they are absorbed into kundalini, consciousness becomes purified. As the
process of thought-concentration develops real
concentration, so bhatashuddhi is a purifying
process.

Purusha and Prakriti
Supreme Reality - the eternal static whole Consciousness - is inconceivable at any stage of
evolution. Supreme Power which is inseparable
from Supreme Consciousness, in its power

Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration

aspect, evolves creative principles. T h e seed of
duality is born with the emergence of two great
principles - Purusha (consciousness principle)
and Pnzkriti (primus), and duality becomes an
established fact in sense-consciousness. In purusha, consciousness is not tinged with what is not
consciousness. This means that though prakriti
has emerged, it is nonexistent in the purusha
consciousness, and, consequently, there is no
prakriti while one is in purusha. Prakriti is unmanifested here. Unmanifested to w h o m ? To
purursha, or when one is in purusha, that is in one's
own conscious form. T h e three primary attributes
of prakriti are in a negative phase.
But prakriti is not nothing; it is the source of
all created phenomena. But how are its creative
possibilities actualized? Can we say when
prakriti is 'seen' by purusha? W h a t is it that is
'seen'? Purusha consciousness is that in which
there is nothing but consciousness. Prakriti is not
consciousness, so it does not exist in purusha
consciousness. Though prakriti is negated in
purusha consciousness, it none the less exists.
It exists as an aspect of Power (Shakti), and that
Power itself is inseparable from, and one and
the same with, Supreme Consciousness. So, it
is Supreme Power. T h e Supreme Power as the
power of beingness of Supreme Consciousness
is infinite; but its power-manifestation is only
possible when the power becomes finite. It is
only possible when an unreal phenomenon unreal in relation to Supreme Reality - is made
to appear as real. This is effected by M a y a the specific power of Supreme Power. By the
influence of this power, Supreme Consciousness
appears as purusha and Supreme Power in its
bindu (supremely concentrated power) aspect,
appears as prakriti.

differently when there is no experience above
the purusha-prakriti level. Purusha is consciousness in which there is no trace of anything else.
As this consciousness is not analysable or
reducible, so purusha is the ultimate principle.
And prakriti exists as an independent principle,
which is not consciousness. If we accept this,
we have to explain the nature of the relation
between consciousness and what is not consciousness. It is said that purusha is lame but can see,
and prakriti can move but does not see. It is as
if purusha sits on the shoulders of prakriti and
shows the way, and prakriti moves blindly.
This means prakriti in contact with conscious
purusha undergoes evolutionary changes. But
what does it actually mean? Does it not indicate
that purusha is also endowed with power that
makes prakriti evolve? If it is assumed that
consciousness itself is the stimulus to make prakriti
evolve, then we have also to assume that purusha
consciousness exerts some influence on prakriti,
either consciously or unconsciously. This purusha
influence on prakriti cannot altogether be denied.
This means consciousness as power, which is
not without motive, is the root cause of the
evolutionary changes of prakriti. If prakriti
remains infinitely as an independent principle
tending to develop as different cosmic principles
in relation to purusha, then we have to admit
that the ultimate picture of consciousness is that
form of consciousness which is associated through
its power with prakriti which is evolving. This
form of consciousness cannot be the irreducible
ultimate Supreme Consciousness, but it is a
form which appears at a transitory phase of
realization that ultimately culminates in the
experience of the eternal static whole consciousness.

Prakriti is that aspect of bindu-power in which
creative energy is in three forms as minus factors.
These three forms are called gunas (primary
attributes). In prakriti, the gunas are negative
factors, but there is the possibility of the gunas
being patent when prakriti becomes the source
of creation. But the gunas remain negative in
prakriti, unless they are aroused by something
from outside prakriti. From where does this
'something' come?
Punusha and prakriti may be interpreted

If the mere presence of purusha causes
prakriti to evolve, then prakriti can never be in
a state when the gunas are negative, and under
this condition the absorption of prakriti is not
possible and, consequently, non-mens concentration is an impossible phenomenon. Supreme
Bindu is both Consciousness and Power. In its
creative aspect, the power is prana-energy
in a supremely concentrated state. On the other
hand,
kundalini-power
is associated with
Supreme Bindu in its spiritual aspect. When
119

Fundamentals of Layayoga

creative prana-energy is manifested, the spiritual
kundalini-power remains in a coiled state.
To make a finite phenomenon possible in infinite
Supreme Consciousness-Power, M a y a - negatopositivity principle - arises from Supreme Bindu.
By the influence of maya prakriti appears as a
separate principle in which is imbedded the
creative germ consisting of three primary principles as minus factors, and from the mantra
viewpoint prakriti is kamakala in which lie the
pre-matrika units in a latent form. With the
evolution of prakriti, also arises purusha as
consciousness separate from, but related to,

prakriti.
Purusha consciousness is Shiwa Consciousness,
as if, isolated from Supreme ConsciousnessPower by maya. T h e emergence of purusha
is a most important phenomenon. T h e passivity
of purusha does not stir prakriti directly, but as
purusha consciousness is the consciousness of
Supreme Bindu which, as Ishwara (Supreme
Being in his creative aspect) 'wills' to express
his (or her) creative omnipotence, it is this
'will' which acts on prakriti silently to make the
gunas operate. T h e gunas operate on the principle
of bindu-nada-bzja. T h e nada or sound-emitting
power becomes rajas (primary energy-principle)
which is the source of all energy in the mental
and physical fields. T h e same power becomes
transformed into sattwa, (primary sentienceprinciple), which exhibits mental consciousness.
T h e same nada-power becomes tamas (primary
inertia-principle) which creates metamatter and
matter.
T h r o u g h the omnipotent 'willing' of Ishwara,
purusha consciousness is reflected on sattwa,
causing an 'artificial' consciousness which is expressed as mental consciousness; and the nature
and degree of the expression depend on the
concentration of sattwa. This reflection of purusha on sattwa does not change its passive nature.
Sattwa itself is not consciousness; it is unconscious. But sattwa is in such a rarefied form that
purusha consciousness becomes reflected on it.
This reflection is mental consciousness. When
mental consciousness is embodied, it begins to
function, and the whole organization is called
jiwa - an embodied being. Mental consciousness
is also unconsciousness, if it is not enlivened by
120

life-force. Life-force is manifested in an embodied
being. Mental consciousness is the source of all
knowledge of embodied beings. This knowledge
is attained only through the instrumentation
of the body, senses and mind, and is limited. It
does not reach beyond the sensory realm. Mental
consciousness plays a predominant role in the
functioning of the senses. As mind can also
function without the help of the senses, so
/shwara's 'will' functions without mind or body.
As prakriti is not conscious, so the three
gunas are not conscious factors. But sattwa
cannot function without a background of lifeforce. It is clearly seen in embodied beings. If
life-force ceases to function in an embodied
being, mental consciousness is also brought to
an end. T h e 'will' of Ishwara which stirs the
minus gunas, also provides the life-background.
T h e 'will' of Ishwara is the concentrated power
of Supreme Bindu which is also Shiwa-consciousness. T h e power aspect is prana, which
is living energy. In Ishwara's 'will', prana is
fully controlled. T h e controlled prana is expressed
as omnipotence in creation. Prana as energy
gives rise to the three primary principles rajas,
sattwa and tamas to constitute prakriti. These
three gunas are unconscious. Through Ishwara's
'will' not only comes the directing impulse to
rouse the gunas, but also the life-force which
serves as a background for the functioning of
sattwa, which, as mental consciousness, is manifested in a living organism.
T h e evolution of the universe is an expression
of the highest yoga-wibhuti - omnipotency by Ishwara. In Ishwara, prana-force is supremely
concentrated and is fully under conscious control.
In evolution, three fields are created: a mental
conscious field, created by sattwa, a material
field created by tamas, and a power field created
by prana as life-force. Rajas creates energy
which operates in the mental and material
fields. Rajas-energy is transformed into elements
of sentience in sattwa, and material energy and
matter in tamas. Life-force transforms inorganic
matter into living matter. In life-force lies also
conscious power by which appropriate matter
is selected that is made living, and is transformed
into a pattern most suitable for the manifestation
of mental consciousness. This transformation

Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration

is a highly complicated process by which an
apparently simple substance becomes highly
complex. Every part of the process is purposeful,
properly timed and wholly controlled. Cell
activities and functional activities of the organs
are parts of the activities of the organism as a
whole. All these suggest that there is a conscious
factor in the life-force. T h e life-force is the
specific expression of prana. Prana, in creation,
becomes wayu-force in five forms, namely
prana-wayu, apana-wayu, samana-wayu, udanawayu and wyana-wayu.
To summarize: purusha is the disembodied
consciousness principle, arising from Suprerne
Bindu when it is about to evolve. When purusha
consciousness becomes embodied and individualized by the influence of maya and
kanchukas, it is jiwa - embodied conciousness
or being. So jiwa is purusha with modifications.
Here purushas are many. On the other hand,
when purusha becomes embodied cosmically
and at the same time he is the master of maya
and kanchukas (five forms of the power of
limitation derived from maya), he is called
Ishwara. Ishwara is an aspect of Supreme Bindu.
So Ishwara is also purusha.
Prakriti, which is the unconscious power principle, also arises from Supreme Bindu. When
Bindu is about to evolve, the power of Bindu assumes trifurcate creative power principles, which
are in a state of negativity when the value of each
principle is zero. This is called prakriti. Prakriti
is the latent phase of creativity in the form
of power principles as primary attributes in a
negative state. This negativity is transformed into
a state of relativity when the primary attributes
become plus factors by the direction of Ishwara.
At the pre-creative state, Ishwara is beyond
prakriti - nirguna (without attributes). After
creation, Ishwara becomes saguna (with attributes) and the entire cosmic mind-body is the
embodiment of Ishwara.

Evolution of Creative Principles
Power in Supreme Bindu exists in two forms prana and Kundali. Prana is the energy principle

of Supreme Power in its omnipotent aspect,
which is expressed as creative omnipotency.
Supreme Power in its spiritual aspect is kundalini.
In Supreme Bindu energy is in a supremely
concentrated form ready to manifest its creative
omnipotence. Therefore, the prana-energy flow
is away from Supreme Consciousness.
Prana is the living energy. At the prakriti
level, a part of prana-energy is released which
trifurcates as non-living gunas. Kundali-power is
conscious spiritual power which flows most
powerfully only towards Supreme Consciousness
when prana-flow is controlled. But prana at the
bindu point is also controlled by Kundali-power.
This Kundali-control makes prana-energy exhibit highest yoga-wibhuti - creative omnipotence. Supreme Power in her power aspect
is Supreme Bindu; and Supreme Bindu in its
creative aspect is Ishwara.
Before prana manifests its creative omnipotence, a power called maya arises from
Supreme Bindu by the influence of which the
infinite power of Supreme Bindu appears as
finite, and then evolution becomes possible.
At a certain point, maya makes consciousness,
which is united with the power in Supreme
Bindu, appear as purusha - consciousness principle. M a y a also causes prakriti to appear as
unconscious power principle. But purusha and
prakriti exist in relation to each other. When
prakriti emerges from Supreme Bindu, Kundalini,
as it were, radiates its power in the form of sound
as kamakala (coiled creative omnipotency in
sound-form)
in which lie the germinal
matrika-units.
In fact, kamakala and prakriti are not
fundamentally different. T h e nature of the
powers inherent in prakriti is in the sound-forms
that are represented in kamakala. T h e three
gunas in prakriti are the three lines of an
equilateral triangle, consisting in latent soundunits which form kamakala. When the gunas
begin to operate, the kamakala triangle, as it
were, bursts and emits sound known as pranawasound. T h e power which is involved in transforming the minus gunas into plus ones, thus
effecting their operations, is in the nature of
pranawa-sound. T h e pure energy is from prana
and the control of that energy is from Kundali121

Fundamentals of Layayoga

power expressed as pranawa-sound.
Prakriti does not exist above the purusha
level. T h e existence of prakriti is due to maya.
and with the absorption of maya, prakriti is also
absorbed, and what remains is bindu-powerconsciousness in Supreme Bindu. T h e absorption
of maya is a great step towards arousing the
Kundali-power to the extent when it absorbs
all sound-forms as well as prana. Now all
creative impulses cease. Now, Kundalini as
Supreme kundalini is the spiritual aspect of
Supreme Power. But Supreme Power in its
creative aspect is Supreme Bindu in which
prana-energy is supremely concentrated and on
which Kundali as Shabdabrahman exerts control
through sound-power to raise it to the level
of creative omnipotence. T h e Kundalini-control
over prana remains at the pashyanti and madhyama levels.
kundalini, as Supreme kundalini, ascends
from Supreme Bindu to Supreme Nada. Nada
is the power of Supreme Power in its power
aspect, which is infinite, but with a trace of
something which may develop as finite power.
At this point, prana as infinite energy-principle
is a part of Kundali. T h e possibility of being
'motional' is most pronounced in Supreme
Bindu, in which prana becomes concentrated
to the highest degree; but it is also controlled
by kundalini.
Nada is predominantly Kundali-power where
there is a faint indication of sound element,
which is neither evident, nor traced, nor manifested. This sound element becomes sound
principle at the bindu level when kundalini is
Shabdabrahman. At the nada level, when kundalini is towards Supreme Shiwa (Consciousness),
sound is completely coiled into her. But when
the power-flow is away from Shiwa, a faint
indication appears. This untraceable sound
element may develop into specific bija-mantra
by which Supreme kundalini, united with
Supreme Shiwa, appears as Ishtadewata in the
thousand-petalled lotus. T h e sound element
develops into matrika in latent form at the
bindu level, when Supreme Power is in its
creative aspect.
W h e n Supreme kundalini is at the ShiwaShakti level, Shiwa shines forth in kundalini.
122

At this stage, there is nothing but Shiwa in
kundalini. Thereafter kundalini is in union
in supreme love with Parama Shiwa - infinite
Consciousness. This occurs at the Sakala Shiwa
stage. Finally, kundalini in supreme union
becomes one and the same with Parama Shiwa.
Now there is only Shakti (Power) as Shiwa,
and Shiwa as one with his Shakti. Mahakundalini
is now Parama Shiwa.
W h e n bindu-power as prana first manifests
its creativity, Kundalili-power bursts through the
kamakala triangle and appears as pranawa-sound
which exercises control over the manifested
pranic force. In fact, the pranawa-sound is the
intrinsic part of the first manifested pranic
force. T h e manifestation of pranic force is
associated with the changes of minus gunas to
plus gunas in prakriti. Now kundali-controlled
pranic force begins to operate at the rajas point.
This occurs just at the end of pranawa-sound,
that is, at the junction between pashyanti
and madhyama. Pranic force exhibits circular
motions, making twenty circles, and at each
circle fifty matrika-units appear. In this way
sahasrara (the thousand-petalled centre) comes
into being. Here, each matrika-unit is twenty
units strong.
Thereafter, the rajas-line, the sattwa-line and
the tamas-line are manifested. In the rajas-line,
where rajas is the predominant factor, prana
bifurcates into rajas-energy and life-energy.
Rajas-energy at the sattwa point is transformed
into sentience, and at the tamas point it becomes
matter and material energy. Life-energy at the
sattwa point forms the vital basis for the functioning of sattwa, and at the tamas point forms living
matter. At the rajas point, life-energy as wayuenergy creates force-field.
From sattwa arise, stage by stage, the following
principles:
1 M a h a n (supermind).
2 Ahang (I-ness).
3 Buddhi (intellective mind).
4 Chitta (sense-consciousness).
5 Jnanendriyas (senses).
6 Karmendriyas (conative faculties).
In mahan, there is a maximum concentration
of sattwa. W h e n the traces of rajas and tamas

Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration

in the sattwa-line are neutralized, the absorption
of mahan into prakriti takes place. T h e maximum
concentration of sattwa gradually diminishes
with the penetration of more rajas. M a h a n is
that form of consciousness in which there is
absolute calmness without any undulations.
This consciousness is where there is no objective
phenomenon, and it is in a state of deepest
concentration, that is, the final phase of superconscious concentration. This consciousness is
illuminated by the splendour of divine Kundalini.
When more of the rajas begins to penetrate
into the sattwa point, consciousness begins to
show oscillations. At the same time more of
tamas also concentrates in it, causing a limitation
of consciousness. All these occur step by step. In
this way, ahang (I-ness) is created. Now, the
conscious field is divided into two parts: Iconsciousness and objective consciousness. T h e
objective consciousness is that in which things
remaining outside the I-consciousness become
reflected. T h e objective consciousness has two
aspects: dhi (concentrative mind) and chitta
(sense consciousness). Along with chitta are
created buddhi (intellective mind), manasyana
manas (will-mind) and indriya manas (sensemind). Then with more rajas and tamas, five
jnanendriyas (senses) and five karmendriyas
(conative faculties) come into being.
To summarize.
1 Mahan: consciousness which is without
I-ness and objects. In this most rarefied consciousness there is the full reflection of purusha.
Consciousness is in a state of the fourth stage of
superconscious concentration. M a h a n consciousness is the culmination of dhi consciousness.
2 Ahang. First level: consciousness which
bifurcates into I-consciousness and objective consciousness. T h e objective consciousness is dh; consciousness which is in a state of the third stage of
superconscious concentration in which Ishwara in
form is reflected. Second level: Dhi is in a state of
the second stage of superconscious concentration.
Objects are five mahabhutas and five tanmatras.
Third level : Dhi is in a state of the first stage of
superconscious concentration. Objects are sensory. Fourth level: Chitta is in an oscillatory
state (writti state). Intellective mind, sensemind, senses, will-mind and conative faculties

are involved in this state. Objects: material
objects. Functions: (1) sensory perception;
(2) thought and intellection; (3) affectivity;
(4) volition and conation.
From concentration viewpoint: 1 M a h a n :
superconscious concentration, final stage.
2 Ahang. First level: superconscious concentration, third stage. Object: Ishwara in form.
Second level: superconscious concentration,
second stage. O b j e c t : five mahabhutas and five
tanmatras. T h i r d level : superconscious concentration, first stage. O b j e c t : sensory. Fourth
level: writti state. Writtis are derived from:
(1) perception; (2) thought and intellection;
(3) affectivity; (4) volition and conation.

Tamasa Evolution
Tamasa (relating to tamas - primary inertia
principle) evolution arises from the primary
inertia-principle from which develop five tanmatras (tanon), five mahabhutas (metamatter)
and matter. T h e first development from tamas
is sound tanon (shabda tanmatra). Sound tanon
is the germ of all madhyama sound. It is itself
in the form of the germ-mantra 'Hang'. Sound
tanon develops into void metamatter (akasha
mahabhuta), with which are related sixteen
matrika-units from 'Ang' to 'Ah'.
From sound tanon arises touch tanon (sparsha
tanmatra), the sound-form of which is 'Yang'.
It develops into air metamatter (wayu mahabhuta), which is related to twelve matrikaunits from 'Kang' to 'Thang'. From touch tanon
arises form tanon (rupa tanmatra), the sound-form
ofwhichis 'Rang'. It develops into fire metamatter
(tejas mahabhuta) represented by ten matrikaunits from 'Dang' to Phang'. From form tanon
is evolved taste tanon (rasa tanmatra). Its
sound-form is 'Wang'. It develops into water
metamatter (ap mahabhuta) represented by
six matrika-units from 'Bang' to 'Lang'. Smell
tanon (gandha tanmatra) arises from taste tanon.
Its sound-form is 'Lang'. It develops into earth
metamatter (prithiwi mahabhuta) represented
by four matrika-units from 'Wang' to 'Sang'.
123

Fundamentals of Layayoga

At this point the five forms of metamatter are
combined to form matter.

Bhutashuddhi
It has been stated: 'Brahman is without
manifested power (wiraja), (that is, static),
and in it Supreme Power is absorbed (nishkala);
that is, pure (shubhra), (that is, Brahman is in
itself, there is nothing in it except Brahman);
it is the splendour of all splendours, (that is, the
splendour of kundalini is from Brahman); Brahman is in supreme splendorous abode (that is,
Brahman is in supreme void in splendorous K u ndalini in the triangular process of moon-sphere in
sahasrara); Brahman is reached by those who
have realized (in samadhi) the supremeness
of his being' ( - Munaakopanishad, 2.2.10).
Nishkala (with absorbed Power) Brahman is
nishkala Shiwa - Parama Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness). T h e aim of layayoga is to reach
nishkala Brahman. This is achieved by getting
Supreme kundalini absorbed into Parama Shiwa
in non-mens supreme concentration.
About Brahman, it has been further stated :
'Brahman is beyond sound, touch, form, taste
and smell; beyond the reach of the organs of
speech, prehension and locomotion, Brahman
is untouched by organic activities and carnal
pleasures; Brahman is beyond mind, intellect,
I-ness and sense-consciousness. Brahman is without prana, apana, samana, wyana and udana,
without sense organs and sense objects, and
m i n d ; Brahman cannot be defined; Brahman is
free from bondage, without attributes, unchangeable'
( - Nrisinghatapinyupanishad, 2.9.20).
Brahman is beyond the senses, all actions,
sense-mind,
sense-consciousness,
intellective
mind, and I-ness consciousness. Therefore, layayoga aims at the absorption of all these principles
through Kundali-power to reach Brahman.
It is stated : 'They say that there was only
Narayana (Supreme Consciousness) without a
second; there was no Brahma, no Ishana (that
is, God in forms); no water, fire and air; no
heaven and earth; no stars, no sun and no moon.
124

It was he who was alone and motionless. Then
he, being in himself, was in concentration,
and then yajnastoma (creative energy in germ
form) came into being. From this creative
energy there issued fourteen purushas (forms of
consciousness), one girl (primus), ten indrivas
(senses and conative faculties), manas (sensemind) as the eleventh, tejas (here : intellective
mind) as the twelfth, ahangkara (I-ness) as the
thirteenth, prana (bio-energy) as the fourteenth,
atman (jiwatman) as the fifteenth, who is
endowed with intelligence. T h e other principles
are : five tanmatras (tanons), five mahabhutas
(five forms of metamatter) : twenty-five in all,
and that purusha (consciousness principle) is
one' ( - Mahopanishad, 1.2-5).
Narayana is Parama Shiwa - Supreme Consciousness. He is infinite and all, and so, he is
beyond the universe of mind-matter. But when
he is in concentration, being established in his
own secondless static form, he is also conscious
of the beingness of his own power which, as
Supreme Power, is one and the same with him.
This beingness of power in him gives rise to the
phenomenon of Shiwa-shakti in which there is
a faint awakening of power which is of Shiwa.
But in that power there is the possibility of
expressing it in a finite form. T h e first step
towards that manifestation is the supremely
concentrated power in which is embedded the
spiritual control factor. This has been termed
'Yajnastoma' - the germ of power-manifestation
which in Tantrika terms consists of Supreme
Nada and Bindu.
Form yajnastoma the following creative principles arise :
1 Purushas, which are fourteen; that is, divine
forms of consciousness.
2 Purusha (consciousness principle).
3 Prakriti (primary creative principle;
primus).
4 A hang (I-ness).
5 Buddhi (intellective mind).
6 Manas (sense-mind).
7 Indriyas, which are ten. These a r e : five
senses and five conative organs of action.
8 Prarca (bio-energy).
9 J i w a t m a n (embodied being).

Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration
10 Tanmatras (tanons), which are five in
number.
11 Mahabhutas (metamatter), which are five.
Here we find the fundamentals of kundaliniyoga and bhutashuddhi. The fourteen purushas
are deities, of which six are Shiwas. The first
Shiwa is Deity Brahma situated in the muladhara
centre; the second is Wishnu in the swadhishthana centre, the third is Rudra in the manipura centre, the fourth is Isha in the anahata
centre, the fifth is Sadashiwa in the wishuddha
centre, and the sixth is Parashiwa in the indu
centre. These Shiwas are also called Brahmas.
The Waidika process of kundahliyoga has been
briefly described here : 'Hridaya (hrit or anahata
centre in the heart region) is like a lotus with the
pericarp which hangs down in a deconcentrated
state. This centre should be turned upward by
sitkara (i.e. sitkara breath-control) and other
means. Within this centre is super-light (mahan
archi) with all-pervading flame, which radiates
in all directions. In the middle of this is subtle
Fire-flame (Kundalini), which has been brought
upward (that is, splendorous subtle Kundalini,
who resides in the muladhara centre, should be
roused and conducted to the hrit or the anahata
centre). Inside the flame (splendorous Kunda-alini), lies purusha as Supreme Being; he is
Brahma, Ishana (Shiwa), Indra, Akshara (imperishable) and supreme Swaraf (Ishwara God)' (-Mahopanishad, 1.12-14).
In the Tantrika process, Kundalini is aroused
in the muladhara centre, conducted to the
sahasrara centre and is then absorbed into
Parama Shiwa; thereafter, the infinite Shiwakundalini is given a form having two aspects mantra-sound derived from Supreme Nada and
power-form from Supreme Bindu; this is Ishtadewata; then I.fatadewata is brought down to the
hrit or the anahata centre for concentration. In
the Waidika process, kundalini is aroused in the
muladhara centre and then brought to the hrit or
anahata centre where concentration is done, first,
on mahan archi, that is, super-light emanating
from kundalini; when concentration becomes
deeper: on Kundalini who is within the light;
and finally, concentration on Supreme Being Narayana or Parama Shiwa - within kundalini.

At the first stage of concentration, superlight is the object. When concentration becomes
deeper, the super-light is not recorded in
consciousness, but Kundalini herself shines forth
there. At the last phase of concentration,
Narayana emerges from kundalini. In the Tantrika process, both Parama Shiwa and kundalini
are transformed into Ishadewata and concentration is done either in the sahasrara or the anahata.
There is also a Waidika process in which
kundalini' is brought from the muladhara centre
to the sahasrara centre where union between
them takes place. It is stated: 'Soma (here
Shiwa) is with that power which operates in the
upper region, and Anala (fire, here Kundalini)
is endowed with that power which operates
from below. The worldly knowledge is enclosed
between the two (that is, sensory knowledge is
due to the different situations of Soma-power
and Anala-power). When Agni (= Anala = Kundalini) rises up (from muladhara) and is united
with immortal Supreme Soma (Shiwa), Soma
becomes in the nature of Agni, and amrita
flows downwards (from the union). When the
power (Kundali-power), situated in the lower
region (that is, muladhara), passes upward, it is
called Kalagni (because that power, then,
absorbs time; that is, that power exhibits
absorptive power); when Kalagni-power goes
upward, it expresses its purifying and burning
effects (that is, the upwardly going Kundalini
purifies and absorbs all creative principles).
That power situated in adhara (i.e. muladhara)
is Kalagni (i.e. Kundalini); when it goes upward, Soma (Shiwa) turns downwards, and in
this way the union between Shiwa and Shakti
(Kundalini) takes place. Shiwa is in the upper
region (i.e. sahasrara); when Shakti goes into
the upper region, Shiwa becomes united with
Shakti (that is, when Kundalini goes up from
muladhara to sahasrara, Shiwa and kundalini
become one and the same); everything is pervaded by Shiwa-Shakti. The universe arises
from that energy of Agni (when Agni as Kunaalini is latent in muladhara, and prana is aroused);
by Agni (as Kundalini being aroused) the knowledge of the world is burned to ashes; the creative
energy is reduced to ashes (i.e. completely
absorbed). The energy of creativity evaporates
125

Fundamentals of Layayoga

(when it is absorbed into Agni)' ( - Brihajjabalopanishad, 2.8-13).
Also : 'Shiwa-fire (that is, Kundalini as fire
who is situated in the muladhara around Shiwa
as Swayambhu-linga), after burning the body
(that is, the five mahabhutas and five tanmatras
which produce the material body and, as
creative principles, are in the five centres from
muladhara to wishuddha), becomes united with
Soma (that is Shiwa), in sahasrara, and as a
result amrita (deathless life-stream) flows; when
a yogi is able to flow that amrita from Shakti
(kundali-power) and Soma (Shiwa), through
the yoga-path (i. e. sushumna-path), he attains
immortality (that is, when the sushumna-path
is made free from all creative principles, and is
full of only amrita, immortality is attained)'
( - Brihajjabalopanishad, 2. 19).
Here is the Waidika process of kundaliniyoga.
W h e n kundalini is actually aroused and conducted upwards, it is kunadliniyoga; and when
it is not possible, the whole process, either
Waidika or Tantrika, is done through thoughtconcentration and it is called bhutashuddhi.
This term has been used in Ramatapinyupanishad (1.5.1). It has been stated there : 'Bhutadikang shodhayet', that is, bhutas (five subtle
elements) and other principles should be purified.
This is bhutashuddhi. Bhutashuddhi is a fundamental process in the Tantrika form of layayoga,
and, consequently, it has been elaborated there.
Rishi N a r a d a said : 'The purification of the
tanmatras-mahabhutas of which the body is
composed is by the union with changeless
Brahman; this is called bhutashuddhi. Splendorous Atman lies within the mind, and this is
called the mental body by the yogis who have
realized truth. W h e n it is purified, all is purified'
( - Goutamiyatantra, ch. 9). Here, bhutashuddhi
has been defined. It is a process of purification
of the principles of the body and mind. About
the process, it is stated : 'By deep thinking,
Shakti (Kundali'-power) situated in her own
abode (i. e. muladhara) should be aroused by the
m a n t r a 'Hung' and conducted from muladhara
through swadhishthana, manipura, anahata, wishuddha and ajna which are situated in the
anal, genital, navel, cardiac, cervical and eyebrow regions respectively. Think of muladhara,
126

the golden lotus with four petals; think that
there is a triangle which shines like moon, sun
and fire in muladhara; then think deeply of
jiwatman (embodied being) in concentration;
think of kundalini who is deep red, as bright
as ten million lightnings and ten million suns,
and as cool as ten million moons, and like the
(motionless) flame of a l a m p . By thinking,
kundalini should be conducted through the
path of sushumna. to unite herself with Paramatman in the region of Shiwa in sahasrara by the
mantra 'Sohang'. During the process of conduction, five mahabhutas (and tanmatras), the
organs of speech, feet, hands, anus and genitals
which cause speech, locomotion, prehension,
excretion and reproduction, and the organs of
hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell and their
functions - these twenty-five principles and
purusha; and I-consciousness, sense-mind, intellective mind, sense-consciousness - all these
should be absorbed (into kundalini) by
thinking. . . . Finally, going down through the
sushumna-path, all these principles should be
replaced in their appropriate places by the
mantra 'Sohang'; this is bhutashuddhi which
is followed by matrikanyasa (a hand-process
with mantra)' ( - Goutamiyatantra, ch. 9).
Ishwara has said about bhutashuddhi that:
'Supreme kundalini-power should be made to
pass with jiwatman by the mantra 'Hangsh'
from muladhara by piercing all centres, step
by step, to sahasrara and to unite her
with Supreme Brahman (by thinking); senses
and conative organs of actions, bhutas, etc.
and their functions, intellective mind, I-consciousness, sense-consciousness, etc. - all should
be united (by absorption)' ( - Nilatantra, ch. 4).
Also: ' O h Mother of gods, jiwatman along
with kundalini and twenty-four principles should
be m a d e to be absorbed into Paramatman by
the mantra "Hung Hangsah" along with inspiratory
breath-control
by
the
practitioner'
( - Todalatantra, ch. 4).
It has been stated: 'The purification of
five bhutas (i.e. five mahabhutas and five tanmatras) and indriyas (five senses and five conative organs of actions) is very carefully done;
this is why it has been termed bhutashuddhi'
( - Gayatritantra, 1.202). So, the process of

Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration

purification of creative principles is termed
bhutashuddhi. This purification is effected by
absorption. T h e roused kundalini is alone able
to exhibit the full and effective absorptionpower. So, it is very important that Kundalini
first should be aroused. About the rousing of
kundalini, Ishwara has said: 'Supreme Kundalini-power should be aroused by making apana
go upward by pranayama in conjunction with
prana-mantra ("Yang"); then Kundalini with
jiwatman from anahata should be conducted by
piercing all the centres to sahasrara above and
unite her with Supreme Brahman' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 3). T h e fire-energy should
also be applied to rouse Kundalini as has been
stated by Mahadewa ( - Sammohanatantra,
ch. 4).
Sadashiwa, in expounding the process of
bhutashuddhi, says: 'The earnest practitioner
should place his hands with the palms upwards
in his lap (sitting in a concentration posture);
focussing his attention on muladhara, he should
rouse Kundali by the mantra "Hung"; he should
then conduct Kundali with all the principles
associated with the " e a r t h " to swadhishthana
by means of the mantra "Hangsah", where these
principles should be made to be absorbed in the
"water". Having the " e a r t h " together with the
smell principle and its objects and others thus
absorbed into the "water", he should get the
"water" together with the taste principle, its
objects and others absorbed into the "fire";
then the "fire" together with the sight principle,
its objects and others into the " a i r " ; then the
"air" and the associated touch principle, its
objects and others into the " v o i d " ; then the
"void" together with the sound principle and its
objects into I-consciousness, I-consciousness
into supraconsciousness, supraconsciousness into
primus, and primus into Brahman' ( - Mahanirwanatantra, 5. 9 3 - 7 ) .
It has been stated: 'Thereafter bhutashuddhi
should be done. Placing his hands with palms
upwards in his lap, the calm practitioner should
concentrate on Kulakundalini who is the source
of spiritual knowledge and is in muladhara;
she is coiled like a sleeping serpent (that is, in
a latent form) with three and a half coils around
Swayambhu-linga, subtle, splendorous like ten

million lightnings and all knowledge. After
the concentration, kundalini should be roused
by the mantra "Hangsah", or Pranawa, or K w c h a bija ("Hung")' ( - from Yamala, quoted in T a r a bhaktisudharnawa, ch. 5). Here, one of the three
mantras has been advised for rousing and
conducting Kundalini.
Apana-raising, pranayama and mantra are
most important factors in the process of rousing
kundalini. It has been stated: 'By inspiring
through the left nostril and at the same time
contracting slightly the anus and pressing the
palate with the retroverted tongue, Kundalipower should be united with Shiwa; expiration
should also be done through the left nostril'
(from Merutantra, quoted in Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 3). Here it is disclosed that Kundalipower which is in muladhara should be aroused
by left inspiratory-expiratory breath-control
along with anal-lock and tongue-lock. T h e n the
roused kundalini should be conducted to
sahasrara to unite her with Parama Shiwa.
Apana-energy is raised upwards by anal-lock.
About tongue-lock, Shiwa has said: 'A yogi
should practise pressing the palate with the
tongue by folding it. Gradually he will be able
to reach the uvula. When the palatine region is
pressed with the tongue, a kind of cool lifeful
substance is secreted by the utilization of which
the yogi is able to prolong his life. T h e tip of
the tongue should press on the uvula. T h e lifesubstance secreted from the white lotus (i.e.
Sahasrara) is in concentration. T h e yogi gains
control over hunger and thirst and prolongs his
life to a very great extent by bathing his body
with this life-substance' ( - Shiwapurana, 6.
47.83-5).
To be able to execute tongue-lock correctly,
the tongue should be made soft and elongated
by milking-process and lingual exercise. Milking
is the pulling of the tongue by wrapping it
with a soft, fine, wet cloth. Lingual exercise
consists in retroversion and stretching of the
tongue, done alternately while assuming the
adamantine posture (wajrasana).
Tongue-lock consists in pressing with the
tip of the retroverted tongue the soft palate and
uvula. This tongue-palate contact, when continued for a long time and with breath-suspension
127

Fundamentals of Layayoga

dries the part which is usually wet with mucus
secreted by the palatine glands, and creates
a state in which a radiation of life-force occurs
through this part. An advanced yogi is able to
reenergize his whole body with it, and, as a
result, he attains a disease-free body and long
life.
Pranayama plays an important role in rousing
Kundalini. It has been stated: 'Subtle Supreme
Kundalini should be roused from muladhara
by Kumbhakapranayama (breath-suspension)'
( - Mantramaharnawa, 1. leaf 41). Prarcayama
is a fundamental part of bhutashuddhi. It is
a special pranayama termed bhutashuddhi pranayama. But there is a. modified form of bhutashuddhi which is done only by deep thinking
and without prawayama. It has been stated:
'Divine kundalini along with five bhutas should
be united in thought-concentration; then "I am
t h a t " should be thought in concentration' ( - Uddisha, quoted in Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 3).
T h a t deep thinking is the most important part
of bhutashuddhi has been stated by Shiwa.
He says: 'So, in bhutashuddhi thought-concentration (bhawana yoga) alone (is used)'
( - Shaktisangamatantra, T a r a Section, 12.13).
Mind is purified by bhutashuddhi. It is stated:
' T h e purification of the mind and the embodied
being is effected by bhutashuddhi' ( - Shadamnayatantra,4.151).
It has been stated: 'Sitting on a comfortable
seat consisting of Kusha grass and on the top
of which is spread the skin of the black antelope,
the practitioner should assume the lotus posture
and perform bhutashuddhi' ( - Skandapurana,
2.5.4.20). So, lotus posture is considered a suitable posture for bhutashuddhi. But the posture
to be assumed is mainly determined by the
form of the process adopted. Accomplished
posture is also very good, especially when apanacontrol is introduced in the practice.
Brahma has explained a form of bhutashuddhi
in which pranayama in conjunction with the
mantra pranawa has been used to purify all the
principles - five forms of metamatter, five tanons,
senses, conative organs, sense-mind, sense-consciousness, intellective mind, I-consciousness and
others; pranayama is executed in a special
m a n n e r with pranawa to control prarca- and
128

apana-energy ( - Lingapurarna, Section 1. 73.
11-16).

Absorptive Thoughtconcentration
Consciousness, when super-purified and in a
state of superconcentration at its fourth stage,
is of splendorous Kundalini. It is the final state
of superconsciousness. This consciousness is finally absorbed into Kundalini. But before the
attainment of the final form of superconsciousness, consciousness undergoes three stages of
superconcentration: concentration-on-materialform (superconcentration, first stage), concentration-on-mahabhuta-tanmatras (superconcentration, second stage), and concentration-on-divineform (superconcentration, third stage).
To transform concentration into superconcentration, it has first to be developed into
dharana and dhyana. Dhyana is changed ultimately into the deepest form of concentration
in which the I-ness feeling sinks, and only an
object in its subtle form is held in consciousness,
uninterruptedly and continuously. This is samadhi - superconcentration.
But dharana must be established in a form of
consciousness which is multiform in character.
This is due to the fact that this form of consciousness is maintained by the constant penetration
into it of the sensory forms of smell, taste, sight,
touch and sound through the sensory channels
and in which sense-mind plays a fundamental
role. T h e sensory images in the consciousness
evoke intellection to a certain degree and also
conscious thoughts associated with images. According to the types of sensory images, affectivity and conativeness or specific intellectuality
are aroused. So sense-consciousness is the perceptual field (sangjnana) in which intellection,
affectivity and conation play their roles, and,
in this manner, sense-consciousness constantly
changes its form.
In such an undulatory form of consciousness,
concentration is not easy. Concentrative mind
(dhi) does not radiate into such consciousness.

Bhutashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration

Conscious thoughts associated with perception
often become the centre of exciting conative
activities in which the organs of speech, prehension and locomotion, and organic and sexual
functions are involved. When all these conative
actions go on, consciousness is unable to exhibit
holding-power to the extent of developing concentration. When the actions are controlled by
appropriate postures (asanas), the body may be
motionless, but the associated thoughts remain
uncontrolled. Those thoughts directly concerned
with the movements may cease to appear in
that form; but, actually, they immediately
change their character and begin to flow in
consciousness in many new forms. But unless
the flowing of thoughts is controlled, concentrative mind fails to operate in consciousness.
There are four main levels in perceptive
consciousness: perceptual, conative, affective
and intellective. Conative, affective and intellective phenomena are based on perception.
At the conative level, all the five conative organs
of action are in operation and conscious thoughts
arising from perceptivity and conativeness are
multiform and consciousness is in a state of
restlessness. Such a form of consciousness is
unfavourable to concentration. Holding-power
is not maintained in such consciousness. But
as such a form of consciousness is a fact in our
common mode of existence, yogis have introduced two methods of developing concentration
in a state when actions are a predominating
factor. They a r e : karmayoga and mantrayoga.
Karma (action) may be divided into two
categories: white and black. White actions are
based on yama and niyama, and are done for
the good of others, without having any selfinterest. Black actions are those which are
associated with hostility, falsehood, theft, discontent and excessive sexuality. In an ordinary
life, man does both kinds of action. But only
white actions are elements of karmayoga, while
black actions impede it and impurify consciousness. These black actions which are habitually
done should be controlled by doing the habitual
white actions in a more intensified manner and
often, and by the practices of yama, niyama
and prarcayama. Organic actions should be
harmonized and sexual control should be achiev-

ed by the appropriate processes of hathayoga.
Actions should be executed in the following
m a n n e r : (1) dedication of all actions to God
or Ishtadewata; (2) cultivation of unattachment
to actions and their results. This is the path of
karmayoga. Through it, consciousness becomes
spiritually purified, and holding-power is
developed.
Another means is mantrayoga. In mantrayoga,
speech is transformed into the waikhari form of
mantra. By japa (mantra-process of repeating
mantra), the waikhari sound which is an approximate imitation of mantra-nada is correctly
established in the mind. First of all wachika
(verbal, which others can hear) japa should
be practised for that purpose. T h e n upangshu
(mantra is uttered in such a low voice that only
the practitioner himself can hear, but not others)
japa should be practised. Finally, manasa (mantra
is uttered only mentally, without producing
any sound) japa should be practised. In manasajapa, the sounds of the matrika-units of the
mantra should be thought. This sound-thought
will be gradually established in the consciousness; that is, conscious thought is m a d e of
mantra-sounds by manasa japa. This can be
achieved by repeated practice. From soundthoughts will emerge holding-power.
Affectivity is an avenue through which concentration can be developed. This is possible
through love (anuraga). W h a t is love? It is an
intense pleasurable feeling aroused in relation
to a person for whom there is liking and who
appears extremely attractive to that person,
and for whom there is a strong attachment.
Union with such a person gives highest pleasure
and satisfaction. Separation causes sorrow, disturbances, anxiety and restlessness. W h e n there
is real and intense love, consciousness is saturated
with love and in it the image of the object of love
is held. In union, deep thought with deep
feeling is evoked through pleasure and satisfaction, and, in separation, deep thoughts flow
in sorrow. Qualities associated with real love are
self-dedication and self-sacrifice, admiration and
respect for each other, and a sort of deep
intimacy, and a strong desire for union in which
m a n or woman becomes fully absorbed in the
object of love. Such an intense love is often
129

Fundamentals of Layayoga

associated with sexual desire which is fully
aroused in contact. Sexual desire may also go
so far as to cause intense sexuality. At this
point love becomes lust. However, love has
other forms. Love in the form of affection is
naturally expressed towards one's own children.
It is very strong in mothers. There is also love
for brothers and sisters, and for friends.
Is it possible to develop concentration in the
centre of such emotionalized thoughts? First of
all, concentration is based on a state of singlepointedness of consciousness. According to
bhaktiyoga, love can be spiritualized to that
degree when it assumes exclusively the form
of only that object and nothing else. It is called
ananyabhakti - single-pointed concentrated flow
of love for God. This one object cannot be a
material object. Because, material objects are
seen in the diversified consciousness. T h r o u g h
the process of concentration, diversity is transformed into uniformity. T h e likeness of a
material object in thought-form can be undertaken at the beginning as an object of concentration. As concentration develops, the
thought-form changes and finally is reduced to
what is an unknown phenomenon, never experienced in the material world. This is the experience of subtle elements - mahabhutas which can
be farther reduced to tanmatras. These experiences occur when consciousness is in a state of
concentratedness. Superconcentration is attained on mahabhutas and tanmatras. But when
love is fully spiritualized, even mahabhutas
and tanmatras are not registered in consciousness
which is flooded by bhakti (divine love). In
the most intensified love in concentration, only
God in the form of Ishtadewata is held in consciousness. Love-concentration at its highest
degree becomes ananda samadhi - superloveconcentration.
So, when bhakti flows, consciousness only
receives and holds divine forms, and nothing
else. Bhakti develops non-attachment to worldly
objects, stage by stage. T h e r e are, of course,
preliminary practices which help to arouse
bhakti. First of all, thoughts should be purified
and spiritualized by yama and niyama, especially,
by ritualistic worship, japa (mantra-practice)
and thinking of Ishtadewata.. All these belong
130

to waidhi-bhakti (ritualistic or devotional divine
love) which ultimately leads to ragatmikabhakti (all-love). This is the path of bhaktiyoga.
Those who are able to raise their intelligence
and thoughts to a spiritual level, and whose
thoughts are purified by yama and niyama, are
fit for the practice of jnanayoga. By spiritual
deliberation and reflection, they become unattached to m u n d a n e objects and are able to
make consciousness free from worldly thoughts.
By applying 'neti neti' (not this, not this)
deliberation, they go beyond the world, and
finally become established in Brahman (Supreme
God) in asamprajnata samadhi. This is the state
of rajayoga.
In layayoga, kundalini is aroused by concentration in combination with mantra, pranayama
and certain control processes of hathayoga.
T h e aroused kundalini exhibits absorptive power
to the highest degree, by which she absorbs
all the creative principles located in the chakras
(subtle centres) when piercing through them.
Absorption occurs in a certain order, and, finally,
when all creative principles except superconsciousness are withdrawn, samprajnata samadhi
is attained in sahasrara. This is the limit of
Amakala. Thereafter, the stage of Nirwanakala
is reached. Now Kuzdalini becomes Nirwanashakti. After that Kundalini herself becomes
united with and is absorbed into Parama Shiwa.
This is the final stage of asamprajnata samadhi.
This is kundaliniyoga.
In bhutashuddhi, the entire process of kundaliniyoga, in exact order, is rendered in thoughtforms. W h a t actually happens in kundaliniyoga
is imitated in thoughts. In fact, kundaliniyoga
in thought-form is bhutashuddhi. T h e Kundalirousing which is the first part of the process of
Kundaliniyoga is done in thought, that is,
thinking deeply of the rousing of Kundalini.
T h e absorption of various creative principles
in the same order as actually takes place in
kundaliniyoga is also done in thoughts in the
same order.
In bhutashuddhi, thought is not mixed with
intellectuality. Here, thought is merely a mental
image of a certain form or action which requires
no intellection, but is associated with attention
and a certain degree of concentration. Con-

Bhatashuddhi - Purificatory Thought-concentration

centradve-mind is brought into play for making
thought forceful. When the thought is a conscious
form of an image of an object, and the whole
thought is of that image, and there is no interruption in the flow of that thought and there is
no penetration of something else in it, it is
called thought-form. A thought-form is to be
maintained for a certain time without allowing
it to slip, or mix with, or be replaced by, other
thoughts. T h e minimum time a particular
thought-form is to be maintained is the lowest
kumbhaka-unit which is a four-matrika-unit
(4-m-u). During kumbhaka (breath-suspension),
an internal calmness develops. T h e calmness
is frequently interrupted by organic and muscular disturbances. Organic harmony should be
established by exercise, diet and internal cleanliness. Muscular relaxation a n d motionlessness
should be developed by the practice of asana
(static posture exercise).
Thought-form should be practised while
assuming a concentration posture in which the
body is fully relaxed and without any motion.
Sit calm for some minutes. T h e n practise 4-m-u
kumbhaka. It is done in this way: inspire in an
effortless manner and suspend for four matrikaunits, then expire slowly in an effortless m a n n e r
without measure. When the 4-m-u kumbhaka
becomes easy, and inner calmness remains
undisturbed, and it can be repeated according
to certain rules, then this kumbhaka should
be considered as accomplished. Thereafter,
higher-unit kumbhakas should be practised
stage by stage.
The following are the stages of kumbhaka:
1 4-matrika-unit kumbhaka
2 6-m-u
3 10-m-u
4 12-m-u
5 16-m-u
Thought-form should be practised during
kumbhaka. It is done in this m a n n e r : think of
one object only, and nothing else. T h e depth
of thinking will be such that the whole thought
will be of that object only, and nothing else;
and that thought will not be dim, but vivid and
clear, nonundulatory, and unpenetrable and
unreplaceable by other thoughts. T h a t non-

moving steady single thought is mono-thought.
T h e duration of mono-thought is the duration
of kumbhaka. T h e practice is done stage by
stage:
1
2
3
4
5

4-m-u kumbhaka together with monothought
6-m-u
- ditto 10-m-u
- ditto 12-m-u
- ditto 16-m-u
- ditto -

This is the general limit of kumbhaka and
mono-thought practice. W h e n mono-thought
with kumbhaka is practised in this way, thought
becomes deeper and deeper, and, at a certain
point, it is transformed into real concentration.
At this stage, the power of control to hold an
object in consciousness is so developed that
that object becomes the whole of consciousness;
consciousness, now, is of one form and singlepointed; the object held in consciousness becomes
steady; and consciousness is now impenetrable
by other objects, and does not change its form.
Such holding-power of control is termed dharana
- holding-concentration. As concentration goes
deeper, it becomes uninterrupted normally,
and continues for a longer period. This is dhyana
- deep concentration. Finally, concentration
becomes so deep that I-ness feeling disappears
and only an object in its subtle form remains.
This is samadhi - superconcentration. T h e first
form of samadhi is samprajnata samadhi superconscious concentration. It is also divided
into four stages:
1 In which appropriate material forms are the
objects.
2 In which mahabhutas-tanmatras are the
objects.
3 In which God in form, or Ishtadewata is the
object.
4 In which subtle kundalini is the object.
Finally, samprajnata samadhi is transformed
into asamprajnata samadhi after the absorption
into Kundalini of samadhi-consciousness and
primus. Now only Kundalini remains. Ultimately, Kundalini is absorbed into infinite
Supreme Consciousness and remains as the
being of Shiwa. This is the final stage of asam131

Fundamentals of Layayoga
prajnata samadhi. This is the goal of kundaliniyoga, and bhuthashuddhi is the means to it.
In bhutashuddhi, the mono-thought formation is done in the chakras (subtle centres),
starting from the muladhara and working up to
the sahasrara. The chakras are the seats of
creative principles. The lower five chakras,
in addition, are the seats of sensory principles,
principles of conative actions, bio-energies and
deities. The yoga-processes practised in the
chakras are summarized here.
1 In the muladhara:
(a) Conative control - sexual control.
(b) Sensory control - smell control.
(c) Bio-energy control - apanayama to
control apana-energy.
(d) Anal control.
(e) Concentration on Deity Brahma.
2 In the swadhishthana:
(a) Conative control - organic control.
(b) Sensory control - taste control.
(c) Bio-energy control - apanayama.
(d) Yonimudra and perineal control.
(e) Concentration on Deity Wishnu.
3 In the manipura:
(a) Conative control - locomotor muscular
control.
(b) Sensory control - sight control.
(c) Bio-energy control - samanayama to
control samana-energy.
(d) Uddiyana process (abdominal retraction
control).
(e) Concentration on Deity Rudra.
4 In the anahata:
(a) Conative control - prehensile control.
(b) Sensory control - touch control.
(c) Bio-energy control - pranayama to
control prarca-energy.
(d) Concentration on Deity Isha.
5 In the wishuddha:
(a) Conative control - speech control.
(b) Sensory control - sound control.
(c) Bio-energy control - udanayama to
control udana-energy.

132

(d) Jalandharabandha mudra.
(e) Concentration on Deity Sadashiwa.
6 In the ajna:
(a) Sense-mind control.
(b) Will-mind control.
(c) Concentration on the Goddess Hakim.
7 In the manas:
Control of sense-consciousness.
8 In the indu:
(a) Thought control.
(b) Concentration on the God Parashiwa.
9 In the guru:
Concentration on Guru - God in form.
10 In the sahasrara:
Samprajnata samadhi.
In bhutashuddhi, all these different forms of
control are not practised as specific exercises
in different chakras. But the concentration on
gods and goddesses situated in the chakras is
a part of bhutashuddhi. A specific system, based
entirely on what actually happens in kundaliniyoga, of mono-thought formation has been
adopted in bhutashuddhi. At the beginning, the
process is only of thought. Thought is of a nonintellective and non-deliberative character, of
one image, non-undulatory, and impenetrable
by other thoughts. The duration of each thoughtform is willed and is immediately replaced by
another specific thought-form. In this manner,
a specific thought-chain is made. Thought
gradually becomes deeper by practice, and
finally is transformed into concentration in
which holding-power is manifested. This is
holding-concentration.
A thought, when composed of only one image
without any intellective oscillations and remaining steady and deep, is able to express its hidden
power by which it becomes a living phenomenon
- a fact. So, deep thinking of arousing Kundalini
and of absorption of different creative principles
in different chakras becomes facts, when thought
is transformed into holding-concentration, and
that into deep concentration. In this way, bhutashuddhi becomes ultimately kundaliniyoga.

CHAPTER 6

Bhutashuddhi Pranayama Purificatory Breathing

Bhutashuddhi pranayama is a special form
of sahita breathing which forms an important
part of bhutashuddhi. This breathing effects
deep internal purification by the mantra power.
The purificatory effects of bhutashuddhi are
enhanced by this breathing in which mantra
and concentration are intrinsic parts. Mantra
causes deep internal purification and its power
is increased by breath-suspension and concentration. This is why Shiwa has said that
bhutashuddhi should be done with pranayama
( - Brihannilatantra, ch. 2, p. 5).
About the technique of bhutashuddhi pranayama, it is stated: 'Inhale air through the left
nostril, 16 measures; then suspend breath,
64 measures; and finally expire through the
right nostril, 32 measures; with smoke-coloured
wayu-bija, that is, the mantra "Yang", situated
in a hexagram. Then breathe in through the
right nostril, 16 measures; suspend, 64 measures;
with red-coloured wahni-bija, that is, the mantra
"Rang", in a triangle with swastika sign. Now
think of black-coloured "Personified Impurity"
(papapurusha) lying in the left side of the practitioner . . . and then think that it is burned
by the fire arising from muladhara, and its
ashes are then expelled from the body with
expiration through the right nostril, 32 measures.
Now, with the white-coloured chandra-bija,
that is, the mantra "Thang" which is in the
forehead (that is, indu centre), inspire through
the left nostril, 16 measures, then suspend,
64 measures, and at the same time think that
by the showers of deathless substance in the
form of 50 matrika-letters a new body has been

created. Then, make the body firm by the
mantra "Lang" while expiring (through the
right nostril) with 32 measures' ( - Goutamiyatantra, ch. 9, p. 27).
It has been stated: 'The whole body along
with "personified impurity" should be burnt
by the fire-flame arising from muladhara. Inspire
through the left nostril with the japa of mantra
(thinking mantra mentally) "Yang", 16 measures; suspend 64 measures with the japa "Yang"
and then expire 32 measures with the japa
"Yang" through the left nostril; again inspire
with the japa of "Rang" 16 in order to burn the
subtle body, suspend with the japa of "Rang" 64
and at the same time think that the body is
burnt into ashes, then expire with the japa of
"Rang" 32 and think the ashes are eliminated;
then inspire with the japa of "Lang" 16 and (by
thinking) irradiate the body . . .; suspend with
the japa of "Thang" 64 and make the body
firm (by thinking); and expire with the japa
of "Wang" 32 and vitalize the body with deathless substance' ( - Tararahasya, p. 8). Here is a
slightly different technique.
Ishwara said: 'Inspire through the left nostril
with the japa of the air-germ-mantra, that is
"Yang" 16; then hold in the manipura centre
with breath-suspension and with the japa of
"Yang" 64; expire with the japa of "Yang" 32
through the right nostril. In this manner do the
breathing with the fire-germ-mantra ("Rang"),
holding the breath in the anahata centre.
Purification is effected by the mantra "Yang"
and burning by the mantra "Rang". Thinking of
the white-coloured water-germ-mantra (that is,
133

Fundamentals of Layayoga

"Wang") in the forehead (that is, ajna), expiration
should be done through the right nostril with
japa 32. In this m a n n e r the process should be
repeated twelve times. This is bhutashuddhi for
the purification of the subtle body' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6, pp. 5 - 6 ) .
T h e technique described here is as follows:
(1) left inspiration and suspension, right expiration, with mantra 'Yang'; measures 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 ;
for the purification (drying purification) of the
subtle body; (2) right inspiration and suspension, left expiration, with mantra 'Rang'; measures 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 ; for the burning (burning-purification) of the subtle body; (3) left inspiration and
suspension, right expiration, with mantra 'Wang';
measures 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 .
Another technique of bhutashuddhi breathing, which is done in modified bhutashuddhi,
is this: 'Inspire through the left nostril and at
the same time think of smoke-coloured airgerm-mantra ("Yang"), and do japa of the mantra
16 times; suspend and do japa of the mantra
64 times, and at the same time think that the
black-coloured "personified i m p u r i t y " in the
left interior part of the body along with the
(subtle) body, has been dried (by the m a n t r a ) ;
then expire through the right nostril with the
japa of the mantra 32 times; inspire through
the right nostril with the japa of fire-germ-mantra
"Rang" 16 times and at the same time think
of the mantra as red-coloured; suspend with the
japa of the mantra 64 times and at the same time
think that the "personified impurity", together
with the subtle body, has been burnt by the
fire arising from muladhara; then expire through
the left nostril with the ashes (produced by burning) and with the japa of the m a n t r a ; again,
thinking of the white-coloured moon-germmantra "Thang", inspire with the left nostril
and at the same time make japa of the mantra
("Thang") 16 times and think of the moon in
the forehead (indu centre); then suspend with
the japa of the water-germ-mantra "Wang" 64
times and at the same time think that the whole
body which is of matrika-letters has been (newly)
made by the deathless substance (amrita) flowing
from the moon in the forehead (indu centre);
then expire through the right nostril with the
japa of earth-germ-mantra "Lang" 32 times and
134

at the same time think that the body has been
made firm' ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 16, p. 15).
T h e technique of bhutashuddhi breathing
given here is complete. It is as follows: (1) left
inspiration 16 - suspension 64 - right expiration
32, with the japa of the mantra 'Yang' along with
concentration; (2) right inspiration 16 - suspension 64 - left expiration 32, with the japa of the
mantra 'Rang' and concentration; (3) left inspiration 16, with the japa of the mantra 'Thang'
and concentration; suspension 64, with the
japa of the mantra ''Wang' and concentration;
right expiration 32, with the japa of the mantra
'Lang' with concentration.
Here, concentration means deep thinking
which is done along with the mental mantrajapa and with either inspiration, suspension
or expiration. These respiratory acts are measured by the japa. Thinking becomes deeper when
done with mantra and breathing. T h e purificatory process consists of internal drying and
burning. Drying becomes effective by the mantra
'Yang' in combination with thinking and breathing. Similarly, burning becomes effective by
the mantra 'Rang' in combination with thinking
a n d breathing. T h e purificatory process is
followed by the re-energizing process. It consists
of two factors: body-remaking and body-firming.
T h e remaking of the body is done by the mantras
'Thang' and 'Wang' with breathing and thinking,
and the newly made body is made firm by the
mantra 'hang' with breathing and thinking.
T h e power of 'Yang' is released when done with
left, inspiratory and suspensive, right, expiratory
breathing, and of 'Rang' in right inspiratory
and suspensive, left expiratory breathing. The
power of 'Thang' is awakened in left inspiratory
breathing, that of 'Wang' in suspensive breathing,
and that of 'hang' in right expiratory breathing.
T h e process of drying (shoshana) is effected by
the mantra 'Yang' in left inspiratory and suspensive, right expiratory breathing with 16-64-32
measures; and the process of burning (dahana)
by the mantra 'Rang' in right-inspiratorysuspensive-left-expiratory breathing with 166 4 - 3 2 measures ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2,
p. 23). It has been stated: 'Drying, burning
and irradiation (plawana) should be done with
the mantras "Yang", "Rang" and "Wang" res-

Bhutashuddhi Pranayama - Purificatory Breathing

pectively. In this manner, the practitioner should
perform
bhutashuddhi'
( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 2, p. 6). Also, ' O h Deweshi! the practitioner,
for the purification of the body, should do drying,
burning, ashes-removal, amrita (vital substance) shower (warshana) and irradiation (aplawana)
by the air-germ-mantra ("Yang"), fire-germmantra ("Rang"),water-germ-mantra ("Wang"),
moon-germ-mantra ("Thang") and earth-germmantra ("Lang") respectively, in conjunction
with inspiration-suspension-expiration (that is,
pranayama)' ( - From Tantragandharwa, quoted
in Shaktanandatarangini, 7. 10).
Here the process of purification has been
clearly defined. T h e purificatory process consists
of five practices:
1 Drying with the mantra 'Yang' in conjunction
with breathing.
2 Burning and ashes-removal with the mantra
'Rang' and breathing.
3 Amrita-shower with the mantra 'Wang' and
breathing.
4 Irradiation with the mantra ' Thang' and
breathing.
5 Body-firming with the mantra 'Lang' and
breathing.
Thinking is an intrinsic part of the purificatory
process. It is stated: 'In the left nostril, the
thinking of smoke-coloured air-germ-mantra
("Yang") should be done (in inspiration through
the left nostril). T h e n the body should be dried
by "Yang" (in suspension) by thinking, and then
think of "Yang" (while expiring) through the
right nostril. Then think of red-coloured firegerm-mantra ("Rang") (while inspiring) through
the right nostril; burn the dried body into ashes
by the fire from "Rang" (by thinking while
suspending breath), and then expire through
the left nostril (while thinking that) the ashes
are removed. Then the white-coloured germmantra "Thang" should be placed in the forehead
(indu centre), by which the lunar amrita (vital
substance) will be made to flow downward (all
by thinking). Then, thinking that the amritaborn body is pure and pleasing, bring the jiwatman to its own place in a right manner' ( - Sanatkumaratantra, ch. 3, p. 2). Here, the whole process is done by thinking in conjunction with

breathing. T h e sounds and colours of mantras
are thought of and the purificatory processes
are done by thinking.
Wayu is the subtle pranic energy which is in
operation. T h e germ-mantra is in the form of
wayu-energy, that is, wayu-energy forms an
intrinsic part of the germ-mantra. T h e wayuenergy changes its character in left inspiration,
right inspiration, left expiration, right expiration
and suspension. T h e wayu-energy when operative during left inspiration and suspension, and
right expiration, is the 'Yang'-energy by which
the body is dried; the wayu-energy in right
inspiration and suspension, and left expiration
becomes 'Rang'-energy which burns the body
along with impurities ( - from Bhairawatantra,
quoted in Tarabhaktisudharnawa, ch. 5, p. 153).
It indicates that the wayu-energy becomes a
germ-mantra-energy by appropriate breathing.
T h e mantra-energy is subtle and radiates a
particular colour-ray and is apprehended in
concentration. So long as apprehension is not
possible, the mantra should be thought of in
the right colour.
It has been stated: 'In the navel region
(manipura centre), think of the red-coloured
maya-bija, and then burn the subtle impure
body by the fire coming from it by thinking'
( - Tarabhaktisudharnawa, ch. 5, p. 155). Here,
it has been clearly stated that the purificatory
processes should be done by thinking, and the
body is not the physical body but subtle body.
Again, 'Think of the smoke-coloured "Yang"wayu (-energy) in the navel region (manipura
centre) and make the subtle body dry by the
mantra ("Yang") (by thinking) while doing the
left-inspiratory-suspensive,
right-expiratory
breathing, 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 . Think of the red-coloured
fire-germ-mantra ("Rang") in the region of genitalia (swadhishthana) and burn the impure
subtle body by the mantra ("Rang") (by thinking)
and at the same time do the right-inspiratorysuspensive, left-expiratory breathing, 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 .
Thinking of the water-germ-mantra "Wang"
in the region of the uvula, make the flow of
amrita from the sahasrara centre by the mantra
("Wang") (by thinking) while doing left-inspiratory breathing, and irradiate the whole bodyby amrita by "Wang" (by thinking) while doing
135

Fundamentals of Layayoga

suspensive breathing. T h e n think of the earthgerm- mantra "hang" in the anal region (muladhara centre) a n d irradiate the body fully by
"Lang" (by thinking) while doing right-inspiratory breathing. By this, a most excellent nonwhite-non-black divine body is attained' ( - from
Yamala, quoted in Tarabhaktisudharnawa, ch. 5,
p. 156).
From the above exposition, it is clear that a
germ-mantra is in the nature of wayu, that is,
prana or vital energy which emits a particularray. In other words, a germ-mantra is a form
of life-force which emits silent sound and colour
radiation. T h e mantra-power is only approachable through deep mono-thought which, in
time, develops into concentration. However,
the power of the mantra is aroused by deep monothought, and is utilized in the purification of the
subtle body to make it divine. T h e purificatory
effects also extend to the physical body through
thought
and
pranayama
(breath-control).
T h o u g h t becomes forceful and effective by
breathing. So, mantra, thought and breathing all three become intrinsic parts of the purificatory process.
It has been stated: ' T h e drying (process) done
by air-germ-mantra ("Yang") is called bodydrying. This (process) should be performed while
doing left-inspiratory-suspensive, right-expiratory breathing. T h e burning of the body by
burning-germ-mantra ("Rang") is called bodyburning. T h e process should be done in rightinspiratory-suspensive, left-expiratory breathing. T h e whole body should be irradiated by the
currents of amrita flowing from the union of
Kundalini and Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness).
This process is called irradiation' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 15, p p . 7 4 - 5 ) . Here, it is indicated that
the processes of body-drying and body-burning
are the effects of specific germ (bija)-mantras
and the mantras become effective when done
in conjunction with appropriate breathing. T h e
germ-mantra 'Rang' has been called burninggerm-mantra, (dahana-bija) that is, fire-germmantra which is 'Rang'. Certain germ (bija)mantras are endowed with the power of purification, so it is stated: ' T h e purification of the
body should be done by "Yang", "Rang", "Wang"
and "Lang" ( - Garua'apurana, 1.12.2); and ' T h e
136

body of subtle elements is to be dried and burnt
by the germ (bija)-mantras "Yang" and "Rang"
respectively; a n d then think of amrita (vital
substance) along with the germ-mantra "Wang";
finally, the whole body should be irradiated by
amrita with the help of the germ-mantra "Lang"
( - Garudapurana, 1.11.2-3). Here, it is clearly
stated that the mantras have the power to effect
purification of the subtle body.
T h a t deep thinking plays a most important
role in the mantra purification of the body has
been expressed thus: 'Think of "Yang" in the
heart region (that is, anahata) and of "Rang"
which is like three bright flames endowed with
the power of burning and purifying; then think
in the moon centre (indu chakra) situated in the
cerebral region of white-coloured amrita by the
flow of which the earth centre (muladhara) is
being irradiated; by this process, a divine body
which is free from all impurities is attained'
( - Brahmapurana, 6 1 . 4 - 6 ) . Here we find that
the mantra and its specific purificatory action
should be done by deep thinking. It has been
further stated: ' T h e germs of the body are five
elements. These subtle elements are earth,
water, fire, air and void factor (akasha). For the
purification of these elements, the processes of
drying, burning, ashes-removal, amrita (vital
substance)-shower and irradiation should be
done (in succession); these purificatory processes
are done by thinking' ( - Kalikapurana, 57.
104-6). It has been clearly stated here that the
purificatory processes should be done by
thinking.
So, bhutashuddhi pranayama is a special purificatory process done as a part of bhutashuddhi.
It is the mantra purification, as it is effected by
mantra. T h e mantra purification consists of the
specific processes of drying, burning, ashesremoval, amrita-shower, irradiation and bodyfirming. Each specific process is intimately
related to a specific germ-mantra. T h e germmantra causes the specific purification. Drying
is effected by the germ-mantra 'Yang', burning
and ashes-removal by 'Rang', amrita-shower by
'Thang', irradiation by 'Wang'and body-firming
by 'Lang'. T h e impure subtle body is dried by
'Yang' and burnt by 'Rang'. Amrita-flow ii
caused by 'Thang' and a new body is formed

Bhatashuddhi Pranayama - Purificatory Breathing

by the irradiation of amrita by 'Wang', and
finally, the new body is made firm by 'Lang'.
The power of the germ-mantra is aroused by
japa, deep thinking and breathing. Japa is the
repetition of the germ-mantra by thinking of the
desired number during breathing. Verbal
and semi-verbal japa should be practised first
to master the correct sound of the mantra.
In mantra-thought the correct sound-form is an
important factor. Also the colour of the germmantra should be thought of. T h e specific
action of the germ-mantra, namely, drying,
burning, etc. should be done by thinking.
Therefore, thinking is the thought of the mantra
sound, mantra colour, mantra japa and mantra
action. Thinking is done in conjunction with
breathing. Mantra becomes effective and thinking deep by appropriate breathing. Each germmantra produces effects when practised in
conjunction with a particular form of breathing.
Now we shall consider the breathing aspect of
the mantra purification.

Sahita Breathing
Sahita is a Waidika form of breath-control.
It is stated: 'Kumbhaka is said to be of two kinds
- sahita and kewala; so long as kewala is not
attained sahita should be practised' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.20). Moreover, 'Kumbhaka
(breath-suspension) is of two forms - sahita and
kewala. Sahita is with inspiration and expiration,
and kewala is without inspiration and expiration.
Sahita should be practised until kewala is
attained' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.13-15).
The two main forms of Waidika breathcontrol are sahita and kewala. In sahita, suspension is with inspiration and expiration. Therefore, it is inspiratory-expiratory suspension.
It ultimately leads to the attainment of kewala.
Kewala
is
non-inspiratory-non-expiratory
suspension. This is the highest form of suspension.
Sahita develops that power by which the suspensive phase is much prolonged and gradually the
inspiratory and expiratory phases are fully
controlled. At this stage the suspensive phase

develops into kewala-suspension - automatic suspension 'without inspiration and expiration'
( - Yogatattwopanunad, 50).
T h e prolongation of suspension (kumbhaka)
is extremely difficult. According to yoga, this
is only possible when certain deep internal
purification is effected. So it is stated: 'Thereafter (after the specific purification) the power
of holding breath for a prolonged time is developed' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 49). This specific
purification is termed nadishuddhi, that is, the
purification of the subtle wayu-force (vital-force)
operating as nadis - force-motion lines. These
nadis are not physical channels but subtle
radiation lines created by the motional wayuforces. T h e motional directions of wayu-forces
are the nadis. The nadis form a system technically
called nadi-chakra - force-motion field, or forcefield.
T h e term 'shuddhi', which means purification,
in relation to the nadis has been used in a
technical sense. Purification is that process
which makes wayu-force free from what interrupts its full functioning. There are two main
motions of wayu-force - ida and pingala. These
two motions or flows are controlled by sushumna.
U n d e r sushumna control, the sun and moon lines
are perfect and in harmony.
Pingala-force (that is, wayu-force radiating
as pihgala-line) causes the consumption of
energy in the body by exhibiting actions, that is,
the energy is transformed into activities. When
there is excessive consumption of energy, the
body becomes depleted of energy, weak and
exhausted. On the other hand, if the body is
unable to mobilize the necessary quantity of
energy, there will be an impairment of functional
efficiency of the body. Energy conservation is
effected by ida-force. There is a certain limit of
this process. When the ida-force is weak, the
conservation of energy is below the normal
level and, consequently, the body is in an
adynamic state. When the ida-force functions
excessively, the pingala-function is lowered.
If both ida- and pingala-forces are under normal
sushumna control, a balance will be established
between the conservation and consumption of
energy, and as a result, the body will be vital,
healthy, vigorous and efficient.
137

Fundamentals of Layayoga

In the mental field, pihgala-force produces
creative mental energy and ida-force mental
relaxation and calmness. Excessive pingala influence causes uncontrolled and destructive
thoughts, violent emotion and a general restlessness of the mind. Excessive ida-force causes
dullness, mental torpor and decreased thinking
power. When the forces are under sushumnacontrol the mental life is well-balanced and wellcontrolled. U n d e r this condition, the mind is
able to do intellective, constructive thinking and
also to exhibit controlled thoughts; mental
creativity and mental calmness and concentratedness go together. All these are only
possible when sushumna-control is brought into
play.
T h e harmonization of ida and pingala occurs
when sushumna exercises its control over them
in a normal manner. This is effected by the superpurificatory process called nadishuddhi. U n d e r
this state, sushumna radiates its control-power to
ida and pingala by which their flows are normalized and harmonized. T h e ida-pingala powerflows are now forceful but well-controlled,
neither in excess nor in deficiency, and the
directions of force-motions are now normal,
that is, they radiate in a right course enabling
them to exhibit their full potency without any
deviation or destruction. Nadishuddhi is the
process of normalization of the wayu-forces
when they are able to exercise their full power
on the mind and body to effect rarefaction and
concentratedness of the mind and purification
and vitalization of the body.
According to yoga, sahita breathing plays the
fundamental role in nadishuddhi. Because of
this sahita breathing forms a very important
part of pranayama, both of Waidika and Tantrika
forms. It has been stated: 'The practitioner who
has been practising regularly abstention, observance and (concentration) posture should perform pranayama; by pranayama the nadis (wayus
or vital forces) become purified' ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.3.15). Here, the pranayama is
sahita pranayama. When pranayama is done with
inspiration, expiration and suspension it is
called sahita. It is often called only pranayama,
as it is stated, 'The process consisting of inspiration-suspension-expiration is called pranayama
138

( - Darshanopanishad, 6.1). It has been farther
stated: 'Pranayama is that which consists of
inspiration-suspension-expiration
with
the
measures 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 ' ( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.1.6). T h e measures of 16-64-32 are
the regular ones used in sahita.
T h e technique of sahita has been given as,
'Inspire slowly through the left nostril, measure
16, suspend, measure 64, and then expire
through the right nostril, measure 32; again
do inspiration through the right nostril, suspend
and expire as before with attendveness' ( - Y o g a tattwopanuAad, 4 1 - 2 ) . Here, the form of sahita
and its regular measures have been given. So
sahita is that breathing in which the breath-acts
are executed in the following sequence: left
inspiration 16 - suspension 64 - right expiration
32 - right inspiration 16 - suspension 64 - left
expiration 32. T h e sahita breathing causes
nadishuddhi, so it is stated: 'By the practice of
this breathing (sahita) for three months, nadishuddhi is attained' ( - Yogatattwopanshad, 44).
Nadishuddhi is also important for the practice
of a higher stage of sahita in which power of
suspension develops to a very high degree. It has
been stated: 'The practitioner who is wellcontrolled by the practice of abstention,
observance and posture, should first do nadishuddhi (by sahita) and then perform (the
higher aspect of sahita) pranayama' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, 53).
Nadishuddhi is only possible when inspirationsuspension-expiration is executed in right
measures. It has been stated: 'When inspiration,
suspension and expiration are done in right
measures, then nadishuddhi is attained'
( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.7.7.).
T h e general indications of nadishuddhi are
'lightness of the body, increased power of digestion and assimilation' ( - Darshanopanishad, 5.
11); 'reduction of body fat' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 4 6 ) ; 'comeliness' ( - Shandilyopanishad,
1.5.4), and 'healthiness' ( - Shandilyopanishad,
1.7.8). T h e fundamental effects of nadishuddhi
are 'the increased power of breath-suspension'
( - ibid., 1.7.8), and 'the easy entrance into
sushumna of the wayu-force; when this is
effected, tranquillity of the mind is attained'
(ibid., 1.7.8-10).

Bhutashuddhi Pranayama - Purificatory Breathing

In Tantrika pranayama, sahita and kewala
are also the most important parts. It has been
stated: 'Kumbhaka (suspension) is of two forms
- sahita and kewala. Sahita suspension is that
which is done in conjunction with inspiration
and expiration. Sahita should be practised until
kewala is accomplished. T h a t natural suspension
which is without inspiration and expiration is
really pranayama, and that is kewala suspension'
( - Grahayamala, Pranayama Section). T h e
technique of sahita which has been given here
is: 'Assuming the lotus posture, . . . inspire
slowly through the left nostril, then suspend as
long as you can, and then expire slowly, not
forcibly. Again, inspire slowly through the
right nostril, suspend as long as you can, then
expire slowly (through the left nostril). . . . This
is harmless sahita suspension, (kumbhaka)'
( - from Dattatreyasanghita, quoted in Pranatoshanitantra, Part 6, ch. 1, p. 407). This
indicates that left-inspiration-suspension, right-

expiration, right-inspiration-suspension, leftexpiration type of breathing is sahita breathing.
This breathing when practised for three months
effects nadishuddhi ( - ibid.). So, sahita breathing causes nadishuddhi.
T h e regular measures adopted in inspiration,
suspension and expiration in sahita breathing
is explained here: 'Inspire slowly through the
left nostril with the measure 16, . . . suspend
64, and expire slowly through the right nostril.
T h e n the breathing should be done in a reverse
manner, and again it will be reversed, and in this
m a n n e r breathing should be controlled' ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 10).
All this indicates that sahita breathing causes
nadishuddhi and when nadishuddhi is attained
the body becomes vitalized and normally healthy
and the mind purified and concentrative. And
above all, nadishuddhi creates a state in which
the power of suspension (kumbhaka) is
enormously increased.

139

1 Muladhanra Chakra

2 (above) Deities in muladhara (A)
3 (opposite) Deities in Muladhara (B)

4 Swadhishthana Chakra

5 Deities in Swadhishthana (A)

6 Deities in Swadhishthana (B)

7 Manipura Chakra

8 Deities in Manipura (A)

9 Deities in Manipura (B)

10 Hrit Chakra

11 Anahata Chakra

12 Deities in Anahata (A)

13 Deities in Anahata (B)

14 Wishuddha Chakra

15 Deities in Wishuddha (A)

16 Deities in Wishuddha (B)

17 Ajna Chakra

18 Hakini

19 Ajna system

20 Indu Chakra

21 Nirwana Chakra

22 Sahasrara Organization

23 Guru Chakra

24 Sahasrara Chakra (A)

25 Sahasrara Chakra (B)

J

1 .

BOW

POSITION

26 The Ida-Pingtfla Course, (i) Bow Position,
(ii) Half-coil Position

2. HALF-COIL

POSITION

27 Location of Chakras in the Chitrini; the
Surface - Vertebro-Cranial Relations

28 Concentration

PART 2

THE CHAKRA
SYSTEM

CHAPTER 7

Introduction to the System
of Chakras

The word 'chakra' has many meanings, viz.,
the wheel of a carriage, a potter's wheel, an
astronomical circle, a circular weapon, an army,
a form of military array, etc. It has also been used
in a more specific sense. There are some special
chakras used for the selection of an appropriate
mantra for initiation, namely, kulakula-chakra,
akathaha-chakra, akadama-chakra, etc. Special
chakras are also used in relation to worship, as,
for example, kurma-chakra. In our study here,
a chakra is an organization which is circular
in form, having a specific centre. It is situated
within the body, not as a part of the gross body,
but as a supra-material power-form. It is
imprinted undetectably in the body. Because
of its subtle character a chakra is not seen by the
eyes, even with the help of supersensitive instruments.
It has been stated: 'Body is of two kinds:
gross (material) and subtle (extra-material).
The material body is composed of flesh, bone,
hair, blood, fat and marrow, excretes urine and
discharges faeces, is endowed with vital activities
(wata) and undergoes metabolism (pitta). T h e
subtle body is composed of nadis (force-motionlines), of which ida is that nadi which is moonwhite and situated on the left side, pingala is
like the sun and masculine, and between these
two nadis is sushumna containing brahmanadi. Sushumna is extremely fine and, turning
from right to left, it extends from muladhara
to brahmarandhra ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6,
p. 5). From this it is clear that the nadi system
belongs to the subtle body, it is not a part of the
material body. T h e chakras are within the

sushumna nadi. So it is said: 'Inside it (sushumna)
is the extremely subtle chitrini nadi which is
divine in character and is in the form of letters
(matrika-units), and in which are strung the
six chakras' ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2). More clearly, 'Inside the sushumna is
the shining nadi named wajra, and inside it is
the subtle chitrini through which Kunadali passes;
the beautiful six lotuses (chakras) are in this
nadi ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25. 5 1 - 2 ) . So
the chakras are subtle centres within the
innermost force-line of sushumna. They do not
belong to the material body, and therefore they
are not seen.
T h e material body is the effect of the metamorphosis of the basic energy which is made to
operate on the surface stratum due to the influence of prawa-force. T h a t basic energy is
entirely matter-free and active in the substratum, but is endowed with a specific quality
which, under certain condition, gives it an
inertial character. This basic energy exhibits
a circular wave motion which is reducible to a
subtle infinitesimal point. This energy pattern
is the tanmatra-mahabhuta forces which exist
in five forms. T h e fifth mahabhuta, prithiwi
(earth metamatter) force on the surface stratum
exhibits its inertial quality and, as a result, energy
appears in a conjugated form - energy particles.
But energy may appear also as free from particles.
Here, the prithiwi factor becomes latent, and
the tejas (fire metamatter) factor patent. U n d e r
this condition, energy appears as thermal,
luminous or electrical. In the energy transformation, the ap (water metamatter) factor
143

T h e Chakra System

plays an important role and is associated with the
chemical form of energy and energy as waves.
T h e tanmatra-mahabhuta forces create inorganic matter, in which the influence of
prana-force plays a most important role. Pranaforce, appearing as wayu-forces, operates in
relation to tanmatra-mahabhuta forces to create
living matter. T h e creation of a living organized
body is impossible without the wayu-forces
being involved in combination with the basic
tanmatra-mahabhuta forces. T h e chemical
changes in the body are not able to create a
living body, but they are an indication of and
concomitant with life-force activities in the body.
T h e inoperativeness of pranic forces makes the
chemically intact body a corpse. Nothing can
alter it. Different forms of energy - thermal,
mechanical, electrical - which are active in a
living body are entirely dependent on the operation of the pranic forces; they themselves cannot
create living matter, or atomic energy. Energy
in a more refined form appears as electrical.
Energy associated with the elementary particles
and radiation is electrical in nature. In muscular
contraction, conduction of nerve impulses and
cerebral activities, the electrical form of energy
is manifested. But the pranic force is neither
thermal, mechanical nor electrical; it is
supramaterial. T h e r e must be a level at which
energy becomes non-electrical in nature and is
completely released from any material bondage.
T h e living brain substance is associated with
chemical energy, and electrical energy is patent
in the cerebral activities. But there is no possibility of having either the vital force or consciousness manifested in the brain, unless there
is a source of energy which is non-material.
T h e material body is living because the wayuforces are operating in its substance in an
intrinsic manner, but their centres of operation
do not lie in it; they are beyond the matterenergy field; they are in the substratum. W h e n
the wayu-forces are withdrawn from the material
substance, the body appears as lifeless and
without consciousness. This inoperativeness of
wayu-forces in the material body does not make
them vanish. In the substratum, they function
in a subtle organization - the immaterial subtle
body - in which consciousness is held without
144

material substance. T h e truth of this statement
is demonstrated by what is called 'Parasharirawesha' (entering into another's body). A
yogi can leave his own body by volition, and can
enter into a body which is recently dead. When
he leaves his own body, it becomes dead, and a
dead body becomes alive when he enters into it.
This superpower was exhibited by the wellknown Shahkaracharya.
T h e nadi-field has been created by the matterfree wayu-force-motion-lines. T h e wayu-forces
are in motion in this field, and gliding as pingalacurrent to vitalize the material body on the one
side, and, on the other, as ida-current it makes the
mind operate. There is a central power-line
called sushumna which exercises its control
over ida. and pingala flows, and in which the
centralization of the wayu-forces has occurred.
T h e wayu-forces are constantly oozing from the
sushumna
centres
causing
the ida-pingala
currents. In these centres, the centrifugal wayuforces can be controlled and harmonized, and
can also be stopped.
T h e basic part of the sushumna centres are
tanmatra-mahabhwta forces. Each centre consists
of two parts - the centre itself and a peripheral
aspect. T h e centre is an infinitesimal point which,
from a material point of view, is zero. This point
in the substratum is a power concentrated to its
highest degree, which arises from the primary
inertia-principle (tamas), and is called tanmatraforce. This force is in the nature of germ-mantra.
T h e tanmatra-force, being transformed into
mahabhuta-force, appears as circular radiant
energy emitting certain matrika-units. This is
the peripheral aspect. This is a sushumna centre
a n d is termed chakra. There are five lower
chakras in the sushumna which are formed of
tanmatra-mahabhuta forces. T h e chakras are
stabilized by the tanmatra-mahabhuta forces,
because of their inertial nature. The inertial factor is more pronounced in prithiwi
(earth metamatter)-force, wave character in
ap(water metamatter)-force, brilliance and
power in tejas(fire metamatter)-force, and
highly purified energy is in wayu(air metamatter)-force. T h e akasha(void)-force is the
base.
T h e tanmatra-forces are so subtle and con-

Introduction to the System of Chakras

centrated that they can only be realized in their
mantra forms. Each tanmatra-force represents a
specific germ-mantra. A germ-mantra consists
of three fundamental parts - b i j a (sound-specificality), nada (sound-power) and bindu (conscious form). In a germ-mantra, sound-power
assumes a specific character from the bija and is
exposed as a divine form (dewata - deity) at
bindu. So in each of the five lower chakras, is a
germ-mantra from which arises a specific deity.
Also in each chakra, there is a specific PowerConsciousness which controls all forces operating
there. A sense principle is also connected with
the tanmatra-forces. So each chakra is the seat of
a specific sense principle. Prana, being manifested
as wayu-forces, is linked to the tanmatra-mahabhuta forces. Each specific wayu force is located
in a chakra. T h e conative principles are also in
the chakras.
So we find that a chakra is the repository of
powers of various forms - tanmatra-mahabhuta
forces, wayu-force, mantra-power, a specific
Deity and Power (Shakti), sensory principle,
conative principle, and other forms of power.
How is it known that all these powers are in the
chakras? T h e chakras are subtle, so they are not
seen even with the aid of a supersensitive instrument. This does not indicate that they do not
exist. An atom is built up of particles which are
so minute in size that they are not visible. T h e
chakras are subtler than atoms and particles.
If an atom can contain a tremendous amount of
energy, why should not a chakra, which is infinitely subtle, contain energy which is practically
unlimited in quantity and capacity? T h e chakra
energy can be aroused and controlled by
pranayama (breath-control) and dhyana (deep
concentration).
When the specific energy residing in the
muladhara centre is aroused by deep concentration, the power of levitation is developed
( - Shiwasanghita, 5. 92). Deep concentration in
the swadhishthana centre causes the body to be
disease-free and long-lived (ibid., 5, 108 - 9).
The power of entering into another's body
(paradehapraweshana) is developed by deep
concentration in the manipuraka centre (ibid.,
5.114). T h e development of supersensory power
and the power of the passing through air occur

by deep concentration in the anahata centre
( - ibid., 5.120). All this indicates that chakras
and powers located in them are not imaginary
but facts. By the application of appropriate
measures these powers can be aroused and made
to manifest on the physical plane. T h e chakras
with their mantras and deities can be seen in
deep concentration. Deep concentration on the
colour-form of a chakra at a particular location
point produces a characteristic resonance - a
response from an unknown region, and finally,
a real living colour-form of the chakra appears
there. T h e chakras are no more unreal than a
nerve centre or a nerve plexus, though the former
is extra-material, and the latter material.
T h e chakras form a system in the sushumna..
T h e chakra system has been described both in
the Upanishads and Tantras. There are also
fragmentary descriptions of the chakras in the
Puranas. This indicates that the subject is very
ancient and was widely known in ancient India.

Pouranika Fragments on
the Chakras
T h e thousand-petalled chakra, called sahasrara,
is the first centralized power of pranawa emitted
by Kundalini in her Shabdabrahman aspect, and
in her supreme aspect she is one with Supreme
Consciousness as Supreme kundalini. It has been
stated: 'From the navel of Narayana (Supreme
Consciousness), lying in infinite water (in samadhi), arose a lotus with a large number (that is,
one-thousand) of petals lustrous like ten-million
suns' ( - Shiwapurana, 1.2. 3 4 - 6 ) . Here, the
origin of sahasrara has been stated. It has been
more clearly stated: 'The imperishable great
lord Hari (Supreme Consciousness) who is the
creator of the whole universe, while lying in
infinite water, produced a finite phenomenon;
he created a lotus from his navel, which contains
1000 petals, and is pure, golden and shines like
the sun' ( - Padmapurana, 1.39. 152-3). T h e
great rishi Sanatkumara stated: ' T h a t lotus which
is at the highest part is yellow and shines like
the sun and the moon' ( - Shiwapurana, 4.40.26).
145

T h e Chakra System

T h a t lotus is sahasrara. It has been stated:
'The Supreme Power (in the form of Mahalakshmi) is in the pericarp of the thousandpetalled lotus' ( - Dewibhagawata, 9.42.8). Concentration should be done on Mahalakshmi
in sahasrara. Also, 'Eternal, splendorous, lotuseyed Brahma, arising from primus, sat in the
thousand-petalled lotus' ( - Mahabharata, 12.
331.21).
Sahasrara is the centre where concentration
is developed into superconcentration (samadhi).
Concentration is first made on Guru (God in
form) in a white twelve-petalled lotus which is
a part of sahasrara. It is stated: 'Getting up from
bed in the early morning and changing dress,
one should concentrate on Guru in the subtle,
pure and life-giving thousand-petalled lotus
which is in relation to brahma-line (-randhra)'
( - Brahmawaiwartapurawa, 1.26. 5 - 6 ) . It has
been said here that sahasrara is a subtle centre,
that is, it is extra-material and endowed with
prana-force. Concentration on Ishtadewata also
is done on hritpadma or sahasrara. So it is
stated: 'Concentrate on Ishtadewata. in hritpadma or the great pure white thousand-petalled
lotus (chakra)' ( - ibid., 1.26.8). Sahasrara is
the centre where there is spiritual splendour.
It has been said: 'In ancient time, Indra was able
to "see" the spiritual splendour in the thousandpetalled padma by the japa of germ-mantra
given by his guru' ( - ibid., 4.21.174).
About ajna chakra, it has been stated: A j n a
where concentration is done on Supreme Brahman (in form) is from Supreme Power' ( - Shiwapurana, 5 b. 8.7). Ajna chakra is in the form of
energy, the source of which is Supreme Power.
So ajna and other chakras are power-centres.
Four chakras have been mentioned in a technical
manner by Maitreya in describing the yoga
process adopted by Sat; when she desired to
a b a n d o n her physical body. Maitreya stated:
Assuming a (yoga) posture over which she had
full control, Satt executed the pranayamic
method of control of prana and apana wayus
in the nabhi-chakra (that is, manipara chakra);
then she raised slowly the udana wayu in
pranayama with concentration to hrit (that is,
hrit or anahata chakra), and then she conducted
it through the kantha (that is, wishuddha

146

chakra) to the bhrumadhya (the space between
the eyebrows, that is, ajnachakra)' ( - Bhagawata, 4.4.25).
Of 1000 names of Shiwa stated by God
Wlishnu, there are three names which are after
three chakras. T h e y a r e : Swadhishthaanapadashraya (the support of the position of the swadhishthana chakra), Manipura, HritpundarikamasmaA (seated in the hrit chakra) ( - Shiwapurana, 1.71. 6 9 - 7 0 ) . T h e muladhara chakra has
been mentioned here: 'Starting from muladhara'
( - ibid., 2.11.40). In explaining pranawa (Ong),
Ishwara said: ' O h Parwati! adhara (muladhara),
manipara, hridaya (hrit or anahata chakra), wishuddhi (wishuddha), ajna, shakti, shanti and shantyatita are in due order the seats of pranawa, and
of all seats shantyatita is the highest; only he
who is intensely passionless is fit for it' ( - ibid. ,3.3.
2 7 - 9 ) . Here, the swadhishthana chakra has not
been mentioned. However, there are nine chakras
if swadhishthana is included. Shakti, shanti and
shantyatita are the new terms which are not
common. Shakti chakra may stand for manas,
shanti for indu and shantyattta for sahasrara.
Rishi U p a m a n y u gave a description of the
chakras. He said: 'Making the body completely
motionless with bio-energy fully controlled,
worship Shiwa and Shakti with concentration
seated in hrit padma (chakra) within the body.
Concentration should also be done in mula
(the perineal region, that is, muladhara),
nasagra (the tip of the nose), nabhi (navel, that is,
manipura), kantha (throat, i.e. wishuddha),
talurandhra (lalana chakra), bhramadhya (ajna),
dewadashanta (brahmarandhra, that is nirwana
chakra) and murdhan (highest part, that is,
sahasrara) . . . In dwidala (a chakra with two
petals, that is ajna), .shodashara (sixteen-petalled
chakra, that is wishuddha), dwadashara (twelvepetalled chakra, that is anahata), dashara (tenpetalled chakra, that is manipura), shadasra
(six-petalled swadhishthana chakra) or chaturasra (four-petalled muladhara), concentration
should be done on Shiwa. In the space between
the eyebrows (that is, intra-cerebral region),
there is a lotus (chakra) with two petals shining
like lightning; the petals contain two matrikaletters ("Hang" and "Kshang"), arranged from
the right to the left.

Introduction to the System of Chakras

'The sixteen-petalled chakra contains 16
matrika-letters (from 'Ang' to 'Ah'), arranged
from the right. T h e (twelve-petalled) lotus
which is as bright as the sun is in the heart region;
the matrika-letters from "Kang" to "Thang" are
on its petals, arranged from the right; concentration should be done here. In the navel region
within the spinal column, there is a milk-white
lotus (ten-petalled) which contains in its petals
the matrika-letters from "Dang" to "Phang" in
due order. T h e lotus with 6 petals, with its face
down, and red, contains the matrika-letters from
"Bang" to "Lang" in its petals. T h e golden coloured muladhara contains the matrika-letters from
"Wang" to "Sang" in due order in its (four) petals'
(-Shiwapurana, 5 b. 29. 130-40). Here, the
following chakras have been mentioned: muladhara, swadhishthana, manipura, hrit or anahata,
wishuddha, lalana, ajna, nirwana and sahasrara.
Practically the whole chakra system has been
briefly described.
It has been stated: 'Upawarhana, at first,
passed through the muladhara, swadhishthana,
manipura, anahata, wishuddha and ajna - these
six chakras' ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana 1.13.
13). Here, the regular six chakras have been
mentioned. Furthermore, 'Brahma controlled
by yoga (that is, breath-control and concentration) with great care the six nadis (power-lines),
viz., ida, sushumna, medhya, pingala, nalini
and budha, and six chakras, viz., muladhara,
swadhishthana, manipura, anahata, wishuddha
and ajna' { - ibid., 4.20.27-8). It indicates that
there was a yoga process to control the nadis
(power-motion-lines) and the six chakras.
Krishna said: 'After achieving control over
longings, senses, hunger and thirst, and effecting
the internal purification and the purification
of the nadis (superpurification of the power
system), and piercing through the chakras, concentration should be done on Supreme Being unitted with Kundalini-power. T h e six chakras a r e :
muladhara, swadhishthana, manipura, anahata
wishuddha and ajna' ( - ibid.,4.110.8-10). I t h a s
been disclosed here that concentration on Supreme Consciousness united with Kundalini is effective when the control of the body by exercise
and ascesis, control of the senses and desires by
sensory control, internal purification of the body

and the purification of the nadis, and the piercing
of the chakras are done. T h e piercing of the chakras means the rousing of Kundalini and her conduction through the chakras to sahasrara where
concentration should be done.
Here is a technical exposition of the chakras.
It has been stated: 'Concentrating for a brief
period on Supreme Power in the six chakras,
the practitioner should concentrate on her in
the chakra with 16 petals in which are located
the matrika-letters from "Ang" to "Ah", and
thereafter japa should be commenced with
mulamantra (special mantra given in initiation).
At the space between the eyebrows where lies
the borders of the three nadis, and is known as
the junction of the three power-lines, there is a
centre which is red, hexagonal and magnified
to four-fingers' breadth; it is called by the
yogis ajna chakra. In the region of the throat,
the three nadis - sushumna, ida and pingala
form a coiling which is hexagonal and magnified
to six-fingers' breadth, where lies the centre,
belonging to six-chakras, which is white, sixteenpetalled, magnified to seven-fingers' breadth,
and contain (the matrika-letters from) "Ang"
(to "Ah"). T h e expert yogis make concentration
and japa of mantra in this chakra. T h e three
nadis are united in the heart region' ( - Kalikapurana, 55. 2 8 - 3 3 ) . Here only two chakras
are mentioned: ajna and wishuddha. All six
chakras are suitable for concentration. The
wishuddha chakra is suitable for both concentration and japa. T h e chakras are magnified to a
certain extent which is necessary for thoughtconcentration in the earlier stages.
In another technical exposition of the chakras,
it has been stated: 'The practitioner should
concentrate on an excellent lotus situated threefingers' breadth below the navel point (at the
perineal point, that is, the lotus is situated within
the coccyx and is called muladhara), having
(in its pericarp), a region with eight corners or
five corners. There is a triangle (inside the region)
which is in the nature of fire, moon and sun.
Concentration, according to one's power, may
be done in this order: triangle of sun, of moon,
and of fire, or triangle of fire, of sun, and of moon
according to the process instructed. He should
think that there are spiritual action, spiritual
147

T h e Chakra System

knowledge, unaffectedness and yoga-power in
the lower part of fire. He should think in due
order of the three primary attributes (gunas)
in the region of the lotus. T h e n he should concentrate on Rudra (a specific divine form) who
is united with his Power lying in relation to the
primary sentience-principle (sattwa). Concentration should be done properly in the navel
region (that is, manipura chakra), the throat
region (wishuddha chakra), the region between
the eyebrows (ajna chakra), the region of the
forehead (indu chakra), or at the highest point
(that is, void, where lies sahasrara). Thoughtconcentration on Shiwa should be done in the
lotus with 2 petals (ajna), with 16 petals (wishuddha), with 12 petals (anahata), with 10 petals
(manipura), with 6 petals (swadhishthana), and
with 4 petals (muladhara), in this order'
( - Lingapurana, 1.8. 9 2 - 7 ) . Most of the chakras
- muladhara, swadhisthana, manipura, anahata,
wishuddha, ajna, indu and sahasrara - have
been mentioned here. A new technical description of the muladhara chakra has been
given. T h a t the chakras are the specific centres
for the practice of concentration has been
disclosed.
Again, 'Worship (with concentration) (to
Shiwa) is done outside the body, and also in the
square region (muladhara), the six-cornered
(lotus, termed swadhishthana), the ten-cornered
(or ten-petalled lotus, that is manipura), the
twelve-petalled (lotus, that is anahata), the
sixteen-petalled (lotus, that is wishuddha) and
the triangle (ajna) (within the body)' ( - ibid.,
1.75.35).
Furthermore,
'Those
who
are
spiritually advanced, worship Shiwa, the great
master of yoga, with godly love (bhakti) and
spiritual concentration (shubha yoga) in the
six-petalled lotus (swadhishthana). He who 'sees'
Shiwa in the triangle (ajna) . . . becomes absorbed into him' ( - ibid., 1.75. 3 8 - 9 ) . It has been
stated: ' I m m o r t a l Shiwa who is joyous in his
self is in the dwadashantabrahmarandhra (that
is, nirwana chakra), the point between the
eyebrows (ajna), the palate region (lalana),
the throat region (wishuddha) and the heart
region (anahata), in this order' ( - ibid., 2.21.28).
Here, nirwana and lalana have been mentioned
along with other chakras.
148

T h e system of chakras as explained by Dewi
is as follows: 'There is a lotus which has 4 petals
of molten gold (that is red). On the petals are
(the matrika-units) "Wang", "Shang", "Shang"
and "Sang" which are yellow. It has a six-cornered region. It is the basic centre (mala) and the
support (adhara) (of kundalini), so it is called
muladhara. This is a centre for concentration.
'Above it is an excellent (lotus called)
swadhishthana with 6 petals which are like fire
(that is red). On the petals are (the matrikaunits)
"Bang",
"Bhang",
"Mang",
"Yang",
"Rang" and "hang" of the lustre of a diamond.
T h e name swadhishthana is from "swa" to mean
Supreme Shiwa in an apprehensible form (linga)
(that is, this lotus is the seat of Shiwa in form, so it
is called swadhishthana).
'Above it, in the navel region, is splendorous
manipura which is dark like a cloud (that is,
black) shining like lightning. It is of power.
It has 10 petals on which are 10 letters from
"Dang" to "Phang" (that is, the 10 matrika-units;
and they are like lightning; the shining effects
on the petals are due to this). This lotus is like a
blooming gem, so it is called manipadma.
Deity Wishnu is in this lotus. Here it is possible
to "see" Wishnu (by concentration).
'Above it is the anahata lotus (chakra) with
12 petals which are red like the rising sun and on
which are the 12 letters from 'Kang' to 'Thang'.
Within it is in linga-form (a form effective for
concentration) Bana (a form of Shiwa) who
is splendorous like ten-thousand suns. This lotus
is called by the yogis anahata because here arises
that sound which is non-sensory and is in the
nature of Shabdabrahman. In this lotus is
Supreme Being (in appropriate form) and it is
the abode of bliss.
'Above it is the lotus named wishuddha
with 16 petals of smoke-colour on which are
the 16 matrika-units form 'Ang' to 'Ah' of great
lustre. T h e superpurification of the embodied
being occurs in this lotus through the realization
of divine being, this is why it is called wishuddha.
This wonderful lotus is also called akasha (void)
(because it is the centre of the void-principle).
'Above it is the beautiful ajna chakra with 2
petals on which are (the matrika-units) "Hang"
and "Kshang". Here lies the Supreme Being. In

Introduction to the System of Chakras
this centre, spiritual force passes into the practitioner, so it is called ajna.
'Above it is what is called kailasa (chakra),
and above that is rodhini (chakra).... Above
it (rodhim) is sahasrara (1000-petalled chakra)
in which is the seat of Supreme Bindu' ( - Dewibhagawata, 7.35.34-47).
About the locations of the six chakras, it has
been stated: 'In the perineal region (adhara =
yonisthana), genital region, navel region, heart
region, neck region (talumula = the root of the
palate, but here it is kantha = neck - Nilakantha's
commentary) and the eyebrow region (lalata =
the forehead, but here bhrumadhya = the space
between the eyebrows - Nilakantha), (are the
six chakras) having 4 petals, 6 petals, 10 petals,
12 petals, 16 petals and 2 petals respectively'
{ - ibid., 11.1.43). About the regions and mantras
of the subtle elements (mahabhutas), it has
been said that the 'earth' region is square of
golden (yellow) colour within which is 'Lang'bija (germ-mantra of the same colour); that the
region of 'water' is of the shape of a white halfmoon, within which is 'Wang'-bija (of the same
colour); that the region of 'fire' is triangular
in shape and red and encloses 'Rang'-bija
(of the same colour); that the region of 'air'
is circular and smoke-coloured and encloses
'Yang'-bija (of the same colour); and that the
region of 'void' (akasha) is circular and is white
(or transparent) in colour, and encloses 'Hang'
-bija (of the same colour) ( - ibid., 11.8.3-7).
Concentration on deities in different chakras
is an ancient spiritual process and was practised
by the rishis. It has been stated that a group
named Karpadrisha, which followed the rishipath, used to practise concentration on the
divine being in the abdominal region (that is, the
manipura chakra), while the Arum group practised
concentration on extremely subtle form of God
in the heart region (either hrit or anahata
chakra), connected with the nadi-system; but
the abode of Supreme Consciousness is in the
extra-cerebral region (parama shiras, that is
sahasrara) ( - Bhagawata, 10.87.18).
There was a process of dharana (holdingconcentration) in which the vital force is held
in different chakras with breath-suspension and
concentration. The holding was done in the

chakras with four petals (muladhara), with six
petals (swadhishthana), in the navel region
(manipura), in the heart region (hrit chakra),
(the chakra) in the region of the lungs with
twelve petals (anahata), (the chakra) with
sixteen petals, in the region of the palate (lalana
or talu chakra), the space between the eyebrows
(ajna chakra), and in brahmarandhra in the head
(nirwana chakra) ( - Skandapurana, 1.2.55.
44-5).

The Pouranika System of Chakras
From the descriptions of the chakras given in
the Puranas, the Pouraraka system for chakras
emerges. It is as follows:
1 Muladhara. The term 'muladhara' has been
used in Shiwapurana, 2.11.40; 51.29.140; in
Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.13.13; 4.20.28; 4.110.
10; and in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.34. It is mentioned indirectly in Shiwapurana, 56.29.131
and 134; in Skandapurana, 1.2.55.44; and in
Lingapurana, 1.8.92 and 97; 1.75.35. Maladhara is also called adhara, Shiwapurana, 3.3.28.
Description. The muladhara chakra is situated
in the perineal region (adhara or mula =
yonisthana), that is a certain intracoccygeal
point. It has four petals of red colour. On the
petals are four matrika-letters 'Wang' to 'Sang'
of yellow colour. It has a square region inside.
It has also been stated that the region is fivecornered, six-cornered or eight-cornered. However, the region is of 'earth', and is generally
accepted as a square which is yellow in colour,
and the 'earth' germ-mantra 'Lang' which is
also yellow resides in the square region. Inside the
region is a triangle which is in the form of fire,
moon and sun. This chakra is called muladhara,
because it is the basic centre (mula) which is
the support (adhara) of kundalini. It is a centre
of thought-concentration and mental worship.
2 Swadhishthana. The term 'swadhishthana'
has been used in Shiwapurana, 1.71.69; in
Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.13.13; 4.20.28; 4.110.
10; and in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.35. This chakra
is mentioned indirectly in Lingapurana, 1.8.97;
149

T h e Chakra System

1.75.35 and 3 8 ; in Shiwapurana, 5b. 29.134;
and in Skandapurana, 1.2.55.44.
Description. T h e swadhishthana chakra is
situated above muladhara, in the genital region
(that is, a certain intrasacral point). It has
six petals of red colour. On the petals are six
matrika-letters from 'Bang' to 'Lang' of the lustre
of a diamond. In the pericarp is a half-moonshaped region of' water' of white colour in which
is 'Wang'-bija of white colour. It is also said
that the region is six-cornered. It is the seat of
Supreme Shiwa in a form effective for concentration, so it is called swadhishthana. It is a centre
for thought-concentration and mental worship.
3 Manipara. T h e term 'manipura' has been
used in Shiwapurana, 1.71.70; 3.3.28; in Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.13.13; 4.20.28; 4.110.10; and
in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.36. It is indirectly
mentioned in Lingapurarna, 1.8.96 and 9 7 ;
1.75.35; in Shiwapurana, 5b.29.131 and 134;
and in Bhagawata, 10.87.18. This centre is also
called nabhi (navel)-chakra ( - Bhagawata,
4.4.25).
Description.
Manipura
is
situated
above
swadhishthana, in the navel region (that is, a
certain intralumbar point). It has 10 petals of
dark colour or black colour. On the petals are
10 matrika-letters from 'Dang' to 'Phang' which
are lightning (of lightning colour). In the pericarp, there is a triangular region of 'fire' of red
colour. Within it is the red-coloured 'Rang'bija. This chakra has also been said to be milkwhite. In that case the petals are white in colour.
It is a centre for thought-concentration and
mental worship.
4 Hrit (-padma). T h e hrit chakra has been
mentioned in Shiwapurana, 5b.29.131; and
indirectly in Skandapurana, 1.2.55.44.
Description. T h e lotus (chakra) is situated
in relation to the heart (that is, a certain intrathoracispinal point, below anahata and above
manipura. It has eight petals which are white
in colour. Pranic forces are located here. It is
a sacred place for spiritual concentration
( - Lingapurana, 1.86.62-64).
5 Anahata. T h e term 'anahata' has been used
in
Brahmawaiwartapurana,
1.13.13;4.20.28;
4.110.10; and in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.39. It is
mentioned indirectly in Lingapurana, 1.8.97;

150

2.21.28; in Bhagawata, 4.4.25; 10.87.18; in
Skandapurana, 1.2.55.44; and in Shiwapurana,
5b.29.133.
Description. Anahata is situated, above manipura, (and above hrit) in the heart region (that
is, a certain intrathoracispinal point). It has
twelve petals of red colour. On the petals are
twelve matrika-letters from 'Kang' to 'Thang'.
In the pericarp is the region of 'air' which is
circular and of smoke-colour. In the region
is the smoke-coloured 'Yang'-bija. Within the
chakra is splendorous Bana-linga (Shiwa in a
special form which is suitable for concentration
and worship). In it is 'heard' the non-sensory
sound (anahata nada) of mantra, so it is called
anahata. It is a centre for thought-concentration
and mental worship.
6 Wishuddha. T h e term 'wishuddha' has
been used in Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.13.13;
4.20.28; 4.110.10; and in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.
42. Another term 'wishuddhi' (for wishuddha)
has been used in Shiwapurana, 3.3.28. It is
mentioned indirectly in Lingapurana, 1.8.96
and 9 7 ; 1.75.35; 2.21.28; in Bhagawata, 4.4.25;
in Shiwapurana, 5b.29.131 and 133; in Kalikapurana, 55.28 and 33; and in Skandapurana,
1.2.55.44.
Description. Above anahata is the wishuddha
chakra, situated in the neck region (that is, a
certain intracervicospinal point). It has sixteen
petals of smoke-colour. On the petals are the
sixteen matrika-letters from 'Ang' to 'Ah' which
are lustrous. In the pericarp, there is the region
of ' void' (akasha), which is circular in shape and
white in colour (or transparent). The 'Hang'bija, which is also white is in this region. This
chakra is called wishuddha (which means purified), because here spiritual purification of the
practitioner occurs through the realization of
Supreme Being. It is the centre for thoughtconcentration, japa and mental worship.
7 T a l u (chakra). This chakra has been mentioned in Skandapurana, 1.2.55.44; in Lingapurana, 2.21.28; and in Shiwapurana, 5b.29.131.
T h e talu chakra has been termed lalana chakra
in the Tantras. There is no description of the
chakra in the Puranas.
8 Ajna. T h e term 'ajna' has been mentioned
in Shiwapurana, 3.3.28; in Brahmawaiwarta-

Introduction to the System of Chakras

purana, 1.13.13; 4.20.28; 4.110.10; in Kalikapurana, 55.30; and in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.44.
It is indirectly mentioned in Lingapurana, 1.8.96;
2.21.28; in Bhagawata, 4.4.25; in Shiwapurana,
5b.29. 132; and in Skandapurana, 1.2.55.44.
Ajna has been termed 'dwidala', because this
chakra has two petals. Dwidala has been mentioned in Lingapurana, 1.8.97; and in Shiwapurana, 5b.29.133 and 134. This lotus is also
called 'trirasra' (triangle), as it has a triangular
process inside the pericarp. Trirasra has been
mentioned in Lingapurana, 1.75.39.
Description. Ajna is situated above talu chakra
at the eyebrow region (that is, at a certain intracerebral point). It has two petals. T h e petals are
like lightning. They are also mentioned as red
in colour. On the petals are two matrika-letters
'Hang' and 'Kshang', arranged from right to
left. It is a great centre for concentration and
mental worship.
9 Shakti (-chakra). T h e term 'shakti' is
a new one. It has only been mentioned in Shiwapurana, 3.3.28. It may be the Tantrika 'manas'
chakra. It is above ajna.
10 Kailasa(-chakra). 'Kailasa' is a new term.
It has only been mentioned in Dewibhagawata,
7.35.46. Perhaps it is the same as the chakra
'shanta' used in Shiwapurana, 3.3.28. However,
it appears that kailasa and shanta are identical

with the indu chakra. Kailasa is above shakti.
11 Rodhini (-chakra). T h e term 'rodhini' is
a new one, and it has been mentioned in Dewibhagawata 7.35.46. T h e terms 'dwadashanta',
mentioned in Lingapurana, 2.21.28, and in
Shiwapurana, 5b.29.132, and 'brahmarandhra',
mentioned in Skandapurana, 1.2.55.45, appear to
be synonymous with rodhini. T h e chakra which
is in brahmarandhra has been termed nirwana
in the Tantras. So rodhini is probably
the Tantrika nirwana chakra.
12 Sahasrara .The term 'sahasrara' has been
mentioned in Dewibhagawata, 7.35.47. This
chakra also is called 'sahasrapadma' (lotus with
1000 petals), mentioned in Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.5, 'sahasrapatra' (1000-petalled),
mentioned in the same Purana, 1.26.8, and
'sahasradala-padma' (lotus having 1000 petals),
also mentioned in the same Purana, 4.21.174.
T h e chakra named 'shantyatita', mentioned in
Shiwapurana, 3.3.29, and sahasrara appear to
be synonyms. Sahasrara has been indirectly
called 'parama shiras', that is, supracerebral
centre, mentioned in Bhagawata, 10.87.18.
Description. Sahasrara is situated above
rodhini (at the supracerebral point). It has
1000 petals which are white in colour. It is the
seat of Bindu (Supreme Bindu). Here concentration develops into superconcentration.

151

CHAPTER 8

T h e Waidika System
of Chakras

T h e nadis are the subtle pranic force-motionlines. T h e y are created by the operation of the
prana-wayus. T h e ordinary operation of the
prana-wayus produces two effects: maintaining
life in the body by their complex activities,
and supporting mentation. But there is an
extraordinary function of the prana-wayus in
which the force-motions are centralized as the
sushumna-line
through
which
the
central
spiritual force passes and absorbs all principles
which are the root causes of all nonspiritual
phenomena. T h e centre of the nadi-system is
in relation to hridaya, that is, the subtle hrit
centre situated in the heart region. This subtle
centre is not in the flesh of the heart, but at a
point within the sushumna and that part of the
sushumna is inside the thoracic spine in the heart
region. T h e pranic energy passes externally to
the mental and material fields as different nadilines to support mentalization and vitalization
of the body. But when the hrit centre is aroused,
a concentration of pranic energy occurs by which
the d o r m a n t sushumna. is energized.

Nadi-system
It has been stated: 'There are 101 nadis in
relation to the hridaya (that is, the subtle hrit
centre); among them that " o n e " nadi (that is,
the sushumna) goes upward to the murdhan
(the highest point, that is, brahmarandhra).
T h r o u g h this nadi the spiritual elevation (to
152

the sahasrara) is effected and, as a result, one
becomes immortal. T h e passing through the
other nadis causes deaths and births' ( - Kathopanishad, 2.3.16). T h e 100 nadis indicate a large
number of nadis. These pranic flows maintain
worldliness. But that one nadi which is sushumna
remains dormant when the other nadis flow
strongly. T h e sushumna is aroused by the control
of the flows through the other nadis. T h e shushumna passes upward from the muladhara to the
brahmarandhra where lies the nirwana chakra.
kundalini passes through the sushumna to be in
the sahasrara. T h e control factor appears to
remain in the hrit centre.
This has been more clearly stated here: 'There
are 101 nadis in relation to hridaya (hrit centre).
Of these, one goes to the murdhan (brahmarandhra). Immortality is attained when one
passes upward (to reach the sahasrara by piercing
all the chakras). Death (and consequently birth)
cannot be prevented when going through the
other nadis. Of 101 nadis, the one is sushumna
which is the highest. Within sushumna is concealed the nadi which is of the form of Brahman
(that is, brahma nadi); this is pure in character.
T h e ida is situated on the left side and the
pingala on the right side. Between these two
is the most excellent position (where the sushumna is located); one who knows that is the knower
of the Weda' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.4-6).
H e r e it is explained that of the 101 nadis, the
'one' nadi is the sushumna, and within it is the
brahma nadi. On the left side of the sushumna
stands the ida nadi and on its right side is the
pingala nadi.

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

More about the sushumna: ' T h e winadanda
(the vertebral column), made of bone and long,
lying at the posterior part, extends from the anus
and supports the body. T h e brahma nadi extends
within. T h e sushumna. which is sun-like is between the ida. and pingala and is situated as a
subtle line within the spinal column, and the
brahma nadi is within the sushumna' ( - ibid.,
6. 8-9). Farther, 'The sushumna is the support
of all nadis which are in all parts and spread in
all directions. There are 72 thousand nadis along
which wayu (pranic energy) operates. T h e
wayu-paths are the empty lines of operation'
(-ibid., 6.10, 14-15).
From all this emerges the following: the
nadi-system consists of innumerable nadis which
are all-directed and are in all places. T h e subtle
hrit centre supports the function of the nadis.
Of all the nadis, the one which is the sushumna
is the greatest, because yoga is effected with the
help of it. All other nadis are dependent on the
sushumna for their controlled actions. T h e nadis
are the directions of wayu (pranic force-motion).
The sushumna is the central nadi and is situated
within the vertebral column. On the left side
of the sushumna is the ida and on the right side
the pingala. Inside the sushumna lies the brahma
nadi.
It has been stated: 'The oscillating pranaforce which causes respiration becomes controlled when it is held in the sushumna' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.7). When the pranic force
operates through the other nadis, the vitalization
of the body is effected. But when it is held in
the sushumna, it is fully controlled and there is
natural breath-suspension, with no inspiration
or expiration. So the sushumna is the central
nadi where the control factor is situated.
When the sushumna flow occurs, the pranic
force is withdrawn from other nadis and is
concentrated within the sushumna and, as a
result, breath-suspension (kumbhaka) occurs.
This is very favourable for concentration. At
this stage the sushumna centres are aroused.
Both breath-control and concentration play
a most important role in arousing the centres.
Concentration on the sushumna centres is so
important that it is denoted by a technical term
'sushumnadhyanayoga' ( - Yogashikhopanishad,

6.43) - concentration-in-sushumna which leads
to superconcentration.
It has been stated: 'The sun-coloured sushumna extends from the muladhara to the brahmarandhra. Within it (that is, within the muladhara
to which is connected the sushumna), lies Kundalini who is lightning-like splendorous and
extremely
subtle'
( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.2.6). Within the vertebral column lies
the sushumna as a subtle line of pranic operation,
extending from the muladhara to the brahmarandhra, and is sun-coloured (that is, red).
T h e junction between the muladhara and the
sushumna is called the sushumnadwara, that is,
the entrance to the
sushumna
( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.75). T h e sushumna has been
called the central nadi (madhyanadi) ( - ibid.,
6.41).
About the nadi-system (nadi-chakra) it has
been stated: 'The sushumna being connected
with the triangle of the muladhara is of twelve
digit-length. W h e n the sushumna. is cut lengthwise like a half-split bamboo, the innermost part
is the brahma nadi. T h e ida and pingala stand
on either side of the sushumna and are closely
attached to the wilambini and have extended to
the interior of the nadika. T h e golden (or yellow)coloured wayu (pranic or vital force) moves
through the ida on the left, and the sun (or red)coloured wayu through the pingala on the
right. T h e wilambinz arises from the central
part from where all nadis originate and ramify
upwards, downwards and obliquely. This is
called the nabhichakra, which is like a plexus
the size of a hen's egg. Therefrom arise the
gandhari and hastijihwa, which pass to the eyes;
and the pusha and alambusa which go to the
ears; and the great nadi shura to the space
between the eyebrows; that nadi called wishwodari is concerned with the digestion of four
kinds of food; the saraswati nadi extends to the
tongue; the raka nadi causes thirst, sneezing
and phlegm in the nostrils. T h e shankhini
nadi originates from the region of the throat and
turns downwards; it absorbs the essence of
food and circulates in the brain. There are
three nadis which, from the centre, go downwards. Of these the kuhu nadis is involved in the
evacuation of the bowels, waruni in making
153

T h e Chakra System

water; and the nadi in the frenum of the prepuce
of the penis, called chitra, causes ejaculation of
the semen. This is nadi'-chakra' ( - Yogashikhoponiidad,5. 17-27).
And 'the nadi-kanda (the central plexus of
the nadis) is located nine digit-lengths above the
genitals. It is (when magnified) four digitlengths in thickness and four digit-lengths long,
egg-shaped and concealed in fat, marrow, bone
and blood (that is, physically invisible). There
lies the twelve-spoked nadi-chakra (nadi-system)
which supports the body. In nadi-chakra lies
kundalini who has kept concealed the brahmarandhra, which is to be reached through the
sushumna.
'The alambusa and kuhu nadis are situated
in relation to the sushumna. Adjoining them are
the waruna and yashaswini where lie the two
spokes. T h e pingala is situated in the right
spoke. Between the spokes are situated the
pusha and the payaswini. T h e nadi saraswati
lies in the posterior spoke of the sushumna. Adjoining them are the sharikhini and the gandhari.
T h e nadi called ida stands on the left side of
the sushumna. T h e hastijihwa and then the
wishwodari lie adjacent to it. These nadis
are in the spokes of the chakra (nadi-chakra),
and are arranged from right to left. They are
the twelve nadis which are the flows of twelve
wayus (vital forces). These nadis are the vital
force-motion directions (or lines) and are of
different colours; they are like a piece of cloth,
the central part of which is called nabhichakra
(centre of the nadi-system). . . . T e n wayus
(vital forces) flow through these nadis (that is,
the flows of the wayus are the nadis, or the
subtle lines created by force-motions); thus
the wise student having well understood the
nadi-motion (-gati) which is (actually) wayumotion' ( - Warahopanshad, 5. 2 0 - 3 1 ) .
Moreover, 'There (in the nadi-chakra) is the
sushumna which is known as the bearer of
cosmic principles (that is, there are various
centres of cosmic principles within the sushumna)
and the means to liberation (when these centres
are absorbed in kundalini). It (sushumna)
dwells in the vertebral column (winadanda)
(that is, sushumna is situated within the vertebral
column), and extends from the back of the anal
154

region (that is, the muladhara) to the head where
is the brahmarandhra. This subtle divine nadi
is manifested there. T h e ida is situated on the
left side of the sushumna, and the pingala on
the right side. . . . T h e saraswati and kuhu
are situated on the postero-lateral part of the
sushumna. T h e waruni is between the yashaswini
and the kuhu. T h e payaswini is situated between
the pusha and the saraswati. Between the gandhari and saraswati is yashaswini'. The alambusa
is in the kanda (nadi-konda). T h e kuhu extends
to the genitals. T h e waruni, which extends in
all directions, is in the superior and inferior
aspects of kundalini (that is, muladhara where
lies kundalini). T h e bright yashaswini extends
to the great toe. Going upwards, the pingala
extends to the right nostril. Behind the
pingala, the pusha extends to the right eye.
T h e yashaswini goes to the right ear. T h e saraswati goes to the tongue. Being upwardly directed, the shankhini goes to the left ear. The
gandhari, lying behind the ida, extends to the
left eye. T h e alambusa extends upwards and
downwards from the anal region. There are
other nadis in relation to the fourteen (chief)
nadis, and besides them, there are many more
nadis. As the leaf of the ashwattha (Ficus Religiosa - sacred fig tree) and other trees are full
of vessels, so the body is pervaded by nadis'
( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.4. 10-11).
To summarize - the nadi-chakra (nadi-system)
is formed of innumerable nadis which are arranged in a plexus-like formation, having twelve
spokes. T h e nadis arise from the spokes and they
are also between the spokes. T h e nadis are
essentially the subtle lines of pranic forcemotions, and are of different colours. Of all
nadis, fourteen are important, and of the fourteen,
three are the most important. They are the ida,
pingala and sushumna. Of these three nadis,
the sushumna is the greatest. T h e sushumna
is the central part of the nadi-system. It is within
the vertebral column and extends from the
muladhara to the brahmarandhra in the head.
Inside the sushumna lies the brahma nadi.
T h e ida and pingala are situated on the left
and the right side of the sushumna respectively
(outside the vertebral column).

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

Chakras
Surya - God, who in his infinite aspect is static,
but in his power aspect appears as finite when
he assumes the form of the universe. T h a t Surya
is the secondless divine knowledge-light who
manifests his power as rays. T h e Supreme Power,
which is the power of Surya, is splendorous,
and so he is splendorous. T h e first manifested
rays are centralized in a form of a lotus from
which radiate 1000 rays, as if they were petals.
The central kundali-power emits power-rays
which are in the nature of supra-sounds. These
are the matrika-sounds containing fifty distinct
sound-units, which, being summated, cause
pranawa-sound. T h e fifty sound-powers in the
thousand-petalled lotus are distinct, and each
is twenty-fold strong. T h e matrika-sound-powers
become more specialized in the six lower chakras,
and the sound chain is formed from the regular
and inverse manner, which makes the total
sound strength 100, each sound being two-fold
strong ( - Prashnopanishad, 1.8).
It has been stated: Aditya (God) is father
(in his creative aspect) and has five feet (that
is, five creative principles - tanmatras-mahabhutas, represented by "Hang", "Yang", "Rang",
"Wang" and "Lang") and twelve forms (that is,
mahat, ahang, five senses and five conative
faculties); he is beyond the sensory knowledge,
but from him came the senses and other
principles; he is in the seven chakras (as the
presiding Deity in each chakra, that is, in the
muladhara, swadhishthana, manipura, anahata,
wishuddha, and indu as a Shiwa, and in the
sahasrara as Parama Shiwa) and in six spokes
(that is, the six principles - mind, and the
five mahabhutas which are in the six chakras,
from the ajna to the muladhara)' ( - Prashnopanishad, 1.11).
From God in his creative aspect arise seven
chakras where all creative principles are located.
So it is said: 'From God seven worlds (lokas,
that is, chakras) have come where the pranas
move ( - Mundakopanishad, 2.1.8).
The chakras are the subtle positions where
Supreme Being is realized in his appropriate
forms. T h e principal positions are within the

sushumna, and their corresponding external
locations are the navel, heart, throat and head.
It has been stated: 'There are four (main)
positions (for the realization) of Supreme Being.
They are the navel, the heart, the throat and the
head. Brahman in its four aspects (chatushpada)
becomes manifested in these positions as Brahma
in the waking state, as Wishnu in the dreaming
state, as R u d r a in the state of deep sleep, and as
Supreme Brahman (akshara) in the samadhi
(superconcentration) state (turiya), ( - Brahmopanishad, 1). T h e waking is that in which the senses and mind are in action. At this stage the spiritual
realization is not possible unless one is able
to be in the position in the sushumna, which is
the manipura chakra, which is at the same line
of the navel. It is a suitable centre for concentration, and when concentration becomes deep
(dhyana), Supreme Brahman as Deity Brahma
is realized here. T h e dreaming state is the state
of thoughts. So long as thoughts are not fully
controlled, deep concentration (dhyana) is not
possible. U n d e r this state, one should be in the
hrit chakra in the sushumna for concentration.
This centre corresponds externally to the heart
region. In the hrit centre, Supreme Brahman is
realized as Deity Wishnu. In deep sleeping, the
senses and mind are inoperative, and it is a
state of unconsciousness. But when consciousness is turned into a state of deep concentration,
the senses and sense-mind become actionless.
U n d e r this condition Supreme Brahman as
R u d r a is realized in the wishuddha chakra
situated in the neck region. T h e fourth state
(turiya) is the state of samadhi, when concentration develops into superconcentration.
This occurs in the sahasrara - the extra-cerebral
centre, when Supreme Brahman is realized in
superconscious
concentration
(samprajnata
samadhi).
About the hrit chakra, it has been stated:
'All deities, prana-wayus and the (main) prana,
and the divine light . . . are in the heart (hrit
chakra); all these are in the heart which is in
the nature of consciousness' ( - Brahmopanishad, 4). T h e hrit centre is of consciousness, that
is living. When a chakra is aroused by concentration, it becomes living. T h e hrit chakra is an
excellent place for deep concentration (dhyana).
155

The Chakra System
It has been stated: 'The immutable living divine
light situated in the hrit lotus (chakra) becomes
the Supreme Being in the kadamba (Stephegyne
Parviflora Karth) which is like a spherical form
(that is, the sahasrara chakra) (through superconscious concentration); that Supreme Being
is actually beyond samadhi; he is infinite, he
is love, supreme consciousness, splendorous and
all-pervading. The yogi who concentrates on
this (divine) light as still resembling a lamp in
a windless place and like a real gem, is sure to
get liberation' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad,
Mantra Section, 156-8). Here two stages of
concentration have been mentioned. The first
stage is deep concentration on the divine light
in the hrit chakra. This divine light is Kundalini.
When kundali'-concentration is mastered, it is
transformed into superconscious concentration
in the sahasrara, where Kundalini is ultimately
absorbed into the Supreme Being in non-mens
supreme concentration.
It has been stated: 'Cool light is experienced
by internal focussing (antarlakshya) in the sahasrara' ( - Manalabrahmanopanishad, 1.4.1). Internal focussing is the concentrativeness of
consciousness based on sense-withdrawal. Cool
light is the Brahman-light which is revealed by
internal focussing in the sahasrara. This light
is from luminous Kundalini. kundalini is the
spiritual aspect of Supreme Power of Supreme
Being. When Supreme Power manifests herself
in a finite form from her supreme state of infinitude, the cosmic phenomenon arises. The
embodied being, though a very minute part of
the vast cosmos, exhibits all the creative
principles which are operating cosmically. It
has been stated: 'From Atman (Supreme Being)
arise all pranas. All lokas, all dewas, all bhutas;
the secret name of that Atman is the truth of
all truths; the pranas are truth, but Atman
is the truth of all truths' ( - Brihadararayakopanishad, 2.1.20). The pranas are the pranic forces
which include also the sense-mind and senses
located in the chakras; the lokas are the chakras
in the body; the dewas are the deities within the
chakras, bhutas are the tanmatras (tanons) and
mahabhutas (five forms of metamatter).
The yoga-practitioner realizes in concentration Supreme Being as a Deity in a chakra.
156

The Deity appears as splendorous and living,
and he, the practitioner, with the increased
depth of concentration, becomes absorbed into
the Deity and realizes the sameness of his form
with that of the Deity. In the 'earth'-principle
(which is in the muladhara chakra) is the
splendorous living Deity. By deep concentration,
the embodiment of the practitioner is transformed into the form of the Deity in the conscious
field. Similarly, the splendorous living Deity
is in the 'water'-principle (in the swadhishthana),
in the 'fire'-principle (in the manipura), in the
'air'-principle (in the anahata), in the 'void'(akasha)-principle (in the wishuddha), in the
'moon' (that is, the indu chakra), in the 'lightning' (that is, the nirwana chakra), and in the
'truth' (that is, the sahasrara), and the realization of the Deity and the absorption into it
is possible by deep concentration and by the
control of the specific principle lying in the
chakra through concentration ( - Brihadaranyakopanishad, 2.5.1,2,3,4,7,8,10,12).
It has been stated: 'There is the hridaya which
is like the bud of a lotus, and its face is turned
downwards. . . . In relation to it lies an infinitesimal void (sukshma sushira) where is situated
the whole. Within that lies the great fire (mahan
agni) with its all-pervading flame and its power
on every side. . . . Its rays are emitted upwards,
downwards and obliquely. . . . Within it is
a very minute fire-flame (wahni-shikha) which
shines like lightning in the blue sky, and is
lightly yellow and subtle. Within this flame is
the Supreme Spirit. He is Brahma, Shiwa,
Hari, Indra; he is the imperishable Supreme
God' ( - Narayanopanishad, 50-52). Here the
chakra system has been explained in an ancient
technical manner. The hridaya is like a lotus,
that is, it is the hrit lotus or chakra, which ordinarily lies with its head downwards. The chakra
turns upwards during concentration. There
is a void in relation to the hrit lotus. The void
is subtle, that is, it does not exist in a material
sense. Here the whole chakra system is situated.
This void is the sushumna within which lie the
chakras, including the hrit chakra. Within
sushumna, at its lower end, is the great fire, that
is the fiery triangle lying inside the muladhara.
Within this fire sphere lies the extremely rarefied

The Waidika System of Choleras
fire-flame, that is, Kundalini who is lightninglike splendorous and slightly yellowish and
subtle. When Kundalini is aroused, the fiery
sphere becomes illuminated and emits rays on
all sides. Within Kundalini the Supreme Spirit
is revealed. First, Kundalini is aroused in the
muladhara and then conducted to the hrit
chakra, where concentration on Kundalini is
done. When concentration becomes very deep
a divine form as Brahma, Shiwa or Hari is
revealed. When Kundalini is brought to the
sahasrara, deep concentration is transformed
into superconscious concentration. The Supreme
Spirit is realized in superconscious concentration
in Kundalini. Finally, Kundalini is absorbed
into Supreme Spirit and what remains is only
He in a state of Supreme concentration.
In the first five chakras, are situated five
mahabhuata-tanmatra-principles. Each has its
own colour and sphere. They are described here:
'The "earth"-principle is yellow in colour, and
its sphere is quadrangular in shape and with
the emblem of wajra (thunderbolt) . . . . The
"water"-principle is white, and its region is crescent-shaped and white . . . . The "fire"-principle is shining vermilion in colour . . . . The
"air"-principle is smoke-coloured, and its region
is shaped like a sacrificial altar where is strong
Deity Maruta . . . . The "void" (akasha)-principle is shining black in colour' ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, 135-41).
The chakras are mentioned in connection with
a Waidika process of pratyahara (sense-withdrawal) in which prana is held by breathsuspension in conjunction with concentration.
It has been stated: 'The holding should be done
in . . . muladhara, nabhikanda (that is, manipura), hrit, neck region (wishuddha), talu (talu
or lalana chakra), space between the
eyebrows (that is, ajna), lalate (forehead; that
is, manas and indu chakras), and murdrum
(head; that is, nirwana chakra)' ( - Darshanopanishad, 7. 11-12).
The acquirement of the knowledge of the
chakras is absolutely necessary. It has been
stated: 'Having acquired the knowledge of the
six chakras, the yoga-practitioner should reach
into the regions of the chakras by breath-control.
Thereafter, the pranic force should be conducted

upward (through the sushumna) by breathsuspension. This yoga should be practised in
conjunction with wayu (that is, pranayama),
bindu (that is, mantra), chakras, and chitta
(consciousness). (This practice leads to) samadhi
(superconcentration) by which the yogis attain
immortality' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6. 74-75).
By concentration combined with breath-control
and mantra, kundalini should be aroused in the
muladhara and conducted to the various chakras,
and, finally, to the sahasrara where samadhi
is attained.
Kundalini is the Supreme Power in her highest
spiritual aspect when she is one and the same
with Supreme Spirit. But when she is coiled in
the muladhara, prana manifests as wayu (forcemotion) and operates in the mental and material
fields. So it has been stated: 'The muladhara
triangle (that is, the triangular region inside the
muladhara) which is situated between the anus
and the genitals (that is, yonisthana = perineum)
is the place where Shiwa (Supreme Being) manifests himself in the form of bindu (that is, Swayambhu-linga which becomes reflected in consciousness in concentration). In this place
(triangular region) lies Supreme Power as
Kundalni (that is, in a coiled form). From Kundalini arises wayu, fire is kindled, appears bindu
(divine form), nada (suprasound) becomes gross,
and hangsah (in the form of respiration) and mind
originate. The six chakras from the muladhara,
(to the ajna) are said to be the seats of Shakti
(Power). The place above the throat (that is,
above the ajna) and which ends in the head
(that is, the region from the ajna to the nirwana
chakra) is said to be the seat of Shambhu (shambhawasthana)' ( - Warahopanishad, 5.50-3).
About the importance of the muladhara
chakra, it has been stated: 'Some say that the
adhara (muladhara) lies in relation to the sushumna and the saraswatt (nadi. The (knowledge
of the) world arises from the adhara and it is
also absorbed there. Therefore, one should
seek shelter with all efforts at the feet of a guru
(who alone can disclose it). When the adharashakti (-power, that is, Kundalini) is asleep
(latent) the knowledge of the world arises by
the sleep (unspirituality). When kundali-power
is aroused, the true knowledge of the three
157

T h e Chakra System

worlds (that is, the whole chakra system) is
attained. He who knows the adhara goes beyond
darkness. . . . T h e brightness of the adhara
chakra is like the radiance of a cluster of lightning; if the guru is pleased, liberation is attained
undoubtedly (that is, the lustre of the adhara
is due to the arousing of kundalini; if a disciple
learns from his guru the method of rousing
kundalini and her conduction through the
sushumna, and practises it successfully, he will
attain samadhi and then liberation). . . . By
doing kumbhaka (breath-suspension) in the
adhara (by special pranayamic process), one
is able to make absorptive concentration in the
hrit or sahasrara. T h e kumbhaka in the adhara
causes the shaking of the body, makes the yogi
dance, (that is, to levitate), and the universe
(in its subtle form) is seen there. T h e support
of all creative principles is the adhara (because
they are supported when kundalini remains
coiled in the a d h a r a ) ; in the adhara are all
deities, all the Wedas. Hence one should choose
the adhara (for one's spiritual practice).
' I n the posterior aspect of the adhara (that
is, the sushumna), there is a union of the three
streams (triweni'-sangama) (that is, the union
of the ida, pingala and sushumna nadis). By
bathing (performing deep internal purification)
and drinking (assimilating life-substance by
pranayama) there, m a n becomes free from all sins.
In the adhara, there is Pashchima-linga (that
is, Swayambhu-linga) where lies the entrance. As
soon as it is opened (by rousing Kundalini),
one becomes liberated from worldliness. In the
posterior aspect of the adhara (that is, in the
sushumna), if the ida (chandra) and pingala
(surya) are controlled (that is, kumbhaka is
done), there appears wishwesha (Shiwa, Supreme
Being) (in a divine form); the yogi is absorbed
into Brahman by concentration on him.
' I n the posterior aspect of the adhara, is
the living divine form (Deity Brahma). T h e
prana-force enters into the sushumna when the
ida-pingala flows are controlled (by kumbhaka).
T h e n the six chakras are pierced (by kundalini
who then) enters the brahmarandhra (that is,
nirwana chakra) and then comes out of it and
attains the highest position (that is, reaches the
sahasrara)' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6. 2 2 - 3 4 ) .
158

T h e muladhara is the most important chakra
from the viewpoint of spiritual practice. In this
centre lies kundalini in her coiled form, and it
is here she should be aroused. This is why
kundalini is called the adhara-power. When
kundalini is roused, her splendour makes the
muladhara bright. kundalini lies coiled around
Pashchima-liriga. When she is aroused, the entrance into the sushumna opens and she passes
through the sushumna, piercing all the chakras
situated there, and reaches the sahasrara. The
process of rousing kundalini' consists of breathsuspension combined with mantra, concentration and certain internal control. T h e passing
of kundalini through the sushumna causes absorptive concentration which develops into samadhi (superconcentration) when kundalini reaches the sahasrara.
About the passing through the sushumna of the
roused Kundalini, it has been said: 'Then breaking through the Brahma-knot (Brahmagranthi)
arising from primary energy-principle (rajas
guna), kundalini at once radiates into the sushumna-mouth (-wadana) (that is, the junction between the muladhara and sushumna) like a
flash of lightning. Then kundalini goes upward
into the Wishnu-knot (Wishnugranthi) lying
in the hrit (chakra; according to the Tantras,
Wishnu-knot lies in the anahata chakra which is
above but close to the hrit chakra). T h e n (piercing the Wishnu-knot) kundalini goes still higher
into the Rudra-knot (Rudragranthi) in the eyebrow-space (ajna chakra), and, breaking through
it, reaches the moon-region (shitangshumandala);
this is what is called anahata chakra having 16
petals (the moon-region has also been called
the indu chakra - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.71;
the Tantrika term for the moon-region is the
soma chakra which has also 16 petals; indu and
soma are synonyms; they denote moon)'
( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1. 6 7 - 9 ) . Finally,
kundalini reaches the sahasrara chakra. It has
been stated: 'Absorbing into her the eight
creative principles arising from primus (prakriti),
kundali reaches the (highest) region (that is,
the sahasrara) where she is in contact with
Shiwa; then she becomes united with and absorbed into Shiwa' ( - ibid., 1. 74). T h e roused
kundalini absorbs various creative principles

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

located in the chakras when passing through
them. When she reaches the sahasrara, Kundalini alone shines forth in superconscious concentration. Thereafter, Kundalini becomes one
and the same with Parama Shiwa in non-mens
concentration.
About the six chakras, it has been stated:
'The muladhara, swadhishthana, the third manipura, anahata, wishuddhi and the sixth ajna
are the six chakras. T h e adhara is in the anal
region; the swadhishthana in the genital region;
the manipura in the navel region; the anahata
in the heart region; the wishuddhi in the throat
region; the ajna chakra in the head' ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 3. 9 - 1 1 ) .

Systems of the Chakras
There are several Waidika
We shall now deal with these.

chakra

systems.

1 Chakra system as explained by Narayana
In the perineal region (adhara) is the brahma
chakra (that is, the muladhara chakra). There
is a triangle (trirawritta, or trirawarta, that is,
turned round three times; the Tantrika term
is traipura kona) which is a triangular region
in the pericarp (of this chakra) where lies Shakti
(Power, that is kundali-power) which is in the
form of lightning. Concentration should be
done on this form. There (in the triangle) is
the seat of kama (an aspect of apana-force) in
the form (of the mantra 'Kling') which grants
all desires.
The second is the swadhishthana chakra which
has six petals. Inside the (pericarp of the)
chakra is the linga (a divine form for concentration and worship) of the colour of a new leaf.
Concentration should be done on this linga. Here
is the place of udyana (that is, for the practice
of lower uddiyanabandha control) which develops adamantine suction-power.
The third is the nabhi chakra (manipura
chakra). Inside the pericarp is kundalini who

is lustrous like ten-million newly-risen suns
(that is, shining deep red) and splendorous
like lightning and is in five coils like a coiled
serpent. Concentration should be done on
kundalini (as deep red and very bright). T h e
aroused Power (samarthya-shakti) (that is,
kundalini-power aroused by concentration) who
is in the manipura chakra bestows all success.
T h e next is the hridaya chakra (that is, anahata
chakra). It has eight petals and it lies with its
face down. Inside (the pericarp) of this chakra
is the shining linga-form (or lustrous jiwatman
like the flame of a lamp). Concentration should
be done on it. It is called hangsakala (that is,
when jiwatman - embodied spirit, being purified, manifests its spiritual power), it is all love,
and it exhibits the great power of control.
T h e next is the kantha chakra which is four
fingers in size. On the left side of it stands the
ida - the moon-nadi, and on the right side
of it stands the pingala - the sun-nadi. Inside
the (pericarp) of the chakra is the white sushumna on which one should concentrate. The
anahata gives success to one who knows this.
N.B. - Here the kantha chakra has been named
the anahata chakra. But it is actually the wishuddha chakra.
T h e next is the talu chakra. It is situated
(externally) in the uvular region (that is,
pertaining to the uvula palatina), in the oral
cavity, being supported by the front teeth. This
chakra has twelve petals. T h e amrita (deathless
substance) stream is flowing in this centre.
Here, void-concentration should be done. This
causes absorption of sense-consciousness (chitta).
N.B. - T h e talu chakra has in the Tantras
also been termed lalana chakra.
T h e seventh is the bhru chakra (ajna chakra).
It is a subtle chakra. Here, concentration should
be done on the knowledge-light as a still flame
of the l a m p (in a place without wind). This
chakra is the root of the cranial centres (kapalakanda). Here, in the ajna chakra, the superpower
of word-effectuality (waksiddhi) is attained.
T h e next chakra is the brahmarandhra which
is also called the nirwana chakra. Here concentration should be done on Shiwa (Supreme
Being) as a smoke-coloured flame (dhumrashikhakara). Here also is the seat of Power in
159

T h e Chakra System

form (jalandharapitha), granting liberation. T h u s
the parabrahma chakra.
T h e ninth is the akasha chakra (the sahasrara).
Here is a sixteen-petalled lotus (chakra) with
its face upwards. Inside the pericarp of this
lotus is a triangular shaped region within which
lies the raised Power (urdhwashakti, that is,
kundali-power raised from the muladhara to
this chakra) in relation to which is supreme void
(parashunya). Concentration should be made
here (as kundalini united with Parama Shiwa).
T h e Supreme void is the seat of Supreme Being
(Purnagiripitha). All desires are spiritualized
here ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad', 3. 1-9).

2 Chakra System as Exposed in the
Yogachudamanyupanishad
T h e adhara (the muladhara chakra) has four
petals; the swadhisthana has six petals; in the
navel is the ten-petalled lotus (that is, the
manipura); hridaya (that is, the lotus in the heart
region named anahata) has twelve petals; what
is known as the wishuddha has sixteen petals;
in the space between the eyebrows is the dwidala
(that is, the ajna which has two petals); in the
great path of brahmarandhra (that is, where
the line of conduction of brahmanadi, and
consequently sushumna, ends) there is the lotus
with 1000 petals (the sahasrara).
T h e first chakra is the adhara (muladhara),
the second is the swadhishthana. Between the
two (that is, the space between the anus and
scrotum) is yonisthana (perineum), which is
also called kamarupa and kama. T h e lotus
situated in the anal region (that is, in the perineal
region), having four petals (that is, the maladhara), contains within it (that is, inside the
pericarp of the muladhara) what is said to be the
yoni (triangle, a triangular-shaped region) which
is also called kamakhya (because here lies the
kama-germ-mantra 'Kling') which is worshipped
by the yogis. In this triangle is the great linga
(mahalinga), facing backwards (this linga has
been termed in the Tantras Swayambhu-linga).
(Around the great linga), lies (kundalini) who
shines like molten gold and is lightning-like
splendorous; she is below the genitals (that is,
160

in the muladhara which is below the swadhishthana which is in the genital region). The
supremely splendorous Light (kundalini) is
'seen' in samadhi as infinite and all-pervading.
W h e n she is 'seen' in mahayoga (asamprajnata samadhi - non-mens concentration) (as
Mahakundalini - Supreme kundalini), the respiratory movements stop (that is, kewala kumbhaka is attained). In the navel region, there
is the gem-like chakra (that is, the manipura
chakra); he who knows it is a real yogi. Here is a
triangle which is the region of fire'.
T h e word 'swa' denotes prana (prana-force);
as it is the seat of prana, so it is called swadhishthana; and as it is the seat of sex-force, so it is
also called the medhra (chakra - the genital
centre). As a gem is stitched by a thread, so the
chakra is strung by the sushumna; this is why the
chakra situated in the navel region is known as
manipuraka. Until the embodied being realizes
the spiritual truth in the great chakra with
twelve petals (the anahata chakra), which is
beyond white and black actions he is not free
from mundaneness. ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, 4 - 1 4 ) .
Summary
T h e first chakra is the adhara (muladhara)
which is situated in the perineal region. It
has four petals. Inside the pericarp of the
chakra is a triangle, also called kamakhya.
Inside the triangle is the great linga, facing
backwards, around which lies splendorous Kundalini who is 'seen' in superconcentration. In
mahayoga (non-mens concentration), she is
realized (as Supreme kundalini).
T h e second chakra is the swadhishthana,
(situated in the genital region), which has six
petals. It is called swadhishthana, because it is
the seat of 'swa' to mean prana (-force). It is
also called the medhra (chakra - the genital
centre), because it is also the seat of sex-force.
T h e third is the manipuraka. It is situated
in the navel region and has ten petals. It is
strung in the sushumna like a gem stitched by a
thread, so this gem-like chakra is called the
manipura. Inside the pericarp of the chakra
is a triangle which is the seat of'fire'.
T h e fourth is the twelve-petalled chakra

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

(anahata) where lies the embodied being. T h e
fifth chakra is the wishuddha having sixteen
petals. T h e sixth chakra, situated in the space
between the eyebrows, is dwidala (that is, the
lotus with two petals, called ajna). T h e n the
thousand-petalled chakra (sahasrara) lying beyond brahmarandhra.

3 Chakra System as Exposed by Maheswara
The muladhara is situated in the space between
the anus and genitals (that is, the perineum).
There is a triangle (inside the pericarp of the
chakra). Here lies the Supreme Power as
kundalini. Here is the seat of what is called
kamarupa (that is, the power in the form of the
mantra 'Kling'), which makes desires fruitful.
The swadhishthana chakra is situated in the
genital region. It has six petals.
The manipura chakra is situated in the navel
region. It has ten petals. T h e great chakra
anahata is situated in the heart region and it has
twelve petals. Here is the seat of what is known
as Purnagiri (Supreme Being).
The chakra situated in the throat region is
called wishuddha which has sixteen petals.
Here is the seat of jalandhara (power to control
breath by chin-lock). In the space between the
eyebrows is an excellent chakra called ajna with
two petals. Here is the great seat of what is known
as udyana (udana-force control).
The 'earth' region is quadrangular, and the
presiding Deity is Brahma. T h e 'water' region
is half-moon-shaped and its presiding Deity is
Wishnu. T h e 'fire' region is triangular, and its
presiding Deity is Rudra. T h e region of 'air' is
hexagonal, and its presiding Deity is Ishwara or
Sangkarsha. T h e region of 'void' (akasha) is
circular, and its presiding Deity is Sadashiwa,
or Narayana. In the space between the eyebrows
(in relation to and above the ajna) is the manas
mandala (chakra) in the nada form. Here (that
is, above the manas chakra) is the shambhawa
sthana (chakra) (that is, the indu chakra).
All these chakras in the body are in the form
of power. ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1. 168-78;
5. 5-16).

Summary
muladhara. T h e muladhara chakra is situated
in the perineal region. It has four petals. Inside
the pericarp is the quadrangular 'earth' region.
Brahma is the presiding Deity of the chakra,
residing in the square region. In the pericarp,
there is also a triangle where kundalini resides.
Here is also the seat of kamarupa (kama-power
in the mantra-form 'Kling').
Swadhishthana. T h e swadhishthana chakra is
situated in the genital region. It has six petals.
Inside the pericarp of this chakra is the semilunar
'water' region. T h e presiding Deity is Wishnu.
Manipuraka. T h e manipuraka chakra is situated
in the navel region. It has ten petals. T h e
triangular 'fire'-region is in the pericarp. T h e
presiding Deity is Rudra.
Anahata. T h e anahata chakra is situated in
the heart region. It has twelve petals. T h e
hexagonal 'air' region is in the pericarp. T h e
presiding Deity is Ishwara, or Sangkarsha. This
chakra is the seat of Purnagiri (Supreme Being).
Wishuddha. T h e wishuddha chakra is situated
in the throat region. It has sixteen petals.
T h e r e is the circular 'void' (akasha) region
in the pericarp. T h e presiding Deity is Sadashiwa,
or Narayana. Here is the seat of jalandhara
(the location for executing the chin-lock in
breath-suspension).
Ajna. T h e ajna chakra is situated in the space
between the eyebrows. It has two petals. Here,
that is, in relation to and just above the ajna is the
manas mandala (chakra) which is in the form
of nada. T h e centre of udyana (udana-force
control) is also here. Above this is the shambhawasthana (the indu chakra).

4 Chakra System as Explained in the
Yogarajopanishad
T h e first is the brahma chakra where lies (in the
pericarp) a triangle. In the apana (-force, which
is situated in the triangle) is the germ-mantra
(mulakanda) of kama form (that is 'Kling').
T h a t (the triangle) is the place of fire (wahnikunda) where lies Kundalini in three coils
(trirawritta). O n e should concentrate on Kundalini who is Divine Light and living power.
161

T h e Chakra System

T h e second is the swadhishthana chakra.
Inside the (pericarp of the) chakra is the linga,
facing backwards, and in shape and colour
like a new leaf. There is also the seat of udriyana
(uddiyanabandha) where concentration on it
(linga) (along with uddiyana) develops the great
power of contraction-control.
T h e third is the nabhi chakra (that is, the
manipura chakra situated in the navel region).
In this chakra, concentration should be done on
Madhya-shakti (the roused and conducted K.undali-power) who is in five-coils and as bright as
lightning. It will give all success.
T h e fourth chakra (anahata) is in the heart
region and lies with its face downwards. O n e
should concentrate with great efforts on the
hangsan (jiwatman - embodied being) in the
form of (still) light.
T h e fifth is the kantha (throat) chakra (that is,
the wishuddha chakra). There the ida is on the
left side and the pingala on the right side (of the
chakra), and the sushumna is in the middle.
There, concentration on the bright Light gives
success.
T h e sixth is the taluka chakra (talu chakra).
It is in the region of the uvula. Here absorptive
concentration in the void gives liberation.
T h e seventh is the bhru chakra (that is,
ajna chakra). Here is the seat of bindu (bindusthana). Liberation is attained by concentration
on the circular Light in this centre.
T h e eighth is the brahmarandhra (chakra;
that is, nirwana chakra). It is indicative of final
liberation (nirwana). Liberation is attained by
concentration on the subtle smoky light. H e r e ,
is the jalandhara (breath-power in chin-lock);
and the absorptive concentration in this chakra
causes liberation.
T h e ninth is the wyoma chakra (sahasrara),
with which is connected (as its part) a chakra
with sixteen petals. Inside it (wyoma chakra)
is concealed what is known as Supreme PowerConsciousness. Here is the seat of Purnagiri
(Supreme Being). In this seat, concentration on
Shakti (Kundali-power) causes liberation.
Concentration should be done on these nine
chakras stage by stage. T h e n one will attain
success and liberation. ( - Yogarajopanishad,
5-19).
162

Summary
1 Brahma chakra (muladhara). In the pericarp
of this chakra, is a triangle which is the fireplace. Inside the triangle lies the splendorous
and living power kundalini in three coils.
2 Swadhishthana chakra. Inside the pericarp
of the chakra is the linga of the shape and colour
of a new leaf, facing backwards. Here is the seat
of udriyana (that is, the practice of the lower
aspect of uddiyana control).
3 Nabhi chakra (manipura). Inside the chakra
lies lightning-like shining kundalini as Madhyashakti (power in the middle) in five coils.
4 Fourth chakra (anahata). Inside the chakra
is the hangsah (jiwatman - embodied being)
in the form of still light.
5 Kantha chakra (wishuddha). Inside the
chakra is the bright Light.
6 Taluka chakra (talu). This chakra is situated
in the uvular region. It is an important centre
for absorptive concentration.
7 B h r u chakra (ajna). This chakra is the seat
of bindu and of the circular Light.
8 Brahmarandhra chakra (nirwana). In this
chakra is the seat of jalandhara and of the subtle
smoky light bindu. It is a suitable centre for
absorptive concentration.
9 Wyoma chakra (sahasrara). In this chakra
is a sixteen-petalled chakra as a part of it. Inside
the pericarp of the chakra is Supreme PowerConsciousness as kundali-power. Here is the seat
of Purnagiri (Supreme Being).
From the above fragmentary descriptions
the Waidika chakra system has emerged.

Waidika Chakra System
1 Muladhara chakra. T h e term 'muladhara'
has been mentioned in the Ganapatyupanishad,
6; Darshanopanishad, 4 . 3 ; 7.7, 11; Mandalabrahmanopanishad,
1.2.6;
Yogakunoalyupanishad, 3.9; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.168; 3.2;
5.5, 17; and Warahopanishad, 5.50, 53. T h e
muladhara has been termed 'adhara' mentioned
in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 3.10; Yogachudamanyupanishad, 4, 6; and Yogashikhopa-

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

nishad, 6. 2 6 - 3 3 ; 'mulakanda', mentioned in the
Yogakundalyupanishad, 1. 8 2 ; and 'brahma'
(chakra) in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.1; and Yogarajopanishad, 5.
Description. T h e muladhara chakra is situated
in the perineal region (intracoccygeal point).
It has four petals. Inside the pericarp of the
chakra is the quadrangular 'earth' region.
The presiding Deity of the chakra is Brahma who
is in the square region. In the pericarp, there
is a triangle, called yoni. It is also called kamakhya. T h e triangle is the place of fire (and,
consequently, it is red). Within the triangle
is the seat of kama (desire), an aspect of apanaforce, in the form of the germ-mantra 'Kling'.
Inside the triangle, there is the great linga,
facing backward, and around which lies lightning-like splendorous Kundalini in three coils,
who is revealed in its true form in superconscious
concentration, and as Supreme kundalini in
non-mens concentration (mahayoga).
2 Swadhishthana chakra. T h e term 'swadhishthana' has been mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.2; Yogakundalyupanishad,
1. 84; 3.9, 10; Yogachudamanyupanishad, 4,
6, 11; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.172; 5.8; and
Yogarajopanishad, 7. It is also termed 'medhra'
(chakra), mentioned in the Yogachua'amanyupanishad, 12.
Description. T h e swadhishthana chakra is
situated in the genital region (intrasacral point).
It has six petals. T h e semilunar 'water' region
is inside the pericarp of the chakra. T h e presiding
Deity of the chakra is Wishnu who is in the
semilunar region. Here also lies the linga,
facing backwards, of the form and colour of a
new leaf. In this chakra is the seat of udyana
(that is, a position for the practice of adamantine
suction-power), which is also termed udnyaraa.
The term 'swadhishthana' is from the seat
(adhishthana) of the prana (swa), that is, this
chakra is the seat of wyana force.
3 Manipura chakra. T h e term 'manipura' has
been mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad,
3.9, 11. T h e chakra is also termed 'manipuraka',
mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.3;
Yogachudamanyupanishad,
13; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.172; 5.9; and 'nabhi' chakra,
mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,

3.3; Brahmawidyopanishad, 6 8 ; and Yogarajopanishad, 9. It is indirectly mentioned in the
Brahmopanishad, 1; Parabrahmopanishad, 5;
Darshanopanishad, 7.12; and Yogachudamanyupanishad, 5.
Description. T h e manipura chakra is situated
in the navel region (intralumbo-vertebral point).
It has ten petals. In its pericarp, there is the
triangular 'fire' region. T h e presiding Deity
of this chakra is Rudra who resides in the
triangular region. Here also lies lightning-like
splendorous Kundalini in five coils as Madhyashakti (Kundali-power, roused from the muladhara and conducted into the manipura).
4 Hrit-pundarika (hrit chakra). T h e term
'hrit-pundarika' has been mentioned in the
Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section,
156; a n d Maitreyyupanishad, 1.12. It has also
been called 'padmakoshapratikashahridaya' (lotus-bud-like hridaya, that is, the hridaya or hrit
chakra) in the Mahopanishad, 1.12; and Narayanopanishad, 50.
5 .Anahata chakra. T h e term 'anahata' has
been mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad,
3.10, 1 1 ; and Yogashikhopanishad, 1. 173;
5.9. It has also been termed 'hridaya' chakra
(because it is situated in the heart region),
mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.4; and Yogachudamanyupanishad, 5; and
'dwadashara' chakra (twelve-petalled lotus) in
the Yogachudamanyupanishad, 13; and the
'fourth' chakra in the heart region in the
Yogarajopanishad, 10. It has been indirectly
mentioned in the Parabrahmopanishad, 5;
Brahmopanishad, 1; and Darshanopanishad, 7.12.
Description. T h e anahata chakra is situated
in the heart region (intrathoracispinal point).
It has twelve petals. In the pericarp, there is
the hexagonal 'air' region, Ishwara or Sangkarsha
is the presiding Deity, residing in the 'air'
region. Inside the chakra is the hangsah (embodied being) in the form of still light.
6 Wishuddha chakra. T h e term 'wishuddha'
has been mentioned in the Yogachudamanyupanishad, 5; and Yogashikhopanishad, 5.10. It
has also been termed 'wishuddhi', mentioned
in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 3.10, 1 1 ; and
Yogashikhopanishad, 1.174; and 'kantha' (throat)
chakra, mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupa163

The Chakra System
nishad, 3.5; and Yogarajopanishad, 12. It has
been indirectly mentioned in the Brahmopanishad, 1; Parabrahmopanishad, 5; and Darshanopanishad, 7.12.
Description. The wishuddha chakra is situated
in the region of the throat (intracervicospinal
point). It has sixteen petals. In the pericarp of the
chakra is the circular 'void' (akasha) region
in which is the presiding Deity Sadashiwa,
or Narayana. Here is the seat of jalandhara
(a postion for the execution of chin-lock).
7 Talu chakra. The term 'talu' has been
mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.6. It has also been termed 'taluka' chakra in the
Yogarajopanishad, 13. It has been indirectly
mentioned in the Darshanopanishad, 7.12.
Description. The talu chakra is situated in
the uvular region. It has twelve petals. It is a
centre where amrita (deathless substance) flows.
Here is the void for the practice of concentration.
8 Ajna chakra. The term 'ajna' has been
mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 3.10,
11; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.175; 5.11; and
Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.7. This chakra
has also been termed 'bhra' chakra, mentioned
in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.7; and
Yogarajopanishad, 15; and 'bhruyugamadhyabila' in the Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.3.3;
and 'baindawa-sthana' (-chakra) in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 3.8; and 'dwidala' in the
Yogachudamanyupanishad, 5. It has been indirectly mentioned in the Darshanopanishad,
7.12.
Description. The ajna chakra is situated in
the space between the eyebrows (intracerebral
point). It has two petals. Here is the knowledgelight as a still flame of the lamp for concentration.
It is the centre for the control of udana-force.
And here also lies the seat of bindu (bindusthana). This chakra is the root of other cranial
chakras.
In relation to, and just above, the ajna is the
manas mandala (manas chakra). Connected with
the ajna (and above the manas chakra) is the
shambhawa-sthana (-chakra) (that is, the indu
chakra).
9 Indu chakra. The word 'indu' means moon.
The Tantrika term for this chakra is soma
(moon) chakra. The term 'indu' is mentioned
164

in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.71. It has also
been termed 'shitangshu (moon)-mand'ala' (chakra) and anahata chakra mentioned in the
Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.69; and 'shambhawasthana' (-chakra) in the Yogashikhopanishad,
5.16. It has indirectly been mentioned in the
Darshanopanishad, 7.12; and Yogashikhopanshad, 6.48, 49.
Description. The shitangshu-mandala (-chakra), or indu chakra is situated in the forehead
(lalata) region (above the manas chakra). It has
sixteen petals. Here lies the deathless substance
(amrita).
10 Nirwana chakra. The term 'nirwana' has
been mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8. It has also been termed 'brahmarandhra' (chakra), mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad,
1.83; and Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8; and Yogarajopanishad,
16; and 'parabrahma' chakra, mentioned in the
Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8; and 'brahmarandhra mahasthana' (the great brahmarandhra
chakra) in the Yogashikhopanishad, 6.47. It is
indirectly mentioned in the Darshanopanishad,
7.12.
Description. The nirwana chakra is situated
at the end point of the sushumna called the
brahmarandhra. This is why it is also called
brahmarandhra chakra. The petals are not
mentioned. According to the Tantras, the nirwana chakra has 100 petals. Here lies the subtle
smoky divine light suitable for concentration.
Here is the seat of jalandhara (Power developed in
breath-suspension with chin-lock). In this centre,
Supreme Consciousness-Power resides.
11 Sahasrara chakra. The term 'sahasrara'
has been mentioned in the Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.4.1. The other terms for the
sahasrara are: 'sahasradala' (the chakra having
1000 petals), mentioned in the Yogachudamanyupanishad, 6; 'sahasrakamala' (the lotus or
chakra with 1000 petals), mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.86; 'akasha chakra' (the
chakra in the void), mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.9; 'wyoma chakra' (the
chakra in the void), mentioned in the Yogarajopanishad, 17; 'wyomambuja' (a lotus or
chakra in the void), mentioned in the Yogashikhopanishad, 6. 48; 'Kapalasangputa' (the

T h e Waidika System of Chakras

chakra which covers the cranium) mentioned in
the Yogashikhopanishad, 1.76; and 'sthana'
(to mean literally a place, an abode, a state,
but technically it denotes a chakra; here sthana
means Shiwa-sthana - the abode of Shiwa, that
is, the sahasrara), mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.74. This chakra has been
mentioned indirectly in this m a n n e r : 'Sun - the
Supreme Being - exists with a thousand rays
of light (sahasrarashmi) and in a hundred
ways (shatadha)' ( - Akshyupanishad, ch. 1,
p. 1), that is, Paramo Shiwa - Supreme Consciousness - being
united
with kundalini
is splendorous in the sahasrara, and he is also in a
hundred-fold in the nirwana chakra.
Description. T h e sahasrara is situated in the
region of void, that is, at the extracranial or

extracerebral point. It has 1000 petals. There
is a chakra with sixteen petals with its face
upwards, under the sahasrara and forming a
part of it. Inside the pericarp of the sahasrara
is a triangle where lies the raised Supreme PowerConsciousness (Kundali-power). In relation to
the Power lies supreme void (parashunya) where
the seat of Supreme Being (Purnagiri) is.
T h e above description of the chakras indicates
the incompleteness of the Waidika chakra system.
It is mainly due to two factors: first, parts of the
Waidika documents were lost during the course
of time, and, consequently, the extant part
is incomplete. Second, the Waidika chakra
system is now less used by the laya-yogis in their
spiritual practice. T h e Tantrika system has now
been widely adopted.

165

CHAPTER 9

The Tantrika System
of Chakras

T h e Tantrika chakra system is completer than
the Waidika chakra system. T h e Tantrika system
is based on the Tantras which are extant.
It may not be quite complete, as a very large
n u m b e r of Tantras are lost. But from the viewpoint of spiritual practice, it is complete. Now,
most of the layayogis have followed the Tantrika
system. M a n y great layayoga masters have
adopted it, and the Tantrika gurus teach it
to their disciples directly and thoroughly.

Tantrika Nadi-system
nadis constitute the nadi-system. It is said that
the nadis are innumerous ( - Wishwasaratantra,
ch. 1, p. 6; Sharadatilaka, 1.43). Of these, the
important nadis are numbered at 35,000,000
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 15;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.7; and Goutamiyatantra, 34.35). Of these, the more important
nadis are 350,000 in number ( - Shiwasanghita,
2.13), and still more important are 72,000
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 1;
Jnanasarikalinitantra, verse 77); Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7; Shaktanandatarahgini, 1.7),
and of these are 70,000 ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 79), and of these, the chief nadis are
fourteen
in
number
( - Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 1; Shiwasanghita, 2.13; and Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 8). These fourteen
nadis a r e : sushumna, ida, pingala, gandhari,
166

hastijihwa, kuhu, saraswati, pusha, shahkhini,
payaswini, waruni, alambusha, wishwodari and
yashaswini ( - Shiwasanghita, 2. 14-15).
Of these fourteen nadis, ten are more important; in fact, the ten nadis are considered the
principals of all the nadis ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4; Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7;
Goutamiyatantra,
34.35;
Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 2 7 ; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6, p. 5;
and Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.7). T h e ten principal nadis a r e : ida, pingala, sushumna, gandhari,
hastijihwa, pusha, yashaswini, alambusha, kuhu,
and shangkhini ( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7;
and Shaktanandatarahgiini, 1.7). T h e gandhari
flows in the region of the left eye, the hastijihwa
in the right eye, the pusha in the right ear, the
yashaswini in the left ear, the alambusha in the
mouth, the kuhu in the genitals, and the shangkhini in the head ( - Shaktanandatarangini,
1.7). T h e ida and pingala flow in the nostrils
and the sushumna flows in the subtle path in the
palatine region and up to the brahmarandhra
( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) .
Of the 10 principal nadis, three are the most
important ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 1; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
ch. 3, p. 8; Sharadatilakatantra, 25.29;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.7; Shiwasanghita, 2.
15; and Goutamiyatantra, 34.35). These three
nadis a r e : ida, pingala and sushumna ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 8; and Shiwasanghita, 2.15). Of the three nadis again, one is
the fundamental, and that is the sushumna

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

'( - K a n k a l a m l i n i t a n t r a , ch. 2, p. 4;Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
ch. 3, p. 8; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25.51; Shiwasanghita, 2.16; and Goutamiyatantra, 34.36).
Nadis are of two kinds: gross or material,
and subtle or non-material. T h e gross nadis
are nerves, arteries, veins, capillaries, lymphatic
vessels and other tubular organs of the body.
The subtle or non-material nadis are called
yoga-nadis ( - Shiwapurana, 4.40.5). T h e word
nadi is derived from 'nada' = bhrangsha, that is,
falling down, running away; here, in a more
technical sense, radiating. T h e word 'bhrangsha'
is almost similar to the word 'bhresha' = motion.
Kalicharana, the well-known commentator of
Skatchakranirupana, a most authoritative work
on the Tantrika chakra system, says, in
explaining verse 2 of this work, that the word
nadi is derived from nada = motion. Therefore,
nadi is that which is motional or in motion;
that is, whose nature is motion. T h e word 'wayu'
has the same meaning. It is derived from wa =
motion. T h a t which is in constant motion is
wayu. In a technical sense, wayu is the motional
or active state of life-energy (prana), in which
force-motions are exhibited. T h e principal forcemotions are five, and they are termed pranawayu, apana-wayu, samana-wayu, udana-wayu
and wyana-wayu. T h e pranic wayus are inseparable from nadis.
It has been stated that the ten wayus prana, apana, samana, udana, wyana, naga,
karma, krikara, dewadatta and dhananjaya, move
in all the nadis ( - Shandilyopanishad, 5.4.12;
and also Warahopanishad, 5.31). As the nadis,
termed yoga-nadis, are not material structures
but subtle ( - Shiwasanghita, 2.17), it should
be interpreted in a technical manner. T h e
nadis do not exist as tubules or wires, but are
subtle lines of direction along which the wayus
move. This means that the wayus which are
constantly in motion are also nadis, as motion is
associated with the lines of direction. It has been
more clearly stated that the nadis are the
prana-flows (pranawahini) ( - Niruttaratantra,
ch. 4, p. 7; Yogachudamanyupanishad, 16). In
other words, the nadis are pranic force-radiationlines, and their existence is inseparable from the
existence of the pranic force-motions. T h e plexus-

like arrangement of the nadis (nadimaya chakra)
constitutes the power field (shakti-chakra)
( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7). This is the
nadi-system.
From the yoga viewpoint, the ida, pingala
and
sushumna arc of great importance;
and of the three, the sushumna is the highest.
T h e sushumna is in the middle of the ida and
pingala ( - Todalatantra, ch. 2, p. 2; Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7; Jnanasarikalinitantra, verse
1 1 ; Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2). T h e ida is on the
left side and pingala on the right side
( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 2 7 ; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
ch. 3, p. 8; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6, p. 5;
Sammohanatantra, part 2, ch. 2, p. 1-2);
Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 6; Mundamalatantra,
ch. 3, p. 5; Sharadatilakatantra, 25.30; Shaktanandatarangini, 1.7). T h e positions of the ida
and pingala have been more precisely stated
h e r e : outside the vertebral column are the ida
and pingala, being on the left and the right,
that is, the ida is on the left side of the spinal
column, a n d the pingala on its right side
( - Skatchakranirupana, verse 1). Also, on the
left side of the vertebral column is the ida
nadi, and on its right side is the pingala nadi
( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22), and, outside the
vertebral column, is the ida on its left, and the
pingala on its right ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 79).
T h e accurate position of the sushumna cannot
be determined from the statement that it is in the
middle of the ida and pingala. It has been
stated: 'The principal nadi (sushumna) is in
front of the vertebral column (merudandagre)'
( - Karikalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4). Here, the
word 'agre' has been used, and it denotes 'in
front of. From this it can be assumed that the
sushumna is outside and in front of the vertebral
column. Apparently, this is supported by the
following passage: 'O Shiwa, the ida nadi
which is deathless substance of moon is on the
left of the vertebral column, the sun-like pingala
on its right side. Outside it (tadbahye)
and between these two (tayormadhye) is the
fire-like sushumna' ( - T a n t r a c h d a m a n i quoted
by Kalicharana in explaining verse 1 of Skatchakranirupana). Kalicharana has rejected this
167

T h e Chakra System

statement on the ground that it contradicts
verse 2. But 'tadbahye' can be interpreted as outside the ida and the pingala. In that case, it will
mean that the sushumna is outside of and between
the ida and pingala, not outside the vertebral
column.
It has been stated : ' T h e sacred nadi sushumna
which bestows all success is in front of the
vertebral column (merupuratas)' ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22). T h e word puratas means in
front of. It should be interpreted to mean that
the sushumna is in the anterior part of the
vertebral column. It has been stated: 'The
sushumna, resting on the vertebral column
( p r i s h a w a n g s h a n g samashritya), is between the
ida and the pingala' ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
ch. 3, p. 8 ) ; and 'The moon-sun-fire nadi
(sushumna) rests on the vertebral column'
( - Shiwasanghita, 2.17). Here, it should mean
that the sushumna rests interiorly on the vertebral
column. Raghawabhatta, the well-known commentator on the Sharadatilakatantra, has made
this clear. T h e text says: 'The nadi sushumna,
resting on the vertebral column (wangshamashrita), is between them (the ida and the
pingala)' ( - Sharadatilakatantra, 25.30). In explaining this verse, Raghawabhatta says:
'Wangsha means the spinal column, and ashrita
denotes tadantargata = being in the interior
of the spinal column', as it is said: 'She
(sushumna) who is inside the void of the vertebral
column (mundadharadanda), extending from
the head to the adhara (muladhara).'
In commenting on the verse 'The nadi
sushumna is in the middle . . . ' (Shatchakranirupana, verse 1), Kalicharana says that 'in the
middle' (madhye) means inside the void of the
vertebral column. This is what Shatchakranirwpana actually means, and that is proved by
verse 2, in which it has been stated: 'Inside her
(the nadi wajra) is chitrini . . . who pierces all
the chakras lying inside the vertebral column
and appears luminous because of these lotuses
which are strung on her' ( - Shatchakranirupana,
verse 2). T h e chakras which are inside the spinal
column are strung on the chitrini, and the
chitrini is inside the wajra, and the wajra is inside
the sushumna. T h e sushumna, consequently, is
inside the vertebral column, not outside it.
168

T h e exact position of the sushumna has been
more clearly indicated in the following passages:
'The principal nadi (sushumna) which is in the
form of moon-sun-fire is in the vertebral column
(merudande)' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27).
Here, 'in the vertebral column' means within
the vertebral column, not outside it. ' T h a t nadi
(sushumna) which is absolutely calm (that is,
realizable only through concentration) and
which gives liberation, is inside the vertebral
column (merumadhyasthita)' ( - Todalatantra,
ch. 2, p. 2). Here, it is clearly stated that the
sushumna is inside the vertebral column, not
outside it. Also, ' T h a t (nadi) which is inside the
vertebral column (merumadhye) extending from
the muladhara to the brahmarandhra, and is all
knowledge and in the form of fire, is sushumna'
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2).
Here also it is clearly said that the sushumna
is inside the vertebral column. 'She who is
inside the vertebral column (merumadhye) is
the multiform sushumna' ( - Rudrayamala, Part
2, 27.52). 'Smnumna is inside (madhyaga = being
inside) the winadanda termed prishthawangsha
(that is, the vertebral column)' ( - Tantrarajatantra, 27.35). 'She (sushumna) is inside the
vertebral column (prishthamadhyagata = being
inside the spinal column), extending to the
head' ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 79). 'The
principal (nadi sushumna) who is moon-sun-fire
is inside the vertebral column (merudandantar =
being inside the vertebral column), ( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.7). From all this we can come
to the definite conclusion that the sushumna is
inside the vertebral column.
It has been stated 'What is called wichitra
(the nadi chitra or chitrini) . . . is inside her
(sushumna)' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27).
' T h a t nadi which is inside the sushumna is the
chitrini' ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2). Further in Sharadatilakatantra, 25.34;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 8; and
Shaktanandatararigini, 4.8. These passages indicate that the chitrini is inside the sushumna,
but that does not mean that the chitrini is
next to the sushumna as the second nadi within
it. Inside the sushumna is the nadi wajra, and
inside the wajra is chitrini. So it has been stated:
'Inside the sushumna is the bright nadika (nadi)

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

which is called wajra, and in it (within the wajra)
is the subtle chitrini; and Kundali passes through
it' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25. 5 1 - 5 2 ) . And,
'Inside the sushumna. is the wajra nadi, and
inside it (wajra) is the highest nadi called chitra
(chitrini); and within it lies the supreme Kundali'
( - Tantrarajatantra, 27.44). Also in Shatchakranirupana, verses 1,2; Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 79-80).
It has been stated: 'The brahma nadi is inside
the chitrini' ( - Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 15).
Moreover, 'Inside her (chitrini) is the brahma
nadi, which extends from the oral orifice of
Hara (here, Swayambhu-linga) to a point beyond
which Adidewa (Paramashiwa in sahasrara) is
situated' ( - .Shatchakranirupana, verse 2). And
in Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2; ch. 4, p. 22; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80; Shaktanandatarangini,
4.8. 'The brahma nadi has also been termed
brahmarandhra'
( - Shiwasanghita,
2.18).
Further 'The supremely subtle brahmarandhra
lies in her (chitriri)' ( - Sammohanatantra, Part
2, ch. 2, p. 2, and in Sharadatilakatantra, 25.32.
And 'Inside it (chitra nadi = chitrini nadi) is
the exceedingly subtle brahmarandhra' ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 8).
According to some authorities, the brahmarandhra is within the brahma nadi. It has been
stated: 'The brahmarandhra, which extends
from the mouth of Hara (that is, the orifice
of Swayambhu-linga in the muladhara) to
Sadashiwa (that is, to the point beyond which
lies the sahasrara in which lies Sadashiwa), is
within it (brahma nadi
( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80). Also in Shaktanandatararigini, 4.8.
There are other authorities who have not
mentioned the brahma nadi or the brahmarandhra, but who speak about the movement of
Kundalini through the chitrini. It has been
stated: 'There lies the subtle chitrini through
which Kundali moves' ( - Rudrayamala Part 2,
25.52). Furthermore, 'The supreme Kundali
is within it (chitra)' ( - Tantrarajatantra, 27.44).
This means that in the innermost part of the
chitrini-power-radiation there is a void where
there is no radiation. This inmost void has been
termed brahma nadi, or brahmarandhra. T h e
word randhra here denotes the vacuity deepest
within. It is this void through which kundalini,

who is Shabdabrahman, passes, or, it can be
said that it is this void-path which leads to the
sahasrara, the abode of Shiwa or Brahman.
When it is said that the brahmarandhra is
within the brahma nadi, it means that the
immediate, outer aspect of the void is the
brahma nadi, that is, the brahma nadi contains
this innermost void termed brahmarandhra.
T h e chitrini-power-radiation remains outside
the brahma nadi. When the brahma or the
brahmarandhra is not mentioned, it simply
denotes that the inmost void is part of the chitrini.
Kalicharana (in his commentary on verse 2,
Shatchakranirupana) says that the brahma nadi
is the course along which kundalini, who is in
the nature of Shabdabrahman, moves to Paramashiwa; it is the void aspect within the chitrini
nadi, and there is no other nadi inside the chitrini.
T h e brahma nadi is the brahma-void, and so
it is called brahmarandhra, and through it
Kundali passes.
T h e sushumna extends from the mula to the
brahmarandhra. So it has been stated: 'The
sushumna, which is in the nature of fire and is
endowed with all power, lying inside the
vertebral column, extends from the mula (root)
to the brahmarandhra' ( - Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 27). Also in Bhutashuddhitantra,
ch. 6, p. 5; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.8; Tantrarajatantra, 27.36. It has also been stated that
the sushumna 'extends from the middle of the
kanda (the root or the origin of the nadis) to
the shiras (the head, or cerebrum)' ( - Shatchakranirupana, verse 1).
It has been stated: 'In the region below the
genitals and above the anus (that is, the
perineum), is the kanda-mula (central root)
of oval shape, from which 72000 nadis have
originated' ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 1). T h e kanda-mula is the source, resembling
a bulb of oval shape, from which all nadis
arise. T h e kanda-mula is externally in the perineal
region, but, interiorly, it is inside the coccyx
(the terminal part of the vertebral column),
in a position just below the muladhara.
When it is said that the sushumna extends from
the mula, it does not mean from the muladhara,
but from the kanda-mula which is the source
of all nadis. T h e sushumna arises from the middle
169

T h e Chakra System

or the central part of the kanda-mula, which is
just below the muladhara chakra. It then passes
through the whole spinal column and the head
to reach the brahmarandhra. It (sushumna)
goes to the terminal point of the brahmarandhra
('brahmarandhranta'), that is, to the end of
brahmarandhra ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6,
p. 5; Tantrarajatantra, 27.36).
T h e kanda-mula has also been termed kanda.
It has been stated that between the genitals and
the anus (that is, in the perineal region) lies
kanda, which is circular; and the nadis proceed
from this kanda ( - Sharadatilakatantra, 25.
28 - 9). T h e kanda is not actually situated directly
in the perineum, as a physical organ, but inside
the coccyx which is related to the perineal
region. T h e word kanda has also been used in the
Shatchakranirupana, verse 1.
T h e wajra nadi is inside the sushumna. It
has been stated that the wajra extends from the
genitals to the head ( - Shaichakranirupana,
verse 1; Koulawahtantra, ch. 22, p. 80). Here the
genitals mean the perineal region connected
with the genitals. It actually indicates the kanda
within the coccyx. T h e wajra arises within
the sushumna. at its starting point below the
muladhara. It passes along with the sushumna
to the head, that is, the end point of the brahmarandhra where the sushumna ends. Inside the
wajra is the chitrini. T h e chitrini extends from
the point from which the wajra starts, and ends
where the sushumna and the wajra end, that is,
at the terminal point of the brahmarandhra.
It has been stated : 'Above it (the ajna chakra)
is the splendid sahasrara where lies the end point
of the sushumna with its void-part in the talumula
(the end point of the palatine region). From here
the sushumna, which supports all nadis, goes
downwards to the triangular region of the
muladhara. . . . In the talusthana (palatine region) is a lotus (that is, guru chakra) which
is (the part of) sahasrara. In the pericarp of this
lotus (guru chakra) is a triangle, facing behind,
where lies the end point of the sushumna with
its inmost void. This void is termed brahmarandhra, which extends from here to the muladhara
lotus. Inside the sushumna (or more accurately,
wajra), and around the brahmarandhra, always
lies the power of the sushumna. This power is the
170

chitra (chitrini). It is also termed sushumnaKundali. T h e brahmarandhra and others (the
chakras) are to be thought of in the chitrapower' ( - Shiwasanghita, 5. 161-5).
It is indicated here that the end point of the
sushumna and, consequently, the end of the
brahmarandhra is in the palatine region in its
upper border beyond which is the guru chakra,
which is the lower part of the sahasrara. We
have noted that the brahmarandhra or the
brahma nadi starts from the orifice of the
Swayambhu-linga, situated in the muladhara,
and extends to reach the proximity of the guru
chakra. But the sushumna starts from the kanda,
which is just below the muladhara. T h e wajra
and the chitrini also arise from the starting point
of the sushumna. T h e brahmarandhra arises
from the orifice of the Swayambhu-linga. So
the sushumna, and along with it the wajra
and chitrini, starting from the point just below
the muladhara, extend upwards. At the point
of the orifice of Swayambha-linga brahmarandhra emerges within the chitra, and then the
sushumna, wajra, chitrini and brahmarandhra,
all extend upward and reach the terminal point
of the head which is immediately adjoining to,
but not continuous with, the guru chakra.
Chitra (chitrini') is in the form of power.
T h e chitra-power has been termed sushumnaKundali. T h e term indicates that the chitrapower creates the brahmarandhra through which
Kundalini passes. T h e brahmarandhra is actually
the Kundali-power-motion. When there is no
Kundali-power-motion, the brahmarandhra remains in a potential form. T h e nature of the
chitra-power is that it concentrates and
centralizes to form chakras throughout its course
at certain points. T h e chakras are in the chitrini.
It has been stated that all the chakras are strung
on the chitrini' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25.52;
Shadamnayatantra, 5. 111; Koulawalitantra, ch.
22, p. 80). T h e chakras are not external objects
attached to the chitrini. T h e chitra-power
concentrates and develops into a chakra. The
development of the brahmarandhra within the
chitrini, and of the chakras in it, are the two
specific power phenomena of the chitrini.
T h e chitrini is lustrous and radiates lifeenergy; in it are the deities ( - Sammohana-

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

tantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 27); the five bhuta-principles and five
deities are there (in the lower five chakras)
and it is luminous with five colours ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
ch. 3, p. 8 ) ; it is pure, deathless and blissful;
it is the divine path ( - Shiwasanghita, 2. 1 9 - 2 0 ) ;
it is moon-bright and contains all deities, and
is realizable by the yogis ( - Shaktanandatararigini, 4.8); it is extremely subtle and pure
intelligence, and is revealed through yoga to
the yogis ( - Shatchakramrupana, verse 2). It is
in the nature of sentience (sattwaguna), but the
brahma nadi which is inside it, is in the nature
of inertia (tamoguna), and the wajra, within
which lies the chitrini, is in the form of energy
(rajoguaa) ( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7).
This means, that the energy-principle predominates in the wajra, and owing to its influence
its power radiates also centrifugally. In the
chitrini, the power-radiations are essentially
centripetal, concentrated and imbued with consciousness, because of the influence on it of the
sentience-principle. Because of this, the chitrini
is only realizable in deep concentration. Moreover, the chakras which are in the chitrini
can only be known by concentration-knowledgelight (sukshmajnana) ( - Shadamnayatantra, 5.
204). In the brahmarandhra, the inertia principle predominates and, consequently, all powerradiations cease, and a void is created where
nothing but kundalini can penetrate. This is
why this tamas void is called the brahma-void
(brahmarandhra).
It has been stated that the sushumna is in the
form of moon, sun and fire ( - K a r i k a l a m l i n i tantra, ch. 2, p. 4; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27;
Shaktanandatararigini, 4.7; Shiwasanghita, 2.17).
This means that the sushumna exerts the influence of its moon aspect on the ida and that
of its sun aspect on the pingala, and the control
influence on both as fire. In the sushumna the
control factor predominates because its basic
nature is fire which exhibits the power of control.
So it has been said that the sushumna is in the
nature of fire ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27;
Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatarangini 4.8). In the shushumna, both the
moon and the sun radiations occur ( - Sam-

mohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Sharadatilakatantra, 25.34), and they are conveyed to the
ida and pingala. T h e sushumna assumes different
forms ( Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.52), because
of its connection with the ida and pingala.
T h e sushumna is all knowledge ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2) and all power
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.8; Goutarmyatantra, 34.39).
In sushumna, three primary attributes (gunas) are
operating ( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7). T h e
sushumna is exceedingly subtle ( - Bhatashuddhitantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25.51),
and this is why it cannot be known sensorially,
but is 'seen' by the yogis through deep concentration ( - Goutarmyatantra, 34.39). T h e
sushumna is fit for yoga ( - Shiwasanghita,
2.16), as it is non-undulatory ( - Todalatantra,
ch. 2, p. 2). Concentration on moon-and-sunform is done in the sushumna ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 11). T h e sushumna is spiralled
from right to left ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6,
p. 5).
T h e ida is in the form of moon ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6,
p. 5; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 1;
Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 6; Mundamalatantra,
ch. 3, p. 5; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.51;
Goutamiyatantra, 34.36), so it causes the conservation of energy in the body and calmness
in the mind. It is in the nature of power
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatararigini,
4.7; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 271. 5 1 ; Goutamiyatantra, 34.37), because the power is conserved there. In ida lies the deathless
substance (amrita) ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p. 27; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.7; Rudrayamala, Part
2, 271.51; Goutamiyatantra, 34.37), so it is
suitable for concentration and all spiritual
activities. Ida is white (in colour) ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6,
p. 5; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 1;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.51; Goutamiyatantra,
34.36).
T h e pingala is in the form of sun and masculine
in character ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27;
Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Sammohana171

T h e Chakra System

tantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatarangini,
4.7; Goutami'yatantra, 34.37). It indicates that
energy is released and consumed in the activities,
and muscular activities requiring great strength
and speed are maintained by the influence of
the pingala. T h e pingala also causes diversification of the mind. This is due to the sun-power.
To overcome it, it is necessary to practise
concentration-on-sun ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch.
2, p. 11). T h e pingala is like the pomegranate
flower in colour (that is, vermilion) ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Sammohanatantra, Part
2, ch. 2, p. 2; Rudrayamala, Part 2, ch. 27,52;
Goutamiyatantra, 34.38).
T h e ida and pingala are the pranic flows
( - Niruttaratantra, ch. 4, p. 7). T h e ida starts
from the left side and the pingala from the right
side of kanda-mala, and are on the left and the
right side of the triangle situated in the muladhara
( - Shiwasanghita, 5.172) when passing upwards.
T h e ida is placed on the left and the pingala
on the right side of the vertebral column.
T h e y are shaped like bows ( - Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). They arise from the kanda,
pass by the left and the right side of the maladhara-triangle, and during their course they are
like bows and reach the ajna chakra. They
also take another position. When they go
upwards, they encircle the chakras (from the
muladhara to the ajna) by alternating from left
to right and right to left ( - Yamala quoted by
Kakcharana in his commentary on Shatchakranirupana, verse 1). In the bow position, the ida
and pingala radiate independently, and in the
circling position, they are energized and harmonized by the sushumna.

Summary
T h e r e are innumerable nadis which form the
nadi-system. These nadis are subtle and are
called yoga-nadis. From the yoga-viewpoint
the three nadis - ida, pingala and sushumna
are the most important. T h e nadis are pranic
force-motions creating subtle lines of direction.
All the nadis originate from the kanda-mula the central root, lying below the position of the
muladhara chakra (within the coccyx). T h e
172

sushumna arises from the central part of the
kanda, and goes upward through the vertebral
column and the head and ends at a point which
is externally cerebral and immediately adjoins
the extra-cerebral guru chakra. There is no
direct continuation of the sushumna with the
guru chakra, which is the lower stratum of the
sahasrara.
T h e wajra develops within the sushumna
as its second internal nadi, and extends from the
beginning of the sushumna to the point where the
sushumna ends. T h e chitrini develops within the
wajra as the third interior nadi, extending from
the beginning of the wajra and terminates
at the point where the sushumna ends. Within
the chitrini, there is a void termed brahma
nadi, or brahmarandhra, extending from the
orifice of Swayambha-linga situated within the
muladhara, to the point where the sushumna
ends. In fact, the sushumna itself is a system
consisting of the outermost sushumna, interior
to it the wajra, and inside the wajra is the chitrini.
T h e chitrini has a void inside, which is called
brahma nadi or brahmarandhra.
T h e sushumna has three aspects: moon, sun
and fire. It radiates its power to the ida and
pingala by its moon and sun factors respectively.
It exercises its control influence on the ida and
the pingala by its fire aspect. T h e fire power is
fully awakened by the control of pranic radiations
and is centralized in the wajra. T h e chitra-power
is termed sushumna-Kundali, because it makes
the brahmarandhra fully patent when the Kundali-power passes through it. T h e chakras are in
the chitrini. T h e brahma nadi is in the nature
of inertia (tamas), the chitrini in the nature
of sentience (sattwa), and the wajra in the
nature of energy (rajas). T h e three primary
attributes (gunas) operate in the sushumna.
T h e ida is in the form of moon and power
and its radiations contain deathless-substance.
It is white in colour. T h e pingala is in the form
of the sun, and its colour is vermilion. T h e ida
originates from the left side of the kanda-mula,
and the pingala from the right side, remaining
to left and right respectively of the sushumna
which is between them in the central position
of the kanda. T h e n sushumna extends upwards
through the vertebral column, but the ida and

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

the pingala leave the vertebral column and
extend upward to reach the ajna, remaining
on the left and the right respectively of the
vertebral column. W h e n they go upwards,
they assume two positions: bow and circling.
The sushumna., when going upwards, assumes
a spiral form.

Tantrika Systems of Chakras
According to the type of spiritual practice and,
consequently, the mode of concentration, there
are some differences in the systems. Here is the
exposition of the main thirteen Tantrika systems
of chakras, of which six systems are expounded
by Shiwa.

1 T h e chakra systems as expounded by Shiwa
System A
The first chakra is the adhara, having four
petals of molten gold (that is red). On the petals
are the four letters from wa to sa, (i.e. wa, she,
sha, sa). Inside the pericarp of the chakra is
a beautiful triangle which is in the nature of the
deities Brahma, Wishnu and Shiwa, and of will,
consciousness and action. Swayambhu-linga with
kundalini coiled around him is in the triangle.
There is the desire-germ (Kamabija, that is the
mantra 'Kling') in the triangle, which is to be
concentrated on. Here are the centres of smell,
locomotion and elimination principles. In this
chakra lies Power (Shakti) Dakini, and concentration should be done on her. All these
are in the 'earth'-region (lying in the pericarp
of the muladhara). Concentration should be
made on kundalini in this m a n n e r : she is
splendorous like ten-million moons and is in the
nature of Supreme Brahman; she has three
eyes and four arms and is mounted on a lion;
she holds a book and a lute, and makes the
gestures of granting boons and of dispelling fear.
T h e next is the swadhishthana which is situated
in the genital region. It has six petals of vermilion
colour. On the petals are the six letters from ba

to la (that is, ba, bha, ma, ya, ra, la) which
are of shining coral-red. In the pericarp of the
chakra is (the 'water'-region of) Waruna. Here
lies the Power named Rakini. Concentration
should be made on her. Here are also the
centres of taste and sex principles.
T h e next chakra is the manipuraka. It has ten
petals, dark blue in colour. T h e petals are
ornamented with the letters from da to pha
of lightning-like colour. In the pericarp of the
chakra is the region of 'Fire'. Here lies Deity
Rudra, endowed with the power of destruction,
and with him is Power Lakini. Concentration
should be done on R u d r a and Lakini. Here is the
centre of the sight-principle.
T h e next chakra is anahata. It has twelve
petals of deep red. T h e shining letters from ka
to tha are on the petals. In the pericarp of the
c'hakra is 'air'. It is also the seat of jiwatman.
Here is a triangle in which are situated Banalinga. Power Kakini is also there. It is the
centre of the touch principle.
T h e next is the wishuddha chakra situated
in the neck region. It has sixteen petals which
are smoke-coloured and contains the sixteen
vowels (from a to ah) on its petals. In the pericarp
of the chakra are the akasha (that is, the region
of the void), and Deity Shiwa mounted on an
elephant. It is the centre of the hearing and
speech principles.
T h e next is the ajna chakra. It has two petals,
white in colour, and ornamented with the
letters ha and ksha. In the pericarp of this
chakra is a triangle where lies Itara-linga.
Power Hakini is situated here. Manas, buddhi,
ahankara and prakriti are there (in separate
chakras but closely connected with the ajna).
T h e n there is the great lotus sahasrara. This
perpetual sahasrara is white and stands with
its face turned downward. On its petals are the
shining letters from a to ksha (that is, fifty
letters). Connected with the pericarp of the
chakra are the inmost spirit (antaratman) and
Guru (in the twelve-petalled guru chakra which
is the lower aspect of the sahasrara). (Below the
guru chakra) there are the 'sun'-sphere (suryamandala) (which appears to be the manas
chakra, just above the ajna), and the 'moon'sphere (chandra-mandala) (that is, the indu
173

T h e Chakra System

chakra above the manas chakra). T h e n comes
the mahanada-wayu (that is, the wayu in the
form of mahanada - the great power of control)
(that is, supremely controlled pranic power,
effecting natural kumbhaka). And then (above
the wayu) is the brahmarandhra (here is the
terminal part of the brahmarandhra which
bears also the same n a m e ; the chakra termed
brahmarandhra or nirwana is here). Inside the
(brahma) randhra (that is, the nirwana chakra)
is the untinged and blissful Wisarga (that is, the
Power which goes outside the brahmarandhra).
Above it (that is above the sahasrara) is the
divine Shankhini (Supreme Power who is in the
spiral form and supremely tranquil in nature),
and who (in her power aspect) creates, maintains
and destroys. Below Shankhini is the 'moon'sphere (within the sahasrara proper) where
lies a triangle which is the abode of Shiwa
(Kailasa). Here is the perpetual and unchanging
amakala (that is, the power which maintains
consciousness in a state of samadhi). Within
it is the nirwanakala (the power named nirwana)
in coil. Within it (nirwanakala) is the nirodhika
(power of supreme control) in the form of fire.
T h e r e is the supreme Nirwanashakti (Kundalini
in her all-absorbing power aspect), who is the
source of all. In this power (Nirwanashakti)
is immutable supreme Shiwa. At this point,
kundali-power goes through the brahmarandhra
back to the muladhara lotus ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, abridged).
System B
T h e brahma lotus (muladhara chakra), which
stands with its face turned downward, has
four petals. Inside the pericarp of the lotus lies
the beautiful 'earth'-region which is q u a d r a n gular and encircled by the seven 'seas'. T h e r e
is a triangle on the square region, which is the
seat of 'love-desire'. Inside the square region
lies the bija (germ-mantra) Lang' which is
in the form of Deity Indra, mounted on the
king of elephants. Within the triangle is the
great lord Shiwa in the linga form (a form suitable
for concentration). T h e power, an aspect of
which is maya (negato-positivity), in a coiled
form like a serpent (that is, kundali-power),
encircles the linga by the three and a half coils,
174

and she has kept the orifice of the linga
closed by her mouth. T h e bija of Indra (that is,
'Lang') is situated on the left side of the linga.
Above the nada of the bija (the crescent aspect
of the ''Lang' bija) is the seat of Deity Brahma
who is the creator and the lord of all created
beings. On his left side is Goddess Sawitn
who is the source of the Weda.
Above this is a shining lotus called bhima
(swadhishthana). It has six petals of vermilion
colour. Inside the pericarp of the lotus is a
circular region with four doors, wherein lies the
bhuwar-world. Here lies Deity Wishnu with
Shri (Goddess Lakshmi) on his left side, and
Wani (Goddess Saraswati) on his right side.
"Wishnu is dressed in yellow raiment and is
ornamented with a garland of flowers of all
seasons (wanamala), and tranquil in appearance.
He is the maintainer of the universe. His abode
is called the waikuntha-world. On the right side
of it is the goloka (a world) where Deity Krishna,
holding a flute in his two hands, and Goddess
Radhika are situated.
Above it is a great lotus (manipura) which has
ten petals of black colour like rain clouds.
On the petals are the letters from da to pha
(ten letters) with nada-bindu (that is, matrikaletters). Inside the pericarp of the lotus is a
triangle of red colour like the rising sun, and is
ornamented with the swastika marks on its
three sides. Inside the triangle is the wahni-bija
(the 'fire'-germ m a n t r a 'Rang'), seated on a
ram. Here lies the abode of Rudra. Deity
Rudra and Goddess Bhadrakali are here. This
lotus is called the swar-world.
Above it, there is the beautiful wimala (pure)
lotus (that is, the anahata chakra). It has twelve
petals of deep red colour on which (are twelve
letters from ka to tha) of the colour of pure
vermilion. Inside the pericarp of the lotus is a
shining hexagonal region where lies the beautiful
wayu-bija ('Yang'). Here are Deity /shwara
and Goddess Bhuwaneshi (the mother of the
universe), lying on his left side. This chakra is
called the mahar-world.
Above it, there is the fascinating nirmala
(free from impurities) lotus (that is, the
wishuddha chakra). It has sixteen petals. In
the pericarp of the lotus is the 'moon'-sphere

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

(a circular region), where lies a hexagonal
region. Inside it are (Power) Gouri and on her
right side Deity Sadashiwa, seated on a bulllion (one half bull and the other half lion).
Sadashiwa has five faces and each face has three
eyes. He is like a mountain of silver (that is,
of white colour and motionless), and his body
is smeared with ashes. He is clothed in a tiger
skin and is ornamented with a garland of gems.
He is in the form of the united Power-Consciousness (arddhananshwara, that is, Power Gouri
is the half of Sadashiwa's body). Sometimes he
is only of lustre, and sometimes he is without
any form. This chakra is called the jana-world.
Above it is the jnana (ajna) lotus. It has two
petals. It includes the 'full-moon'-sphere (purnachandra-mandala, that is, the indu chakra)
within which is a nine-cornered region, made of
wishing-gem (chintamani). Here lies Shambhubija (that is, the germ-mantra of the God Shiwa 'Hang') which is in the form of a swan (hangsah).
The 'swan' (the bija mantra) is Supreme
Brahman (without any form) and also in the
form of Shiwa (that is, wachaka-shakti - powerin-sound-form, of the mantra 'Hang' is Shiwa
in divine form, and the wachya-shakti - power
as Consciousness, of the mantra is Supreme
Brahman). In the internal aspect of the 'swan'
(that is, in the bindu of 'Hang') is Deity Para
Shiwa and on his left is the all blissfull Goddess
Siddhakali. This chakra (jnana) is called the
tapas-world.
Above the jnana lotus is the sahasradala
(thousand-petalled) lotus. It stands with its
face downward and is situated in relation to
the head (just beyond it). T h e petals of the lotus
are endowed with all power. They are diversified
and variegated, presenting white, red, yellow,
black and green colours. Now they appear as
white, the next moment they are red, and then
yellow, and again white and then green. T h e
lotus is called the satya-world. Inside the pericarp
of the lotus, there is a vast ocean of nectar wherein
lies the isle of gems (manidwipa). There is a
wishing-tree (kalpadruma) where is situated a
lustrous temple with four doors. Inside the temple
is an altar made of fifty matrika-letters. On it
lies a jewelled throne on which is seated Mahakali
(Supreme Power) united with Maharudra

(Supreme Consciousness) as one. He who is
Maharudra is Mahawishnu and M a h a b r a h m a .
T h e three are the one, only there is the difference
in name ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4 - 1 0 , abridged).
System C
muladhara. In the muladhara, there is a triangle
called tripura which is in the nature of will,
knowledge and action. Inside the triangle lies
Swayambhu-linga shining like ten-million suns.
Concentration should be done on his fourth
aspect (turiya, that is, the concentration aspect)
which is deep red. Above it is Kundali as his
crest, and of red colour. Kundali is supremely
subtle. She is the Supreme Power as Goddess
Mahatripurasundan. She is the sentience principle in all beings. She is Shabdabrahman. She
is splendorous and is in the nature of beingconsciousness-bliss and eternal. She is within
all beings in a coiled form. T h e lotus has four
petals of red colour, and on the petals are the
letters from wa to sa (four letters) of shining
golden colour. It is the root and support of all
chakras.
Above it is the lotus called swadhishthana
which has six petals of fire-like red. On the petals
are the letters from ba to la (six letters) of
diamond-colour (that is, shining white). T h e
name swadhishthana is derived from swa to
mean supreme linga.
Above it is the great chakra - manipura,
situated in the navel region. This centre is like
mam (jewel), so it is called manipura. T h e lotus
has ten petals of golden colour which shine like
lightning. T h e petals have the letters from da
to pha (ten letters) on them. (Deity) Wishnu
is established in this lotus.
Above it is the anahata lotus which has twelve
petals of red colour like the rising sun. T h e
petals are ornamented with the letters from ka
to tha (twelve letters) of red colour. Inside the
lotus (in the pericarp) is Bana-linga (Shiwa
in the linga-form named Bana), shining like
10,000 suns. T h e anahata-sound (non-sensory
suprasound) arises in this lotus, so it is called
by the yogi's anahata. It is the abode of bliss
where lies the divine spirit (parapurusha).
Above it is the lotus termed wishuddha
which has sixteen smoke-coloured petals on
175

T h e Chakra System

which are placed the shining sixteen letters
(from a to ah). In this lotus, the embodied being
(jiwa) is purified because of his realization of
Hangsah (Supreme Being), so it is called
wishuddha. It is also called akasha (because
it is the seat of akasha - the 'void'-principle).
Above it is the ajna chakra where lies the
Supreme Spirit. T h e lotus has two petals on
which are the letters ha and ksha. T h e y are
moonlike white. T h e transference of divine
knowledge (Guru's ajna) occurs here, so the
lotus is called ajna.
Above it is the kailasa (chakra), and above
the kailasa is the bodhini (chakra). Above the
bodhini is the sahasrara (having 1000 petals)
lotus which is the centre of Bindu (bindusthana) ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, abridged).
System D
T h e basic lotus is the muladhara which has
four petals of deep red colour. On the petals are
the matrika-letters from wa to sa. T h e r e is a
beautiful bright triangle inside (the pericarp of)
the lotus where lies the 'earth'-germ mantra
(Lang). Within the triangle is situated Shiwa (in
linga-form) of a dark-green (shyamala) colour.
•Concentration should be done on him. H e r e (inside the triangle), lies kundalini; who is Supreme
Power. T h e divine Kundalini, who is (Shabda-)
Brahman, is splendorous like ten million
lightnings and in a latent form, and in coils like
a serpent around Shiwa.
T h e next is the swadhishthana, which is the
seat of the 'water' (-germ-mantra). It has six
petals of lightning-like colour, and on the petals
are the letters from ba to la which are white in
colour. H e r e lies omniscient Shiwa who is to be
concentrated upon.
T h e next is the manipura, which has ten
petals of black colour. On the petals are the ten
black-coloured letters from da to pha with
nada-bindu. Here lies Shiwa-linga (Shiwa in
linga-form) of black colour like clouds.
T h e n , there is the anahata-puri (-chakra ).
It has twelve petals and on the petals are twelve
letters from ka to tha. T h e colour of the petals
and letters is white. This is (also called) hritpadma (heart-lotus) which is in the nature of
pure sentience (sattwa). There, in front, lies
176

jiwa (the embodied being) in its divine aspect,
like the flame of a lamp, in the form of consciousness and power, quiescent, pure and of golden
colour.
T h e next is the smoke-coloured wishuddha
with sixteen vowels (letters from a to ah on its
sixteen petals). Inside it lies akasha (void) which
is in the form of power.
Thereafter is the ajna-puri (-chakra). It has
two petals on which are two letters (ha and
ksha). T h e y (petals and letters) are white in
colour. Here, divine knowledge (Guru's ajna) is
imparted (to disciples), so it is called ajna.
Next is the sahasrara. It lies in connection
with (but beyond) brahmarandhra where is
situated Sadashiwa. T h e Supreme Power (as
Mahakundalini) is in union with Sadashiwa.
This lotus has 1000 petals. Within the lotus is the
region of power where lies Sadashiwa, who is pure
consciousness and motionless like a corpse
( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1-3, abridged).
System E
The
muladhara,swadhishthana,
manipuraka,
anahata, wishuddha and ajna are the six chakras
which are situated in the anal, genital, navel,
heart, throat and eyebrow regions respectively.
T h e basic chakra (adhara pankaja) which is the
muladhara is above, but linked to the kanda,
with its face upwards. T h e muladhara has four
petals of red colour. On the petals are the letters
wa, sha, sha and sa, ornamented with filaments.
There is the 'earth'-region which is quadrangular. Here is situated (the deity) Indra
mounted on an elephant named Airawata.
In the lap of the 'earth'-seed mantra (that is,
within the bindu of the mantra 'hang') is the
child creator (Brahma). Above it is a triangle
composed of wama, jyeshtha and roudrz lines.
This triangle is the seat of Power (kundalinipower). Inside the triangle is the tremulous
kama-wayu (desire-radiating power) in seedform (that is, the kama-bija mantra 'Kling').
Here is Swayambhu-linga (Shiwa in the lingaform named Swayambha) with his face downwards. Divine K.undali is of conch-shell colour
(white), and like a creeper she is in three and a
half coils around Swayambha-linga and covers
the face of the linga. Here also lies (Power) Dakini

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

with instruments in her hands as the doorkeeper (that is, the presiding Divinity of the
chakra).
Above is the swadhishthana with six petals
of lustrous red. On the petals are the letters
ba, bha, ma, ya ra, la, ornamented with filaments. There lies the watery waruna-bija (that
is, the 'water'-germ mantra 'Wang') and above
it is a triangle where is situated the great linga
in the form of Wishnu. Power Rakini as a doorkeeper is also there.
Above it is the manipura which has ten petals
of a shining dark-blue (ni\a) colour. On the
petals are the letters from da to pha. There lies
the wahni-bija ('fire'-germ mantra 'Rang') in
the triangle (which is inside the pericarp of the
lotus) where is also Rudra-linga (linga in the
form of Rudra) with six faces. In this chakra
is situated Power Lakini as a door-keeper.
Above it is the anahata having twelve petals
of yellow colour with the letters from ka to tha
which are decorated with filaments. There is
a triangle where is situated Bana-linga named
/shwara. There are also wayu-bija ('air'-germ
mantra 'Yang') and jiwa (embodied being like
the flame of a lamp and in the form of hangsah
(that is, living). Here lies Power Kakini as the
door-keeper.
Above it is the lotus wishuddha which has
sixteen smoke-coloured, or sky-coloured (blue),
petals. On the petals are the sixteen vowels (the
letters from a to ah), decorated with filaments.
There is a beautiful triangle (in the pericarp)
where is situated Sadashiwa, and also Power
Shakini as the door-keeper.
Above it is the ajna chakra which is without
any principles of matter (shunya) and is the
seat of mind. It has two petals of variegated
(or white) colour on which are (the letters)
ha and ksha. Here is situated the linga named
Itara.
In the 'earth'-region (muladhara) lies the
Power of Brahma; in the 'water'-region (swadhishthana) is Narayani (the Power of Wishnu);
in the 'fire'-region (manipura) is the Power
Waishnawi; in the 'air'-region (anahata) is
Ishwari (the Power of Ishwara); in the 'void'region (wishuddha) is Sadashiwa himself; and
in the seat of mind (ajna) is the Itara-power.

Above it (ajna) is indu (that is, indu chakra,
also known as soma chakra) which is situated
in the region of the forehead (lalatadesha).
Above it (indu chakra) is the nada in the form
of half-moon. Above it (nada) is the shining
mahanada which is in the form of a plough.
Above it (mahanada) is the kala termed Anji,
and above it is unman;. At the end of the kundalirandhra-kanda (that is, the nadi wajra, and,
consequently, sushumna nadi; in other words
where the sushumna ends), there is the twelvelettered (twelve-petalled) lotus (dwadasharna)
shining white in colour, where Guru is (this is
called guru chakra). This chakra stands with
its face upwards, being covered on the top by
the lotus with 1000 petals of white colour mixed
with red (rose or pink). There is a triangle
(in the guru chakra) formed of three lines named
a, ka and tha, and decorated with the letters
ha, la, ksha (situated in the three corners)
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, abridged).
System F
In the perineal region and in relation to the
kanda is situated the adhara (muladhara) lotus.
It has four petals and on the petals are 4 letters
from wa to sa. This lotus is called kula (because
of the seat of Kundalini). Inside the lotus are
Swayambha-linga and (Power) Dakini as the
presiding Divinity. There is a triangle within
the lotus where lies Kundalini. Above it is the
quivering kama-bija (the desire-germ mantra
'Kling'), radiating light.
T h e second lotus which is called swadhishthana
is situated in the genital region. It has six petals
of red colour, and on the petals are the six
letters from ba to la. T h e presiding Divinity is
Rakini.
T h e third lotus which is called manipuraka
is situated in the navel region. It has 10 petals
of golden colour which are decorated with the
letters from da to pha. T h e presiding Divinity
is Lakini.
T h e fourth lotus is anahata, situated in the
heart region. It has twelve petals of deep red
which are decorated with the letters from ka to
tha. Here is the wayu-bija (the 'air'-germ
mantra 'Yang'). In this lotus is situated the
lustrous Bana-linga. T h e presiding Divinity of
177

T h e Chakra System

the chakra is Kakini.
T h e fifth lotus is the wishuddha which is
situated in the throat region. It has sixteen petals
of smoke colour, and on the petals are the sixteen
vowels (from a to ah). T h e presiding Divinity
is Shakini.
In the eyebrow region is the ajna lotus with
two petals of white colour which are decorated
with (the letters) ha and ksha. T h e presiding
Divinity is Hakini. Here is moon-like aksharabija (Ong) which is Parama-hangsah (Supreme
Being).
Above the ajna are three pithas (seats; here
chakras, or auxiliary chakras), bindu, nada
and shakti, situated (one upon the other) in the
forehead region.
Above the three pithas, but outside the physical body (that is, cranium) is the brilliant lotus
sahasrara (that is, the sahasrara is situated outside the cranium where the sushumna nadi
ends). T h e sahasrara is also called kailasa where
lies Mahesha (Supreme Shiwa) who is known
as akula (Parama Shiwa - Supreme Consciousness - into which kula - Kundalini - has been
absorbed) - the eternal, the immutable. Here,
kundalini-power named kula becomes absorbed
(into Parama Shiwa) ( - Shiwasanghita, 5. 8 0 205, abridged).

2 T h e chakra system as expounded by Bhairawi
T h e great lotus muladhara has four petals of
red colour on which are the letters from wa
to sa of golden colour. Here (in the pericarp)
is the kshiti-mandala (the 'earth'-region). In
the muladhara, there is a triangle (inside the
'earth'-region) which is in the nature of willknowledge-action.
Inside the triangle is
Swayambhu-linga shining like ten-million suns.
Above it is the kama-bija, and above that is
the divine Kundalini in the form of a flame.
Above it is the shining swadhishthana which
has six petals of red colour. On the petals are
the six letters from ba to la which are like diamonds (shining white). (Power) Rakini and
(Deity) Wishnu are situated in the pericarp.
This lotus is situated in the genital region and
is pervaded by the kandarpa wayu (an aspect of
178

the apana power which radiates love-desires).
Above it is the ten-petalled manipura, shining
like ten-million gems. It is situated in the navel
region. T h e lotus (that is, its petals) is like
cloud (that is black in colour). On the petals
are the lightning-like letters from da to pha.
Here (in the pericarp of the lotus) lies (Deity)
R u d r a with (Power) Lakini.
Above it is the anahata lotus, situated in the
heart region. It has twelve petals of red colour
like the rising sun, or the colour of the bandhuka
flower (Pentapoetes Phoenicea), that is, deep
red. On the petals are the letters from ka to
tha. Here (in the pericarp) are (Deity) Ishwara
and (Power) Kakini. Inside it is Bana-linga
shining like ten-thousand suns. T h e anahata
is in the nature of Shabdabrahman which is
realized here.
Above it is the sixteen-petalled lotus of
smoke colour termed wishuddha, and on the
petals are the sixteen vowels from a to ah of
the colour of lightning. T h e lotus is situated in
the throat region. It is the seat of akasha (that
is, the 'void'-region). Here are situated (Deity)
Sadashiwa and (Power) Shakini. This lotus
is called wishuddha (which causes purification),
because here the embodied being becomes
purified through the realization of Hangsah
(Supreme Being).
Above it is the ajna chakra situated in the
eyebrow region. It has two petals of white
colour. On the petals are the letters la and ksha
with bindu. Here are the seats of hangsah and
bindu. T h e transference of divine knowledge
(Guru's ajna) occurs here, so it is called ajna.
Above ajna is what is called kailasa (chakra),
and above kailasa is bodhana (chakra). Above
the bodhana is the great white lotus sahasrara.
It is the seat of Bindu. ( - Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 22. 2 - 1 3 ; 27. 53-70, abridged).

3 T h e chakra system as explained by Rishi
Narada
T h e lotus termed muladhara has four petals
of red colour on which are (the letters) wa,
sha, sha, sa of golden colour. Inside the muladhara
is a triangle which is in the nature of will-

T h e Tantrika System of Chakras

knowledge-action. Inside the triangle is Swayambu-linga, shining like ten million suns. Above
it is the kama-bija with kala-bindu-nada (Kling).
Above it is Kundali brilliant like a flame. kundali
is shyama (that is black or deep green in colour),
and is in the nature of Krishna (Supreme Being).
She is established in Krishna.
Above it is the swadhishthana which has six
petals of red colour, and on the petals are the
six letters from ba to la, shining like
diamonds.
Above it is the lustrous manipura, situated in
the navel region. It has 10 petals of smoke colour.
This lotus is like gems, so it is called manipura.
Above it is the lotus termed wishuddha which
has sixteen petals. Above that is the ajna chakra.
Above ajna is kailasa (chakra), and above the
latter is bodhini (chakra). Above bodhini is
sahasrara where lies the seat of Bindu
( - Goutamiyatantra, 34. 4 0 - 5 4 , abridged).

4 The chakra system as explained by
Mahidhara
The muladhara has four petals which are decorated with the letters from wa to sa. Inside it is
situated (Deity) Brahma with (Power) Dakini.
The chakra named swadhishthana is situated
in the genital region. It has six petals decorated
with the letters from ba to la. Here is (Deity)
Wishnu with (Power) Rakini.
The manipuraka chakra has ten petals on
which are the letters from da to pha; it is situated
in the navel region. Here are (Deity) Rudra
and (Power) Lakini.
The anahata, which is in the heart region,
has twelve petals on which are the letters from
ka to tha. Here are situated (Deity) Ishwara
and (Power) Kakini.
The wishuddha is situated in the throat region.
It has sixteen petals on which are sixteen vowels
(from a to ah). In this lotus are (Deity) Sadashiwa
and (Power) Shakini
The ajna chakra is situated in the eyebrow
region, and the letters la and ksha are (on its
two petals). Here lies (Deity) Parashiwa with
(Power) Hakini ( - Mantramahodadhi, 4. 19-25,
abridged).

5 T h e chakra system as explained by
Brahmananda
At the root of the vertebral column (that is,
at the lowest point of the sushumna nadi which
is within the vertebral column) lies the lotus
called muladhara. It has four petals of deep
red colour. Inside the pericarp of the lotus
is a triangle. Within the triangle is Swayambhulinga of golden colour and in the form of bindu
(supremely concentrated form which has no
magnitude but only position). He is with Power
Kakini. Supreme Kundali is in three and a half
coils around the great linga.
T h e six-petalled lotus (named swadhishthana)
is of whitish-red (raktapandara) colour. Inside
it is a linga of whitish-red colour and with
Power Hakini.
In the navel region is situated the eightpetalled lotus (manipura) like a new cloud (that
is, black in colour). Here is a linga endowed with
the power of absorbing the universe, and it is
with Power Shakini.
T h e r e is a lotus (anahata) in the heart region
with sixteen petals of white colour. Here is the
great Maheshwara-linga with Power Lakini.
Thereafter is the great lotus (wishuddha)
with the ten petals of dark-blue colour. There is
a great linga named K a m a lying with his
Power.
In the forehead region is the two-petalled
lotus (ajna) where is situated Brahma-linga
with the Power.
Above the topmost point of the sushumna
nadi, which is inside the vertebral column,
is the twelve-petalled lotus (guru chakra) where
lies a triangle which is in the nature of BrahmaWishnu-Shiwa, and above it is the sahasrara
lying with its face downward. Here (in the
sahasrara) is situated Parama Shiwa who is
Brahman (Supreme Consciousness). Guru (who
is in the twelve-petalled chakra) is in the divine
form and in the nature of mantra ( - T a r a rahasya, ch. 4, abridged).
6 T h e chakra system as explained by J n a n a n a n d a
There is a lotus (muladhara) with four petals
of golden colour in the perineal region, which
179

T h e Chakra System

are decorated with (the letters from) wa to sa,
shining like gold. Here lies (Power) Dakini
of red or white colour, three-eyed, and with
fierce teeth, holding (in her two right hands)
a shula (trident) and a khafwanga (a staff with
a h u m a n skull at its top), and in her two left
hands a khadga (sword) and a surakumbha
(wine-pot). In the pericarp of the lotus is a
triangle called kamakhya. Inside the triangle
is kandarpa, an aspect of the apana (-power).
Within the triangle is also Swayambhulinga with his head downward, who is shining
red and roving. There is the Kundali-power in
eight coils around Swayambhu-linga.
T h e great lotus adhishthana (swadhishthana)
is situated in the genital region. It is deep red
and is decorated with the letters from ha to la
of the colour of vermilion (on its six petals).
Here lies (Power) Rakini who is of the colour of
dark blue (shyama), holding in her hands a
shula (trident), a wajra (thunderbolt), a padma
(lotus) and a damaru (drum).
In the navel region is the manipura lotus
of ten petals of the colour of deep blue (nila)
on which are the letters from da to pha of the
colour of lightning. Here is the 'fire'-region
where is situated (Power) Lakini.
In the heart region is the anahata of twelve
petals of the colour of mixed blue and yellow,
or like the flame of a lamp (pingabha) with the
letters from ka to tha of red colour.
In the eyebrow region is the lotus (ajna)
shining like ten million lightnings which is the
seat of mind. It has two petals with the bright
letters (ha and ksha). Inside the triangle (which
is situated in the pericarp of the chakra) abides
Itara-linga the red colour (taruna aruna - the
newly risen sun). Here is situated (Power) Hakini
who is white in colour and three-eyed, and holds
in her hands an akshamala (a rosary of rudraksha = Eleocarpus Ganitrus), a damaru (drum),
a kapala (skull) and a pustaka (book), a chapa
bow) and mudra (the gesture of granting boons).
Within the lotus is situated the Inner-Atman
(Supreme Being) bright with ongkara-light.
T h e n comes the sahasrara lotus standing with
its head downwards. It is also called kailasa
( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 2, abridged).

180

7 T h e chakra system as explained by
Lakshmana Deshikendra
T h e muladhara has four petals. Inside it is a
bright triangle where dwells Divine Shakti
(Power, that is, kundalini) who is splendorous
like ten million lightnings, supremely subtle,
in the nature of Shiwa-Shakti (ConsciousnessPower) and in three-coils. She passes through
the middle-path (that is, the brahma nadi
which is within the sushumna) to Parama
Shiwa (situated in the sahasrara). On the
petals are the letters from wa to sa. Here is
Kamalasana (Brahma, as the presiding Deity
of the muladhara).
T h e six-petalled lotus swadhishthana has (on
its petals) the letters from ba to la. Here is
(Deity) Wishnu.
T h e navel-lotus (manipura) has ten petals
with the letters from da to pha. Here abides
(Deity) Rudra.
T h e heart-lotus (anahata) is decorated with
the letters from ka to tha (on its twelve petals).
Here is (Deity) Ishwara.
T h e throat-lotus (wishuddha) has sixteen
petals on which are the (sixteen) vowels. Here
lies (Deity) Sadashiwa.
T h e eyebrow-lotus (ajna) has two petals,
decorated with the letters ha and ksha. Here is
Bindu (which is Shiwa). Then, there is kala,
then nada, nadanta, unmani, wishnu-waktra
and guru-waktra ( - Sharadatilakatantra, 5. 12737, abridged).

8 T h e chakra system as explained by
Brahmananda Giri
T h e basic chakra is what is known as muladhara
which has four petals deep red in colour, and
the petals are decorated with the letters from
wa to sa of deep red colour. In the pericarp of
the chakra is a triangle named kamakhya,
which is in the nature of will-knowledgeaction. In the triangle lies kandarpa (-power)
named apara. Inside the triangle is also Swayambhu-linga of dark-blue colour, with a fissure,
and his face downward. Divine kundali, who

The Tantrika System of Chakras
is like a streak of lightning and supremely subtle,
is in a latent form, and in three and a half
coils from right to left around Shiwa (Swayambhu-linga).
The great lotus swadhishthana which is situated
in the genital region has six petals on which
are the letters from ba to la.
The manipuraka which is situated in the navel
region has ten petals of red colour with the
letters from da to pha.
The lotus anahata is situated in the heart
region. It has twelve petals of red colour on
which are the letters from ka to tha. Inside
(the pericarp) is Bana-linga shining like tenthousand suns. Anahata-mantra (mantra in the
madhyama form, that is, the suprasound form)
which is in the nature of Shabdabrahman
(that is, Kundalini) is 'heard' here; and from
this fact this lotus has been named by the yogis
anahata.
In the throat region is what is called wishuddha, which has sixteen petals of smoke colour.
The petals are decorated with the sixteen vowels
from a (to ah). The purification of the embodied
being is effected here, owing to the 'seeing'
of Hangsah (Supreme Being); so it is called the

wishuddha lotus. It is also called akasha (because
it is the region of akasha - 'void').
The chakra called ajna, which is situated in
the eyebrow region, has two white petals on
which are two letters ha and ksha. Inside the
chakra is the great linga named Itara (that is,
the great Itara-linga) of golden colour. Here,
the transference of living divine knowledge
(Guru's ajna) occurs, so its name is ajna.
Above the ajna is the kailasa (chakra) and
above kailasa is the bodhini (chakra), and again
above it, is the sahasrara, in which are situated
Nada and Bindu. Here lies the Void (shunyarupa) which is Shiwa (that is, the void is that
where everything has been absorbed into Shiwa
who, as Supreme Consciousness, only remains),
and the circle (writta) around it (void, that is
Shiwa) is splendorous Supreme Kundalini in
three and a half coils. The thousand-petalled
lotus stands with its face downward and is above
the twelve-petalled lotus (the guru chakra,
which is the lower part of the sahasrara), where
lies Shiwa as Guru (infinite Supreme Being
in divine form) ( - Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.
9-15, 31, abridged.)

181

CHAPTER 10

Exposition of the Chakras

This exposition of the chakras is essentially
based on the Tantras and supplemented by the
Waidika and the Pouranika accounts. T h e
chakras are the centralizations of the chitrapower, occurring at certain points along the
chitrini, and forming the chakra system. T h e
chakra system consists of the muladhara, swadhishthano, manipura, hrit, anahata, wishuddha,
talu, ajna, manas, indu, nirwana, guru, and
sahasrara. T h e chakras will be considered under
four subheadings: terminology, position, description, and explanation.

1

muladhara

T h e muladhara is the first chakra occurring
at the downmost point of the chitrini nadi.
T h e principal term for the first chakra appears
to be muladhara, which has been mentioned in
the Upanishads, Tantras, and Puranas.

Terminology
T h e following are the Tantrika terms of the
first chakra: (1) muladhara which has been
mentioned in the Todalatantra, ch. 2, p. 3;
ch. 7, pp. 1 3 - 1 5 ; ch. 8, p. 15; ch. 9, p. 17;
Matrikabhedatantra, ch. 15, p. 2 3 ; K a m a dhenutantra, ch. 13, p. 16; Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 6; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27;
ch. 10, p. 4 7 ; ch. 29, pp. 108, 112; Mantra182

mahodadhi, ch. 4, 20, 2 8 ; Shaktakrama, ch. 1,
p. 1; Kubjikatantra, ch. 6, 280, 331; Tararahasya, ch. 2, p. 8; ch. 3, p. 18; ch. 4, p. 22;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 5.4; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 2; ch. 3, p. 3; ch. 4, p. 4;
ch. 5, pp. 4 , 5 ; ch. 8, p. 8; ch. 10, p. 9; ch. 14,
p. 12; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
ch. 4, p. 4; Mayatantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 9, p. 9; ch. 10,
p. 1 1 ; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, pp. 6, 10;
ch. 2, pp. 12,23; ch. 4, p. 44; Koulawalitantra,
ch. 2, p. 6; ch. 3, p. 7; ch. 22, p. 80; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.127; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.10,
25,27,30,32,34; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 21.18;
22.2; 25.55; 27.53,58; 44.20; 45.6; Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104,115; Tantrarajatantra, 27.
35; 30,64; Puraschcharyarnawa, ch. 2, p. 90;
ch. 5, p. 386; ch. 6, p. 490; Shaktisangamatantra,
T a r a Section, ch. 61.113; Mantramaharnawa,
ch. 4. 1; Shadamnayatantra, 5.240; Shiwasanghita, 2.29; 5.92, 144; and Goutarmiyatantra,
34.40.
(2) Adhara, mentioned in the Karikalamalinitantra, ch.2, p.6; Phetkarinitantra, ch. 14,
p. 39; Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 19; Jnanasankalinitantra, 67, p. 5; Kubjikatantra, ch. 6, p. 7;
Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 4, p. 4; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, pp. 11,12; Shaktanandatarahgini,
ch. 4. 9, 25, 29; ch. 9.16; Tantrarajatantra,
21.82; Shiwasanghita, 2.21; 5.89; Shatchakranirupana, 4; and Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 3, p. 3.
(3) mula chakra, padma, mentioned in the
Ni'latantra, ch. 5, p. 8; Gayatntantra, 3.44;
Brihanni'latantra, ch. l,p. 2; ch. 6, p. 3 1 ; Gandh-

Exposition of the Chakras

arwatantra, ch. 5, p. 24; Bhutashuddhitantra,
ch. 1, p. 1; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 0 ;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.28; Rudrayamala, Part
2, 21.22, 2 3 ; 22.4; 29.11; Mahanirwanatantra,
5.93; Shiwasanghita, 5.98, 172; and Shatchakranirupana, 13.
(4) Brahma padma, chakra, mentioned in the
Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6; Shadamnayatantra,
5.249.
(5) Bhumi ('Earth') chakra, mentioned in
the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 21.27,28,40,49,50,
53,54,55.
(6) Chaturdala (four-petalled lotus), chaturdala padma (four-petalled lotus), mentioned
in the Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.27; Mundamalatantra, ch. 6,
P . 9.
(7) Chatuh-patra (four-petalled lotus), mentioned in the Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 16.

Position
The muladhara is situated in the region below
the genitals and above the anus, and is attached
to the mouth of the sushumna ( - Shatchakranirupana, verse 4). T h e region between the
genitals and the anus is the perineum. So externally, the muladhara is situated in the perineal
region. Internally, the chakra is at the point
of the opening of the sushumna, that is, at the
beginning of the sushumna.. T h e muladhara
centralization occurs just at the point where
the chitrini starts. T h e chitrini is inside the wajra,
and the wajra inside the sushumna.. It has been
stated that kanda is situated above the anus
and below the genitals ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.80).
This kanda is not the perineum, but the root
from which all subtle nadis have originated.
Externally, the kanda is in relation to the perineum, but internally it is situated inside the coccyx.
The sushumna arises from the central point
of the kanda. T h e mouth of sushumna is connected
with the kanda. T h e mouth is the starting point
of the sushumna and then it goes upward. T h e
wajra, which lies inside the sushumna as the
second nadi, arises from the starting point of the
sushumna. T h e chitrini, which is inside the wajra
as the third nadi, also arises from the same start-

ing point. At this starting point, which has been
called the mouth of the sushumna, - and in
fact, also the mouths of the wajra and the chitrini
- the muladhara lies in the chitrini.
It has been stated: 'The four-petalled lotus
(muladhara) is in the adhara' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39). So, the region between the
anus and genitals is called adhara, that is, the
perineum. It has also been stated: 'The fourpetalled lotus is in the adhara which is (connected with) the gudasthana (that is, anal region)'
( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80). So, the adhara
is the perineum. Yoni is another term for the
perineum. It has been stated that the region
between the anus and the genitals is yoni,
where the kanda lies ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.81).
So the yoni is the perineum, and in the yoniregion lies internally (that is, in the coccyx)
the kanda from which the sushumna arises. It
has also been said that the muladhara is in the
region of the anus ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2), and so this lotus is also called gudapadma (anal lotus) ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch.
10, p. 9). T h e exact position of the muladhara
has been clearly stated in the Mridanitantra,
which says that the muladhara is situated above
the anus. This position of the muladhara has
been approved in the Yogaswarodaya. T h e place
above the anus means the place lying in that
part of the perineum which is very close to the
anus.
In the Waidika accounts, the same position
of the muladhara has been described. It has
been stated that the muladhara is in the region
between the anus and the genitals ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.168; 5.5). This region is the
perineum. It has been stated that the yonisthana is between the muladhara and the swadhishthana and the muladhara is situated in the
gudasthana (anal region) ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantras 6 - 7 ) . This means: the
yonisthana is between the anus and the genitals,
and, consequently, it is the perineum. T h e
gudasthana is actually that part of the perineum
which is close to the anus. Here, it is indicated
that the position of the muladhara is in that part
of the perineum which is closest to the anus.
T h e term adhara for perineum has also been
used. It has been stated that the brahma chakra
183

T h e Chakra System

Description

gold is the shining red colour. According to
a certain Tantrika school the colour of the petals
is pita ( - Puraschcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490).
Pita is a yellow colour. It has also been stated
that the adhara is of a golden colour
( - Dakshinamurti, quoted by Wishwanatha in
his commentary entitled shatchakrawiwriti;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80). T h e golden
colour is the shining yellow. This school practises
a different mode of concentration. However,
in the generally adopted mode of concentration
the petal colour has been accepted as deep red
as taught by most of the gurus. In the Pouranika
accounts, the muladhara has been described
as of golden colour (that is, shining yellow)
( - Shiwapurana, 5b.29.140) as well as of molten
gold (that is shining red) ( - Dewibhagawata,
7.35.34).

T h e muladhara (Plate 1) has four petals ( - Shatchakranirupana, verse 4). This has been supported by all Tantras as well as by the Waidika
and Pouranika accounts. T h e arrangements
of the petals are as follows: the first petal is
situated in the north-east corner, the second
petal in the east-south corner, the third petal
in the south-west corner, and the fourth petal
in the west-north corner of the lotus. T h e east
and the west are considered to be on the right
and the left side of the practitioner respectively.
T h e colour of the petals of the muladhara
is shona ( - Shatchakranirapana, verse 4). T h e
commentators Kalicharana, Shankara and Bhuwanamohana say that the shona is the bloodcolour. According to Wachaspatyam (the great
Sanskrit Dictionary, compiled by T a r a n a t h a
Tarkawachaspati Bhattacharya), shona is the
blood-colour. T h e blood-colour is the deep
red colour like the jawa flower (the China rose
or Bengal rose). T h a t the petal-colour is deep
red has been stated in the Bhatashuddhitantra,
ch. 1, p. 1; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2; Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22; Mridanitantra,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha MS and Shaktanandatarangini, 4.9. It has also been stated that
the colour of the petals is like molten gold
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4; Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27.56; and Goutarmiyatantra, 34.43). T h e molten

On the petals of the muladhara, are the four
letters (wedawarna) from wa to sa which are of
the colour of the shining udyat gold ( - Shatchakranirupana, verse 4). T h e commentator
Ramawallabha says that udyat gold means
heated gold. T h e commentator Bhuwanamohana gives the same translation. The shining
heated gold presents a mixture of shining red
and gold colours. T h e commentator Wishwanatha explains 'udyat' as 'prasphutita', that is,
blown or opened. T h e translation of the passage
can also be: the letters are visibly shining as
the colour of gold shines. Or, the lotus usually
hangs with its head downwards; but when
its head is upwards, it blooms and the four
letters are seen shining like the colour of gold.
However, let us see what other Tantras say
about it. It has been stated that the letters
(on the petals of the muladhara) are of the
shining colour of gold ( - Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 27). This means that the letters shine
like gold, i.e. the letters are gold or shining
yellow in colour. This has been clearly mentioned
by Bhairawi. She says: 'The letters from wa to
sa are of the colour of gold (swarnawarna,=
gold-colour)' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.2).
Narada also says: 'The letters wa, sha, sha, sa
(which are on the petals of the muladhara)
are of golden colour' ( - Goutamiyatantra,
34.42). It has been stated that the letters from
wa to sa shine like gold ( - Koulawalitantra,

(muladhara
chakra)
is
in
the
adhara
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.1.).
The
adhara is the perineal region.
According to the Pouranika accounts, the
muladhara is situated in the perineal region.
It has been stated that the four-petalled lotus
(muladhara) is placed in the adhara ( - Dewibhagawata, 11.1.43). Adhara is the perineum.
Also the term mula has been used for the perineum ( - Shiwapurana, 5b. 29.131).
All the evidences - Waidika, Tantrika, and
Pouranika - indicate that the position of the
muladhara, when considered externally, is in
that part of the perineum which is very close
to the anus.

184

Exposition of the Chakras

ch. 22, p. 80). There is another school which
holds that the letters are of blood-colour
( - Mayatantra, quoted by the commentator
Wishwanatha; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.9). In
the Pouranika accounts, it has been stated that
the letters from wa to sa shine like gold (that is,
gold-colour) ( - Dewibhagawata, 7.35.34). So
we find that the letters are of golden colour
(or shining yellow colour) and also of bloodred or deep red colour. According to the mode
of concentration, either golden or deep red
colour should be adopted.
These four letters are wa, sha, sha and sa.
This has been adopted in all Tantras. These
letters are with nada-bindu (o). It has been
stated in relation to the manipura chakra that
the letters should be with bindu (nada-bindu)
( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, p. 8). This applies
to all chakras. It has been stated that
bindwardha
(bindu + ardha : ardha-bindu =
nada-bindu) should be added to the letters
which are on the petals of the muladhara,
swadhishthana, manipura, anahata, wishuddha,
and ajna chakras ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1,
pp. 1 and 2; ch. 2, p. 2). Wishwanatha, in his
commentary entitled Shatchakrawiwriti, says
that according to the Sarasamuchchaya, the
letters which are in the six lotuses are with bindu
(nada-bindu). So the letters wa, sha, sha and sa
become wang, shang, shang and sang when nadabindu is added. This indicates that the letters
in the chakra are not the letters of the alphabet
of the Sanskrit language. T h e y are matrikaunits which are the mantra-units.
T h e letters (matrika-letters) on the petals
of the chakras are arranged from the right
(to the left) ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10).
In connection with the wishuddha chakra,
it has been stated that the letters are arranged
from the right ( - Shiwapurana, 5b.29.136).
This applies to all chakras, as is stated in the
Wishwasaratantra. So in the muladhara, the
letters are arranged in this way: on the petal
situated in the north-east corner, which is the
first petal, is wang, on the petal in the east-south
is shang, on the petal in the south-west is shang,
and on the petal in the west-north is sang.
Concentration on the letters is done both from
right to left and in the reverse manner, depend-

ing on the purpose, evolution or absorption
( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10).
T h e petals of the chakras are the seat of specific qualities (writtis). Narayana, in his commentary on the Hangsopanishad, Mantra 7, has
mentioned these qualities. He says that according to the Adhyatma Wiweka the specific
writtis (qualities) are in the muladhara, swadhishthana, manipura, anahata and wishuddha,
and these wnttis are arranged on the petals
from right (to left). Jaganmohana, Jaganmohana
Tarkalankara
alias
Purnananda
Tirthanatha, a great authority on Tantra),
in note eighty-seven in connection with his
commentary on the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104,
also mentions the wnttis which are on the petals
of the chakras. Moreover, he has not only mentioned the writtis in the muladhara, swadhishthana, manipura, anahata and wishuddha as is
done by Narayana, but also in the talu, manas
and indu chakras. All these writtis will be mentioned in their appropriate place.
On the petals of the muladhara are the four
writtis arranged from right to left. On the first
petal (situated in the north-east) is greatest
joy (paramananda), on the second petal is
natural pleasure (sahajananda), on the third
petal is delight in the control of passion
(wirananda), and on the fourth petal is blissfulness in concentration (yogananda).
In this chakra is the quadrangular 'earth'region, surrounded by eight shining spears
(shulas), and within it ('earth'-region) is the
dhara-bija (the 'earth'-germ mantra Lang) of
the shining yellow colour and delicate like
the lightning (that is, the bija is lightning-like
and yellow in colour) ( - Shatchakranirupana,
verse 5). This translation (of verse 5) is according
to Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana. But
Kalcharana differs. He qualifies both the 'earth'region and the 'earth'-germ mantra as yellow.
He cites two passages in support of his explanation. In one passage, it is stated that the
'earth'-region is square and yellow in colour and
surrounded by eight spears. T h e other passage
says that inside it is the aindra-bija (that is, the
'earth'-germ mantra) which is yellow in colour.
Let us investigate what other Tantras say. T h e
K a n k a l a m a l i n t a n t r a (ch. 2, p. 4) mentions
185

T h e Chakra System

the 'earth'-region (prithwi) in the muladhara,
but does not qualify it. T h e Rudrayamala
merely mentions (Part 2, 22.3) the 'earth'region (kshiti-mandala = 'earth'-region) in the
muladhara without any description. Only the
name of the 'earth'-germ mantra (prithwibija) has been mentioned in the Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 1. It has been stated that in the
muladhara is the 'earth'-region (kshiti-chakra)
where the 'earth'-germ mantra (dhara-bija)
is situated, mounted on the elephant named
Airawata ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2). T h e colour of the 'earth'-region and its
germ mantra has not been mentioned here.
Also, the 'earth'-region (kshiti-chakra) is inside
the pericarp of the lotus (muladhara), which is
four-cornered (that is, square) and where the
Langbija lies in the form of Indra (the Deity)
(that is, aindra-bija which is the same as the
prithwi-bija) ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6).
Here also colour has not been mentioned.
It has been stated that the 'earth'-region
(prithwi-mandala)
(lying in the muladhara)
is yellow in
colour and
quadrangular
and is surrounded by the eight spears; inside it
('earth'-region) is the 'earth'-germ mantra
(dhara-bija) mounted on an elephant and fourarmed ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) . Here, the colour of the 'earth'region has been mentioned, but not of the 'earth'germ mantra. In the Waidika accounts, the
'earth'-region is only said to be a square ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.176; 5.13). We find in the
Pouranika accounts that the 'earth'-region
(awani-mandala) is golden colour (that is, shining
yellow), quadrangular and with a thunderbolt,
and inside the region is the Lang-bija (prithwibija = the 'earth'-germ mantra) ( - Dewi'bhagawata, 11.8.3). Here also the colour of the langbija has not been mentioned.
The colours of the regions in the chakras
are identical with their bijas. In the muladhara,
the 'earth'-region is yellow in colour, so its
bija lang should be yellow also. In concentration,
the colour of the 'earth'-region and that of the
'earth'-bija are thought of as yellow. This has
been indicated in the Mantramaharnawa, 1,4,
p. 4 1 . Of the mantra Lang, 'la' is the bija part.
It is the basic part which is intimately connected
186

with the particularized sound-form. The 'la' is
the prithwi-bija ( - Matrikanighantu, 53, p. 51).
It has been stated that 'la' is yellow and like a
streak of lightning ( - Kamadhenutantra, 6.28).
So, the colour of 'la' is shining yellow, and,
consequently, 'la' with nada-bindu, that is,
Lang, the 'earth'-bija, is of a shining yellow
colour, as has been stated in the Shatchakranirupana, Verse 5. That the 'earth' (prithwi)bija lang which is in the muladhara is yellow
has been clearly stated in the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104; also in the Shyamarahasya, ch. 1,
p. 16. So both the 'earth'-region and the 'earth'bija situated in the muladhara are yellow in
colour.
The 'earth'-bija lang has been explained in
the Sathchakranirupana, Verse 6: 'the 'earth'bija is ornamented with four arms and mounted
on the King of elephants; on the lap of the bija
is the child Creator, shining like the sun in the
morning with four arms and four faces which
are beautiful like lotuses. T h e King of elephants
means the elephant named Airawata who is
the bearer of Deity Indra. T h e 'earth'-bija
and the aindra-bija are identical. From the
viewpoint of the mahabhuta, Lang is the 'earth'bija, and from that of the dewata (deity) it is
aindra-bija. T h e Lang consists of the bija part
and the nada-bindu part. T h e bija part is
Deity I n d r a who has four arms and is mounted
on the best elephant Airawata. On the lap of
Indra is the Creator, that is, Deity Brahma
who is the shining red colour like the rising sun,
and who has four beautiful faces and four arms.
It has been stated that Lang-bija is in the form
of (Deity) Indra ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6).
So the bija aspect is Deity Indra, that is, Deity Indra arises from the bija aspect of Lang, when the
mantra is m a d e living by concentration and
japa. I n d r a is seen mounted on the elephant
named Airawata. So it is said that the king of
the elephants (Airawata) is the carrier of the
aindra-bija ( - ibid., ch. 4, p. 6). Airawata is
white and has four tusks ( - Shabdakalpadrumah). So it has been said that the seat of Indra,
mounted on the elephant Airawata, is in the
q u a d r a n g u l a r 'earth'-region in the muladhara
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). In
the concentration-form (the form arising from

Exposition of the Chakras

the mantra in concentration; and also the form
which is thought of in concentration) of Indra,
he is yellow in colour, thousand-eyed and holds
in his hands the thunderbolt and a lotus, and is
adorned with ornaments ( - Tantrasara 3.52).
The thousand eyes should not be taken in a
literal sense. It means the fully aroused spiritual
eyes. He has been described as having two
eyes as well as three eyes. Indra should be
considered as having four arms according to the
text. He has also been described as having two
arms. T h e thunderbolt and lotus are in his hands.
If he is thought of as having four arms, then in the
third hand he is holding a goad (ankusha), and
the fourth hand may pass round his Power
Indrani as in an embrace. But, in the concentration form, Indra is alone, and, consequently,
he is holding the thunderbolt and a lotus in
his two hands, and his other two hands are in the
gestures of granting boons and dispelling fear.
The lotus which is held in his hand is a blue lotus.
Brahma
On the lap of the dhara-bija Lang is Deity
Brahma. So it has been said that on the lap of the
dhara-bija is the child Creator (Brahma)
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). Also,
Brahma, with Power Dakini, is in the fourpetalled muladhara ( - Mantramahodadhi, 4.
19-20); and, Kamalasana (Brahma) is in the
muladhara ( - Sharadatilakatantra, 5.130). T h e
celebrated commentator Raghawabhatta says
that Kamalasana is Brahma, who is the presiding
Deity of the adhara.
In the Waidika accounts we also read that
Brahma is the presiding Deity (adhidewata) of
the quadrangular 'earth'-region (that is, the
muladhara) ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1. 176; 5.
13). About the actual seat of Brahma, it has been
stated that it is above the nada (the crescent
aspect) of the aindra-bija (Lang) ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6). Above the nada of Lang is
bindu (point), and, therefore, bindu is the seat
of Brahma. This means that within the bindu
lies Brahma in an unmanifested state. When the
mantra is aroused, Brahma emerges from the
bindu. So it is said that Brahma dwells there
(that is, above the nada, which is bindu) ( - ibid.,
ch. 4, p. 6). Kalicharana explains rightly that

'in the lap of dhara-bija' means within the bindu
of the bija. He quotes a passage in which it has
been stated: 'In the muladhara is the dharabija (which is) Amaradhipa (Indra) who is
mounted on an elephant; in his (Indra's) lap,
that is, in its bindu (i. e. the bindu of the dhara
-bija Lang) dwells Brahma in the form of a child.'
Here it has been shown that the dhara-bija
and Deity Indra are the same. Kali'charana too
says that the dhara-bija is identical with Indra.
He quotes a passage which says: 'The mantraletters are the dewata (divinity), and the dewata
is in the form of the mantra.'
In the Waidika sandhya-yoga-process, concentration is done on Brahma during puraka
pranayama (the inspiratory phase of breathcontrol). T h e Samaweda form of Brahma is as
follows: Brahma is blood-coloured (deep red
colour), with four faces and two arms, and holds a
rudraksha rosary (aksha-sutra) in one hand, and
a sacred water-pot (kamandalu) in the other hand,
and is seated on a swan (hangsah). T h e Rigweda
and the Yajurweda forms are the same as the
Samaweda form. Concentration on Brahma is
done in the navel region, that is, in the manipura
chakra.
T h e concentration-form of the Divine Power
Gayatri (kundalini) as Brahmi (Power of
Brahma) is this: as Brahma, she is (that is,
she is of a deep-red colour, four-faced, and twoarmed), with holy grass (kusha) in her hand,
seated on a swan; she is in the stage of preadolescence - from her arises the Rigweda - and is
in the sun-sphere (surya-mandala). This is the
Samaweda-form. T h e Yajurweda-form is this:
She is of a deep-red colour, clad in red raiment,
three-eyed, holds (in her three hands) a goad, a
rudraksha rosary and a sacred water-pot, and
(the fourth hand) in the attitude of granting
boons, is seated on a swan, in the stage of
preadolescence, uttering the Rigweda, and in
bhur-world, and she is the Divine Power of
Brahma. In the Rigweda-form she is on a swan,
and is assuming the lotus posture (padmasana);
she is four-faced and deep-red in colour, her two
arms are holding a rudraksha rosary and a
sacred water-pot; she is in the stage of preadolescence; she is like Brahma; and she is Brahmani
(the Power of Brahma). From all this, it appears
187

The Chakra System
that the form of Brahma and that of his Power
are identical.
In shatchakrayoga, concentration on Brahma
is done in the muladhara. In the Waidika
process, the concentration form of Brahma is
this: in the 'earth'-region with Lang is Hiranmaya (Brahma) who has four arms and four
faces. In the sandhya process, there are greater
details of his form.
The Pouranika form of Brahma for concentration is as follows: he is situated in the pericarp
of the hrit lotus; his face is deep-red in colour
(this means that he is of a deep-red colour); he
has beautiful eyes, four faces and four arms,
making the gestures of granting boons and dispelling fear, he has the sacred thread (brahmasutra) over his shoulder, and he is splendorous
( - Padmapurana, 1.15.188-9). Brahma is also
golden in colour, four-faced, and large-eyed
( - Brahmandapurana, 24.15). Brahma has also
been mentioned as having five faces ( - Wamanapurana, 2.24). About the Powers (Shaktis) of
Brahma, Wishnu and Rudra, it has been stated
that Power Brahmi is of sattwa, and white in
colour, Power Waishnawi is of rajas, and red in
colour, and Power Roudri is of tamas, and black
in colour ( - Warahapurana, 96. 58-9). So the
Powers of Brahma, Wishnu and Rudra appear to
have the same qualities and colours.
The dhyana (concentration)-form of Brahmi
(Power of Brahma) is as follows: Brahmi is deepred in colour (as quoted by Kalicharana, or
golden according to the text edited by
Rasikamohana), clothed in the skin of the black
antelope (krishnajina), and holds a staff (danda),
a sacred water-pot (kamandalu) and a rosary of
rudraksha, and makes the gesture of dispelling
fear ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 22). According to Kalicharana, Brahma has the same
weapons as his Power Brahmi; this conclusion
he bases on the Saptashatistotra, which says that
Shiwa and Shakti have the same weapons. The
Pouranika accounts also support this view.
Moreover, it has been stated that Brahmani
(Power of Brahma) is the real creator, and not
Brahma, so he is (like) a corpse ( - Kubjikatantra, 1.25-6). It indicates that the creativity
of Brahma becomes manifested through his
Power termed Brahmani or Brahmi. So, the
188

characters of both are identical.
The form of Brahma described in the Mridanitantra (quoted in the Amarasanggraha MS) is as
follows: Shiwa named Brahma who is in the lap
of dhara-bija is of deep-red colour and has four
faces and four arms with different weapons. Also,
Brahma is of deep-red colour, three-eyed, fourfaced, holding (in his hands) the rosary of
rudraksha and the sacred water-pot and seated
on a swan ( - Koulawali'tantra, ch. 22, p. 80).
Kalicharana quotes a passage from the Bhutashuddhitantra in his commentary on verse 6,
which says that in 'its' lap is the child Brahma
who is deep-red in colour, four-faced and fourarmed and seated on the back of a swan. It has
been stated that the Goddess Sawitri who is the
'mother' of the Weda is on the left side of Brahma
( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6). It has also been
stated that Brahma is with (Power) Dakini in the
muladhara ( - Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14; Mantramahodadhi, 4.19). (Concerning the form of
Brahma for concentration, see Plate 2, left top
figure).
Dakini
The Goddess (dewi) named Dakini is situated
here (in the muladhara); she has four beautiful
arms and bright red eyes; she is splendorous
like the brilliance of many suns rising
simultaneously; she always carries divine knowledge-light (to impart to the yogis) ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 7).
Dakini is the Power of the muladhara. It has
been stated that concentration should be done on
Power Dakini who is fit to be worshipped
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4). Power
Dakini is the presiding Divinity of the muladhara,
so it has been stated that here (in the muladhara)
is situated Dakini as the door-keeper (that is, the
presiding Divinity) ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2). That Dakini is the divinity of the
muladhara has been stated in the Shiwasanghita,
5.90). Kalicharana quotes a verse in which it is
stated that Dakini, Rakini, Lakini, Kakini',
Shakini and Hakini are the queens of the six
respective lotuses. So, Dakini is the presiding
Divinity of the muladhara. Dakini is the Power
which is linked to Brahma, the first Shiwa. It has
been stated that Dakini, Rakini, Lakini, Kakini,

Exposition of the Chakras

Shakini (and Hakini) are the Powers residing in
the six lotuses, who are linked to six Shiwas
(Brahma and others) ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
25. 54 - 5). Because of this connection, concentration is done on Dakini along with Brahma in the
muladhara ( - ibid., 30.14).
Now we come to the form of Dakini for
concentration. In the text (verse 7) Dakini has
been described as having four arms and bright
red eyes. About the colour of the body, it has been
stated that she is shining like the lustre of many
suns rising at the same time. Wishwanatha
explains it as 'very red'. She is shining deep-red
in colour. For concentration purposes we need
greater details.
Forms of Dakini
'She appears like the autumnal moon (that is,
she is shining white in colour), and has two arms;
her eyes are smeared with collyrium and
tremulous; she is bright with a mark on the space
between the eyebrows (tilaka) of vermilion, clad
in black antelopes skin and adorned with various
ornaments; and her face is as beautiful as the
moon' ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 5, p p . 2 2 - 3 ) .
'Dakini is radiant and appears agile; she is the
mother of wealth; she holds (in her hands) a
sacred water-pot and a knife, and makes the
gesture of granting boons' ( - Kularnawa, ch.
10, p. 53).
'Dakini is shining white in colour and redeyed; she holds a sword, a drinking vessel, a
trident, and a skulled staff and has fierce teeth'
( - G a n d h a r w a t a n t r a , ch. 9, p. 42).
'Dakini who is the Power of Brahma is shining
red in colour, four-armed, divinely dressed and
holds varied weapons (in her hands)' ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) .
'Dakini is red in colour, red-eyed, fearful to the
unspiritual persons; she holds a skulled staff,
club and a drinking vessel filled up with wine;
she is fierce and has terrific teeth' ( - Mahamuktitantra, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S ) .
'Dakini shines like the morning sun (that is,
red), (or) white like milk; she holds (in her right
hands) a trident and a skulled staff, and in her
left hands a sword and a drinking vessel; she has
three eyes and fierce teeth' ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80). (For the form of Dakini for

concentration, see Plate 2, right top figure.)
T h e Triangle
In the region where the moth of the wajra lies
(and, consequently, the mouths of the sushumna
and chitrini), in the pericarp (of the muladhara)
is a triangle named traipura which is bright like
lightning, beautiful, and is in the nature of lovedesire (kama); wayu (vital force) named
kandarpa (the energy associated with pleasurable
desires) is present always and everywhere in the
triangle; kandarpa is the controller of the embodied beings, very deep red and shines like
ten million suns ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 8).
It has been stated that inside the pericarp of
the muladhara is a beautiful triangle (trikona)
which is in the nature of will-knowledge-action
and (the Deities) Brahma, Wishnu and Shiwa
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4). T h e
triangle is the seat of love-desire (madana) where
kandarpa is the presiding force ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6). T h e triangle has been termed
tripura ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27).
T h e triangle is composed of three lines,
called
wama, jyeshtha.
and
roudri
and
there lies the seat of Power (kundalini-power);
inside it is the tremulous desire-radiating force
(kama-wayu) in the form of germ (bija) (that is,
the kama-bija-mantra Kling) ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). T h e triangle has also
been termed yoni (a triangular process which is
the abode of powers) where lies Kxindalini,
and in its upper aspect is situated the quivering
and shining kama-bija (that is, the mantra
Kling) ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.91). In the muladhara is a triangle which is in the nature of willknowledge-action where lies the kama-bija Kling
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27. 5 3 - 4 ) . Also in the
Goutamiyatantra, 34. 4 0 - 1 ) . Yoni is a triangle.
So it is said that the yoni (triangle) which is
situated inside the pericarp of the muladhara
is called kamakhya, inside of which lies kandarpa
(force in the form of pleasurable desires) which
is an aspect of apana (wayu) ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80). T h a t the kandarpa-force is an
aspect of apana-force has also been mentioned
in the Shrikrama, quoted in his comment by
Wishwanatha. T h e kandarpa has a special term
- apara ( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.9). Kan189

T h e Chakra System

darpa has also been called wahni-wayu (fireforce) ( - Mayatantra, also cited by Wishwanatha).
It is mentioned in the Waidika accounts that
there is a trirawritta region (that is a triangle)
in the muladhara where lies the seat of kama
in form (kama-rupa) (that is, kama in the form
of the mantra Kling) ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.1). Inside (the pericarp of) the muladhara is yoni (the triangular region) which is
kamakhya (the seat of kama) ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, 8). In the triangle is the seat of
what is called kama-rupa (kama in form, that is,
in the form of the mantra Kling) which makes desire fruitful ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.171; 5.8).
In the triangle is apana (-wayu) in which is what
is called mula-kanda (germ form) and it is also
called kama-rupa (kama-form); the triangle
is the wahni-kunda (the place of fire) ( - Yogarajopanishad, 6). Here it is indicated that an
aspect of apana wayu is kama in germ-form
which is Kling. T h e triangle is the seat of fire,
that is, fire-wayu which is called kandarpa-wayu
in the Tantras. So the kama or kandarpa-wayu
is an aspect of apana wayu and is in the nature
of fire, and it is called fire-force.
Swayambhu-linga
'Inside it (the triangle) is situated Swayambhu
in the form of linga as pashchimasya (that is,
"Ong"); he is beautiful like molten gold and is
revealed by the knowledge arising in concentration (dhyana); he is of the shape and colour
of new leaves; he shines like lightning and
radiates cool rays like the full moon; as Kashi
(the holy city of Benares) is the great seat of
Shiwa, so the triangle (in the muladhara) is
the seat of Swayambhu (a name of Shiwa);
he is in union with kundalini (wilasi); and he
is like a whirlpool in the river (that is, in circular
motion)' ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 9).
T h e meaning of the word 'pashchimasya'
is: with the face lying behind. But all the commentators - Kahcharana, Shankara, Wishwanatha, Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana interpret it a s : with the face downwards.
Kalicharana quotes from the Kalikulamrita
which says that Swayambhu is with his face
downwards. T h e technical meaning of the
190

word is ' O ' ( - Warnabijakosha) which, with
nada-bindu, becomes 'Ong'. On the basis of the
technical meaning, it can be said that the linga
is in the form of 'Ong'.
'Jnanadhyanaprakasha' - jnana is knowledge
and dhyana means concentration. This compound word has been interpreted as follows.
Kalicharana says: 'he who is realized by
knowledge and concentration. T h e formless
aspect of Swayambhu is revealed by knowledge,
and Swayambhu in form is realized by concentration. Shankara says that the realization is
caused by j n a n a yoga and dhyana yoga. According to Wishwanatha: he who is revealed by knowledge and concentration. Ramawallabha interprets j n a n a as tattwajnana and dhyana as chinta
(reflection). Tattwajnana is the true knowledge;
the knowledge of Brahman' ( - Wachaspatyam);
knowledge of the truth ( - Apte). Bhuwanamohana also says that knowledge is the true
knowledge and concentration is the reflection
on the true n a t u r e ; the jnanins by true knowledge
and the dhyanins by concentration 'see' him.
However, the senso-intellectual form of knowledge does not reach Swayambhu, so that knowledge which develops in concentration is the
only means of his realization. So jnana-dhyana
is the concentration-knowledge-light by which
Swayambhu is 'seen'.
About the appearance (rupa) of Swayambhu,
it has been said that it is like the appearance
of a new leaf. According to Kalicharana, rupa
includes both shape and colour. He says that
as the pistil inside the champaka flower is broad
at the bottom and tapers to a point at the top,
so is the shape of Swayambhu, and he is shyama
in colour. Shyama is black or green colour
( - Wachaspatyam and Shabdakalpadrumah).
Ramawallabha simply says that he has the colour
of a new leaf. This has been explained by
Ramakrishna Widyaratna as slightly red in
colour (araktawarwa).
Now, let us investigate what other Tantras say
about Swayambhu. Swayambhu-linga is always
with Kundali coiled around him ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4) and this explains why he
has been called wilasi. It has been stated that inside the triangle is Swayambhu-linga, shining like
ten million suns ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.54;

Exposition of the Chakras

Goutamiyatantra, 34.40). T h e colour of Swayambhu-linga has been more clearly stated here:
he is as bright as the lustre often million suns and
is of deep red colour ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 80). And also, he shines like the lustre of ten
million suns, and concentration should be done
on his fourth aspect (that is, turiya - the concentration aspect) which is deep-red in colour
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27). These statements indicate that Swayambhu-linga is of
shining deep-red colour. There is mention of his
other colours too. It has been stated that concentration should be done on Divine Shiwa
(here, in the linga-form, that is Swayambhulinga) who is beautiful in the colour of shyamala
(black or green colour), lying inside the triangle
( - Bhwtashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p . l ) . And in
Shaktanandatararigini, 4.9. He is also of golden
colour (shining yellow colour). It has been
stated that inside the triangle is what is known as
Swayambhu-linga who is of golden colour
( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22).
About the linga-form of Shiwa. It has been
stated that Maheswara (a name of Shiwa)
in the form of linga is in the triangle ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6). T h e lingo has also been
called Mahalinga (the great linga; it is an
epithet of Shiwa) ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad,
8). In the linga-form, there is a fissure a n d it
lies in pashchimanana (= pashchimasya, that
is Ong-shaped) ( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.9).
The linga-form is actually the bindu-form, so it
has
been
stated
that Swayambhu-linga
is in the form of bindu ( - Tararahasya, ch.
4, p. 22). T h e linga-form appears not to
be in tranquillity. It has been said that
Swayambhu-linga
is
roving
( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80). This unquietness of the
linga is due to the untranquil kamawayu-bija
(kama-force in the germ-form, that is, the
mantra Kling) ( - -Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2). Kama-bija (Kling) itself is restless
( - Shiwasanghita, 5.91). There is a close relation
between Swayambhu-linga and kama-bija and
the unquietness of the kama-bija is imparted to
the linga. Their relation is still deeper. T h e
linga-form appears
from
the
kama-bija
( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) . All this explains why it has been

said that Swayambhu-linga is like a whirlpool.
Kundalini
Over it (on the body of Swayambhu-linga) is
Kundalini who is subtle like the lotus-filament
and splendorous like the lustre of young lightnings, and, like the spiral of the conch-shell,
makes three and a half coils round Shiwa like
a serpent, a n d keeps the sweet mouth
(because of the amrita-flow in it) of brahmadwara (brahma nadi) covered by her own
m o u t h ; she is asleep (in a latent form); she,
like the indistinct h u m of the excited bees,
makes undifferentiated charming sounds (that
is, the matrika-sounds which arise from Kundalini); she is the world-bewilderer (by her mayapower); she who preserves all the beings of the
world by maintaining the functions of inspiration
and expiration (in latency), being deep within
the triangle of the muladhara, shines like a
row of lights of excessive brilliance; within her
(Kundalini, that is, in her inner aspect) is
Parama Kala (Supreme Kundalini) (that is,
Kulakundalini is really Supreme Kundalini)
who is endowed with supreme yoga-power,
supremely subtle (that is, her being is the being
of Parama Shiwa), and (is the source of) para
(shabda, that is, the principle of sound, or
Brahmawidya - the Brahman-knowledge), and
holds uninterrupted flow of the stream of
amrita oozing from the constant joy (of being in
supreme union with Parama Shiwa); she is
Shriparameshwari (Supreme Power) who shines
as eternal consciousness (that is, her consciousness is the eternal Shiwa Consciousness), and by
her splendour the whole universe is illumined
(that is, has come into being); and she remains
supreme ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verses 10-12).
Now, let us study what other Tantras say
about kundalini. It has been stated that Mayashakti (Power, that is, Kundali-power who
exhibits maya when coiled) is in coil like a
serpent (that is, unroused) and the linga
(Swayambhu-linga) is encircled by the three
and a half coils by her, and she stays always
by covering the orifice of the linga by her mouth
( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 4, p. 6). Above the
turiya aspect of Swayambhu-linga is the flamelike Kundali of red colour (that is, shining red)
191

T h e Chakra System

who is supremely subtle; she is Goddess Mahatripurasundari (Supreme Power), Shabdabrahman,
splendorous, and in the nature of being-consciousness-bliss; and she is eternal and is in a
coiled state within the embodied beings
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27). Divine
Kundalini who is Supreme Power and (Shabda-)
Brahman is coiled like a serpent and splendorous
like ten million lightnings and lies by encircling
Shiwa .(Swayambhu-linga) in the muladharatriangle ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 1).
Divine Kundalini who is white as the conchshell surrounds Swayambhu-linga by three and
a half coils like a creeper and covers his mouth
by her own ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch.
2, p. 2).
"Supreme Kundali is splendorous like lightning
and in three and a half coils, situated in the
sushumna-path' ( - Shiwasanghita, 2.23). 'Kundali who is Brahman is like a flame' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.55). 'Kundali is para (that is,
the source of para sound) and shines like a
flame, and black (or dark-green) in colour,
and is in the nature of Krishna (God)' ( - Goutamiyatantra, 34. 4 1 - 2 ) . 'kundalini; who is
Supreme Power and is in the nature of Brahman
shines like ten million suns and is bright and cool
like ten million moons and splendorous like
lightning; she is not steady and, like a serpent,
she is in three and a half coils around the great
linga '(Swayambhu-linga)' ( - Tararahasya, ch.
4, p. 22). 'kundali-power in whom is embedded
(the matrika-letters) a to ksha shines like lightning and is subtle like the lotus-filament, and
is sleeping like a serpent, and is in eight coils
( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80). 'Dewi (Divine
Kundalini) is Shiwa-Shakti (that is, Kundalini
is Supreme Power being one and the same with
Parama Shiwa - Supreme Being) a n d in the
nature of only consciousness; she is the power
and is supremely subtle; she is splendorous like
ten million lightnings and in three coils'
( - Sharadatilakatantra, 5. 128-9). 'Divine
Kundali who shines like a streak of lightning is,
as a sleeping serpent, unroused, and in three
and a half coils from right to left around Shiwa
(Swayambhu-linga), and is supremely subtle
like a lotus filament' ( - Shaktanandatarangini,
4.10).
192

In the Waidika accounts, we find that Shakti
(kundali-power) is like fire ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.1). Kundali who is unroused and in coils ( - Yogakunadalyupanishad,
1.65). Kundali-shakti (-Power) is in eight coils
( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, 36; Shandilyopanishad, 1.8; Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra
Section, 63). Kundalini is the divine light and
living power ( - Yogarajopanishad, 7).
From the above statements emerges the
following.
Divine kundalini is in the nature of consciousness. She is the living power and is supremely
subtle. She is like fire. She is splendorous like
the lustre of strong lightnings, bright like many
suns and cool like the moon. She is in three and a
half coils around Swayambhu-linga, encircling
him from right to left. She has also been described
as being in three and eight coils. She is like a
flame, not steady, and remains unroused in the
muladhara. She is of shining red colour. She is
also said to be white and black (or dark-green)
in colour. She is Parama Kala (Supreme Kundalini) and also Supreme Power. She is Brahman.
She is Shiwa-Shakti.
T h e r e are two forms of concentration on
Kudalini - subtle and gross.
Concentration on subtleness
Kundalini is the living power and is consciousness,
supremely subtle, lightning-like splendorous,
moon-like cool, and in three and a half coils
-around Swayambhu-linga, from right to left.
Concentration on form
1 kundalini who is Supreme Brahman shines
like m a n y million moons. She is seated on a
lion, and has three eyes and four arms. She holds
a book and a wina (Indian lute), and makes the
gestures of granting boons (wara mudra) and
dispelling fear (abhaya mudra) ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4).
Note : She should be thought of as red in
colour.
2 kundalini is red in colour, perpetually
youthful with fully developed breasts and
attractive eyes, and adorned with jewelled
bracelets, small bells around the hip, anklets
on the feet, and all kinds of ornaments and gems;

Exposition of the Chakras

she is charming like the full moon and very
beautiful ( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.34).
3 In the morning: in the muladhara. kundalini
is red like the rising sun in the morning; she
has three eyes like the sun, fire and moon, and
holds (in her four hands) a noose, a goad, a
bow and a arrow.
At noon: in the hrit lotus. She is in early youth.
In the evening: in the ajna. She is splendorous,
youthful and beautiful, and is Parama Kala
(Supreme kundalini) ( - Shaktanandatarangini,
4.54).
4 kundalini as Ishtadewata.
Note. T h e form of Ishtadev/ata. is the form of
kundalini.
5 Special concentration on kundalini, in the
form of Goddess Dakshinakalika, in the muladhara. Goddess Dakshinakalika is four-armed,
making the gestures of granting boons and
dispelling fear with her right hands, and holding
a sword and a h u m a n head with her left hands;
she is possessed of three eyes which are like the
moon, sun and fire; she is black in colour,
perpetually death-less, youthful and naked,
with a girdle made of hands of dead persons;
she has dishevelled hair, a smiling face, long
teeth and wears a necklace of skulls; her right
foot is on the heart of Shiwa and stands on a
great lotus; and she is in deep love-desire
for union with the Supreme Being ( - Kubjikatantra, ch. 6, p. 7).

Explanation
T h e chakras are the different levels of superconsciousness, so they are not reflected in senseconsciousness, because of its oscillatory character.
It indicates that superconsciousness is not undulatory and is in a state of concentratedness.
Therefore, the chakras are also the different
levels of concentration. When concentration is
very deep, the chakras appear in concentrated
consciousness and are 'seen'. When concentration is practically a thought-form, it can be made
deeper and transformed into real concentration
comparatively easier when the thoughts are of the
images of the chakras as seen in concentration.
So the description of the chakras is vitally im-

portant for those students of concentration who
are at the thought level.
T h e petals of the muladhara are the energyradiations from the continuous circular energymotions which maintains the prithiwi mahabhuta organization. T h e petals are deep red in
colour. It indicates that there is the concentration
of apana-energy which radiates red-rays. Each
petal has its own specific concentration which is
marked by a special matrika-letter. This mark
is not artificial but occurs as an intrinsic aspect
of the concentration. In the first petal is wang,
in the second shang, in the third shang and in the
fourth sang. T h e original colour-radiation of
wang is yellow lightning-like, of shang golden,
shang rose (red mixed with white) and sang
lightning-like. In the muladhara petals, all the
matrika-letters are of golden colour. So wang
and shang retain their original colours, but
the other two change their colours. T h e golden
colour indicates that the mahabhuta-tanmatraforces are concentrated in the petal-letters.
When the petal-letters are blood-red (due to
different mode of concentration), it indicates
the apana-concentration.
From the viewpoint of concentration, the petalletters form the mantra wang-shang-shang-sang
which are utilized for japa for developing
thought-concentration. At first, there is a petalgap between the letters, and by the practice of
japa the gaps become less and less and finally
disappear and become conjoint with nadabindu ('ng' factor). At this stage the four-lettered
mantra becomes a four-matrika-concentrationunit. This is the unit for the muladhara. Now,
the petal-concentration is reduced to circular
concentration. At this stage, the four radiations
(designated by the four-matrika-letters) cease
and the circular energy-motion becomes more
concentrated. T h e four-matrika-concentrationunit is that in which the four letters are seen
simultaneously and as a whole in thought-form.
Thereafter, concentration is done on two
main lines: mahabhuta-tanmatra concentration
and concentration within the triangle. In
mahabhuta-tanmatra concentration, the following forms are practised stage by stage: (a)
meta-earth (prithiwi mahabhuta) concentration,
(b) supra-smell (gandha tanmatra); (c) con193

T h e Chakra System

centration-on-divinc-form (-dewata).
In very deep concentration, meta-earth is
'seen' as a yellow square. When concentration
deepens more and more, the square is reduced
to an infinitesimal point which is the smell tanmatra, from which emerges the germ-mantra Lang of
shining yellow colour. T h e original colour of the
matrika-letter is yellow-lightning-like and the
colour remains unchanged when it becomes the
germ-mantra of supra-smell. When concentration becomes still deeper the bija aspect (that is,
la) is transformed into Deity Indra. It is the
beginning of concentration-on-divine-form. T h e
Indra-form represents a higher order of powers
to the point of most effectiveness and under the
control of higher intelligence. T h e yellow colour
of the form indicates that meta-earth and suprasmell (prithiwi mahabhuta and gandha tanmatra)
is the predominating factor in the form. This is
indicative of power.
Indra's great power is represented in the wajra
(a thunderbolt) which he holds in his h a n d .
T h e great control power has been concentrated
in the wajra. Desire in its specific form is the
creative desire which culminates in love-desire
in which the senses function in relation to
pleasurable objects and conative organs cause
to heighten the pleasure-feeling and effect the
union which is associated with the highest
enjoyment. This longing for conjugal pleasure
in which the strongest feeling is excited and the
full organic cooperation becomes a fact, is an
expression of strongest natural energy having a
definite mental form and it becomes involved in
organic activities at a certain point which is an
elaboration of the original desire. From wajra
comes the highest control power termed wajroli
- the adamantine control, by which sexual
energy in its mental and organic forms is fully
controlled and transformed into a divine energy
which increases the strength of concentration.
T h e adamantine control consists of two main
processes: development of reverse organic control
and utilization of mental sexual energy in
concentration. T h e apana-control plays an essential role in wajroli.
T h e fittest persons for the practice of this
control are those who are endowed with great
sexual vigour which is supported by general
194

physical development. But usually these persons
go in for sexual excesses, especially, when their
spiritual qualities are in a rudimentary state.
T h e wajra excites fear in them by causing disease
and other sufferings. For all unspiritual persons,
the wajra is the cause of fear. T h e sexually weak
and physically undeveloped persons are unfit
for the practice of adamantine control.
Indra is seated on an elephant. T h e elephant
represents an excellence of physical development
and strength. But Indra's elephant is not an
ordinary one, it is a white elephant. It indicates
that physical development need not impede
spiritual growth but harmonizes with spiritual
qualities. Indra's white elephant shows the
spiritualized physical development. The Kunjara (elephant)-process has been developed in
relation to the white elephant of Indra. It is the
process of purification and vitalization of the
body. A person with such a development is the
fittest person for the practice of adamantine
control.
T h e wajra has other characteristic features.
T h e sound associated with the wajra arises
from the transformation of the madhyama
sound (suprasound) into the waikhari (audible)
sound. This means that the mantra is transformed
into the waikhari form by the wajra-power,
which is necessary for the practice of mantra.
T h e wajra itself is the manifestation of the bija
Lang or Mang. T h e Lang (or Mang) power is
metamorphosed into the form of wajra in the
muladhara. T h e wajra-power has also been
manifested by Kundalini, by which she keeps
concealed the great fire-energy lying within
Swayambhu-linga. T h e light aspect of the wajra
is the spiritual light by which consciousness is
illumined. This consciousness becomes so purified and concentrated that the Deity Brahma
appears in it and the whole consciousness is
brightened by the lustre of Brahma. The Indraform is derived from the bija Lang in the
muladhara. T h e form can be reduced to Lang.
T h e white elephant of Indra is from the bija
Kang or Khang.
Concentration on Brahma
Brahma is one of the six Shiwas (Supreme Being
in forms). It has been stated that Brahma,

Exposition of the Chakras

Wishnu, Rudra, Ishwara, Sadashiwa and Parashiwa are the six Shiwas ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
25. 5 3 - 4 ; also in the Shadamnayatantra, 5. 2 8 3 - 4
and the Gayatritantra, 3.146-7). Beyond the
six Shiwas is Parama Shiwa (Supreme Brahman).
It has been stated: 'Brahman has three aspects gross, subtle and Supreme. T h e five forms
(belonging to the five mahabhuta-tanmatras) of
Brahman (that is, five Brahmas which are the
five Shiwas of the Tantras) are gross and termed
wairaja (belonging to Brahman forms). T h e
subtle form is Hiranyagarbha characterized by
the primary three bijas with nada (that is, the
first mantra Ong). T h e Supreme Brahman is
the ultimate truth, in the nature of consciousness,
being and love, immeasurable, undefinable,
beyond mind and senses, in itself, attributeless,
without form, immutable, untinged, eternal,
whole, incomparable and perfect' ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.
14-17). T h e Waidika
Supreme Brahman is the Tantrika Parama
(Supreme) Shiwa. T h e five forms of Brahmans
are the first five Shiwas. Hiranyagarbha is the
sixth Shiwa named Parashiwa. T h e five Brahmans
have been named Hiramnaya (Brahma) in the
'earth'-region (in the muladhara), Narayana
(Wishnu) in the 'water'-region (in the swadhishthana), Rudra in the 'fire'-region (in the
manipura), Ishwara in the 'air'-region (in the
anahata), and Sadashiwa in the 'void'-region
(in the wishuddha) ( - Yogatattwopanishad, 8 4 99). So the Waidika terms and the Tantrika
terms are identical.
All the Shiwas or Brahmas are the six forms
which arise, stage by stage, in concentration.
They are the divine forms of Supreme Shiwa,
also called Narayana. So it has been stated that
Brahma and Shiwa are Narayana ( - Tripadwibhutimahanarayanopanishad, 2.16). It has also
been
stated
that
Brahma is
Narayana
( - Karmapurana,
1.6.3). Narayana is the
Supreme Being, and Wishnu, Brahma and
Maheswara are the same ( - Warahapurana,
70.26). T h a t the (Supreme) Brahman is Brahma,
Shiwa and Wishnu has been stated in the Kaiwalyopanishad, Mantra 8. He who is Shiwa is
also Hari (Wishnu) and Brahma - Brahman
in three forms ( - Garudapurana, 1.23.34). This
means that Supreme Brahman assumes the

forms of Brahma, Wishnu and Rudra.
According to the predominating primary
attributes (gunas), the divine forms vary. Sattwa
predominates in the Wishnu-fbrm, rajas in the
Brahma-form and tamas in the Rudra-form
( - Shiwapurana, 1.6.20). Powers associated with
Wishnu, Brahma and R u d r a are of the same
character. Lakshmi, the power of Wishnu, is
in the nature of sattwa; Brahmi, the power of
Brahma, in that of rajas; and Sat;, the power
of Rudra, in that of tamas ( - ibid, 1.6.21).
T h e rajas, sattwa and tamas attributes influence
the mind and its concentration power. In the
first stage of concentration rajas, which functions
on the sattwa basis, develops the power which
makes concentration deep, and consciousness
is in the Brahma-form.
T h e basic aspect of the Brahma-form is the
smell principle (gandha tanmatra) which is
rarefied yellow in colour. When this aspect is
predominant, Brahma appears as of golden
(shining yellow) colour. But when the rajas
attribute and apana-force predominate Brahma
is deep red. In the usual mode of concentration
deep red colour is applied. Brahma has four
faces, each with three eyes, and four arms. Four
faces indicate the four forms of sound: para (the
principle of sound), pashyanti (radiant), madhyama (suprasound) and waikhari (audible). T h e
first three forms are inaudible. T h e two ordinary
eyes are the eyes which are endowed with full
sensory power and coupled with a highly
developed insight. T h e third eye in the forehead is the concentration-eye which 'sees' things
which can only be seen in deep concentration.
Brahma holds in his hands a danda (staff),
kamandalu (a sacred water-pot) and akshasutra
(a rosary of rudraksha). Danda indicates the
power of control exercised by Brahma over the
nonconscious impressions (sangskaras) which
maintain the body. Kamandalu indicates that
the life-force symbolized in water, which is
held in it, is under full control, that is, in a state
of kumbhaka. Or the kamandalu is the expression
of the indu chakra where amrita (life-energy)
is reserved, and radiates to reenergize the whole
organism in concentration on Brahma. Akshasutra is the sutra (thread) on which a-ksha, that
is, the fifty matrika-letters from a to ksha, have
195

T h e Chakra System

been strung; the sutra is that on which all
words have been strung; it is Brahman ( - Brahmopanishad, 7 - 9 ) . Also, it is called sutra because
it (as Brahman) is within all beings and it awakens
the Brahman-form ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.
10-11). It has been stated that akshamala (the
rosary of rudraksha) is in the form of fifty (matrika-) letters from a to ksha ( - Guptasadhanatantra, ch. 11, p. 15). T h e akshasutra indicates
the matrika-letters from a to ksha strung by
Kundalini. Brahma makes the gesture of
dispelling fear. Fearlessness is a spiritual
quality. Real fearlessness arises when unspiritual
knowledge is removed. Brahma dispels fear from
the practitioner by bestowing spiritual strength.
Brahma is seated on the hangsah (swan).
Shankara in his commentary on Kathopanishad,
2.2.2, says that he who moves everywhere is
hangsah. This means that he who pervades
everything is hangsah, that is Supreme Being
(Paramatman). So it has been stated that
hangsah is within all beings ( - Nirwanopanishad, 1.24). Hangsah is without a second (Shwetashwataropanishad, 6.15), so he is Supreme Being.
It has been stated clearly that hangsah is Paramatman ( - Pashupatabrahmopanishad, Part 1, 13).
On commenting on this, Upanishad Brahmayogi says that one who removes the delusion
which is in the nature of nonself, by the realization of the true nature of Atman is hangsah.
T h e commentator Narayana also says that he
who removes ignorance (unspiritualness) is
hangsah (his commentary on Chulikopanishad,
Mantra 1).

he moves in the worldly circle without the
recognition of his infinite nature ( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 1.6). This mode of existence
ceases when the superunion of jiwatman and
Paramatman occurs in manojajna (that is, samadhi) ( - Pashupatabrahmopanishad, Part 1, 18).
T h e real thread of connection is effected through
the five forms of pranayama in which the five
pranas are controlled. Jiwa as a conscious being
is constantly undergoing changes because his
consciousness is oscillating between the four
main powers (chatushkala) - sensory, intellective, affective and volitive. These changes are
expressed by the functioning of the five pranas
as ha-sa movement which is automatic and in
which consciousness itself remains unaffected,
but it supplies all the power causing its undulatory form. W h e n the normal cessation of respiration occurs, consciousness becomes free from
oscillations and in a state of concentration
(based on Brahmawidyopanishad, 16-19).
T h e hangsah-breathing is normal respiration
with its rate and depth reduced to an almost
imperceptible form by conscious relaxation,
general effortlessness and mental calmness.
U n d e r this condition of breathing, concentration develops. Hangsah is here hangsah breathing
as the basis for concentration on Brahma.
From the mantra viewpoint, Brahma is reducible to the matrika-letters kang, mang and
kshang, and the bija-mantras Ong and Kang;
danda to the mantra Namah; kamandalu to
thang; and akshasutra to all matrika-letters from
ang to kshang.

T h e garland of letters, that is, fifty matrikaunits, is in the form of hangsah who is Shabdabrahman, that is, kundalini. Shabdabrahman
is Ishwara when the matrika-sound-power has
been manifested in which time becomes involved,
Ishwara is Paramatman. T h e matrika-soundpower causes the attainment of the wealth of
Brahman, that is, samadhi (based on Pashupatabrahmopanishad, Part 2,1). This is the hangsah
process of the attainment of samadhi and this
has been expounded in a technical Waidika
language. So it has been stated that hangsah
is the spiritual thread of manojajna (the spiritual
process of concentration) ( - ibid., Part 1, 17).
Hangsah is also jiwa (embodied being) when

Concentration on Power Dakini
T h e power (shakti) of the Supreme Being is
Supreme Power who is eternal and always with
and in the being of Supreme Consciousness.
Sometimes she is awakened and sometimes
she is unroused. In one of her aspects, she is
Shabdabrahman, and in another aspect she is
beyond it. At times she manifests her specific
'powerhood', at other times she is tranquil.
She is omnipotent. She manifests her conscious
power (ichchashakti) in three forms: yogashakti
(the samadhi-power), bhogashakti (the power
involved in world-experience) and wirashakti
(the heroic power). In samadhi-power one is

196

Exposition of the Chakras

able to reduce consciousness into the supreme
form in asamprajnata samadhi. Bhogashakti
is that power which operates when there is
awareness of the outer world. In the spiritual
practice of the eight-fold yoga, and in worship
and other religious activities this power is fully
operative. It is also operative in the activities
of daily life and all humanitarian actions done
with the purpose of pleasing God. Wirashakti
is the power of formalization by which Shakti
(Power) manifests herself in form. Shakti in
form is endowed with eight superpowers (aishwarya) ( - based on Sitopanishad, 3 4 - 7 ) .
Shakti appears in many forms. In the chakras,
there are six main forms. T h e y are in the six
chakras from the muladhara to the ajna. T h e y
are called Dakini, Rakini, Lakini, Kakini,
Shakini, and Hakini ( - S h a a m n a y a t a n t r a , 6.
261-2). They are the presiding Divinities of
the chakras, that is, the chakras are fully controlled by them. T h e y are also called the doorkeepers. They exercise their power for the
selection of qualified practitioners who are
able to practise in the chakras.
Power Dakini is situated in the muladhara.
Her fierce appearance and weapons excite
fear in m a n who is not spiritually prepared.
The drinking vessel in her hand stimulates
thirst for drinking and appetite for food. But
the food and drink which m a n takes cannot
prevent death. It is indicated in the skulled
staff. While living, he often expresses a feeling
of harmfulness because he is unable to love
others, and the sword and trident are used as
destructive weapons. But a practitioner with
well-developed spiritual qualities sees in the
drinking vessel deathless substance (amrita)
which can be made to flow within him by deep
concentration, and he proceeds towards immortality in spite of the death of the body as
indicated in the skulled staff. T h e sword is the
spiritual knowledge which destroys all m u n d a n e ness. T h e trident removes three forms of pain pain arising in the body, pain caused by outside
influences and pain from the invisible source.
Concentration on Dakini develops spiritual
qualities.
Dakini is reducible to her germ-mantra Dang,
the mantra Khphreng, and the matrika-letters

ong, oung, ah and phang; the sword to the germmantra khang, and the trident to the matrikaletter oung.
Yoni in muladhara
Yoni is a triangular process, being formed
by the triangular kandarpa-energy which is an
aspect of the apana-force, and is shining deep
red in colour. T h e mantra-form of this energy
is kling. T h e nature of the energy is of fire which,
when aroused, is expressed as love-feeling
associated with the intense desire for enjoyment.
T h e kandarpa-energy is always in motion, but
its activities are intense when it is brought
to the conscious level, and the whole apana
system is accelerated by them. T h e triangular
energy is associated with the three-fold controlprocess termed yonimudra - genito-control. It
consists of three factors: (a) ano-genital contraction in which anal-lock develops into genitallock, (b) abdominoretraction, and (c) breathsuspension
with
chin-lock.
Apana-force,
including kandarpa-energy, is controlled by
yonimudra. For deep concentration on Kundalini, it is very important for neutralizing the
kandarpa-energy motions, which is effected
by yonimudra. Yonimudra is also an important
part of the process for rousing Kundalini. Moreover, it is the first step towards the practice of
wajroli - adamantine control.
Swayambha-linga and concentration
Shankara in commenting on Swayambhu (Kathopanishad, 2.1.1) says that Swayambhu is Parameshwara (Supreme Being) who always exists
by himself - independently, never dependent
on another. Swayambha is the Supreme Being,
and also the name of Brahma, Wishnu and
Shiwa ( - Wachaspatyam). So Swayambha is
he who exists always by himself, without depending on another or anything else - the eternal
self-existing being, that is, the Supreme Being.
In the triangle of the muladhara Swayambhu is
in the linga-form.
T h e term linga has been used here in a technical sense. It has been stated: 'It is that which is
called linga because it is subtle, it is the source
(of everything), it is that into which all is absorbed, it is also motional, and it is a (specific)
197

T h e Chakra System

form (for the realization) of the Supreme Being'
( - Yogashikhopanishad, 2.9-10).
T h e linga
is a specific manifestation of Supreme Being,
subtle in character, endowed with omnipotency,
which in concentration becomes, step by step,
reduced from a subtle line-form to a subtle
bindu (point) when its motional aspect disappears, and into which all cosmic principles
are absorbed. T h e power aspect associated with
the linga is Kundalini which gives it a form
because of her coils around it, and this form is
most suitable for concentration. T h e nada
(suprasound) aspect of the linga is aroused and
'heard' as pranawa which are the coils of Kundalini, and the pranawa-concentration to its highest
point causes the uncoiling of Kundalini.
T h a t the linga is the Supreme Being and in his
subtle aspect is realized by the yogis in concentration has been stated: 'The linga which bestows
all good and bliss is luminous, imperishable,
perfect and omnipresent, and is established
in the hearts of yogis' ( - Shiwapurana, 1.26.14).
It has also been stated in the Skandapurana
that akasha (void) is called linga the base of
which is the earth and is the abode of the dewas
(deities) and into which everything is absorbed.
Here the akasha is the chidakasha. T h e chidakasha is what is undefiled as the akasha, and
the support of all - the Brahman ( - Wachaspatyam). T h e base of the linga (Swayambhulinga) is the 'earth'-region in the muladhara
where lie Deities and Powers. Swayambhulinga is always with Kundalini in the muladhara,
and when kundalini is roused all Deities and
Powers and cosmic principles are absorbed
into her.
It has been stated: 'The linga is of two kinds,
outer and inner. T h e outer linga is material,
the inner is subtle and bright. Those who are
devoted to religious rites worship the linga
of material forms. Those who are unprepared
take the gross form of the linga to be able to
concentrate on the subtle linga. O n e who is
unable to "see" the spiritual (adhyatmika) linga
should think of the subtle linga in the gross
forms. T h e subtle, shining and immutable
linga is "seen" by those who possess the knowledge (arising from concentration). T h e gross
linga made of earth, wood and other materials
198

is for those who have no such knowledge'
( - Shiwapurana, 1.26. 15-18). The real linga
is subtle and luminous and is 'seen' inside by
deep concentration. W h e n a practitioner has
not the power of deep concentration, he will
have to take the gross linga for worship and the
thought-form of the gross linga for developing
concentration. So it has been said that the
worship of Swayambhu-linga develops (concentration-) knowledge by itself ( - ibid, 2.16.34).
T h e r e is a void aspect (chidra) of Swayambhulinga where lies the great fire-energy which
becomes activated by prana-force by pranayamic
suspension. T h e entrance is guarded by Kundalini when in coils. This state maintains the idapingala flows which effect respiration (based
on Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 16). When the fireenergy is released by pranayama, it plays an
important role in arousing Kundalini. It has
been stated: 'So long Kundalini and Swayambhu
are in an unroused state in the muladhara, no
spiritual work should be done. . . . T h a t divine
Kundalini and that Divine Being (Swayambhalinga) who is the Supreme Being are roused
by pranayama and assume the wished for forms'
( - Tripurasaratantra, quoted in Sarwollasatantra, 15. 15-16). When the fire-force is ignited
by pranayama both Swayambhu-linga and
Kundalini are aroused.
T h e concentration-form of Swayambhu-linga is
diagrammatic. It has been stated that Shiwalinga is in the form of the diagram consisting
of a, u, ma, nada and bindu, and is surrounded
by pranawa from which arises the nada (pranawasound) and thereafter it is absorbed ( - Shiwapurana, 3.10. 14-16). T h e bright subtle line
which emerges from the Supreme Bindu assumes
the pranawa-form and emits pranawa-sound.
In the muladhara, the pranawa-form is the coils
of kundalini around the bright line which is
Swayambhu-linga. By concentration, pranawa
is enlivened and the mantra-sound appears.
By deeper concentration the mantra-sound is
absorbed into kundalini and she is then roused
along with Swayambhu-linga.
Concentration on Kundalini
After a practitioner is well prepared by concentration-on-Brahma, he can undertake con-

Exposition of the Chakras

centration-on-kundalini. T h e first stage is the
concentration-on-form. T h e concentration-onform of kundalini is of red colour like the rising
sun in the morning. When the form is clear and
well established in consciousness by repeated
and long practices, the red colour should be
thought of as very bright. At first, the face should
be thought of as very bright and gradually the
whole body. T h e n the red form should get slowly
absorbed in the shining red colour and finally
there will be no form, but only the red light.
Now kundalini is in the form of red light.
T h e next step is to transform kundalini,
who is in the red light form, to the lightninglike splendorous form. Now kundalini has no
shape, but is only in her splendorous form. T h e
practitioner is advised to see, in the lightninglike brightness the formless subtle kundalini
in concentration. There will be more and more
perception of her subtleness through her brilliant
lustre. These forms of concentration should be
done in the muladhara.
In another of her aspects, kundalini is situated
in the brahma nadi and extends from the muladhara to the sahasrara, and is supremely subtle
and in the nature of force ( - Wishwasaratantra,
ch. 2, p. 12). Concentration should be done
on this supremely subtle kundalini in the
brahma nadi who extends from the muladhara
to the sahasrara. To be able to accomplish this
advanced concentration, the practitioner is
advised to do the following forms of
concentration:

(b) Concentration on Moon-kundalini,
situated from the ajna to the end of
brahmarandhra.
4 Concentration on Turya (the fourth aspect) kundalini who is only spiritual consciousness,
in the sahasrara.

1 (a) Concentration on Fire (Wahni)-kundalini
who is shining red like the molten gold in the
muladhara.
(b) Concentration on Fire-kundalini who is
situated from the muladhara to the bottom
of the anahata.
2 (a) Concentration on Sun (Snrya)-kundalini
who is splendorous like m a n y suns at a time,
in the anahata.
(b) Concentration on Sun-Kundalini from
the anahata to the Swadhishthana.
3 (a) Concentration
on Moon (Chandra)kundalini who is lustrous like many moons
at a time and in the form of amrita (deathless
substance), in the ajna.

T h e following are the Tantrika terms of the
second chakra.
1 Swadhishthana, mentioned in the Nilatantra, ch. 5, p. 9; Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14;
ch. 9, p. 17; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 13, p. 16;
Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 4; Kularnawa,
ch. 4, p. 19; Jnanasankalini'tantra, verse 6 7 ;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Mantramahodadhi, 4 . 2 1 ; Kubjikatantra, 6. 289; T r i p u r a sarasamuchchaya, 5.11; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch.
1, p. 2 ; ch. 3, p . 3 ; ch. 4, p . 4 ; ch. 5, pp. 4 , 5 ;
ch. 8, p. 8; ch. 10, p. 9; ch. 14, p. 12; Sammohanatantra, part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 4, p. 4;
Mayatantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Purashcharanarasollasa,
ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10;

After the practice of all these forms of concentration, bhutashuddhi-concentration should
be undertaken. After it is accomplished, the
process of arousing kundalini should be practised.
At first, the mantra should be aroused according
to the instructions of a guru. T h e n , the arousing
of kundalini should be practised. T h e roused
kundalini then goes to the sahasrara after
absorbing all principles lying in the chakras,
where samprajnata samadhi is attained. At this
stage, consciousness is only in the form of
kundalini. When this stage is fully established,
the kundalini-consciousness is coiled into kundalini when she alone shines in Supreme Consciousness and finally is absorbed into it in asamprajnata samadhi.

2 Swadhishthana
T h e swadhishthana is the second chakra, lying
above the rmuladhara in the chitrini nadi.

Terminology

199

T h e Chakra System
Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 9; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.131; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.11,29,
30, 34; 9.16; Rudrayamala, part 2, 15.35;
22.4; 25.55; 27.57,58; 37.14,35; 44.20,21;Mahanirwanatantra, 5.94; Tantrarajatantra, 21.82;
Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 2, p. 90; ch. 5, p. 387;
ch. 6, p. 490; Shaktisangamatantra, 61.114;
Shadamnayatantra, 5.262;423; Shiwasanghita,
5.106,107,213;
Mridani'tantra
(quoted
in
Amarasanggraha M S ) ; Goutamiyatantra, 34.44;
and .Shatchakranirupana, verse 18.
2 Adhishthana, mentioned in Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; and Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80.
3 Bhima, mentioned in Nirwanatantra, ch. 5,
p.6.
4 Shatpatra (lotus with six petals), mentioned
in Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 16; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4; Gandharwatantra,
ch. 8, p. 39; Shaktanandatarangini, 7.14.
5 Shaddala padma (lotus with six petals),
mentioned in Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 45.6; 60.28.
6 Wari-chakra (chakra containing 'water'principle), mentioned in Rudrayamala, Part 2,
21.97,107,112,113.
Position
T h e swadhishthana is situated in the genital
region, when considered externally. As the
chakras are in the chitrini, and the chitrini
is within the sushumna as the third nadi, and the
sushumna is within the vertebral column, so
the swadhishthana is within that part of the
vertebral column which corresponds to the
genital region. T h a t the swadhishthana is situated
in the genital region has been stated in the
.Shatchakranirupana, Verse 14; Jnanasahkalinitantra, Verse 6 7 ; Gandharwatantra, ch. 8,
p. 39; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p p . 8,10; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; Shaktanandatarangini, 7.14;
Mahanirwanatantra, 5.114; Mridani'tantra (quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) , and in all other
Tantras. T h a t the position of the swadhisthana
is in the genital region has also been mentioned
in the Waidika as well as in the Pouranika
accounts.

200

Description
T h e swadhishthana (Plate 4) has six petals
( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 14; and in all
T a n t r a s . and in the Waidika and Pouranika
accounts). T h e colour of the petals is vermilionred ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 14; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Nirwanatantra, ch. 5,
p. 7; Shiwasanghita, 5.106; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h e colour has also
been stated to be fire-like red ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27.56; Goutamiyatantra, 34.43), lightning-like
( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 2), lustrous
red ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2);
whitish red ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22); and
deep-red ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80).
In the Parwati-Parameshwara-sangwada ( - dialogue) (quoted by Narayana in his commentary
on the mantra 10 of Hangsopanishad), it has
been stated that the colour is of gold.
On the petals are the letters from ba to la
with bindu (that is, nada-bindu - the matrikaletters) ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 14, and
in all Tantras and Pouranika accounts). The
matrika-letters are arranged from right to left.
T h e colour of the matrika-letters is like that of
lightning ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 14). It
has also been stated that the colour is diamondlike white ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27. 5 6 - 5 7 ; Goutamiyatantra, 34. 4 3 - 4 4 ) ; white ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 2 ) ; and vermilion-red ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80). It has been stated in
the Pouranika accounts that the matrika-letters
are of a diamond-white colour.
There are six specific qualities (writtis) on
the six petals of the swadhishthana. They are:
affection (or indulgence), pitilessness, feeling
of all-destructiveness, delusion, disdain and
suspicion ( - Adhyatma Wiweka, quoted by
Narayana in his commentary on Hangsopanishad,
Mantra 7). T h e y are arranged in the above
order from right to left. Jaganmohana (Footnote
87, in connection with the verse 104, Mahanirwanatantra) gives the following order: affection, suspicion, disdain, delusion, feeling of
all-destructiveness and pitilessness.
Within the swadhishthana (that is, inside the

Exposition of the Chakras

pericarp of the swadhishthana) is the half-moonshaped 'water'-region of Waruna of white colour
and inside it lies the bija Wang which is moonwhite and seated on a makara (kind of alligator)
( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 15). It has been
stated that in the pericarp of the swadhishthana
is situated (Deity) waruna ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5). This means that Waruna,
who is in the form of the bija m a n t r a Wang, lies
in the 'water'-region which is situated in the
pericarp of the swadhishthana. T h a t the watery
waruna-bija (Wang) is within this chakra has
been stated in the Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2. T h e waruna-bija which is within the
waruna-region has four arms and is seated on
makara ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha MS). T h e waruna-bija has the pasha
(noose) in its hand ( - the passage quoted by
Kalicharana). T h a t the semilunar 'water'-region
is within the pericarp of the swadhishthana
has been stated in the Waidika accounts ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1. 176; 5.13). In the Pouranika
accounts, it has been stated that the 'water'region is half-moon-shaped and white and encloses the bija Wang ( - Devibhagawata, 11.8.4).
T h e bija aspect of Wang is Deity waruna,
that is, from the bija wa arises waruna. There
is no distinction between the bija and the form.
waruna is in the form of Wang as well as in
divine form. T h e concentration form of waruna
is as follows:
waruna is white in colour; he has four arms
and is seated on a makara; he holds the pasha
(noose) in one of his hands.
Wishnu
In the lap of the bija Wang (that is in the lap of
Deity waruna who is in the form of Wang) is
Hari (a name of Wishnu - Shabdakalpadrumah
and Wachaspatyam), who is bright dark-blue
(or black) (nila), graceful, youthful and pleasing;
he has four arms and is dressed in yellow raiment;
he wears shriwatsa (a mark on the chest of
Wishnu) and koustubha (the celebrated gem
worn by Wishnu on his chest) ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 16).
Kalicharana explains 'in the lap' (anke) to
mean within the bindu which is on the top of
the bija. As Brahma arises from the bindu of

Lang, so Wishnu appears from the bindu of
Wang in deep concentration. It has been stated
that above the waruna-bija (that is, Wa) is
the great linga in the form of Wishnu ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). This indicates
that Wishnu in the linga-form is within the
bindu of the Wang and emerges from the bindu
as Wishnu in deep concentration. T h e presence
of Wishnu has also been mentioned in Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.4; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.132;
Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ;
Mantramahodadhi, 4.20; Todalatantra, ch. 7,
p. 14; and Shad'amnayatantra, 5. 2 6 2 - 3 . Wishnu
has been described as the presiding Deity of
the
swadhishthana
( - Yogashikhopanishad,
1.176; 5.13).
Kalicharana quotes a verse from another
Tantra in which it has been stated that Hari
(Wishnu), who is in the lap of him who holds
the noose in his hand (that is, Waruna), is darkblue (or black) (shyama) and dressed in yellow
raiment and has four arms, and holds a shankha
(conch), chakra (wheel), gada (mace) and
padma (lotus) in his hands. T h e Nirwanatantra
(ch. 5, p. 7) says that Wishnu is four-armed,
dressed in yellow raiment, adorned with wanamala (a large garland of flowers of all seasons)
and tranquil in appearance.
In the form of Narayana (an epithet of Wishnu
- Wachaspatyam, Shabdakalpadrumah, Apte)
for concentration, he has been described as
holding a conch, wheel and mace ( - Atmaprabodhopanishad, 1.2).
In the commentary on this mantra, Gangacharana (Gangacharana Bhattacharya Wedantawidyasagara, the commentator of this Upanishad)
quotes a verse from Wishnusanghita which says:
Wishnu wears a crown, jewelled ear-rings,
shriwatsa (a curl)-mark on his chest, and a
large garland of flowers of all seasons (wanamala), he is pleasing in appearance and holds
(in his hands) a conch, a wheel, a mace and a
lotus, and the world is at his feet.
T h e dhyana-form of Narayana as Krishna
is as follows: he is in the fully blown eight-petalled
hrit-lotus; his feet are marked with the divine
ensign and umbrella, and the shriwatsa mark
is on his chest, the koustubha-gem on his breast;
he wears armlets, a garland (wanamala), a
201

T h e Chakra System

crown, bracelets and makara-shaped earrings;
he has four arms and holds a conch, a wheel,
the sharnga-bow, a lotus and a m a c e ; he is of
golden colour, serene, and makes his devotees
free from fear. Or concentration can be done on
Krishna holding a flute and a horn (that is twoarmed) ( - Gopalatapinyupanishad, Part 2, 4 6 9). It is stated that Wishnu as Krishna has two
arms and holds the flute ( - Nirwanatantra,
ch. 5, p. 7). Bhutashuddhitantra (ch. 9, p. 8)
says that Hari (Wishnu) is dark-blue (or black)
in colour, dressed in yellow raiment, wears the
wanamala, the crown, earrings, the shriwatsamark, the koustubha-gem, a necklace of jewels
and anklets; he has long arms, bright eyes and
a kindly disposed face and grants boons.
From the above accounts, the concentration
form of Wishnu emerges as follows.
Wishnu is shining dark-blue (or black) in
colour, graceful, youthful and serene; he has
four arms, and holds in his hands a conch, wheel,
mace and lotus, and also the sharnga-bow;
he is dressed in yellow raiment and wears
shriwatsa-mark and the koustubha-gem on his
breast and wanamala on his neck; he is ornamented with the crown, jewelled earrings,
anklets; he has bright eyes and is kindly disposed,
and he grants boons.
T h e colour of Wishnu has been generally
accepted as dark-blue or black ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 16; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 9,
p. 8). In the Waidika form of concentration,
Wishnu has been described as of dark-blue or
black colour ( - Waidika Sandhya-widhi). T h e
colour of Wishnu is also golden ( - Gopalatapinyupanishad,
Part
2,
49),
crystalwhite ( - Garudapurana, Part 1, 30.11), moonwhite ( - ibid., Part 1, 31.10; Skandapurana,
1.1.1.1; Mahabharata, 12.332.66); and white
( - Mahabharata, 12.272, 28). It has been
stated that the colour of Wishnu changes according to yuga (an age of the world - Apte).
In the Satya-age, Wishnu is white, in the Tretaage he is red, in the Dwapara-age he is yellow,
and in the Kali-age he is black ( - Warahapurana, 3.18). A Waidika dhyana form of
Narayana (Wishnu) is as follows: He is fourarmed, has the colour of pure crystal, wears a
crown and is dressed in yellow raiment ( - Yoga202

tattwopanishad, 8 9 - 9 0 ) .
K a l i h a r a n a says that we should think of
Wishnu as seated on garuda, as we have seen that
Brahma is seated on the hangsah in the muladhara. It is not necessary to infer this as we
find in the Waidika concentration-form that
Wishnu is seated on garuda ( - Waidika Sandhyawidhi).
It has been stated that it is the Power of
Wishnu that maintains, but not Wishnu, so he
is as if a corpse ( - Kubjikatantra, 1. 26-7).
This indicates that the power of Wishnu is
Wishnu himself, and therefore the form of his
power is the form of Wishnu. So it has been
stated that Sawitn (as Power of Wishnu) has
the same form as Wishnu ( - Rigweda Sandhyaprocess), and Sawitri is in the form of Wishnu
( - Samaweda Sandhya-process). T h e concentration-form of Sawitn is as follows: Sawitn is
of black colour, four-armed, three-eyed, holding
a conch, wheel, mace and lotus, youthful,
seated on the garuda, the Power of Wishnu and
in the form of Wishnu ( - Yayurweda Sandhyaprocess). From this form we have to infer that
Wishnu also has three eyes. (For the concentration-form of Wishnu, see Plate 5, left top figure.)
Rakini
Rakini, who is always in the swadhishthana, is
of the colour of a blue lotus (that is, dark blue)
and holds various instruments in her four hands;
she is dressed in splendid raiment and adorned
with ornaments, beautiful and delightful ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 17).
T h e presence of Rakini in the swadhishthana
has been mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5; Shiwasanghita, 5.106; Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 22.4; Mantramahodadhi, 4.20; and
Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14. Rakini is Kundali
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 42.1). This means
that Rakini is one of the forms of Kundali,
and consequently, other Powers, situated in
different chakras, are also forms of kundalini.
It has also been stated that Power Rakini is
the door-keeper of the Swadhishthana ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2).
O t h e r concentration-forms of Rakini are as
follows.
Rakini who is red in colour, two-armed and

Exposition of the Chakras

fawn-eyed is shining with the vermilion-redmark on her forehead, her eyes are gracefully
painted with collyrium, she is dressed in white
raiment and adorned with various ornaments,
and her face is as beautiful as the moon
( - Kahkalamalinitantra, ch. 5, p. 23).
Divine Rakini is dark-blue (or black) in colour
and adorned with various ornaments, and holds
a sword and a shield ( - Kularnawa, ch. 10,
p. 53).
Rakini is dark-blue (or black) in colour, and
holds in her hands a spear (or trident), the
wajra (thunderbolt), a lotus and a d r u m ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80).
Rakini is dark-blue (or black) in colour,
holds in her hands a spear (or trident), a lotus,
a drum and a sharp chisel (or axe); she is powerful and has three red eyes and prominent teeth;
the great, lustrous, divine Rakini is seated on
a double lotus ( - the verse quoted by
Kalicharana).
Kalicharana says that it is to be understood,
by seeing Rakini seated on a lotus here, that
all six Powers everywhere are seated on red
lotuses. (For concentration-form of Rakini', see
Plate 5, right top figure.)
Explanation
T h e petaline processes of the swadhishthana
are the processes of the radiations of energies
from the central aspect of the chakra into the
ida-pingala power-flows. T h e colour of the
swadhisthana-petals is generally vermilion-red.
This indicates that there is a mixture of redradiations of apana with the golden-radiations
of wyana. It also indicates that apana radiates
in a more concentrated form, while wyanaradiations are less concentrative and slower in
character. When the petals become red and
deep red, it indicates greater concentration
of apana-radiations. T h e wyana-radiations predominate when the petals are of a golden colour.
T h e whitish-red colour of the petals indicates
the white-radiations of samana in combination
with the red-radiations of apana.
T h e matrika-letters are the measures of the
power-concentration in the petals. There are
six petals as there are six main radiations from

the central aspect of the swadhishthana. T h e
matrika-letters are bang, bhang, mang, yang,
rang and lang. Their colour is white. T h e y are
indicators of the basic ap-mahabhuta power
lying within the swadhishthana. T h e original
colour-radiation of bang is moon-white, of
bhang and mang shining red, of yang smoke
colour, of rang red-lightning colour, and of
lang yellow-lightning colour. T h e original colours
of the matrika-letters, except bang, have been
changed into white in the swadhishthana-petals.
T h e y are influenced by the ap-mahabhuta
power.
Petaline Concentration
T h e six-lettered mantra bang-bhang-mang-yangrang-\ang, with gaps between, will be transformed by japa in combination with thought-concentration into a gapless conjoint mantra which
is a swadhishthana-concentration-unit. At this
stage the petaline concentration is in the form
of a circular ring of vermilion-red colour with
the diamond-white conjoint matrika-mantra.
When this is successfully done, the powerradiation outwards ceases in concentration.
Mahabhuta-concentration
T h e first stage is the thought-concentration
on ap-mahabhuta in the form of the half-moonshaped region of white colour. When concentration is very deep this 'water'-region is 'seen'
as a white half-moon.
Tanmatra-concentration
When concentration becomes still deeper the
white half-moon is reduced to an infinitesimal
point which is rasa-tanmatra and is represented
by the germ-mantra Wang of white colour.
Dewata-concentration
W h e n concentration on Wang is very deep,
Deity Waruna emerges from the bija aspect.
Waruna is 'seen' seated on a makara, white in
colour, and is holding the pasha (noose). Makara
represents immense power operable in the watery
medium. In the body, the makara-power operates
to maintain circulation at the action and inaction
levels in a most efficient manner. Therefore,
it plays a most important role in circulatory
203

T h e Chakra System

development and maintains general health and
efficiency of the body in action, relaxation and
mental concentration.
Makara also represents sexual vigour, essentially based on endocrine development. T h e gonadal
development is brought about by general and
local blood-movements induced by the makaraprocess. T h e process comprises general muscular
movements, pelvic muscular movements, voluntary muscular relaxation and inactivity, blood
purification and mental control of the sex urge.
T h e purificatory and control aspects are indicated by the white colour of the makara.
From the spiritual viewpoint the makara
is reducible to the matrika-unit tang. T h e five
prana-powers are aroused and controlled to
effect better functioning of the various organs
of the body which are controlled by these
powers. T h e circulatory function is improved
by wyana-control and the sexual function is
developed by apana-control. T h e dewata aspect
of the matrika-unit is aroused in the form of
Deity Waruna in yellow-lightning-like radiation.
Waruna, Consciousness-Power in a divine
form (dewata), has full control over the 'water'principle (ap-mahabhuta and rasa-tanmatra),
the medium through which the five pranaforces exhibit their functional activities. This
subtle 'water' in its essence is amrita - the
deathless substance, and in its gross form is
blood and various external and internal secretions. So, it is the life-substance, and its controlling power is Waruna. T h e full creative energy
of the life-substance has been imparted to
gonadal secretions. T h e sex impulse and gonadal
activities are intertwined with the affective
impulse. T h e uncontrolled expression of sex
and associated affective impulses is due to the
functioning of the life-force when it is without
the spiritual basis. U n d e r this condition, the
spiritual nature of a living being remains unroused and Waruna's pasha (noose) becomes
operative. T h e pasha is the primary bondage
causing the mind to be fettered by unspiritual
pasha-qualities - disgust, bashfulness, fear, sleepiness (or sorrow, or anger), slander, certain
family characteristics and the notion and
distinction of the race and class. T h e release
from the bondage is only possible by concentra204

tion on Waruna, which finally transmutes the
pasha into the form of matrika-unit ang.
Ang is white in colour. By concentration,
the control over the five prana-forces is increased
through the release of kundali'-power, and
consequently pranayama develops. Then Deity
Wishnu, associated with this bija, begins to be
awakened. However, at this stage, concentration is directed to Wang, and when it becomes
very deep, Wishnu is roused from the bindu
aspect of Wang.
In deep concentration Wishnu is 'seen' as
the shining dark blue (or black) divine form with
four arms, holding a conch, wheel, mace and
lotus, and seated on the garuda. Wishnu is the
Supreme Being into whom all dewas (divine
beings in form) enter ( - Atharwashikhopanishad,
2.2). This means all divine beings and everything
else are absorbed into Wishnu, and only he
remains, and nothing else. When the universe
and all beings are not absorbed, all are pervaded
by Wishnu ( - Nrisinghatapanyupanishad, 2.5.2).
T h e word Wishnu is derived from wisha, and
which means pervasion ( - Wachaspatyam).
Wishnu is endowed with the essence of all powers
(wirya) ( - Nrisinghatapanyupanishad, 2.5.9). By
his power, the universe is maintained. He is
also the source of the highest spiritual power.
T h e dark blue (or black) colour of Wishnu
indicates that in concentration all forms are
absorbed into Wishnu and only he remains,
and he appears vast. When Wishnu is 'seen'
through the original colour of Wang, he is
shining like lightning in yellow colour; his white
colour is from Wang as the bija of the 'water'principle in the swadhishthana. When wyanaforce predominates, he is of golden colour and
when samana-force and sattwa-quality predominates he is of white colour. In the specific
Tantrika forms of concentration, Wishnu's colour
has been described as of molten gold, and also of
many suns rising at the same time, that is,
shining red ( - Tantrasara, ch. 2, p. 155).
Apana-force and rajas-quality predominate in
Wishnu when he is red in colour. When Wishnu is
seen as crystal white, he is in the form of purest
sattwa, and from this state he becomes formless.
T h e shankha (conch), chakra (wheel), gada
(mace) and padma (lotus) held by Wishnu

Exposition of the Chakras

indicate that he is the supporter of the universe.
The shankha is the principle of 'void' (akasha)
with which sound is intrinsically related. T h e
chakra is the principle of 'air', gada is the
principle of 'fire', padma of 'water', and the
'earth'-principle is in his feet. So Wishnu
maintains all the cosmic principles. From the
specific viewpoint, the shankha indicates the
creative I-ness of five cosmic principles, and each
principle is expressed by its bija-mantra - Hang
('void'-principle), Yang ('air'-principle), Rang
('fire'-principle), Wang ('water'-principle), and
Lang ('earth'-principle). T h e shankha of Wishnu
is called panchajanya, because it expresses the
five cosmic principles by their appropriate
mantra-sounds. Shankha in a general way expresses happiness. T h e chakra indicates the most
powerful mind which is fully controlled by
Wishnu. More technically, chakra is consciousness. T h e immense power of consciousness,
when uncontrolled, is constantly radiating like
spokes which support the rim - the range of
diversified consciousness. When the radiated
spokes are concentrated to the nave, consciousness is single-pointed and in a state of concentration where God as Wishnu endowed with yogapower, religion, glory, wealth, passionlessness
and knowledge is held and 'seen'. It is the
'seeing' of what is worthy to be seen. So, Wishnu's
chakra is called sudarshana.
Gada (mace) is the spiritual knowledge based
on the matrika-sounds arising from Kundalipower. Gada is also spiritualized intelligence
having immense power. Wishnu's gada is called
koumodaki, because he is the source of happiness
due to his power of maintaining the world.
It is also called koumodi. However, gada
destroys unspirituality by spiritual knowledge.
Padma (lotus) is the heart-lotus, by concentration made living and in full bloom, in which lies
the Supreme Being in divine form. Padma also
indicates the universe supported by Wishnu;
and the practitioner acquires the true knowledge
of the world through deep concentration on it.
The sharnga-dhanu (bow) of Wishnu indicates
the process of concentration. T h e koustubhagem of Wishnu is Atman, pure without qualities
and beyond mind-matter which is the real
being of Wishnu. T h e shriwatsa-mark indicates

primus, supported by Wishnu. T h e wanamala
(a garland of flowers of all seasons) is the mayapower which shows the diversified universe.
M a y a controls all beings, but it is fully controlled
by Wishnu and is held round his neck as the
garland. All these phenomena are experienced
by a practitioner in deep concentration on
Wishnu.
Garuda (name of the king of birds) is the
concentrated wayu-power developed from the
highest form of kumbhaka (breath-suspension)
which is under full control of Wishnu.
T h e garuda-process is the pranayamic process
which develops the power of suspension to the
highest point when the body levitates. So the
garuda stage is the highest stage of kumbhaka.
It indicates two forms of practice; one is the
development of concentration through kumbhaka, adopted in hathayoga; the other is the
achievement of natural kumbhaka through concentration, adopted in layayoga. Either concentration-on-Wishnu can be developed by the
garuda-process; or deep concentration-onWishnu effects natural kumbhaka. T h e r e are
also two practices which have been developed
from the garuda-process: the uddiyana-control
which is an important factor in pranayama, and
garudasana, a posture for developing the power
of maintaining physical stillness in concentration.
From the mantra viewpoint, shankha (conch)
is reducible to the matrika-sound shang,
chakra (wheel) to ing or lang, gada (mace)
to hang, padma (lotus) to ing, thang and garuda
to khang or the bija kshing.
Concentration on Rakini;
For spiritual purification and increased power
of concentration, concentration should be done
on Power Rakini. T h e most suitable colour for
increasing internal calmness and concentration
is darkblue which is the colour of Rakini. More
concentration should be done on her face which
is very beautiful and shining. If, in concentration,
one-pointedness deviates owing to other
thoughts, her three eyes become red, teeth are
shown and she appears as frightful. She should
be realized in her beauty and power. Her red
eyes indicate the sun which is the knowledge
by which the outer objects are known. H e r face
205

T h e Chakra System

is like the moon. T h e moon is mind. When the
mind is in concentration the sun is separated
from the moon due to the absorption of the
worldly knowledge. H e r beautiful moon-like
face is the expression of the highest power of
concentration. If the practitioner deviates while
concentrating on her face, he is spiritually not
quite purified.
H e r trident indicates three forms of control control of prana-forces by pranayama, control
of senses by pratyahara, and control of mind by
dharana. These control exercises are absolutely
necessary for deep concentration. T h e lotus is the
hrit-lotus opened by deep concentration. T h e
d r u m (damaru) signifies the nada (the silent
suprasound) through which Shabdabrahman
manifests. T h e sound of the d r u m is heard in
deconcentration. T h e chisel (tanka) removes
the deeply seated unspiritual qualities. Rakini
is 'seen' in concentration in the enlivened hritlotus.
Rakini is reducible to the mantra-form Eng.
T h e bija-mantra of Rakini is Rang. T h e trishula
(trident) can be reduced to Oung, abja (lotus)
to Sang, Aing, and Drang, damaru (drum) to
Khang, and tanka (chisel) to Tang.

3 Manipura

p. 9; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.30,34; Rudrayamala, Part 2,
25.55; 27.59, 60; 44.20, 24, 26, 58, 67, 69;
4 5 . 7 , 10, 11, 13, 16, 18, 19; 46. 35; 56.2; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 2, p. 90; Shadamnayatantra,
4.64; 5.245, 424; Mridanitantra, quoted in
Amarasanggraha M S ; Goutamiyatantra, 34.45.
2 Manipuraka, mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Mantramahodadhi,
4.22; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.18; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatarangini, 4 . 1 1 ; Rudrayamala, Part 2,44.61;
Tantrarajatantra, 21.82;
Purashcharyarnawa,
c h . 6 . p. 490; Shiwasanghita, 5.111, 113.
3 Dashapatra (ten-petalled lotus), mentioned
in the Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 16; Tararahasya,
ch. 4, p. 2 3 ; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4.
4 Dashadala Padma (the lotus with ten petals),
mentioned in the Shaktanandatarangini, 4.29;
9.16; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.6; Shadamnayatantra, 4.62; 5.265.
5 Dashapatrambuja (the lotus with ten petals),
mentioned in the Shaktanandatarangini, 7.14;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39.
6 Dashachchada (the lotus with ten petals),
mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.29.
7 Nabhipadma (the navel lotus), mentioned
in the Gandharwatantra, ch. 29, p. 112; Shatchakranirupana, Verse 21.
8 Nabhipangkaja (the navel lotus), mentioned
in the Sharadatilakatantra, 5.132; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387.

T h e manipura is the third chakra, above the
swadhishthana, and lies in the chitrini nadi.
Position
Terminology
T h e following are the Tantrika terms of the third
chakra.
1 Manipura, mentioned in the Todalatantra,
ch. 7, p. 14; ch. 9, p. 17; Matrikabhedatantra,
ch. 2, p. 2; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 13, p. 16;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Kubjikatantra,
5.267; 6. 294; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 2;
ch. 2, p . 2 ; ch. 3, p . 3 ; ch. 4, p. 4 ; ch. 5, pp. 4 , 5 ;
ch. 6, p . 6; ch. 8, p. 8; ch. 10, p. 9; ch. 14, p. 12;
Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10; Mundamalatantra, ch. 6,
206

T h e manipura is situated in the navel region,
that is, that part of the vertebral column which
corresponds to the navel region. Technically,
the manipura is also called nabhi (the navel)
( - Nilatantra, ch. 5, p. 9; Kularnawa, ch. 4,
p. 19; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, pp. 8, 10;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; Mahanirwanatantra, 5.114). So, the location of the manipura
is in the navel region ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p. 27; ch. 8, p. 39; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.6; 27.49; Shiwasanghita,
5.111;
Goutamiyatantra,
34.45;

Exposition of the Chakras

Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ;
Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.11,29; 7.14; 9.16; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.18; Mantramahodadhi, 4.22;
Shatchakranirupana, Verse 19).
In the Waidika accounts, the manipura has
also been termed nabhi chakra ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.3; Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 9). It has also been stated that the manipura
is situated in the navel region ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantras 5, 9; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.172; 5.9). Also in the Pouranika
accounts it has been stated that the manipura
is situated in the navel region( - Dewibhagawata,
7.35.37; 11.1.43).

Description
The manipura (Plate 7) has ten petals. This is
supported by the Tantrika as well as by the
Waidika and Pouranika accounts. T h e colour
of the petals is like dense rain-clouds (purnamegha-prakasha) ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse
19). T h e commentator Kalicharana interprets
purnamegha-prakasha as krishna-warna (= kalawarna - Wachaspatyam and Shabdakalpadrumah; krishna-warna, kala-warna = black
colour - Apte). Bhuwanamohana explains it as
follows: purna is gadha (= dense - Apte), the
colour like dense clouds, that is, a deep black
colour. Let us see what other Tantras say
about it.
That the colour of the petals is black (krishnawarna) has been clearly stated in the Bhatashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2. It has also been stated
that the colour is like rain clouds ( - Rudrayarnala, Part 2, 27.59; Goutamiyatantra, 34.46).
Here, the black colour has been indirectly
indicated. It may also mean the smoke colour
(dhumra-warna), as it has been stated that the
petals are smoke-coloured ( - Goutamiyatantra,
34.47). Dhamra is a mixture of red and black
colours ( - Wachaspatyam, Shabdakalpadrumah,
and Apte). It has also been said that the colour
of the petals is nila ( - Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 0 ; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.18; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6,

p. 490; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h e commentator Wishwanatha
(in his Shatchakrawiwriti) accepts the nila-colour
as the colour of the petals, and quotes a passage
from the Dakshinamurti in which it is stated
that the manipuraka is very nila and the letters
da to pha are quite nila. Narayana, in commenting
on Hangsopanishad, Mantra 10, quotes passages
from Parwatiparameshwarasangwada in which
the colour of the manipuraka and the letters
is said to be blue. Nila is the shyama colour
( - Wachaspatyam). Shyama is the black or
green colour ( - Wachaspatyam and Shabdakalpadrumah). T h e following indicate that they
are of the colour of nila: shaiwala (a kind of
aquatic plant), durwa (a kind of grass), young
grass, the shoot of a bamboo, and emerald
(marakata) and a sapphire ( - Shabdakalpadrumah). Nila, here, indicates dark green and
dark blue. But nila is also the colour black. So,
nila indicates three colours: black, dark green
and dark blue. It has been said that the petals
are the colour of nila like rain clouds in the sky
( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, p. 8). Here nila is black.
T h e colour of the petals is also said to be golden
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Shiwasanghita, 5.111), and red ( - Shaktanandatarangini,
4.11). So the petals of the manipura have the
following colours: (a) black, (b) dark green
or dark blue, (c) golden and (d) red, and of these
the black colour has been generally accepted.
On the petals of the manipura are the letters
da, dha, na, ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha. This
has been accepted in all Tantras. T h e letters are
with the nada and bindu ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 19; Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, p. 8; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.18). This indicates that the
letters are matrika-units. T h e colour of the
matrika letters (from da to pha) is like the colour
of the nila lotus ( - .Shatchakranirupana, Verse 19).
Nila means dark-blue here. T h e colour of the
letters is also said to be black ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2), and lightning-like
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27.59; Goutamiyatantra, 34.46; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80). So the colour of the letters
is dark-blue, black or lightning-like. T h e
207

T h e Chakra System

matrika-letters are arranged from the right to
the left.
On the petals of the manipura, there are 10
specific qualities (writtis). They a r e : spiritual
ignorance, thirst, jealousy, treachery, shame,
fear, disgust, delusion, foolishness and sadness
( - Adhyatma Wiweka, quoted by Narayana
in his commentary on Hangsopanishad, Mantra
7). T h e y are arranged in the above order from
the right to the left. Jaganmohana differs a little
and gives the following order: shame, treachery,
jealousy, thirst, spiritual ignorance, sadness,
passion, delusion, disgust and fear ( - Footnote
87, in connection with the verse 5.104, Mahanirwanatantra).
'Fire'-region
In the pericarp of the manipura, lies the 'fire'region which is triangular in form and the
colour is like the rising sun (that is, a red colour);
within is situated the bija of wahni ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 19). Wishwanatha quotes
a verse from Mayatantra in which it is stated
that the 'fire'-region lying in the pericarp of the
ten-petalled lotus is triangular in form and bloodred in colour.
T h e r e is in the pericarp of the manipura the
'fire'-region
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80), which is
triangular in form ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha, MS) and red in colour ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, pp. 8-9) where lies the wahnibija (fire-germ mantra) ( - Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Mridanitantra M S ) . In the
Waidika accounts, it has been stated that the
'fire'-region is a triangle ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 10; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.177;
5.14) which is red in colour ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 92). Also in the Pouranika accounts,
the 'fire'-region has been mentioned as triangular
in form and red in colour ( - Dewibhagawata,
11.8.5).
Kalicharana says that the wahni-bija is Rang.
Agni-bija is Rang ( - Warnabijakosha). Agni
and wahni are synonyms ( - Wachaspatyam;
Shabdakalpadrumah). Also, wahni-bija is Rang
( - Wachaspatyam; Shabdakalpadrumah). It has
been clearly stated that the reta (that is, the
208

letter ra - Wachaspatyam; Shabdakalpadrumah;
Apte) is in the red triangle of fire ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 93), and still more clearly,
in the red triangular 'fire'-region lies the
bija Rang ( - Dewi'bhagawata, 11.8.5).
T h e matrika-unit rang is red-lightning-like
in colour, and there are always the five Deities
and five pranas and three forms of power. In
the manipura, rang becomes the bija of the
'fire'-principle, and its red-lightning-like colour
is retained. From the bija aspect of Rang appears
Deity Wahni in deep concentration. T h e dhyanaform of the bija aspect of Rang is as follows.
T h e bija or Wahni is seated on a ram, red
like the morning sun and four-armed (Shatchakranirupana, Verse 20). T h e form of the
wahni-bija is Deity Wahni seated on a ram
( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, p. 9). Also, the form
of wahni-bjja is four-armed and seated on a ram
( - Mridani'tantra M S ) . Kalicharana cites a passage in which the dhyana-form of Wahni is as
follows: 'seated on a ram, aksha-sutra (a rudraksha rosary) in one hand, and shakti (a spear)
in his other'. He adds that the other two hands
are to be thought of as in the attitudes of granting
boons and of dispelling fear as is seen in other
dhyana-forms. So the dhyana-form of Wahni
is as follows: he is shining red, seated on a ram,
four-armed, and holds a rudraksha rosary and
a spear, and shows the gestures of granting
boons and dispelling fear.
Rudra
There lies Deity Rudra in the lap of the wahnibija ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 20; Mridanitantra M S ) . T h e presence of Rudra in the firetriangle has been mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Nirwanatantra, ch. 6,
pp. 8 - 9 ; Shiwasanghita, 5.112; Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 22.7; Mantramahodadhi, 4.21; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.133; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.177;
5.14; and Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 93. In
the lap of the wahni-bija means in the bindu
of Rang. R u d r a appears from the bindu of
Rang in deep concentration.
A Tantrika dhyana-form of Rudra is as
follows.
Rudra is red like pure vermilion colour,
appearing whitish because of his body being

Exposition of the Chakras

smeared with ashes; he has three eyes; he is in
the attitude of granting boons and of dispelling
fear, and he has attained his full growth ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 20). According to Kalicharana Rudra should be concentrated upon as
seated on a bull (wrisha). This has been supported
in the dhyana-form in the Sandhya-process.
During the expiratory phase (rechaka) of
pranayama in the sandhya-process, concentration is done on Shambhu (Rudra). T h e Samaweda form of Shambhu is as follows: he is of
white colour, two-armed, holding a trident and
a drum, adorned with the crescent moon, threeeyed and seated on a bull. T h e Yajurweda and
the Rigweda forms are the same. In some Rigweda form, Shambhu is dressed in tiger's skin.
However, the main differences from the Tantrika
form are these: the colour of the body is white
instead of red; he holds a trident and a drum
instead of showing the attitude of granting
boons and of dispelling fear; and he is seated
on a bull.
There is a Waidika form of dhyana which is
similar to the Tantrika form. It is as follows.
Rudra is three-eyed, his colour is like the
morning sun (that is, red), his body is smeared
with ashes; he is showing the gesture of granting
boons and being kindly disposed ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 93).
It has been stated that a Shiwa-linga, in
colour like a black (nila) cloud, is situated in the
manipura
(in the triangular 'fire'-region)
( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2). This Shiwalinga is the Rudra-linga with six faces lying in
the manipura ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2). This linga has also been called
Siddha (endowed with great yoga-power) Rudra
(the Siddha-linga named Rudra - Jaganmohana)
( - Shiwasanghita, 5.112). So Rudra has two
aspects, the linga- and the dewata-form. In the
linga-form, he is black in colour. In the dewataform he is either red or white. Moreover, the
linga-form may remain in substance in the
bindu of the bija Rang, from which Rudra-inform emerges. It has also been stated that
Wshnu is in the manipura ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27). This is a special process of
concentration. (For the concentration form of
Rudra see Plate 8, left top figure.)

Lakini
Power Lakini is situated in the manipura ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 2 1 ; Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5; Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shiwasanghita,
5.112; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22. 7; Mantramahodadhi, 4 . 2 1 ; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 0 ;
Mridanitantra M S ) . Lakini has been called
the door-keeper ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2), because concentration on her
makes things easier in the manipura. Also,
concentration on R u d r a with Lakini is necessary
for the attainment of success in yoga ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.7). Lakini has also been called
Bhadrakali ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, p. 9).
A dhyana-form of Lakini is as follows.
Lakini is four-armed, of shining black (or
dark-blue) (shyama) colour, dressed in yellow
raiment, adorned with various ornaments, and
in deep concentration ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 21). T h e commentator Ramawallabha
interprets 'shyama' as 'the golden colour'.
Jaganmohana says that Lakini is of the colour
of tapta-gold (Footnote 87, in connection with
the verse 104, Mahanirwanatantra). T h e word
tapta is vague. It may mean heated or red-hot.
So tapta-gold means red-hot gold, that is,
shining red, rather than gold-coloured.
Kalicharana quotes a verse in which the
dhyana-form of Lakini is given as follows.
Divine Lakini is Nila (black or dark-blue),
and has three faces, each having three eyes,
with large teeth, and is powerful; she holds in
her right hands wajra (a thunderbolt) and a
spear (shakti), and her left hands are in the
gestures of dispelling fear and of granting
boons. This dhyana-form is similar to what
has been stated in the Jamala, quoted in the
Yogakalpalatika M S . Even the wordings are
almost similar.
O t h e r dhyana-forms of Lakini are the
following.
Lakini is of the colour of vermilion-red and
two-armed; she shines with the vermilionmark on her forehead; her face is as beautiful
as the moon and her eyes are bright and painted
beautifully with collyrium; she is clad in white
raiment and adorned with various ornaments
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 5, p. 23).
209

T h e Chakra System

Lakini is of a pale red colour, holds a noose
and a goad, wears a garland of skulls and is
adorned with various ornaments ( - Kularnawa,
ch. 10, p. 53).
T h e power of Rudra (Lakini) is blood-red
in colour, three-eyed, with large teeth, and
powerful, and she assumes the attitudes of
granting boons and of dispelling fear ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 9, p. 42). (For the concentrationform of Lakini see Plate 8, right top figure.)

Explanation
T h e central power of the manipura chakra,
designated by Rang, has ten radiations which
are also named by the matrika-letters dang,
dhang, nang, tang, thang, dang, dhang, nang,
pang, phang. T h e matrika-letters indicate the
nature of the radiations. Rang with the ten
matrika-letters is the tejas-mahabhuta power in
operation. T h e prana-forces are also being
operated along with the mahabhuta power.
T h e tejas-mahabhuta is seen in deep concentration as a red triangle. When the radiations are
withdrawn into the central Rang by pratyaharic
concentration only the bija Rang remains. It
is the rnpa-tanmatra power. At this stage all
other forces cease to operate.
T h e colour of the petals is black. It indicates
that the prana-force is predominating in the
radiations, though there is some samanic radiation. W h e n the petals are smoke-coloured,
udana-radiation predominates. When they are
dark green or dark blue, prana predominates;
when golden, wyana; and when red, prana
and apana predominate.
T h e colour of the matrika-letters in the petals
of the manipura is black, dark green or dark
blue, golden or red. When they are black, dark
green or dark blue they are radiating mainly
prana. W h e n they are golden, they radiate
wyana, and when red, they radiate both prana
and apana. T h e original colour of dang is like
yellow-lightning; that of dhang is like redlightning; of nang and tang like yellow-lightning;
the colour of thang is red; of dang and nang it
is like red-lightning; of dhang like yellow-lightning; of pang moon-white; and of phang like red210

lightning. In yellow-lightning, wyana radiates
predominantly; in red-lightning prana and apana
radiations occur; and in white samana radiation.
These individual radiations are modified in
the manipura, where each of them radiates
the same force conjointly to heighten the
effects.
T h e following are the forms of concentration.
1 Petaline Concentration. T h e mantra 'dangphang' should be taken as the unit of manipuraconcentration in japa and thought-concentration,
and gradually the petals will be changed into
a black circular ring without any interruption.
2 Mahabhuta-concentration. In this concentration, consciousness assumes the form of
a triangle of the red colour with Rang inside it.
T h e first stage is thought-concentration which
is finally developed into real concentration
when the red triangle along with Rang is actually
'seen'.
3 Tanmatra-concentration. Now the red triangle disappears and only Rang of red colour
remains. This is the rupa-tanmatra.
4 Wahni-concentration. Deep concentration
on Rang causes the emergence of Deity Wahni
(Agni) from the bija aspect of Rang. Wahni is
'seen' on a r a m ; he is red in colour, and holds
a rudraksha rosary and a spear.
Mesha (ram) is the basic power-in-concentration which supports the central energy as fire
(wahni)-energy in the form of Rang. Mesha
has four mantra-forms represented by ang,
ring, nang and hang. T h e mesha form is essentially
due to nang in which lie the sun-energy and
the divine energy of Shiwa. T h e energy of
creativity (as Brahma-energy) and the reduction
of energy to consciousness (as Wishn-energy)
are mainly derived from ang. T h e prana-energy
comes from hang. An aspect of creative energy
is released as the great and prolongable sexual
vigour. But this vigour also remains under
control. T h e mesha-process is the process of
full development of the sexual vigour based on
the fully energized body, and to harness it by
anti-ejaculatory control and to transform the
desire into elements constituting concentration.
It is an advanced method of gonadal control
in which the highly developed sexual vigour
is utilized in arousing the whole energy system

Exposition of the Chakras

of the organism, and the roused energies are
radiated to the conscious field through desire
in concentration, and the energy-desire becomes
energy as concentration and supports and
increases concentration. For the attainment
of Rudra-consciousness-concentration, this process is invaluable and it becomes most effective
through the influence of ring.
Now a practitioner becomes fit for Wahniconcentration. In Wahni all forms of heatlight-energy are concentrated as prana and
are transformed into a conscious form which
constitutes Rudra-consciousness. This indicates
that pranayama is an important factor in Rudraconcentration. Wahni-concentration develops into Rudra-concentration. T h e red colour of
Rudra indicates that the rajas force, which is
in great concentration and in which both
prana and apana form important parts, is
spiritualized to form Rudra-consciousness. T h e
Shakti (spear) is the power of concentrating
all forms of energy and transforming them into
concentration-energy. Akshasutra (a rudraksha
rosary) is the sutra (thread) or basic power,
called Kundalini, from which arise ang force
which draws all desires into it, and kshang
force which absorbs all creative principles. T h e
shakti and akshasutra are spiritual powers which
create divine consciousness and transform all
energies into concentration.
5 Rudra-concentration. When a practitioner
is fully prepared by energizing his body and
mind, through the practice of pranayama and
Wahni-concentration, he is able to rouse R u d r a
from the bindu aspect of Rang in deep
concentration.
Rudra as Supreme Being (Brahman) is one
and without a second. This is realized in supreme
samadhi. When he manifests his supreme power,
he is Ishwara and is the creator, maintainer and
destroyer of the universe. Rudra also appears
in a specific divine form - a spiritual, calm and
pure form and absorbs all cosmic principles by
which an individual is bound to worldliness,
when his devotee is spiritually prepared. T h e
word Rudra is derived from 'ruda' which means
crying ( - Wachaspatyam). It is owing to his
destructive power, he causes the embodied
beings to weep. But actually his destructive

power is the power of absorption of all that
causes diverseness of consciousness, that is,
all anti-samadhi influences. According to
Karunamaya (Acharya Karunamaya Bhattacharya Saraswati, the celebrated Sanskrit scholar
of Calcutta, India), Rudra is he who causes the
disappearance of 'rut', that is, sorrow, or who
bestows 'rut', that is, knowledge. This knowledge
is the Brahman knowledge, arising in samadhi.
Rudra is seated on a wrisha (bull). A wrisha
which emits power or bestows knowledge. So
it has been said that wrisha is knowledge (Weda)
and spirituality (dharma). Wrisha is vitality and
virility. R u d r a is established on spiritual knowledge and power. Karunamaya says that Shiwa
(Rudra) is the guru of knowledge; wrisha who is
in the form of knowledge supports the guru
Shiwa who is all knowledge. Rudra is in the
attitudes of granting boons and dispelling fear.
T h e bestowing of spiritual knowledge is the
best boon, and one can really be free from fear
when unspirituality is removed. T h e mantraforms of wrisha are ung, shang and shang.
6 Lakini-concentration. To be really prepared
for successful concentration in the manipura,
and especially on Rudra, it is absolutely necessary
to concentrate on Lakini. This is why Lakini
has been called the door-keeper. Unless a
practitioner is able to penetrate inside the
manipura without any obstruction, he cannot
do much. All obstacles are removed by concentration on Lakini, moreover without rousing
Lakini it is not possible to rouse Rudra, as the
power aspect of R u d r a is Lakini without whom
he is like a corpse.
T h e colour of Lakini is black. T h e colour
indicates that she is in tamas form in which
she absorbs all creative principles. 'La' of
Lakini means to take; she who takes or absorbs
all which is cosmic to make her devotee free
from the bondage is Lakini. W h e n she appears
in red colour, she has been identical with Rudra.
H e r three heads indicate that the three primary
attributes (gunas) are so spiritually controlled
that tamas is utilized to make the body inert
and sense-consciousness functionless, rajas to
develop concentration, and sattwa to maintain
divine consciousness. T h e wajra (thunderbolt)
indicates adamantine control and shakti (spear)
211

T h e Chakra System

is the power to transform all forms of energy
into concentration-energy.
T h e mantra forms of Lakini are lang and
aing; those of shakti are eng, ah, ang, ing, ring,
Iring, aing, kang, khang, tang, sang, kling, hring and
hsoua; and those of wajra are mang and \ang.

4 Hrit
T h e hrit chakra has not been included in the
regular six chakras which are muladhara, swadhishthana, manipura, anahata, wishuddha and
ajna. T h e point is this: Is hrit an independent
chakra or a name of the anahata chakra? Let us
investigate the matter.
It has been stated that concentration should
be done on the astra-bija (the mantra Hung)
in the hridaya, that is, the chakra situated in
the heart region ( - Nilatantra, ch. 5, p. 9).
It has been mentioned along with the swadhishthana and navel {manipura), so the chakra
in the heart region is anahata. Hridaya (heart)
has also been mentioned as from the navel
(manipura) to the heart, and from the heart
to the throat (wishuddha) ( - Todalatantra,
ch. 7, p. 14). Here also it is anahata. Concentration should be done on Goddess M a h a m a y a
in the twelve-petalled hrit lotus (chakra)
( - Kamadhenutantra, ch. 12, p. 15). Here, the
hrit lotus is clearly anahata. Also, concentration
should be done on the bija-mantra of Ishtadewata in the luminous hrit lotus having twelve
petals ( - Kamadhenutantra, ch. 13, p. 15).
It is anahata which has twelve petals. T h e
anahata has been clearly indicated in the following two statements: concentration should be
done on one's own Shakti mantra in the twelvepetalled hrit lotus { - ibid, ch. 15, p. 19); Concentrating on Kamini (Power) in the pericarp
of the twelve-petalled hrit lotus ( - ibid, ch. 17,
p. 23). It is not quite clear in the statement
(Kamadhenutantra, ch. 18, p. 24) 'First concentrating on Kamini in the hrit lotus'; but
here the hrit lotus may be the anahata because
of the previous statement {ibid., ch. 17, p. 23).
In the statement 'Concentrating on the
212

hutashana ("fire")-bija in the "fire"-region
lying inside the hrit lotus' ( - Kamadhenutantra,
ch. 13, p. 16), it is difficult to determine whether
the lotus is hrit or anahata. T h e 'fire'-region
indicates that it is hrit.
The hritpatra and hrit padma indicate the
anahata chakra in the following verses: concentrate on Shakti in the hritpatra; the hrit
lotus is a great region, it is the place of Brahman
and jiwa; the hrit lotus has twelve petals and is
luminous; here concentration should be done on
God Shiwa ( - Brihanni'latantra, ch. 8, p. 65).
T h e nyasa (a mantra process) should be done in
the heart with concentration on Kakini
( - Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 19); here the heart
stands for the anahata. In the following verses
anahata is indicated: T h e twelve-petalled hrit
lotus ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39); do
concentration on Kundalini who is in the form
of mantra, along with luminous Bana-linga,
situated in the triangle of hrit ( - ibid, ch. 29,
p. 109); the luminous Hring (a bija-mantra of
Power) is in the hrit lotus { - ibid., ch. 29, p. 112);
the nyasa should be done in the hridaya
( - Mantramahodadhi,
4.28);
hrit
padma
( - Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2 ) ; the all pure hrit
lotus ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2); hrit
lotus { - ibid., ch. 4, p. 4; ch. 6, p. 6 ) ; 'seeing'
Brahman in the hrit lotus { - ibid., ch. 5, p. 4);
Goddess Mangala arid others are in the hrit
lotus ( - ibid., ch. 5, p. 5 ) ; hrit lotus is yoga
lotus ( - ibid., ch. 10, p. 9 ) ; concentration on
lshtadewata. first in the muladhara, then in
the swadhisthana, then in the manipura, then
in the hrit lotus, and thereafter in the wishuddha
chakra ( - ibid., ch. 14, p. 12); the flame-like
jiwa is to be brought from the hridayambhoja
(hrit lotus) into the muladhara where it should
be united with kundalini; the hridayambuja
(hrit lotus) with twelve petals in which are the
letters from ka to tha where lies Deity /shwara
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4);
hridayasarasija ( = hrit lotus) ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8 ) ; the twelve-petalled hridayasarasija ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8); the
twelve-petalled hridayambuja ( = hrit lotus) decorated with the twelve letters from ka to tha
where lies Deity isha { - Sharadatilakatantra,
5.133); Bana-linga is in the hrit lotus ( - Shaktan-

Exposition of the Chakras

andatararigini, 4.34); the twelve-petalled hrit
lotus with the 12 letters from ka ( - ibid., 7.14).
T h e terms hridayambhoja (= hrit lotus)
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57. 1,3,33,47; 59.23);
hridambhoja ( = hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 57.12,14),
hritpankeruha (= hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 57.14),
hritpadma ( = hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 57. 19,42);
hridayabja
(= hrit lotus)
( - ibid., 59.24);
hridayakamala ( = hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 59.27);
hridayambuja ( = hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 59.28;
60.9); hridabja ( = hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 60.10);
and hridambuja ( = hrit lotus) ( - Shad'amnayatantra, 4.144) - all stand for the anahata.
Anahata is also indicated in the following
verses: there is a ten-petalled lotus, then the
hrit lotus, and then a sixteen-petalled lotus
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.29). Here the
hrit lotus is clearly the anahata. T h e letters
ka-tha are placed in the hridambuja ( = hrit
lotus) ( - Mahanirwanatantra, 5.114). Here also,
the hrit lotus stands for the anahata. Hritsaroruha
(= hrit lotus) is decorated with the letters katha and here is situated Deity Ishwara ( - Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387). Here, the hrit lotus
stands for the anahata.
T h e numerous evidences from the Tantras
show that the hrit lotus in its various names
stands for the anahata. It is supported by the
Waidika accounts. It has been stated that
hridaya (the lotus situated in the heart region)
has twelve petals ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 5). Here the lotus in the heart
stands for the anahata. In the heart, prana
wayu should be held ( - Darshanopanishad,
7.12). T h e heart means the lotus situated in
the heart region, and this lotus here is anahata.
It has been stated that the fourth chakra, lying
with its face downwards, is situated in the heart
( - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 10). This chakra
is the anahata.
In the Pouranika accounts, we also find that
the hrit lotus stands for the anahata. T h e order
of the chakras as given here is: adhara (muladhara), manipura, hridaya (hrit lotus), wishuddhi
and ajna ( - Shiwapurana, 3.3.28). Here the
swadhishthana has not been mentioned. But it
is stated that hridaya, that is hrit lotus, stands
between the manipura and wishuddhi. This
hrit lotus is clearly anahata. Further, jiwatman

which is situated in the hridaya (the padma in
the heart region) is to be brought through the
brahma nadi to the sahasrara which is above the
twelve-petalled lotus (guru chakra) ( - Shiwapurana, 3.5.52,53). This hrit padma is the
anahata. Concentration should be done on
the sun-coloured (red) lotus, with 12 petals
which are decorated with the 12 letters from
ka to tha, and is inside the heart (that is the
hrit lotus) ( - ibid., 5b.29. 136,137). This lotus
is clearly anahata.
In the following verses, the hrit lotus stands
for the anahata: concentration is to be done on
the letter 'a' lying in the heart (hrit
lotus) ( - Brahmapurana, 61.4); Shiwa is situated
in the sahasrara, the eyebrow region (ajna),
the palatine region (talu" chakra), the throat
region (wishuddha chakra) and the heart region
(hrit chakra) ( - lingapurana, 2.21.28); T h e
nyasa of the m a n t r a Hang should be done in
the muladhara, of Rang in the hridaya (heart
lotus), of Ing in the eyebrow region (ajna
chakra), and Hring in the head region (sahasrara
chakra) ( - Dewibhagawata, 7.40.7). In this
order - anal region, genital region, navel region,
heart region ( - Dewibhagawata, 11.1.43), the
hrit lotus in the heart region is anahata.
We have to investigate farther to know whether
the hrit is an independent chakra. It has been
stated that mental worship should be done on
Power situated in the hritpundari'ka (hrit lotus)
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 11, p. 48). Here the
hritpundarika is hrit padma (hrit chakra). Concentration on Goddess Durga, who is in the
hrit padma (hrit lotus), is to be done ( - Mayatantra, ch. 8, p. 7). Most probably, here hrit
chakra has been indicated. Hrit padma mentioned in the Wishwasaratantra, ch. 3, p. 39,
may also be hrit chakra. Concentration should
be done on Shiwa and Power in the hrit padma
( - Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 10), and on the
Goddess Kalika in hridayambhoja (hrit padma)
( - ibid., ch. 6, p. 12). Here the hrit padma
and hridayambhoja may be hrit chakra. It has
been stated that hrit padma should be given
as a seat to the Goddess Kalika (in mental
worship) ( - Mahanirwanatantra, 5.143). Jaganmohana interprets the eight-petalled lotus in
the heart as the seat. In this case it is the hrit
213

T h e Chakra System

lotus. But it can be interpreted as the anahata
chakra. T h e term hridayambhuja ( - ibid., 5.130)
has been interpreted as hrit padma by the
commentator Hariharananda,
and hridaya
padma by Jaganmohana. In both cases it means
hrit chakra.
It has been stated more clearly in the Shrikrama (quoted in the Yogakalpalatika MS)
that the hrit padma (lotus) has eight petals.
More details have been given in the Gitasara
in which it has been stated that the hrit padma
has eight petals on which are situated eight
deities, Indra and others; inside it (that is,
inside the pericarp) is the sun, inside the sun
is the moon, and inside the moon is the fire;
inside the fire is radiance where a seat is located
which is ornamented with jewels, and which
is very bright; on this seat God Narayana is
sitting ( - Gitasara, 290-293, quoted in the
Yogakalpalatika M S ) . It has been stated that
in the heart region is the fourth lotus anahata
with twelve petals, and the bright eight-petalled
lotus with its face upwards lies in the interior
of the anahata ( - Yogaswarodaya, quoted in
the Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h a t the eightpetalled lotus (that is, hrit lotus) with its face
downwards is within the shining fourth lotus
with twelve petals (i.e., anahata) is also stated
in the Tattwayogabindu M S . T h e eight-petalled
lotus (i.e., the hrit chakra) which is within the
anahata is of golden colour, and there is the
celestial wishing-tree (kalpataru) shining red
in the pericarp, and at the base of the tree is a
gemmed seat ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the
Amarasanggraha M S ) .
T h e existence of the hrit chakra has been
mentioned in the Waidika accounts. It has been
stated that Atman is within the golden lotus
(hemapunda'arika)
( - Atmaprabodhopanishad,
1.3). This golden lotus is eight-petalled, subtle,
stainless and untouched by physical impurities
( - Taittiriya Aranyaka, 10.12). T h e lotus-like
hridaya (that is, hrit-lotus) with its face downwards is situated both under (anahata) and above
the navel (manipura), and at its boundary is
a subtle hole (sushumna), within which all lies
(the whole chakra system) ( - Narayanopanishad,
Mantras 50, 51). This means that the hrit chakra
is situated above the manipura and below the
214

anahata, and within the sushumna. where all the
other chakras lie. In fact, this hrit chakra belongs
to the anahata and forms its lower part. The
lotus-like hridaya in the sushumna also lies with
its face downwards ( - Brahmopanishad, Mantra
34). It is the hrit chakra. It has been stated that
the lotus-like hridaya with its face downwards
should
be
raised
upwards
by
sitkara
(pranayama); within the hridaya is superlight
and within it lies the most subtle fire-flame and
within that again is Purusha, who is the Supreme
Being ( - Mahopanishad, 1. 12-14). The hridayais
the hrit chakra, which remains usually with
its face downwards. Its face should be turned
upwards by special pranayama. In the pericarp
of the raised hrit chakra is 'seen' the fire-flamelike Kundalini from which is radiated superlight.
In deeper concentration Purusha - Supreme
Consciousness - is revealed within Kundalini.
In the following mantras, the hrit chakra has
been indicated: fully opened eight-petalled
hrit ( - Gopalatapinyupanishad, Part 2, Mantra
6 0 ) ; concentration on Supreme Being within
the hritpundarika (hrit lotus) ( - Maitreyyupanishad, 1.12); concentration on the universal form
of God situated in the hridaya-amburuha (hrit
lotus) ( - Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra
Section, 153); T h e imperishable Brahman light
is within the hritpundarika (hrit lotus) ( - ibid.,
Mantra Section 15ndarikathe divine existence in
the hridayakamala (hrit lotus) as the internal
sign ( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 2.4.4); the
lotus which is situated in the heart region (i.e.,
the hrit lotus) lies with its face downward
( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 137).
In the Pouranika accounts, hrit padma has
also been accepted as a separate chakra. Krishna
says: 'Controlling the mind in the hridaya
(heart)' ( - Bhagawadgita, 8.12), and 'Ishwara
(God) is situated in the hrit desha (heart region)'
( - ibid., 18.61). Here, both 'hridaya' and 'hrit
desha' possibly indicate hrit chakra. In the statements - the manifestation of lightning-like splendorous form of Supreme Being in the hritpadmakosha ( - Bhagawata, 4.9.2) and the practice
of concentration by Dhruwa by fixing the mind
in the hridaya ( - ibid., 4.8.77), the hrit chakra
has been indicated.
In 'the eight-petalled hritpundarika' ( - Shiwa-

Exposition of the Chakras

purana, 3.3.59), the hrit chakra has also been
indicated. Moreover, it shows that the hrit
chakra has eight petals. More description of the
hrit chakra has been given here: T h e excellent
hritpankaja (hrit lotus), situated in the hridaya
(the heart region) should be opened by prarcayama with mantra; in the pericarp of the lotus,
concentration should be done on the sun, moon
and fire; a gemmed seat should be thought
of in the pericarp; the lotus should be thought
of as a delicate, beautiful, red like morning sun,
in the form of the mantra-letters and with
eight forms of superpower in its petals; concentration on God Wishnu should be done in this
lotus ( - Skandapurana, 2.5.4.21-4). Here, the
hrit chakra has been described as having 8
petals of red colour, in which are situated the
eight forms of superpower; in its pericarp are
the sun, moon and fire, and a gemmed seat;
it is an excellent lotus for concentration.
It has been stated in its further exposition
that the eight-petalled lotus lying with its face
downwards is within the lotus which forms its
outer aspect; 'in its pericarp is the (circular)
sun region within which lies Shiwa in his most
subtle aspect' ( - Skandapurana, 6.29. 153-4).
The hrit lotus may have one thousand petals
according to the mode of concentration. It
has been stated that concentration on Ishtadewata is made in the hrit padma (hrit chakra)
which is bright, white and with one thousand
petals ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.8). T h e
thousand-petalled hritsaroruha ( = hrit padma,
i.e. hrit chakra) has also been mentioned in the
Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.37.10. T h e hrit chakra
has also been described as having sixteen petals.
It has been stated that 'the three nadis (sushumna
na, ida and pingala) have been united in the
heart where lies a sixteen-petalled chakra which
is the seat for concentration and mantra-japa;
as this chakra arises in the hridaya (that is,
lying in the heart region) it is called the original
sixteen-petalled chakra' ( - Kalikapurana, 55.
32-4).
In another description, it has been stated
that 'the pundaraka in the hridaya (the heart
region) is above the navel (mamipura) which is
in the nature of spiritual knowledge, and its

pericarp is untouched by passion; this lotus has
eight petals having superpowers, and is white,
and the prana wayus are also there' ( - lingapurana, 1.86.62-4). T h e order of the different
chakras as given in the verse ( - Skandapurana,
1.2.55.44) is as follows: in the navel (i.e., manip;/ra), in the heart (i.e., hrit lotus), in the lungs
lies the lotus with twelve petals (i.e., anahata).
In this order the hrit lotus stands between the
manipura and the anahata; it has been accepted
as an individual chakra.
In the following passages, the hrit chakra
has been indicated: the God Shiwa is situated
in the hritpundarika (hrit padma) ( - Shiwapurana, 1.71.70); concentration on Shiwa and
Shakti (Power) situated in the hritpankaja
(hrit padma) ( - ibid., 3.3.54); the worship of
Shiwa and Shakti on the seat within hrit padma
by dhyana-yajna (concentration) ( - ibid., 5b.
29.131); after concentrating on the shining
bija-mantra following lying within the hritpankaja (hrit padma) burn all impurities by
the directed flames of the bija radiating in all
directions
( - Agnipurana, 23.3);
worship
splendorous Atman situated in the hridabja
(hrit padma) ( - Garudapurana, 1.18.13); concentration on Deity Brahma situated in the
pericarp of the hrit padma ( - Padmapurana,
1.15.188); concentration on all-pervading attributeless Supreme Being situated in the hollow
of the hrit padma ( - Brahmapurana, 235.20);
Brahma saw Krishna exteriorly in the same form
in which he had 'seen' him in the hridayambhoja
(hrit padma) ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.20.
18); concentration on Supreme Power in the
hridaya (hrit padma) ( - Kalikapurana, 55.26);
Shiwa is situated in the hritpundarika (hrit
padma)
( - Sourapurana, 41.81; lingapurana,
1.98.96); concentration on Supreme Power in
the hridambhoja (hrit padma) opened by pranayama ( - Dewibhagawata, 7.40.9).
All the above statements indicate the existence
of hrit padma as a separate chakra. Now our
findings about the hrit chakra may be summarized as follows.
T h e hrit chakra, though not included in the
six-chakra group, is the fourth chakra, above
the manipura, and lies in the chitrini nadi.

215

T h e Chakra System

Terminology
T h e following are the Tantrika terms for
the hrit chakra:
1 Hrit padma, mentioned in the Mayatantra,
ch. 8, p. 7; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 3, p. 39;
Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 10; Mahanirwanatantra, 5.143; Shrikramasanghita,
quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S ; Gitasara,
quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S .
2 Hritpundari'ka, mentioned in the Gandharwatantra, ch. 11, p. 48.
3 Hridayambhoja, mentioned in the Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 12.
4 Eight-petalled padma, mentioned in the
Yogaswarodaya, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ; Mridanitantra, quoted in the
Amarasanggraha M S .
5 Eight-petalled Kamala, mentioned in the
Tattwayogabindu M S .
6 Sixteen-petalled padma, mentioned in the
Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22.
Waidika terms:
1 Hridaya chakra, mentioned in the
Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.4.
2 Hrit padma, mentioned in the Gopalatapinyupanishad, Part 2, Mantra 60.
3 Hridaya padma, mentioned in the Yogatattwopanishad, Mantras 137-8.
4 Hridaya kamala, mentioned in the Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 2.4.4.
5 Hridaya-amburuha, mentioned in the
Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, M a n t r a
Section, Mantra 153.
6 Hridaya padmakosha, mentioned in the
Narayanopanishad, Mantra 5 0 ; Brahmopanishad, Mantra 34; Mahopanishad, 1.12.
7 Hritpundarika, mentioned in the Maitreyyupanishad, 1.12; Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, Mantra 156.
8 Hemapundarika, mentioned in the
Atmaprabodhopanishad, 1.3.
Pouranika terms:
1 Hrit padma, mentioned in the Shiwapurana,
5b.29.131; Padmapurana, 1.15. 188;
216

3.31.41; Brahmapurana, 235.20; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.8; Kalikapurana,
18.76; Garudapurana, 1.23.35.
2 Hritpadmakosha, mentioned in the
Bhagawata, 4.9.2.
3 Hritpurdari'ka, mentioned in the Shiwapurana, 1.71.70; 3.3.59; Sourapurana,
34.59; 4 1 . 8 1 ; Lingapurana, 1.98.96.
4 Hritpankaja, mentioned in the Shiwapurana,
3.3.54; Agnipurana, 23.3; Skandapurana,
2.5.4.21.
5 Hritsaroruha, mentioned in the Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.37.10.
6 Hridabja, mentioned in the Garudapurana,
1.18.13.
7 Hridambuja, mentioned in the Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.20.30.
8 Hridambhoja, mentioned in the Dewibhagawata, 7.40.9.
9 Hridayambhoja, mentioned in the
Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.20.18; 4.20.32.
10 Hridaya Kamala, mentioned in the
lingapurana, 2.18.36.
11 Hridaya pundarika, mentioned in the
lingapurana,
1.86.63.
12 Hridaya (lotus in the heart region),
mentioned in the Bhagawadgita, 8.12;
Bhagawata, 4.8.77; Skandapurana, 1.2.55.
4 4 ; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.20.38;
Kalikapurana, 55.26.
13 Hrit desha (lotus in the heart region),
mentioned in the Bhagawadgita, 18.61.
14 Ashta-patra (lotus with 8 petals), mentioned
in the Skandapurana, 6.29.153.
15 Adi shodasha chakra (Primary sixteenpetalled chakra), mentioned in the
Kalikapurana, 55.33.
Position
T h e hrit chakra is situated in the heart region
above the manipura and just below the anahata,
which is also in the heart region. The hrit
chakra is, in fact, a part of the anahata, forming
its inferior aspect. But the hrit chakra should
be considered as an individual chakra.
T h e hrit chakra lies in the chitrini which is
within the sushumna, and the sushumna. within
the vertebral column. It is that part of the

Exposition of the Chakras

vertebral column which
heart region.

corresponds to

the

Description
The hrit chakra (Plate 10) has eight petals
( - Shrikrama and Gi'tasara, quoted in the
Yogakalpalatika M S ; Yogaswarodaya and Mridani'tantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ;
Tattwayogabindu M S ; Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad; 3.4; Gopalatapinyupanishad; Shiwapurana, 3.3.59; Skandapurana, 2.5. 4.23;
lingapurana, 1.86.64).
It
has
also
been
described as having sixteen petals ( - T a r a rahasya, ch. 4, p. 22; Kalikapurana, 55.33),
and 1000 petals ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.
8; 4.37.10). Usually there are eight petals.
In special concentration, the sixteen and 1000
petals are thought of.
Ordinarily, the hrit chakra lies with its face
downward ( - Tattwayogabindu, M S ; Narayanopanishad, Mantra 50; Brahmopanishad, Mantra
34; Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.4; Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 137). When the hrit
chakra lies in a downward position it is closely
connected with the anahata, as if by a stalk
( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 138). Its face
should be raised upwards for concentration
( - Dewibhagawata, 7.40.9). This is done by
special pranayama, such as sitkara ( - Mahopanishad, 1.12). W h e n it is done the hrit lotus
stands with its face upwards ( - Yogaswarodaya,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ; Gopalatapinyupanishad, Part 2, Mantra 60).
The colour of the eight petals of the hrit
chakra is golden ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in
Amarasanggraha M S ) ; also white ( - Lingapurana, 1.86.64), and red ( - verses quoted
by Kalicharana) according to the form of
concentration. When the hrit chakra is thought
of as having sixteen or 1000 petals, the colour
of the petals is white ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4,
p. 22; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.8). On the
eight petals are situated eight forms of superpower and the mantra-letters of shining red
( - Skandapurana, 2.5.4.23).
According
to
Swami Sachchidananda the colour of the petals
is shining reddish yellow ( - Pujapradipa).

Inside the pericarp of the hrit chakra, is the
circular region of the sun ( - Skandapurana,
6.29.153; Gitasara, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S ) , and within it the (circular) region
of the moon and inside that is the (circular)
region of the fire ( - Gitasara, quoted in the
Yogakalpalatika M S ) . T h e colour of the sunregion is vermilion, of the moon-region white,
and of the fire-region deep red. Inside it (the
fire-region) is the celestial wishing-tree of shining red colour and at the base of it is a gemmed
seat ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) .

Explanation
T h e hrit chakra is specially suitable for the
practice of concentration, mental worship and
mantra-japa. T h e chakra should be raised up
and opened by pranayama and thought-concentration when japa, worship and concentration are to be made here. It is a special seat
for concentration on Ishtadewata. and also other
deities.

5

Anahata

In the regular six-chakra group, the anahata
is the fourth chakra, but numerically it is the
fifth centre. It lies in the chitrini nadi.

Terminology
T h e following are the Tantrika terms of the
anahata.
1 Anahata, mentioned in the Todalatantra,
ch. 7, p. 14; ch. 9, p. 17; Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27, 2 8 ;
Mantramahodadhi, 4.23; Kubjikatantra, 5.262;
6.300; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.20; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 4, p. 4; Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1,
p. 3,10; Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 9; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 0 ; Shaktanandatarangini,
217

T h e Chakra System

4.12; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25.26; 27.62; Tantrarajatantra, 21.83; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 2,
p. 90; ch. 6, p. 490; Shadamnayatantra, 5.266,
425; Shiwasanghita, 5.116; Goulamiyatantra,
34.49; Shatchakranirupana, Verse 22; Yogaswarodaya, quoted i n ; 4 m a r a s a n g g r a h a M S ;
Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S .
2 Anahata-puri (-abode), mentioned in the
Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2.
3 Padma-sundara (beautiful lotus), mentioned
in the Nirwanatantra, ch. 7, p. 9.
4 Dwadasha (the twelve), mentioned in the
Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 16.
5 Dwadashadala (the twelve-petalled), mentioned in the Shaktanandatarangini, 4.29;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.8.
6 Suryasangkhyadala (the twelve-petalled),
mentioned in the Shaktanandatarangini, 9.16.
7 Hrit padma (heart lotus), mentioned in the
Kamadhenutantra, ch. 12, p. 15; ch. 13, p p . 15,
16; ch. 15, p. 19; ch. 17, p. 2 3 ; ch. 18, p. 24; Brihannilatantra, ch. 8, p. 65, 6 6 ; Gandharwatantra,
ch. 8, p. 39; ch. 29, p. 112; Tararahasya, ch. 1,
p. 2; ch. 3, p. 18; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2;
ch. 4, p . 4; ch. 5, p . 4, 5; ch. 6, p. 6 ; ch. 10, p. 9;
ch. 14, p. 12; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.34;
7.14; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57, 19, 42; 60.29.
8 Hritpatra (heart petal = heart lotus), mentioned in the Brihannilatantra, ch. 8, p. 65.
9 Hritpankeruha (heart lotus), mentioned in
the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.14.
10 Hritsaroruha (heart lotus), mentioned in
the Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387.
11 Hridambhoja (heart lotus), mentioned in
the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.12, 14.
12 Hridambuja (heart lotus), mentioned in
the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.114; K a m a d h e n u tantra, ch. 18, p. 24; Shadamnayatantra, 4.144.
13 Hridabja (heart lotus), mentioned in the
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.10.
14 Hridaya (heart = heart lotus), mentioned
in the Nilatantra, ch. 5, p. 9; Todalatantra, ch. 7,
p. 14; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 13, p. 16; ch. 18,
p. 24; Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 19; Gandharwatantra,
ch. 29, p. 109; Mantramahodadhi, 4.28;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.30.
15 Hridayambhoja (heartlotus), mentioned in
the Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.1, 3, 33, 47; 59.23.
218

16 Hridayambuja (heart lotus), mentioned in
the Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4;
Sharadatilakatantra, 5.133; Rudrayamala, Part
2, 59.28; 60.9.
17 Hridayasarasija (heart lotus), mentioned
in the Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3. p. 8.
18 Hridayabja (heart lotus), mentioned in the
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 59.24.
19 Hridaya Kamala (heart lotus), mentioned
in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 59.27.
20 Hritpankaja (heart lotus), mentioned in
the Shatchakranirupana, Verse 26.

Position
T h e anahata is situated in the heart region
( - Mantramahodadhi,
4.23;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.20; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 3;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.12, 29; 9.16; Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27.62; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490; Shiwasanghita, 5.116; Yogaswarodaya and Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ) . T h e anahata is called the heart
lotus because of its location in the heart region.
In the Waidika accounts, the anahata has also
been termed hridaya (heart) ( - Narayanopanishad, Mantra 5 0 ; Brahmopanishad, Mantra 34;
Mahopanishad, 1.12), because it is situated in the
heart region ( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 3.11;
Yogashikhopanishad, 1.173; 5.9; Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 10). In the Pouranika accounts,
the anahata has been described as being situated
in the heart region ( - Dewibhagawata, 11.1.43).
T h e actual location of the anahata is not
directly in the heart region, but within the
vertebral column corresponding to the heart
region.

Description
T h e r e is a beautiful lotus, situated above the
manipura and in the heart region, of the colour
of the bandhuka flower (Pentapetes Phoenicea Monier-Williams) and bright, which possesses

Exposition of the Chakras

the twelve (matrika-) letters from ka (to tha)
of vermilion colour (on its petals); it is termed
anahata ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 22). This
means that the anahata chakra (Plate 11) has
twelve petals of deep red colour, and on the
petals are the matrika-letters kang, khang, gang,
ghang, nang, chang, chang, jang, jhang, nang, tang
and thang of vermilion colour. T h e colour of
the bandhuka flower is white, vermilion and
deep red ( - Shaligramanighantubhushana, pushpawarga (flower group).Here, the deepred colour
should be taken. T h e colour should be like the
shona flower (Bauhinia Variegata - MonierWilliams) which is deep red ( - Waidyakashabdasindhu).
T h a t the anahata has twelve petals has been
stated in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Nirwanatantra, ch. 7, p. 9; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 28; ch. 8, p. 39; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 4, p. 4; Shiwasanghita, 5.116;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.8; 27.63; Goutamiyatantra,
34.49;
Mantramahodadhi,
4.23;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; ch. 22, p. 80;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.12, 29; 7.14; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 12, p. 15; ch. 13, p. 15; ch. 15,
p. 19; ch. 17, p. 2 3 ; Brihannilatantra, ch. 8, p. 6 5 ;
Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 9; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.133; Shadamnayatantra, 5.266; Yogaswarodaya and Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ; and Tattwayogabindu M S . There
are exceptions. T h e anahata has been described
as the pure white sixteen-petalled lotus in the
heart region ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22). T h e
anahata has also been called hridaya chakra with
eight
petals
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.4).

ed in Amarasanggraha M S ) ; Mayatantra, quoted
by Wishwanatha in his Snatchakrawiwriti). T h e
colour of the petals is also stated to be red like
the rising sun ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.62; Goutarmiyatantra,
34,49), like red-hot gold (that is, shining red)
( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.12), shining red
( - Brihannilatantra, ch. 8, p. 65), shining vermilion ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.20; Nirwanatantra, ch. 7, p. 9 ) ; a mixture of dark blue
and yellow ( - Dakshinamurti and Jnanarnawa,
quoted in Yogakalpalatika M S ; Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80), yellow ( - Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2), and white ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2). In the Pouranika accounts,
the colour of the petals of the anahata has been
stated as red like the sun ( - Shiwapurana,
5b. 29.137) and red like the rising sun ( - Dewibhagawata, 7.35.39).
T h e above statements indicate that the colour
of the petals of the anahata is deep red, shining
red, shining vermilion, yellow, dark blue-yellow,
and white. T h e differences in colour are due to
the nature of power-radiations and modes of
concentration. But the generally accepted colour
by the practitioners is deep red.
It has been accepted in the Tantras that the
twelve matrika-letters from kang to thang are
on the petals of the anahata chakra. T h e colour
of the matrika-letters has been stated to be
vermilion ( - Snatchakranirupana, Verse 22),
deep red ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 6, p. 9 ) ; molten
gold (that is, shining red) ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80), red ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
57.19), shining ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5), and white ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2,

In the Waidika accounts, the anahata has been
described as having twelve petals ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantras 5,13; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.173; 5.9). T h a t the anahata
has twelve petals has also been stated in the
Pouranika accounts ( - Shiwapurana, 5b. 29.136;
lingapurana, 1.8.97; 1.75.35; Dewibhagawata,
7.35.40; 11.1.43).
It has been stated that the colour of the petals
of the anahata is deep red ( - Karikalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Shiwasanghita, 5.116;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.8; Mridanitantra, quot-

T h e matrika-letters are arranged from right
to left.
There are twelve specific qualities (writtis)
on the petals of the anahata, arranged from right
to left in the following order: (1) lustfulness,
(2) fraudulence, (3) indecision, (4) repentance,
(5) hope, (6) anxiety, (7) longing, (8) impartiality, (9) arrogance, (10) incompetency,
(11) discrimination, and (12) an attitude of
defiance ( - Adhyatma Wiweka, quoted by the
commentator Narayana in his commentary on
Hangsopanishad, Mantra 7). Jaganmohana

p. 2).

219

The Chakra System
assigns the qualities and their order as
follows: (1) hope, (2) anxiety, (3) endeavour,
(4) 'mineness,' (5) arrogance, (6) incompetency,
(7) discrimination, (8) egoism, (9) lustfulness, (10) fraudulence, (11) indecision, and
(12) repentance ( - Footnote 87, in connection
with the verse 5.104, Mahanirwanatantra).
Wayu-mandala ('Air'-region)
Here (that is, in the pericarp of the lotus Kahcharana) is the 'air'-region which is
hexagonal (arranged by interlacing two
triangles) and smoke-coloured ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 22). It has been stated that the
wayu ('air') (-region) is in the pericarp (of the
anahata) ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.30; Shadamnayatantra,
5.266). The 'air'-region is six-cornered (hexagonal) ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 7, p. 9; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha MS; Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 95; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.177; 5.14). The 'air'-region has also been
described as circular with six points in the
Dewibhagawata, 11.8.6, and Rudrayamala, Part
2, 57.33. This six-cornered region is smokecoloured (a mixture of black and red colours)
( - Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha
MS; Mayatantra, quoted by Wishwanatha;
Dewibhagawata, 11.8.6). It has also been stated
as being black in colour ( - Yogatattwopanishad,
Mantra 95).
Within it (within the 'air'-region - Kalicharana) is the pawana-akshara (that is, the
rnatrika-akshara - matrika-letter, of pawana,
which is the 'air'-germ mantra Yang; pawanabija is Yang - Warnabijakosha and Bejabhidhana;
pawana-akshara is Yang bija - Kalicharana; pawana-akshara is Yang - Wishwanatha) which is
smoke-coloured and with four arms and seated
on a black antelope ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse
23). Pawana-akshara is wayu-bija which is Yang.
The word akshara means bija ( - Commentator
Shankara). It has been stated that wayu-bija
(Yang) is inside the six-cornered region of 'air'
( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 7, p. 9; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shiwasanghita, 5.116;
Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha MS;
Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 95; Dewibhagawata, 11.8.6). Wayu-bija is seated on a black
220

antelope ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in .Amarasanggraha MS). So the form of Yang-bija is
smoke-coloured, four-armed and seated on a
black antelope. This is the form of Deity Wayu.
According to Kalicharana, there should be an
ankusha (goad) in the hand of Wayu, as Waruna
holds in his hand a pasha (noose). The concentration form of Deity Wayu is as follows.
Wayu is smoke-coloured, four-armed, holding
in one of his hands an ankusha, and seated on a
black antelope.
It has been stated that there is the circular
region of Wayu within which lies the
smoke-coloured 'air'-letter (Yang); within it
(the circular region) is a six-cornered region
which is the seat of the Deity and here one
should concentrate on one's own Ishtadewata.
Concentration on Wayu should also be made
here (in the six-cornered region). Wayu is
extremely subtle; he is Supreme Brahman
when without form, and when with form, he
is in the nature of sound; . . . his seat is on the
black antelope; he grants boons to the three
worlds, is very kind and wears a crown; he is
life himself ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.33-8).
/sha
Within it (within wayu-bija - Kalicharana; that
is within the bindu of Yang) is /sha who is all
mercy, bright and like hangsah, and with his
two hands shows the mudras of dispelling fear
and granting boons to the three worlds
( - Snatchakranirupana, Verse 23).
The expression, 'like hangsah' (hangsabha)
requires explanation. Kalicharana has not explained it, but quoted a passage saying that the
desired One is splendorous like ten million
moons. It indicates that he is like the moon,
that is, he is possessed of the colour of shining
white. Shankara and Wishwanatha interpret
'hangsabha' to be the colour of the sun, that is,
red. On the other hand, the commentators
Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana translate
it as white colour.
/sha is one of the six Shiwas. Isha has also been
called Ishwara. So Ishwara is one of the Shiwas
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 25.53). The presence
of Ishwara in the six-cornered 'air'-region has
been mentioned in the Tantras ( - Nirwana-

Exposition of the Chakras
tantra, ch. 7, p. 9; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.8;
Mantramahodadhi, 4.22; Sharadatilakatantra,
5.133; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387). In the
Waidika accounts, also Ishwara has been stated
to be in the 'air'-region ( - Yogatattwopanishad,
Mantra 96;
Yogashikhopanishad,
1.177).
Ishwara has been called Hara ( - Todalatantra,
ch. 7, p. 14) and Shiwa ( - Brihannilatantra, ch.
8, p. 65). Ishwara has also been described as
Bana-linga ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2). It has been clearly stated that Ishwara is in
the lap of wayu-bija ( - Mridanitantra, quoted
in Amarasanggraha MS).
In the anahata, concentration should be done
on Ishwara ( - -Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.41).
His concentration-form is as follows: /shwara
is in the form of (matrika-) letters, four-armed,
shining white in colour, and wears a crown and a
red garland; he does good to the three worlds
and is the lord of the yogis ( - ibid., 57, 41-2).
Here it has been clearly said that Ishwara is
white in colour. Here is another concentrationform:
Shiwa, the conqueror of death, resembles
pure crystal (in colour); he is five-faced and of
great lustre, with lotus-like beautiful and smiling
face and ten long arms; his breast is ornamented
with a garland of rudraksha and his head with
the matted and twisted hair; and he wears a
crown, an earring, an armlet, a bracelet, and is
clad in tiger's skin ( - Brihannilatantra, ch. 8,
p. 65). As Shiwa has been described as having
three eyes in all his forms, so here he should be
thought of as having three eyes in each of his
faces. Kalicharana also says that Shiwa has been
described everywhere as having three eyes,
hence Isha is also three-eyed. He also quotes a
passage saying that one should concentrate on
him as wearing a necklace, an armlet, a chain
of pearls and an anklet, and clad in silken
raiment.
In concentration, the forms of Isha or Ishwara
have been described as follows:
(a) One-faced; five-faced.
(b) Two-armed; four-armed; ten-armed.
(c) Colour: pure crystal; shining white.
(d) Three-eyed.
(e) Making the gestures of dispelling fear

and granting boons.
(f) Wearing a crown, earrings, armlets, a
necklace, anklets and a garland of
rudraksha.
(g) Clad in tiger's skin; silken raiment. (See
Plate 12, left top figure.)
Kakini
Here (in the pericarp - Kalicharana) is Kakini
(Power Kakini - Kalicharana) who is new lightning-like yellow (that is, shining yellow in colour),
three-eyed, adorned with all kinds of ornaments
and holds in her two hands a pasha (noose)
and a kapala (human skull), while the other two
hands are in the wara and abhaya mudras (that is,
the gestures of granting boons and dispelling
fear); she wears a necklace of bones; she is
auspicious and joyous and the benefactress
of all; and she is fully absorbed in supreme
blissfulness in death-conquering union (Shatchakranirupana, Verse 24). (See Plate 12, right
top figure.)
The presence of Power Kakini in the pericarp
of the anahata has been mentioned in the
Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Shiwasanghita,
5.118; Mantramahodadhi, 4.22; Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 22.8; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.21;
Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14; Shadamnayatantra,
5.266; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha MS. Kakini has been described as doorkeeper ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2).
Power Bhuwaneshwari (the mother of the universe) has been mentioned in the Nirwanatantra,
ch. 7, p. 9. It has also been said that Power
Lakini is in the anahata ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4,
p. 22). But these forms are for special concentration.
A concentration-form of Kakini is as follows.
Kakini is white in colour and two-armed,
and shines with the vermilion-mark on her
forehead, and her eyes are beautifully painted
with collyrium, and she is clad in white raiment
and adorned with various ornaments, and her
face is as beautiful as the moon; concentration
should be made on Kakini for the attainment
of success in the mantra ( - Kankalamalinitantra,
ch.5,p.23).
Kalicharana quotes a two-lined verse which
is exactly the third and fourth lines of the four221

T h e Chakra System

lined verse of the Kankalamalinitantra quoted
above, except the first word of the first line
quoted by him which is 'Krishnambaraparid h a n a n g ' , meaning, clad in black clothing, but
in the Kankalamalini text the first word of the
third line is 'shuklambaraparidhanang', which
means clad in white clothing.
In another form, Kakini has been described
as having three beautiful faces, which are
shining red in colour and very graceful; she is
wearing a necklace of skulls and granting success
( - Kularnawa, ch. 10, p. 53).
Kakini, in another of her concentrationforms is yellow in colour, with highly
developed breasts, carries a trident, a drum,
and a noose, and shows the gesture of dispelling
fear; she is fully absorbed (in concentration)
(mahamatta), and worshipped by the great
sages ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 9, p. 4 2 - 3 ) .
Wishwanatha quotes a verse from a Tantra
in which it is stated that Kakini is yellow in
colour and holds in her hands a noose, a trident,
a skull, and a d r u m .
O t h e r concentration-forms of Kakini.
'Kakini is as beautiful and splendorous as
millions of moons; she is pure and holds the
Weda in her h a n d ; her grandeur is that of the
celestial trees; her necklace is like the rays
of the sun; she appears agitated (with power)'
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 59.27).
'Kakini has six faces and three eyes (in each
face); she is yellow in colour, and holds in her
hands a trident, a bow and a skull and makes
the gesture of granting boons' ( - Jamala, quoted
in Yogakalpalatika M S ) .
' T h e great Divine Mother Kakini who is
worshipped in the three worlds is subtle as
well as in form; she has four arms and holds
a skull and a trident, and makes the gestures
of granting boons and dispelling fear; she is
like ten million lightnings (that is, she is shining
yellow in colour), and clad in yellow raiment;
she wears various ornaments of gold and jewels;
she is delighted with the drinking of sudha
(amrita - deathless substance) and is fully absorbed (in concentration)' ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
57,43-6).
T h e following are the forms of Kakini in
concentration:
222

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

O n e face; three faces; six faces.
Face is beautiful.
Three-eyed.
Colour: shining yellow; yellow; shining
red; moon-white; white.
(e) F o u r - a r m e d ; two-armed.
(f) Holding a noose and a skull; a trident, a
d r u m , and a noose; a noose, a trident, a
skull and a d r u m ; the Weda; a skull, and a
trident; a trident, a bow, and a skull.
(g) M a k i n g the gestures of granting boons and
dispelling fear; the gesture of dispelling
fear; the gesture of granting boons.
(h) Clad in white raiment; black raiment;
yellow raiment.
(i) Wearing various ornaments of gold and
jewels,
(j) Graceful.
(k) Fully absorbed (in concentration).
Bana-linga
'In the pericarp of this lotus (anahata), there
is Power as a triangle (that is, triangular in
form - Kalicharana) and her delicate body is
like ten million lightnings (that is, she is
splendorous); within that (that is, the triangular
Power) is the Shiwa-linga (that is, Supreme
Being in a specific concentration form) called
Bana (that is, Bana-linga) who is gold-like
luminous (that is, shining yellow in colour);
there is a subtle void (that is, the bindu) on his
head as that in a gem and there is the abode in
him of the roused superpower of yoga (Lakshmi)'
(Shatchakranirupana, Verse 25).
It should be noted here that the Power is in the
form of a triangle, so there is no distinction
between the Power and the triangle. T h e triangle
is to be considered as the body of the Power.
Because of this, the triangle is the yoni, and so
its apex is downward. This also has been expressed by Kalicharana. Kalicharana farther
says that this triangle is situated below the
wayu-bija ('air'-germ mantra). He quotes a
passage in which it is stated that in the lap of
the wayu-bija is Isha and below him is the
triangle where lies Bana-linga.
T h e triangle is of lightning-like colour, that is,
shining red, or shining yellow in colour. Banalinga is within the triangle. This means he is

Exposition of the Chakras

within the Power who is triangular in form.
This Power supports or holds a dewata in a
centre. So it is the holding-power by which an
appropriate dewata is maintained in a particular
centre or seat. This Power has been termed Pithashakti - the holding-power which is the power
of concentration. It has been stated that the
Pitha-shakti (situated in the anahata) in her
dhyana-form is in the form of a triangle, golden
in colour, shining like ten million lightnings at
the same time (that is, shining yellow colour),
and adorned with all kinds of ornaments
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.48-9). In concentration, the Pitha-shakti is in form. This
form is not the triangular form, but a specific
form of concentration lying in the triangle
which is her form of support. So it has been
stated • that concentration should be done on
Bana-linga who is situated by the right side of
the Pitha-shakti ( - ibid., 57.50).
T h e triangle in the anahata is called the yoni
where lies Bana-linga ( - Kankalamalini'tantra,
ch. 2, p. 5). Therefore, the triangle is situated
with its base upward and apex downward.
T h a t Bana-linga is situated within the triangle
has been stated in the Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Gandharwatantra, ch. 29, p. 109;
Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) .
About the colour of Bana-linga, it has been
stated that he is gold-like luminous ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 25). T h e text reads:
Kanakakararigaragojjwalah to mean gold-like
(kanaka-akara) luminous (ujjwala) colour of
the body (anga-raga). T h e usual meaning of
kanaka is gold. Bhuwanamohana has translated
it as gold-like luminous colour. Ramawallabha
has translated kanaka-akara as gold-colour.
But Wishwanatha translates the word kanaka
as being similar to the flower of bandhaka,
and quotes a passage to support this. T h e colour
of the bandhuka-flower is white, deep red and
vermilion. W h a t colour should apply here?
Usually, the deep red colour is taken. Jaganmohana says that Bana-linga is blood-red
( - Footnote 87, in connection with the verse
5.104, Mahanirwanatantra).
Let us see what other tantras say about the
colour of Bana-linga. Bana-linga is as lustrous
as the ten thousand suns (indicating that the

colour is shining red) ( - Gandharwatantra, ch.
5, p. 2 8 ; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.63; Goutamiyatantra, 34.50; Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.12;
Dewibhagawata, 7.35, 4 0 ) ; and like pure gold
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.50); and also highly
luminous ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.117). So the
colour of Bana-linga is shining red or gold or
shining yellow.
There is a subtle void on the head of Banalinga. Kalicharana says that there are on the
head of the Shiwa-linga the half-moon (ardhachandra) and bindu (point) and within the
bindu is a hole which is void. To support it he
quotes a verse which says that Bana-linga who
is within the triangle is adorned with golden
ornaments and with the half-moon on his head.
We would put it in this way: the void on the
head of Bana-linga is bindu isolated from the
body by the half-moon. It indicates that concentration on the form is finally developed into
formless Divine Consciousness indicated by
bindu.
Jiwatman
There is in the lotus (in the pericarp of the lotus Kalicharana) in the heart region (this lotus is
anahata - Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana)
hangsah (jiwatman - Kalicharana, Wishwanatha,
Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana) who is
like the flame of a l a m p in a windless place
(that is, hangsah is luminous and motionless);
there is also (in the pericarp of this lotus Kalicharana) the region of the sun by which
the filaments in the pericarp are illuminated
( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 26).
It has been clearly stated in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5, that in the pericarp of
the anahata are the seats of Wayu and jiwa.
In the Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2, it has
been also said that jiwa is always situated in the
anahata; and also in the Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
5.21;
Goutamiyatantra, 34.51; Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.4;
Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 14; Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 1 1 ; Shiwapurana, 3.5.52;
Dewibhagawata, 7.35.41).
About the form for concentration of jiwatman,
it has been mentioned that he is like the flame of a
lamp, the nature of which is Brahman; he is of
223

T h e Chakra System

golden colour ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2,
p. 2 ) ; also, jiwa as hangsah is shining like the
flame of a l a m p ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2 ) ; hangsakala (jiwatman) is luminous
and like the flame of a lamp (lingakara)
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.4); hangsah
(jiwatman) is luminous ( - Yogarajopanishad,
Mantra 11). So the dhyana-form of jiwatman
is that he is in the form of linga and like the
flame of a lamp. T h e linga-form here means
that his form is like the still flame of a lamp
which tapers upward. Hangsah is also shining
like gold, or shining gold colour.
T h e existence of the sun-region has also been
mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 57.54,
and this is mainly for concentration in which
also the sun-illuminated filaments of the lotus
should be included.

Explanation
T h e central powers of the anahata, mainly
consisting of wayu-power, radiate as petaline
force-radiations, twelve in number, and are
designated by the matrika-letters kang, khang,
gang, ghang, nang, chang, chang, Jang, jhang,
hang, tang and thang. T h e nature of powerradiations is indicated by the colours of the
petals and the matrika-letters. T h e deep red
indicates the predominance of prana in combination with apana, the shining red that of
prana and udana, the shining vermilion that of
prana, udana and wyana; the dark-blue-yellow
that of prana and wyana; yellow is essentially
wyana and white is mainly samana.
T h e original colour of kang is vermilion;
of khang, chang and tang white; of gang and
ghang red like the rising sun; of hang smoke;
of chang and thang shining yellow; of ]ang moonwhite; and of jhang and hang shining red.
T h e original colours of the matrika-letters are
changed into vermilion, red, shining red, deep
red and white in the anahata-petals. T h e
vermilion indicates the concentration of prana,
udana and wyana; the red and deep red that of
prana and apana; the shining red that of prana
and u d a n a ; and the white that of samana. T h e
purpose of this colour-change is to intensify
224

particular anahata radiations.
T h e following are the forms of concentration
in the anahata.
1 Petaline concentration. T h e twelve matrikaletters from kang to thang should be made into
mantra-form which ultimately will become the
unit of the anahata-concentration by japa and
thought-concentration. T h e separate petals will
finally become a circular wheel of deep red
colour when the externalized radiations will stop.
2 Mahabhuta-concentration. There are two
main stages of concentration. T h e first is thoughtconcentration in which the six-cornered smokecoloured wayu-region with the wayu-bija Yang,
also of smoke colour, is thought of. Finally, it
reaches the second stage when the hexagonal
region and Yang are 'seen' in deep concentration.
3 Tanmatra-concentration. When concentration becomes deeper, the hexagonal region
gradually disappears, and only the smokecoloured wayu-bija remains. It is indicative of
sparsha (touch) tanmatra.
4 Wayu-concentration. Deep concentration
on Yang causes the appearance of Deity Wayu
form the bija aspect (ya). Wayu is seen on a black
antelope, and is smoke-coloured, four-armed,
holding an ankusha (goad).
T h e krishnasara (black antelope) is the carrier
of Deity Wayu. It is a kind of mriga (deer,
antelope - Apte). T h e antelope is very swift.
T h e prana-force becomes metamorphosed into
energy as speed through the muscles at the
physical level. T h e krishnasara is the supporter
of the activities of prana-forces which have been
centralized in Wayu. T h e pranic activities are
the expression of life in the body with which are
associated the organic and muscular activities
and the senso-intellectual activities and diversiform consciousness. Wayu as mahabhuta-tanmatra is the central energy which can be manifested with tejas-ap-prithiw; ('fire-water-earth')
energies and then its motion is modified; when
it manifests by itself its motional force is almost
boundless and cannot operate in the material
field, and, consequently, it creates its own field the power-field where it operates in conjunction
with pranic forces. Prana in the wayu (or power)field, becomes wayus or motional forces when it
is in operation. T h e principal wayus are five:

Exposition of the Chakras

prana, apana, samana, udana and wyana.
Prana has another aspect. In that aspect it
is what is called daiwa prana ( - Brihadaranyakopanishad, 1.5.20), that is, supernormal prana.
It exhibits the extraordinary function - cessation
of motions, in addition to its motional function.
In both states, daiwa prana is free from all
disturbances and there is no dissipation. In other
words, prana as daiwa prana functions normally
and most efficiently in all its motions, and also
undergoes a non-throbbing state when kumbhaka becomes natural. Daiwa prana is the basis
on which daiwa manas (supernormal mind)
( - Brihadaranyakopanishad, 1.5.19) is aroused.
It is that aspect of the mind which is above all
sorrows and exhibits concentration power by
which samadhi becomes the natural mode of
consciousness.
Through a process of internalization prana
is transformed into daiwa prana. This process
is the process of control, indicated by the ankusha
(goad) held by Deity Wayu. This control is
based on spiritual knowledge, represented by the
letter ang. It requires great physical endurance
and strong will to withstand, which is represented
by the letter ku, for its development to a high
degree; and when control becomes natural it
gives happiness which is represented by the
letter shang. Wayu is of daiwa prana. In him
the prana is supercontrolled into daiwa prana.
T h e process of control of prana is pranayama.
To make pranayama successful, it is necessary
to purify and normalize the pranic activities
supported by krishnasara-mriga. From it a process
called mriga-process has been evolved for the
cardiopulmonary vitalization and development
and internal purification. T h e vitalizing exercise
consists of swift running, slow running, long
walking, and swimming. T h e purificatory exercise comprises bhastrika and sahita breathing
and shodhana.
From the mantra viewpoint, wayu is in the
form of bija-mantra yang from which Deity
Wayu is aroused. There are other matrikaletters for wayu. They are kang, khang, ghang,
hang, chang, jhang, tang, dhang and sang. T h e
bija-mantra of ankusha is Krong. T h e other
matrika-letters standing for it are jhang, tang
and shang. Mriga is represented by hang and ung.

5 Isha-concentration. In deep concentration,
Deity Isha emerges from the bindu of the bijamantra Yang. Isha is Supreme Being endowed
with supreme yoga-power. Isha and Ishwara
are the same. In his power aspect, Isha is omniscient and omnipotent, whereas the embodied
beings have limited knowledge and power;
Isha is infinite; he is beyond the universe and
also he is within it; he is also hidden within
all beings'( - Shwetashwataropanishad, 1.9; 3.7).
Isha also assumes divine forms. O n e of these,
the form of Isha, arises at the level of wayuprinciple, that is, in the anahata chakra. T h e
colour of Isha is white. It indicates he is all
sattwa (of sentience and purity). W h e n his form
is roused in the anahata in deep concentration,
the practitioner experiences that power emanates
from Isha which dispels all fear arising from
unspirituality, and strengthens concentration
which is the greatest boon to him. T h e third eye
of Isha is the samadhi-knowledge which is always
with him. T h e other two eyes indicate that
Isha is also conscious of his worshippers who are
in his consciousness in concentration, and in
thoughts when in the post-concentration stage.
Isha is in the lotus posture, not seated on a carrier,
but on the air. This levitation indicates the
highest stage of pranayama which is natural
to Isha. T h e anahata is the special centre of
prana-wayu, and here pranayama can be
developed to its highest level through Deity
Wayu. Pranayama becomes firmly established
in a disciple devoted to Isha. T h e mantra
forms of Isha are represented by ung, eng,
ring, hring, gang, nang, sang, soung, and hang.
6 Kakini-concentration. Kakini is the doorkeeper of the anahata. Concentration on Kakini
prepares a disciple to remove all obstacles and
develops the power of control. Concentration
on Kakini develops enough power to be able
successfully to do concentration on Isha. T h e
power aspect of Isha is Kakini. T h e power which
develops in concentration leading to the realization of Supreme Shakti (power) is Power Kakini.
T h e control-power which effects the motionlessness of the prana wayus becomes stabilized
in the anahata by Kakini.
T h e shining yellow colour of Kakini indicates
that her power maintains the divine form of

225

T h e Chakra System

consciousness. Her shining red colour indicates
that her power is being utilized in the control
of prana wayus. When she is white, she is ishaconsciousness. She holds in her hands pasha
(noose) and kapala (skull). T h e kapala is that
which preserves 'kang', that is, 'sukhang'.
Sukhang is 'su' meaning excellent, and khang
which is knowledge. So kapala indicates spiritual
knowledge. Pasha is 'pang', meaning the knowledge of atman, and 'asha', meaning desire.
T h a t is, one who desires to attain atman-knowledge is indicated by pasha. T h e bija-mantra
of Kakini is Kang.
1 Concentration on Bana-linga. Concentration on Bana-linga consists of three stages.
(a) Concentration on the triangular power:
the triangular power is the power of holding in
concentration expressed by consciousness when
it is a triangle. T h e triangle is that form of
consciousness when it is not deviated from one
aspect to another of the usual three aspects of
the sensory objects. T h e holding-power should
be developed by doing concentration on the
subtle lightning-like triangular-shape power.
(b) Concentration on the linga-form: the form
of Bana-linga is broad at the bottom and tapers
gradually to a point in its head. T h e colour of
the Bana-linga is of gold or shining red. O n e of
the two colours should be taken. Concentration
should start at the broad aspect, and as concentration becomes deeper, it will move towards
the tapering. T h e process of concentration is
this: at first the conscious field of concentration
is broader, then gradually the field becomes
narrow, and, finally, it is a point, as concentration develops deeper. So the Shiwa-linga form
is actually the process of concentration, (c) Concentration on Bindu: 'the Shiwa-linga concentration finally becomes the bindu concentration. When the Shiwa-linga-body concentration
develops to its highest point, which is indicated
by the crescent, it is transformed into formless bindu concentration.
8 Concentration on Jiwatman. Concentration
on jiwatman is an important factor in the
bhutashuddhi process. J i w a t m a n is the spiritually
purified and illuminated embodied being, situated within the power-triangle and below Banalinga. In the pericarp of the anahata is the
226

hexagonal wayu-region in which is situated
Yang. T h e power-triangle is below Yang. Banalinga is within the power-triangle, and jiwatman
is inside the triangle, but below Bana-linga.
T h e form of jiwatman is like the steady flame
of a lamp and luminous. Concentration should
be done on the motionless flame-like jiwatman
with a view to making the I-consciousness as
steady as the jiwatman and gradually, in
concentration, it should be dissolved into the
steady flame-like consciousness.

6 Wishuddha
T h e wishuddha is the fifth in the six-chakra
group, but serially it is the sixth chakra. It is
situated within the chitrini nadi.

Terminology
T h e following are the Tantrika terms of the
wishuddha.
1 Wishuddha, mentioned in the Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14; ch. 9, p. 17; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 13, p. 16; Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 28;
Mantramahodadhi, 4.24; Kubjikatantra, 6.304;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.23; Bhuatashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 3, p. 3; ch. 5, p. 5; ch. 8,
p. 8; ch. 10, p. 9; ch. 14, p. 12; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra,
ch. 1, p. 10; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.13; Rudrayamala, Part
2, 22.10; 25.56; 27.65.67; Tantrarajatantra,
21.83; Purascharyarnawa, ch. 2, p. 9 1 ; ch. 6,
pp. 490,492; Shadamnayatantra, 5.267,426;
Shiwasanghita, 5.124,126; Goutamiyatantra,
34.52; .Shatchakranirupana, Verse 28; Dakshinamurti, Jnanarnawa and Jnanachudamani, quoted
in
Yogakalpalatika
MS;
Yogaswarodaya
and Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha
MS.
2 Wishuddhi, mentioned in the Shaktanandatarangini, 4.30.34.
3 K.antha (the neck; it means the wishuddha,

Exposition of the Chakra

as it is situated in the neck region), mentioned
in the Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14; Kularnawa,
ch. 4, p. 2 1 ; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 4, p. 4;
Mahanirwanatantra, 5.113.
4 Kanthadesha (the neck region, that is,
wishuddha), mentioned in the Mantramahodadhi, 4.28; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p p . 8,10;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; Shadamnayatantra,
4.145.
5 Kantha-padma (the lotus in the neck region),
mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387.
6 Kanthapankaja (the lotus in the neck region)
mentioned in the Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 4, p. 4; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.134.
7 Kanthambuja (the lotus in the neck region
that is, wishuddha), mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.52.
8 Kanthambhoja (the lotus in the neck region,
that is, wishuddha), mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2 , 6 1 . 1 .
9 Shodasha (the sixteen, that is, wishuddha),
mentioned in the Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 16.
10 Shodasha-dala (the sixteen-petalled, that
is, wishuddha), mentioned in the Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 9; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.29;
9.16.
11 Shodashara (the sixteen-petalled, that is,
wishuddha), mentioned in the Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3,
p. 8; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.29; Shadamnayatantra, 4.60.
12 Nirmala-padma (the bright, or pure
lotus), mentioned in the Nirwanatantra, ch. 8,
p. 10.
13 Dwyashtapatrambuja (the sixteen-petalled
lotus), mentioned in the Gandharwatantra, ch. 8,
p. 39; S h a k t a n a n d a t a n g i n i , 7.14.
14 Akasha (akasha-lotus, that is, the lotus
containing the akasha principle = wishuddha),
mentioned in the Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 5,
p. 4; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.13.
15 Shodashollasa-dala (the splendorous sixteen-petalled, that is, wishuddha), mentioned
in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.9.
16 Shodasha-patra (the sixteen-petalled), mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.13.

Position
T h e wishuddha is situated in the neck-region
( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 2 8 ; Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39; Mantramahodadhi, 4.24;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.23; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.13,29;
7.14; 9.16; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.9; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490; Shiwasanghita,
5.124; Yogaswarodaya and Mridannantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h e same
position has been accepted in the Waidika
accounts ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.174; 5.10)
as well as in the Pouranika accounts ( - Shiwapurana, 5b, 29.131; Dewibhagawata, 11.1.43).
T h e neck region means that part of the vertebral
column (that is, the cervical part of the spinal
column) which corresponds to the region of the
neck.

Description
T h e lotus called wishuddha (Plate 14), situated
in the neck region, is of the shining smoke
colour; and the petals are adorned with all the
vowels (that is, the sixteen matrika-letters from
ang to ah) of deep red colour which are 'seen'
by him whose consciousness is illumined by the
concentration-light (diptabuddhi); there is the
void-region (nabhomandala) (in the pericarp
of the wishuddha) which is like the full moon
(that is, shining white - Bhuwanamohana) and
circular in shape; (within this region) there lies
the form (tanu, that is, the bija) of Ambara
( = akasha-bija) which is white and seated on
a snow-white elephant ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 28).
In this verse, there is no clear mention of
the petals of the wishuddha. But it has been
stated that all the vowels are on its petals.
This means that as the number of the vowels is
sixteen, so, by implication, the number of the
petals is sixteen. Each matrika-letter is on one
petal. Kalicharana also says the same. In support
of which he quotes a verse which states that
above it (anahata) is the smoke-coloured sixteenpetalled lotus; on the petals are sixteen vowels
227

The Chakra System
with bindu (that is, the first sixteen matrikaunits) which are deep red in colour; its filaments are red and there is the void-region
(in its pericarp).
It has been clearly stated that the wishuddha
has sixteen petals ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 8,
p. 10; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 28; Mantramahodadhi, 4.24; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Koulawali'tantra, ch. 22, p. 81;
Sharadatilakatantra,
5.134;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.13; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.65;
Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387; ch. 6, p. 490;
Shiwasanghita, 5.124; Goutarmiyatantra, 34.52;
Jnanachudamani, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika
MS), and its petals are smoke-coloured
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.23; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch.
2, p. 2; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.13; Puraschcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p.
490; Shiwasanghita, 5.124; Dakshinamurti,
Jnanarnawa and Jnanachudamani, quoted
in the Yogakalpalatika MS; Mridanitantra,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha MS), or the
shining smoke colour ( - Gandharwatantra, ch.
5, p. 28; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.10; 27.66.
There are vowels (the first sixteen matrikaletters) on the petals of the wishuddha (Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3,
p. 8; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.134; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387; Shiwasanghita,
5.124), and these vowels are 16 in number
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 28; Mantramahodadhi, 4.23;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.23; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.13; 7.14;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.66; Mahanirwanatantra, 5.113; Shadamnayatantra, 5.267; Jnanachudamam, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika MS;
Mridani'tantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha
MS). The colour of the vowels is red ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81; Dakshinamurti and
Jnanarnawa, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika
MS) and also golden ( - Mridani'tantra, quoted
in the Amarasanggraha MS). The sixteen vowels
or the matrika-letters are: ang, ang, ing, ing,
ung, ung, ring, ring, Iring, Iring, eng, aing, ong,
oung, ang, ah.
228

There are sixteen specific qualities (writtis)
on the sixteen petals of the wishuddha chakra.
They are arranged from the right to the left
as the petal arrangement, and in the following
order: (1) Pranawa (the mantra Ong), (2) Udgi'tha (the Sama-mantras), (3) Hung (a mantra),
(4) Phat (a mantra), (5) Washat (a mantra),
(6) Swadha (a mantra), (7) Swaha (a mantra),
(8) Namah (a mantra), (9) amrita (deathlessness),
and the seven (musical) tones, viz, Shadja
and others ( - Adhyatma Wiweka, quoted by
the commentator Narayana in his commentary
on Hangsopanishad, Mantra 7). Jaganmohana
gives the names and their order as follows: The
seven tones - (1) Nshada, (2) Rishabha,
(3) Gandhara, (4) Shadja, (5) Madhyama,
(6) Dhaiwata, and (7) Panchama; (8) poison,
(9) Hung, (10) That, (11) Woushat, (12) Washat,
(13) Swadha, (14) Swaha, (15) Namah (these
seven mantras), and (16) amrita ( - Footnote
87, in connection with the verse of the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104).
Akasha-region
There is the akasha (void)-region in the pericarp
of the wishuddha ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 8,
p. 8; ch. 14, p. 12; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 81; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.30). The akasha
is the void-principle (shunyatattwa) ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 4, p. 4), and is in the
nature of power ( - ibid., ch. 2, p. 2); it is Deity
Sadashiwa himself ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2). There are five different aspects of
akasha, namely, abhrakasha (atmospheric void),
jalakasha (void in water), ghatakasha (void
within a jar), patakasha (void in relation to a
surface), and mahakasha (supreme void)
( - Mahamuktitantra, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika MS). The five aspects of akasha
have also been stated in the Waidika accounts.
They are as follows: gunarahita akasha (attributeless void), parakasha (supervoid), mahakasha (supreme void), tattwakasha (bright void),
and suryakasha (sun void) ( - Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.2.13).
The shape of akasha (void)-region is circular
( - Mantramaharnawa, ch. 4, p. 41). It has been
stated that there is the moon-region in the

Exposition of the Chakras

pericarp of the lotus (wishuddha); there is also
a six-cornered diagram where are situated
Sadashiwa and Gouri ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 8,
p. 10). It has also been stated that there is a
beautiful triangle (in the wishuddha) where the
filaments are (that is, in the pericarp), and here
(in the triangle) is Sadashiwa ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). It has been stated
clearly that there (in the pericarp of the wishuddha) is the akasha-region which is triangular
in shape and of smoke colour ( - Mridanitantra,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) . So the
akasha-region is circular or triangular. In the
Waidika accounts, it has been stated that the
akasha-region is circular ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 9 8 ; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.178;
5.15). T h a t the akasha-region is circular has also
been stated in the Pouranika accounts ( - Dewibhagawata, 11.8.7).

bija is akasha-bija which is Hang. It has been
clearly stated in the Mantramaharnawa, ch. 4,
p. 4 1 , that the bija Hang is in the akasha-region.
It has been supported by the Waidika account
in which it has been stated that there is the
ha-letter (that is, the matrika-letter hang as the
bija) in the circular akasha ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 98). T h a t the ha-letter is the Hangbija has been stated in the Pouranika account
which says that concentration should be done
on the akasha-region where lies the Hang-bija
( - Dewibhagawata, 11.8.7). T h e Hang-bija is
white ( - Bhutashuddhi, quoted by Kalicharana).
T h e akasha-bija Hang is seated on an elephant
( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5),
and the colour of the elephant is white ( - Nigamalata; Bhutashuddhi, quoted by Kalicharana).

T h e colour of the akasha-region is implied
as moon-white ( - .Shatchakranirupana, Verse 2 8 ;
Nirwanatantra, ch. 8, p. 10). But the colour has
been clearly mentioned as white or crystallike transparent (swachcha) in the Mantramaharnawa, ch. 4, p. 4 1 . It has also been stated
that the colour is smoke ( - Mridani'tantra,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h a t the
colour of the akasha-region is smoke has also
been stated in the Waidika accounts ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantra 98). But the Pouranika
account supports the white (or transparent)
colour of the region ( - Dewibhagawata, 11.8.7).
So the akasha-region is white, transparent,
or smoke in colour.
T h e form (tanu) of ambara (mentioned in
the Shatchakranirupana, Verse 28) means the
bija of Deity Ambara, that is, akasha-bija which
is Hang. Ambara is akasha (void) ( - Wachaspatyam; Shabdakalpadrumah). T a n u is body or
form. Here, it is the mantra-form of akasha.
T h e mantra-forms of ambara and akasha are
ang and hang ( - Warnabijakoshah). In the
wishuddha chakra, the bija-mantra of akasha
(or ambara) is Hang. It has been stated that
kha-bija is inside the akasha-region ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ) .
Kha is akasha ( - Wachaspatyam; Shabdakalpadruman). T h e mantra-forms of kha are lring
and hang ( - Warnabijakoshah). So the kha-

More about the forms of the Hang-bija
T h e bija (as Deity Ambara or Akasha) holds
the pasha (noose) and ankusha (goad) and makes
the gestures of granting boons and dispelling
fear; in the lap of the mantra (that is, Hangbija), there always is he who is known as Deity
Sadashiwa; he is white in colour and three-eyed,
and has five faces and ten arms, clad in a tiger's
skin; his body is united with that of Girija
(Power of Shiwa) ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse
29).
T h e bija-aspect of Hang assumes the divine
form of Deity Ambara who is white and
seated on a white elephant. He has four arms
( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha MS) and holds a noose and a goad, and
makes the gestures of granting boons and dispelling fear ( - Nigamalata). This is the concentration form of Ambara.
Sadashiwa
Deity Sadashiwa lies in the lap of Hang-bija
( - Mridanitantra, quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ; Nigamalata). In the lap of the Hangbija means that Sadashiwa is always in the
bindu of the bija and manifests himself in form
in concentration. T h e manifested form of Sadashiwa is as follows: he is white in colour ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 29); he has five faces and
three eyes (to each face) ( - Nirwanatantra,
229

T h e Chakra System

ch. 8, p. 10; Mridanitantra M S ) , and ten arms
( - Mahanirwanatantra, 14.35; Nigamalata), and
is clad in tiger's skin ( - Mahanirwanatantra,
14.33; Nirwanatantra, ch. 8, p. 10). T h e presence
of Sadashiwa in the wishuddha chakra has been
generally recognized ( - Todalatantra, ch. 7,
p. 14; Mantramahodadhi, 4.23; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Sharadatilakatantra,
5.135; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.9; Puraschcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387; Mantramaharnawa,
ch. 4, p. 4 2 ; Shadamnayatantra, 5.267).
In the text (Shatchakranirapana, Verse 29),
it has been stated that Sadashiwa's body is not
different from Girija, that is, Sadashiwa and
Girija have the same body. This means that
Sadashiwa is in the form of Ardhanarishwara
in which the Supreme Power, who is the Mother
of the universe in the form of Gouri, is the half
of the body of Shambhu (Shiwa) ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 8, p. 10). Kalicharana also interprets
it as Ardhanarishwara (half male and half
female form). Ardhanarishwara is a form of
Shiwa in which the female (that is Shakti Power) forms the half part of Ishwara (Shiwa)
( - Wachaspatyam). It cannot be translated
by the word androgyne or hermaphrodite.
It is a form in which Supreme ConsciousnessPower manifests both the Shiwa and Shakti
(Power) aspects distinctly but also in union.
T h e right part is Shiwa and the left part is
Shakti. Kalicharana says that Ardhanarishwara
is of golden colour on his left half of the body,
and white on his right half. He cites a verse in
which it is stated that there (in the wishuddha)
is Deity Sadashiwa who is clad in white raiment
and half of his body is the same as that of Girija,
his body being of both silver (white) and gold
(yellow) colour. T h e Ardhanarishwara form is
also called Hara(Shiwa)-Gourz'(Shakti)-murti
(form) ( - the commentator Shankara) and U m a
(Shakti) -Maheshwara (Shiwa)
( - Shabdakalpadrumah).
Sadashiwa as Ardhanarishwara is on the bull,
half of whose body is that of the great lion (that
is, the half-bull-half-lion) ( - Nirwanatantra, ch.
8, p. 10). T h e carrier (wahana) of Shiwa is the
bull, and that of Shakti is the great lion (mahasingha). As the right part is Shiwa and the left
part is Shakti (ibid., ch. 8, p. 10), so the bull
230

part is on the right side and the lion part on
the left side.
Sadashiwa has ten arms. But in the text
( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 29), there is no
mention of the implements which are in his
hands. Kalicharana quotes a verse in which the
implements carried by Sadashiwa have been
mentioned. T h e y are as follows: the shula
(trident), the tanka (axe, or chisel), the kripana
(sword), the wajra (thunderbolt), dahana (fire),
the nagendra (the great serpent), the ghanta
(bell), the ankusha (goad), and the pasha
(noose), and a hand in abhaya-mudra (the
gesture of dispelling fear).
So the concentration-form of Sadashiwa as
Ardhananshwara is as follows.
T h e right half of the body ofArdhanarishwara
is white and the left half is of golden colour;
he is on the bull-lion; he has five faces and each
face has three eyes; he is clad in tiger's skin;
he has ten arms and carries in his hands a trident,
a chisel (or an axe), a sword, the thunderbolt,
fire, the great snake, a bell, a goad and a noose,
and makes the gesture of dispelling fear. (See
Plate 15, left top figure.)
Sadashiwa has another form (not as Ardhanarishwara), described as follows. 'He is calm
a n d as bright as ten million moons, and clad
in a tiger's skin; his sacred thread is the serpent
and his body is smeared with ashes and ornamented with snakes; he has five faces of the
smoke, yellow, vermilion, white and deep red
colour, and three eyes to each face; his head is
covered with matted hair and he holds Ganga
(the sacred river by that n a m e ) ; he is adorned
with the moon (in crescent form) on his foreh e a d ; he has 10 arms, holding in his left hands
the kapala (skull), pawaka (fire), the pasha
(noose) the pinaka (Shiwa's bow) and the
parashu (axe), and in his right hands the shala
(trident), the wajra (thunderbolt), the ankusha
(goad) and the shara (arrow), and shows wara
(-mudra with one of his right hands) (the gesture
of granting boons); he is white as snow, the
kunda flower, or the moon, and seated on a bull'
( - Mahanirwanatantra, 14.32-7). This is also
the concentration-form of Sadashiwa.
T h e r e is a Waidika concentration-form of
Sadashiwa as Ardhanarishwara which is as

Exposition of the Chakras

follows. 'Sadashiwa is like pure crystal (that is,
colourless transparent, or pure white) and holds
the crescent on his forehead; he has five beautiful
faces, three eyes (to each face), and ten arms;
he holds all implements and is adorned with
all kinds of ornaments, he shows the gesture
of granting boons; and one half of his body
is of U m a (Power of Shiwa)' ( - Yogatattwopanishad, Mantras 100-1).
Power Shakini
In this lotus (that is, in the pericarp of the
wishuddha chakra - Kalicharana), is Shakini (the
Power named Shakini - Kalicharana) who is
white like the ocean of nectar ( - Kalicharana)
(or whiter than the ocean of nectar - Bhuwanamohana), clad in yellow raiment, and the shara
(arrow), the chapa (bow), the pasha (noose)
and the srini (goad) are held in her four beautiful hands ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 30).
(See Plate 15, right top figure.)
T h e presence of Power Shakini in the wishuddha chakra has been generally recognized in
the Tantras ( - Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14;
Mantramahodadhi, 4.23; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.23; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.9; Shadamnayatantra, 5.267; Jnanachudamani, quoted
in the Yogakalpalatika M S ) . SHakini has been
called the doorkeeper ( - Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). It has been said that Shakini
and Sadashiwa are the same ( - Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 61.2). Shakini is the presiding Deity
(of the wishuddha) ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.125).
SHakini has four arms ( - Mridanitantra, quoted
in the Amarasanggraha M S ) .
Kalicharana quotes a verse in which the
concentration-form of Shakini has been described. T h e verse states: Deity Shakini is in the
form of light; she has five beautiful faces and
three eyes to each face; she holds a noose, a
goad, and a book in her lotus hands and makes
j n a n a m u d r a (an attitude of the right hand in
which the tip of the first finger touches the tip
of the t h u m b ) .
T h e commentator Wishwanatha also quotes
a verse from a Tantra in which the concentration-form of Shakini has been stated as follows.
T h e divine Shakini is splendorous, having
five faces with three eyes each, and beautiful

teeth, and holding in her lotus hands a bow,
a trident, a book, and showing j n a n a m u d r a .
He adds that the arrow, the noose, the book
and the j n a n a m u d r a (in the hands of Shakini)
have also been mentioned in another Tantra.
O t h e r concentration forms of Shakini are
as follows.
1 Shakini is shining white in colour; she has
two arms, and a charming face with beautiful
eyes, painted with collyrium; she shines with the
vermilion-mark on her forehead, and is clad in
black raiment and adorned with various ornaments ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 5, p. 23).
2 Shakini has a red face with a sweet smile,
and her eyes are painted with collyrium; she is
beautifully ornamented and holds the thunderbolt and a staff ( - Kularnawa, ch. 10, p. 53).
3 Shakini has five faces, three eyes (to each
face), and four arms, holding a noose, a goad,
and a book, and making the j n a n a m u d r a ; she
is powerful and has prominent teeth ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81).
4 T h e amiable Shakini, who gives blessings
to the three worlds, is clad in yellow raiment,
and beautiful and delighted; she is splendorous;
she is beyond the Weda (Wedadya; from the
mantra viewpoint, it is the mantra Ong) and
she is the source of the Weda (Wedamata;
from the mantra viewpoint, the bijas ing, ing,
and thang, and the mantra S w a h a ) ; her body is
moistened by the flowing streams of pure
nectar; she has the most charming and smiling
face with the three lotus-like beautiful eyes,
well-developed breasts and matted hair and
is adorned with all ornaments; she has four arms,
and carries a lotus and an implement, and makes
the gestures of dispelling fear and granting
boons; she is also terrific when she is Goddess
Shyama ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 6 1 . 3 - 4 ) .
5 Shakini is both without and with form;
she is the mantra-knowledge; she is yellow in
colour, three-eyed, four-armed and adorned
with all ornaments; she has a smiling face;
as Gouri she is united with Sadashiwa; she
holds with her lotus hands the skull and the
white lotus, and makes the gestures of granting
boons and dispelling fear ( - Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 62. 3 2 - 3 ) .
6 Divine Shakini is yellow in colour; she has
231

T h e Chakra System

five faces and three eyes to each face, and
beautiful teeth; she holds with her lotus hands
a noose, a trident and a book, and shows jnanam u d r a (the symbol of knowledge, done by a
particular position of the hand) ( - Jamala,
quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S ) .
. T h e differences in the forms and implements are due to the mode and object of concentration.
Moon-region
There is in the pericarp of the wishuddha the
spotless circular lunar region ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 30). Kalicharana says that
Divine Shakini is in the moon-region which
lies in the pericarp of the wishuddha and he
quotes a passage from the Premayogatarangini
as his support, which says that there is Power
Shakini in the shining lunar region.
Kalicharana says that there is at first the
akasha-region in the pericarp of the wishuddha,
and inside it is a triangle, within the triangle is
the lunar region and within it the akasha-bija
and others. This is supported by a verse he
quotes which states that concentration should
be done on the full moon (that is, the circular
lunar region) which is in the triangle situated
in the pericarp (of the wishuddha); there (in the
lunar region) concentrate on white Akasha
(as Deity), clad in white raiment and seated
on an elephant; there is Deity Sadashiwa.
T h e presence of the lunar region in the
pericarp of the wishuddha chakra has been
mentioned in the Nirwanatantra, ch. 8, p. 10.
T h e Nirwanatantra says that there is the very
beautiful Jana-world where the great spiritual
darkness ends; outside it (but inside the pericarp)
is the lunar region . . . in the pericarp lies the
gemmed region where is a six-cornered d i a g r a m ;
inside the diagram is the half-bull-half-lion
on which is seated (Power) Gouri united with
Sadashiwa on her right side. This seems to
indicate that there is the lunar region in the
pericarp; within it the gemmed region; within
the latter is a hexagon, inside which is the Deity
in Ardhanarishwara-form.
It has been stated that in the region where
the filaments of the wishuddha lotus are (that is,
the region surrounded by the filaments; this is
232

the pericarp) there is a beautiful sky-blue
triangle where lies Sadashiwa ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). T h e triangle has been
farther explained in the Mridanitantra, which
says that there (in the pericarp of the wishuddha)
is the akasha-region which is a triangle and of
smoke colour; inside it is the akasha-bija (Hang)
who is four-armed and seated on an elephant;
in his lap is the four-faced, three-eyed Sadashiwa;
here also is situated Power Shakini who has
four arms.
T h e whole thing may be summarized as
follows.
In the pericarp of the wishuddha chakra
there is the akasha-region which is circular in
shape and white in colour ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 28). T h e triangle (mentioned in the Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2) is not to be
considered as situated directly in the pericarp,
but inside the akasha-region which is in the
pericarp. T h e triangle is the essential part of the
circular akasha-region, and, therefore, it has
also been termed the triangular akasha-region
( - Mridanitantra). T h e triangle is either skyblue ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2) or smoke
( - Mridanitantra) in colour. Inside this triangle
is the circular lunar region ( - the verse quoted
by Kalicharana). Akasha (in the bija-form)
lies inside the lunar region ( - ibid.). According
to some other authorities, there appears to be a
gemmed region inside the lunar region, and
inside the gemmed region is a hexagon, and inside
it is Ardhanarishwara ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 8,
p. 10). As Sadashiwa in the form of Ardhanarishwara, is in the hexagon, so the akashabija in whose lap Sadashiwa is ( - Mridanitantra) must be in the hexagon.
According to some authorities the jiwatman
(the embodied being) is situated in the wishuddha chakra ( - Jnanarrnawa, quoted in the
Yogakalpalatika MS) and concentration should
be done on him ( - Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6,
p. 492). T h e wishuddha chakra is the centre for
udana-wayu ( - Amritanadopanishad, Mantra
34; Dewibhagawata, 7.32,40). According to
some other authorities the centre of prana-wayu
is in the wishuddha ( - Mantramaharnawa, ch. 4,
p. 42). T h e wishuddha is also the centre of the
principles of hearing and speech ( - Kankala-

Exposition of the Chakras

malinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Mantramaharnawa,
ch. 4, p. 42).
Explanation
The akasha-power and udana-wayu radiate
through the sixteen petaline processes of the
wishuddha chakra into the ida-pingala field.
The petaline power phenomenon consists of 16
radiations designated by the first sixteen matrikaunits from ang to ah. T h e colours of the petals
and the matrika-letters indicate the nature of the
radiations. T h e smoke colour of the petals
indicates the concentration of udana-wayu.
T h e original colours of the matrika-letters
form ang to ah are as follows: ang, ang, ung, ung,
lring, aing are white; ing, ung, ring, lring, ang
are yellow; ring, eng, ong, oung, ah are red.
These matrika-letters become red in the wishuddha. It indicates the concentration of pranawayu. When the matrika-letters become golden,
the concentration of wyana-wayu is indicated.
Through the processes of japa of the matrikaletters as mantra and thought-concentration
the petals are transformed into a circle of smoke
colour when all powers shall be internalized.
This mantra-form is the unit of concentration
at the wishuddha level.
Akasha-principle
T h e central force of the wishuddha chakra is the
akasha-principle which is seen first as a round
white form in concentration, and as the depth
of concentration increases, a triangle of the
colour of sky-blue appears inside it. T h e n a
moon-white circular form, termed the lunar
region, appears within the triangle, and finally
the akasha-bija Hang is seen in the lunar region.
The Ha aspect (which is the real bija aspect
of Hang) develops in concentration as Deity
Akasha (Ambara) white in colour, four-armed
and seated on a white elephant; he holds a
noose and a goad, and makes the gestures of
granting boons and dispelling fear. T h e power
imbedded in the bija aspect of Hang is fully
roused when it assumes a divine form. T h e basic
aspect of the power is the greatest development
of physical power arising from the purity of the
body; this is represented by the white elephant.

Associated with the physical power is the power
of control being exercised on the body and m i n d ;
it is represented by the goad (ahkusha). U n d e r
this condition, the disciple begins to be free
from bondage, which is represented by the noose
(pasha). T h e gesture of granting boons (waramudra) and that of dispelling fear (abhayamudra) are indicative of imparting spiritual
knowledge and removing all obstacles in the
spiritual path. T h e mantra-forms of hasti
(elephant) are shang, krang and prang; of
ankusha (goad) are jhang, tang, shang and
krong; and of pasha (noose) is ang.
At the next stage of concentration, Deity
Sadashiwa emerges from the bindu of Hang.
He is usually seen in the form Ardhanarishwara
(half male-form and half female-form). T h e
right half is Sadashiwa who is white in colour,
has five faces and three eyes in each face; he
has ten arms and holds a trident, a chisel,
a sword, the thunderbolt, fire, the great snake,
a bell, a goad and a noose and shows the gesture
of dispelling fear; he is clad in a tiger's skin
and is seated on the bull side of the bull-lion.
T h e white colour indicates that the
Sadashiwa's form is of pure sattwa (sentience),
expressing divine knowledge. His five faces
indicate the concentration-knowledge of the
five principles represented by the mantras hang,
Wang, Rang, Yang and Hang. In each face there
are three eyes. W h e n the two eyes do not see
the world, because of their being absorbed in
concentration, the third eye opens and expresses
samadhi-prajna (true knowledge arising from
superconcentration). T h e trident (shula) indicates the power of absorption of the primus
(prakriti) consisting of three primary attributes.
T h e chisel (tanka) indicates that living spiritual
strength which removes all unspirituality. T h e
sword (kripana) indicates the destruction of all
forms which apparently limit the infinite formless Being. T h e thunderbolt (wajra) is the
adamantine control of apana-function. T h e
fire (dahana) is the kundalini-fire of absorption
of all cosmic principles. T h e great serpent
(nagendra) is the roused Kundali-power. T h e
bell (ghanta) indicates the silent sound of
mantra. T h e clothed tiger's skin indicates that
all power has been controlled and spiritualized

233

T h e Chakra System

for the attainment of samadhi, or liberation.
Ardhanarishwara indicates the union of Shakti
(Power) with Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness)
as one and the same. T h e full realization of this
occurs at the level of Parama Shiwa (Supreme
Consciousness). Below the level of Sadashiwa,
Shiwa and Shakti remain separate, but oneness
is experienced in concentration. At the material
level, both the male and the female forms are
of Shakti, and consciousness-in-concentration is
the experience of Shiwa in relation to Shakti
as Kundalini. But these forms constitute different
entities. This causes a differentiation in the
pranic force in its life-creating aspect and
effects a bifurcation as red-energy (rajas) and
white-energy (shukra). T h e red-energy operates
fully and freely in the female form and develops
essential feminine qualities which maintain
femininity. On the other hand, the whiteenergy does the same thing in the male. God
Brahma as Ardhanarishwara made half part of
his body male and the other half female, and
they were separated for creative purposes.
Owing to the natural affinity of the two forms of
energy, m a n and woman are attracted to each
other; each tries to get in contact as much as
possible, but there is an inescapable powerlimitation when the energy-flow begins to ebb.
This only serves a part of our purpose. Unless
one is able to ingest the essence of the substanceenergy from each other during multi-levelled
contacts by exercising control and by applying
well-mastered motions, adequately and controllingly, the inner instability will continue and
the mental diversiform will not cease. T h e
Ardhanarishwara form of Sadashiwa is the form
in which the female process has been united
with the male process to manifest the full power
phenomena, leading to full union of Shakti
in Shiwa. T h e power aspect of Sadashiwa is
Gouri - the eternal Power. When in form, She
is of golden colour and three-eyed. T h e golden
colour indicates that the all-directing wyanaforce has been centralized in her to effect the
motionlessness of the prana-wayus.
When the Power of Sadashiwa is taken as a
separate form, she is Power Shakini As a distinct
power-form, Shakini is the presiding Deity of the
wishuddha chakra and its door-keeper. This
234

means that the worship and concentration of
Shakini are absolutely necessary to acquire
competence to be able to do spiritual practices
in the wishuddha chakra, and for the removal
of all obstacles.
Shakini is white like Sadashiwa. She has also
five faces and three eyes to each face like Sadashiwa. She holds in her four hands a bow, an
arrow, a noose and a goad. T h e bow (chapa)
and the arrow (shara) indicate the concentration
power developed to its deepest form. Her yellow
raiment indicates the full control of the pranawayus through the centralization of wyanawayu. She is on the lion part of the bull-lion.
It indicates that all power-manifestation is
under her full control. T h e mantra-forms of
chapa (bow) are ung, kang and ghang, and
that of shara (arrow) is phat ( - Warnabijakoshah).

7 Talu
T h e talu chakra is not included in the sixchakra group. It is the seventh chakra
numerically, counting from the muladhara.
It is not the chakra which is stated to be situated
in the talumula ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1,
p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; Dewibhagawata, 11.1.43). T h e word 'talumula' has been
technically used here to mean the lowest part
or the base of the palatine region - the neck.
T h e reputed commentator Nilakantha has also
interpreted the word as kantha = neck or throat
( - Commentary on Dewibhagawata, 11.1.43).
So, the chakra situated in the talumula is the
wishuddha.
T h e talu chakra has been mentioned in the
Waidika accounts. T h e term talu chakra has
been used in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.6. It is above the kantha chakra (wishuddha)
and below the bhru chakra (ajna) ( - ibid.,
3.5-7). Another Waidika term of the talu
chakra is the taluka chakra which has been
called the sixth chakra, the fifth being the
kantha chakra (wishuddha), and the seventh
being the bhru chakra (ajna) ( - Yogarajopa-

Exposition of the Chakras

nishad, Mantras 12, 13, 15). Here it is very clear
that the taluka (or talu) chakra is above the
wishuddha and below the ajna. T h e talu chakra
has been indirectly mentioned in the Darshanopanshad, 7.12.
In the Pouranika accounts the talu chakra
has been mentioned. In connection with the
pranayamika-dharana, prana is held in the fourpetalled lotus (muladhara), the six-petalled lotus
(swadhishthana), the navel region (manipura), the
twelve-petalled lotus in the heart region
(anahata), the sixteen-petalled lotus (wishuddha), in the palatine region (talu chakra),
and finally the brahmarandhra (brahmarandhra
or nirwana chakra) ( - Skandapurana, 1.2.55.
4 4 - 5 ) . Here the talu chakra has been indirectly
mentioned. It has been stated that concentration
should be done on the hrit lotus, in the anal
region (muladhara), navel region (manipura),
throat region (wishuddha), palatine region (talu
chakra), the eyebrow-space (ajna) in the forehead and dwadashanta (the brahmarandhra or
nirwana chakra) in the top part of the brain
(Shiwapurana, 5b. 29. 131-2). Here also the
talu chakra has been indirectly mentioned.
The talu (palate) region as a place for concentration has been mentioned in the lingapurana, 2.21.28. T h e talu region indicates the
talu chakra which is situated in the palatine
region.
The talu chakra has not been dealt with in the
general Tantrika texts. It is a special chakra
about which a disciple should learn directly
from his guru. However, the subject has been
briefly treated in certain Tantrika manuscripts.
The talu chakra has been mentioned in the
Amarasanggraha M S , Brahmasiddhantapaddhati
MS and Tattwayogabindu M S . It has been
stated in the Tattwayogabindu that the
wishuddha chakra is situated in the region of
the neck, then the sixth is the talu chakra,
and then the ajna chakra is in the eyebrow
region. It has been clearly indicated here that the
talu chakra is above the wishuddha and below
the ajna.
According to Jaganmohana Tarkalankara, a
great authority on the Tantras, there is a secret
chakra named lalana chakra which is above the
wishuddha, and is in the palatine region

( - Footnote 87, in connection with the
verse of the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104, dealing
with the chakras). He further says that thereafter (after leaving the wishuddha chakra)
K.undalnii will pass through the secret chakra
lalana and reach the ajna (ibid.). So the lalana
chakra and the talu chakra are the same.
Swami Sachchidananda Saraswau says that
there is the secret lalana chakra lying within the
sushumna which is in the vertebral column, in the
region behind the uvula; it is situated above
the wishuddha chakra and in the upper part of
the neck ( - Pujapradipa (by Swami Sachchidananda Saraswati), Part 2, ch. 4, p. 78).
He farther says that there is the very secret
lalana chakra, situated between the fifth (the
wishuddha) and the sixth (the ajna) chakra,
and is taught by the gurus successively . . . T h e
seat of the lalana chakra is in the palatine region,
above the wishuddha chakra ( - Gurupradipa
(by Swami Sachchidananda Saraswati), ch. 6,
p. 262). He also says that the generally unknown
and the secret lalana is situated above the
wishuddha and below the ajna chakra, that is,
in the upper part of the cervical spinal column,
near the uvular region, and inside the sushumna
( - Gitapradipa by Swami Sachchidananda
Saraswati, p. 121).
T h e lalana chakra has been mentioned here:
then (that is, after passing through the wishuddha
chakra) a yoga disciple shall make Kundalini
pass, through the secret chakra named lalana
by using the mantra 'Hangsah', to the ajna chakra
( - Atma-tattwa-darshana, edited by Jaganmohana Tarkalankara, and collected and
published by Nilamani Mukhopadhyaya), ch. 2,
p. 201).

Terminology
T h e following are the terms for this chakra.
1 Talu, mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanu/zad, 3.6; Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ;
Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S .
It has been indirectly mentioned in the
Darshanopanishad, 7.12; Skandapurana, 1.2.55.
44;
Shiwapurana,
5b.29.131; lingapurana,
2.21.28.

235

T h e Chakra System

2 Taluka, mentioned in the Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 13.
3 Lalana, kept secret by the gurus who
usually instruct their disciples directly.
Position
T h e talu chakra is situated in the palatine
region within the chitrini nadi. It is above the
wishuddha and below the ajna.
Description
T h e talu chakra has 12 petals ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.6; Jaganmohana Tarkalankara's Note No 87, in connection with his
translation of the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104;
Gurupradipa (by Swami Sachchidananda Saraswati), ch. 6, p. 262). According to some other
Tantras, the talu chakra has 64 petals ( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ; Amarasanggraha M S ;
Tattwayogabindu M S ; Gurupradipa (by Swami
Sachchidananda Saraswati), ch. 6, p. 262).
T h e colour of the petals, when the chakra
is twelve-petalled, is red ( - Jaganmohana's Note
8 7 ; Gurupradipa (by Swami Sachchidananda
Saraswati), ch. 6, p. 262). When the chakra has
sixty-four petals, the petals are shining white
in colour ( - Tattwayogabindu M S ) .
There is a circular region (karnika) of red
colour, termed ghantika (because of its intimate
relation to the uvular region) in the pericarp of the
lotus, and inside it is a region (bhumi) where lies
the moon's power (chandra-kala) which oozes
nectar (amrita) ( - Tattwayogabindu M S ) . This
region (bhumi) is called the region of nectar
(amritasthali) which shines like a million moons
(that is, shining white in colour), and full of
nectar; within it lies the nectar-oozing moon's
power ( - Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h e region
of nectar is the reservoir of nectar (amritadhara)
( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) . This is why
it has been stated that the talu chakra is the
centre where the nectar-stream flows ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.6).
In the exterior aspect of the talu chakra is an
interstice which leads to the uvular 'point'
(ghantika-linga wiwara), technically called the
236

'tenth' ( - Soubhagyalaksamyupanishad, 3.6).
This 'point' in the uvular region is also called
the ghantika-lingamula-randhra (uvular 'point')
which leads to the reservoir of nectar in the
chakra ( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati MS).
There are twelve specific qualities (writtis)
on the twelve petals of the talu chakra (when it
is considered as a twelve-petalled lotus), arranged
from the right to the left in the following order:
(1) respect, (2) contentment, (3) offence, (4)
self-control, (5) pride, (6) affection, (7) sorrow,
(8) depression, (9) purity, (10) dissatisfaction,
(11) honour, (12) anxiety ( - Jaganmohana's
footnote, No. 87 in his translation of the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104).

Explanation
T h e talu chakra is a very important centre for
concentration. There are two main forms of
concentration which are practised here: concentration on the moon-power (chandra-kala),
and the void-concentration (shunya-dhyana).
1 Moon-concentration. Concentrate on the
circular nectar-region of shining white colour
and on the moon-power lying inside it, from
which nectar (white in colour) is oozing constantly. There are two important practices in
connection with this form of concentration:
irradiation and tenth-point-process. T h e whole
body should be irradiated with nectar in concentration. T h e tenth-point-process (dashamadwara-marga - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 14)
is the process of tongue-lock consisting of the
pressing with the elongated and retroverted
tongue the tenth 'point' in the uvular region.
During this concentration, it is desirable to
execute the tongue-lock which enhances its
value. This mode of concentration develops the
power to make concentration deeper, prevents
mental diversification, increases energy and
causes well-being. It is always desirable that a
disciple should be in the talu chakra for some
time when making concentration on the chakras.
Whenever there is some lack of power of concentration, concentration should be made here.
2 Void-concentration. T h e void-concentration is a difficult form of concentration in which

Exposition of the Chakras

the absorptive concentration power is developed
to transform the sense-consciousness into superconsciousness. This process is for advanced
disciples and should be learned from a guru.

8 Ajna
T h e ajna chakra is the sixth of the six-chakra
group, but, numerically, it is the eighth chakra.
It is situated within the chitrini nadi.
Terminology
T h e following are the Tantrika terms of the
ajna chakra.
1 ajna, mentioned in the Todalatantra, ch. 7,
p. 14; ch. 9, p. 17; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 13,
p. 16; Kularwawa, ch. 4, pp. 19, 22; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 28; Mantramahodadhi, 4.24;
Kubjikatantra, 6.308; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
5.27; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3; ch. 5,
pp. 4,5; ch. 8, p. 8; ch. 14, p. 12; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra,
ch. 1, p. 10; Mundamalatantra, ch. 6, p. 9;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.14, 30,34; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 16.22,23,27; 15.37,38; 18.2; 19.25,
36; 20.6,40,42; 21.27; 22.14; 25.56; 27.68;
Tantrarajatantra, 21.83; Purashcharyarnawa,
ch. 2, p. 9 1 ; ch. 6, pp. 490,492; Shiwasanghita,
5.131,148,150; Goutamiyatantra, 34.52; J n a n a r nawa, quoted in Yogakalpalatika M S ; Yogaswarodaya and Mridantanitra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S .
2 Ajnapatra (the ajna with petals = ajna
lotus), mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5.
3 Ajna-pura (ajna-centre), mentioned in the
Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 14, p. 12.
4 Ajna-puri (ajna-centre), mentioned in the
Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2, ch. 10, p. 9.
5 Ajnambuja (ajna-lotus), mentioned in the
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 15.66; Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 32.
6 Ajna-pankaja (-lotus), mentioned in the
Shiwasanghita, 5.141, 147.
7 Jnana-padma (knowledge-bestowing lotus .

mentioned in the Nirwanatantra, ch. 9, p. 11.
8 Dwidala (the two-petalled), mentioned in
the Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80; Shaktanandatararigin/,
4.29; 7.14; 9.16; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 16.15;
15.64; 22.11; 60.30; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5,
p. 387; Shadamnayatantra, 4.59, 60, 169; 5.268;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39.
9 Dwidalambuja (the two-petalled lotus),
mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2, 16.4,6.
10 Dwidala-kamala (the two-petalled lotus),
mentioned in the Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S .
11 Dwipatra (the two-petalled), mentioned in
the Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8.
12 Bhrusaroruha (the lotus in the eyebrow
region), mentioned in the Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.135.
13 Triweni-kamala (the lotus where the three
nadis have joined together), mentioned in the
Mahamuktitantra, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S .
14 Netra-padma (the two-petalled lotus),
mentioned
in
the
Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5.
15 Netra-patra (the two-petalled), mentioned
in the Tararahasya, c h . 4 , p. 23.
16 Bhrumanadala (the eyebrow-chakra), mentioned in the Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 21.
17 Bhru-madhya (the space between the eyebrows, that is, the lotus situated in the eyebrow
space), mentioned in the Mantramahodadhi,
4.28.
18 Bhru-madhyaga-padma (the lotus situated
in the space between the eyebrows), mentioned
in the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.113.
19 Bhru-madhya-chakra (the chakra situated
in the space between the eyebrows), mentioned
in the Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S .
20 Bhru-mula (the eyebrow-root, that is, the
lotus in the eyebrow region), mentioned in the
Shadamnayatantra, 4.145.
21 Shiwa-padma (-lotus), mentioned in the
Shadamnayatantra, 4.144.
Position
T h e ajna chakra is situated in the space between
the eyebrows ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 8, p. 39;
237

T h e Chakra System

Mantramahodadhi, 4.25; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.27; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10; Koulawahtantra,
ch. 22, p. 80; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.14,29;
7.14; 9.16; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 16.4,27;
22.11; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 5, p. 387; ch. 6,
p. 490; Shiwasanghita, 5.131; Yogaswarodaya
and Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha
M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ) . It has also been
stated that the ajna is in the l a l a t a (the forehead)
( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 23; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8; Koulawahtantra, ch. 3, p. 8).
Here, the word lalata, which usually means the
forehead, has been used technically. Here, it
indicates the lowest part of the forehead which is
connected with the eyebrow-region. T h e word
l a l a t a has also been used in the Dewibhagawata,
11.1.43. T h e great commentator Nilakantha
interprets l a l a t a as the eyebrow space (bhrumadhya) here. It is to be noted that both
Wishwasaratantra and Koulawalitantra have
used lalata ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 8;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8) as well as bhrumadhya (the eyebrow-space) ( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 80) to indicate the position of the ajna.
This means that lalata here is the eyebrowspace, not the actual forehead as has been
interpreted by Nilakantha.
According to the Waidika accounts the ajna
is situated in the eyebrow-space ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 5; Yogashikhopanishnad,
1.175; 5.11; Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 15).
As the ajna is situated in the space between the
eyebrows, so it has the Waidika terms bhruchakra
( - Soubhagyalakramyupanishad,
3.7;
Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 15) and bhru-madhya
(the eyebrow-space) ( - Yogakunadalyupanishad,
1.69). M a n y Tantrika terms of the ajna are
due to its location in the eyebrow-region
(see terms Nos 16-21 above). In the Pouranika
accounts, the position of the ajna is the eyebrowspace
( - Shiwapurana, 5b.29.134;
Kalikapurana, 55.30).
So the position of the ajna chakra is in the
eyebrow-space. This does not mean that it is
situated directly there. It means that the ajna is
inside the sushumna. at the point where it passes
through a part of the brain, lying at the level
238

of the midpoint of the space between the eyebrows.

Description
Shatchakranirupana says: the lotus termed ajna
which is like the moon and becomes manifested
by the concentration-light has two petals of an
intense white colour on which are the matrikaletters hang and kshang; inside it (that is, inside
the pericarp of the lotus) is (Power) Hakini
who is white like the moon and has six faces and
holds the widya (a book), kapala (a skull),
damaru (a drum) and japawati (a rudraksharosary) and shows mudras (the gestures of
granting boons and of dispelling fear); her whole
consciousness is Supreme Consciousness ( - Verse
32). (See Plate 17.)
Kalicharana interprets 'like the moon' to
mean moon-like white colour. He adds that it
may also mean that as the moon has nectarous
cool rays, so the ajna chakra is cool-rayed.
According to the commentator Ramawallabha,
it is like the colour of the moon, and Bhuwanamohana has clearly stated that it is white in
colour. Wishwanatha explains that it causes
moisture (from nectar) like the moon. However,
'like the moon' cannot be interpreted only by
white like the moon. To indicate the whiteness
of the chakra the word 'sushubhra' (very white)
has been used in the text. It has been stated that
in the hollow of the ajna chakra is an excellent
fluid (that is, the nectar) ( - Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 18.2). So there is nectar in the ajna as
there is in the 'moon'.
T h e ajna has two petals ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Nirwanatantra ch. 9, p. 11;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.27; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2,
p. 2; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
ch. 4, p. 4; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, pp. 8, 10;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; ch. 22, p. 80;
Sharadatilakatantra, 5.135; Shaktanandatarangini, 4. 14; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 15. 6 5 ; 16.4,6,
15; 22.11; 60.30; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6,
p. 490; Shadamnayatantra, 4.144; 5.268; Shiwasanghita, 5.131; Brahmasiddhantapaddhati MS;
Jnanarnawa and Mahamuktitantra, quoted in

Exposition of the Chakras

Yogakalpalatika M S ; Yogaswarodaya, quoted
in Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ;
also, Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 5; Yogashikhopanishad, 1.175; 5.11; Dewibhagawata,
7.35.45; 11.1.43; Shiwapurana, 5b. 29.135);
and the colour of the petals is white ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.27; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2;
Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.11; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6,
p. 490; Shiwasanghita, 5.131; Mayatantra,
quoted by Wishwanatha), or lightning-like
colour ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80;
Jnanamawa, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika
M S ; also, Shiwapurana, 5b. 29.135). On its
two petals are the two matrika-letters hang
and kshang ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.27; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 1, p. 10;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 8; Sharadatilakatantra 5.135; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.14; 7.14;
Mahanirwanatantra, 5.113; Purashcharyarnawa,
ch. 5, p. 387; ch. 6, p. 490; Shadamnayatantra,
5.268; Shiwasanghita, 5.131; Jnanarnawa, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S ; Mridanitantra,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ; also, Dewibhagawata, 7.35.45; 11.1.43; Shiwapurana, 5b.
29.135), and the colour of the letters is white
( - Jnanarnawa, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika
M S ; Dakshinamurti, quoted by Wishwanatha),
golden ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2),
variegated ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2), or shining ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 80). T h e shining colour may mean bright
white.
It has also been stated that the matrika-letters
on the petals of the ajna are \ang (the second
la which is pronounced as da) and kshang,
and shine like ten million moons (that is, shining
white) ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.13). According to Jaganmohana ( - Note 87 on the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104) the matrika-letters hang
and kshang are red in colour. He further says that
lang (= dang) is hidden in the pericarp ( - ibid.).
Sachchidananda says the same ( - Gurupradipa
(by Swami Sachchidananda Saraswati), ch. 6,
p. 263).
It has been stated that the borders of the

three nadis (that is, the ida, pingala and
sushumna.) are situated in the space between the
eyebrows, termed the tripatha-sthana (the j u n c tion of the three power-lines) which is sixcornered and (can be magnified) to fourfingers' breadth, and red in colour; this is what
is called the ajna chakra by the yogis ( - Kalikapurana, 55.30). It means that in the ajna
chakra, situated in the eyebrow space, are the
ends of the ida and pingala which form a junction
in combination with the sushumna, and this
junction is called the tripatha-sthana, which is
in the form of a six-cornered region and red in
colour. T h e Waidika term is the trikuta
( - Brahmawidyopanishad, Mantra 73) where the
ida, pingala and sushumna have been united,
that is, in ajna. So, the ajna has a red, sixcornered region in its pericarp. The ajna has also
been called the trirasra (the triangle) ( - Lingapurana,
1.75.39),
because it contains the
triangular process in its pericarp.
T h e ajna chakra has been described as having
within it the beautiful kama chakra; inside the
kama chakra is the very subtle prashna chakra,
and inside that the phala chakra ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 2 0 . 6 - 7 ) . These special chakras
are for the practice of special concentration.
Hakini
Power Hakini is situated in the pericarp of the
ajna ( - Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14; Karikalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 19;
Mantramahodadhi,
4.24;
Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.27; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80;
Shadamnayatantra, 5.268; Shiwasanghita, 5.131;
Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) .
T h e various concentration-forms of Hakini are as
follows.
1 Hakini is moon-white in colour, six-faced
and six-armed; she holds a book, a skull, a
drum, and a rudraksha-rosary, and makes the
gestures of granting boons and of dispelling fear
( - Shatchakranirapana, Verse 32).
2 Hakini is white in colour; she has six faces
of red colour, each with three eyes; she holds in
her hands the d r u m , the rudraksha-rosary, the
skull and the book, and makes the gestures of
granting boons and dispelling fear; and she is
seated on a white lotus ( - A verse quoted by
239

T h e Chakra System

Kalicharana in his commentary on Verse 32).
(See Plate 18.)
3 T h e colour of Hakini is a mixture of whiteblack-red; she is two-armed and her face is moonlike beautiful with rolling eyes, like a moving
black bee; she shines with the vermilion-mark
on her forehead and her eyes are beautifully
painted with collyrium; she has curled hair and
is clad in red raiment and her upper garment is
white ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 5, p. 23).
4 Hakini is like the dark-blue cloud (that is,
her colour is dark-blue) and has one, two, three,
four, five or six faces (according to the type of
concentration) which glitter like stars; she
holds the skull, the spear, and the shield,
and she makes the gesture of dispelling fear
( - Kularnawa, ch. 10, p. 53).
5 Hakini is white in colour; she has three
eyes and holds the rudraksha-rosary, the drum,
the skull, the book and the bow, and shows the
m u d r a (either the gesture of granting boons or
that of dispelling fear) ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80).
6 Hakini is red in colour; she has six faces
and three eyes to each face; she holds a drum,
a rudraksha-rosary, a skull and a book and shows
mudras (that is, the gestures of granting boons
and of dispelling fear) ( - Jamala, quoted in
the Yogakalpalatika M S ) .
7 Hakini is pure white (or) like a blue lotus
(that is, dark-blue in colour), and has six faces
( - Mridanitantra, quoted
in
the
Amarasanggraha M S ) .
Itara-linga
Shatchakranirupana says: it is well known that
the seat of the subtle (sukshmarupa) manas
(sense-mind) is at an intermediate point (antarala) of this lotus (ajna); inside the pericarp of
this (ajna) is a triangle (yoni) which is the seat
(pada) of Itara-Shiwa (Shiwa endowed with
the power of full control over desires) who is
revealed in his linga-form (absorptive concentration-form) (lingachihnaprakasha); here is also
the seat (pada) (which is triangular in shape)
of the Supreme Power as kundalini (paramakula), like the streaks of lightning flashes,
causing the rousing of the brahma nadi (brahmasutra-prabodha), and manifesting as the first
240

bija (primary source) of the Wedas (that is,
the first mantra Ong); a practitioner, being
calm mentally, should do thought-concentration
according to the order (prescribed by the guru)
( - V e r s e 33).
T h e 'subtle manas' indicates that the manas
has a specific centre of operation which is
beyond the centres of the operation of the senses
which are situated in the lower five chakras.
T h e term 'antarala' (an intermediate point)
indicates that there is a subcentre within the
ajna where the seat of the manas is.
Kalicharana has interpreted lingachihnaprakasha' to mean shining in the linga-form. It
means that Itara-Shiwa is in the linga-form.
But the linga-form should never be translated
here as phallic form. T h e linga is the central
point within the triangle.
About the order, Kalicharana says that the
order as given in the text should not be taken,
but the arrangements of words according to
their import is to be adopted. He gives the
following order: First, Power Hakini in the
pericarp; next, Itara-linga within the triangle
which is above Hakini; then, above him (Itaralinga), is the pranawa (Ong) in the triangle;
and lastly, manas which is above pranawa.
This is the right order of thought-concentration.
T h e meaning of brahma-sutra, as given by
Kalicharana, is chitrini nadi. But Ramawallabha, Wishwanatha, Bhuwanamohana and
Shankara give its meaning as brahma nadi.
T h e brahma-sutra is the brahma nadi.
T h e presence of Itara-linga in the ajna has
been mentioned in the other Tantras. It has
been stated that Itara-linga is situated in the
ajna ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2)
inside the triangle lying in its pericarp ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5), and the triangle
is called yoni, and Itara-linga is like the rising
sun (that is, red in colour) ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 80). T h e colour of Itara-linga has also
been stated as golden ( - Shaktanandatarahgini,
4.14), or like the moon (shining white) ( - Yoginihridaya, quoted by Wishwanatha).
Pranawa
More has been said about pranawa in the text.
Within that (the triangle before mentioned -

Exposition of the Chakras

Kahcharana), in this chakra (the ajna) is
the seat of splendorous (pradipabhajyotis), pure
(shuddha), aroused (buddha) inner consciousness (antaratman) (that is, the divine conscious
power kundalini) who is manifest (from her
subtle form) through the (first) sounds (warna)
which form the pranawa; above it (the bija
aspect of the pranawa, that is, O letter) is the
half moon (called nada) and above that (half
moon) is the ma letter in the bindu form (thus,
O with nada-bindu becomes Ong); above this
(that is, Ong) is the nada (which is not the nada
of Ong) which is shining white in colour ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 35).
About the pranawa, it has been stated that in
this chakra (ajna) there is the bija in aksharaform (akshara-bija) (that is, the first bija-mantra
Ong) which is moon-white; it is splendorous
( - Shiwasanghita, 5.132-3). In this chakra,
there is splendorous consciousness like light on
which concentration should be done ( - Soubhagyalaksamyupanishad, 3.7). This is the lustre
of kundalini. Here (in ajna) is the circular light
for concentration ( - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra
15). T h e circular light indicates the luminous
coils of Kundalini.

Explanation
The name 'ajna' for this chakra is due to the fact,
when stated literally, that the transference of
Guru's ajna (order) occurs in this chakra. But
it has deeper meaning. ajna is the power in
'Ou'-form, which means the kundali'-power.
Guru is the first divine form of the formless
Supreme Being, centered in the guru chakra.
From Guru Kundali-power radiates as Oung
to the ajna chakra to rouse Ong residing in the
triangle there when consciousness begins to
be of Kundalini. In the ajna chakra, kundalini
is in the form of Ong, that is, in the pashyantiform. When the aroused kundalini is conducted
from the muladhara to the ajna, Ong is absorbed
into kundalini and consciousness becomes of
kundalini. In the ajna there is another possibility
of making consciousness of kundalini. It is the
rousing and transforming of Ong by the radiated
Oung-power from Guru into kundalini when

consciousness becomes of Kundalini.
T h e Petals
T h e ajna has two petals of shining white colour.
T h e two petals are the two radiations of power,
one passing downwards through the lower five
chakras, and the other passing upwards through
the upper chakras. T h e radiations are white,
sentient and powerful. T h e two radiations are
the hang and kshang radiations. In hang and
kshang radiations are five wayus, five divine
powers and Kundali-power. T h e original colour
of hang is shining red, and of kshang is moonwhite. In the ajna, hang becomes moon-white,
and kshang retains its original colour. T h e shining
white colour indicates the greater concentration
of udana-wayu. T h e udana-wayu arouses the
sense and sentient principles in the five lower
chakras and sense-consciousness, intelligence and
attention in the upper three chakras. W h e n
hang and kshang are united in concentration,
the lower radiation stops and the power becomes
united with the upper radiation. Now, the forceful upper radiation is not received in the centres
of sense-consciousness and intellection but passes
directly to the centre of dhi which effects samadhi.
Concentration on Hakini
Concentration on Power Hakini is the basic
concentration of the ajna chakra. T h e practitioner gets all the necessary powers and qualities
to be able to work in the ajna through the
concentration on Hakini.
T h e six faces of Hakini indicate the five
principles centered in the five lower chakras
and the manas in the ajna system. T h e third
eye in the centre is the concentration-light, and
the other eyes indicate the perceptual knowledge
and thoughts. She is said to have one, two,
three, four, five or six faces. O n e face indicates
concentration in which I-ness has been dissolved; two faces indicate concentration in
which I-ness still remains; three faces - the
three primary attributes; four faces - gross sensory knowledge, supersensory knowledge, presensory knowledge and nonsensory knowledge;
five faces - the knowledge of five principles in the
lower five chakras; and six faces - perceptual
knowledge, thoughts, attention, and concentra241

T h e Chakra System
tion-knowledge of three forms - dharana, dhyana
and samadhi. It indicates kundalini-knowledge
when her faces are red in colour.
T h e white colour of her body indicates her
highly rarefied form of sattwa (sentience). T h e
dark-blue colour of her body indicates the
sattwa-form which is ready to proceed to a
formless state. T h e red colour of her body
indicates the fully aroused kundalini in form.
It indicates the harmonious actions of the three
primary attributes when her body colour is a
mixture of white, red and black.
Hakini holds in her hands widya (book),
kapala (skull), damaru (drum) and japawati
(rudraksha-rosary), and shows the wara (granting
boons) and abhaya (dispelling fear) mudras
(by special positions of the hands). T h e widya
is the spiritual knowledge of samadhi transformed into communicable word-forms represented in a book. T h e kapala indicates the
existence of consciousness without the material
instrumentation; or the functioning of consciousness when it is disjoined from the body.
This consciousness is spiritual consciousness
and develops from deep concentration. Damaru
indicates the silent sounds of mantras developed
from the waikhari form. T h e japawati indicates
the spiritual practice of awakening the mantra.
T h e wara is the imparting of spiritual knowledge
and the abhaya is the removal of all obstacles
to concentration.
T h e bija-mantra of Hakini is hang. T h e
mantra-forms of widya are ang, ing, ung, ring,
gang and chang; of kapala - kang, lring; of
damaru - khang;
of aksha (rudrakysha) - ung,
bring; of wara - thang, dang, shang.

242

Concentration on Itara-linga
T h e linga is the specific form of formless Shiwa
(Supreme Consciousness) which is held in
consciousness in concentration. It is not a detailed
form but a basic form most suitable for the
practice of concentration. It is a tapering form
on which concentration starts from its thick
starting end, and as concentration goes deeper,
it becomes slender and smaller and, finally, it
is a point when concentration is still deeper.
This point is also reached in concentration
when it is applied on shalagrama (sacred stone)
of Wishnu (Supreme Being). There are many
forms of shalagrama of which the round or the
oval are the most important for concentration.
In concentration on the shalagrama, the reduction of form is from the circumference to its
central point.
T h e linga is subtle, that is, it is a form in
consciousness created in the process of concentration in which are involved three factors:
the holding-power of concentration, its application on an appropriate form in an appropriate
bright colour, and the absorptive power which
develops step by step to transform the linelinga into a point-linga. These three factors associated with concentration are represented by
the three power-lines constituting the triangle
in which the linga is formed. T h e reduction of
the linga to a point is the process of absorptive
concentration. Those who are unable to create
a clear conscious form of the linga in concentration, are advised to practise with an appropriate
gross form to establish thought-form.

C H A P T E R 11

Exposition of the Chakras
(continued)

The chakra system can be grouped into three
main forms: first, the six-chakra system, consisting of the six main chakras - muladhara,
swadhishthana, manipura, anahata, wishuddha
and ajna, with two supplementary chakras,
hrit and talu, to which is added the sahasrara.
Secondly, the ajna system which consists of the
ajna, manas, indu, nirwana and sahasrara.
The guru chakra, sahasrara, Supreme Bindu,
Supreme Nada, Shakti principle, Shiwa principle
and Parama Shiwa constitute the third, the
sahasrara system.

Ajna System
The ajna proper (Plate 19) consists of the following factors, which are arranged in this order:
first, Power Hakini in the pericarp of the ajna;
second, above Hakini, is Itara-linga, situated
within a triangle; and third, above Itara-linga,
is the pranawa in a triangle (this triangle is above
the triangle where lies Itara-linga). T h e pranawa
is constituted of the bija ' O ' , joined with nada
and bindu, that is Ong.
Above this is nada ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 35). 'Above this' means above the pranawa,
that is, above the bindu of Ong. In other words,
the second nada is not to be confused with the
nada of Ong. This second nada is above the
bindu of Ong, and, consequently, above the
triangle in which is situated the pranawa.
At an intermediate point or position of the

ajna is the subtle manas ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 33). This point or position is between the
bindu of Ong and the second nada which is above
the pranawa. So the order is this: Ong, manas
(which is above Ong); and nada (second).
T h e qualifying word 'subtle' has been used here
in a technical sense. T h e manas is not itself a
sense like smell-sense or sight-sense, but plays an
important role in making the senses operative.
It is more rarefied and powerful than the senses.
T h e senses are under its control. To signify its
special characteristics, it has been qualified by
the word subtle. T h e sense-principles are connected with the lower five chakras. T h e manas
is situated above them in the ajna. T h e senseoperation requires the instrumentation of the
body, but manas may operate independently
of the body, so it is subtle. This manas can be
termed sense-mind, because of its connection
with the senses. T h e manas receives sensory
radiations and then conducts them to the second
nada.
It has been stated that manas is always shining
in the two-petalled lotus (ajna) ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5). This manas is sensemind. Manas is intimately related to ahang
(I-ness) (which includes chitta-consciousness),
buddhi (intellective mind) and prakriti (mentimatter principle) ( - ibid., ch. 2, p. 5). Here the
whole mind has been referred to, the whole
of which manas is a part. Farther, the seat of
manas is always in the ajna chakra ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 8, p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80; Shaktanandatarangini,
4.16, 30; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2).
243

T h e Chakra System

It has been stated that the manas tattwa (principle) is above the void (shunya) principle
which is situated in the throat region (that is,
the wishuddha chakra) ( - Bhutashuddhitantra,
ch. 4, p. 4). T h e manas principle is the whole
mind termed antahmanas or antahkarana. It is
situated above the wishuddha chakra, that is,
in the ajna system. M i n d in a functioning state
manifests its different aspects. T h e general
characteristics of mind a r e : thinking power
(wibhutwa) and nonspatiality (wyapakatwa)
( - ibid., ch. 4, p. 4). Mind has the power to
reach everywhere; it is the source of all knowledge; here lies the 'I-ness' which sees everything
( - ibid., ch. 4, p. 4). It is clear that the seat of
mind is in the ajna system, and its aspect as
sense-mind is in ajna proper. O t h e r aspects of
mind are above it.
Now, what is the second nada (the nada above
Ong), mentioned in the Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 35? This nada has been mentioned in the
Sharadatilakatantra, 5.136; Shadamnayatantra,
5.268; Shiwasanghita, 5.149; Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; and Shrikrama, quoted in Yogakalpalatika M S . It has been stated that manas
mandala (chakra), situated in the space between
the eyebrows (that is, ajna), is in the form of
nada ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.178; 5.15). From
this it is clear that the second nada is the manas
chakra. It has also been termed surya mandala
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5). It has
been stated that dwipashikhakara jnananetra
(knowledge-light) is in the ajna ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.7). T h e jnananetra is indicative of manas chakra. T h e manas chakra
is situated above sense-mind (which we may
term manas 2).
It has been stated that here (that is, the
position above the manas mandala) is the
shambhawa sthana (the position belonging to
Shiwa, that is, shambhawa chakra) ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 5.16). T h e shambhawa chakra
is also termed shitangshu mandala. T h e
shitangshu mandala (chakra) is above the space
between the eyebrows (that is, ajna) and it is
called the anahata chakra having 16 petals
( - Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.69). We have already seen that there is a chakra named anahata
as the fourth chakra below the wishuddha
244

chakra, belonging to the six-chakra group.
Here, the shitangshu chakra has a special
Waidika name - anahata which is unrelated to
the anahata of the six-chakras group. This
chakra may be termed anahata 2. T h e shitangshu
has also been called indu chakra (ibid., 1.71).
We can say it is the moon chakra. T h e words
shitangshu and indu are synonyms, and mean
the moon.
Another Tantrika term for the indu chakra
is chandra (moon) mandala (chakra). It has been
stated that beyond the nada (nadanta, that is,
above the manas chakra) is chandra mandala
where lies Shiwa (Wrishabhadhwaja) with his
Power (Shakti) ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 8 1 ; also in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Nirwanatantra, ch. 9, p. 11). T h e indu
chakra has also been indicated by the term
nadanta (that is, the chakra beyond the nada manas chakra) ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81;
Sharadatilakatantra, 5.136; Shrikrama, quoted
in the Yogakalpalatika M S ) .
It has been stated that there are three pithas
(literally seats, but technically chakras) named
bindu, nada and shakti as the lotuses in the
forehead ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.149). Here, the
nada lotus is the manas chakra, and the shakti
lotus seems to be the indu chakra. The Pouranika
term 'shakti' ( - Shiwapurana, 3.3.28) which is
above the ajna also appears to stand for the
indu chakra. T h e bindu pitha (chakra) ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.149) which is situated below the
nada lotus appears to be the seat of manas 2
(sense-mind). T h e bindu pitha appears to be
above but in close relation to the bindu of Ong
in the ajna. T h e indu chakra has also been
termed kailasa chakra ( - Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 28; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.14;
Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.69; Goutarmiyatantra,
34.53; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha
M S ; Dewibhagawata, 7.35.46).
Above the indu chakra is the nirwana chakra
( - Soubhagyalakshamyupanishad, 3.8; Brahmasiddhantapaddhati MS). T h e nirwana chakra
is also called parabrahma chakra ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8); brahmarandhra chakra
( - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 16; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 22;
Shiwapurana, 3.3.68; Agnipurana, 74, 13;

Exposition of the Chakras
Skandapurana, 1.2.55.45); bodhini chakra
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 28; Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.14; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60.
30; Goutamiyatantra, 34.53); rodhini chakra
( - Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha
MS; Dewibhagawata, 7.35.46); bodhana chakra
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.69); chitkala-shakti
( - Shadamnayatantra, 5.269); shatapatra
(hundred-petalled) chakra ( - Tattwayogabindu
MS); kala chakra ( - ibid.) dwadashanta chakra
( - Shiwapurana, 2.11.40; 5b.29.132; Garudapurana, Part 1, 23.48); shanta ( - Shiwapurana,
3.3.28); shantipada (shanti padma or chakra)
( - Shiwapurana, 5a.7.4); dwadashantapada
(dwadashanta padma or chakra) ( - Agnipurana,
74.10).
The nirwana is the last chakra in the chitrini
nadi. The chitrini is inside the wajra and wajra
inside the sushumna. This means that the
sushumna is the outermost nadi containing within
it the wajra as the second internal nadi, and
within the wajra is the chitrini nadi as the third
internal nadi. All the chakras are in the chitrini.
Inside the chitrini lies the brahma nadi. The
brahma nadi is also called brahmarandhra.
It is extremely subtle and usually remains only
potentially. It becomes actual when kundalini
passes through it.
The sushumna arises from the central aspect
of the kanda-mula which is situated just below the
muladhara. It then goes upward centrally within
the vertebral column and the head and ends at
the terminal part of what is called brahmarandhra. The wajra arises from the kandamula at the same starting point as that of the
sushumna, and, passing through it, ends where
the brahmarandhra and the sushumna. terminate.
The chitrini extends from the starting point of the
wajra, goes upward within the wajra and ends
where the sushumna and wajra terminate, that
is, the end point of the brahmarandhra. The
innermost brahma nadi starts from the orifice
of the Swayambhu-linga in the muladhara and
extends through the chitrini and ends where
the sushumna, wajra and chitrini terminate.
The starting points of the sushumna, wajra
and the chitrini are from the kanda-mula and
that of the brahma nadi is from the Swayambhulinga in the muladhara. This is clear. But the

terminal points of these nadis need more clarification. Confusion arises with the term brahmarandhra. The brahmarandhra is also intimately
related to the brahma nadi. The brahmarandhra appears to have two aspects: brahmarandhra as brahma nadi and as the brahmarandhra region in the head.
kundalini being aroused and uncoiled passes
through the hollow into the brahma nadi
( - Yogakunaalyupanishad, 1.46). This indicates
the presence of the brahma nadi in the muladhara. The roused kundalini extends herself
into the sushumna ( - ibid., 1.66) and becomes
connected with the brahmarandhra ( - ibid.,
1.83). This means that the roused kundalini
in the muladhara chakra enters the brahma nadi
or brahmarandhra through the sushumna. So,
the brahma nadi and brahmarandhra are the
same and are in the muladhara, which is approached by kundalini through the sushumna. The
brahma nadi or the brahmarandhra is within
the sushumna. So it has been stated that the
brahma nadi is seen inside the sushumna when
'cut' into halves ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 5.17),
and the sushumna is in the form of brahma,
that is, it possesses the brahma nadi within
( - ibid., 6.5). It has been more clearly stated
that there is a subtle vacuity inside the sushumna,
and it is called brahma nadi ( - ibid., 6.9).
Also, kundali has kept closed the brahmarandhra
lying within the sushumna ( - Warahopanishad,
5.23); kundalini lies (in the muladhara) by
enclosing the brahmarandhra ( - Shandilyopanishad, 1.4.8). All these are clear indications
that brahma nadi or brahmarandhra is in the
muladhara and inside the sushumna.
The brahma nadi is inside the chitrini ( - Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 15; Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2;
ch. 4, p. 22; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 80;
Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.8; Rudrayamala, Part
2, 29.41). The brahmarandhra is also inside the
chitrini ( - Shiwasanghita, 2.18; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 8; Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Sharadatilakatantra, 25.32).
From this it appears that the brahma nadi and
brahmarandhra are the same. But according to
some authorities the brahmarandhra is within
the brahma nadi ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 80; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.8). This means
245

T h e Chakra System

that the central aspect of the brahma nadi the real vacuity - is the brahmarandhra, the
immediate external aspect of which is brahma
nadi; and all these are situated inside the chitrini.
Practically, both are the same.
T h e chitrini is inside the wajra and the wajra is
inside the sushumna ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 22;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 0 ; Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 2 5 . 5 1 - 5 2 ; Tantrarajatantra, 27.44).
T h e brahma nadi is called brahma-marga
(-path), as Kundalini passes through it to reach
the sahasrara ( - Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 16).
T h e brahma nadi leads to spiritual success;
it is stimulated by Kundalini, the mother of yoga
who passes through it when going to be united
with Shiwa (in the sahasrara) ( - Shadamnayatantra, 4.177). All cosmic principles are absorbed
by Kundalini when passing through the brahma
nadi, so it is said that it devours all principles
( - Yogashikhopanishad, 1.125). Kundali-power
is established in the great path brahmarandhra
(ibid., 6.47).
About the course of the sushumna, it has been
stated that it passes from the kanda-mula (or
muladhara) to the brahmarandhra ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
ch. 3, p. 8; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 6, p. 5;
Shaktanandatararigini, 4.8; Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.2.6; Dewibhagawata, 11.8. 1-2).
T h e brahmarandhra mentioned here is not the
brahma nadi but a region where the sushumna
ends. It can also be the brahmarandhra chakra.
It is situated in the head. It is clear from the
statement that the sushumna extends to the head,
and it is called the brahmarandhra ( - Shanadilyopanishad, 1.4.10). T h e brahmarandhra region
or chakra lies in the topmost part of the head
where the sushumna ends. About the origin and
the end of the sushumna, it has been stated that it
arises from the central part of the kanda a n d
extends to the head ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 80). T h e brahmarandhra is situated in the
head ( - Skandapurana, 1.2.55.45; 3.1.13.39).
T h e brahmarandhra as the nadi as well as
the region (or chakra) has been clearly stated
h e r e : the sushumna extends to the brahmarandhra (here it is the region or chakra); the
extremely subtle brahmarandhra (here it is the
nadi) is inside the chitrini ( - Tripurasara246

samuchchaya, ch. 3, p. 8). There are other expressions which indicate that the brahmarandhra is a region or chakra, viz. - from
muladhara to brahmarandhra ( - Nilatantra, ch.
5, p. 9 ) ; in a nyasa process (a mantra process),
the order is ajna, forehead (indu chakra),
brahmarandhra ( - Kularnawa, ch. 4, pp.
1 9 - 2 0 ) ; concentration on the pranawa which
extends from the muladhara to the brahmarandhra should be made ( - Shiwapurana, 3.3.
6 8 ) ; the nada (sound) which arises from the
muladhara and goes to the brahmarandhra
after piercing the twelve knots is to be uttered
and
concentrated
upon
( - ibid.,
3.6.41);
the order from the hrit (anahata) is throat
(wishuddha), talu
(-chakra), eyebrow-space
(ajna) and brahmarandhra (-chakra) ( - ibid.,
5a.28.46; Agnipurana, 74.13); after passing
through the six chakras, it should be brought to
the brahmarandhra ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana,
4.20.29). T h a t the brahmarandhra is a chakra
has been clearly stated in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8; Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 16;
and Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.5.
Another term 'dwadashanta' has been used
for brahmarandhra as a region or chakra. It has
been stated that the light-like jiwa (embodied
being) is to be brought by the instrumentation
of pranawa to the dwadashanta ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 5, p. 4). T h e dwadashanta indicates
brahmarandhra. 'From the muladhara to the
dwadashanta' ( - Shiwapurana, 2.11.40); here
the dwadashanta indicates the brahmarandhra.
It is still clearer here: the jrwa-consciousness
which is in the hrit (anahata) is to be brought
through the path of the brahma nadi to the white
sahasrara lotus situated above dwadashanta
(that is, brahmarandhra) ( - ibid., 3.5.52-53);
also, 'Next to indu (-chakra) is dwadashanta
(brahmarandhra), and thereafter is the white
lotus (guru chakra)' ( - ibid., 5a. 28.49). The
order of the chakras has been given as - eyebrowregion (ajna), forehead (indu chakra), and
dwadashanta (brahmarandhra) in the head
( - ibid., 5b. 29.132). T h e exact location of the
dwadashanta has been indicated in this mantra:
'The short pranawa is in the bindu, the long is
in the brahmarandhra, and the protracted in the
dwadashanta' ( - Warahopanishad, 5.70). Here,

Exposition of the Chakras

both brahmarandhra and dwadashanta have
been used. T h e well-known commentator Upanshadbrahmayogi interprets dwadashanta as
the upper part of the brahmarandhra. This
indicates that the region is brahmarandhra
and its upper part is dwadashanta. However,
as the dwadashanta is also a lotus ( - Garudapurana, 1.23.48), like the brahmarandhra, there
cannot be two chakras in the region. Above
the indu chakra is the nirwana chakra which is
the last chakra in the chitrini. This nirwana
chakra has been termed brahmarandhra and
also dwadashanta chakra.
It has been stated that at the talu-mula
(the upper end of the palatine region) lies the
upper end of the sushumna with its inner vacuity
(that is, brahmarandhra, and consequently, it
includes the wajra and chitrini) and from
where the sushumna goes downward to the end
of the triangle situated in the muladhara;
in the proximity of (the upper border of) the talusthana (palatine region) is a lotus (belonging
to) the sahasrara, in the pericarp of which (that
is, the pericarp of the guru chakra) is a triangle,
facing posteriorly, where the end-point of the
sushumna with its vacuity is situated; it is called
the brahmarandhra, and extends from here to
the muladhara ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.161-4).
T h e talu-sthana is a region which is externally
related to the palate, so it is the palatine region.
Technically, it is that part of the sushumna.
which passes from the talu chakra upwards to
its end-point termed the sushumna-mula (upper
extremity of the sushumna), and this end-point
is in the talu-mula (upper border of the palatine
region). So, the upper extremity of the sushumna
lies in the upper border of the palatine region
and from this point the sushumna goes downward
to the end of the muladhara-triangle. This means
that the sushumna starts from the lowest point
of the muladhara (that is, mula-kanda) and goes
upward and terminates at the end-point of the
palatine region, called the talu-mula. This endpoint is also called the brahmarandhra. T h e
brahmarandhra as a nadi extends from the talumula to the muladhara. In other words, the
brahmarandhra which is inside the chitrini
( - Shiwasanghita, 2.18) passes from the muladhara as a nadi and ends at the point where the

sushumna ends. T h e end of the sushumna lies
in the talu-mula, which is also called brahmarandhra and dwadashanta. At this end-point
is the nirwawa chakra which is also called the
brahmarandhra chakra and dwadashanta chakra.
However, the sushumna is neither continuous
with nor proceeds into the guru chakra belonging
to the sahasrara, but ends in the proximity of the
chakra.
T h e above study indicates that the term
brahmarandhra has been used in two senses:
one, as a nadi; or vacuity within the chitrini
nadi which runs from the muladhara to the head
where the sushumna ends; the other, as the
region or point where the sushumna-mula is
situated, that is, the upper terminal point of the
sushumna. This region or point has been variously
termed the talu-mula, brahmarandhra, and
dwadashanta. It may also be called the sushumnamula. This terminal point is marked by the
presence of the nirwana chakra. This chakra
is also called the brahmarandhra chakra and
dwadashanta chakra.
Here is still another important point which
needs to be discussed. Does the brahmarandhra
extend into the sahasrara? According to the
commentary of Kalicharana on the first verse
of the Padukapanchaka the 'brahmarandhrasarasiruha' has been rendered as 'that lotus called
the thousand-petalled in which is the brahmarandhra'. It can simply be translated 'brahmarandhra lotus'. T h e translation of the verse can
be done as follows: at the higher position (udare)
of the brahmarandhra lotus, and always in
contact with it, is the wonderful white twelvepetalled lotus which lies as a crown of the
kundaliwiwarakanda (that is, the chitrini nadi);
I adore it. This twelve-lettered (petalled) lotus
is the guru chakra. So, the guru chakra is above
the chitrini (and, consequently, the sushumna).
In the Gandharwatantra (ch. 5, p. 23), we
find a passage which reads that concentration
should be made on the guru lying in the circular
region of the moon in the lotus with 1000 petals
which is situated in the brahmarandhra.
Apparently, it indicates that the sahasrara is
in the brahmarandhra. This means the extension
of the brahmarandhra beyond the head, and
beyond the terminal point of the sushumna
247

T h e Chakra System

and the nirwana chakra. It is contrary to most
of the documents cited above. It also conflicts
with the passage in the Gandharwatantra (ch. 5,
p. 27) itself, which says that the sushumna
extends through the vertebral column from the
mula-kanda to the brahmarandhra. This brahmarandhra-point is situated in the head where the
sushumna ends
( - Shandilyopanishad,
1.4.10).
T h e sahasrara is situated above this (that is, the
brahmarandhra - Jaganmohana - the commentator) and outside the body (that is, outside the
cranium which is the topmost part of the body)
( - Shiwasanghita,
5.198).
Therefore,
the
brahmarandhra is the end point of the cranium
where
the
sushumna.,
and
consequently,
wajra and chitrini', terminate. This terminal
point is within the cranium. But the sahasrara
is situated extra-cranially; so, the sushumna
and all nadis inside it cannot proceed to the
sahasrara. Hence, the literal meaning of'situated
in the brahmarandhra' should be changed to the
technical meaning - 'situated in the proximity
of the brahmarandhra'. In a similar m a n n e r the
expression 'In the sahasrara, lying in the brahmarandhra, the God Sadashiwa is situated'
( - Bhatashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3) should
be changed (that is, lying in the proximity of the
brahmarandhra).
It has been stated that kundalini passes
through the ajna situated in the forehead
(eyebrow-space) to the sahasrara lying face
downwards, and above the topmost point of the
sushumna nadi which is inside the vertebral
column ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 23). Here
it is stated that the sahasrara is above the terminal
point of the sushumna, that is, above the head.
It has also been stated that the twelve-petalled
lotus (that is, guru chakra) is situated at the endpoints of the three nadis (that is, sushumna,
wajra and chitrini') ( - ibid., ch. 4, p. 23). It is
clear that the guru chakra is situated above the
terminal point of the sushumna in the head.
So, the guru chakra is above the cranium.
It has been clearly stated that at the end
of the kundalirandhrakanda (sushumna), situated
in the dwadashanta (= brahmarandhra), is the
twelve-petalled, shining, white lotus. T h e face
of this lotus is turned upwards; it is the seat of

248

guru, and outside it (guru chakra) is the lotus
with 1000 petals - with a moon-like, shining,
white colour ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2). So, the guru chakra is above the brahmarandhra and situated extra-cranially, and its
top is covered by the sahasrara.
T h e exact position of the brahmarandhra has
been mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra
(ch. 2, p. 5). But the literal translation of the text
will give an incongruous meaning. So, it should
be explained from the technical viewpoint. The
literal translation of the text is: the imperishable sahasrara lotus is white in colour
and lies with its face downwards; it is decorated
with the shining letters from a to ksha; in its
pericarp is antaratman (jiwatman; but here
Supreme Spirit), and then the guru, and the
sarya-mandala and the chandra-mandala, then
mahanada-wayu followed by brahmarandhra.
If the first, italicized 'then' before the guru
means 'above', then the meaning would be
that the guru is above antaratman which is
absurd. I f ' a b o v e ' is used for 'then' in all places,
the meaning would be: above antaratman
is the guru, and above him is the surya-mandala,
above it is the chandra-mandala, above it
mahanada-wayu, and above it brahmarandhra.
T h e arrangement of things like this does not
exist in the sahasrara. Of course, there is the
chandra-mandala in the sahasrara. The guru
is situated below the pericarp of the sahasrara,
that is, in the guru chakra which is the
lower aspect of the sahasrara. So, the italicized
'then' (before the guru) would indicate 'below'
a n t a r a t m a n ; 'and the surya-mandala and the
chandra-mandala' would be below the guru
(-chakra) (and above the ajna). T h e suryamandala indicates the manas chakra; above it is
the chandra-mandala to indicate the indu chakra;
above it mahanada-wayu; and above it the
brahmarandhra.
T h e following passages from the Kankalamalinitantra (ch. 2, p. 5) read thus: 'In that
randhra (that is, brahmarandhra) lies wisarga;
above it (it means not only above wisarga,
but also above the sahasrara) is divine Shankhini;
below Shankhini is the chandra-mandala (within
the sahasrara) where lies a triangle; kailasa

Exposition of the Chakras

(the abode of Shiwa) is situated in the triangle;
. . . here lies the perpetual and unchanging
amakala.'
T h e wisarga is the power-bridge through
which kundalini passes from the brahmarandhra
to the guru chakra and sahasrara. We get the
following order: ajna, surya-mandala (manas
chakra), chandra-mandala (indu chakra), mahanada-wayu, brahmarandhra (here lies the nirwana chakra), wisarga (which connects brahmarandhra with the), guru chakra, sahasrara,
Sharikhini. Shahkhini is Supreme kundalini in
the spiral form lying above the sahasrara.
kundalini becomes Sharikhini after passing
through the sahasrara.
T h e three forms of specific orders of the chakras
and associated power aspects have been given
in the Sammohanatantra, Part 2.
Form 1 (ch. 2, p. 2). T h e order is this: ajna,
indu, half-moon-shaped nada, plough-shaped
mahanada, power anji, unmani, twelve-petalled
chakra (guru chakra), sahasrara where lies the
chandra-mandala,
wisarga,
dhruwa-manoala
(infinite region).
Form 2 (ch. 2, p. 2). O r d e r : muladhara,
swadhishthana, manipwra, anahata, wishuddha,
ajna, bindu, kalapada, nirodhika, indu, nada,
nadanta,
unmani,
wishnuwaktra
(-mouth),
dhruwamandalika Shiwa (Infinite Consciousness) .
Form 3 (ch. 4, p. 4). O r d e r : muladhara to
ajna, bindu,
kala-nada,
nadanta,
unmani,
wishnuwaktra,
guruwaktra,
Parama
Shiwa
(Supreme Consciousness).
From the above three forms we get the following order:
muladhara to ajna chakras
Bindu
Kala
Nirodhika
Indu
Nada (half-moon-shaped)
Mahanada (plough-shaped)
Anji kala
Unmani
Twelve-petalled lotus (guru chakra)
Circular region of the moon (sahasrara)
Wishnuwaktra

Guruwaktra
Wisarga
Dhruwamanadala, or Parama Shiwa
This order presents stages through which
kundalini passes from the muladhara to Parama
Shiwa. T h e first stages are from the muladhara
to the ajna. In the ajna Power Hakini, Itaralinga and pranawa are absorbed in this order
into kundalini. T h e n comes bindu. This bindu
may be supposed to be the second bindu closely
related to the bindu of pranawa, and is the seat
of manas 2 (sense-mind). Associated with the
second bindu are three forms of power, namely
kala, nirodhika and indu. T h e sense-mind
ordinarily functions in relation to the senses
by kala. By the power nirodhika, the sensory
function of the sense-mind is controlled, and
then it is able to receive outer objects directly;
this power is indu. Here indu is not the indu
chakra. Kundalini absorbs all these.
T h e n is the half-moon-shaped nada. It is the
same as the second nada, and is the seat of the
manas chakra where lies chitta (sense-consciousness). Above it is plough-shaped mahanada,
also called nadanta. Here there is no clear
indication where the indu chakra is situated.
It has been stated in the Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5, that the chandra mandala (indu
chakra) is below the mahanada. Also, in the
Shatchakranirupana, Verse 39, the position of
the plough-shaped mahanada is above the seat
of Bhagawan (indu chakra). So, the indu
chakra is to be placed above the half-moonshaped nada and below the plough-shaped
mahanada. Above it is the nirwana (or brahmarandhra) chakra. Here two forms of power are
situated - anji and unmani. This chakra is the
seat of dhi (concentrative mind). By the power
of anji dhi functions as attention, in conjunction
with the intellective mind. When anji is controlled by unmani concentration develops. In
this chakra lies I-ness. kundalini absorbs all
these and then passes through the power-bridge
(wisarga) into the guru chakra and sahasrara.
Wishnuwaktra and guruwaktra are in the sahasrara. Wishnuwaktra is the final stage of the
samprajnata samadhi. It is dissolved into guruwaktra which is the entrance to the Supreme
249

T h e Chakra System

Bindu where asamprajnata samadhi starts. T h e
final stage is dhruwa-mandala - the infinity of
Parama Shiwa. There is the wisarga (second)
which separates sahasrara proper from Supreme
Bindu.
For the passing of Kundalini from the ajna
another order has been given, using different
technical terms: after piercing the ajna, Kundalini passes into the bodhini chakra, then through
kataha to parnashaila; then through dyumani to
ghatadhara where absorption of mind takes
place; above it is the brahma-chakra where
calmness prevails; above it the brahmadanda,
and above that is only water (that is, void)
where the lustrous sahasrara is seen; next comes
the karnikasthana (pericarp); above it is the
siddhakhadga; then there is the matrika-mandala
containing all bijas (germ-mantras); above it are
nectarous pretabija (= Hsouh) where concentration should be made on Supreme Power
( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60. 3 0 - 4 ) .
Now, the description of the chakras situated in
the ajna system has to be made in the right order.

9 Manas
T h e manas chakra, numerically from the muladhara, is the ninth. It is situated within the
chitrine nadi.

Terminology
1 Manas mandala (chakra), mentioned in the
Yogashikhopanishad, 1.178; 5.15.
2 Manas chakra, mentioned by Jaganmohana
Tarkalankara in Foot-note 87 on the Mahanirwanatantra, 5. 104; by Swami Sachchidananda
Saraswati in the Gurupradipa, p. 275; Pujapradipa, Part 2, p. 79; Jnanapradipa, Part 1,
p. 173.
3 Nada, mentioned in the Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 35; Sharadatilakatantra, 5. 136; Shadamnayatantra, 5. 268; Shiwasanghita, 5. 149;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 4, p. 4; Shrikrama,
250

quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S .
4 Surya mandala, mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5.
5 Jnananetra (knowledge-light), mentioned
in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.7.

Position
T h e manas chakra is situated above the second
bindu which is just above the bindu of pranawa in
the ajna ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2;
ch. 4, p. 4). T h e second bindu has not been
mentioned in the Shatchakranirupana Verse 35,
where it was simply stated that the nada (manas
chakra) is above the bindu of pranawa in the
ajna chakra. T h e Shiwasanghita (5.149) mentions the second bindu as bindu pitha (or bindu
chakra), and gives the order as follows: bindu
pitha, nada pitha, shakti pitha. So, the nada
pitha (chakra), which is the manas chakra, is
above the bindu pitha and is situated above the
ajna chakra. Here, the second bindu has been
termed as bindu pitha, that is, bindu chakra.
So, the position of the manas chakra is above
the bindu chakra, situated above the pranawabindu in the ajna.

Description
T h e manas chakra is white ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 3 5 ; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81).
It has six petals, and these are connected with
the senses of smell, taste, form, touch and sound,
and sleep. T h e petals assume the sense colours,
that is, the petal connected with smell becomes
yellow. Those connected with taste, form, touch,
and sound, are white, red, ash, and white respectively. T h e petal representing sleep is black.

Explanation
T h e manas chakra is the seat of chitta (senseconsciousness). Here, the absorption of chitta
takes place. It has been stated that the nada
(manas chakra) which is the abode of all bliss
is the place or position for the absorption of

Exposition of the Chakras

chitta by the niralamba-pura (-mudra) (the
process of sense-control), the secret of which
can be learnt from the parama-guru (a guru who
has been given the secret which has been handed
down in regular succession from the gurus);
by the practice of this yoga-process, the yogi
'sees', in deep concentration, the subtle fire
(that is, the sushumna which is subtle and fiery),
and then inside it the shining forms (that is,
inside the sushumna is seen the chitrini where
lie the chakras) ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse
36). T h e absorption of chitta occurs when Kundalini passes through the manas chakra.
In waking (and not in deep concentration),
chitta is constantly receiving sensory radiations
through manas 2 (sense-mind). From the sensory
area of the the brain, the sensory impulses of
smell, taste, sight, touch and sound, on being
reduced to non-material wayu-forms, pass
through the ida nadi to the appropriate chakras,
and proceed from there to the sense-mind. Smell
in wayu-form passes to the muladhara, taste to
the swadhishthana, form-colour to the manipura,
touch to the anahata and sound to the wishuddha.
The senses get their own characteristic qualities
in the chakras, and are radiated through the
petaline processes of the chakras to the ida and
are carried to the sense-mind, by this nadi. T h e
sense-mind sends the senso-mental radiations
to chitta where the senso-mental patterns are
changed into conscious forms, and the I-ness
recognizes them as smell, taste, sight, touch and
sound. In this manner, consciousness is being
undulated and is assuming different sensory
forms, and becomes tinged with characteristic
sense-colours. Smell gets its yellow colour,
taste its white, sight its red, touch its ash colour
and sound its white when they pass through the
appropriate chakras.
When the senso-mental radiations are stopped
or obstructed by the predominance of the tamas
quality in chitta, consciousness is masked, and
a state of nonconsciousness is induced. T h e
induced nonconsciousness in the normal state
is sleep. But there is always a permanent area
of unconsciousness connected with chitta where
all post-conscious and unconscious impressions
(sangskaras) are stored. Pleasurable impressions
are conveyed to chitta by memory as a notion

(bodha), which becomes a feeling (bhawa),
and the feeling develops as love (raga), which
becomes mixed with desire (kama) arising from
thought and perception. Desire, being mixed
with will (manasyana), develops as volition (chikirsha) and then as conation (kriti).
Conation, as conative impulse (kratu), passes
to the appropriate chakra (one of the five lower
chakras), and emerges as a pre-motor impulse,
and is carried to the brain by the pingala.
Consciousness is the phenomenon in which
sentiency is manifested, derived from the sattwa
attribute of primus, which presents two forms:
dichotomous and unitary. In the dichotomous
form there is a constant and changeless individualized entity endowed with the power
of being aware of what is happening in the other
aspect. This individualized entity gives rise to the
I-feeling in relation to the objective aspect of
consciousness. In fact, consciousness is no consciousness unless a union takes place between
the 'I' and what the 'I' knows. As this knowing
or consciousness is conjugated in character,
it is called sangjnana, that is, united knowledge
or consciousness. W h a t the 'I' knows are the
contents of consciousness radiated into it sensorially from the outer world. This consciousness
is termed chitta - sense-consciousness. Radiations from buddhi (intellective mind) also
penetrate into chitta. When the senso-mental
radiations are controlled by pratyahara, thoughts
and intellection are also controlled, and now
chitta is transformed into dhi (superconsciousness). T h e emptying of the sensory objects and
the elimination of thoughts do not make consciousness vacant. In superconsciousness, the
contents are subtle objects. T h e subtle objects
come into being naturally in superconsciousness
as the gross objects are naturally contents of
sense-consciousness. T h e 'I' as an experiencer
remains the same here too. T h e dichotomous
consciousness is transformed into a unitary
form only at a higher stage of samprajnata
samadhi when the individualized I-ness is absorbed into all-I, all-dewata, or Kundalini consciousness. T h e individualized 'I'-consciousness remains an indispensable aspect of chitta and dhi
up to the levels of dhyana and the first three
stages of samadhi. Thereafter, the stage of
251

T h e Chakra System

I-lessness develops. T h e seat of the 'I' is in the
nirwana chakra.

10 Indu
T h e indu chakra, numerically from the muladhara, is the tenth. It is situated within the
chitririni nadi.

Terminology
1 Indu (moon) chakra, mentioned in the
Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.71.
2 Shitangshu (moon) mandala (chakra), mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.69.
3 Sixteen-petalled Anahata, mentioned in the
Yogakundayupanishad, 1.69.
4 Shambhawa (belonging to Shiwa) Sthana
(chakra), mentioned in the Yogashikhopanishad,
5.16.
5 Chandra (moon) mandala (chakra), mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5;
Nirwarcatantra, ch. 9, p. 1 1 ; Koulawalitantra,
ch. 22, p. 8 1 .
6 Chandra (= Chandra mandala - Jaganmohana), mentioned in the Shiwasanghita, 5.188.
7 Kailasa (an abode of Shiwa), mentioned in
the Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.14; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.69;
Goutamiyatantra, 34.53; Mridanitantra, quoted
in Amarasanggraha M S ; Dewibhagawata, 7.35.
46.
8 Shakti (power), mentioned in the Shiwapurana, 2.11.40; Shiwasanghita, 5.149.
9 Widya-pada (-chakra), mentioned in the
Shiwapurana, 5a. 7.4.
10 Nadanta, mentioned in the Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; Sharadatilakatantra, 5.136.
11 Soma, mentioned by Jaganmohana in his
note No. 87 in connection with the explanation
of the Mahanirwanatantra, 5.104, and note No.
42 in relation to his explanation of the Shiwasanghita, 5.188; and by Swami Sachchidananda
in his works Jnanapradipa, ch. 3, p. 152, Pujapradipa, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 48, 80, and Gurupradipa, ch. 6, p. 279.
252

Position
T h e indu chakra is situated above the manas
chakra ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; Shiwasanghita,
5.149; Shrikrama, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika M S .

Description
T h e indu chakra (Plate 20) is moon-white in
colour, as its name indicates. It has sixteen petals
( - -Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.69). According to
Jaganmohana this chakra has sixteen petals.
Swami Sachchidananda quotes a passage from
the Tantra in which it is stated that the ninth is
the brahma chakra which is decorated with
sixteen petals ( - Jnanapradipa, Part 1, ch. 3,
p. 153). He identifies brahma chakra with soma
chakra. T h e colour of the petals is also moonwhite.
On the petals are the following specific
qualities (writtis) which are arranged from right
to left: (1) mercy; (2) gentleness; (3) patience;
(4) non-attachment; (5) control; (6) excellent
qualities; (7) joyous mood; (8) deep spiritual
love; (9) humility; (10) reflection; (11) restfulness; (12) seriousness; (13) effort; (14) controlled emotion; (15) magnanimity; (16) concentration.
It has been stated that there is the purna
chandra mandala (full moon region, that is,
chandra or moon chakra) in the ajna (system);
in its pericarp, there is a nine-cornered region
where lies the manidwipa (the isle of gems);
in the isle of gems is the Shambhu-bija (that is,
the germ-mantra of the God Shiwa - Hang)
which (with sah which denotes Shakti - Power)
is in the form of hangsah (swan); hangsah (as
mantra in its power as consciousness) is Supreme
Brahman, and (in its power-in-sound-form)
is Shiwa in divine form; the beak of the swan is the
pranawa, the wings are the Agama and Nigama
(two forms of the Tantra), the feet are Consciousness-Power, the three eyes are the three bindus,
and he is in a golden lotus; in the lap of the
hangsah (that is, in the bindu of the Hang bija)
is Deity Parashiwa with Power Siddhakali on

Exposition of the Chakras
his left, who is eternal bliss (Nirwanatantra,
ch. 9, p. 11).
It has been stated that above the nada (that
is, in the chandra mandala) is Wrishabhadhwaja
(an epithet of Shiwa) with his Power ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81). The concentration
form of Wrishabhadhwaja is as follows: He is like
crystal-white in colour, with braided hair and
adorned with (crescent-) moon (in his forehead),
and decked in tigerskin [ibid.). The concentration form of his Power is: she is yellow in colour,
and holds in her beautiful hands a drum, a
trident, a noose, and makes an attitude of
dispelling fear; she is beautiful and adorned
with various ornaments ( - ibid.). It has also
been stated that Parashiwa is with Power
Hakini in the ajna (system) ( - Mantramahodadhi, 4.24).
The presence of Deity Parashiwa has been
mentioned in the Shadamnayatantra, 5.268.
Parashiwa has also been mentioned as Sadashiwa
in the form of a swan situated in a chakra (indu
chakra) above the ajna ( - Shadamnayatantra,
3.76). He has been mentioned as Mahadewa
(Shiwa) and Wishabhadhwaja who is like crystal
white ( - Shrikrama, quoted in the Yogakalpalatika MS). He has also been called Bhagawan
(God) as immutable and Supreme Being, endowed with supreme yoga-power ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 37).

lection. Pada means a place or position ( - Apte),
here a chakra. This chakra is the seat of buddhi
the general function of which is intellection. So,
buddhi is the intellective mind.
There is a difference between sense-knowledge
(sangjnana) and intellection, which is technically
termed wijnana. Though some rudimentary
intellection is involved in sense-knowledge, yet
intellection is specific in character and exclusive
to buddhi. Sense-knowledge, of course, plays
a great role in the functioning of buddhi. The
main functions of the buddhi are: manisha
(higher intellection), mati (thought), manana
(intellection), drishti (insight),andmedha (retentive power). On the one hand, buddhi functions
in relation to perception, and, on the other, it
can be abstracted into a field which is outside
the perceptual field. When kundalini passes
through this chakra, buddhi becomes absorbed
into her.
In the indu chakra is situated Parashiwa,
the sixth Shiwa. Concentration is made on him
in this chakra.

11 Nirwana
The nirwana chakra, which is numerically the
eleventh from the muladhara, is situated within
the chitrini nadi.

Explanation
Terminology
The indu chakra is the seat of buddhi (intellective
mind). This is indicated by the term 'widya
pada' (widya chakra) given to the indu chakra.
It has been stated that first Shakti (Power)
becomes manifested from Shiwa who is in
union with Shakti; from Shakti shantyatita
pada (sahasrara chakra), and then shanti pada
(nirwana chakra), and thereafter widya pada
(indu chakra) ( - Shiwapurana, 5A. 7.4). The
word 'widya' is derived from wida, meaning
jnana (knowledge). The word 'buddhi' is derived
from buddha to mean also jnana. Jnana means
buddhi-writti (Wachaspatyam), that is, intel-

1 Nirwana, mentioned in the Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad,
3.8;
Brahmasiddhantapaddhati MS.
2 Brahmarandhra (chakra), mentioned in the
Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 16; Yogashikhopanishad, 6.47; Trishikhibrahmanopanishad, Mantra Section, Mantra 151; Shandilyopanishad,
1.4.10; Adwayatarakopanishad, Mantra 5; Nilatantra, ch. 5, p. 9; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Kularnawa, ch. 4, pp. 20, 22; Mantramahodadhi, 4.28; Agnipurana 72.31; 74.13;
88.43; Skandapurana, 1.2.55.45; 3.1.13.39;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 27; Bhatashuddhi253

T h e Chakra System

tantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Brahmawaiwartapurawa,
1.13.17; 1.16.67; 4.20.29; Dewibhagawatapurana, 11.1.48.
3 Parabrahma chakra, mentioned in the
Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8.
4 Bodhini (chakra), mentioned in the Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Shaktanandatararigini,
4.14; Goutarmiyatantra, 34.53; Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 60.30.
5 Bodhana, mentioned in the Rudrayamala,
Part 2, 27.69.
6 Rodhini, mentioned in the Mridanitantra,
quoted in the Amarasanggraha M S ; Dewibhagawatapurana, 7.35.46.
7 Chitkalashakti (chakra), mentioned in the
Shadamnayatantra, 5.269.
8 Shanta (chakra), mentioned in the Shiwapurana, 3.3.28.
9 Shantipada (chakra), mentioned in the
Shiwapurana, 5a, 7.4.
10 Shatapatra
(hundred-petalled)
chakra,
mentioned in the Amarasanggraha M S .
11 Shatadala (hundred-petalled) chakra, mentioned in the Tattwayogabindu M S .
12 Kala chakra, mentioned in the Tattwayogabindu M S .
13 Dwadashanta (chakra), mentioned in the
Shiwapurana, 2.11.40; 3.5.53;
14 Dwadashanta pada (chakra), mentioned in
theAgnipurana, 74.10.
15 Dwadashanta Sarasija (= lotus), mentioned in the Garuaapurana, Part 1, 23.48.
16 Brahmarandhra Pankaja (lotus), mentioned in the Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.5.
17 Shirshantargata (being in the interior of the
cranium) mandala (chakra), mentioned in the
Manadalabrahmanopanishad, 1.4.1.

Position
T h e nirwana is the last chakra within the chitrini
nadi;, the first being muladhara. At the end point
of the nirwana, chitrini ends and, consequently,
the wajra and sushumna also terminate. This
terminal point is within the cranium, and there
is nothing intracranially beyond this terminal
point. T h e brahmarandhra or brahma nadi
also ends at this terminal point, but a non254

nadi connection
between
the
intracranial
brahma nadi and the extracranial guru chakra
is maintained by the wisarga (power-bridge).
So, the position of the nirwana chakra is at the
upper terminal point of the chitrini nadi within
the cranium at its topmost end.
Description
T h e nirwana chakra (Plate 21) is shining white
( - Amarasanggraha M S ) . It has 100 petals
( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ; Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu MS). T h e petals
are also lustrous white. Inside the chakra (that
is, in the pericarp) is Shiwa in shining smokecolour and concentration should be made on
him
( - Soubhagyalakyamyupanishad,
3.8;
Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) .
In the (pericarp of the) chakra lies jalandharapitha (-seat) which leads to liberation ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8; Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) . It is consciousness, shining in blue
light ( - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 17).
Inside this chakra is situated Supreme Consciousness-Power ( - Yogashikhopanishad, 6.47).
T h a t is, kundalini as Divine ConsciousnessPower is realized in concentration here.
Explanation
T h e nirwawa chakra is the centre of dhi (concentrative mind) as well as ahang (I-ness).
Chitta (sense-consciousness) exhibits multiobjectivity in relation to which buddhi (intellective mind) functions in a general manner.
But when a particular sense-object is singled
out from many sense-objects, buddhi exercises
its specific function and as a result clear thought
and
intellection
and
greater
retentive
power (medha) are exhibited. T h e selection
of a single object, or a group of objects from many,
and focusing it in consciousness are the functions
of dhi as awadhana (attention). Attention also
exercises a tremendous influence on buddhi by
which deep thought and intellection are aroused
and finally become higher and deeper thoughtintellection (manisha). Attention is the secondary
function of dhi.

Exposition of the Chakras

T h e principal function of dhi is concentration.
Concentration is a mental mechanism or process
effecting the centralization of consciousness by
eliniinating all its contents except one, which
becomes identified with consciousness in its
contraction or condensation to bindu - the point.
In this process the mental control power is
roused to the highest degree, which functions
at three levels: first, the centralization of consciousness by the elimination of its contents by
holding a single object in consciousness without
interruption; second, the identification of consciousness with the held object in non-perception
and non-thought-non-intellective concentration; and third, raising the depth of concentration to its highest point when I-consciousness
becomes the submerged factor, and consciousness
is in its highest concentration and in full identification with the object held. T h e first level is
called
dharana - holding-concentration;
the
second level is dhyana - objects-absorptive concentration; and the third is samprajnata samadhi - superconscious concentration.
Samprajnata samadhi has four stages. At
the first stage, objective elimination is effected
by holding a sensory object. At the second stage,
the holding is of subtle objects (mahabhutas
and tanmatras); at the third, the holding is
done on lustrous conscious forms (dewatas);
and at the fourth, consciousness is all-dewata,
or all-I-ness, or all-kundalini. So, samprajnata
samadhi consists of (1) sensorial superconscious
concentration; (2) non-sensorial superconscious
concentration; (3) dewata concentration; and
(4) formless concentration. Formless concentration consists of (a) all-dewata concentration;
(b) all-I concentration; and (c) all-kundalini
concentration.
Consciousness exhibiting sensory phenomena
does not terminate when these phenomena
cease to occur there, but continues as superconsciousness when subtle phenomena take
place. In other words, chitta as sense-consciousness is transformed into dhi as concentrative
consciousness - the sangjnana-wijnana into
prajnana.
In the nirwana chakra, concentration is done
on lustrous Shiwa and on jalandhara of shining
blue in colour. From the mantra viewpoint,

jalandhara indicates the bija 'Gang'. Gang is
the
spiritual
knowledge
developed
in
concentration.
W h e n kundalini passes through the nirwana
chakra, I-ness is absorbed into her.

Sahasrara System
T h e sahasrara system (Plate 22) starts with the
guru-chakra which is the lower aspect of the
sahasrara itself. T h e first question is where the
sahasrara lies. To determine the location of
the sahasrara is a problem, because it has been
described in the texts in different ways. It
has been stated that the sahasrara lies in the
great brahmarandhra path ( - Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 6; Shaktanandatararigini,
4.29; 9.16). If the sahasrara is included in the
brahmarandhra, then the location would be
incorrect. T h e right interpretation is that the
brahmarandhra is not isolated from the sahasrara
but is in contact with it through the powerbridge (wisarga); however, it is not within the
brahmarandhra.
There are other similar expressions which also
should be technically explained. 'The sahasrara
lying in the head' ( - Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 22;
Guptasadhanatantra, ch. 2,p. 2; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3; Shaktanandatararigini, 4 . 1 ;
4.25; Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, p. 3; Shiwapurana,
3.3.63; 4.40.26) and 'The sahasrara lying in
the brahmarandhra' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p p . 23, 24; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3;
Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9; Jnanarnawa,
quoted in Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, p. 3; Shiwasanghita,
5.138;
Brahmawaiwartapurana,
1.26.5); here, 'in the head' or 'in the brahmarandhra' is to be interpreted 'in the void in
contact with the head or brahmarandhra',
otherwise these statements will go against other
statements and the fact. It has been stated that
the roused divine kundalini passes into the
region of void through the sushumna-path,
and comes back to her abode (in the muladhara)
( - Phetkarinitantra, ch. 14, p. 39). T h e region
of void is where the sahasrara lies. It is a well255

T h e Chakra System

known fact that Kundalini passes into the
sahasrara where union takes place with Paramo
Shiwa. It has been stated that the mantra
becomes living when kundalini is roused by
Hangsah mantra and conducted into the great
lotus sahasrara for the union with Parama
Shiwa in the form of Bindu ( - Todalatantra,
ch. 6, p. 12); also, the roused kundalini, eager
to be in the sahasrara (for the union) passes
through the brahma-path (that is, brahma
nadi) into the sahasrara ( - ibid., ch. 8, p. 16).
So, this void is the sahasrara or where the sahasrara lies. This is why the sahasrara has been
termed akasha (void) chakra ( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.9; Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ) , wyoma (void)
chakra ( - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 17),
wyomambuja
( - Yogashikhopanishad,
6.48),
a n d wyomambhoja ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 4.12). It has been clearly stated that the
sahasrara is in the void ( - Munadamalatantra,
ch. 2, p. 5), and so the akasha (void) chakra
is the thousand-petalled lotus (sahasrara)
( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) .
About the location of the sahasrara, the
Shatchakranirupana
(Verse 40) says, above that
(tadurdhwe), in the region of void, which is at
the end of (that is, above) where shankhini
is, a n d below wisarga, is the lotus of a thousand
petals.
T h e commentator Kalicharana interprets
'above that' (tadurdhwe) as above all that has
been said before. It is vague. Shankara and
Bhuwanamohana say 'above the mahanada'.
This is also not precise. According to the Shatchakranirupana,
the order of 'forms' above
pranawa in the ajna system is as follows: subtle
manas (in the second bindu) - nada (second
nada = manas chakra) - seat of Bhagawan (Parashiwa in the indu chakra) - plough-shaped mahanada - shankhini - void region where lies the
lotus of 1000 petals. We have seen that above
mahanada is brahmarandhra ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5). In this text there is no mention
of the brahmarandhra, but instead of that,
shankhini.
W h a t is shankhini? Kalicharana, Wishwanatha, Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana say
that shankhini is a nadi by that name. It has

256

been stated that the nadi termed shankhini
goes up through the cavity of the throat to the
head where it remains with its face downwards;
it carries nutrients and becomes the source of
nourishment (to the brain) ( - Yogashikhopan s h a d , 5.25). Shankhini is a subtle nadi which
lies within the cranial cavity. Its gross replica
is the internal carotid artery (arteria carotis
interna) through which the brain receives its
main blood supply. T h e term shankhini seems
to indicate the highest point within the cranial
cavity, which is above mahanada. Beyond
shankhini lies a void region. In the text, the
word 'shikhara' (of shahkhini) has been used.
Kalicharana interprets it as 'mastaka' ( = the
head or top of anything - A p t e ) ; Wishwanatha
as 'agra' ( = the foremost or topmost point A p t e ) ; and Ramawallabha and Bhuwanamohana
as 'agrabhaga' ( = fore-part, tip - Apte). It gives
a clearer meaning if it is interpreted as antamatra
( - Wachaspatyam) = the end-point. This means
that at the end-point of sharikhini lies a voidregion. So shahkhini appears to be synonymous
with the nirwarca chakra, that is, the topmost
part of shahkhini which is above mahanada
is nirwana chakra.
Beyond the upper border of shankhini, but
in contact with it, is a void. This void is outside
the cranium ( - Shiwasanghita, 5.198). Kalichara?za interprets 'void' as 'the place where there
are no nadis, and it indicates that it (the void)
is above where the sushumna. ends'. So, the void
is outside the head and where there are no
nadis - shankhini, sushumna, wajra, chitrini and
brahma nadis, and consequently, these nadis
end intracranially. It has been stated that
kundalini passes from the bodhini ( = nirwana)
chakra by piercing the skull (kataha) to enter
certain intermediate forms and reaching an
all-water (void) region where the lustrous sahasrara is seen ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2, 60. 30-2).
This clearly shows that the sahasrara is in the
void which is outside the skull, and to reach the
sahasrara the head has to be pierced. The
sahasrara has a Waidika term kapalasamputa,
that is, it is a shining sheath-like hemispherical
formation over the skull. This indicates that
the sahasrara is, like an umbrella, above the
head.

Exposition of the Chakras

In the brahmarandhra lies wisarga ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5) which like a bridge
connects the nirwana chakra with the sahasrara.
Therefore, to reach the sahasrara from the
nirwana chakra the head has to be pierced and
the wisarga passed through. This wisarga should
not be confused with the wisarga which is above
the sahasrara. Also, the shankhini nadi which
is in the head and below the void region is not
the same as divine Shankhini ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5), who is Supreme Kundalini
in a spiral form and is above the sahasrara.
The void region, situated above the topmost
point of shankhini nadi, has been termed
mahashunya (great void) chakra ( - Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ) . There
is nothing above it. It is the sahasrara system.
It consists mainly of the sahasrara and Supreme
Bindu. T h e sahasrara can be considered as
having three aspects: lower aspect, which is
the guru chakra as the lower part of the sahasrara;
the middle aspect, which is the sahasrara proper;
and the higher aspect which leads to Supreme
Bindu. It is more convenient to study the
sahasrara system in three parts: guru chakra
and sahasrara in its middle and higher aspects.

12 Guru

the sahasrara' clearly indicates that there is a
lotus at the feet of Guru within the sahasrara
as its part. T h e lotus within the sahasrara has
also been described as 'In the lotus, adorned
with thousand petals, is a circular moon region
where lies Guru and concentration should be
done on him' ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 23).
This means that there is a lotus on which the
sahasrara stands as an umbrella, that is, this
lotus is the lower part of the sahasrara. 'The lotus
at the feet of G u r u ' means the lotus where
Guru lies. T h e lotus at the feet of Guru has
also been called guru-pura (Guru's abode)
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4),
guru-sthana
(Guru's
place)
( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9) and guru-pada
(Guru's feet or place) ( - S h a d m n a y a t a n t r a ,
5.99). T h e words pura, sthana and pada technically signify a chakra, so guru-pura, gurusthana and guru-pada stand for guru chakra.
T h e guru chakra has also been termed dwadasharna (twelve-lettered) lotus ( - Tararahasya,
ch. 1, p. 1; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.31; Padukapanchaka, Verse 1), dwadashadala (twelve-petalled)
padma (lotus) ( - Shaktanandatararigini, 4.31),
urdhwamukha padma (lotus with its face u p wards) ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 8, p. 8;
Shaktanandatararigini, 4.30) and shukla abja
(white lotus) ( - Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2;
Mahanirwanatantra, 5.26).

It has been stated that concentration should
be on Guru who is in the sahasrara ( - Nilatantra, ch. 1, p. 1; Todalatantra, ch. 3, p. 4;
Matrikabhedatantra, ch. 7, p. 10; Brihannilatantra, ch. 6, p. 3 1 ; Karikalamalinitantra, ch. 3,
p. 7; Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 22; Guptasadhana
tantra, ch. 2, p. 2; Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p. 24; Shaktakrama, ch. 1, p. 1; Tararahasya,
ch. 1, p. 2; Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 8, p. 8;
Shaktanandatararigini, 4 . 1 ; 4.25; Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, p. 3; Shiwapurana, 3.3.63; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26. 5 - 6 ) . This comprehensive
statement indicates that Guru's place is within
the sahasrara; and this place has a specific name
and is a part of the sahasrara.
The statement 'Concentrating with all efforts
on the lotus at the feet of Guru, which lies in

T h a t the guru chakra is a part of the sahasrara
is indicated by the following statements: 'There
(in the sahasrara) is a twelve-lettered twelvepetalled (lotus)' ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in
Amarasanggraha M S ) ; 'There is a twelvepetalled lotus connected with the pericarp of
the sahasrara' ( - Gherandasanghita, 6.9); 'The
sahasrara is vast and is associated with the
twelve-petalled (lotus) (that is, the guru chakra
belongs to the sahasrara)' ( - Shadamnayatantra,
5.99); 'Above the pericarp of the twelve-lettered
lotus lies the thousand-petalled lotus' ( - T a r a rahasya, ch. 1, p. 1); 'Concentration should
be done on Guru who is in the face-up twelvepetalled lotus, situated in the lower part of
the face-down thousand-petalled lotus' ( - Shaktanandatararigini, 4.31).
In connection with the above passage (from

257

T h e Chakra System

the Shaktanandatararigini), Brahmananda quotes
a verse from the Yamala and explains it himself.
This verse is exactly the same as verse 1 of the
Padukapanchaka which has also been interpreted
by Kalicharana. 'I adore the twelve-lettered,
that is, twelve-petalled, lotus. W h a t is the
distinctive character of the lotus? It is like a
head-ornament of the stalk which supports the
passage
of Kundali,
running
from
the
muladhara lotus to the God Sadashiwa in the
form of Bindu situated in the pericarp of the
thousand-petalled lotus, that is, the chitrini'
nadi. As the twelve-lettered lotus stands on the
head of the chitrini nadi, so the word ornament
(bhushana) has been used. W h a t more? It is
inseparably connected with the pericarp of the
brahmarandhra lotus, that is, it is situated at
the lower part of the pericarp of the sahasrara
lotus with inseparable connection' ( - Brahma n a n d a : Shaktanandatararigini, 4.32).
T h e r e are two most important points in this
verse which need to be carefully considered.
First, a connection of this lotus with what has
been termed 'kundali-wiwara-kanda' ( = the support of the passage of kundali). T h e passage of
kundali means the brahma nadi. It is supported
by the chitrini nadi. T h e chitrini is within the
wajra, and the wajra within the sushumna.
So, the essence is that the sushumna, with all
its internal nadis, has a connection with the
twelve-lettered lotus. To indicate the connection
the word 'manaita' has been used. Brahmananda
explains it by head-ornament. Kalichararna interprets 'adorned by chitrini''. However, there is no
vital difference between them. Kalicharana
makes it clear by saying: 'As a lotus stands on
its stalk, so the twelve-lettered lotus is adorned
by the stalk in the form of the chitrini nadi.'
This means, the twelve-lettered lotus stands on
the chitrini nadi. T h e implication is that the
chitrini' and brahma nadis are in contact with
the twelve-lettered lotus, but not continuous
with it. So, the sushumna-wajra-chitrini-brahma
nadis end at the proximity of the twelve-lettered
lotus. It has been supported by the Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2, which says: 'The
twelve-lettered lotus is situated at the top of
the end-point of the chitrini nadi which contains
in it brahmarandhra (Kundalirandhrakandanta).

258

It is the abode of Guru who is lustrous white.
This lotus stands always with its face upwards.
There is a lotus with a thousand petals which
lies outside the face-upwards lotus (as an
umbrella).'
Second, there is a constant relation between
the twelve-lettered lotus and the brahmarandhra
lotus. Both Brahmananda and Kalicharana explain brahmarandhra lotus as sahasrara. But
the author thinks it unnecessary to regard
brahmarandhra as sahasrara. It has been clearly
stated that the brahmarandhra chakra is the
nirwana
chakra
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.8), not the sahasrara. Numerous statements have been quoted to show that brahmarandhra ends either as a nadi or a region intracranially, and beyond this is a void region where
there are no nadis and there it is situated extracranially, and in this void lies the sahasrara.
Kakcharana has explained in this way - the
brahmarandhra lotus, that is, the lotus - the
thousand-petalled lotus - in which is the brahmarandhra. T h e brahmarandhra lotus is the nirwana
chakra at the end point of the chitrini nadi. The
twelve-lettered lotus is in constant connection
with the pericarp of the brahmarandhra
(nirwana) lotus.
A question was raised by Dewi (Parwati):
the great lotus sahasrara stands always with its
face downwards; how is it possible for Guru to
be there ? Mahadewa's reply: the lotus (sahasrara)
lies always with its face downwards, but it
contains a pericarp which has its face always
upwards ( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 8, p. 8).
Mahadewa gives a further explanation. He says:
'The chitrini nadi containing lotuses is in the
form of Power. It extends from the muladhara
and all the chakras are in this nadi. chitrini
is an aspect of kundali-chitrini is kundali, and
therefore, it is, as kundalini, in three and a half
coils, residing always in the triangular process
of the lotus (muladhara). Where there is the
upper end of the chitrini nadi, there lies the
face-upwards (chakra = guru chakra), in constant contact with the topmost point of the
chitrini', the pericarp of which is in the nature
of power going upwards. . . . T h e pericarp with
the upwardly power h a s . the Kundali-coils in
it and therefore it is bright. . . . This pericarp

Exposition of the Chakras
(that is, the pericarp of the twelve-petalled
lotus, imbedded in the sahasrara) is in contact
with the upper end of the chitrini. Concentration should be done (on Guru situated) in the
pericarp. This is why the pericarp (of the
twelve-petalled lotus) is with its face upwards
and with the power directed upwards' ( - ibid.,
ch.9, p. 9).
From the above it is clear that the sahasrara
which stands with its face downwards contains
a lotus as its part with its face upwards and,
consequently, its pericarp is upward. That this
upwardly directed pericarp of the twelve-petalled lotus is within the sahasrara has been made
clear by Mahadewa himself. He says: In the
lower deep hollow part (gahwara) of the sahasrara
lies the pericarp which stands always with its
face upward ( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 8,
p. 8). This upwardly faced lotus in its lower
edge is in contact with the upper end of the
chitrini nadi.

Terminology
1 Dwadasharna (twelve-lettered) Sarasiruha
(lotus), or Padma (lotus), mentioned in the
Padukapanchaka, Verse 1; Tararahasya, ch. 1,
p. 1; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.31,32; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2.
2 Dwadashadala (twelve-petalled) Saroja
(lotus), or Padma (lotus), mentioned in the
Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 23; Shaktanandatararigini,
4.31,32; Gherandasanghita, 6.9.
3 Dwadashapatraka (twelve-petalled), mentioned in the Mridanitantra, quoted in
Amarasanggraha MS.
4 Urdhwamukha (upward-face)
padma
(lotus), mentioned in the Bhutashuddhitantra,
ch. 8, p. 8; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.30.
5 Shukla (white) Abja (lotus), mentioned
in the Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2; Mahanirwanatantra, 5.26.
6 Gurupada padma (lotus with Guru's feet),
mentioned in the Kamadhenutantra, ch. 17,
p. 23.
7 Gurupura (Guru chakra), mentioned in
the Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4.

8 Gurusthana (Guru chakra), mentioned in
the Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9.
9 Gurupada (Guru's place = guru chakra),
mentioned in the Shadamnayatantra, 5.99.
10 Brahma Chakra, mentioned in the Rudrayamala, Part 2,60.31.
11 Somamandala (-chakra), mentioned in the
Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 2, p. 91.
Position
The guru chakra is situated in the void-region
as the lower part of the sahasrara; it is situated
at the top of the upper end of the sushumna.
Description
The guru chakra (Plate 23) is white ( - Padukapanchaka, Verse 1; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2, p. 2; Gherandasanghita, 6.10), and it is
therefore called shukla abja (white lotus) (-Mahanirwanatantra, 5.26; Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2).
It has twelve petals ( - Padukapanchaka, Verse 1;
Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 1; ch. 4, p. 23; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.31,32; Shadamnayatantra, 5.99;
Mridanitantra, quoted in .dmarasanggraha MS;
Gherandasanghita, 6.9). The colour of the petals
is white, as the lotus is white. On the twelve
petals are twelve letters, so the lotus is called
the dwadasharna (twelve-lettered). The letters
are Ha, Sa, Kha, Freng, Ha, Sa, Ksha, Ma,
La, Wa, Ra, Yung ( - Gheradasanghita, 6.10)
which constitute the Guru-mantra, and are
arranged from right to left. The colour of the
mantra-letters has not been mentioned. As
Guru is white in colour, so the mantra-letters
would also be white, as the form and the mantra
of Guru are identical.
The pericarp of the lotus is always with its
face upward ( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 8,
p. 8; ch. 9, p. 9), so it is called urdhwamukha
padma (upward-face lotus). The top of this
lotus is adorned with the thousand petals
(like an umbrella) ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p. 23); as the thousand-petalled lotus stands
above the pericarp of the twelve-petalled lotus
259

The Chakra System
( - Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 1), and on the outside
( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). The
pericarp of the twelve-petalled lotus is like a
circular moon region ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p. 23), consequently, it is moon-like, lustrous
and nectarous ( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 8,
p. 8). It is the place where concentration on
Guru should be done. For this, the detailed
knowledge of the pericarp is necessary.
It has been stated: 'Inside the open pericarp
of the (twelve-petalled) lotus is a triangular
region (abalalaya), formed by the lines beginning
with A, Ka and Tha; in the corners of the triangle are the letters Ha, La and Ksha, and all
these form a diagram; I adore it' (Padukapanchaka, Verse 2; here, the text interpreted by
Kalicharana has not been strictly followed;
a manuscript text in possession of the author's
guru has been used).
The three lines which constitute the triangle
are A-line, consisting of sixteen letters from a
to ah; Ka-line, consisting of sixteen letters from
ka to ta; and Tha-line, consisting of sixteen
letters from tha to sa. The letters on the lines
and in the three corners within the triangle are
together fifty-one matrika-units. The triangle
is situated with its apex downward. The A-line
starts from the apex and forms the left side of
the triangle. On this line are sixteen letters from
a to ah. The A-line is called wama, Brahma or
rajas line.
The Ka-line starts from the top of the left
side and forms the base of the triangle. On this
line are sixteen letters from ka to ta. The Kaline is called the jyeshtha, Wishnu or sattwa
line. The Tha-line starts from the right end of
the base line and goes down to meet the apex,
thus forming the right side of the triangle.
On this line are sixteen letters from tha to sa.
The Tha-line is also called the roudri, Shiwa
or tamas line. The letter ha is at the apex, la at
the left corner and ksha at the right corner,
inside the triangle. These lines and letters form
the Power-yantra - the triangular process of
Kundalini, called abalalaya.
It has been stated that there are three gunas
(as three lines) in the pericarp of the twelvepetalled lotus, and (the lines) are in the nature
of Brahma, Wishnu and Shiwa ( - Purashcha260

ranarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9). This means that there
is a triangle in the pericarp, which is formed
by the Brahma, Wishnu and Shiwa lines, that
is, the A-Ka-Tha triangle. So it has been said
that the splendorous Kundalini-coils are in the
pericarp ( - ibid., ch. 9, p. 9), that is, inside the
triangle in the pericarp. More clearly, the
pericarp contains a triangle in which lies Kundali,
so it is said to be in the form of three and a half
coils ( - ibid., ch. 8, p. 8). Because of the presence
of Kundalini, the triangle is called abalalaya.
The triangle in the pericarp is formed by the
lines beginning with A, Ka and Tha ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha MS; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Gherandasanghita, 6.11), and within the triangle in its
corners are the letters ha, la and ksha ( - Gherandasanghita, 6.11; Sammohanatantra, Part 2,
ch. 2 p. 2). The triangle is in the nature of
Brahma, Wishnu and Shiwa ( - Tararahasya,
ch. 4, p. 29).
It has been stated: 'Inside that triangle is
the region of the jewelled altar (manipithamandala); the whitish-red lustre of the gems
in the altar, seems to challenge the brilliance of
the bluish-yellow (pingala) lightning flash; nadalbindu as an aspect of the altar is connected
with Supreme Consciousness embodied as Wagbhawa-bija (chinmaya wapu) ( - Padukapanchaka, Verse 3).
The jewelled altar shines so brightly that it
appears more splendorous than the brilliance
of a lightning flash. The compound word
nadabindumanipithamandala may be interpreted
as manipithamandala with nada and bindu;
or nada and bindu and manipithamandala; or
manipithamandala in the form of nada and bindu.
The commentator Kahcharana has rejected the
third alternative because of the dissimilarity
of their colours. He says that as nada is white
and bindu is red, they can never be whitishred which is the colour of the altar. But this is
not a strong argument. The white and red
when mixed together produce the patala (pale
red) colour. He explains that nada is below,
bindu is above, and the region of the jewelled
altar is in between the two. He states that
'chinmaya wapu' is the body of nada, bindu and
manipithamandala in the form of knowledge.

Exposition of the Chakras

He does not accept that 'chinmaya wapu'
stands for wagbhawa-bija because, as Guru is
white, his bija is also white, and the attribute
of whitish-red lustre to the bija does not fit.
But the words in this verse should be translated technically, as they indicate the modes of
concentration to be practised. W h e n concentration is done on Guru in form, he is thought of
as white in colour and is on the jewelled altar
of whitish-red lustre. But concentration is also
done on the mantra-form of Guru. Chinmaya
wapu means Chit or Supreme Consciousness
embodied as Wagbhawa-bija, that is Aing which
is the Guru-mantra. Nada-bindu is an aspect
of the jewelled altar. T h e jewelled altar becomes
absorbed in the nada-bindu of the bija Ai to form
Guru-bjja-mantra. In concentration on the
mantra-form, the jewelled altar is not thought of,
but only the bija Ai with nada-bindu, that is,
Aing.
The manipitha (jewelled altar) has simply
been called pitha (altar) which is with nadabindu and is beautiful ( - Gherandasanghita,
6.12). T h e manipitha has also been called bright
singhasana (throne) in the Kahkalamalinitantra,
ch. 3, p. 7. There, it has been stated that splendorous Antaratman (Brahman) is in the thousandpetalled lotus; in addition to it, there is (within
the twelve-petalled lotus which is the lower
aspect of the sahasrara) the bright throne between
nada and bindu on which Guru is seated, who
is to be contemplated on. O n , and in connection
with, nada is a lustrous position to be thought
of as the jewelled altar or bright throne in gross
form of concentration, above which is bindu.
Above it is hangsah-pitha (seat). It has been
stated: 'Above it, there is the primordial Hangsah
who is the centre of splendour, growing like a
flame, and who manifests himself as the destroyer
of the universe by his great power of destruction;
I do concentration on him' ( - Padukapanchaka,
Verse 4). Above it means above the space
which is above nada, that is, manipitha. Above
manipitha is bindu, and within the bindu is
Hangsah. So, the bindu is the hangsah-seat.
Hangsah is Shiwa and Shakti. Hangsah is splendorous. This means that Shiwa is in union with
kundalini. Hangsah is the destroyer of the
universe, that is, the aroused kundalini exhibits

her great power of absorption, being in Shiwa,
by which all cosmic principles are absorbed into
her. Hangsah represents a pair: H a n g is Shiwa
and Sah is Power as kundalini.
It has been stated that concentration should
be done on Guru in Hangsah ( - Kularnawa,
ch. 4, p. 22; Nilatantra, ch. 1, p. 1); also, concentration is done on Guru in hangsah-seat
( - Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, p. 3). Hangsah is
above the altar ( - Gherandasanghita, 6. 12), that
is in bindu, which is above the jewelled altar.
So, bindu is Hangsah, that is, kundalini united
with Shiwa. And from a mantra viewpoint,
Hangsah is in the bindu of the Guru-bija-mantra
Aing.
It has been stated: 'There, that is, in the
Hangsah-seat, are the lotus-feet of Guru from
which the saffron-like red-coloured and honeyimbibed nectar flows, and which are cool like
nectar of the moon (or the rays of the moon)
and the place of all good; my mind contemplates
them' ( - Padukapanchaka, Verse 5).
Guru's feet are actually the source from which
the streams of life-substance of red colour
containing the essence of vitality (makaranda)
constantly flow; and concentration on that
causes revivification of the mind and revitalization of the body.
'The lotus-feet of Guru are in the hangsahseat, as it has been stated that the footstools
(paduka) of Guru are in Hangsah' ( - Gherandasanghita, 6.12). 'Where the footstool is, there
is Guru, and concentration on G u r u should be
done there' ( - ibid., 6.13). T h e footstool is
the spiritual symbol of Guru, indicating the
presence of Guru.
It has been stated: 'I adore the lotus feet of
Guru, situated in the lotus lying in contact with
the h e a d ; the lotus feet are on the jewelled
footstools and all unspirituality disappears when
one comes in contact with t h e m ; they are red
like young leaves; their nails are as bright as
the moon; they are moistened with nectar and
as beautiful as the lotuses in the lake' ( - Padukapanchaka, Verse 6).
Guru's lotus feet are on the jewelled footstool.
This jewelled footstool is not the jewelled altar
situated above nada and below bindu. T h e
footstool is on the Hangsah-seat and the
261

T h e Chakra System

Hangsah-seat is in bindu. Guru's feet are always
on the bright footstools in Hangsah, and, in
fact, they indicate that Guru, in form, is lying
in Hangsah, where concentration should be
done.
T h e following are the concentration-forms of
Guru.
1 Guru is moon-like white with smiling face
and bright eyes and his body has odour of
purity; he wears the garment of flowers, holds a
lotus in his hand and makes gestures of granting
boons and of dispelling fear; he is all dewatas
( - Nilatantra, ch. 1, p. 1).
2 G u r u is like a mountain of silver, that is,
white and motionless; he is seated in wirasana.
(hero posture), adorned with all ornaments,
wearing a white garland and dressed in white
raiment; he makes the gestures of granting
boons and of dispelling fear; his Power (as
Divine Mother) is seated on his left thigh,
holds with her right hand the divine body of
G u r u , and with her left h a n d a blue lotus, and is
adorned with red-coloured ornaments; Guru's
look is kind, and he is with knowledge and in
bliss ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 3, p. 7).
3 Guru is like a mountain of silver (white and
motionless), he is with his Power who has a
divine face and is self-luminous ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 10, p. 13).
4 Guru, who is Shiwa, is moon-white, holding
in his hand a lotus, and making the gestures of
granting boons and of dispelling fear; he wears a
fragrant garland of white flowers; his face is
smiling and his eyes are bright; he is all dewatas
( - Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 22).
5 Guru is splendorous like the autumnal
moon, that is, shining white in colour, with
lotus-eyes, moon-like beautiful and smiling face,
he wears a garland of divine flowers and is
dressed in divine raiment, and his body is
anointed with a fragrant substance of divine
character; on his left side is his beautiful Power
of deep red colour; he holds in his hand a lotus
and his hands are in the gestures of granting
boons a n d dispelling fear ( - Guptasadhanatantra, c h . 2 , p. 2).
6 Guru is like pure crystal (in colour),
adorned with white-coloured ornaments, wearing a garland of white flowers, seated in padma-

262

sana (lotus posture), and established in yoga;
he is two-eyed, calm (in samadhi) and very
kind; his hands are in wara (granting boons)
and abhaya (dispelling fear) mudras; his Power,
who is red in colour, is seated on his left thigh and
holds his body with her right hand while holding
a blue lotus with her left h a n d ; his eyes are red
and his face smiling; he is all bliss and, as God
(Ishwara), he should be very respectfully saluted
( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 23).
7 Guru is like pure crystal (in colour),
anointed with a fragrant substance, calm and
smiling; he makes the gestures of granting boons
and dispelling fear and his look is very kind; he
is with his Power, who is seated on his left thigh,
adorned with white coloured ornaments; he is
in full bliss ( - Shaktakrama, ch. 1, p. 1).
8 Guru is white in colour, adorned with
various ornaments, three-eyed, and seated in
swastikasana (auspicious posture); he is glad
to see the lotus-face with ruddy lips of his Power
of red colour by his left side ( - Tararahasya,
ch. l , p p . 1-2).
9 Guru is white-coloured, two-armed, calm
and has a pleased countenance ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4).
10 G u r u is like ten thousand moons, that is,
intensely shining white in colour; his hands show
the gestures of granting boons and dispelling fear;
he is dressed in white raiment, wears a garland
of white flowers, and his body is anointed
with white sandal paste; he is with his Power,
who is red, seated on his left thigh; he is divine,
imperishable; he is Shiwa and Supreme Guru
( - Shaktanandatararigini, 4.2).
11 Guru is like pure crystal (in colour),
dressed in silken cloth; smeared with a fragrant
substance and adorned with white-coloured
ornaments; he is calm and smiling and his look
is kind; he makes the gestures of granting boons
and dispelling fear and holds a lotus; he is with
his Power, who is red in colour and is seated
on his left thigh; she holds his beautiful body
with her right hand and a blue lotus with her
left h a n d and all this makes a lovely picture;
Guru's lotus-eyes are full of supreme bliss
( - Shyamarahasya, 1.10).
12 Guru is two-eyed, two-armed, and dressed
with white raiment; he wears a garland of white

Exposition of the Chakras

flowers and his body is anointed with the white
sandal paste; one of his hands shows waram u d r a (the gesture of granting boons), and the
other makes abhaya-mudra (the gesture of
dispelling fear); he is calm and very kind;
his Power (Shakti) embraces him (by her right
arm, lying on his left side) and holds with her
left hand a blue lotus; he is gracious-looking
and smiling and grants the desires of his
worshippers ( - Mahanirwanatantra, 5.26-28).
13 Guru is divine, three-eyed, two-armed,
and dressed in white raiment; he wears a garland
of white flowers and his body is anointed with
the white sandal paste; he is with his Power, who
is red in colour ( - Gherandasanghita, 6.13-14).
14 Guru is like pure crystal (in colour) and
two-eyed; he makes the gestures of granting
boons and dispelling fear; he is Shiwa and very
beautiful ( - Shiwapurana, 3.3.64).
15 Guru holds in his hand a book (wyakhyam u d r a ; it can also be translated as: Guru holds
a book and makes the gesture of granting boons);
he is delighted, smiling, tranquil, contented and
kind; he is Brahman ( - Brahmawaiwartapurana,
1.26.6-7).
From the above descriptions, the form of Guru
for concentration is as follows:
1 Guru is either moon-white or like pure
crystal in colour.
2 He has two eyes. He may also be thought of
as three-eyed. His eyes are bright.
3 He has two arms. He makes the gestures of
granting boons and dispelling fear; or
holding a book in one of his hands, and
showing wara m u d r a (granting boons) with
the other hand.
4 His face is lustrous, calm, contented,
delighted, kind and smiling.
5 He is dressed in white raiment; he wears
a garland of fragrant white flowers, and is
adorned with ornaments of white colour;
his body is smeared with the white sandal
paste.
6 Guru assumes padmasana (lotus posture),
swastikasana (auspicious posture), or
wirasana (hero posture).
7 His Shakti (Power) is seated on his left
thigh, holds his body with her right hand

and a blue lotus with her left hand. T h e
Power is red in colour and has a face as
beautiful as a lotus.

Explanation
T h e twelve-petalled lotus is a great centre of
concentration. Here, dhyana is perfected and
developed to its highest level, and transformed
in sahasrara into samprajnata samadhi. T w o
main forms of dhyana are practised here: first,
dhyana on form; and finally, dhyana on
luminosity. Dhyana on Guru is the concentration on form, and dhyana on Kundalini is the
concentration on luminosity.
From the mantra viewpoint, Guru is derived
from the matrika-letters Gang, Ung, Rang and
Ung. Gang exhibits attributes and is also beyond
attributes; it contains five dewas and powers,
and five prana-wayus; there is Kundali in it;
it is like the morning sun (vermilion) in colour.
Ung contains five dewas and five prana-wayus;
Kundalini lies in it; it is yellow in colour. Rang
contains five dewas, five prana-wayus, three
Powers; in it lies Kundali; it is like red-lightning
(shining red in colour). So, the basic power of
Guru is Kundalini and there are five Shiwas
and Powers in a latent form in him.
T h e ga-aspect is the highest spiritual knowledge arising from samadhi. It has been stated
that Guru removes darkness arising from unspirituality, designated by 'gu', by control,
designated by 'ru' ( - Dwayopanishad, Mantra
4). But the meanings of 'gu' and 'ru' as stated
here are secondary. In the Yamala, it has been
stated that 'gu' means which gives success, and
'ra' is what burns impurities, and 'u' is Shiwa,
so Guru is in the nature of these three
( - Shaktanandatarangini, 2.8). This is also the
secondary meaning.
T h e U-aspect is Shiwa. So it has been stated
that G u r u is Shiwa ( - Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 2 2 ;
Purashchararcarasollasa, ch. 8, p. 8; Shaktanandatarahgini, 4.2; 4.5; Shiwapurana, 3.3.64);
Guru is Brahman ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5,
p. 24; Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.7). But Shiwa or Brahman
has two aspects; as Supreme Consciousness
263

T h e Chakra System

without the limitation of mind, and as PowerConsciousness manifesting mind in the form of
samadhi-consciousness. Supreme Consciousness
is full, infinite and static in which Supreme Power
remains in Shiwa as Shiwa. Here, Shiwa is
Parama Shiwa, Brahman is without attributes.
At this stage, Shiwa-consciousness is not limited
by the mind, so it is non-mental, and supreme
and infinite. This is the asamprajnata-samadhiconsciousness. This aspect is in Guru in latent
form. T h e aspect which becomes manifest in
G u r u is Power-Consciousness appearing in form.
In this aspect, Guru is Ishwara ( - Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 23), that is, he is endowed with
omnipotency a n d omnisciency. He is divine
(dewa) ( - Gherandasanghita, 6.13). He assumes
a mental form ( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9,
p. 9), that is, Parama Shiwa appears in subtle
form as G u r u in dhyana. Consciousness in
dhyana is in the form of Shiwa when concentration is done on G u r u .
Guru as Shiwa is beyond the six Shiwas Brahma, Wishnu, Rudra, Isha, Sadashiwa and
Parashiwa, and, therefore, he is the seventh
Shiwa who is Parama Shiwa, appearing in form.
So, G u r u is Parama Shiwa in form. Guru is
with his Shakti (Power). But his Power is
beyond the six Powers lying with six Shiwas.
In Parama Shiwa, Supreme Power becomes one
and the same with Shiwa. In Guru, the Power
is manifested. Guru and his Power are the
replica of Shiwa-Shakti principle. His Shakti
is Kundalini in form. T h e ra-aspect of G u r u is
Shakti and the u-aspect indicates her union
with Shiwa. So, in concentration-form she is
seated on Guru's left thigh and in embrace.
It has been stated that Guru's Power is called
unmani ( - Purashcharawarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9).
U n m a n i is that power by which consciousness
becomes free from all objects, and is established
in Shiwa-form. This is the highest state of
samprajnata samadhi. This power arises from
Kundalini, a n d kundalini in form is Guru's
Power.
W h e n dhyana on G u r u develops to its highest
point, one is able to go beyond form and dhyana
is transformed into a luminous type. This means
that now it is possible to make dhyana directly

264

and without thought, on the splendour of
Kundalini. Now, the form aspects of Guru
and his Power are absorbed into Kundalini
and she appears as splendorous. On the accomplishment of dhyana-on-splendour, the practitioner is able to pass into the sahasrara proper and
attains samprajnata samadhi in which his whole
consciousness becomes splendorous Kundalini.
Concentration on Guru consists of the following stages.
1 Thought-concentration o n :
the white
twelve-petalled lotus on which is twelve-lettered
Guru-mantra of white colour; the pericarp of
the lotus is moon-white.
2 Thought-concentration o n : the a-ka-tha
triangle, red in colour, situated within the
pericarp, with its apex downward, and with all
letters which are on the three lines - starting
from the left line, then the base line and finally
the right line, and the letters ha, la, ksha in the
corners.
3 Thought-concentration on: nada of white
colour, situated above the triangle; above nada
is the jewelled altar of very bright whitish-red
colour; and above it is bindu of red colour.
4 Thought-concentration
on:
Guru-bija
mantra Aing of white colour, lying within the
triangle.
5 Thought-concentration
on:
luminous
Hangsah, lying within the bindu of the bijamantra Aing. Note. Hangsah is Shiwa in union
with Kundalini, and by deep concentration
Shiwa-Kundalini should be aroused as Guru
and his Shakti in form.
6 Thought-concentration: within the pericarp
of moon-white colour of the white twelvepetalled lotus is the red triangle and above it is
white nada, and above that is the shining
whitish-red jewelled altar, and above the altar is
red bindu, and within bindu is Guru of moonlike white with his Shakti of red colour. From the
Guru's feet the saffron-like red life-substance is
continuously being irradiated. Above the head
of Guru, there is the down-faced white thousandpetalled lotus, covering him like an umbrella.
7 Dhyana on Guru and his Shakti in form.
8 Dhyana on splendorous Kundalini.
Now we come to the sahasrara proper.

Exposition of the Chakras

13 Sahasrara
The sahasrara is the last chakra in the chakra
system. It is the thirteenth chakra, numerically
from the muladhara. T h e sahasrara and its
lower part, guru chakra, are not situated within
the chitrini nadi, as this nadi ends intracranially,
and the sahasrara, including guru chakra, lies
in the void region, where there are no nadis.

Terminology
1 Sahasrara (Thousand-petalled), mentioned
in the Adwayatarakopanishad, Mantra 13;
Mandalabrahmanopanishad, 1.41; Goutamiyatantra, 35.54; Todalatantra, ch. 3, p. 4; ch. 8,
p. 16; ch. 9, p. 17; Gayatritantra, 2 . 3 ; Matrikabhedatantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 3, p. 3; ch. 7, p. 10;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 5, p. 24; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 17, p. 2 3 ; Shaktakrama, ch. 1, p. 1;
Kubjikatantra, 5.263; Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 2 3 ;
Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 3, p. 3;
ch. 10, p. 9; ch. 14, p. 12; ch. 15, p. 13; Mayatantra, ch. 6, p. 5; Purashcharawarasollasa, ch. 2,
p. 2; ch. 8, p. 8; ch. 10, p. 11; Wishwasaratantra,
ch. 2, pp. 11, 2 3 ; Mundamalatantra, ch. 2, p. 5;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 3, p. 7; Shaktanandatararigini, 4 . 1 ; 4.16; 4.21; 4.34; Shyamarahasya,
ch. 1, p. 3; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 22.16; 60.32;
Mahanirwanatantra, 5. 143; Purashcharyarnawa,
ch. 6, p. 4 9 1 ; Shadamnayatantra, 3.75; 4.54,
73, 140, 141; 5.99, 103, 243, 389; Shiwasanghita,
5.138, 161, 163; Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ; Shiwapurana, 3.3.63; 3.5.53;
Dewibhagawata, 7.35.47; Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5.
(a) Sahasrara Padma (Thousand-petalled
lotus), mentioned in the Shaktakrama, ch. 1,
p. 1; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.41;
Bhunashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3;
Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 4, p. 4;
Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; Shaktanandatararigini, 4.25; Mahanirwanatantra, 5.86; Shiwasanghita, 5.190.
(b) Sahasrara Mahapadma (the great
thousand-petalled lotus), mentioned in the

Todalatantra, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 6, p. 12; ch. 7,
p. 14; ch. 9, p. 17; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Nirwanatantra, ch. 3, p. 5; Guptasadhanatantra, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktakrama, ch. 1, p. 1;
Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 2; Mayatantra, ch. 6,
p. 5; Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 2, p. 2; ch. 8,
p. 8; ch. 9, p. 9; Wishwasaratantra, ch.l, p.10;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.15; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490; Gheradasanghita, 6.9.
(c) Sahasrara Ambuja (thousand-petalled
lotus), mentioned in the Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Rudrayamala, Part 2, 27.70;
Mridanitantra, quoted in;4marasanggraha MS.
(d) Sahasrara Saroruha (thousand-petalled
lotus), mentioned in the Shaktanandatarangini,
4.29; Shiwasanghita, 5.188, 198.
2 Sahasraradala (thousand-petalled), mentioned in the Kubjikatantra, 5.265; 6.312.
3 Sahasradala (with or without Padma, Pankaja, Kamala) (lotus with one thousand
petals), mentioned in the Yogachudamanyupanishad, Mantra 6; Nilatantra, ch. 1, p. 1;
Kamadhenutantra, ch. 15, p. 19; Karikalamalinitantra, ch. 3, p. 7; Nirwanatantra, ch. 10,
pp. 12,14; Radhatantra, 5.11; 6.7; 11.9,23;
14.1; Gandharwatantra, ch. 29, p. 112; Kubjikatantra, 6.314; Tararahasya, ch. 1, p. 1; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 1, p. 1; ch. 3, p. 3; Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 1 1 ; Koulawalitantra, ch. 3,
p. 7; Shaktanandatararigiri, 4.24, 29,31; 9.16;
Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, pp. 3,15; ch. 4, p. 79;
Brahmasiddhantapaddhati
MS;
Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ; Padmapurana,
5.38,73; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 4.21, 174;
Dewibhagawata, 9.42.8; Kularnawa, ch. 4, p. 22.
4 Sahasrara Kamala, Pankaja, or Padma (lotus
with a thousand petals), mentioned in the
Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.86; Brahmawaiwartapurana, 1.26.5.
5 Sahasrachchada Pankaja (thousand-petalled
lotus), mentioned in the Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2.
6 Sahasrabja (thousand-petalled lotus), mentioned in the Mundamalatantra, ch. 2, p. 5;
ch. 6, p. 9.
7 Sahasrapatra (with or without Kamala)
(thousand-petalled lotus), mentioned in the

265

T h e Chakra System

Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 492; Skandapurana, 7.1.31; Mahabharata, 12.331.21.
8 Sahasraparna Padma (thousand-petalled
lotus), mentioned in the Padmapurana, 1.39.153;
Matsyapurana, 168.15.
9 Sahasradala Adhomukha Padma (thousandpetalled, face-down lotus), mentioned in the
Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 10, p. 11.
10 Adhomukha Mahapadma (the great facedown lotus), mentioned in the Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9.
11 Sthana (literally, a place; here sahasrara),
mentioned in the Yogakundalyupanishad, 1.74.
12 Kapalasamputa (a hemispherical covering
over the skull, that is, technically, sahasrara),
mentioned in the Yogashikhopanishad, 1.76.
13 Wyomambuja (lotus in void), mentioned
in the Yogashikhopanishad, 6.48.
14 Wyomambhoja (lotus in void; void lotus),
mentioned in the Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 4.12.
15 Wyoma (with or without chakra and
sthala), mentioned in the Yogarajopanishad,
Mantra 17; Phetkarinitantra, ch. 14, p. 39;
Gandharwatantra, ch. 29, p. 112.
16 Akasha Chakra (chakra in void; void
chakra),
mentioned
in
the
Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.9.
17 Shiras Padma (lotus in contact with the
h e a d ; topmost lotus; highest lotus), mentioned
in the Brihannilatantra, ch. 6, p. 3 1 .
18 Amlana Padma, or Pankaja (fresh or bright
lotus), mentioned in the Purashcharanarasollasa,
ch. 9, p. 9.
19 Dashashatadala Padma (lotus with onethousand petals; thousand-petalled lotus), mentioned in the Shatchakranirupana, Verse 40.
20 Shuddha Padma (pure, or white lotus),
mentioned in the Shatchakranirupana, Verse 52.
21 Shantyatita (Sahasrara), mentioned in the
Shiwapurana, 3.3.29; Garudapurana, 1.23.48.
22 Shantyatita Pada (Sahasrara Chakra), mentioned in the Shiwapurana, 5a. 7.3.
23 Parama Shiras (supracranial chakra), mentioned in the Bhagawata, 10.87.18.
Position
T h e sahasrara lies in the void-region where there
are no nadis; it is outside the cranium, but in
266

contact with the top-end of the chitrini nadi,
lying intracranially, through wisarga (powerbridge). At the terminal part of the chitrini
is the nirwana chakra, which is connected through
the wisarga, indirectly with the twelve-petalled
lotus, which is the lower aspect of the sahasrara.

Description
T h e sahasrara has 1000 petals ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 4 0 ; Yogachudamanyupanishad,
Mantra 6; Nilatantra, ch. 1, p. 1; Kamadhenutantra, ch. 15, p. 19; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 3,
p. 7; Nirwanatantra, ch. 10, p. 12; Kularnawa,
ch. 4, p. 22; Kubjikatantra, 6.314; Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3; Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Purashcharanarasollasa,
ch. 8, p. 8; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.29; Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, p. 3 ) ; this is why it is called
sahasrara, sahasraradala, sahasradala, sahasra
kamala, sahasrabja, sahasrapatra and sahasraparna.
T h e colour of the petals is white ( - Shathakranirupana, Verse 4 0 ; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2,
p. 5; Kubjikatantra, 6. 314; Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatarangini, 4.29;
Shyamarahasya, ch. 1, p. 3; Mridanitantra,
quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ; Shiwapurana,
3.3.63); red ( - Shaktanandatararigini, 4.25);
yellow ( - Shiwapurana, 4.40.26) and golden
( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, quoted in Yogakalpalatika M S ) . T h e petals are also variegatedwhite, red, yellow, black and green; now they
appear as white, then red, then yellow, again
white, then green ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 10,
p. 12); also, the petals are white, red, yellow,
black and green; now it is white, then black,
yellow, red and green; in this manner, the petals
acquire different colours ( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9).
T h e petals of the sahasrara are the seat of all
powers ( - Kubjikatantra, 6.315; Nirwanatantra,
ch. 10, p. 12; Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9,
p. 9), all mantras ( - Kubjikatantra, 6.315),
and the matrika-letters ( - Shaktanandatararigini, 4.29). There are 50 matrika-letters
on the petals ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in Amarasanggraha M S ) . T h e Shatchakranirupana names

Exposition of the Chakras

the matrika-letters which are on the petals.
There are two readings of the text. In one, the
text reads as 'lakaradyairwarnaih', that is, the
letters beginning with la. T h e la is the second
la pronounced rha or da. In this connection
Kalicharana says that here it is not meant that
the letters are to be read from the end to the
beginning (wiloma), but the meaning is to take
la, and leave ksha out. T h e letter-arrangement
has been more clearly stated in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5. It says that on the petals
of the sahasrara are the letters from a to what is
the end of ksha (akaradi kshakarantaih). Kalicharana interprets anta (after kshakara) as awasana, that is, termination. At the end of ksha
is la, so the la is to be taken by leaving ksha out.
This is the opinion of Kalieharana. T h a t the
arrangement of the letters on the petals should
be from the beginning to the end, not the
reverse, and from a to la by leaving ksha out has
been stated in the Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 17.
It has been declared there that Kundali, being in
the sahasrara and seeing Shiwa there, encircles
Shiwa-linga in the form of a garland consisting
of matrika-letters from a to la (akaradilakaranta)
in which ksha is in the mouth, that is, ksha
becomes the central letter (meru). This garland
of matrika-letters is called panchashika mala
(a garland of fifty letters). T h e string of this
garland is Shakti-Shiwa. T h e matrika-letters
strung in the garland are fifty from a to la,
and ksha becomes the central letter, and is not
counted. T h e japa is made from a to la (anuloma)
and also from la to a (wiloma). However, the
arrangement of letters on the petals is from a
to la, and without ksha.
T h e text of the Shatchakranirupana (Verse 40)
can be read as 'lalatadyairwarnaih', literally,
all letters from lalata. T h e usual meaning of
lalata is the forehead. But it does not apply
here. Technically, l a l a t a indicates the letters
a, tha and ha ( - Warnabijakosha). Here lalata
stands for a, so the meaning is, letters from a.
The commentator Shankara explains it as fifty
letters from a placed in twenty layers. T h e
commentator Wishwanatha says 'all the matrikaletters from a'. Ramawallabha only says 'letters
from a'. Bhuwanamohana makes it clearer by
saying, from the beginning of a to the end of

ksha (akaradi kshakaranta). Kalicharana makes
it still clearer. He says that it is to be understood
as meaning that the fifty letters from a to ksha
are to be taken by leaving out la.
T h e petals are arranged in twenty layers,
each layer containing fifty petals. In each layer,
there are fifty matrika-letters on the fifty petals.
So the matrika-letters from a to la (rha) or
ksha go round each layer; and each matrikaletter is on one petal. T h e matrika-letters are
arranged on the petals from right to left. T h e
colour of the matrika-letters has not been
mentioned in the text. Kaheharana says that as
the matrika-letters are white, they should be
thought of as white here (on the sahasrarapetals). (See Plate 24.) But the normal colours
of the matrika-letters are different; some are
white, some yellow, while others are red, smokecoloured, etc. In the Kankalamalinitantra (ch. 2,
p. 5), it has been stated that the matrikaletters are shining. It may mean white, or red,
or any colour. However, when the petals are
thought to be white, the letters may be taken to
be white. When the petals are thought of as
having other colours, the letters can be thought
of as having the colour of the petals or their
normal colours.
T h e sahasrara stands with its face downward
( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 4 0 ; Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Nirwanatantra, ch. 10,
p. 12; Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 2 3 ; T r i p u r a sarasamuchchaya, 5.41; Purashcharanarasollasa,
ch. 8, p. 8; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 1 ;
Shaktanandatarangini, 4.29; Shyamarahasya, ch.
1, p. 3; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490;
Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) , and its filaments are. red in colour ( - Shatchakranirapana,
Verse 4 0 ; Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.41; Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Shaktanandatararigini;, 4. 29; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6,
490), and they are also lightning-like splendorous
( - Purashcharawarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9). T h e
arrangement of the petals is such that the
sahasrara appears as bell-shaped. (See Plate 25.)
T h e pericarp of the sahasrara is of a golden colour
( - Kubjikatantra, 6. 316; Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 9, p. 9), and is endowed with various
powers, and within in it lies all knowledge
( - Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 8, p. 8). Here are
267

T h e Chakra System

the seats of Supreme Being ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 14, p. 12); Shadamnayatantra, 5.103)
and Supreme Power ( - Bhutashuddhitantra,
ch. 10, p. 9; Shadamnayatantra, 5.243); it is the
centre of immortality ( - Shadamnayatantra 5.
389). Now we have to study the pericarp in
detail.
T h e Shatchakranirupana says: 'Within the
pericarp of the sahasrara is the full moon (that
is, the circular moon-region) which is shining
brilliantly and without the spots. It radiates
a b u n d a n t light which is nectarous (that is, full
of life) and delightful. Inside the circular moon
region is the lightning-like luminous triangle
(trikorza). Inside this triangle is void (shunya)
(that is, Supreme Bindu) which lies concealed
(that is, realizable only by dhyana) and is
worshipped by the yogis' ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 41).
T h e presence of the circular region of the
moon (chandramandala) in the pericarp of the
sahasrara has been mentioned in the Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Sammohanatantra,
Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2; Mayatantra, ch. 6, p. 5;
Purashcharanarasollasa, ch. 2, p. 2; Shyam-arahasya, ch. 1, p. 15; ch. 4, p. 79). Rays are
being emitted from the moon-region ( - T r i p u r a sarasamuchchaya, 5.41; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22,
p. 81). T h e moon-region is in the nature of
consciousness ( - Shiwapurarna, 3.5.53). There
is a triangle within the moon-region ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5; Shyamarahasya,
ch. 1, p. 15; Amarasanggraha M S ; M r i d a n tantra, quoted in;Amarasanggraha M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ) . This triangle has also been
termed trikuta, that is, three-cornered = triangle
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.9; Brahmasiddhantapaddhati M S ) .
There is the void (shunya) within the triangle
which lies inside the circular moon-region.
T h e void has been termed supreme void (parashunya), which is with the upward-power (Kundalini), and dhyana should be done here
( - Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad, 3.9). Supreme
Power as Kundalini lies concealed here ( - Yogarajopanishad, Mantra 18). T h e roused Kundali
passes into the sahasrara through the brahma
nadi ( - Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 16), so she is
called the upward power. She is concealed here,
268

she is only known by dhyana. T h e term supreme
void has also been accepted in the Tantras.
It has been stated that the supreme void (paramashunya) which is inside the triangle of the
sahasrara is with the upward-power (Kundalini),
and dhyana should be done on the supreme
void ( - Brahmasiddhantapaddhati MS). The
presence of the void in the triangle of the
sahasrara has been mentioned in the Mridanitantra (quoted in the Amarasanggraha MS).
T h e void has been described as the abode of
Parama Shiwa who is infinite and beyond
mind-matter (niramaya) ( - ibid.). About the
void, it has been stated: 'That (that is, void),
which is well concealed (in another reading:
which is to be kept secret with care) is the main
root of a b u n d a n t and never-ending supreme
bliss; it is subtle and its pure form becomes
manifest along with nirwarza-kala and moon
(shashi)-kala, that is, ama-kala, by the long and
regular practice of dhyana' ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 42).
In this void is Parama Shiwa. So, it has been
stated: 'Here, that is, in the void, the celebrated
Dewa (Divine Being) known as Parama Shiwa
is situated. He is without form (in another reading: he is in his supreme aspect as infinite and
formless); he is in union (rasa) (with Kundalini)
and is also the one and the same (wirasa) (with
Kundalini); like the sun, he destroys the darkness
of unspiritualness and delusion' ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 42).
T h e void is a circular process (writta) consisting of Kundali- power around the formless Parama,
Shiwa. T h e void has been clearly explained
here: Shiwa is in the form of Void and the
circumference of the circle (writta) is Supreme
Kundali who is splendorous and is in three and
a half coils; the Yamala says that the writta is
K u d a l i n i Power in whom lies the three primary
attributes, and the void aspect (of the writta)
is Shiwa, who is the great Ishwara; Kundalini
is always there in coils around Shiwa like a snake;
Bindu (Supreme Bindu) is in the nature of
Shiwa and Shakti (Power) and gives life and
liberation; that eternal Divine Power (kundalini)
is the source of all in her Nada (Supreme Nada)
aspect ( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.15).
This void (shunya) cannot be represented by

Exposition of the Chakras

the bijas Ang, Ang, Khang, Thang and Hang.
Hang is the germ-mantra of akasha (void)
mahabhuta, so this void is beyond akasha. In
this void, there is neither akasha nor mind. So
it has been termed supreme void (paramashunya). It can only be designated by Bindu.
But this bindu is not a point. It is 'non-magnitudinous' and 'non-positional', and still it exists.
Because of this it has been termed Parabindu Supreme Bindu. This Supreme Bindu is the
Supreme Void. It has been stated that Bindu
signifies void (Shunya) and also quality (guna)
( - Todalatantra, ch. 6, p. 13). T h e void indicates
the absence of magnitude and position; therefore, it is without mind and matter. T h e void
is that in which matter-mind and its source
primus are absorbed, and what remains is
Shiwa in union with his Power (Shakti). Kundalipower finally absorbs into her prakriti (primus)
from which arises the phenomenon of mindmatter, and remains in coils in Shiwa. Because
of Shiwa and Power (Shakti) the void is in the
nature of a writta or circle. T h e void aspect is
Shiwa and the quality aspect indicated by the
circumference of the circle is the Power. So it
has been said that Parama Shiwa is immutable
and supremely subtle and in the form of Bindu
( - Todalatantra, ch. 8, p. 15). T h e subtle and
changeless aspect of Bindu is the void which is
Shiwa. Shiwa is also with his Power. This Power
is in a state of Supreme contraction. This is
Supreme Bindu. So Supreme Bindu is both Shiwa
and his Power.
Bindu stands in relation to the sahasrara
(Goutamiyatantra, 34.54; Dewibhagawata, 7.
35.47). So it has been said that the sahasrara
is the centre of Bindu ( - Gandharwatantra,
ch. 5, p. 2 8 ; Mridanitantra, quoted in;Amarasanggraha M S ) . This Bindu is Parabindu. It
has been clearly stated that the sahasrara lotus
which is all pure is the centre of Parabindu
(Supreme Bindu) ( - Rudrayamala, Part 2,
27.70).
More has been stated about Parama Shiwa:
Bhagawan, that is Shiwa endowed with yogapower, from whom the nectar (power of eternal
life) is continuously and abundantly flowing,
imparts to the yogi whose thoughts are purified
the real knowledge of Atman (the highest

spiritual knowledge arising in .samadhi); the
Supreme Being (Sarwesha, literally, the Lord
of the universe), known by the name of Parama
Hangsah (that is, Parama Shiwa) from whom the
waves of all happiness are continuously overflowing is situated here ( - Shatchakranirupana,
Verse 43).
Shaiwas (the worshippers of God Shiwa)
call it (the centre where is Parama Shiwa) the
abode of Shiwa; the Waishnawas (the worshippers
of God Wishnu) call it the abode of Supreme
Being (Paramapurusha, that is, Wishnu); others
(the worshippers of Harihara) call it the centre
of Harihara (a conjoined form of Wishnu and
Shiwa); those who are devoted to the lotus
feet of Divine Shakti (that is, the worshippers of
the Goddess Shakti) call it the centre of Dewi
(Shakti); and other great yogis call it the pure
place of Prakriti-Purusha ( - ibid., Verse 44).
It has been stated: 'Within the pericarp of
the sahasrara, there is the nectarous ocean wherein lies the isle of gems, and inside the isle of
gems is the wishing tree; there lies a lustrous
temple with four doors; inside the temple is
an altar consisting of fifty matnka-letters; there
is a jewelled throne on the altar, and on the
throne is seated Mahakali (Supreme Power) in
union with Maharudra (Parama Shiwa). He who
is M a h a r u d r a (Supreme Rudra or Shiwa) is
Mahawushnu (Supreme Wishnu) and Mahabrahma (Supreme Brahma). T h e three are
one, there is only the difference in n a m e ' ( - Nirwanatantra, ch. 10, pp. 13-14, abridged). It indicates that Parama Shiwa (Supreme Consciousness) is also called Supreme Rudra, Supreme
Wishnu and Supreme Brahma. T h e description of
the centre as given here is for the purpose of
dhyana.
Parama Shiwa is without form ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 4 2 ) ; he is Brahman and immutable ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 23); he is only
'being' (or he is in himself), fully quiescent and
beyond mind-matter ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch.
3, p. 3). This supreme aspect of Parama Shiwa
is beyond samprajnata samadhi, it is only 'realizable' in asamprajnata samadhi. In a superconcentrated state of consciousness induced by
samprajnata
samadhi
( - Wishwasaratantra,
ch. 2, p. 11), a highly rarefied form in white
269

T h e Chakra System

colour ( - Tararahasya, ch. 4, p. 23) shines
forth. Now, the infinite Supreme Shiwa becomes
Sakala Shiwa - Shiwa with manifested Power.
Now, the individualization of Shiwa and Power
occurs.
Shiwa is always with Power (Shakti). In the
supreme state both Shiwa and Shakti are formless
and there is no double existence as they are not
individualized. So Shiwa and Shakti are in
supreme union as one and the same. This is
what has been called the state of wirasa. W h e n
Shiwa and Shakti are individualized, they are
also in union, a n d this is the state of rasa. So
it has been stated that Supreme Shiwa who also
assumes a cosmic form and Supreme Kundalini
are always in the great lotus sahasrara ( - Todalatantra, ch. 7, p. 14); also, in the sahasrara, there
is the union between Supreme Shiwa and Kundalini ( - Bhutashuddhitantra, ch. 3, p. 3 ) ; Supreme
Shiwa is with Supreme Kundalini ( - ibid.,
ch. 14, p. 12); Supreme Shiwa is with Shakti
( - Wishwasaratantra, ch. 2, p. 11). All these
statements indicate that Supreme Shiwa as
Sakala Shiwa assumes form in the sahasrara.
At first the form is non-specific, vast and luminous. At this stage, the whole consciousness is
in a luminous form and in deepest concentration.
This is the state of samprajnata samadhi. W h e n
concentration becomes less deep, the luminosity
changes into distinct form and it is held in
consciousness continuously and without interruption. This is the state of dhyana. T h e dhyana
form is transformed at the highest stage of
concentration into samadhi form. Both Shiwa
a n d Shakti a p p e a r in dhyana and samadhi
forms.
A dhyana form of Shiwa in the sahasrara
is as follows: 'Shiwa is like pure crystal in colour;
he is joyful and smiling; he has three lotus-eyes
and eight beautiful arms; he wears a garland of
1000 lotuses; he is adorned with ear-rings,
a necklace of pearls, and handsome anklets'
( - Bhatashuddhitantra, ch. 9, p. 8).
Ama-kala and nirwana-kala are situated within
the triangle of the sahasrara. T h e Shatchakranirupana (Verse 46) says: 'Here (that is, within
the triangle situated in the pericarp of the
sahasrara) is the excellent sixteenth power
(kala) of the moon (called ama) which is like
270

the morning sun (that is, shining red in colour),
pure (that is, samadhi-consciousness is maintained by h e r ) ; her form is like the hundredth part
of a delicate lotus-filament (that is, she is subtle);
she is with Kundali-power (para); she is always
lightning-like splendorous; she is with her face
downward (that is, in one-half coil, crescent);
there is the uninterrupted flow of perpetual
bliss and she is the source of the abundantly
flowing nectarous stream.'
Ama-kala is always in a roused state and not
subject to growth or decay (that is, unchanging)
( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5 ) ; she is
red like the morning sun and is as subtle as
the h u n d r e d t h part of the tip of a hair ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.46); this sixteenth kala
of the moon (ama-kala) stands with her face
downward and is the centre of the constantly
flowing nectarous stream ( - Koulawalitantra,
ch.22,p.81).
About nirwana-kala, it has been stated that:
Inside it (ama-kala) is the famous nirwanakala (manifested power of absorption of Kundalini); she is the most excellent; she is like the
thousandth part of the end of a hair (that is,
extremely subtle); she is endowed with supreme
yoga-power (Bhagawati) and is in all beings as
lshtadewata.; she is consciousness herself; she
is bent like a crescent moon (that is, in one-half
coil); and she is as lustrous as the brilliance of
all suns shining at one time (that is, extremely
shining red in colour) ( - Shatchakvanirupana,
Verse 47).
Nirwana-kala is situated inside ama-kala;
she is called the seventeenth kala (manifested
power) and is crooked ( - Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, p. 5 ) ; she is bent like a crescent moon
(half-coiled) and as subtle as the thousandth
part of the tip of a hair ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.47; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81).
Nirwana-kala is subtle and in the nature of
consciousness ( - Mridanitantra, quoted in
Amarasanggraha M S ) . Nirwana-kala is also called
the seventeenth niranjana-kala which is as
bright as the lustre of ten million suns and as
cool as ten million moons ( - Amarasanggraha
M S ; Tattwayogabindu M S ) .
There is Nirwana Shakti (all-absorbing Kundali-power) inside nirwaraa-kala. About Nirwana

Exposition of the Chakras

Shakti, it has been stated t h a t : inside it (nirwanakala) is supreme and primordial Nirwana Shakti,
splendorous like ten million suns (red and extremely lustrous), the mother of the universe; she
is like the ten-millionth part of the end of a hair,
and so, extremely subtle; in her is the constantly
flowing stream of love (indicating that she is
in union in supreme love with Parama Shiwa);
she is the life of all beings; she graciously conveys
the knowledge of Brahman to the mind of the
yogi ( - Shatchakranirupana, Verse 48).
T h e Tripurasarasamuchchaya (5.48) says: Nirwana Shakti is supreme and is situated within nirwana-kala; she is as bright as the radiance of
ten million suns and as subtle as the ten millionth
part of the end of a hair, so she is concealed;
she is matrika, always conscious of Shiwa
(nityodita) and p u r e ; here lies the seat of Shiwa;
it is here that the vast nectarous stream flows;
she is without a support (that is, she is in herself).'
Nirwana Shakti is red in colour ( - Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81), very subtle and in the
form of consciousness ( - Mridanitantra, quoted
in Amarasanggraha M S ) . It has been stated
that there is nirodhika (the supreme control
power) in the form of fire within nirwanakala where sound is unmanifest, and there lies
splendorous supreme Nirwana Shakti who is
the source of the universe (as matrika) ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5).
T h e Shatchakranirupana (Verse 49) says:
'Within her (that is, Nirwana Shakti) is the
centre where lies Shiwa (Shiwapada); it is
beyond mind-matter (amala), eternal, all love
and bliss, of pure consciousness; it is revealed in
yoga (asamprajnata samadhi); some wise men
call it the place of Wishnu, others call it Hangsah,
while the spiritual persons call it the place where
the real knowledge of Atman leading to liberation is attained.'
It has been stated: 'In Nirwana Shakti
changeless and formless Shiwa (Parama Shiwa)
is to be realized; it is here that kundali'-power
is in the form of m u d r a (that is, in the form of
ou-letter; or, in love-bliss because of her union
with Shiwa) who again goes back to the adhara
(muladhara)
lotus'
( - Kankalamalinitantra,
ch. 2, pp. 5 - 6 ) . There is also the centre in
Nirwana Shakti of Shiwa; it is eternal, immeasur-

able, pure, ever-existing, and static; the wise
men call it the abode of Wishnu, some call it
the place of Brahman, others call it the abode of
Hangsah, and others again call it the centre of
Supreme Being (niranjanapada) who is all
(niralamba) ( - Tripurasarasamuchchaya, 5.49,
and Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 81). It has been
farther stated that the centre of Nirwana Shakti
is above nirwana-kala; the worshippers of Shiwa
call it the abode of Shiwa, the worshippers of
Wishnu call it the abode of Supreme Purusha
(Wishnu), others call it the abode of Hari-Hara,
the worshippers of Dewi (Divine Power) call
it the abode of Dewi, and the yogis call it the
pure place of Prakriti and Purusha ( - Shaktanandatarangini, 4.33).
It has been stated that there is a linga (Shiwalinga) in the pericarp of the sahasrara which
is like red-hot gold (that is, shining red in colour);
but sometimes the linga becomes white, sometimes black, sometimes yellow and sometimes
blue; sometimes the linga is in the form of
matrika-letters; it is bright and beyond thought
( - Mundamalatantra, ch. 2, p. 5). T h e presence
of Shiwa-linga in the sahasrara has been mentioned in the Todalatantra, which says that
Kundali, coming into the sahasrara and seeing
Shiwa, encircles the Shiwa-linga in the form
of a garland consisting of the matrika-letters
( - Todalatantra, ch. 9, p. 17).
Above the circular region of the moon in
the pericarp of the sahasrara is wisarga (powerbridge) ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2,
p. 2). So it has been stated that the sahasrara
is situated below the wisarga ( - Shatchakranirwpana, Verse 4 0 ; Tripurasarasamuchchaya,
5.41; Koulawalitantra, ch. 22, p. 8 1 ; Purashcharyarnawa, ch. 6, p. 490). Wisarga is Supreme
kundalini ( - Radhatantra, 2.44). Wisarga is
the sixteenth matrika-letter associated with a.
A is the secondary part. Wisarga is like redlightning (shining red in colour) in which lie
in essence five pranas, five dewatas and all
knowledge; it is kundali ( - Kamadhenutantra,
3.16). A (Ang) as the first matrika-letter is the
coil of Kundali-power a part of which radiates
upwards as a straight line indicating an upward
direction of force-motion. T h e straight forcemotion arises from the coiled force-motion and
271

T h e Chakra System

consists of a starting point and an end point,
the two points being represented by two perpendicular dots. In the sahasrara, the first point
lies just beyond ama-kala and the second point
just below Supreme Bindu. So, the two points
form a power-bridge through which Kundalini
passes from the sahasrara to Supreme Bindu.
Wisarga is power ( - T a n t r a b h i d h a n a ) , an aspect
of kundali-power.
Above wisarga (that is, above the second point
of wisarga) is Divine Shankhini ( - Kankalamalinitantra, ch. 2, p. 5). Shankhini is Supreme Kundalmi in the spiral form. From the view-point of
sahasrara, Shahkhini is above the circular moonregion where lies the first point of wisarga.
Technically, the first point of wisarga lies just beyond amakala. T h e second bindu of wisarga lies
under Supreme Bindu, and Shahkhini is above it.
Above wisarga is dhruwa-mandala ( - Sammohanatantra, Part 2, ch. 2, p. 2). Dhruwamandala is infinity of Parama Shiwa. Wisarga
goes upward from ama-kala and passes through
Wishnu-waktra and Guru-waktra to reach
dhruwa-mandala. Sharikhini as Supreme Kundalini goes beyond wisarga and reaches dhruwamandala to be united with Sakala Shiwa, and
finally to be absorbed into Parama Shiwa.

mination and consciousness. He is the one without a second, and splendorous. This indicates
that he is with Supreme kundalini who is all
splendour. Shiwa is in spiritual union with the
radiant Kundali-power so he is 'Sun'. kundalini
at the Supreme Bindu level is Shabdabrahman
where lies parashabda - the principle of sound.
At this stage, prana - the living-energy principle
of the Supreme Mother in her power aspectbecomes concentrated to the highest point to
be able to make parashabda manifest as radiant
sound (pashyanti) which is Pranawa (Ong).
There is a congregation of 1000 light-powers
in pranawa, and there is a summation of 50
sound units which constitute matrika. At the
next stage, the radiant sound begins to be transformed into suprasound (madhyama), and in
this process 1000 petals are created by the
1000 light-powers which constitute the sahasrara;
and the 50 matrika sounds are released from
the pranawa sound and become distinct and
are combined with the light-powers in twentyfold strength. Each matrika sound has twenty
aspects, viz., Kundali-power, three bindus, three
gunas, three specific powers, five dewatas and
five pranas, which make twenty. Because of this
fact, the petals are arranged in twenty layers,
each layer consisting of fifty petals which contain
fifty matrika-letters.

Explanation

T h e light-power is from Shiwa-Shakti. Shiwa
is represented in white colour and Shakti in
red colour. T h e colour of the light-power is
a mixture of white and red which produces
kamala colour which is pale-red. So the lightpower is of kamala colour and its petaline expansion is called kamala (lotus) having 1000 petals.
Another name of kamala is sahasrapatra (a
thousand petals) ( - Shabdakalpadrumah). 'ka'
of kamala means Surya ('sun'), endowed with
illuminating power; 'mala' of kamala indicates
the expression of this power as rashmis - lightpowers. So kamala is the thousand-fold manifestation of the illuminating power as light-powers
in the form of petals. Also, 'ka' is illumination
and is represented by the bija-mantra Wang
( - T a n t r a b h i d h a n a ) , and 'mala', derived from
mrij, which means 'to sound' ( - Apte). This
indicates that the illuminating power in operation emits sounds. These sounds are the matrika

Aditya (God Shiwa) is Surya (Illumination);
he is the possessor of light-power (rashmi), so he
is called Harina; the light-power is in the nature
of consciousness, so he is Jatawedas; he is the
source of vital power (prana), so he is Parayana;
he is without a second and splendorous (ekajyotih); he is with 1000 light-powers (sahasrarashmi) and exists in 100 forms; he is life in all
beings and gives h e a t ; he is in all forms (wishwarupa) ( - Prashnopanishad, 1.8).
T h e secret of the sahasrara has been technically
expounded by Rishi Pippalada in the above
mantra. Aditya - the first God as Shiwa with
his aroused Shakti (Power) technically known
as Shiwa-Shakti principle, is from Aditi - the
infinite Supreme Mother. He is the Sun as he
is in the nature of illumination. He is endowed
with the light-power having the aspects of illu272

CHAPTER 13

Physical Purification and
Vitalization

It is often ignored that the body plays an important role in the development of mental calmness
and concentration. Only a purified and vital
body can function efficiently at a certain organic
functional level without radiating disturbing
influences on the mind.
T h e brain which is the central organ of the
body is connected with the mind. A high order
of functional activities of the brain depends
very much upon the state of the blood and its
adequate circulation through the brain. T h e
blood functions affect the cardiac, respiratory,
alimentary, eliniinative, endocrine and muscular
functions. Physical culture, based on hathayoga,
should be adopted for the normalization of the
body as a whole.
Normalization of the eliminative functions
of the body is an essential factor of blood purification and this creates a very favourable
condition in the brain for its more perfect
functioning. Some surplus materials tend to
accumulate in the body during the course of
time which do not contribute to its vital functions.
This state is mainly due to a lack of vigorous
blood circulation, consumption of foods in
excess of the body's needs, and the bacterial
unhealthfulness of the colon.
Fasting is a natural means of consumption
and elimination of the accumulated materials.
So, it is a very important factor in the purification of the body. By fasting, all the organs of the
body are rested and become functionally more
efficient. Moreover, the cells of the body are
reenergized. However, knowledge of how to
fast properly is very important.

Blood circulation should be accelerated above
the normal resting level by muscular exercise.
General muscular exercise serves this purpose.
Automatic deep breathing exercise should be
a part of the general exercise. R u n n i n g at slow
and moderate speeds, and swimming are
excellent automatic deep breathing exercises.
In growth-strength exercise, vigorous circulation
takes place in the skeletal muscles. In constitutional exercise, circulation is increased in the
skeletal muscles as well as in the vital organs.
Pranayamic breathing has special value, so
it should be an important part of exercise. In
pranayamic breathing, circulation is accelerated
through the activities of the respiratory muscles
and the big muscles of the body remain inactive.
U n d e r this condition, the increased circulation
seems to produce better effects on the nervous
system and the internal organs, as the muscular
avidity for materials from the blood is less. It
is our experience that circulation should be
accelerated both by muscular exercise and
pranayamic breathing in order to develop and
maintain a high degree of efficiency of
the nervous system and vital strength.
Kumbhaka (breath-suspension) is an essential
part of pranayamic breathing. It produces a
specific effect on brain functioning. By
kumbhaka, a measured compression on the
brain can be applied through compression on
the ventricles of the brain and the subarachnoid
space by causing an increased venous pressure
of the brain. This compression arouses the vital
activities of the nerve cells. In a prolonged
kumbhaka,
outwardly
directed
mental
297

Concentration Practices

tendencies causing mental disturbances begin
to be internalized, and an inner calmness
develops. T h e practical aspect of the purificatory
and vitalizing processes of physical culture
can be briefly considered under the following
five headings: purification, internal cleansing,
diet,
muscular exercise and
pranayamic
breathing.

Purification
Undertake a short fast. It cleanses the system,
improves the power of digestion and absorption,
gives the body a physiological rest and builds
vitality. T h e duration of the fast is three days.
T h e three-day-fast with colon washing will
remove all the accumulated contents of the colon
and make it clean and healthy.
First day of fasting.
After a normal evacuation of the bowels in
the morning, take a glass (about 3 0 0 - 3 5 0 m l ;
10 or 12 ozs) of lactose drink. This consists of
a glass of warm water in which lactose (2 or
3 heaped table-spoons) has been mixed and
flavoured with fresh lemon juice. T h e n rest for
30 minutes. Thereafter, water should be drunk
in the following m a n n e r :
Drink a cup of warm water with a little lemon
juice taken at intervals of 30 or 40 minutes for
3 hours. If there are free evacuations of the
bowels during the water-drinking period or
immediately afterwards, it is not necessary
to cleanse the colon with water. T h e n take a
bath and rest. During the resting period, a cup
of cold water can be drunk now and then. But
if there is no evacuation of the bowels, or evacuations are not satisfactory, then cleanse the colon
thoroughly by autolavage. There should be three
or four lavages. Then cleanse the stomach by
gastric lavage (only once). Thereafter take a bath
and rest. In the evening, take a glass of fresh
orange juice.
Second day of fasting.
In the morning, start water-drinking (warm
water with fresh lemon juice) for 3 hours as
on the first day. T h e n colonic autolavage, bath
298

and rest as before. Drink a glass of fresh orange
juice in the evening.
Third day of fasting.
Same as second day.
On the fourth day, the fast should be broken.
In the morning, perform colonic autolavage
once. T h e n take a bath. Thereafter, take 250 ml
(8 ozs) of fresh orange juice 4 times a day.
Drink cool water as desired.
On the fifth day, take a milk diet, a milkfruit diet, or a fruit-greens diet with some milk;
continue the diet for 7 or 10 days. Thereafter,
normal diet should be adopted.
This mode of purification can also be done as
a yearly cleansing.

Internal Cleansing
T h e abridged yogic internal cleansing comprises
oral cleansing, gastric autolavage, colonic autolavage, and pharyngonasal water bath. A special
colonic exercise has also been described here.
Oral cleansing.
Clean the teeth with a fresh tooth-stick made
of the semi-hard twig of some suitable plant,
or a good toothbrush and toothpaste. Use a
tonguescraper in cleansing the tongue. The
t h u m b should be used in cleansing the palate.
Plenty of water should be used in oral cleansing.
T h e mouth should be well-rinsed. Oral cleansing
should be done every day in the morning.
Gastric autolavage.
Drink 4 to 6 glasses of water and vomit it out.
This gastric cleansing should be done when the
stomach is empty. So, the best time for it is the
morning, after oral cleansing. It can be done
about once or twice a month, and during fasting.
Colonic autolavage.
Assume a squatting posture in a bathtub filled
with water about navel-deep, or in a basin with
water. Suck water into the colon through the
rectum and get it into the caecum. Then
evacuate the bowels. T h e temperature of the
water should usually be lukewarm. For a
thorough cleansing, suction, from three to four
times, should be done in the morning when the

Physical Purification and Vitalization
stomach is empty. It is done during fasting.
Suction is also done in the evening, after exercise
and before dinner; this suction is usually done
once. Thorough cleansing can be done once a
week, or once a fortnight or every month.
Evening suction can be done once or twice a
week.
Care should be taken not to depend too much
on colon washing. Colonic health and efficiency
should be developed by exercise and diet.
Washing is a supplementary means, but it is
also necessary.
There is a special colonic exercise which is
helpful in training the colon to evacuate completely. This exercise should be done in the
morning when the stomach is empty and, if
possible, after a normal evacuation of the bowels.
Laxative foods should be added to the diet in
varying proportions according to need. The
technique is as follows.
First suck water through the rectum to reach
only the lower half of the descending colon.
Retain the water and then perform the following
abdominal exercise in this order: (1) Nouh,
from right to left, 15 to 30 times; (2) Nouli,
rolling, 15 to 30 times; (3) Downward abdominal
wave-motions, 15 to 30 times. Rest.
There may be an evacuation after this exercise; if not, do not worry. Practise this exercise
either every day or on alternate days, until
colonic efficiency is sufficiently developed.
There is also a suggestion-method which is
helpful in making the colon evacuate normally.
Suggest to your colon, with concentrated
thought and with the belief that it will obey it,
that it should function normally and effectively
every day. Do it for a few minutes. It can be
done any time. Mental calmness is very helpful
for the evacuative function of the colon.
Pharyngonasal water bath.
Take a glassful of water. Draw the water
through the nostrils and eject it through the
mouth. The water should be lukewarm or cold
(not too cold). Take about 450 ml (15 ozs)
of water. This should be done every day in the
morning, preferably after oral cleansing.

Diet
Prana as life-dynamism infuses its ojas (intrinsic
force) into a suitable form of matter by which it is
transformed into a living body. Ojas operates
in the living body, as the basic life-force, and
from it three fundamental principles of operation
have come into being, by which the body is
maintained as living matter, termed protoplasm.
Brahmanic physiology does not accept that
protoplasm itself is the life-substance but explains that life-force is not a part of matter.
It is accepted as a subtle force capable of being
infused into matter and making it life-like.
The cells of the body are not life-substance
units, or life-minims. If it were so, then there
would have been life in the atoms of which the
cells are constituted; but there is no trace of
life in them. Atreya says that the body and its
different structures are composed of innumerable
extremely minute and imperceptible constituents, that is, atoms. The atoms are the
minima of matter and they maintain the entire
material structure. Atoms maintain the material
aspect of protoplasm, in which the life-force
functions. This physiological dualism was the
accepted theory in ancient Indian physiology.
The three principles, by which the body as a
living organism is maintained are technically
termed wayu, agni or pitta, and soma or kapha.
Wayu is the principle of bioenergy. It operates
in the body in relation to, and in cooperation
with, agni and soma. Agni is the catabolic
principle by which substances of the body are
broken down to release energy to be utilized in
the bodily functions. On the other hand, soma
is the anabolic principle by which the broken
down parts of the body are reconstructed and
also new construction is effected. The anabolic
processes require energy to function and this
energy is released by the catabolic processes.
The catabolic functions also require energy and
that is connected with wayu.
Agni is in the nature of fire to which the
oblation of substances in the body is naturally
and constantly being offered owing to the
influence of ojas. Bioenergy which remains
latent in the tissues or substances in the body be299

Concentration Practices

comes available to the body as energy for motion
and heat by the action of agni, that is, catabolism.
T h e cellular, nervous and endocrine activities,
and all other organic functions are carried out by
activated bioenergy. T h e heat which is thus
produced cannot be changed into any other
forms of energy. Heat is necessary for the body.
It is associated with all functional activities and
it maintains the normal body temperature.
T h e excess of heat is eliminated from the body
by evaporation, convection and conduction.
T h e action of agni, at a certain point, causes a
reaction in bioenergy which then tends to
conserve the substances of the body and energy.
This activates soma which exhibits its 'cooling'
function. Soma utilizes the energy released by
catabolism in its cooling process of synthesizing
substances which become parts of the body. It is
anabolism. All the processes which are going on
in the body - the breaking down of substances
and the release of energy on the one hand, and,
on the other hand, conservation of substances
and energy - are due to pranic ojas, and,
consequently, they are pranic functions in the
body and are technically termed pranana, i.e.,
what is now known as metabolism.
There are a number of root substances or
constituents of the body, which maintain its
integrity. These substances are the main sites
where the action of ojas as the vitalizing principle
is more forceful. These substances have been
termed dhatus. A dhatu is that which holds,
maintains or contains the concentrated ojas.
Ojas is in all parts of the body, but it is in greater
concentration in dhatus. There are seven kinds
of dhatus, viz., rasa (body-water), rakta (blood),
mangsa (muscle), meda (fat), asthi (bone),
majja (marrow) and shukra (gonadal substances). T h e degree of concentration of ojas
in all dhatus is not the same. It is lowest in bodywater, and highest in gonadal substances.
Dhatus are not exactly the tissues of the body.
A tissue is a collection of similar cells and their
intercellular substances, having a particular
function. It is the basic anatomical and physiological component of the body. T h e basic
tissues of the body have been classified as these:
epithelium, connective tissue, skeletal tissue,
muscular tissue and nervous tissue. Adipose
300

tissue has been included in the connective tissue.
T h e fluids of the body have not been included
here. T h e fluids are blood, lymph and tissue
fluids. Cartilage has been included in the skeletal
tissue. T h e muscle tissue presents three forms:
skeletal, cardiac and smooth.
On the other hand, rasa (colourless fluid)
and blood are enumerated as two separate
d h a t u s ; fat has been taken as a d h a t u ; marrow
and gonadal substances have been counted as
two kinds of dhatus. It appears that marrow
(majja) has been used here in a broader sense
to include not only bone marrow but also
marrow-like spinal cord and brain, that is,
nerve tissue. So, practically all dhatus, except
gonadal substances (shukra), are tissues, and
they function like a tissue.
Rasa is the water content of the body. It is
in all parts of the body. T h e water content is
higher than solids. About 60 per cent of the body
is water. T h e entire body water may be divided
into two parts: intracellular and extracellular.
T h e intracellular fluid is more than half of the
total body water. T h e rest is the extracellular
fluid which comprises interstitial fluid, lymph,
plasma water, and fluids in the cartilage and bone
(transcellular fluids).
T h e influence of ojas makes body-water a
most important element in the body, and
without it life-processes cannot function. First
of all, substances which are catabolized to release energy, and substances which are anabolized for the conservation of body tissues
and energy come from outside the body as
foods. T h e natural foods need to be transformed
into their simpler forms for absorption into
blood. This is done in the alinientary canal.
Digestion requires a certain amount of water
in the stomach and small intestine. The main
sources of water in the gastrointestinal tract
during digestion are water which has been
drunk, water-content of foods, and fluids secreted
by the salivary and gastric glands, small intestine,
pancreas and liver.
Now, purified and fluidiform basic food
substances are absorbed through the intestinal
mucosa into the blood plasma. In the plasma
the blood cells are suspended. Since the plasma
and the cells, in the form of a red fluid, are

Physical Purification and Vitalization
enclosed within the blood vessels, blood has
been regarded as a distinct dhatu. Plasma is
actually a part of the extracellular fluid. A
continuous transference of the nutrients occurs
from the blood plasma to the interstitial fluid
in the capillaries, and then from the interstitial
fluid to the intracellular fluid. This process also
removes excretory substances from the cells to
the extracellular fluid. So, we see that bodywater (rasa) plays a most important role in
pranana (metabolism). But this transport system
is maintained by the blood movement throughout the body. The blood movement is principally maintained by the heart, and is assisted
by the vascular smooth-muscle and skeletal
muscular movements. Ojas is here in higher
concentration. It is the red cells which carry
oxygen to the cells.
The next higher dhatu is muscle. Muscle
consists of cardiac, smooth and skeletal. Cardiac
muscle has an inherent power to exhibit automatic rhythmic contraction which is utilized
as a pump to maintain blood circulation. The
level of circulation can be increased by muscular
exercise. It is the skeletal muscles which can
be willed to make movements. Muscular
movements have far-reaching effects on
the body. The entire organic system, including the nervous system, can be influenced
favourably and its functions can be improved by
muscular exercise. Muscular exercise comprises
posture exercise, contraction-control exercise,
growth-strength exercise and speed-endurance
exercise. Smooth muscle is widely distributed
in different organs. It is found in the alimentary
canal, kidney, ureter, bladder, urethra, trachea,
bronchus, and female and male sexual organs.
The movements of smooth muscle are
involuntary, but the skeletal muscular movements exercise a great influence on it. The ojas
concentration in the muscles is high, and,
consequently, muscle exhibits dynamic function
by which every part of the body is influenced.
The next is fat. In the body, fat is found in
three main forms: neutral fat (triglycerides),
phospholipids and cholesterol. Phospholipids
and cholesterol are integral parts of the cells.
However, large quantities of fat are stored as
neutral fat in the adipose tissue - the fat depot.

The fat-absorbing adipose tissue, which is the
main part of meda dhatu, is able to take up
excess fat, store it, and then release it when the
body needs it. Another unusual function of
fat is to form a thin sheath of subcutaneous fat
over the skeletal muscles, which gives them a
smooth appearance. Such fat-coated muscles,
if rightly developed, are able to exhibit great
strength and very strong contractive power,
by which they are made to appear as hard as
rock. These muscles can also be made to relax
voluntarily to such an extent that they seem as
soft as butter.
Then comes bone. 11 gives support and stability
to the body and is involved in motion. The next
is marrow. As bone marrow, it is the source of
the red blood corpuscles. Marrow as brain is the
fundamental control centre of the body, and it is
the only organ which reacts in response to mental
activities. Ojas is very active here.

Sexual Dynamism
Shukra is the seventh dhatu, in which the
concentration of ojas (life-force) is the greatest.
Shukra is, fundamentally, sexual energy,
functioning in relation to, and as an essential
part of, sexual secretions produced by the
sexual glands of the female and male. Sexual
secretions are both external and internal. This
energy system is sexual dynamism, which creates
the sexual urge involving emotions, thoughts
and body. The urge is the continuous sexual
impulse towards consummation by overcoming
all obstructions. So, the desire for enjoyment,
and the enjoyment itself, are not artificial but
real. The desire is not a graft, but a part of bloodbone-muscle-mind. No amount of moralizing
or philosophizing is helpful in nullifying the
desire.
It has been suggested that if a large amount
of energy is spent by doing heavy or longcontinued muscular exercise, the strength of
the urge may be decreased until it is almost
dormant. There may be a temporary lack of
desire due to an accumulation of a very large
301

Concentration Practices

amount of fatigue-products in the system. But
as soon as the body recuperates, sexual desire
returns. In m a n y cases even heavy exercise
fails to suppress desire. Consequently, it is
difficult to get rid of the 'horror of sex'. Prolonged
mental work also does not help. Of course, it is
possible to lessen its intensity by devotion to
certain ideals with great fervour a n d attention.
W h e n the desire is quiescent, this diversion
m a y afford temporary relief, but when it is
ardent, the ideal is shattered.
It has been said that unusually intelligent
and brilliant persons lead a sexually continent
life. A few examples, which include Newton,
K a n t , Pascal, Carlyle, Leibniz a n d Beethoven,
are given as demonstrations. But it has also
been stated that these men were unbalanced
and unhealthy. However, there have been also
highly intellectual persons and even geniuses
who have led a loose sexual life. T h e a u t h o r
was acquainted with a highly intelligent m a n
who knew more than thirty oriental and
occidental languages, but led a loose life and
died prematurely. He also knew a talented
musician who showed extraordinary ability
in vocal music, but had very loose sexual morals.
T h e effects on intelligence of conservation of
sexual energy have not been clearly demonstrated, because it is very difficult to find a
person with brilliant thoughts, leading a life
in which the sex urge has been fully controlled.
Does great muscular strength require complete sexual control ? Not a single strong m a n can
be found who has led a life of complete sexual
continence. During intensive physical training,
some strong men stop entirely all sexual indulgence, as the champion wrestlers of India,
or the boxing champions of the West, while
others follow moderation. Anyhow, heavy training indicates the necessity of stopping completely or partially sexual wastages. T h e r e are
also examples of strong men w h o led a loose
sexual life.
Food has a great influence on sexual impulse.
A well-balanced nutritious diet maintains
sexual desire and vigour at a high level. T h e
effects of milk or meat are practically the same.
An exclusive milk diet does not cause a cessation
of sexual desire. A lactovegetarian diet, an
302

essentially herbivorous diet or a mixed d i e t all have the same effects. A restricted diet does
not affect sexual desire very m u c h ; in some
cases it may be reduced.
An ascetic mode of life, with reduced diet
and sleep and endurance of the rigours of the
seasons, does not make desire impotent; in
certain cases, it m a y reduce sexual desire. It has
been said that a restricted protein diet decreases
sexual desire. Evidence shows that a diet comprising rice, vegetables and some fish maintains
strong sexual desire. Overeating stimulates sexual
desire. Similarly, highly complicated and rich
food has the same effect. A short fast does not
decrease sexual desire, but a prolonged fast
causes a decrease.
W h a t do the yogis say about this question?
First of all, let us investigate the mode of life
they usually lead. We can classify the yogis
into two groups: ordinary practitioners, and
yoga masters. T h e yoga practitioners are advised
to restrain sexual desire; and they try to do so
as best they can. T h e net result is that they
generally lead a well-controlled sex life in which
all excesses have been abandoned, but complete control is rarely attained.
If we investigate the lives of yoga masters,
we find that there are two categories: those who
have led a partially controlled, and those who
have led a completely controlled, sex life.
Goutama Buddha, Chaitanya, Bhaskarananda
and Ramakrishna were married. Buddha and
Bhaskarananda each had one son in the earlier
part of their lives, and thereafter led lives of
complete control. On the other hand, though
Chaitanya and Ramakrishna were married, they
had no children, and there is reason to assume
that they led a life of complete control.
Shahkaracharya, Tailanga Swami, Bamakshepa and Lokanatha were unmarried and led
a life of complete sexual control. These are a
few examples. But there were, and still are,
yogis advanced in yoga some of whom lead
(and led) a partially controlled sex life, whereas
others lead a fully controlled sex life.
Strict sexual control is necessary when practising advanced kumbhaka (breath-suspension).
A pupil, who has prepared himself by undergoing a purificatory process and is mentally

Physical Purification and Vitalization

clean, experiences an inner reaction during the
practice of kumbhaka, if he has had sexual
intercourse. T h e reaction indicates that both
cannot go together. There are some persons
who are unable to abandon sexual indulgence
completely, and, consequently, they have to
give up the practice of kumbhaka.
At a lower level of concentration, complete
sexual control is not indicated, but there must
be moderation, never excess. At a higher level
of concentration, full sexual control becomes
automatic; it is naturally established.
In yoga, there are two most important processes of gaining voluntary control over the
sex urge: wajroli and sahajoli. Wajroli control
is extremely difficult, and it is only possible
for advanced pupils to undertake it. However,
when wajroli. is mastered, the full control over
orgasm and ejaculation in the male, and over
orgasm and fully developed 'receptivity' in
female is attained. T h e whole sexual process
is completely under control.
Sahajoli is comparatively easier. A process
of sense-withdrawal at different stages of contact, executed both passively and dynamically
at exact points, is the fundamental part of
sahajoli. A well-restrained indulgence at certain
intervals is permitted during the first stages of
the practice. T h e essential part of the process
is to sublimate sexual energy in contact-control,
in deep concentration. T h e amaroli process
gives a pupil the necessary vigour which
is required for the practice of sahajoli.
It is essentially a chemical regulation of the body.

Functions of Food
Food is the fuel which keeps the metabolic
fire burning in the body. Therefore, its nature
and functions should be rightly understood.
Food contains substances, the qualities of
which are indicated by their specific flavours.
Flavour is the expression of the taste quality
belonging to ap-energy which becomes linked
to the fluid aspect of the material body. So,
the flavour which is in the fluid portion of food

is the indicator of the nature and quality of the
substance contained in food. All foods can be
classified according to their predominant
flavours. T h e r e can be a mixture of flavours
in a food, indicating that that food contains a
mixture of substances. Sometimes a flavour may
be masked owing to different combinations.
There are six original flavours: sweet, acid,
saline, pungent, bitter and astringent. Consequently food can be classified into six groups.
Foods belonging to the sweet-flavour group have
these main qualities: (1) Bringhana, that is,
substances which cause tissue repair and promote tissue growth. In modern terms, these
substances are essentially proteins. In growth,
fats and carbohydrates may also take part.
Phospholipids are constituents of tissues. T h e y
are fats and are derived from food fats. Actual
tissue growth, especially muscular growth, may
accompany
the
fat
accumulation.
This
accumulated fat is derived from food fats and
carbohydrates. Carbohydrates and fats also
play a part in growth by supplying enough
energy needed by the body in various activities,
thus sparing proteins. (2) Balya, that is, substances from which the release of energy for
heat and action occurs. These effects are mainly
due to the catabolism of carbohydrates and fats.
Protein may also take part in the process, especially if sufficient quantities of carbohydrates
and fats are not available. (3) Jiwaniya, that is,
life-supporting substances. In modern terms
they are vitamins. (4) Laxative.
Foods belonging to the acid-flavour group
are appetizers, digestants, laxatives, blood-forming and energizers. These qualities indicate
that these foods contain mineral elements.
Saline-flavour foods have practically the same
qualities. Pungent-flavour foods are appetizer,
digestant, constipating and stimulating. They
are helpful in counteracting obesity. Bitterflavour foods are digestant. They purify blood
and restore the natural relish for food. T h e
astringent quality has many medicinal properties.
It causes constipation.

303

Concentration Practices

Food Selection
Let us first take two nourishing foods - milk
and meat, and make a careful observation of
their nutritive qualities. Milk and meat both
belong to the sweet-flavour food group.
According to modern food science, these two
foods are excellent protein foods, containing
complete proteins.
Milk contains bringhana substances (proteins)
which repair the tissues and promote their
growth. M e a t has the same qualities. Milk is
strengthening (balya); it means that milk not
only causes growth, but along with it, it increases power or vitality of the tissues. Milk
also effects perfect repair and maintains or
enhances vitality in the repaired tissues. This
growth-vitality factor may be solely due to
proteins or, more probably, proteins combined
with sugar, fat, mineral elements and vitamins,
or some unknown factors. However, the natural
body-building materials of milk are highly
effective and can support both growth and
vitality. M e a t also has the properties of increasing vitality associated with growth. Milk
contains jiwaniya substances, that is, vitamins.
Milk is very rich in riboflavin. Meat also contains vitamins. It has more thiamine and less
riboflavin than milk.
Milk increases sexual vigour. Meat has the
same property. So both milk and meat fuel
sexual desire. Milk has certain special qualities.
It causes an enhancement of ojas (life-force).
It has properties which help to maintain youth
and develop the natural immunity of the body.
It is also laxative. It is specially valuable for
children, old people, the sexually promiscuous
and persons suffering from emaciation. It also
increases mental energy.
On the other hand, meat is very suitable for
construction and reconstruction of the body,
and is very strengthening. It is also valuable
in cases of emaciation. It is highly beneficial
for those who do heavy muscular exercise. W h e n
the level of growth-impulse of the body is very
low, and a rapid rate of growth is desired, milk
is more suitable than meat. But when growth
is accompanied by an increase in fat, meat is
304

better in counteracting fat accumulation. When
milk does not give satisfactory results in growth
and development, meat should be tried, and vice
versa. T h e best milk is the.milk from young
and healthy cows. T h e best meat is the flesh
of the young and healthy goats.
From the above studies, either milk or meat
m a y be taken as basal food in a diet. First, let
us consider milk. T h e question which arises in
this connection is: as milk is nutritionally
a complete food and there are no other
foods which alone can take its place, can it
form the sole article in a normal diet, i.e.,
can milk as a mono-diet be a normal diet?
T h e answer is, that a normal diet, which is a
diet for every day should contain foods which
have all flavour qualities in their right proportion, as a permanent balanced diet. So, milk
alone, though an excellent food by itself, cannot
serve this purpose. Milk diet is actually a rebuilding diet, indicated in cases where the
level of vitality and functional efficiency of the
body have been reduced to a subnormal level.
W h e n the growth impulse and vitality
of the cells are very low, the alimentary, circulatory, glandular and eliminative functions
are lowered, a n d the body is in a state of subhealth, and in many chronic affections, milk
diet is excellent. It has a great therapeutic
value. It is also a wonderful natural means of
purifying the whole alimentary canal.
T h e next question is whether fruits added to
milk, that is, a milk-fruit diet, can be made a
normal diet. Milk-fruit diets are special diets,
essentially having corrective and rebuilding
effects. A carefully selected milk-fruit diet may
be followed for a prolonged period, but still it
needs to be supplemented by other suitable
foods. Either sweet fruits, acid fruits or both can
be used with milk. Ripe mango is essentially
a sweet fruit. It is energy-giving, and it increases sexual vigour. It has also laxative
effects. Ripe bananas are sweet fruits. They
stimulate growth and increase energy and
sexual vigour. Sweet grapes are essentially
sweet-flavour fruits. They are highly nutritious,
prevent physical decay, increase sexual vigour
and are laxative. Dates are sweet fruits. They
promote growth and strength, and increase

Physical Purification and Vitalization

sexual vigour. O n e or more kinds of fruit can
be used in a milk-fruit diet; they can be eaten
alone as fruit or may form part of a normal
diet. It may be noted here that all sweet fruits
increase sexual vigour and desire.
Ripe pineapple is a sweet-acid fruit. It gives
energy and is laxative. Kamala (a kind of orange)
is also a sweet-acid fruit which stimulates digestion and is laxative. Ripe pomegranates are
either almost sweet or sweet-acid fruits. T h e y
give energy and increase digestive power and
sexual vigour. These fruits and other acid
fruits can be taken alone, or combined with
milk and sweet fruits, or form part of a normal
diet. T h e y stimulate sexual vigour.
Milk is an excellent food, the basis of a normal
diet. To such a normal diet, either rice or wholewheat bread can be added. Rice and wholewheat are sweet-flavour foods. T h e y are nutritious, produce energy and increase sexual vigour.
Rice is constipating, but whole-wheat is laxative.
Some butter may be added to the cereal foods.
Cow butter is the best. It is a sweet-acid-astringent-flavour food. It is strengthening and increases sexual vigour. It is slightly constipating.
Various vegetables, including leaves, flowers,
fruits, stalks and bulbs, should be added. And
finally, both sweet and acid fruits should be added. This will make an ideal normal diet. Milk can
sometimes be replaced by whole sour milk.
Meat can also be taken as the basis of a normal
diet. In this connection, it can be noted that
meat cannot be the sole article in a normal
diet. T h e carnivorous animals live almost wholly
on the flesh of other animals. But they not only
eat muscle but also blood, organs a n d bones.
This makes a difference. However, a m a n
cannot be transformed into a carnivorous animal,
nor is it desirable to make him truly carnivorous
like the Eskimos. So, an exclusive meat diet is
not a h u m a n diet. In a normal diet, meat can
be a basic food, to which plenty of vegetables
and fruit should be added. Whole sour milk
can also be added with great advantage. Such
a diet is nutritious and strengthening, and
increases sexual vigour. Rice, or wholewheat bread, and butter can be added to increase
the nutritional value of the diet.
There is also a third possibility. Instead of

making milk or meat a basic food in a diet,
pulses (dal) can be taken as the chief articles.
Pulses contain body-building substances (proteins), almost equal to meat, but they are
inferior in quality. Therefore, milk or meat
should be added to the pulses to raise their
nutritional value. T h e pulses have a high percentage of energy-giving substances (mainly
carbohydrate, but also some fat). Some pulses
increase sexual vigour. Also, certain pulses are
laxative, while others are constipating.
T h e r e are many kinds of pulses. T h e following
are commonly used: mudga, or mug (Phaseolus
M u n g o ) , masha (Phaseolus Radiatus), chanaka
(chick-pea), kalaya (dry pea), masura (lentil),
adhaki (Cajanus Indicus Spreng), and triputa
(vetch). To make the pulse diet more balanced
and nutritious, add some rice or whole-wheat
bread, butter, and liberal quantities of vegetables
and fruit. Above all, some milk, whole sour
milk or meat should be added to the diet to
improve the qualities of the proteins.
In cooking pulses and vegetables, some spices
can be used. T h e y increase palatability and
give a charming colour to the food. But excessive spices should never be used. T h e commonly used spices a r e : coriander seed, cummin
seed, anis seed, turmeric, ginger, black pepper,
fresh green pepper and salt. They are appetizing,
digestant and have medicinal properties. Some
of them are slightly stimulating. T h e y improve
the qualities of food.

Muscular Exercise
According to hathayoga, exercise is a complex
muscular process in which the skeletal muscles
either function dynamically when the level of
bodily activities is raised to a desired, higher
level, or statically when the body is statically
maintained in a desired posture, or all muscular
activities are voluntarily stopped. T h e dynamic
function is purposeful, volitional and conscious,
and contraction is graded to the full contraction
point. T h e static function is associated with the
development of vital endurance, and also the

305

Concentration Practices

conservation of energy. It creates a state in
which there is a physical submission to mental
functions. T h e dynamic function is executed
in a postural m a n n e r as well as in a free muscular
way. Muscular exercise stimulates the growth
and development of the body through the
systematized movements of the fundamental
musculature.
T h e following exercises are to be performed
in the order indicated below.
1 Relaxation and Breathing. Assume the
adamantine posture, that is, sit on the heels
with the body erect. Now, relax the body by
ceasing all physical efforts and strain, and by
making the mind calm and passive. Mental
passivity is to be attained slowly and in a calm
attitude, avoiding mental strain. Patience is
absolutely necessary. When you are fairly relaxed, perform both nostrils breathing with slow
and full inspiration and expiration, being fully
conscious of breathing and without mental
diversions. Maintain mental calmness throughout. Spend about 10 or 15 minutes doing these
exercises.
2 Diaphragm Raise. Sit on heels. Draw
inward and lift upward the front abdominal
wall in expiratory breath-suspension as much
as possible. Maintain it for a short time, then
relax the abdomen and inspire. Repeat 50 to
100 times.
3 Quick Squat. Assume standing position.
Do squatting with a short forward j u m p .
Do this rapidly. Repeat 30 to 50 times.
4 Serpent Raise. Assume prone-lying position, with the palms at shoulder-width on the
floor. Raise the body from the hips upward and
backward as much as possible, inhaling. Lower
the body, exhaling. Repeat 10 to 15 times.
5 Snake Raise. Assume prone-lying position
with the hands clasped behind the back. Raise
the body as high as possible from the hips,
inhaling. Lower the body, exhaling. Repeat
10 to 15 times.
6 Makara Raise. Assume prone-lying position
with the hands clasped behind the head. Raise
the body as high as possible from the hips,
inhaling. Lower the body, exhaling. Repeat
10 to 15 times.
7 Locust Raise. Assume prone-lying position
306

with the arms by the sides. Raise the legs from
the hips as high as possible, inhaling. Lower
the legs, exhaling. Repeat 10 to 15 times.
8 Bow. Assume prone-lying position and
hold the ankles with the hands by bending the
legs at the knees. Raise the body and thighs as
high as possible, inhaling. Lower the body
and thighs, exhaling. Repeat 10 to 15 times.
9 Spine-twist. Sit with the left heel set against
the perineum, and the right knee vertical.
Now, twist the body to the right by grasping
the left knee with the left hand and the right
ankle with the right hand behind the back.
Maintain the position for one or two minutes.
T h e n twist the body in a similar manner to the
left side.
10 Lateral Body-bend. Assume standing position, with the legs far apart, hands clasped behind the head. Bend laterally to the right and
touch the right knee with the head, exhaling.
Go back to the original position, inhaling.
Perform the movement on the left side. Repeat
6 to 12 times, each side.
11 Abdominal Raise. Assume supine-lying
position, with the hands clasped behind the
head. Raise the body slowly to a sitting position,
exhaling. Lower the body to the original position,
inhaling. Repeat 10 to 15 times.
12 Plough. Assume supine-lying position, with
the arms by the sides. Raise the legs and the
body to roll overhead to the floor, exhaling.
R e t u r n to the original position, inhaling. The
rolling movement can be done slowly as well as
quickly. Repeat 10 to 15 times.
13 Lateral Abdominal Raise. Assume right
side-lying position, with the right forearm
locked behind the right side of the head. Now
raise the head and trunk laterally as high as
you can without twisting the body, exhaling.
R e t u r n to the original position, inhaling. Do
this on the left side. Repeat 6 to 12 times,
each side.
14 Curling. Assume standing position, with
the arms by the sides, the palms forward, the
hands clenched. Contract the arm muscles
fully and at the same time contract the latissimus
muscles on both sides. Now bring the forearms,
bending at the elbows, close to the shoulders
without moving the upper arms. Then return

Physical Purification and Vitalization

to the original position. Inhale when curling
the hands and exhale when lowering them.
Repeat 10 to 20 times.
15 Body Press. Assume the suspended, pronelying position, supporting the body on the hands
and feet. Press the body to full arms length,
inhaling. Return to the original position, exhaling. This exercise can be done fairly slowly
as well as quickly. Repeat 30 to 50 times.
16 Relaxation. Assume the supine-lying position, with the arms by the sides. Relax the whole
body. Maintain for 5 minutes.
17 Stand-on-head. Make the body inversely
perpendicular on the head, with interlocked
forearms around the head. Maintain the position
for 10 minutes.
T h e best time for these exercises is the late
afternoon, 5 or 6 hours after lunch, and definitely
before dinner. After exercise, take a short rest
and then take a warm, cleansing bath to be
immediately followed by a cold shower or a
cold pouring. T h e n drink a glass of cold water.
Walking, running and swimming should be
combined with the above exercises for the best
results. T h e following is the schedule:
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday

Exercise
Walking and running
Exercise
Swimming
Exercise
Long walk
Rest

(For fuller details of exercise and associated
factors, see the author's Hathayoga, published
by L.N. Fowler, London, 1959; 2nd edn 1963,
reprinted 1974.)

Pranayamic Breathing
T h e pranayamic breathing consists of five
forms of breathing exercise. Their techniques
and order are given below.
1 M a h a m u d r a Breathing. Sit with the left
heel set against the perineum, the right leg
stretched forward and the hands placed on the

right knee. M a k e both-nostrils, long-slow inspiration. At the end of the inspiration, suspend
breath with chin-lock (by bending the head
forward and setting the chin against the top
of the sternum). T h e n bend the body forward
along the line of the extended leg, hold the right
toes with both hands, and maintain the head
position midway. Now, count 6. T h e n return
to the original position, place the hands on the
knees and bring the head to its normal position.
Now, make both-nostrils, long-slow expiration.
T h e n perform the exercise on the other side,
and, finally, with both legs extended forward.
Repeat 3 to 5 times each side.
2 Matsyendrasana Breathing. Sit in spinetwist posture, with the head up. Make bothnostrils, long-slow inspiration. At the end of
inspiration, suspend breath with chin-lock, a n d
count 6. T h e n raise the head and make bothnostrils, long-slow expiration. T h e n perform the
exercise on the other side. Repeat 3 to 5 times,
each side.
3 Bhujangasana Breathing. Assume pronelying position, with the palms on the floor at
shoulder-width. Make serpent raise with bothnostrils, long-slow inspiration, suspend breath
with chin-lock and count 6. T h e n return to the
original position with both-nostrils long-slow
expiration. Repeat 3 to 5 times.
4 Bhastrika Breathing. Assume lotus posture.
Make short-quick expirations and inspirations,
by using mainly the lungs and keeping the
abdomen relaxed and motionless. Make 100
expulsions. Immediately after this do ujjayi
breathing.
5 Ujjayi Breathing. Assume lotus posture.
Make both-nostrils, long-slow inspiration, then
breath-suspension with chin-lock, and finally,
both-nostrils, long-slow expiration. This is one
round. T h e relative measures of inspiration, suspension and expiration are 1-4-2. We are giving
here three measures for the convenience of the
pupils: 4 - 1 6 - 8 , 8 - 3 2 - 1 6 and 1 6 - 6 4 - 3 2 . N u m ber of rounds, 3 to 12.
T h e best time for the practice of pranayamic
breathing is the morning after evacuation of
the bowels and oral cleansing. Pharyngonasal
water bath should be done after oral cleansing
and before pranayamic breathing. It is very

307

Concentration Practices

useful to do pranayamic breathing before the
practice of concentration. If concentration is
practised both in the morning and evening,
then, in the morning practice, do first breathing

308

and then concentration, and in the evening
practice do only concentration. Pranayamic
breathing should be done once a day.

C H A P T E R 14

Mental Purification and
Rejuvenation

Mental qualities, though fundamentally mindborn, become involved in physical activities.
T h e mental influence on the body is clearly
seen in the ability to execute muscular movements correctly, effectively, and in a wellcontrolled manner. In the training of the body,
intelligence, attention, co-ordination, accuracy,
and other mental qualities are brought into play.
Learning new and complicated movements and
their correct and orderly performance requires
attention, control and skill. All this indicates
that physical excellence is closely associated
with mind, and mind reacts by exhibiting certain
of its qualities.
But how far is mind itself developed by
physical culture? Mental qualities, which are
brought into play by muscular movements,
indicate that a certain aspect of the mind is
influenced which has practical value in everyday life at the physical level. In the mental
field, this physicomental development does not
appear to much enhance these qualities, which
form the core of mental life. It is true that
mental energy which is involved in the development of a high order of mind, functions more
effectively when it is supported by a vast amount
of nerve energy the source of which is a healthy
and vigorous body. So, physical culture has a
place in mental development, but it is only a
fraction. When mental qualities are released
in the mental field by the mental energy function,
they are forceful in their expressions, and are
able to create mental dynamism which ultimately moulds the pattern of mental life.
Thoughts are replicas in known forms of an

unknown mental reality which is the centre
of the mental power system. In this power system
mental energy flows and tends to be at maximal
concentration point. At this point mental consciousness is highly focussed, and thereby the
unknown reality is revealed. W h e n it is revealed,
it appears to be beyond mind. T h o u g h t is a
mental function of replicating what has beenrevealed deep inside, and also all facts which are
imaged in sense-consciousness.
In a more practical way, when thought is
intimately associated with perception on the
physical level, its force is scattered, and consciousness diversified. Now, thought becomes
a 'mirror' of everyday life. Unless we are able
to bring its force to a focus, thought will remain
an open book of our lives. On its way to concentratedness, thought exhibits highly intellectual constructiveness. But as concentration increases its intellectuality is transformed into
mono-form thought-consciousness which is very
close to concentrated inner mental consciousness,
and at a certain point, thought-concentration
becomes real conscious concentration of mind.
Those mental qualities, which help to rouse
the concentration factor in thought, are concentration qualities. There is a mental
antagonism between the concentration qualities
and those qualities which tend to decentralize
thought-force. T h e mental practice is first
directed towards the control of anticoncentration qualities. This is mental purification. Mental
purification creates a mental state in which all
qualities which interrupt and weaken concentration are in coil by the emergence of
309

Concentration Practices

concentration qualities. When mental purity
is established, thought-force begins to concenter.
T h e control process is frequently interrupted
by the penetration of diversifying mental qualities. W h e n mental character is sufficiently
weakened, mind becomes fully externalized.
Now consciousness is the playground of pride,
arrogance, anger, harshness and other black
qualities around the self which has been overemphasized and is in a dark cloud of ignorance.
Ignorance veils the spiritual light and under such
a condition desires, hopes, sadness, fear, disgust, jealousy, disdain and delusion are released.
Unless these impurities are cleaned out from
the mind, thought-force is without strength,
and without developing it to a high degree,
concentration is not possible. Thought-force
and concentration grow in that mental soil
which has been nourished by restfulness, meditativeness, self-control, firmness, patience, magnanimity, mercy, fearlessness, truth, sincerity,
cleanliness and energy.

Discipline
T h e first and foremost step towards mental
purification and for the development of thoughtforce is the practice of tapasya - vigorous disciplining of the body and mind. An aspiring
pupil must undertake it. There is no easecomfort way.
T h e first step of mental purification is as
follows: Be happy when you find that people
around you are happy, and be really sorry
when you find that they are sorry; that is,
make the happiness and sorrow of others your
own and feel in the same manner. Similarly,
when you find that others are doing good things,
be glad for it; but when you find that they are
doing the wrong things, just isolate yourself
from them. This practice will gradually cleanse
your mind.
Start with the practice of disciplining your
body a n d mind. First of all, subject your body
to cold, heat, sun and rain; hunger and thirst;
and lack of sleep. You have to carry endurance
to the pain point. T r a i n the body by vigorous
310

muscular exercise as well as in motionlessness.
Certain appropriate postures can be selected
for the practice of motionlessness carried to the
pain point.
T h e most important part of mental control
is the control of the sex urge. Sex urge has two
main phases: the mental which consists of
sexual thoughts and emotions, and the physical
which includes all forms of sexual acts. Therefore, control has two parts: thought control and
control of orgasm and ejaculation. Physical
control is subordinate to mental control, but it
is necessary.
T h e main point in mental control is to prevent
sexual thought-emotions leading to action. It
is possible and necessary to restrict thoughtemotions, however intense they may be, to the
mental field, without allowing them to exercise
their influence on the sexual organs to the extent
that causes volitional acts. T h e waves of intensified thought-emotions should
be mentally
endured. To do it in a systematic way practise
this thought control process:
Assume
either
accomplished
posture
(siddhasana) or lotus posture (padmasana). Keep
the whole body absolutely motionless. Now,
endure mentally and resolutely the thrusts of
intensified sexual desires. Continue this practice
until the emotion evaporates. If it becomes
very difficult to exercise control, then change the
posture to spine-twist posture (matsyendrasana),
and practise it as long as it is necessary. If it is
still difficult, assume knee-heel posture (watayanasana) and do it. T h e posture should be continued
beyond the pain point, and until the mind
becomes calm.
W h e n you have gained sufficient mental
strength by the regular practice of enduring
sexual desire, then start with the following
thought process. It is indicated when very strong
sexual desire arises in the mind. T h e process:
Assume accomplished posture. Think deeply
that sex-fire is burning in the muladhara. Then
rouse apana-force, red in colour, lying in the
muladhara, by concentrated thought in conjunction with anal contraction, and then get
sex-fire absorbed into apana. Now, raise the
apana along with sex energy through the
sushumna. upward to reach the wishuddha

Mental Purification and Rejuvenation
chakra, by deep thinking. Here lies the smokecoloured udana-force. By deep thinking, transfer
sexual energy to udana which will carry it to
the indu chakra. Here, transform sexual energy
to moon-coloured life-force which is located in
the indu chakra. Patiendy practise this process.

Mental Rejuvenation
Assume accomplished posture. Think deeply

that moon-coloured life-force has been concentrated in the indu chakra. From this concentrated life-force lifeful radiations are being
emitted. Then the life-energy gradually becomes
condensed to form a perfect body, a body which
is vital, vigorous, youthful, internally purified
and diseaseless; the senses being calm; and mind
shining, but perfectly tranquil.
It is better to practise this process in the
morning after pranayamic breathing (see
chapter 13). It can also be practised any time
if you feel like doing it, omitting pranayamic
breathing.

311

CHAPTER 15

Posture, Breath-control and
Sense-withdrawal

T h e first thing in the practice of concentration
is to arrange an appropriate room which is
most suitable for the practice. T h e room should
be in a secluded part of the house. It should
be neither very big nor very small, nor too high,
nor too low. It should be very clean; there must
be no furniture or any other things. It should
be kept well-ventilated and have free access
to natural light. It must be completely free
from bad odours. This room should not be used
for any other purposes or by other persons.
T h e seat on which the practitioner will sit
for concentration should be comfortable, but
not too soft. A soft and thick blanket can be
used as a seat, and if necessary it can be folded
to get the desired thickness. It should be covered
with a piece of washable clean white cloth.
U n d e r the blanket, a seat made of kusha grass
(Poa cynosuroides) may be placed, if possible.
T h e seat should be large enough for the practice.
This seat is exclusively for the practitioner;
no one else should be allowed to use it.
Before starting the practice, the room should
be thoroughly ventilated by opening the doors
and windows. Thereafter they should be closed.
T h e atmosphere in the room must be calm.
There must be no smell - good or otherwise in the room. T h e practitioner's mouth should
be completely tasteless and odourless, and his
breath odourless. To keep them in that state,
overeating should be strictly avoided, and
odoriferous foods, viz., onions, garlics, etc. should
be omitted. By making the room dark and by
closing the eyes during the practice, sight
impressions are eliminated. T h e room should
312

be neither warm nor cold. This means that the
practitioner should feel neither warm nor cold
sensation. T h e neutralization of temperature
is very important. There should be no air
currents in the room, and the practitioner should
not feel any air flow on his body. And above all,
there should be no sound heard in the room.
This is very difficult. But still an attempt should
be made to get the room free from sounds as
much as possible.

The Practice
Sit on your seat. Assume accomplished posture
(siddhasana). T e c h n i q u e : sit with the left heel
against the perineum; place the right leg on
the left leg, the right heel pressing the abdomen.
Care should be taken not to press the genitals.
Place the hands with palms upward, the right
on the left, in the lap, above the right foot.
Keep the trunk straight. Assuming this posture,
say the mantra Ong for a few minutes. Then be
silent and calm.
Now, relax the whole body consciously. Any
physical effort, or any tendency to make an
effort should be abandoned by mental effortlessness - a definite mental passivity. It is difficult, but not impossible. It requires patience and
time. 'Hurrying' should be strictly abandoned.
To make yourself passive, you should not be
active. Passivity should be developed in a
strictly passive way. Otherwise, it will defeat its

Posture, Breath-control and Sense-withdrawal
purpose. Try to feel that you are fully passive
and in complete silence.
Then make your body as still as a mountain
by deep thought. Your whole thought-consciousness will be wholly of'mountain-like still body'.
Continue this thinking sufficiently long. The
secret of success lies here; being completely
passive and perfectly motionless, think very
deeply that your body is becoming as still as a
mountain. This thought should go on continuously, without any interruption by any
other thoughts even for a moment.
By continual practice, a stage will be reached
when, automatically, the normal resting breath
rate will begin to decrease to under 10 a minute,
and gradually to 5, 4, 3, 2 a minute. After that,
and by continued practice, the breath rate
may be 1 a minute, or even less. However,
somewhere, at the 3-2-1 level, an automatic
sense-withdrawal may take place. In this state
no sensory impressions are registered in consciousness. If there is difficulty in getting automatic sense-withdrawal even when the breathing
goes down to 1 a minute, then practise the
special thought-form, sense-withdrawal process
which is as follows.

Assume accomplished posture (siddhasana).
Now inspire slowly through both nostrils, and
at the same time think deeply that extremely
subtle lightning-like Kundalini has been roused,
in the red triangle of the muladhara. At the
end of inspiration, suspend breath with chinlock, and think that the sense of smell has been
absorbed completely into Kundalini; finally,
expire slowly through both nostrils and think
that you are now without the sense of smell.
There is no measure for the breathing. Inspiration and expiration should be done slowly and
carried out to the full extent, and suspension
should be discontinued when there is a definite
feeling of difficulty.
In this manner, the absorption by Kundalini
of the sense of taste in swadhishthana, the sense
of sight in the manipura, the sense of touch in
the anahata, and the sense of hearing in the
wishuddha should be made by deep thinking in
combination with breathing. An inspiration,
suspension and expiration make one round.
There will be five rounds in this process. This
practice will gradually develop the power of
sense-withdrawal.

313

CHAPTER 16

Practice of Dharana.

After automatic sense-withdrawal is established,
dharana (holding-concentration) develops by
itself in consciousness. When the principles of
mahabhutas and tanmatras along with the
sensory principles are controlled, a dewata
(divine form) appears automatically in consciousness and is held there. But this automatic
dharana is extremely difficult to achieve. Therefore, more simple thought-form dharana should
first be practised.
The essential point in thought-form dharana
is to hold a dewata in his (or her) own form in
consciousness by deep thought. The dewata
will occupy the whole consciousness, that is,
the practitioner's whole consciousness is dewata,
and nothing else. The holding power should
be so strong that the dewata does not slip from
consciousness at any time. The firm holding
will make the dewata appear clear, shining,
and lively. This stage should be maintained
for approximately the same time as breathsuspension. Breath-suspension is the time when
on prolongation difficulty is experienced in
holding the breath any longer. By practice,
the sense of breath-suspension time, without
actually doing breath-suspension, is acquired.
The breath-suspension time is equal to holding
time in dharana. This is one unit of holding.

consciousness is usually almost without sensory
impressions. However, at this point commence
the practice of dharana. Dharana comprises
three forms and each form has several stages.
Dharana, First Form
Stage 1
Hold the deity Brahma in consciousness by deep
thought. Think that Brahma is shining deep
red in colour, preadolescent in appearance,
seated in the lotus posture, having four faces,
each with three eyes; four arms, holding a
staff with his upper left hand, a sacred waterpot
with his lower left hand and a rosary of rudraksha
with his lower right hand; and making the
gesture of dispelling fear with his upper right
hand; he is clothed in the skin of a black antelope,
and seated on a white swan. (See Plate 2, left
top figure.) Make the picture vivid in consciousness and hold it for one unit of holding
time, and then go to stage 2.

The Practice

Stage 2
Hold the deity Wishnu in consciousness by deep
thoughts. Wishnu is shining dark blue in colour,
graceful and youthful, and clad in yellow raiment; he has four arms, and holds in his hands
a conch, wheel, mace and lotus (flower); he is
seated on garuda. (See Plate 5, left top figure.)

Assume accomplished posture. First come to
low breathing points: 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 . At this stage,

Stage 3
Hold the deity Rudra in consciousness by deep

314

Practice of Dharana

thought. R u d r a is vermilion-red in colour,
three-eyed, two-armed, and the hands are in
the attitudes of granting boons and dispelling
fear; he is dressed in a tiger's skin and seated on
a bull. (See Plate 8, left top figure.)
Stage 4
Hold the Deity Isha in consciousness by deep
thought, Isha is shining white in colour, threeeyed, two-armed, making the gestures of dispelling fear and granting boons; he is in the lotus
posture and clad in silken raiment. (See Plate 12,
left top figure.)
Stage 5
Hold the Deity Sadashiwa as;Ardhanarishwara
(right half male and left half female form) in
consciousness by deep thought. T h e right half
of the body is male, white in colour, clad in
tiger's skin, having five faces, with three eyes
in each face; he has ten arms, holding a trident,
a chisel, a sword, the thunderbolt, fire, the
great snake, a bell, a goad a n d a noose, and
making the gesture of dispelling fear. T h e left
half of the body is female, golden in colour,
clad in a beautiful dress. He is seated on the
bull-lion. (See Plate 15, left top figure.)
To summarize
First, think deeply of the Deity Brahma (holding
time = breath-suspension time).
Then, without thinking of anything else,
pass directly from Brahma-thought to thinking
about the Deity Wishnu; then the Deity R u d r a ;
then the Deity Isha; and finally, the Deity
Sadashiwa.
When the first form of dharana is well-established in thought, commence with the second
form.

Dharana, Second Form

Stage 1
First think that the Deity Indra is seated on a
white elephant. Indra is shining yellow in colour,
four-armed, holding a thunderbolt in his upper
right hand and making the gesture of dispelling

fear with his upper left h a n d ; his lower two
hands are in the concentration attitude. When
the Indra-form is vivid in consciousness, hold
it during the breath-suspension time.
T h e n think that young Brahma is seated in
the lap of Indra. W h e n the Brahma-form is
vivid, hold it in consciousness during the breathsuspension time.
T h e n think of both Indra and Brahma
(seated in Indra's lap) together, and hold them
in consciousness during the breath-suspension
time.
Next think that Power Dakini is seated in
the lap of Brahma. Dakini is in the lotus posture,
shining red in colour, three-eyed, four-armed,
holding a trident, a sword, a skulled staff, and
a drinking vessel; clad in black antelope's skin.
Make the Dakini-form vivid and hold it in
consciousness during the breath-suspension time.
Finally, all the three forms together should
be thought of deeply and held in consciousness
during the breath-suspension time. (See Plate 3.)
After this is done, start with stage 2.
Stage 2
Practise the three-levelled thought exactly as
in the stage 1. First, think of the Deity Waruna
in the lotus posture on a makara; he is shining
white in colour, four-armed, holding the noose
in one of his hands.
T h e n think of the Deity Wishnu in the lap of
Waruna. Next think of the Power Rakini, seated
in lotus posture, in the lap of Wishnu. Rakini
is dark-blue in colour, three-eyed, four-armed,
holding a trident, the thunderbolt, a blue lotus
and a d r u m with her hands. Finally, think of
the three forms at the same time. (See Plate 6.)
Stage 3
First think of the Deity Wahni, seated on a ram,
fire-like red in colour, four-armed, holding a
rudraksha rosary and a spear, and in the attitudes of granting boons and dispelling fear.
In the lap of Wahni is seated the Deity Rudra.
In the lap of R u d r a the Power Lakini is seated
in the lotus posture. Lakini is shining darkblue in colour, dressed in yellow raiment,
three-faced with three eyes in each face, fourarmed, holding the thunderbolt and a spear,
315

Concentration Practices
and making the gestures of granting boons and
dispelling fear. Finally, think of the three
forms together. (See Plate 9.)
Stage 4
First think of the Deity Wayu, seated in the lotus
posture on a black antelope. Wayu is smokecoloured, four-armed, holding a goad and making the gestures of granting boons and dispelling
fear. In the lap of Wayu is seated the Deity
Isha. In the lap of Isha the Power Kakini is
seated in the lotus posture, clad in black
raiment, shining yellow in colour, three-eyed,
four-armed, holding a noose and a skull, and
making the gestures of granting boons and
dispelling fear. Finally, think of the three
forms together. (See Plate 13.)
Stage 5
First think of the Deity Akasha, shining white
in colour, seated in the lotus posture on a white
elephant. Akasha is four-armed, holds a noose
and a goad, and is making the gestures of
granting boons and dispelling fear. In the lap
of Akasha is the Deity Sadashiwa as Ardhanarishwara. In the lap of Sadashiwa is the
Power Shakini. Shakini is in the lotus posture,
dressed in yellow raiment, shining white in
colour, five-faced with three eyes in each face,
four-armed, holding a bow and arrow, a noose
and a goad in her hands. Finally, think of the
three forms together. (See Plate 16.)
To summarize
First, think deeply of Indra-Brahma-Dakini;
then, Waruna-Wishnu-Rakini; then, WahniRudra-Lakini; then, again, Waya-Isha-Kakini;
and finally, Akasha-Sadashiwa-Shakini.

316

Dharana, Third Form
When the second form of dharana is well-established in thought, commence the third form.
Stage 1
Think deeply of the Deity Parashiwa alone.
Parashiwa is crystal-white in colour, seated
in the lotus posture, three-eyed, and making
the gestures of granting boons and dispelling
fear. Thinking should not be interrupted after
breath-suspension time, but all efforts should
be made to continue the thought-form uninterruptedly up to 2, 3, 4 or more breathsuspension times. In this way dharana is lengthened. (See Plate 20, male figure.)
When you are fairly established in it, proceed
to the second stage.
Stage 2
Think of Power Siddha Kali alone. Siddha
Kali is dark blue in colour, three-eyed, fourarmed, holding a sword and a head, and assumes
the attitudes of dispelling fear and granting
boons. (See Plate 20, female figure.)
When this thought-form is clear and prolonged, commence with the third stage.
Stage 3
Think deeply that Power Siddha Kali is being
absorbed into the Deity Parashiwa, and finally,
they unite in the form of Parashiwa. Think
of Parashiwa and his Power as one and the same.
Try to prolong this thought without any interruption. This is the process of the prolongation
of dharana. When it is sufficiently prolonged,
and there is adequate control of the thought,
the practitioner is fit for the practice of thoughtform dhyana.

CHAPTER 17

Practice of Dhyana

In the practice of thought-form dhyana, thought
of Kundalini is the essential point. Kundalini
in her real nature is without any form and
subtle. When thought is purified and made more
powerful and concentrated by the practice of
thought-form dharana in which a divine form
is held in consciousness, dhyana of subtle
Kundalini is possible. Kundalini should be considered as supremely subtle and conscious power
by which everything which is non-kundalini
is absorbed into her, and in this m a n n e r Brahman
in its supreme and infinite aspect as Parama
Shiwa is revealed. kundali-power does not
create the world, but absorbs the world and
reveals Supreme Consciousness which, otherwise, remains hidden in 'cosmicity'. Kundalini
herself is Supreme Consciousness when her
power aspect is recoiled into T h a t .
To be able to think of formless and subtle
Kundalini, it is necessary to think that Kundalini is light-like and without a definite form.
It is extremely difficult to think of formless,
splendorous Kundalini, but it will be possible by
constant efforts.

Dhyana Process
Assume accomplished posture and reduce breathing to 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 . At this calm moment, think
deeply of Kundalini as fire-like in colour and
brightness within the red-coloured triangle of
the muladhara. Make the thought of Fire-

Kundalini as deep as possible by its uninterrupted
continuity, without any sense of time. When
this thought is well established, then think
that Fire-Kundalini is extending upwards
through the brahma nadi and enters the swadhishthana. Here, make deep thought of FireKundalini as has been done in the muladhara.
T h e n again think that Fire-Kundalini is extending into the manipura where deep thinking
should be done.
From the manipura, Fire-kundalini extends
into the anahata where she is transformed into
sun-like splendorous Kundalini, termed SunKundalini. Here, deep thought of Sun-Kundalini should be m a d e .
T h e n think that Sun-Kundalini is extending
upwards into the vishuddha chakra where deep
thinking of Sun-Kundalini is to be made. Thereafter, think that Sun-kundalini is passing upward
into the ajna chakra, and there she is transformed into moon-like lustrous Kundalini, known
as Moon-kundalini. Here, deep thinking of
Moon-Kundalini should be m a d e . T h e n think
that Moon-Kundalini passes into the nirwana
chakra, and there deep thinking should be done.
Finally, think that Moon-kundalini passes
into the sahasrara c h a k r a where she is transformed into spiritual consciousness-power, termed Turya-Kundalini. To be able to apprehend
Turya-Kundalini and to form an extremely
refined 'imprint' in consciousness, thought should
be developed into a highly concentrated stage.
Deep thinking of Turya-kundalini should be
made in the sahasrara. T h o u g h t should be
converted into almost concentration, and
317

Concentration Practices

gradually thought-form will automatically be
transformed into real form in which Kundalini
will appear as real Power-Consciousness, and
finally as Supreme Consciousness.
If separate practices of thought-form dharana
and dhyana appear more difficult, then the

318

bhutashuddhi process can be undertaken. Bhutashuddhi is the special process of layayoga for
developing actual concentration. But thoughtform dharana and dhyana as pre-bhutashuddhi
practices are extremely helpful and contribute
much in making bhutashuddhi successful.

CHAPTER 18

Practice of Bhutashuddhi

Bhutashuddhi is a process which is executed
by deep thinking. It is not an imaginary mode
of thought, but it is an exact replication of events
naturally occurring in kundaliniyoga. These
events are rousing of kundalini, the passing
of roused kundalini through the brahma nadi,
the absorption of all principles lying within the
chakras by kundalini, and finally, the absorption
of kundalini herself into Supreme Shiwa in
supreme yoga - mind-transcendent asamprajnata
samadhi, which is attained through the process
of samprajnata samadhi, occurring in the sahasrara at the amakala point.
A yogi who has been established in kundaliniyoga has full experiences of what happens in
the various phases of this yoga process and is
able to replicate all facts, in exact order, which
normally take place in this yoga. In fact, bhutashuddhi is the replicated kundaliniyoga in
thought. To be able to do kundaliniyoga, concentration in the forms of dharana and dhyana
are the prerequisites. With the help of such a
concentration Kundali-power is actually roused,
and then she exhibits the absorptive power stage
by stage when passing through the different
chakras. T h e absorptive power develops absorptive concentration, which is advanced dhyana,
culminating in samprajnata samadhi in time.
In the rousing of kundalini, some hathayoga
processes are helpful, especially when concentration has not been developed to a point of effectiveness. T h e full mobilization of concentrated
bioenergy (wayu), subtle 'radiant' energy and
subtle sound is absolutely necessary to effect
a reaction in Kundali-power. But if there is a

diversion of these subtle energies, then they
become less effective in the subtle field. T h e most
concentrated forms of these energies are found
in specific subtle sounds (mantras). These sounds
are only operable in deep concentration. So,
in deep concentration, kundali-power responds
to these sounds. If the depth of concentration
is below the threshold, sounds will not produce
the full effects.
T h e effectivity of the subtle sounds lies in
the partial withdrawal from the body of the
pranic forces by causing a reversed forcemotion and making them concentrated to a
sound-emitting point. T h e pranic withdrawal
and concentration can be successfully done in
deep concentration. Conversely, according to
hathayoga, some special musculo-respiratory
efforts exert a squeezing effect by which the
pranic forces are forced into the subtle realm
where they exhibit reversed motions. Apana
force is essentially related to Kundali-power in
the muladhara. It is more or less in a diffused
state, because it is constantly penetrating into
the body along with other pranic forces, to
play its role in the vital functioning of the
body.
T h e general field of operation of apana is
the abdominal region. Specifically, the apanic
activities extend to the pelvic and perineal
regions. T h e abdominal, pelvic and perineal
muscles and smooth muscles of the alimentary
canal and sexual organs are involved in apanic
actions. T h e locking process of hathayoga aims
at producing a voluntary functional stasis for
the withdrawal of pranic forces into their
319

Concentration Practices

centres in the chakras. T h e apana withdrawal
is effected by perineal and navel locks. T h e full
actions of these two locks are exhibited when the
tongue-lock, neck-lock and chest-lock are executed in conjunction with them, in right order and
with right force. It is absolutely necessary
to learn the lock process and its application
directly from a guru.
T h e withdrawn apana becomes concentrated
in the muladhara as kandarpa-energy which is
'seen' in concentration as a shining deep-red
triangle. T h e kandarpa-energy, when roused
by mantra, becomes more concentrated and its
desire-enjoyment aspect is under control. If
this energy at this point is loosened, then it
becomes a strong desire for enjoyment and
radiates into the pelvic apparatus to incite
sexual functions. Yonimudra is a great help at
this stage. Because it helps to arrest the downwardly directed force-motion by perineal lock,
and especially, when it is strengthened by
navel, chest, neck and tongue locks.
Yonimudra serves three purposes. At the
first stage, it helps the withdrawal of apana
from the body and its concentration in the
muladhara. Second, it helps the mantra in
rousing kandarpa-energy. Third, it helps to
prevent the downward flow of apana.
A bija-mantra is the pranic force concentrated
to a point when its sound-emitting power is
exhibited. This is mantra. It operates in the subtle
field, but is silent on the material plane. Mantra
has replicated gross sound which is operable
with right technique at the physical level, and
it acts on the subtle mantra. This is called
waikhari sound. T h r o u g h the waikhari mantra
the concentrated pranic force can be m a d e to
act on Kundali-power. T h e gross bija-mantra
'Yang' is utilized to rouse kandarpa-energy.
By the mantra influence, this energy is roused
and concentrated and made to 'knock' on
kundalini with full force. T h e deviation of the
energy is prevented by the mantra and yonim u d r a . T h e mantra is done in left nostril inspiration to increase its potency.
Kandarpa-energy exhibits its full power when
it is strengthened by a subtle radiant energy
which is represented by the gross bija-mantra
'Rang'. T h e mantra is operated by deepened
thought while inspiring through the right nostril.

320

When the mantras 'Yang' and 'Rang' are forcefully executed in concentrated thought, there
are reactions in Kundalini. But still more powerful knocking is necessary. This is done by the
application of a very powerful gross mantra
'Hung' done with breath-suspension in yonim u d r a . This mantra (called kurcha bija) causes
the rousing of Kundali-power.
T h e whole process of rousing Kundalini is
apanayama (apana-control), a special form of
pranayama. It consists of yonimudra, left nostril
inspiration with the mantra 'Yang', left nostril
expiration without mantra, right nostril inspiration with the mantra 'Rang', right nostril
expiration without mantra, both nostrils inspiration without mantra, breath-suspension with
the mantra 'Hung', and both nostrils expiration
without mantra.
kundalini is that power which is neither
material nor mental but matter-mind-transcendent in character. So, kundali-power is
unmanifested in the energy play at the physical
level and in the mentation on the mental plane.
So, this power appears as if 'sleeping' in the
body and in consciousness when it is in a coiled
state. This does not mean that this power is
null. When consciousness is concentrated to
single-pointedness Kundalini is caught in it.
Kundalini then appears as supreme absorptive
power by which anything which is not spiritual
is withdrawn from consciousness and, finally,
mental consciousness is absorbed into it. She
appears then as Supreme Consciousness. It
indicates that kundalini is real power solely
concerned in developing samadhi; so this power
reveals Supreme Consciousness which she is.
Kundalini exists supreme-consciously in all the
chakras from the muladhara to the sahasrara,
and beyond the sahasrara which is the realm
of asamprajnata samadhi. Kundalini in the muladhara is within the yoni, termed kula, so she is
called Kulakundalini. T h e yoni is a triangular
process formed of kandarpa-energy where there
is the possibility of concentrating apana and
receiving subtle radiant energy and specific
subtle sound power. It is only possible here to
combine these forces in gross mantra form with
apana and create a formidable effective power
to knock at kundalini;.
Kundalini as supreme being in supreme con-

Practice of Bhutashuddhi
centration lies in the triangle of the muladhara.
Mental consciousness at the sensory and intellective levels is unable to register any impression
of Kundalini in such a state, so she appears latent,
unmanifested and even nonexistent in our
consciousness. But when consciousness is raised
to the superconscious level by transforming
it to a concentrating consciousness, the infinite
and supreme Kundalini is apprehended as
supremely subtle and lightning-like splendorous.
This finiteness is not a being at the supreme level,
but a transitional phenomenon occurring at the
mental level. It is the 'seeing' of Kundalini
through the mind. The rousing of Kundalini
is actually a reflection of supreme Kundalini
on the concentrated mental consciousness as
an extremely subtle and shining being. This
reflection is imaged in concentrated mental
consciousness and is held firmly. This is
automatic (and real) dharana - holding-concentration. By pranic withdrawal and concentration, consciousness is able to receive
the 'light' of Kundalini superconsciously and to
hold it firmly.
When the automatic dharana is established,
the absorbing power of Kundalini, or the power
from Kundalini causing the absorption of cosmic
principles, manifests in mental consciousness
which is in a state of dharana. The absorptive
power manifests as absorptive concentration
in mental consciousness.
Absorptive concentration functions in three
ways: it causes an absorption of mahabhutas
and tanmatras, dewatas and sensory principles,
step by step, occurring in the lower five chakras.
So, it is a process of pratyahara and dharana
combined. Then, the absorption of chitta in
which sensory objects are imaged, and buddhi
which interprets things which have been perceived, occurs in the manas and indu chakras. Now,
the possibilities of mental consciousness to
divert from its concentratedness to perceptual
and intellective multiformity become remote.
Then, dharana is transformed into dhyana
when Kundalini is experienced in the nirwana
chakra. In other words, dharana develops into
dhyana in the nirwana chakra. Thereafter,
Kundalini rises up into the sahasrara chakra
where dhyana is transformed into samprajnata
samadhi (superconscious concentration) at the

ama-kala point. The concentration-light-knowledge develops in samadhi to its highest point,
and as a result Kundalini is revealed in her
almost supreme aspect. This realization is
splendid by itself, and highest on the mental
plane. Now, mental consciousness is only

Kundalini.
Thereafter, the nirwarna-kala point is reached
when samadhi consciousness is absorbed and
only Kundalini in her supreme form remains.
Now, Kundalini becomes nirwana shakti - the
power which exists after the complete absorption
of everything except Kundalini. Then Kundalini
is Supreme Bindu, then Supreme Nada, then
Shiwa-shakti, then Sakala Shiwa, and finally
Parama Shiwa. These are the stages of mindtranscendent supreme concentration - asamprajnata samadhi. This is the yoga which is attained
through Kundalini, so it is called kundaliniyoga.
It takes a long time and hard practice to
attain samadhi in the sahasrara. It takes still
longer time and harder practice to get samadhi
consciousness absorbed and Kundalini shining
alone in her supreme aspect. So long as dhyana
is not transformed into samadhi, the process in
the sahasrara and beyond is to be done through
dhyana. In this manner, dhyana gradually will
be ripened into samadhi. It cannot be forced.
Give enough time for the purification and rarefication of mental consciousness. Continual and
regular practice is the secret of success. The
Guru's help at this stage is indispensable.
When the withdrawal of apana and its
reverse motion and concentration are not actually accomplished, that is, when apanayama is
not effective, and mantras used in this connection
are not forceful, the actual rousing of Kundalini,
and consequently, the attainment of automatic
dharana are not possible. All this indicates that
yonimudra is weak, pranayama is not forceful,
and concentration shallow. Under this condition, apana remains uncontrolled and mantra
lifeless. Here, bhutashuddhi is indicated, and
by its regular and systematic practice, a practitioner will acquire fitness for the practice of
Kundaliniyoga.
The central point of bhutashuddhi is to
centralize thought to a very high degree with
a view to making it deep and forceful. This is
what is called thought-concentration. This
321

Concentration Practices
process consists in thinking a chosen objective
image and trying to see it very clearly; then
making the whole thought only of that object,
by preventing any other thoughts and without
allowing the contemplated thought to slip from
consciousness. In other words, the objective
image should be the whole thought, and full
attention should be focussed on that. No intellectual functioning should participate in the
thought. In this way the single thought form
should be developed. By maintaining it steadily
and unmixed, and by its uninterrupted continuance with the focussing of full attention on it,
thought will be vivid and forceful, and by
constant practice the monothought will be transformed into real concentration.
Now, let us take up bhutashuddhi. Before
undertaking the practice the chakra system
should be very carefully studied, memorized
and contemplated on. (See Chapters 10-11.)
Another very important thing is to create
a condition of the body - an ideal physical
condition - for the successful practice of bhutashuddhi. This ideal condition is the physical
excellence in which the following signs are
manifested:
1 A complete elimination of a coated tongue,
bad mouth odour, bad breath and unpleasant
body odour.
2 Natural, regular, and complete evacuation
of the bowels in two or three motions a day.
3 Good sleep.
4 A feeling of strength and joyousness.
This physical state is the result of regular and
uninterrupted practice of right exercise, pranayamic breathing, right diet and internal
cleansing.

Bhutashuddhi Process
Bhutashuddhi comprises a series of practices
to be done in the right order. The best time for
its practice is the morning. But if it is not possible
to do it in the morning, the next best time is the
evening, before dinner. The following is the
322

order of the practices.
1 After getting up in the morning, do oral
cleansing and pharyngonasal water bath; then
drink a cup of cool water. Normal evacuation
of the bowels may occur either before or after
oral cleansing. Then take a bath.
2 Passive Invigoration. Assume accomplished
posture (siddhasana) with the hands in the lap,
palms up and the right on the left. Relax and
be calm.
Now, think deeply that Guru, moon-white
in colour, with his Power on his left side and
red in colour, lies in the guru chakra. From them
are flowing streams of death-conquering subtle
substance of red colour by which you are bathed
and you have become lifeful and powerful;
you have no disease, no senility, no sorrow, but
abundance of life and joy. All these should be
done in deep thinking.
3 Active invigoration. Sit with the right
leg extended forward, the perineum pressed
with the left heel, and the hands placed on the
right knee.
Now, inspire slowly and fully with both
nostrils, and at the end of inspiration suspend
the breath with chin-lock. Then bend the body
forward and halfway downward, hold the
toes of the right leg with both hands, and maintain this position until you are able to suspend
the breath without much difficulty. Then bring
the body to the original position and place the
hands on the right knee as before, release the
chin-lock and expire slowly and completely.
Do it on the other side.
Contract the arms during inspiration and
maintain the contraction during the suspension.
Retract the abdomen during expiration, and
at the end of expiration relax the arms and the
abdomen.
Thereafter, place the right foot on the left
one, with the hands in the lap, palms upward,
and the right hand on the left. Now, inspire
slowly and fully with both nostrils, and at the
same time contract the anus, and then press
gently the lower part of the abdomen near the
genital region with the sides of the hands. At
the end of inspiration, suspend the breath with
chin-lock and at the same time make an inward
abdominal pressure to a moderate degree,

Practice of Bhutashuddhi

maintaining anal contraction. Suspend as long
as you can without much difficulty. T h e n raise
the head and expire slowly and fully and at the
same time make abdominal retraction. At the
end of expiration, relax the anus and the
abdomen.
Finally, staying in the same position, inspire
with anal contraction; then suspend the breath
with chin-lock and make abdominal retraction,
and then make sideward hip movements; then
stop hip movements and expire and relax the
anus and the abdomen.
4 Kapalabhati (abdominal
short-quick)
breathing.
Assume
the
lotus
posture
(padmasana). First, expire quickly through both
nostrils with the slight retraction of the front
abdominal
wall.
Expiration
should
be
immediately followed by a quick and passive
inspiration through both nostrils with the relaxation of the abdomen. In this manner, quick
expirations and inspirations should continue
until the desired number is reached. T h e effective rate of expulsion is from 100 to 300 times a
minute. Do 200 to 300 expulsions.
5 Hangsah (breath-reduction)
breathing.
Assume the accomplished posture (siddhasana).
Now reduce the normal breathing rate to 4 - 3 - 2
a minute by relaxation and passivity of the body
and tranquilization of the mind. It may take
from 15 to 20 minutes or more. However, time
will be shortened by regular practice. At a
certain point the externalization of the mind
will stop. This is the moment to start with
bhutashuddhi proper.
6 Thought-concentration on Kundalini. T h e
first part of bhutashuddhi is the thought-concentration on Kundalini in the muladhara.
Sitting in the accomplished posture with the
hands in your lap, think deeply that within the
shining deep-red triangle in the muladhara
is Swayambhu-linga as a shining deep red or
black line, around which lies Kundalini in
3 1/2 coils. Kundalini is supremely subtle, that is,
it is extremely difficult to produce an impression
of Kundalini in thought. Therefore, it is advisable
to think of Kundalini as lightning-like splendorous, and appearing around the Swayambhulihga line. T h e line should be gradually reduced
to a point by deeper thought. At this stage

thought is centralized to the extent that it
becomes possible to image Kundalini in thought
as lightning-like splendorous conscious power.
T h e n , (7) thought-concentration on Jiwatman (being with I-principle). Think deeply
that your being-consciousness as 'I' is like a
motionless flame of a lamp, situated in the pericarp of the anahata chakra. T h e n bring the
'I' to the muladhara and unite it with Kundalini
by thinking.
T h e n , (8) Kundalini-rousing. Inspire slowly
and fully through the left nostril and at the same
time think deeply of the mantra 'Yang' during
the whole time of inspiration. At the end of
inspiration, expire through the left nostril slowly
and completely, and at the same time think
deeply that kandarpa-energy is stimulated and
concentrated in the muladhara triangle by the
power of the mantra 'Yang', and the concentrated
energy is knocking at Kundalini.
T h e n , inspire through the right nostril and
at the same time think deeply of the mantra
'Rang'. At the end of inspiration expire through
the right nostril and at the same time think
that subtle fire from the mantra 'Rang' has been
kindled in the muladhara triangle and that both
kandarpa-energy and fire are focussed on
Kundalini.
T h e n , inspire through both nostrils and at the
same time think deeply that the combined
apana and fire actions have produced so much
heat that Kundalini is heated and agitated by
it. T h e n , suspend breath with chin-lock, and at
the same time contract the anus and mentally
say the power-mantra 'Hung' and think deeply
that Kundalini has been roused by the combined
actions of apana, fire a n d the mantra 'Hung'.
Thereafter think that the 'earth'-principle
('earth'-mahabhuta and smell-tanmatra), the
Deity Brahma, Power Dakini, and smell-principle - all have been absorbed into Kundalini.
T h e n , (9) Kundalini Conduction. T h e n , bring
Kundalini from the maladhara to the swadhishthana by saying mentally the mantra 'Hangsah'
in deep thinking. T h e n think that the 'water'principle
('water'-mahabhuta
and
tastetanmatra), the Deity Wishnu, Power Rakini
and taste-principle are absorbed into Kundalini.
T h e n , bring Kundalini to the manipura by the

323

Concentration Practices
mantra 'Hangsah' in deep thinking. Here, the
'fire'-principle ('fire'-mahabhuta and sighttanmatra), the Deity Rudra, Power Lakini,
and sight-principle are absorbed into Kundalini
by deep thinking.
Then, Kundalini is brought to the anahata
in a similar manner, and the 'air'-principle
('air'-mahabhuta and touch-tanmatra), the Deity
Isha, Power Kakini, and touch-principle are
caused to be absorbed here by deep thinking.
Then, Kundalini is brought to the wishuddha
where the 'void' (akasha)-principle ('void'mahabhuta and sound-tanmatra), the Deity
Sadashiwa, Power Shakini, and sound-principle
are absorbed into Kundalini by deep thinking.
At this stage try to feel that you are at a point
where the senses are no longer operating;
think that you are without senses, and are in
Kundalini.
Then, bring Kundalini to the talu chakra
and rest there for some time, thinking that you
are immersed in nectarous (having only life)
fluid. Then, (10) Kundalini in Ajna System.
Bring Kundalini to the ajna chakra where Power
Hakini is absorbed into Kundalini by thinking.
Then, bring Kundalini to the manas chakra,
and get chitta (sense-consciousness) absorbed
into her; and then bring her to the indu chakra
and get the Deity Parashiwa, Power Siddhakali,
and buddhi (intellective mind) absorbed into
Kundalini by deep thinking.
Then, bring Kundalini to the nirwana chakra.
Here think deeply of Kundalini as the sole object,
and that there is nothing but Kundalini.
Then, (11) Kundalini in Sahasrara. Bring
Kundalini to the ama-kala point in the sahasrara
and try to think of Kundalini as deep as possible.
Then, at the nirwana-kala point get dhi (concentrative mind) and ahang (I-ness) absorbed
into Kundalini; and then 'feel' by deep thinking
that there is no mind-consciousness in any form,
but only Kundalini remains. Now, Kundalini
as Nirwana Shakti - the all absorbing power remains alone.
Then, (12) Kundalini beyond Sahasrara. Now,
Kundalini as supreme power is in 3 1/2 coils:
the first coil at Supreme Bindu, the second coil
at Supreme Nada, the third coil at the Shakti
principle, and the half coil at Sakala Shiwa.
324

Then Kundalini begins to uncoil step by step,
and absorbs Bindu, Nada, Shakti and Sakala
Shiwa. Now, Kundalini is in her supreme aspect
and only being. Then she becomes united with
Parama Shiwa and fully absorbed into him, and
becomes one and the same with him, in very
deep thinking. Then think that you have become
all life by the nectarous flow arising from the
Shiwa-Shakti union in absorptive thought.
Then, (13) Pranayamic Purification. This
purificatory process is to purify the subtle
body (pranic and mental) as well as the physical
body. The process consists of sahita breathing,
mantras and thoughts. The relative measure of
the breathing is 16-64-32.
Inspire slowly through the left nostril for 16
counts which are made by saying mentally the
mantra 'Yang'; during inspiration say mentally
'Yang' 16 times, and at the same time think
that 'Yang' is smoke-coloured and has the
drying power. At the end of inspiration, suspend
the breath with chin-lock for 64 counts by saying
mentally the mantra 'Yang', and at the same
time think that the body is being dried by the
power of the mantra. Then expire slowly through
right nostril by saying mentally the mantra
'Yang' 32 times, and at the same time think
that the body has been dried.
Then, without stopping, inspire slowly through
the right nostril by saying mentally the mantra
'Rang' 16 times, and at the same time think
that 'Rang' is deep red in colour and has burning
power. At the end of inspiration, suspend the
breath with chin-lock by saying mentally the
mantra 'Rang' 64 times, and at the same time
think that the impurities of the body have been
completely burnt by the power of 'Rang'. Then
expire slowly through the left nostril by saying
mentally 'Rang' 32 times and at the same time
think that the impurities in the form of ashes
are being eliminated from the body.
Then, without stopping, inspire slowly through
the left nostril by saying mentally the mantra
'Thang' 16 times, and at the same time think
that ' Thang' is moon-white in colour and by the
power of the mantra, nectarous fluid is flowing
from the moon-sphere in the indu chakra. At
the end of inspiration, suspend the breath with
chin-lock for 64 counts by saying mentally the

Practice of Bhutashuddhi

mantra 'Wang' 64 times, and at the same time
think that 'Wang' is white in colour, and by its
power the nectarous life-substance is utilized
in reconstructing the body as a new lifeful body.
T h e n expire slowly through the right nostril by
saying mentally the mantra 'Lang' 32 times, and
at the same time think that 'Lang' is yellow in
colour, and by its power the newly m a d e body
becomes strong and a d a m a n t i n e .
14 A Special Practice. This practice is
especially meant for those practitioners who have
been initiated and given the basic mantra
(mulamantra).
After pranayamic purification, transform into
Ishadewata, by deep thinking and using the
basic mantra, Shiwa-Shakti, that is, Parama
Shiwa and Kundalini in union as one. Ishtadewata is the divine form of infinite ShiwaShakti roused by the power of the basic mantra.
It can simply be said that Ishtadewata is the
mantra-form of formless Shiwa-Shakti. T h e
mantra is first made living, and then it is utilized
for rousing Ishtadewata. So long as it is not
possible to impart life to the mantra, it should
be done by deep thinking.
Bring Iiatodewata to the sahasrara and think
deeply of her (or his) form. T h e n open the hrit
chakra by thinking. This chakra has eight
golden petals where eight forms of superpower
are situated. In its pericarp, there is a circular
region as bright as the sun. Inside the suncircle lies the moon-circle which is cool a n d calm.
Inside the moon-circle is situated the firecircle, where fire is burning and consuming
everything except the gemmed seat which is
there. This seat is your inner 'heart', the seat of
deep feelings and inner power. Bring your
Ishtadewata. to the hrit chakra and place her
(or him) on the heart-seat. T h i n k that you are in
the fire-circle, and everything - all your
thoughts, feelings and desires - are being burnt
by the fire. In this way being purified, you are
in front of your Ishtadewata.. Now, think deeply,
without being deviated, but by focussing the
whole thought, on Ishtadewata. This thought
in time will lead to real concentration. This
deep thinking may be done partly in conjunction with the mental use of the basic mantra.
The thought should be saturated with the mantra

and centralized in Ishtadewata.
Thereafter, worship your Ishtadewata mentally
by offering in the following m a n n e r :
Offer to Ishtadewata your body; then offer
the 'earth'-principle, smell sense, enjoymentaction, and apana-force; then offer the 'water'principle, taste-sense, organic actions, wyanaforce; offer the 'fire'-principle, sight sense,
locomotion, samana-force; offer the 'air'-principle, touch-sense, prehension, prana-force; offer
the
'void'(akasha)-principle,
sound-sense,
speech, udana-force; offer sense-mind, intellective mind, I-ness.
Now, you can make japa of the basic m a n t r a
for 1008 times, or 508, or 108 times. T h e n bring
Ishtadewata back to the sahasrara and from there
to the infinite region by making her (or him)
again transformed into Shiwa-Shakti.
15 Bringing back Kundalini to muladhara.
Now think that Kundalini has emerged from
Parama Shiwa and passes in a reversed way
first to the sahasrara where samadhi consciousness
is restored; then to the nirwana chakra where
concentrative mind (dhi) is restored; then to
the indu chakra where the Deity Parashiwa,
Power Siddhakah, and intellective mind
(buddhi) are restored; then to the manas chakra
where sense-consciousness (chitta) is restored;
then to the ajna chakra where Power Hakini
is restored; then through the talu chakra to the
wishuddha chakra where the 'void' (akasha)principle, the Deity Sadashiwa, Power Shakini,
and sound-principle are restored; then to the
anahata chakra where the 'air'-principle, the
Deity Isha, Power Kakini, and touch-principle
are restored; then to the manipura chakra where
'fire'-principle, the Deity Rudra, Power Lakini,
and sight-principle are restored; then to the
swadhishthana chakra where the 'water'-principle, the Deity Wishnu, Power Rakini, and taste
principle are restored; then to the muladhara
chakra where the 'earth'-principle, the Deity
Brahma, Power Dakini, and smell-principle
are restored; and, finally, Kundalini encircles
Swayambhu-lihga in three and a half coils and
becomes static. Thereafter, bring back I-ness
(jiwatman) in the form of a still l a m p flame
from Kundalini to the anahata chakra. T h e
bringing down of Kundalini and the restoration
325

Concentration Practices

of different principles, deities and powers are
accomplished by deep thinking.
Bhatashuddhi ends here. At the end of the
process, remain calm for some time.

Kundaliniyoga
In kundaliniyoga, Kundalini is actually roused
and passes through all the chakras and becomes
united with Parama Shiwa as one entity in
supreme yoga, that is asamprajnata samadhi.
Events that occur at different stages of the yoga
are as follows:
First, rouse Kundalini by the mantra process
of 'Yang'-'Rang'-'Hung' with yonimudra. T h e
roused Kundalini manifests her great absorbing
power, when she passes through the different
chakras, which works in the consciousness of the
practitioner, and as a result he (or she) is in
a state of absorptive concentration which
develops step by step as Kundalini passes through
the chakras.
Roused Kundalini in the muladhara chakra
absorbs the 'earth'-principle, the Deity Brahma,
Power Dakini, and smell-principle. Because
of this absorption, the practitioner's consciousness is being withdrawn from the smell impression. This is the first stage of absorptive concentration, occurring at the muladhara level.
T h e n Kundalini passes into the swadhishthana
chakra and absorbs the 'water'-principle, the
Deity Wishnu, Power Rakini, and taste-principle. This is the second stage of absorptive
concentration in which the taste impression has
been neutralized.
T h e n Kundalini passes into the manipura
chakra and absorbs the 'fire'-principle, the
Deity R u d r a , Power Lakini, and sight-principle.
This is the third stage of absorptive concentration
in which consciousness is free from the sight
impression as well as from smell and taste
impressions.
T h e n Kundalini passes into the anahata chakra
and absorbs the 'air'-principle, the Deity Isha,
Power Kakini, and touch-principle. This is
the fourth stage of absorptive concentration in
326

which consciousness remains unaffected by
touch, smell, taste, and sight impressions.
T h e n Kundalini passes into the wishuddha
chakra and absorbs the 'void'-(akasha)-principle,
the Deity Sadashiwa, Power Shakini, and soundprinciple. This is the fifth stage of absorptive
concentration in which the sound impression
is neutralized. At this stage, the senses do not
produce any impressions on consciousness, which
is in absorptive concentration. So, there is an
automatic pratyahara (sense-withdrawal).
T h e n Kundalini passes through the talu chakra
into the ajna chakra and absorbs Power Hakini.
T h e n Kundalini passes into the manas chakra
and absorbs sense-consciousness (chitta); and
then Kundalini passes into the indu chakra
and absorbs Deity Parashiwa, Power Siddhakali,
and intellective mind (buddhi). This is the sixth
stage of absorptive concentration in which the
perceptual and intellective functions of the mind
cease. This means that mental consciousness
is now actually elevated from the perceptive and
intellective levels to the supramental level.
T h e n Kundalini passes into the nirwana chakra.
Here, at first, automatic dharana occurs. Kundalini is held in consciousness so firmly and completely that there is no interruption, and so it
continues. T h e uninterrupted continuation of
the holding of Kundalini in consciousness at a
certain point develops into very deep concentration, characterized by the uninterrupted, continuous deep flow of Kundalini-consciousness.
This is dhyana. Now, the absorptive concentration is very deep, in which consciousness has
been established in single-objectiveness. At this
stage, the only object of consciousness is Kundalini; Kundalini fills the whole of consciousness;
and Kundalini is held in consciousness so firmly
that it is never without Kundalini, and so consciousness is wholly Kundalini.
W h e n dhyana reaches a certain point, Kundalini passes into the sahasrara. Here, dhyana is
transformed into samprajnata samadhi (superconscious concentration) in which consciousness
is concentrated to a bindu (extremely concentrated point) which is all Kundalini, and without
the feeling of I-ness. In this deepest concentration, there remains only Kundalini in her
splendorous aspect. This is the seventh stage

Practice of Bhatashuddhi

of absorptive concentration.
Thereafter, Kundalini absorbs samadhi consciousness and finally prakriti (the primary principle of mind and matter), and then there is nothing but Kundalini who, step by step, absorbs
Supreme Bindu, Supreme Nada and Shakti, and
ultimately becomes absorbed into Parama Shiwa
in supreme yoga - asamprajnata samadhi.
This is kundaliniyoga, and bhutashuddhi is

the foremost practice for its acquirement. At
a certain point of its depth bhawana (thought)
begins to be transformed into dharana and then
dhyana. When the thought of Kundalini becomes
intensely deep the image of the chakras appears
automatically in consciousness. It is the sign
that the time of the real rousing of Kundalini
is near. W h e n Kundalini is roused, bhutashuddhi
is transformed into kundaliniyoga.

327

Note on the Pronunciation of
Sanskrit Words and Mantras

The following is a key to the pronunciation of
transliterated Sanskrit words and mantras (based
on the Goswami method).

n has the sound of ng
ch
ch
"
"
ch
chh
"
"
j
j
dgeh
jh
"
n
ny
t
t
th
th
"
"
d
d
dh
dh
"
n
rn
"
t
t
"
th
d
d
"
dh
n
n
"
P
P
"
ph
ph
b
b
bh
bh
m
m
"
"
y
y
r
r
"

"

a
a
i

has the sound of o
a
"
"

"

i

i

"

"

u

"

"

u

ri

e

,,

55

ee
u

u

,,
,,

55

ri

e

ai

55

"

o

"

"

oi
o

ou

k
kh
g
gh

328

"

"

"
"

"

,,

"

k
kh
g
gh

in box
" father
"
Italia (Italian) or
almost as in 'bit'
(English)
" see
" H u n d (German) or
almost as in 'full'
(English)
gut (German) or
almost as 'oo' in
'moon' (English)
"
rivoluzione (Italian)
or almost as in 'river'
(English)
mehr (German) or
as 'ay' in 'day'
(Scottish
pronunciation)
oil
hoch (German) or
as 'oa' in 'coat'
(Scottish
pronunciation)
is a diphthong, where
the first part is
pronounced as ' o '
above, and the last
part as 'u' in 'full'
" sink
inkhorn
dog
"
log h u t
"

55

55

55

55

"

"
"

55

"

"

"
"

"

55

55

55

55

55

55

"

55

"

"

11

l

"

w
sh
sh
s
h
h
ng
ng

"

l

55

55

55

"

55

55

55

"

"

55

55

"

"

w
sh
sch
s
h
h
ng

in king
" catch
" churchhill
" job
" hedgehog
"
canyon
" tie
" anthill
" dog
" red-haired
" barn
vite (French)
aspirated 't'
dent (French)
aspirated 'd'
" noire (French)
" map
" haphasard
big
abhore
" mother
yes
R o m a (Italian) or
Perth (Scottish
pronunciation)
lettre (French) or
almost as in 'letter'
(English)
" walk
" shade
Schade (German)
see
hot
" almost as in 'hot'
king
gives a nasal tone to
the preceding vowel
"

"

"

11

11

11

11

11
11
11

Glossary

Abalalaya The triangle situated in the pericarp
of the guru chakra and formed by the three lines
named A-line, Ka-line and Tha-line. In this
triangle lies Kundalini.
Abhimana I-feeling.
Adhara The perineum.
Adhara-Shakti The power residing in the
muladhara, that is, Kundalini.
Adhyatma-yoga Spiritual yoga.
Aditi Infinite Supreme Power as Supreme
Consciousness, endowed with the specific power
called prana.
Agarbha (or Wigarbha) Pranayama done without
mantra and concentration (cf. Sagarbha).
Agni The catabolic principle of the body.
Ahang I-ness.
Ahara The Tantrika term for inspiration,
Ahingsa Love for all; harmlessness.
Akasha mahabhuta Void metamatter.
Amakala The power which maintains mental
consciousness in a state of superconscious
concentration (samprajnata samadhi).
Amrita Life-substance.
Amrita-warshana Shower of life-substance.
Ananda samadhi Superlove-concentration;
superconcentration-in-divine-love.
Ananyabhakti Single-pointed, concentrated flow
of love for God.
Antahkarana Mind in its entirety,
Antah-kumbhaka Inspiratory breath-suspension
(cf. Bahya-kumbhaka).
Antahmanas Mind in its entirety.
Antaryaga Mental worship; specifically: the
Tantrika process of concentration on Kundalini.
Ap mahabhuta Water metamatter.
Apana (or Apanana) Oupanishada terms for
inspiration.
Apanana The centrifugal vital force-motion.

Apanayama A special form of prarcayama for the
control of apana-force.
Apasara The Tantrika term for expiration.
Arupa-dhyana Deep concentration without form.
Asamprajnata samadhi Non-mens concentration.
Asamprajnata yoga Non-mens supreme
concentration.
Asana A posture in which the body is maintained
motionless, which is necessary for the practice
of pranayama and concentration; posture exercise
in which the body undergoes various posture
movements for physical development and control
(especially prescribed in hathayoga). It constitutes
the third stage of the eightfold yoga
(ashtangayoga).
Ashabda Noil-sound.
Ashtahgayoga The eightfold yoga, consisting of
eight main parts, viz.: yama, niyama, asana,
pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana and
samprajnata samadhi.
Awadhana Attention.
Bahyabhyantara-madhyama-kriya Externo-internomedian process, that is, the process of sensomental control.
Bahya-kumbhaka Expiratory breath-suspension
(cf. Antah-kumbhaka).
Bandha Control.
Bandhana Control.
Bhakti Spiritualized intense love; divine love.
Bhastra kumbhaka Thoracico-short-quick breathcontrol with suspension.
Bhastri Thoracico-short-quick breath-control.
Bhawa Feeling.
Bhawana Thought-concentration; thought.
Bhutashuddhi A process of deep thinking on those
facts which actually happen in kundaliniyoga.
Bija Sound-specificality; sound-specificality-point.
Bija-mantra A highly concentrated power in sound-

329

Glossary

form, created by a particular combination of
matrika-units.
Bindu
Immense Potential; supremely concentrated
conscious power; consciousness-point; conscious
form, as a deity.
Bindu-chakra Sahasrara.
Bodha Notion.
Brahma Supreme Consciousness, manifesting
creativity; God as creator.
Brahma nadi See Brahmarandhra
Brahmacharya Sexual control.
Brahmarandhra T h e brahma nadi or
brahmarandhra (nadi) inside the chitrini nadi;
the terminal part of the brahma nadi where the
sushumna nadi ends (in the c e r e b r u m ) ; the
terminal part of sushumna; passage to the
sahasrara centre; the brahmarandhra chakra,
also termed the nirwana chakra.
Buddhi
Intellective mind.
Chakra A subtle circular organization, containing
mahabhuta, tanmatra, prana wayu and sensory
principle, and situated within the body, not
as a part of the material body but as a supramaterial power-centre, only 'seen' in thoughtconcentration.
Chandra pranayama
Left-nostril inspiratory
breath-control.
Chandra-danda Brahma nadi.
Chandra-mandala
I n d u chakra.
Charana A system of skeletal muscular contraction
and control; muscular control.
Chikirsha Volition.
Chitrini
T h e third inner force-motion-line within
the sushumna., in which the chakras are strung.
Chitta Sense-consciousness; perceptive mind.
Chittakshaya
Absorption of sense-consciousness.
Dahana Burning.
Daiwa manas Supernormal mind.
Daiwa prana
Supernormal life-force.
Dewata
Supreme Consciousness-Power in form;
deity.
Dharana
Holding-concentration, constituting the
6th stage of the eight-fold yoga (ashtangayoga);
the Tantrika term for breath-suspension.
D h a t u A basic constituent of the body.
Dhi
Concentrative m i n d ; superconsciousness.
Dhyana Deep concentration, constituting the
seventh stage of the eight-fold yoga (ashtahgayoga).
Drishti
Insight; intellective vision.
Dwadashantabrahmarandhra
Nirwana chakra.
Ekadhanawarodhana
Bio-energy control.
Ekatanata
U n c h a n g i n g and uninterrupted, deeply
concentrated consciousness.

330

Gunas T h e three primary attributes.
Hridaya T h e nonconscious aspect of mind, where
post-conscious impressions are stored.
Hridayanjali m u d r a A mode of aligning hands and
fingers to make them hollow.
lda and Pingala T h e two vital force-motion lines
or directions, situated on the left and right side
of the vertebral column respectively.
Indriya aharana Pratyahara; sense-withdrawal;
sensory control.
Indriya manas Sense-mind.
Indriya sangharana T h e same as Indriya aharana.
Indriya sanniwesha T h e same as Indriya aharana.
Indriya-yama T h e same as Indriya aharana.
I s h t a d e w a t a A divine form linked to a particular
mantra. W h e n the mantra is m a d e living by japa
and concentration, that divine form appears
and is 'seen' in concentration. Also: the thoughtform of Shiwa-shakti as an object of concentration.
Ishwara
T h e Supreme Consciousness in whom
both yoga-power and pranic energy are in harmony, but who has full control over prana and
has power to transform prana into mind-body.
Jalandhara
Chin-lock.
J a p a Mantra-practice, that is, the repetition of
a mantra (a particular sound-form), verbally,
in a low voice or mentally.
Jiwa T h e embodied being.
Jnanatman
Sense-consciousness and intellect;
perceptive m i n d ; perceptive consciousness;
chitta.
Jnanendriyas Senses.
Kala T i m e principle.
Kala Life principle.
K a m a Desire.
Kamakala Coiled creative omnipotency in soundform; the principle of the actualization of the
power as sound in a triangular process; an aspect
of the supremely concentrated prana as bindu
power, endowed with the capacity of transforming
pranic force into pranawa, which releases fifty
mantra-sound units as matrika and from which the
universe of mind-matter comes into being.
Kama-wayu
Desire-radiating power.
Kanchupas T h e powers of limitation which arise
from maya.
Kanda-mala (or kanda)
Force-concentration centre
from which all nadis originate; an oval-shaped,
subtle, central nadi-root from which all nadis
originate and which is situated inside the coccyx,
just below the muladhara.
Kanda-sthana An oval-shaped subtle space in the
perineal region having a twelve-petalled centre.

Glossary

Karana-samaharana
Pratyahara; sense-withdrawal;
sensory control.
Karmendriyas Conative faculties.
Kewala
Non-inspiratory-non-expiratory
suspension.
Kewala kumbhaka Automatic breath-suspension
caused by pranayamic breathing and deep concentration; non-inspiratory-non-expiratory
suspension.
Khechari m u d r a An advanced control exercise,
by which a latent form of existence is achieved.
Kratu Conative impulse.
Kriti Conation.
Kula Kundalini; the muladhara chakra.
Kulakundalini Kundalini, when in the muladhara
centre.
Kumbhaka Breath-suspension.
Kundalini
Power-Consciousness d o r m a n t at the
senso-intellective levels of consciousness, but
realizable at the superconscious level.
Kundalini-kapata Door of Kundalini, that is, the
entrance to sushumna.
Kundalirandhra-kanda
Wajra nadi.
Kundali-sthana T h e seat of Kundalini in latent
form, that is, in the muladhara centre.
Laya Deep absorptive concentration.
Layakriya Absorption process; absorptive
concentration.
Lihga-form A form which is thicker at its base and
gradually tapers to become a point at its apex.
Concentration starts at the base and gradually,
as it becomes deeper, it automatically passes
towards the apex, where concentration is the
deepest. So the lihga-form is an appropriate
form for the development of concentration.
Madhyama Subliminal.
Mahabhuta
Metamatter. It is that aspect of matter
which lies beyond the boundary of elementary
particles and anu-point.
Mahakulakundalini Mahakundalini, when residing
in the mwladhara centre as Kulakundalini.
Mahakundali Mahakundalini.
Mahakundalini Supreme Power in its supreme
spiritual aspect.
Mahalaya Supreme absorptive concentration,
leading to asamprajnata samadhi.
Mahan I-less supervast consciousness.
M a h a n Manas Superconscious mind.
Mahanada-wayu
Pranic force, exercising great
control, which effects natural breath-suspension;
suspensive power of great control.
Mahayoga Supreme yoga; the original yoga,
consisting of eight fundamental practices, termed

ashtangayoga; asamprajnata samadhi.
Manana Intellection.
Manas Will-mind; sense-mind; the sixth sense;
subconscious m i n d ; also mind as a whole - usually
termed antaamanas or antahkarana - of which
manas as sense-mind is a part.
Manas mandala
Manas chakra.
Manas tattwa Principle of m i n d ; mind as a whole.
Manas-nirodhana
Sense-mind control.
Manasa-radiation Subconscious radiation.
Manasyana Will
Manasyana manas Will-mind.
Manisha
Higher intellection; deeper thoughtintellection; superintellect.
Mantra-chaitanya
T h e process of life-impartation
to a waikhari-mantra.
Mati T h o u g h t .
Matrika All the fifty particularized sound-forms
together.
Matrika-unit A particular sound-form, which
constitutes a lettered mantra and is used as a unit.
Matrika-warna Sound-units.
M a y a T h e specific power of Supreme Power as
negato-positivity, by which it is possible to
manifest a limited phenomenon, such as the
universe, in the unlimited sphere of Supreme
Consciousness; negato-positivity.
M e d h a Retentive power.
Mitahara
Moderation in eating.
M u d r a Control exercise.
Malabandha Anal-lock.
Mulamantra
A special mantra given by the guru
directly to a disciple in initiation; the basic mantra.
Nabhichakra A hen's-eggs-shaped plexus-like subtle
centre from which all nadis originate and ramify
in all directions.
Nada
Causal or unmanifest sound; sound-radiating
energy-point; sound-power.
Nadi T h a t which is motional or in motion; a
subtle line of direction along which the wayus
move, that is, a pranic force-radiation-line. T h e
nadis are no physical channels, neither nerves
nor blood-vessels.
Nadi-chakra T h e nadi-system, i.e. the system
formed by the subtle nadis, which originate from
the nabhi-chakra a n d are distributed all over the
body; force-motion field; force-field.
Nadi-kanda
T h e subtle central aspect of the nadisystem.
Nadi-shodhana
Pranic purification.
Nadi-shuddhi
T h e purification of the subtle wayu
(vital)-force operating as n a d i , that is, forcemotion lines.

331

Glossary

Narayana Supreme Consciousness, beyond creation; God in his supreme aspect.
Nigraha Control.
Nirguna-dhyana
Deep concentration without any
form.
Nirodha Control.
Nirodhika T h e power of supreme control.
Nirodhika-wahni
T h e power of supreme control
exhibited by Kundalini.
Nirwana Shakti All-absorbing Kundali-power.
Nirwanakala T h e coiled power which is an aspect
of Kundalini, exhibiting absorption-power.
Nirwikalpa samadhi
A synonym of asamprajnata
samadhi, that is, non-mens concentration.
Nishkala
Having no manifestation of ShaktiPower; power absorbed in Shiwa.
Niyama Observance - the second stage of control or
discipline in the eightfold yoga (a.shtarigayoga).
Niyati Regulatory principle.
Nyasa A special method of purification by placing
hands on certain parts of the body with appropriate mantras.
Ojas T h e basic life-force. It is derived from
prana as life-dynamism, and, being infused into
matter, transforms it into protoplasm.
Pancha-dharawa Concentration, in conjunction
with breath-suspension, on the earth, water, fire,
air and void principles in stages, with their bijamantras, in their appropriate centres.
Para Supreme.
Parakundali Supreme Power in its spiritual aspect;
Supreme Kundali.
Parama kala Supreme Kundalini.
Parama Shiwa Supreme, infinite and whole
Consciousness.
Parasharzrawesha A yogic process of entering into
another's dead body to make it alive and
functioning.
Pashchima-Lihga Swayambhu-Linga in the triangle
of the muladhara centre. It is Supreme Consciousness in a specific form which shows the process of
concentration.
Pashyanti R a d i a n t .
Pinda Basic force of the body.
Pingala See Ida.
Pitha-shakti T h e holding, i.e. the holding-concentration power.
Plawana Irradiation.
Prajnana
Superconcentratedness;
superconsciousness.
Prakriti T h e primary principle of force, mind and
m a t t e r ; primus.
Prana, Prarcana Oupanishada terms for expiration.

332

Prana-apana sangyama Pranayama; breathcontrol.
Prana-mantra Mantra in a vitalized form; a living
mantra.
Pranana T h e central vital force-motion;
metabolism.
Pranawa-nada T h e sound of the first mantra, Ong.
Prana-wayu(s)
T h e basic vital force exhibiting
functions or motions; different forms of bioenergy.
Pranayama A system of bio-energy control through
short-quick and long-slow breathing and breathsuspension exercises.
Prithiwi mahabhuta Earth metamatter.
Paraka Inspiration.
Purusha
Primary consciousness principle.
Raga Pleasure principle; love.
Ragatmika-bhakti All-love.
Rajas T h e primary energy-principle.
Rasa T h e water content of the body, including
intracellular fluid, interstitial fluid, lymph,
plasma water, and fluids in the cartilage and
bone.
Rechaka Expiration.
R o d h a Control.
Ruchira Oupanishada term for breath-suspension.
Rudra Supreme Consciousness, manifesting the
power of absorbing the creation; God who absorbs
the universe.
Sagarbha
T h a t form of pranayama in which
mantra and concentration form parts.
Saguna-dhyana Deep concentration on a form.
Sahaja state S a m a d h i ; superconcentration.
Sahita Inspiratory-expiratory suspension.
Sakala Shiwa Aroused power, remaining as the
being of Shiwa.
Samadhi
Superconcentration.
Samanana
T h e equilibratory vital force-motion.
Samanya spanda Basic infinitesimal motion, almost
uniform in character.
Samata or Aikya A state of oneness when the embodied spirit is absorbed into the Supreme Spirit
to become one and the same with it.
Samprajriata samadhi
Superconscious
concentration.
Samprajnata yoga
Superconscious concentration.
Sangjnana
Consciousness evoked by sensory
impulses; the quality of chitta; sense-knowledge.
Sangskaras Post-conscious and unconscious impressions.
Sangyama Supercontrol.
Sangyoga Superunion.
Saraswati-chalana
A process of muscular motion,

Glossary

consisting of rolling movements of the rectus
abdominis muscle from right to left and left
to right repeatedly, while assuming the lotus
posture and doing sahita suspension with chinlock and anal-contraction. It is specially done for
rousing Kundalini.
Sarupa-dhyana
Deep concentration on form.
Sarwabhawatmabhawana
Multiform consciousness.
Sarwa chitta
Multiform consciousness.
Sattwa T h e primary sentience-principle.
Shabda tanmatra Sound tanon.
Shabdabrahman Kundalini as the source of sound.
Shakti-chakra
Power field.
Shaktichalana A control process, consisting of
the execution of anal-lock and abdominoretraction in conjunction with the thoracicoshort-quick breathing, while assuming the
accomplished or adamantine posture. It helps
in rousing Kundalini.
Shambhawa sthana
I n d u chakra.
Shambhawi A process of concentration by which
the external seeing is transformed into an internal
gazing.
Shahkhini
Supreme Kundalini in the spiral form,
lying above the sahasrara.
Shnali Lingual breath-control.
Shiwa Supreme Consciousness.
Shiwa-Shakti A stage of non-mens concentration
in which Shakti as yoga-power, lying in the being
of Shiwa, is experienced.
Shoshana
Drying.
Shoucha
Cleanliness, consisting of external baths
and internal lavage.
Shukra T h e sexual energy which activates the
sexual glands of the female and male to produce
sexual secretions, both external and internal.
Siddha mantra A mantra which is living and fully
powerful and can accomplish the desired purpose.
Soma T h e anabolic principle of the body.
Sthulakriya A muscular control process.
Sukshmakriya A breath-control process.
Supreme Bindu Supreme power-concentration.
Surya kumbhaka Right-nostril inspiratory breathcontrol.
Surya pranayama Right-nostril inspiratory breathcontrol.
Suryabheda Right-nostril breath-control.
Sarya-manaala Manas chakra.
Sushumnadhyanayoga
Concentration-on-centresin-sushumna.
Sushumnadwara T h e entrance to the sushumna nadi
in the muladhara centre.
Sushumna-Kundali' T h e chitrini as power which

creates the inner-most void, termed brahmarandhra, through which Kundalini passes.
Swanana Germ-mantra. Its abbreviated form is
swanon.
Tamas T h e primary inertia-principle.
T a n m a t r a s Concentrated sense forces, termed
tanons.
Tanons Tanmatras.
Tantrika Relating to the Tantras; T a n t r i c .
Tantrika yoga An exposition by Shiwa (or Parwati)
of Waidika yoga, in which various processes
have been clearly explained and new ones
incorporated, and which has been collected in
the Tantras.
Tapas (or Tapasya) Energizing process; static
posture exercise to develop vital endurance and
will power; ascesis; vigorous disciplining of body
and mind.
Tejas mahabhuta
Fire metamatter.
Thought-concentration
Bhawana yoga.
Trikonashakti Kundalini, when in the maladhara
centre.
Trirasra A triangle.
U d a n a n a T h e centripetal vital force-motion.
Uddiyana Abdomino-retraction.
Udyana
T h e process of adamantine control and
suction-power. (Also termed Udriyana.)
Ujjayi
Both-nostrils breath-control.
U n m a n i Concentrated consciousness.
Wachaka-power of mantra Kundalini in soundform which appears as dewata by japa and
concentration.
Wachya-power of Mantra Mahakundalini as
Supreme Consciousness, realized when concentration on Kundalini as dewata is transformed
into superconcentration.
Waidhi-bhakti
Ritualistic or devotional divine love.
Waidika Relating to the Wedas; Vedic.
Waidika yoga T h e original form of yoga, concealed
in the Weda-mantras of the Sanghitas of the
Weda in a contracted and highly technical
Shrouta language, and explained and elaborated
in the Upanishads.
Waikhari Acoustic.
Waikhari.-mantra A mantra which is audible.
Wajra-kumbhaka
Adamantine suspension - a
special form of breath-suspension for the conduction of the roused Kundalini.
Wajroli T h e a d a m a n t i n e control process of sex
energy.
Warna T h e specific power-line created by the
operation of the force of a matrika-unit.
Wasana T h e latent impression of feeling.

333

Glossary

Wayu T h a t which exhibits constant motion; the
motional or active state of pranic force.
Widya Knowledge.
Wijnana
Intellection.
Wisarga
(1) T h e power-bridge, connecting the
brahmarandhra with the guru chakra, through
which Kundalini passes.
(2) T h a t which separates sahasrara proper from
Supreme Bindu.
Wishesha spanda A particularized motion releasing
a particularized sound.
Wishnu
Supreme Consciousness, manifesting the
power of sustaining the creation; God as sustainer.
Writti
Mentimultiformity; an imaged consciousness; a knowledge-form; also a nonconscious
form; an objective image.
Wyana, wyanana
Oupanishada terms for breathsuspension.

334

Wyanana
T h e diffused vital force-motion.
Wyayama A controlled movement system to
develop the body; physical education; muscular
exercise.
Yajnastoma
T h e germ of power-manifestation
which in Tantrika terms consists of Supreme
Nada and Bindu.
Yama
Control; abstention - the first stage of
control or discipline in the eightfold yoga
(ashtahgayoga).
Yoga-nidra T h e state of non-mens supreme concentration; asamprajnata samadhi.
Yogasana A posture in yoga; concentration posture.
Yoga-wibhuti
O m n i p o t e n c y ; great yoga-power.
Yojana Union.
Yoni T h e perineum; a triangle; a triangularshaped region. (Also called kamakhya, kamarupa, kama and yonisthana.)

Bibliography

Weda
Rigwedasanghita

Upanishad
Adhyatmopanishad
Adwayatarakopanishad
Aitareyopanishad
Akshyupanishad
Amritanadopanuflad
Annapurnopanishad
Atharwashikopanuaad
Atmaprabodhopanishad
Brahmabinduparnishad
Brahmawidyopanishad
Brahmopanishad
Brihadaranyakopanishad
Brihajjabalopanishad
Chandogyopanishad
Darshanopanishad
Dwayopanishad
Ganapatyupanishad
Gopalatapinyupanishad
Hangsopanishad
Ishopanishad
Kaiwalyopanishad'
Kathopanishad
Kenopanishad
Koushitakyupanishad
Kundikopanishad
Mahopanishad
Maitreyyupanishad
Mandalabrahnianopanishad

Mawaukyopanishad
Muktikopanishad
Munaakopanishad
Nadabindupanishad
Narayanopanishad
Nirwanopanishad
Nrisinghatapanyupanishad
Pairigalopanishad
Parabrahmopanishad
Pashupatabrahmopanishad
Prashnopanishad
Ramatapaniyopanishad
Sannyasopanishad
Shanadilyopanishad
Shwetashwataropanishad
SnopanuAad
Soubhagyalakshmyupanishad
Subalopanishad
Taittiriya Aranyaka
Taittiriyopanishad
Tripadwibhutimahanarayanopanishad
Tripuratapinyupanishad
Trishikhibrahmawopanishad
Warahopanishad
Yogachuaamanyupanishad
Yogakundalyupanishad
Yogarajopanishad
Yogashikhopanishad
Yogatattwopanishad

Tantra
Bhutashuddhitantra
Brihannilatantra
Dattatreyasanghita

335

Bibliography
Gandharwatantra
Gayatritantra
Goutamiyatantra
Grahayamala
Guptasadhanatantra
Jamala
Jnanachudamani
Jnanasankalinitantra
Jnanarnawa
Kamadhenutantra
Kahkalamalinitantra
Koulawalitantra
Kubjikatantra
Kularnawa
Mahamuktitantra
Mahanirwanatantra
Mantramaharnawa
Mantramahodhadhi
Matrikabhedatantra
Mayatantra
Mridanitantra
Mundamalatantra
Nigamalata
Nilatantra
Niruttaratantra
Nirwanatantra
Padukapanchaka (MS; in possession of the
author's guru)
Paranandasutra
Phetkarinitantra
Pranatoshamitantra
Prapanchasaratantra
Premayogatarangini
Purashcharanarasollasa
Purashcharyarnawa
Radhatantra
Rahasya Shadamnaya Nigama Sandarbha Tantra
Rudrayamala
Sammohanatantra
Sanatkumaratantra
Sarwollasatantra
Satwatatantra
Shadamnayatantra
Shaktakrama
Shaktanandatarangini
Shaktisangamatantra
Shaligramanighantubhashana
Sharadatilakatantra
Shatchakranirupana
Shafchakrawiwriti
Shiwasanghita
Shyamarahasya
Tantragandharwa
Tantrarajatantra
336

Tantrasara
Tantrabhaktisudharnawa
Tararahasya
Toaalatantra
Tripurasarasamuchchaya
Tripurasaratantra
Wishwasaratantra
Yamala
Yogaswarodaya
Yoginihridaya

Purana
Agnipurana
Bhagawata
Brahmandapurana
Brahmapurana
Brahmawaiwartapurana
Dewibhagawata
Garudapurana
Kalikapurana
Kurmapurana
Lingapurarea
Matsyapurana
Padmapurana
Shiwapurana
Skandapurana
Sourapurana
Wamanapurana
Warahapurana

Itihasa
Mahabharata

Darshana
Daiwimimangsadarshana

Yoga
Amarasanggraha (MS)
Brahmasiddhantapaddhati (MS)
Gherawaasanghita
Hathadipika
Hathasanketachandrika (MS)

Bibliography
Tattwayogabindu (MS)
Yogakalpalatika (MS)
Yogaswarodaya
Yogawashishthna-Ramayana

Dictionaries
Apte's The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary
Bijabhidhana
Matrikanighaniu
Monier-Williams, Sir Monier, A Sanskrit-English
Dictionary, Oxford, 1899.
Shabdakalpadrumah
Tantrabhidhana
Wachaspatyam
Waidyakashabdasindhu
Warnabijakosha

Other Selected Works
Adhyatma Wiweka
American College of Chest Physicians, Clinical
Cardiopulmonary Physiology, Grune & Stratton,
New York, 1957.
Atma-tattwa-darshana, ed. Jaganmohana
Tarkalarikara, collected and published by Nilmani
Mukhopadhyaya.
Bard, Philip, Medical Physiology, T h e C.V. Mosby
Company, St Louis, 1961.
Campbell, E.J. M a r a n , The Respiratory Muscles and
the Mechanics of Breathing, Lloyd-Luke (Medical
Books) London, 1958.
Comroe, J r , Julius H., Physiology of Respiration,
Year Book Medical Publishers, Chicago, 1965.
Comroe, J r , Julius H., Forster, I I , Robert E.,
Dubois, Arthur B., Briscoe, William A., and
Carlsen, Elizabeth, The Lung, Year Book Medical
Publishers, Chicago, 1963.
Crosby, Elizabeth C , H u m p h r e y , T r y p h e n a , and
Lauer, Edward W., eds, Correlative Anatomy of the
Nervous System, Macmillan, New York, 1962.
Cunningham's Manual of Practical Anatomy, volume I I I ,
Head and Neck and Brain, revised by Romanes,
G.J., 13th edn, Oxford University Press, London,
New York & Bombay, 1967.
Cunningham's Textbook of Anatomy, ed. Romanes,

G.J., 10th edn, Oxford University Press, London,
New York & Toronto, 1964.
Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary, 24th edn,
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia & London, 1965.
Drinker, Cecil K., The Clinical Physiology of the Lungs,
Charles C. T h o m a s , Springfield, Illinois, 1954.
Fenn, Wallace O., and R a h n , H e r m a n n (section
eds), Respiration (Section 3), vol. I (1964) and
vol. II (1965), American Physiological Society,
Washington, D.C.
Gitasara.
Gray's Anatomy, ed. Johnston, T.B., and Whillis,
J., 30th edn, Longmans, Green, London, New York
& Toronto, 1949.
Ganong, William F., Review of Medical Physiology,
Lange Medical Publications, Los Altos, California,
1963.
Guyton, A r t h u r C, Textbook of Medical Physiology,
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia and London,
1966.
Houssay, Bernardo A., Human Physiology, McgrawHill, New York, Toronto & London, 1955.
Jackson, C.M., The Effects of Inanition and Malnutrition upon Growth and Structure, J. & A. Churchill,
London, 1925.
Keele, Cyril A., and Neil, Eric, Samson Wright's
Applied Physiology, Oxford University Press,
London, 1961.
MacNalty, Sir A r t h u r Salusbury, ed. The British
Medical Dictionary, 1st edn, T h e Caxton Publishing Company, London, 1961.
Margulis, Sergius, Fasting and Undernutrition,
E.P. Dutton, New York, 1923.
Miller, William Snow, The Lung, Charles C.
T h o m a s Publisher, Springfield, Illinois, 1947.
Parwati - Parameshwara - sangwada.
Ruch, Theodore C , and Patton, H a r r y D.,
Physiology and Biophysics, W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia and London, 1965.
Sachchidananda Saraswati, Swami, Pujapradipa.
Sachchidananda Saraswati, Swami, Gnapradipa.
Sachchidananda Saraswati Swami, Gurupradipa.
Sachchidananda Saraswati, Swami, J n a n a p r a d i p a .
Shrikramasanghita.
Sobotta, Dr M e d . J o h a n n e s , trans. U h l e n h u t h ,
E d u a r d , Atlas of Descriptive Human Anatomy,
7th english edn, vol 1-3, H a b n e r Publishing
C o m p a n y , New York, 1957.
Waidika Sandhya-widhi.
Wishnusanghita.
Youmans, W.B., Fundamentals of Human Physiology,
Year Book Medical Publishers, Chicago, 1962.

337

Index

Absorption: of cosmic, creative
principles, 12, 6 8 - 7 0 , 72, 73,
7 6 , 8 5 , 8 8 , 9 0 - 2 , 112, 118, 122,
125, 127, 130, 132, 152, 154,
158, 1 9 8 , 2 1 1 , 2 3 3 , 3 1 9 , 3 2 1 ;
mental, 83, 9 2 ; of senseconsciousness, 7 1 - 3 , 76
Abstention, see Yama
Achamana, 9
Aghamarshana, 9
Amaroli, 303
Amrita, 6, 96, 116, 125, 126,
133-7, 159, 164, 172, 199,
204, 322, 324, 325
Anabolism, 299, 300
Anu, 21
Apana 26, 82
Arawinda (Aurobindo), 20, 33, 37
Asana, 37, 43, 74, 129, 130, 146;
defined, 47
Ascesis, 46, 63, 109, 147,302;
see also'Tapasya
Aum, see Pranawa
Bandha(s), 27, 28, 38, 51, 75, 83,
90; see also Lock
Being, embodied, jee Jiwatman
Bhakti, 4, 36, 117, 130, 148
Bhaktiyoga, 24, 130
Bholanatha, 6
Bhutashuddhi, 10, 28, 75, 83, 87,
118, 124-8, 130, 132-9, 318-27
Bindu, 1 3 , 2 1 , 2 7 , 3 7 , 3 8 , 79-82,
103,106,107,109, 113,119, 145
162, 164, 178, 179, 198,249,
272, 285, 326; supreme, 34, 35,
103, 104. 112, 119-22, 124, 125,
151, 180, 181, 1 9 8 , 2 6 9 , 2 7 2 ,
273,275,285, 321,324,327

Bliss, 6 3 - 5 , 79, 148, 175; supreme,
66,82,91,93
Body: building one's, 82, 3 0 4 - 6 ;
culture, 4 7 ; disciplining, 310;
eighteen vital points of the, 5 5 ;
excellent condition, 322; gross,
subtle, 18, 134, 143, 144,"
2 9 9 - 3 0 1 , 303; immunity of the,
304; internal purification, 115,
126, 135; material aspect of the,
290; mental influence on the,
309; pranic, 20; purity of the,
233, 3 1 1 ; vitalization, 153, 204,
319
Brahma, 81, 104, 107, 125, 132,
155, 156, 161, 163, 174, 176,
179, 180, 187, 188, 194,314,
315, 324, 325
Brahmacharya, 45, 46, 83, 129,
132, 1 9 4 , 2 0 4 , 3 1 0
Brahman, 3, 4,26, 85, 103, 109,
124, 126, 130, 146, 152, 155,
169, 173, 175, 179, 192,211,
264,317
Brain, 30, 99, 100, 144, 256, 2 8 6 90, 297; its relation to the
chakras, 1 6 - 1 8 ; its relation to
consciousness, 2 2 - 5 ; see also
Dynamism
Breath-control: practice,
51, 3 1 2 - 1 3 ; pranayamic, 12;
-suspension, 49, 50, 75, see
also K u m b h a k a ; Tantrika,
52-4, 139; Waidika, 49-52,
137; see also Pranayama
Breathing: automatic deep, 297;
hangsah, 196; pranayamic, 8, 9,
307, 308, 311, 313, 322, 323;
and relaxation exercises, 306;

see also Pranayama
Breath-suspension, see K u m b h a k a
Buddha, Goutama, 3, 4, 302
Buddhism, 3,4
Catabolism, 299, 300, 303
Chaitanya, Sri, 4, 24, 302
Chakra(s), 1 1 , 2 6 , 2 8 , 3 1 , 3 4 - 7 ,
54, 130, 132, 143 ff, 320, 326,
327; defined, 22, 143, 193
Christianity, 3
Cleanliness, physical, 45, 131
Cleansing, yogic internal, 298, 299,
322
Conation, 30, 57, 114, 123, 128,
129,251
Conative: faculties, 68, 122, 123,
126, 128, 194; principles, 145
Concentration, 25, 30, 34, 75, 76,
103, 109, 113, 116, 118, 123,
129, 130, 133, 134, 1 4 8 - 5 1 , 153,
155, 157 ff, 194, 3 0 8 - 1 0 , 3 1 9 ,
321, 325; absorptive, 7 5 - 7 , 162,
3 2 6 , 3 2 7 ; bindu, 75, 76;
defined, 10, 37, 38, 5 7 - 6 5 , 255;
development of deep, 36, 4 7 - 9 ,
76, 9 8 ; divine form of, 60;
-knowledge, 78; non-mens,
10, 1 2 , 6 4 - 7 , 7 0 , 7 9 , 8 1 , 112,
117-19, 124, 156, 159, 160,
163, sec also Asamprajnata
samadhi; practice, 3 1 2 - 1 3 ;
real. 2 8 ; and sexual control,
303; spiritual, 114; thought-,
75, 76; see also Dharana,
Dhyana, Samadhi
Consciousness: and the brain, 22,
32; in concentration, 255;
diversified, 205, 309; empty,

339

Index

25; I-, infinite, supreme, 5,
123, 124; levels of perceptive,
129; mental, 13, 35, 120, 285,
320, 3 2 1 ; mind transcendent,
37; multiform, 11, 5 8 , 6 2 , 63,
6 6 ; new form of, 3 5 ; non-, 25;
non-undulatory, 10, 98, 130;
objective, 123; oscillatory, 8, 10,
28; perceptive, 57; and physical
activities, 3 1 , 100; purified, 118,
129; sense-, 5, 7, 1 0 , 5 4 ;
spiritualization of, 88, 106;
superpurified, 128; Supreme, 5,
3 4 , 3 5 , 3 7 , 3 8 , 6 1 - 7 , 70, 7 7 , 7 8 ,
8 0 , 8 6 , 109, 111, 112, 118, 131,
149,264,317,318,320
Continence, sexual, 11; see also
Brahmacharya
Control, 44; see also Yuma
Culture, physical, 29, 297, 298,
309
Deconcentration, state of, 7
Deities, 18, 6 1 , 72, 75, 96, 106-9,
111, 112, 145, 156, 326; see also
Ishta dewatas
Dharana, 37, 38, 43, 44, 5 7 - 6 0 ,
69, 74, 75, 114, 116, 118, 128,
131, 132, 149, 2 0 6 , 2 5 5 , 314-16,
3 1 8 , 3 1 9 , 3 2 1 , 326, 327
Dharma, 3
Dhyana, 26, 37, 38, 43, 44, 68, 69,
7 4 , 8 6 , 115, 117, 118, 128, 131,
145, 155, 251, 255, 263, 264,
269, 270, 274, 275, 286, 291,
3 1 6 - 1 9 , 321, 326, 327; defined,
25, 6 0 - 2
Duality, 119
D y n a m i s m : brain-, 2 5 ; as
Kundalini, 3 5 ; mental, 26, 36,
309; pranic, 32, 34, 37
Energy: balance in the body, 3 1 ,
152; different forms of, 144;
divine, 194; matter-free, 143;
mental, 309; subtle, 319;
system of the body, 137
Fasting, 2 9 7 - 9 , 302
Food, 3 0 3 - 5 , 312
Gafur, Abdul, 4
God, 9 6 ; in form, 11, see also
ishtadewata; love for, 130;
oneness with, 9 2 ; revealed, 47;

340

Supreme, 11, 7 8 , 8 0 - 2 , 113,
120, 121;as Surya, 155; as the
ultimate reality, 1 ff; as Wishnu,
205
Gunas, 80, 104, 106, 107, 109,
119-22, 148, 172,211
Guru(s), 1 5 , 2 6 , 2 8 , 38, 9 1 , 9 5 ,
111-16, 146, 157, 158, 166, 177,
181, 199,291, 3 2 0 - 2 ; of
layayoga, 292; the meaning of,
263, 264; parama-, 251
Hathayoga, 9 - 1 2 , 205, 305;
method of concentration, 38,
4 3 , 4 6 - 8 , 6 8 , 75, 129, 130, 297,
319; in relation to layayoga, 1
Hridaya, 1 0 1 , 2 1 2 - 1 6
ida, 18, 2 0 , 4 9 , 8 2 , 8 9 , 9 9 , 110,
137, 138, 143, 144, 152-4, 159,
166-8, 171, 172, 203.239, 291
I-ness, 101, 117, 118, 122-4,
1 2 8 , 2 0 5 , 2 5 1 , 2 7 5 , 2 8 5 , 324
Intelligence, 58, 78, 8 1 , 82, 114,
130, 194,253,254, 302, 309;
spiritualized, 2 0 5 ; see also Mind
Ishtadewata, 10, 11, 28, 38, 68,
76, 111-15, 117, 122, 125,
1 2 9 - 3 1 , 146,204, 211, 2 5 5 , 2 7 5 ,
314, 325; -concentration, 203
/shwara, 121, 161, 163, 174,
177-80, 211, 2 2 1 ; see also God
Islam, 3

superconscious, 78, 79, 107
Krishna, 174, 179
Kumbhaka, 30, 37, 50, 52, 53, 55,
56, 59, 75, 76, 83, 90, 91, 94, 95,
110, 115, 116, 127, 131, 133,
149, 157, 198,205, 225,297,
303, 313, 314;Kewala, 10,
12,49,51,54,61,68, 75,89,91,
137, 139, 153, 158, 160;sahita,
27, 9 1 ; and sexual control, 302
Kundalini, 156-8, 160, 162, 163,
169, 174, 179, 191, 192, 198,
313, 317,318, 320, 3 2 3 , 3 2 4 ;
arousing of, 10, 13, 20, 26-30,
3 3 - 7 , 6 8 , 72, 7 3 - 7 , 83 ff, 115,
118, 122, 125, 127, 136, 145,'
147, 149, 154, 157, 197, 319,
3 2 1 ; its relation to prana, 32, 33
Kundaliniyoga, 26, 27, 33, 36, 37,
118, 125, 126, 130, 132,319,
326, 327

Japa, 130, 133, 137, 146, 147 150,
193,217, 325; three forms of,
116, 129
Jesus Christ, 3
J i w a ( t m a n ) , 8 1 , 82, 97, 112, 120,
121, 124, 126, 127, 135, 148,
156, 159, 161, 162, 173, 176-8,
181, 223, 226, 323
J o h n of the Cross, 4
Jnanayoga, 130

Language, spiritual, 78, 108
Layayoga: its aim, 124; special
process of, 318; Tantrika form
of, 126
Levitation, 26, 32, 52, 145, 158,
205
Liberated alive, 65
Liberation, 3, 34, 49, 69, 73, 84,
9 0 , 9 3 , 111, 158, 160, 162; the
doors to, 45, 154
Life-energy, 7, 3 1 ; see also Prana
Life-essence, -substance, 27;
see also Amrita
Life maintenance, in the body,
152, 299
Linga, 242
Lock processes, 320
Lotus posture, 128
Love, 129, 130, 159, 2 5 1 ; desire,
194;-feeling, 82, 8 3 ; godly,
see Bhakti; for humanity, 3;
supreme, 79

Kamakala, 103, 104, 120-2
Kanada, 21
Kanchukas, 82, 121
Karmayoga, 129
Knowledge: divine, 58, 178, 181;
of the external world, 9 9 - 1 0 1 ,
120, 2 5 3 ; extra-sensorially
acquired, 7 1 ; manifoldness of,
6 1 ; spiritual, 28, 92, 9 5 ;

Mahabhata(s), 28, 70-2, 101, 104,
107, 113, 123, 125, 126, 128,
130, 131, 143-5, 149, 156,157,
193,204,210, 255, 275,314,
3 2 1 ; concentration, 203
Mahan, 122, 123
Makara, 203, 204, 315
Mantra, 8, 9, 28, 38, 47, 49, 50,
6 0 , 6 1 , 72, 7 5 , 8 1 , 8 6 , 9 0 , 9 2 , 9 3 ,

Index
95, 96, 98 ff, 127, 130, 143, 147,
149, 157, 158, 179, 181, 194,
233, 3 1 9 - 2 1 , 324, 325; arousing
of, 114, 116, 199;bija-, 320;
and breath-control, 52, 5 3 ;
defined, 108, 109; enlivened, 94,
114, 115; living, 1 1 , 6 8 ;
processes of, 27, 246; as
purificatory means, 9, 10, 133
Mantrayoga, 10, 11, 38, 43, 46,
114, 129; in relation to
leyayoga, 1
Matrika, 1 0 6 - 1 1 , 185, 193, 203,
204, 207, 210, 233; defined,
105, 272, 273
Matter, 30, 35, 7 3 , 8 1 , 8 2 , 100,
101, 113, 120,285, 299;
different forms of, 13, 20
Maya, 8 1 , 82, 95, 96, 119-22,
174,205
Metabolism, 35, 37, 143, 300;
basal, 31, 33; in the brain, 30
Metamatter, 22, 25, 70, 71, 73,
8 1 , 101, 102, 120, 123, 124,
128, 143, 144, 194
Microscope, electronic, 25
Mind: and brain connection, 297;
and conative functions, 7, 13;
control of, 8, 57; its creation,
104, 113;dualistic, 274;
externalized, 310, 3 2 3 ;
inoperative, 155; intellective,
57, 122-4, 128, 325, 326; its
main functions, 2 5 3 , 254;
multiformity of, 7, 13;
perceptive, 4, 49, 50, 54, 56;
and physical culture, 309;
purified, 8, 126, 128, 139, 303;
seat of, 177, 250; spiritual, 36;
subconscious, 2 5 ;
superconscious, 12, 109;
tranquility, 138; transformed
into supermind, 78
Mohammad, 3
Monism, and the doctrine of
Brahman, 26
Muscle(s): contraction, 144;
control, 30, 53, 74; different
kinds of, 3 0 1 ; energy, 29, 309;
exercise, 305-7, 310;
movements, 204, 297
Nada, 7 9 - 8 1 , 102-4, 106, 107,
113, 120, 198, 206; Supreme,

112, 122, 124, 125, 181,273,
275, 321, 324, 327
Nadi'(s), 18-20, 30, 34, 89, 143,
147, 183 ff, 245, 247, 256, 258,
285
Nadi-field, 25, 101, 137, 144, 149,
152-4, 166-72, 224, 233, 285,
290
Nadi-paths, 25
Nadishuddhi, 12, 32, 35, 36, 38,
115, 137-9
Narayana, 81
Neti-neti, deliberation, 31, 130
Neuron, 19, 23
Niyama, 4 3 - 6 , 74, 87, 129, 130,
138
Nirwana, as power, 174; see also
Liberation
Observance, see Niyama
Ojas, 299-301
Ominipotency, 120, 121, 198
Ong, see Pranawa
Patanjali, 20
Perception, 8 1 , 100, 129;
instrumentalized, 22; sensory,
1,3, 13, 3 1 , 5 7 , 123,251, 309;
subconscious mode of, 32;
supranormal sensory, 2 3 - 5
Physiology, Indian, 299
Pingala, 18, 20, 49, 82, 89, 110,133,
137, 138, 143, 152-4, 159,
166-8, 171, 172, 203,239,
251, 291
Pleasure, 82, 83, 87, 110, 129, 194
Posture, 310, 3 1 2 - 1 3 ; control, 5 8 ;
see also Asana
Power, Supreme, 78-80, 320
Powergraph, 25
Prakriti, 35, 70, 7 2 - 4 , 80, 8 1 , 90,
109, 118-24, 1 7 3 , 2 3 3 , 2 5 1 , 2 6 9 ,
275, 327
Prana, 20, 21, 32, 33, 3 6 - 8 , 49,
50, 7 8 - 8 2 , 8 9 , 9 0 , 9 6 , 103-5,
112, 114, 119-22, 124, 125, 136,
144-6, 155, 157, 160, 167, 198,
204,211,224,225,272,273;
-concentration, 275; creator
of mind, life, matter, 34;
different forms of, 107, 156,
210; as dynamism, 35, 299;
withdrawal of, 34
Pranana, 82, 300

Prananation, see Pranic
radiations
Pranawa, 47, 50, 51, 53, 6 1 , 63,
8 1 , 9 2 , 9 6 , 102, 104, 105, 109,
110, 114, 121, 122, 128, 145,
146, 1 9 8 , 2 4 3 , 2 4 9 , 2 7 2 , 312;
defined, 35
Pranayama 18, 23, 2 5 - 8 , 30, 31,
34, 37, 38, 43, 44, 4 8 - 5 4 ,
5 9 , 6 1 , 7 2 , 8 8 , 8 9 , 9 2 - 6 , 114,
115, 127-30, 132-9, 145, 153,
2 0 4 - 6 , 211, 217, 225, 297, 298,
321;sahita, 1 2 , 8 9 , 9 0 , 133-9
P r a n i c : creativity, 113; forces,
25, 30, 72, 90, 101, 102, 104,
150, 153, 157, 167, 172,224,
234; functions, 96; operation,
32; withdrawal, 37, 38, 319,
3 2 1 ; see also Dynamism
Pratyahara, 37, 38, 43, 44, 48,
54-6, 63, 65, 74, 99, 156, 206,
251, 321, 326; practice, 312-14;
and sexual control, 303;
Tantrika forms of, 56; Waidika
forms of, 54-6, 157
Prayer, deep and silent, 45
Primus, see Prakriti
Procreation, 82, 83
Protoplasm, 229
Purification: of the alimentary
canal, 304; of the blood, 204,
297, 298; of the body, 8, 9, 47,
4 8 , 9 6 , 138, 194, 2 9 7 , 2 9 8 , 302;
internal, 133, 136, 137, 147,
181, 225; of the mind, 8, 9, 45,
5 2 , 9 6 , 3 0 9 , 310, 3 2 1 ;
pranayamic, 324, 325; spiritual,
150
Purusha(s), 70, 118, 120, 121,
123-5, 275
Radiations, pranic, 34, 311
Rajayoga, 1 0 - 1 2 , 3 8 , 4 3 , 4 6 ,
130; in relation to Layayoga, 1
Ramakrishna, 28, 302
Reality, non-material, non-mental,
4; Supreme, 5, 2 7 3 ; unknown
mental, 309
Relaxation, 3 0 , 8 3 , 196;
muscular 204, 306, 307, 312, 323,
Religion, 28; defined, 5; as a
means to search for G o d , 3, 4
Rishis, 43, 46, 78, 95, 102, 149, 190
Rudra. 8 1 , 104, 107, 125, 132,

341

Index
148, 155, 161, 163, 173,
174, 177-80, 188,208, 211, 314,
315, 324, 325
Samadhi, 10, 26, 28, 34, 37, 43,
44, 46, 6 8 - 7 0 , 74, 76, 77, 79,
8 1 , 8 7 , 9 1 , 9 2 , 102, 155, 158,
174, 199, 211, 225, 263; ananda,
130; (a)samprajnata, 10-13, 35,
37, 38, 130-2, 1 9 9 , 2 5 1 , 2 6 4 ,
270, 2 7 3 - 5 , 319, 321, 3 2 5 - 7 ;
defined, 2 5 , 6 2 - 5 ; its stages, 255;
Tantrika, 64, 65; Waidika, 63, 64
Samanana, 82
Sangskaras, 101, 251
Sanskrit, language, 185
Seers, see Rishis
Senses, 23, 120, 122-4, 126, 194,
2 5 1 ; control of the, 38, 48, 54,
68,75, 7 8 , 8 8 , 9 6 , 110, 128, 132,
147; their creation, 104, 113;
inoperative, 155; limitations of,
2 , 9 9 , 100; seat of the, 275;
withdrawal of, see Pratyahara
Sexual: control, see Brahmacharya;
desire, 36, 130, 3 0 1 - 3 ; energy,
9, 3 1 1 ; enjoyment, 8 3 ;
functions, 129, 320; vigour, 204,
210, 304, 305
Shakti(s), 18, 102, 108, 145, 146,
151, 188,211, 327; Supreme,
8 0 , 8 1 , 9 5 , 119, 122
Shankara, 4, 26-8, 144, 184, 190,
197, 220, 256, 302
Shawasana, 12
Shiwa, 8 0 - 2 , 85, 88, 9 1 - 3 , 96,
108, 109, 112, 117, 118, 120,
122, 125, 126, 130, 131, 136,
148, 150, 156, 159, 160, 169,
1 7 3 - 6 , 181, 188, 191,211,
2 2 1 , 2 6 4 , 2 7 3 , 2 7 4 , 317, 319,
326; Nishkala, 7 8 - 8 0 ; 1000
names of, 146; Sakala, 79, 80,
122,321,324
Shiwa-Shakti, 7 8 - 8 0 , 9 1 , 95, 122,
124, 125, 180, 192, 234, 264,
2 6 9 , 2 7 0 , 2 7 2 , 2 7 4 , 275, 321,

342

324, 325; in form, 28
Sleep, 23, 32. 71, 251, 302, 322;
yoga-, 83, 87, 274
Sound(s), 98, 99, 102, 105-8,
115, 312, 319; non-sensory, 150.
194, 1 9 5 , 2 7 2 , 2 7 5 ; -units, 104,
106, 116, 155,
Space, 100
Spear, see Trident
Spirit, Supreme, 6 1 , 6 4 - 8 , 7 0 - 2 ,
74
Spirituality, defined, 5
Study, spiritual, 45
Superconcentration, see Samadhi
Superlight, 24, 125; of samadhi,
78
Superpowers, 34, 47, 58, 86,
110-15, 144, 145,325
Sushumna, 15, 1 7 - 2 1 , 2 6 , 2 8 ,
3 3 - 6 , 49, 80, 90, 9 1 , 9 3 - 6 , 105,
108, 110, 114-16, 126, 138,
143-5, 152-5, 158, 160, 164,
166-72, 177, 179, 183 ff, 216,
239, 245, 247, 258, 285, 286,
290, 291, 310
Swastika, 133, 174
Tailanga, Swami, 27, 302
Tanmatra(s), 25, 28, 70, 72, 101,
102, 104, 107, 109, 113, 114,
123, 125, 126, 128, 130, 131,
143-5, 156, 157, 193, 194,204,
2 1 0 , 2 5 5 , 275, 314, 3 2 1 ;
-concentration, 203
Tantrikas, 2 8 ; see also Yogis
Tapasya, 310; see also Ascesis
Thought(s), 309, 313, 324, 327;
control process of, 310, 321
Time, 82, 100
Tongue-lock, 127
Trident, 197, 2 0 6 , 2 1 1 , 233
T r u t h , revealed, 78
Udanana, 82
Unconsciousness, see
Consciousness
Uddi'yana, 83, 205

Universe: its appearance, 8 1 , 125;
its evolution, 120; its
maintenance, 204
U r e t h r a , 92
Vibrations, from sound, 99
Volition, 123,251
Waikhan, 10
Wajroli, 46, 194, 197, 210, 303
Wayu, 92, 135, 136, 145, 153, 154,
157, 167, 224;-energy, 99,
122, 135, 144,285,299, 319;
-nadis, 19, 137, 138; prana-,
20, 3 6 , 8 1 , 121, 152, 155, 234
Weda, 48, 104, 109, 111, 174;
-sounds, 114
Will, -principle, 57
Wishnu, 81, 104, 107, 125, 132,
146, 148, 155, 161, 163, 174,
175, 177-9, 188,201, 202,204,
205,314,315,325
Wiwekananda, 18, 33
Worship, 9 2 ; mental, 150, 151,
217; ritualistic, 45, 114, 130
Writti(s), 100, 101
Wyanana, 82
Yama, 8, 11, 37, 43 ff, 74, 87, 129,
130, 138
Yantra, 34, 92
Yoga, defined, 43, 44, 6 5 - 7 ;
different systems of, 38, 4 3 ;
posture, see Asana; and religion,
5; spiritual, 112, 113; supreme,
80, 326, 327; Tantrika, 6,
43, 44, 46, 48
Yogis, 15, 18, 21, 23,24, 2 6 - 8 ,
31,33,47,48,51,52,55,56,
61,63,66, 79,80,81,83,84,87.
9 1 , 9 4 , 9 5 , 9 8 , 126-8, 144, 147,
302; Christian, Muslim, 4;
hatha-, 29, 30; laya-, 165,
166, 291
Yoni, 320
Yonimudra, 75, 76, 197, 320, 321,
326

