The Tree of Life. (Source: Crowley: Magick Without Tears, 777 Revised,
and The Book of Thoth; reproduced by Hymenaeus Beta, copyright © 1993
O.T.O.)

The Magick of
Aleister Crowley
A Handbook of the Rituals of Thelema

Lon Milo DuQuette

This edition first published in 2003 by
Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC
With offices at:
665 Third Street, Suite 400
San Francisco, CA 94107
www.redwheelweiser.com
Copyright © 1993, 2003 Lon Milo DuQuette
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from Red Wheel/Weiser. Reviewers may
quote brief passages. Originally published in 1993 as The Magick of Thelema: A Handbook of the
Rituals of Aleister Crowley by Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
DuQuette, Lon Milo.
[Magick of Thelema]
The magick of Aleister Crowley : a handbook of the rituals of Thelema
/ Lon Milo Duquette.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-57863-299-4
1. Magic. 2. Occultism. 3. Crowley, Aleister, 1875–1947. I. Title.
BF1611.D87 2003
133.4'3—dc22
2003015150
ISBN: 978-1-57863-299-2
Photographs on pages 59, 60, 61, and 62 copyright © 1993 Paul Maska.
Cover and book design by Sky-Peck Design
Typeset in Adobe Garamond
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the American National
Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials Z39.48-1992
(R1997).

To my wife of thirty-five years,
Saint Constance of the Well,
Our Lady of Perpetual Motion,
this work is lovingly dedicated.

“There is no bond that can unite the divided but love.”
—LIBER AL VEL LEGIS, I. 41.

CONTENTS
Foreword by Hymenaeus Beta
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Chapter Zero: Frequently Asked Questions about Aleister Crowley
Chapter One: The Magick of Will
Chapter Two: The Evolution of Magical Formulae
Chapter Three: The Book of the Law
Chapter Four: The Pentagram Rituals
Chapter Five: The Thelemic Rituals of the Pentagram
The Star Ruby & Liber V vel Reguli
Chapter Six: The Hexagram Rituals
Chapter Seven: The Thelemic Ritual of the Hexagram
The Star Sapphire
Chapter Eight: Knowledge and Conversation
of the Holy Guardian Angel
Liber Samekh
Chapter Nine: The Solar Rites
Liber Resh & The Mass of the Phoenix
Chapter Ten: Thelemic Mysticism
Liber NV & Liber HAD
Chapter Eleven: The Rites of Eleusis
Chapter Twelve: Thelemic Orders
Chapter Thirteen: The Religion of Thelema
The Mass of Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica
Notes

Bibliography

FOREWORD
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.

leister Crowley possessed far too much
technical knowledge of magick to readily
understand the problems of ordinary
students. He frequently asked his younger
colleagues to help make his teachings more accessible, and once explained
that “it's the sort of thing I can't do myself, not knowing the scope of the
mind of the ‘gentle reader.’”
Like other “gentle readers” who have delved into Crowley's system on
their own, Brother DuQuette found many of the gaps and pitfalls in the
system by the time-honored method of falling into them, scrambling out,
and trying again until he crossed them. The present work incorporates many
of the results of his personal work.
What is true of science holds true for scientific illuminism. DuQuette is
the first to allow that while some of his findings may be replicated by future
experimenters, others are subjective personal interpretation. But even the
latter are invaluable as suggesting other lines of investigation, and as
examples of the kind of personalization of the system that enables the
magician to make it his or her own.
DuQuette also drew on recent research by other students that will be
formally published in the forthcoming one-volume edition of Crowley's
Book Four. Speaking of Lon Milo DuQuette's mythical eponym, Crowley
wrote in Part II of his Book Four that “Milo began by carrying a newborn
calf; and day by day as it grew into a bull, his strength was found
sufficient.” It is not stretching the metaphor too far to suggest that the
present work will be useful to many students as an introductory guide to
those portions of Crowley's magnum opus dealing with ceremonial magick.
Occultism frequently gives ample grounds for criticism to its detractors
by making insupportable claims for vaguely defined powers, the whole

A

compassed by nonsensical theory. As Israel Regardie did before him,
DuQuette avoids this by writing from his own experience, with a healthy
leavening of common sense and a refreshing sense of humor.
Love is the law, love under will.
—Hymenaeus Beta
Frater Superior, O.T.O.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I

wish first to thank Hymenaeus Beta, Frater
Superior of Ordo Templi Orientis, for allowing
me access to the Order's archival material and
for his fraternal encouragement, counsel, and

criticism.
My thanks also go to Soror Meral, of the College of Thelema,
Christopher S. Hyatt, of the Israel Regardie Foundation, James Wasserman,
Clive Harper, Frater E. A. O. A., Rick Potter, Latin scholar, David Coe,
D.G., Bill Heidrick; and to Paul J. Maska for his excellent photographs, and
Ed Sentowski for his makeup artistry.
It gives me profound pleasure to thank the dedicated and talented
Thelemic ritualists of Heru-ra-ha Lodge O.T.O., and 93 Lodge O.T.O., with
whom I have labored, and from whom I have learned for more than fifteen
years; especially LeRoy Lauer, Doug James, Karen James, Steve Abbott,
Judy Abbott, Jim Kababick, David P. Wilson, and Constance DuQuette.
Lastly, “…unto them from whose eyes the veil of life hath fallen…,”
Grady L. McMurtry (Caliph Hymenaeus Alpha X°), Francis I. Regardie,
Gerald Yorke, and the “prophet of the lovely Star,” Aleister Crowley, I offer
my perpetual thanks.
The quoted material at the beginning of each chapter is from the works
of Aleister Crowley. In case you would like to explore these passages
further, the following reference list will be of interest.
Chapter Zero: The Poet, from The Stone of the Philosophers, Konx Om
Pax, Originally published in 1907 in a limited edition of 500 copies. First
facsimile edition, with introduction published in 1990 by The Teitan Press,
Inc. Chicago, IL. © 1990 Martin P. Starr. p. 108.
Chapter One: Magick in Theory and Practice (New York: Magickal
Childe, 1990), p. xii. This work was originally published in Paris by
Lecram Press in 1929.

Chapter Two: “The Pentagram.” From Thumbs Up! Five Poems by
Aleister Crowley, p. 2. This book was privately printed by the O.T.O. in
1942 “for free distribution among the soldiers and workers of the Forces of
Freedom.”
Chapter Three: This quote is from The Class A Comment of The Book
of the Law (reprinted in its entirety in this work).
Chapter Four: The Equinox, Vol. I, no. 1 (London: 1909; reprinted York
Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992), p. 17.
Chapter Five: Liber LXV, in The Holy Books of Thelema (York Beach,
ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990), p. 59.
Chapter Six: Liber DCCXII vel ARARITA in The Holy Books of Thelema
(York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990), pp. 217, 218.
Chapter Seven: Chapter 108 in Liber Aleph (York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1991), p. 108.
Chapter Eight: Magick in Theory and Practice (New York: Magickal
Childe, 1990), p. 11.
Chapter Nine and Ten: These quotes are from Liber AL vel Legis, III,
xxxviii (reprinted in its entirety in this work).
Chapter Twelve: Liber LXI vel Causae in The Holy Books of Thelema
(York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990), p. xii.
Chapter Thirteen: Magick in Theory and Practice (New York: Magickal
Childe, 1990), p. 174.

INTRODUCTION
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.
—LIBER AL VEL LEGIS I. 40.

he Magick of Aleister Crowley: A Handbook
of the Rituals of Thelema.
Wait a minute! That sounds suspiciously
like a book that was first published in 1993
called The Magick of Thelema: A Handbook of the Rituals of Aleister
Crowley.
You're right! But is it the same book?
Well…yes and no.
“Yes,” because all the material (sans a few typographical errors) found
in The Magick of Thelema is included in this book.
“No,” because the present work has been enlarged and updated with
new material (including this introduction, a chapter featuring Frequently
Asked Questions about Aleister Crowley, and a chapter on Crowley's Rites
of Eleusis).
Perhaps the most important change is the title itself. The Magick of
Aleister Crowley I believe more accurately conveys the essence of what lies
between the covers, and, while it is true that you can't judge a book by its
cover, it is also true that you won't read a book if you don't understand the
cover. I must sadly report that for the past ten years the first thing I most
often hear when I hand someone a copy of The Magick of Thelema is
something like “The Magick of Thelma? Who's Thelma?” By the time I
explain to them that it's not Thelma, it's Thelema, which is a Greek word for
“will,” and then attempt to explain about such things as the evolution of
magical formulae and a philosophy that puts the individual at the center of
the universe, their eyes glaze over completely.

T

The name Aleister Crowley, on the other hand, provokes a far more
animated response:
“My god! Wasn't he some kind of devil worshiper?” or “Into the dark
side are we?”
It seems that everybody who has ever heard the name Aleister Crowley
has an instant (and often very negative) opinion of the man. Nevertheless,
nearly everyone is intrigued and wants to hear a little more. It's likely that at
this very moment you are reading these words not because of your burning
desire to know more about Thelema but because you want to know more
about Aleister Crowley and his works.
That's not surprising. Crowley is far more famous today than he ever
was during his lifetime. While he lived, he was lionized by a tiny group of
students and supporters—an odd mix of free-thinking, spiritual bohemians
and eccentric intelligentsia. His public reputation was molded almost
entirely by a vilifying string of tabloid articles filled with half-truths,
distortions, and downright lies concerning his philosophy and activities. At
the time of his death in 1947 his serious disciples had dwindled to near
extinction, and with them the life and works of this remarkable man seemed
doomed to oblivion.
For exactly twenty years Crowley would, for all intents and purposes,
lie in dead obscurity. Then, a miracle of Dionysian scale occurred. He was
quite literally raised from the dead by the most famous living entity on the
planet…the Beatles!

It Was Twenty Years Ago Today
Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band was arguably the most anticipated
piece of musical art in human history, and its magnificently colorful album
jacket was for a time one of the most recognizable works of modern visual
art in the world. Designed by pop artist Peter Blake, the cover was an
orderly collage of sixty-two of the Beatles's “people we like.” In the top
row, sandwiched between Hindu holy man Swami Sri Yukteswar Giri1 and
Mae West, beams the unmistakable visage of Aleister Crowley.
Beatles fanatics (and they were and are legion) dissected every word of
every cut of that historic album in hopes of uncovering secret political
messages or spiritual truths. They also spent countless hours trying to
identify every face on the cover and ponder why the Beatles would number

that person among “people they liked.” It was easy to guess why they
would include holy men, hipsters, and heroes—personal friends and movie
stars. Everyone in the collage seemed to be someone most any of us would
like—everyone, that is, except Aleister Crowley. Of all sixty-two “people
we like,” Aleister Crowley was the only one with a patently evil reputation.
Some of us wanted to know more about this man.
I'm not suggesting that the Beatles consciously contrived to resurrect a
worldwide interest in Aleister Crowley. I truly believe that one or more of
them (most likely John Lennon) simply knew enough about Crowley to
warrant his inclusion. Nonetheless, since 1967, interest in Crowley has
mushroomed. Currently there are no less than seven biographies in print
(three published in just the past three years). His written works, which until
the mid-'70s were few and nearly impossible to find, are now available
everywhere and translated into many languages.
Perhaps most astonishing is the fact that the magick of Aleister Crowley
—his Thelemic philosophy—(his program of Scientific Illumination) is
embraced by thousands of people from all walks of life throughout the
world. Even the English public, whose opinion of him in life was so terribly
misguided, is now awakening to the national treasure this native son
represents. In 2002, the BBC conducted a poll of 30,000 Britons, asking
them to name their “Greatest Briton.” Voted number 73 among the top 100
greatest Britons of all time, between King Henry V and Robert Bruce, was
the “famous poet, author, and philosopher Aleister Crowley.”2
Love is the law, love under will.
—LON MILO DUQUETTE
Vernal Equinox 2003

CHAPTER ZERO

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT
ALEISTER CROWLEY

Bury me in a nameless grave!
I came from God the world to save.
I brought them wisdom from above:
Worship and liberty and love.
They slew me for I did disparage
Therefore Religion, Law, and Marriage.
So be my grave without a name
That earth may swallow up my shame!
—ALEISTER CROWLEY1

leister Crowley is dead. He died of natural
causes on December 1, 1947, at the age of
seventy-two at his residence at Netherwood,
Hastings. His body was discovered by his
landlord who reported that only moments earlier he had heard the old man
pacing back and forth across the floor of his second-story apartment. There
was no one with him when the end came; therefore reports that his last
words were, “I'm perplexed” are patently false.
Contrary to many reports, he did not die a raving lunatic. He was bright
and witty to the end. In fact, two of his most extraordinarily brilliant works,
The Book of Thoth and Magick Without Tears, were penned in years just
before his death. His last days were not spent in squalor and abject poverty.
His modest residence in Hastings was a charming and reputable
boardinghouse.

A

Distortions of the facts surrounding his death are minor compared to
those that still surround the events of his life. But it is not the purpose of
this work to systematically rebut the mountains of misinformation that still
denigrate the reputation of this remarkable man. This has been
accomplished admirably in a variety of well-researched biographies
including the following works that I do not hesitate to recommend:
A Magick Life, The Biography of Aleister Crowley by Martin Booth,
London: Hodder & Stoughton, 2000.
Do What Thou Wilt, A Life of Aleister Crowley by Lawrence Sutin,
New York: St. Martin's Press, 2000.
Perdurabo: The Life of Aleister Crowley by Richard Kaczynski,
Ph.D., Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 2003.
Even though the focus of this book is upon the importance of the ritual
works of Aleister Crowley, I would be remiss in my responsibility to the
beginning student if I did not at the outset endeavor to disabuse the reader
who has perhaps given credence to the misstatements and downright
whoppers that continue to be perpetuated by religious zealots and tabloid
journalists.
Below are some frequently asked questions about Aleister Crowley. My
answers are the result of thirty years of research into every aspect of his
life; interviews with individuals both here and abroad, who knew and
worked with him, including Major G.L. McMurtry and Dr. Francis (Israel)
Regardie, and a review of historic documents in the archives of Ordo
Templi Orientis, the George Arents Research Library, Bird Library,
Syracuse university, the university of Texas at Austin, and the Gerald Yorke
collection currently housed at the Warburg Institute of the university of
London.

Frequently Asked Questions About Aleister Crowley
• Was Aleister Crowley a Satanist or a devil worshiper?
No. Although he can be misquoted (and quoted out of context) to suggest
otherwise, Crowley most certainly was not a Satanist or a devil worshiper.2
There is no question that he seemed to enjoy his sinister reputation. It is

also true that he loved to shock the shockable and was happy to allow
anyone who was ignorant and superstitious enough to believe in a
bogeyman devil to be afraid of him also. But in order to be a Satanist (by
the most common definition during Crowley's lifetime) one must
acknowledge the reality of the Judeo-Christian-Muslim spiritual worldview
—a worldview that embraces the concept of a devil who is the all-evil
opposite to a god who is all good. As Crowley repudiated Judeo-ChristianMuslim doctrines (including belief in the existence of their “devil”) there
are no grounds whatsoever to charge that he was a Satanist.
“The devil does not exist. It is a false name invented by the Black
Brothers to imply a Unity in their ignorant muddle of dispersions. A devil
who had unity would be a god.”3
It is true that there is much in the imagery of Crowley's writings that is
dark and at first glance very terrifying. But if we view these works
objectively, we find nothing in them any more frightening than the imagery
we find in the Bible or any number of other religious literature, Eastern or
Western.
Crowley especially despised the hypocrisy and the spiritually restrictive
aspects of established religions, especially Christianity, and did not deny
charges that his philosophy was anti-Christian. However, a careful
examination of his writings reveals his profound understanding and respect
for the pure spiritual impulse that is at the heart of all religions including
Christianity. His allusions in his writings to Satan, Lucifer, the devil, and so
forth are pertinent only within the self-referential documents of Thelema.
They can only be understood and evaluated within those contexts and
should only be disturbing or offensive to those individuals who for
whatever reason are unwilling or unable to do a little honest homework.
• Was he a Black Magician?
At the beginning of chapter 8 you will find a quote by Crowley that defines
the term “black magic” in its strictest context. However, the common
definition of a Black Magician is someone who willfully uses magical
powers to harm others. Crowley was bound by multiple magical oaths to
devote all his energies—intellectual, artistic, magical, and spiritual—toward
the complete emancipation of the human race. His entire magical career,
indeed his entire life, was dedicated to that purpose. He most certainly did
not fit the above definition of a Black Magician. But, as I said earlier, for

those unwilling or unable to do a little objective homework many of the
magical operations Crowley chronicled in his diaries and books may on the
surface appear to be works of black magic.
For example, if you haven't read enough of Crowley's works to learn
that Goetic demons are “portions of the human brain”4 or that the “Hell”
into which the magician plunges in order to conquer and command those
“demons” is our own subconscious mind or that the curses and restraints the
magician uses in particular forms of black magic are merely techniques to
isolate, focus, and direct our own natural mental abilities—then there is
little chance of convincing you that these exercises are not black magic and
that those individuals who would try to better themselves by such spiritual
practices are not Black Magicians.
• Why did he call himself the Beast 666?
Crowley's father was a lay preacher of the Plymouth Brethren, a
fundamentalist Protestant sect. His mother was also a devout (Crowley says
“fanatical”) member of the church. Together they did their best to raise
young Alic in the tenets of the faith. However, the youngster was a
mischievous and headstrong lad, and his mother equated his behavior to the
rebelliousness of the devil himself. In moments of aggravation she called
him the “Beast 666.” He loved it, and as he grew up he delighted in
identifying with the name and number as representative of all things
joyously opposed to the spiritual, intellectual, emotional, and sexual
restrictions by which oppressive religions would enslave the human soul.
As a young man just beginning his study of Hebrew and Christian
mysticism, Crowley discovered that the number 666, rather than being a
number associated with evil, was especially sacred to the Sun and the heart
Chakra (or psychic center) in the human body—also called the Christ
center.
To understand why 666 is a magick number of the Sun, we first refer to
the Qabalistic diagram the Tree of Life (see page ii) and discover that the
sphere of the Sun is the sixth Sephirah, Tiphareth. A kamea (or magick
square) of the Sun is a square composed of 36 squares (6 × 6). The numbers
1-36 are then arranged in such a way that every row and every column add
to the same number. That number is 111, and the sum of all the squares is
666.

Like other “blasphemies” he would hijack from Christian literature to
express the dynamics of new Aeon concepts (i.e., Whore of Babalon, Blood
of the Saints, Cup of Abominations, etc.), the term “Beast 666” was just
another example of Crowley using concepts that in the past represented the
unholy terrors of an evil future, and redeeming them so that they presently
represent the holy mysteries of the emerging new age. It's as simple (and as
unsatanic) as that.
Crowley explained why he called himself the Beast 666 when he
testified in court in a 1934 lawsuit. I wish I had space to reprint the entire
testimony.

“Did you take to yourself the designation of ‘The Beast 666'?”
“Yes.”
“Do you call yourself the ‘Master Therion'?”
“Yes.”
“What does ‘Therion' mean?”
“Great wild beast.”
“Do these titles convey a fair impression of your practice and outlook
on life?”
“It depends on what they mean.”
“The Great Wild Beast and the Beast 666 are out of the Apocalypse?”
“It only means sunlight; 666 is the number of the sun. You can call me
‘Little Sunshine.'”5
• Did he advocate or perform human sacrifices?
Crowley clothed many of his teaching in a thin veil of sensational titillation.
By doing so he assured himself that one, his works would be understood
and appreciated only by the few individuals capable of doing so, and two,

his works would continue to generate interest and be published by and for
the benefit of both his admirers and his enemies long after his death.
He did not—I repeat—did not perform or advocate human sacrifice. He
was often guilty, however, of the crime of poor judgment.
Like all of us, Crowley had many flaws and shortcomings. The greatest
of these, in my opinion, was his inability to understand that everyone else in
the world was not as educated and clever as he. It is clear, even in his
earliest works, that he constantly overestimated the level of sophistication
of his readers, and that he took fiendish delight in terrifying those who were
either too lazy, too bigoted, or too slow-witted to understand him. Even
when it is obvious that he is doing his best to be clear and comprehensible
his never-ending allusions to classical literature, chemistry, esoteric
doctrines, myths, and ancient civilizations send the average student flying
to the nearest university library to discover what this man is talking about.
It is even more difficult to discover what he is trying to say when he
purposefully veils the true meaning of his words so that only initiates
possessed of specific information know what he is really talking about.
Such is the case when he wrote about sex magick. First of all, he felt
bound by various oaths not to openly reveal certain secrets of sexual
magick. Secondly, in the years he was writing on these subjects, one could
actually be arrested for writing too explicitly about sexual matters.
Unfortunately, in part 3, chapter 12 of Magick: Book Four, Liber ABA,6
where Crowley attempts to discuss theories and techniques of sexual
magick, it seems he was not satisfied with being simply subtle; he went out
of his way to be scandalously misunderstood. For perhaps a score of
initiates on the face of the Earth at that time, chapter 12 was an informative
(and in places hilarious) essay on the theory and practice of sex magick.
Among other fool traps, he uses the words “blood” and “death” and “kill”
to replace the words “semen” and “ecstasy” and “ejaculation.” To the
unwary, the entire chapter reads like one big instruction manual on human
and animal sacrifice. Big joke!
Nobody laughed.
He titled the chapter, Of the Bloody Sacrifice, and of Matters Cognate,
and I'm sure he thought everyone would understand his literary blind when
they reached the end of the chapter and read his last sentence: “You are also
likely to get into trouble over this chapter unless you truly comprehend its
meaning.”.

The footnote to that statement is even clearer:
There is a traditional saying that whenever an adept seems to have
made a straightforward, comprehensible statement, then is it most
certain that He means something entirely different. The Truth is
nevertheless clearly set forth in His Words: it is His simplicity that
baffles the unworthy. I have chosen the expressions in the Chapter in
such a way that it is likely to mislead those magicians who allow
selfish interests to cloud their intelligence, but to give useful hints to
such as are bound by the proper Oaths to devote their powers to
legitimate ends.7
I guess it didn't occur to Crowley that few people would ever read his
assuring comments because the average reader was scared to death by the
seventh paragraph:
For the highest spiritual working one must accordingly choose that
victim which contains the greatest and purest force. A male child of
perfect innocence and high intelligence is the most satisfactory
suitable victim…. [And its footnote:] It appears from the Magical
Records of Frater Perdurabo that He made this particular sacrifice
on an average about 150 times every year between 1912 E.V. and
1928 E.V.8
It should be obvious to anyone who carefully reads the chapter and its
footnotes that the only thing to which Crowley was confessing was a great
many ejaculations that did not result in the birth of a child. However, in
1923 when he wrote the above “confession,” such candor in print could not
be published. Ironically, talk of human sacrifice and other such shocking
subjects could.
Martha Kuntzel, a Crowley disciple and high-ranking member of the
German O.T.O., saw trouble coming and was understandably concerned
that this statement would be misunderstood. She insisted to Crowley that
the following “initiated interpretation” of his outrageous statement be added
“for the sake of the younger Brethren.”
It is the sacrifice of oneself spiritually. And the intelligence and
innocence of that male child are the perfect understanding of the
Magician, his one aim, without lust of result. And male he must be,

because what he sacrifices is not the material blood, but his creative
power.”9
Unfortunately, people who were only too happy to believe that Aleister
Crowley could personally murder 2,550 babies didn't pay much attention to
Kuntzel's “initiated interpretation.” To make matters worse Crowley
thoughtfully reminds us: “But the bloody sacrifice, though more
dangerous, is more efficacious; and for nearly all purposes human
sacrifice is the best.”10
Thank you very much Mr. Crowley! I'm sure I will not be the last author
who will feel obliged to try to explain your twisted sense of humor to his or
her readers, colleagues, or mother.
• Did he advocate or perform animal sacrifices?
Crowley did not advocate or perform animal sacrifices for magical or
religious purposes. Besides indulging in the hunting escapades of a proper
British sportsman, and the consumption of live clams and oysters, Crowley
confessed to three other “murderous” acts: 1) As a boy, he killed a cat to
test the validity of the statement, “a cat has nine lives.” 2) As a young man,
while attempting to “go native” in India, he paid for a goat to be sacrificed
at a Temple of Shiva. 3) Before dining on frog's legs while camping in
America, he performed a brief passion play before dressing the victim for
the skillet.
Even though there are what appear to be references to the practice in
some of the Holy Books of Thelema, animal sacrifice plays no part
whatsoever in the Magick of Aleister Crowley.
• Was he a drug addict?
Crowley's early belief that drugs could not harm the magician possessed of
a pure enough will was dashed by the example of his own life. Crowley's
struggles with heroin and cocaine addiction are legendary. At various stages
of his life he was most certainly a drug addict. He also bravely overcame
his addiction for lengthy periods of time and finally only needed his
prescriptions to diminish effects of severe asthma and extend his life.
• Was he a homosexual?
So…what if he was?

(Sorry. I couldn't help that!).
Actually, Crowley was bisexual, and I believe he would be absolutely
thrilled with twenty-first century attitudes concerning sexuality.
• Was he a traitor to England and/or a German spy?
Charges that Crowley was a traitor to England and perhaps even a German
spy stem from several newspaper editorials he wrote in New York City, just
prior to America's entry into the war on England's side.
It must be remembered that the United States was very close to entering
the First World War on Germany's side. America's large German population
and other powerful industrial interests were winning the public relations
battle in the press. If England was to survive, something had to be done to
sway American public opinion to the English cause. Crowley convinced the
publisher of the leading English-language German propaganda newspaper
that he was a German sympathizer. He was given an editorial position at the
paper and began to write the most outrageously bizarre editorials. He
equated Kaiser Willhelm with Parsifal and Jesus Christ. He trumpeted
Germany's right to rule the world. He even went so far as to write that
Germany had the right to engage in unrestricted submarine warfare against
the world's civilian shipping.
None of these things, I might add, reflected the German political or
military foreign policy of the time. But it didn't matter. Soon Crowley's
insane and blood-thirsty editorials created an anti-German hysteria that
eventually swept the United States into the conflict on England's side.
His adventures in the Second World War are also interesting. The
following is from my Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot.11
During World War II, at the request of friend and Naval Intelligence
officer Ian Fleming,12 Crowley provided Winston Churchill with
valuable insights into the superstitions and magical mindset of the
leaders of the Third Reich. He also suggested to the Prime Minister,
if reports can be believed, that he exploit the enemy's magical
paranoia by being photographed as much as possible giving the twofingered “V-for-Victory” gesture. This sign is a version of the
magical sign of Apophis-Typhon, a powerful symbol of destruction
and annihilation, which, according to magical tradition, is capable of
defeating the solar energies represented by the swastika.

British intelligence agencies will neither confirm nor deny that Aleister
Crowley (or anyone else for that matter) was in service. Throughout his life
he adamantly averred his patriotic loyalty to England. There is much
evidence to suggest that he was and none to prove he was not.
• Is it dangerous to study Aleister Crowley?
Aleister Crowley was by no means perfect. He was not good with people
and often alienated those who loved him dearest. His bold explorations of
human sexuality and drugs (always meticulously recorded and analyzed)
are fascinating to study, but were never intended to be casually emulated. I
have never encountered anyone who knew him that did not disapprove of
some aspect of his character or behavior.
But he is dead. For us, only his works remain as a measure of the man,
and they are currently more accessible to the general public than at any time
during his life. His influence on the modern world of art, literature, religion,
and philosophy is now widely acknowledged even by his most vehement
critics. It is my hope that this book may help bring the wonder of his genius
to a new generation of seekers and to an even broader audience of students.
But is it dangerous for some people to study Aleister Crowley? I guess I
have to say yes. For those whose belief in a God of goodness hinges upon
the reality of devil who is equally evil; for the superstitious, the ignorant,
the lazy, the immature, the unbalanced, the mentally ill, the paranoid, the
fainthearted; for anyone who for any reason cannot or will not take
responsibility for their own actions, their own lives, their own souls; for
these people Aleister Crowley is still a very dangerous man.

CHAPTER ONE

THE MAGICK OF WILL
Magick is the Science and Art of causing change to
occur in conformity with Will.
—MAGICK IN THEORY AND PRACTICE

he above definition of Magick can be as
misleading in its simplicity as it is in its
complexity. The key word is of course Will,
1 in Greek, and according to this
definition, any willed action is an act of Magick: brushing your teeth,
walking the dog, or even paying your taxes.
Conversely any unwilled action is an unmagical act: reaching for a
cigarette; ordering that fourth Martini; or any habitual or reactive behavior
that overrides the momentum of one's life focus could fall into the category
of an unmagical act.
Try as we might there is no escaping this simple fact: We are all
Magicians and we are either competent or incompetent practitioners of our
craft.
The great majority of successful Magicians do not even realize (nor
should they care) that they are Magicians, or that there is a name for what
they do so well. They just go through life striving to cause change to occur
in conformity with their Wills and that's that. They have made a science out
of their lifestyle and they execute it with great art. They work hard, but for
them the work is not a burden it is a labor of love and a continuing
expression of the purpose of their existence.
Obviously most of us do not, without great effort, fall into this fortunate
category of human being. Our Magick falls somewhere between
competence and incompetence. Occasionally we become aware of what our
Will is (or might be) and try to work the Magick. But more often than not,

T

we find ourselves simply responding to an endless chain reaction of
external events and circumstances over which we have little or no control.
Out of fear, frustration, or what might be called spiritual fatigue, many
of us turn to religions whose champions are more than happy to tell us, in
no uncertain terms, exactly where our place in the universe is.
The religions that Westerners most frequently are attracted to
(Christianity, with its many sects, Judaism, and Islam) postulate a Supreme
Being who personifies and manifests the order of the universe. The
mechanism of this order is often termed the “Will of God.” By surrendering
the individual will to Will of God, the religious devotee can theoretically
harmonize his or her life with that of the Deity's. Not my will, but Thine be
done.
In order for us to know God's Will, these religions offer, for our great
comfort (and often from ancient and “infallible” sources), rules,
commandments, and assorted scriptural injunctions to guide the thoughts
and behavior of the faithful. As an added safeguard that these scriptures be
“correctly” interpreted, a priestcraft of some form or another invariably
evolves and assumes the role of a visible mediator between the worshiper
and the Deity.2 For those who dutifully comply with the dictated formulae
and surrender their wills to the prescribed Will of God, a great burden is
lifted from their shoulders. They no longer feel the need for direct spiritual
experience, and faith in the infallibility of the dogmatists makes even
intellectual investigation unnecessary. The reward for such spiritual
collaborators is the smug comfort of knowing that those who haven't
submitted to the formula will suffer after death, and that they who have,
will not.
Magick also postulates a universal order—call it God, Nature, the
Supreme Being, the Grand Architect of the Universe, the Tao, or just theway-things-are. But the Magician knows that the pure Will of every man
and every woman is already in perfect harmony with the divine Will; in fact
they are one and the same. It is the Magician's Great Work to endeavor to
remove the obstacles that hinder his or her perfect realization of that Will
and then proceed to execute it.
We perceive in the world around us a vast cosmic orderliness (or at least
a glorious systematized chaos). Galaxies, stars, planets, atoms, electrons,
and other sub-atomic particles all seem to have found their niche in the
grand scheme of things and behave themselves accordingly. By realizing

our True Wills we find our place…our orbit. By doing our True Will, we
have the inertia of the entire universe to assist us.
The Magician does not necessarily want the burden of existence lifted
from his shoulders; he wants to understand why he is carrying it and where.

CHAPTER TWO

THE EVOLUTION OF MAGICAL FORMULAE
In the Years of the Primal Course, in the dawn of terrestrial
birth,
Man mastered the mammoth and horse; and Man was the Lord
of the Earth.
He made him an hollow skin from the heart of an holy tree;
He compassed the earth therein, and Man was the Lord of the
Sea.
He controlled the vigour of steam, he harnessed the lightning for
hire;
He drove the celestial team; and Man was the Lord of the Fire.
Deep-mouthed from their thrones deep-seated, the choirs of the
aeons declare
The last of the demons defeated, for Man is the Lord of the Air.
Arise, 0 man, in thy strength! the kingdom is thine to inherit,
Till the high gods witness at length that Man is the Lord of his
spirit.
—THE PENTAGRAM

magical formula is a statement of perceived
cosmological fact or theory It can be as
simple as an axiom:
Love thy neighbor as thyself. An apple a

A

day keeps the doctor away.
It can be a statement or a set of symbols revealing the mechanism of a
natural law:
As above, so below. All is sorrow. Love is the law, love under will.
E = MC2. YHVH. INRI. AUM.
It can even be a single word that initiates an entire age:

TAO; ANATTA; IAΩ; Θελημα
Magical formulae evolve from older magical formulae as humanity's
ability to perceive itself and the universe increases. A change in the
consciousness of the race necessitates a change in magical formula. It's not
that the old formula doesn't work anymore, it's just that the new one works
so much better. Obsolete formulae of the past aren't necessarily discarded
completely but are often amended or fine-tuned to better harmonize with a
new, expanded understanding of natural or spiritual law.
To use an apparently unmagical example, an ancient carpenter or
craftsman seeking to determine the area of a small circle might venerate the
great Magician who revealed to him that the area could be determined by
measuring the radius of the circle, then multiplying that figure by itself,
then multiplying that figure by the sacred number 3. For the rough
calculations required by our primitive ancestors, this crude formula served
quite adequately. But for larger, more complex projects (such as temples,
pyramids, etc.) requiring precise computations, the world had to wait for the
“Magick” of π. Once this new bit of information became general knowledge
the world was never the same.
While this is a very crude analogy, I am confident that the reader can
see how it applies to our ever evolving perception of ourselves and our
place in the universe.

The Formula of the New Age
Great spiritual periods (ages or aeons) are characterized by their magical
formula. This is very important and fundamental to the understanding of
Magick in general and Thelemic Magick in particular, for the planet has just
recently (relatively speaking) entered a new period; a new age; a new aeon.
Yes, this is coincidental to what astrologers and songwriters call the Age
of Aquarius1 and what millions of others refer to simply as the New Age.
But it would be a mistake to view this new aeon as simply another tick on a
great cosmic clock. The Age of Aquarius, profoundly significant as it is, is
only one aspect of a far greater new spiritual age. (Such magical aeons do
not necessarily coincide with the astrological periods and, according to
Crowley2, may be of any length.) A more intimate, more magical
perspective may be had if, rather than considering the ages as merely
astrological epochs, we instead view them as gods.

Crowley recognized in the three principal gods of Egypt Isis, Osiris, and
Horus the characteristic formulae of the last three magical aeons.
The present aeon is that of Horus, which has followed the Aeon of
Osiris, which followed the Aeon of Isis. Each aeon is characterized by the
level of understanding of nature and of self contemporarily prevalent, and
dictates the variety of magical and religious expression that dominate these
periods.
Here it will be necessary to take a moment to review the myth of Isis,
Osiris, and Horus, for it is vitally important to the understanding of the
evolution of magical formulae and the Magick of Thelema. Please keep in
mind that this is only the briefest sketch of a story that has undergone over
four thousand years of revision.

THE MYTH OF OSIRIS
THE CREATOR, Temu, first appeared (from out of a watery chaos) on a
sacred mound. Upon this solid foundation of matter he masturbated,
creating two children, brother and sister, Shu and Tefnet. These two in turn
created Geb (the Earth-god) and Nut3 (the Sky-goddess) who united to give
birth to Osiris, Isis4, Seth5, and Nephthys. These nine deities make up the
ennead of Heliopolis, which appear continually throughout the sacred texts.
Osiris became king of Egypt, supported by his sister-wife Isis. Theirs
was a golden reign that raised the Egyptian people from the sub-human
depths of anarchy and cannibalism. They initiated the systematic cultivation
of the land in harmony with the flooding cycle of the river Nile, and their
administration brought prosperity and happiness.
Seth, the brother of Osiris, became increasingly envious of the success
of his sibling, and conspired to have him assassinated. Secretly he had an
ornate box constructed to the exact measurements of the body of Osiris. He
then hosted a lavish party for his brother and announced that he would
award the box to anyone who could fit perfectly inside. In what can only be
described as an act of divine folly, Osiris volunteered to give it a try. As
soon as he was comfortably snuggled inside the perfectly fitting box, the lid
was immediately nailed shut by seventy-two of Seth's coconspirators and
the coffin set adrift on the Nile.
Isis, hearing of the murder, immediately set out to find the body. She
discovered it at Byblos where it had become imbedded in a tree which had

been cut down and used, because of its wondrous aroma, as a column in the
palace of the king. She pleaded with the local king for the return of her
husband's body and was allowed to take it.
As she was returning with it by boat, she laid down upon the body and
kissed it until its phallus became miraculously erect. She mounted her dead
husband and conceived the child Horus. (Horus or Hoor also has a brother,
Hoor-Paar-Kraat, whom the Greeks called Harpocrates. More on this later.)
Seth, discovering where Isis had hidden the body, stole it, dismembered
it, and scattered the fourteen pieces throughout the entire country.
Isis set out again and successfully recovered all the pieces of Osiris,
save one6, and magically reassembled them, thereby bestowing upon Osiris
immortality and rulership of the afterlife. Henceforth pious individuals who
faithfully adhered to the complex magical formulae of the cult of Osiris, as
outlined in The Book of the Dead, would be assured of the same continuity
of existence after death.
Their son Horus, to avenge the murder of his father, initiated a mighty
struggle against Seth, which according to some stories was successful after
three days and according to others is perpetuated to this day.
The images of this simple passion play are imbedded deeply in the
collective consciousness of the human race. We see it retold almost
verbatim by the Greeks as the story of Demeter and Persephone, and
Orpheus and Eurydice. IAO, the great God of the Gnostics, even announces
the magical formula of life, death, and resurrection in the letters of its name:
Isis (Nature) is ruined by Apophis (the forces of destruction and decay), but
is cyclically resurrected in Osiris.
Most striking to the Western mind are the similarities between the story
of Osiris and the central myth of Christianity: Through treachery a wise
young savior is murdered…nailed to His death; the tree whereon the body
is affixed; the mourning devotee who begs the return of His body in order to
give it proper burial; the resurrection of the God which also provides the
formula for the eternal salvation of the world, etc. All very Osirian.
But I am getting ahead of myself. To understand where we are, we must
first understand where we have been, so let us first examine the conditions
that characterized the last two aeons.

The Aeon of Isis
The Formula of the Great Goddess: It is difficult to speculate precisely
when the aeon of the formula of Isis began for its foundations were laid in
the nebulousness of prehistory. However, we can with relative confidence
venture to pinpoint its zenith as being approximately 2400 B.C.7
This was the Age of the Great Goddess, and nowhere at this time was
Her worship more conspicuous than in the Sumerian city of Uruk where the
magnificent temple of Innana (Ishtar) dominated civilization's first great
city. For us to focus exclusively upon Sumeria, however, would be a grave
error for, indeed, the cult of the Great Goddess was truly universal. She was
worshiped by countless cultures under myriad names and forms. It would
also be a mistake for us to conclude that the magical formula of this period
manifested exclusively through the worship of any particular
anthropomorphic female deity. For, like every aeon, the magical formula of
the Aeon of Isis was founded upon mankind's interpretation of the
“perceived facts” of nature, and our Isian-age progenitors perceived nature
as a continuous process of spontaneous growth.
In the dim beginnings of the aeon, humans were ignorant of the cause
and effect mysteries of sex and birth. Life appeared to come from woman
alone. Blood flowed inexplicably from her body with the same cycle as that
of the moon. And when the cycle of bleeding was interrupted, her belly
swelled for nine moons until she burst with new life. She then continued to
nourish this life with her milk, the white blood of her breasts, and without
this nourishment, drawn directly from her body, the new life would die.
Nothing could match the power of woman. From her all life proceeded
and without her nourishment no life could survive. Like the moon itself, she
lived a three-fold life cycle of maid, mother, and crone; fertility, sustenance,
and wisdom.
Once the child was weaned, the Earth itself became surrogate mother,
directly providing the flesh and blood of animals and plants for sustenance.
Mother was life. Earth was Mother. God was Woman. Death was a mystery
that could not be solved nor overcome.
This fundamental perception of nature persisted long after the mystery
of where babies came from had been solved. Matriarchies and cannibalism
dominated much of this period, but even after the ascent of the male warrior
gods, the essential formula of the Goddess lived on.

There exist to this day tribes of hunter-gatherers8 whose social and
religious lives exemplify the formula of Isis, but the Aeon of Isis survived
only as long as the spirit of humanity was dominated by the perception that
life and its requisite nourishment came directly from the Earth and from the
woman.
A clearer perception of the universe would evolve that would usurp the
formula of Isis and initiate a new cultural and religious age. We are
painfully familiar with this period for it lasted until the turn of the twentieth
century. Its formula is still the consensus of the so-called “Great Religions”
and continues to dominate the spiritual lives of the majority of the
inhabitants of our planet.
In this age the focus was shifted from the Earth to the Sun as the source
of all life, and from the mysteries of birth to the mysteries of death. We
figured out where babies came from; now we were to ponder where we go
when we die.

The Aeon of Osiris
The Formula of the Dying God: It could be said that the Aeon of Osiris
began when men and women first became cognizant of the Sun, and
recognized that the fertility of the Earth (and consequently their lives)
depended directly upon the vitalizing power of sunlight. The secret of life
was now perceived as a partnership of Sun and Earth, and our ancestors saw
this partnership reflected in themselves: man and woman, phallus and kteis,
father and mother.
When it became universally acknowledged that without the Sun, the
Earth would perish, and without the semen of man, woman would remain
barren, the great pendulum of racial consciousness and attitude took a
radical swing. The formula of Isis was altered: woman brings forth life, but
life comes from the Sun. God was now Father.
This new “illumination” resulted in unprecedented advances in
civilization. Armed with the solar knowledge of the cycles of seasons,
Osirian-age farmers began the organized cultivation of crops. Cities arose,
and with them the economies and armies of great nation-states. Patriarchies
supplanted matriarchies as the goddesses of countless cultures became
“wives” to the new male deities.

But inherent in this new formula was a terrible mystery; a factor that
was not a part of the formula of the innocent Aeon of Isis; a dark reality that
would become an all-consuming (and some say, unhealthy) preoccupation
of the Aeon of Osiris: death.
It was perceived as an undeniable fact that the Sun, the source of all life,
was born each day on the eastern horizon and traveled across the sky,
bestowing His warm blessings of light and life upon all the Earth. It was
also observed this great pangenetor “died” each day in the West, plunging
the entire world into a cold darkness—a darkness that evoked introspection
and fear. Where did the Sun go? Would a new one ever reappear?
Each night after the death of the Sun, our early Osirian-age ancestor fell
into an uneasy slumber, and in that sleep lived another life—a strange life,
peopled with other men and women, and filled with impossible wonders
and horrors. Animals killed in the hunt, dead relatives, enemies, and
comrades, all came alive again in this other world of dream. Was this where
the Sun went at night? Was this the Land of the Dead?
Of course the fearful night did not last forever and a “new” Sun
appeared with comforting regularity each morning to conquer the darkness
and assure the continuity of life. But later, more sophisticated Sun watchers
would experience an even greater insecurity crisis when they observed the
dwindling periods of sunlight (as summer moved toward winter) resulted in
the decrease or actual cessation of the fecundity of the Earth. No sunlight,
no crops. This was serious.
The daily solar cycle showed them that the Sun is capable of totally
disappearing from the sky. But unlike the relatively short period of darkness
of the daily cycle, there was no telling how long a great night would last if
the Sun ever experienced a yearly death. Surely all life would end in the
frozen darkness of an eternal (or even a lengthy) night.
Unfounded as these fears were, they were based solidly upon a
perceived reality, and the trauma became indelibly imprinted upon the
psyche of the human race. This “reality” in turn, formed the foundation of
the magical formula of the Aeon of Osiris, the formula of the Dying God.
The Sun, the Father of all Life, goes through a three-fold cycle of birth
(life), death, and resurrection. Humankind, knowing themselves also subject
to death, believed that by following the magical or religious formula of the
Sun, they too could be made eligible for resurrection. What was this
formula?

Everywhere our Osirian-age ancestors looked, they saw the drama of
the Dying God enacted. The farmer observed the fertilizing effects that
blood and decaying flesh had upon the soil; and that seeds (which came
from living plants in the summer and autumn) could lie dead and buried
throughout the winter months, and then miraculously resurrect as new
plants in the spring. It was an obvious and inescapable truth: without death
there is no life.
Did not the Sun suffer death each night and each winter so it might be
reborn? Did not the seed offer itself to the Earth so that it might resurrect as
a new plant? After ejaculation did not the penis sacrifice its potency to
fertilize the ovum and perpetuate the race?
Life from death was a fact, and to assure that the blessings of life would
continue to come out of death, our Osirian-age ancestors believed they must
take an active part in the great life/death ritual. To this end they took
themselves to mountain tops and high places. They gathered stones and
proceeded to build altars and offer up sacrifice to the gods.
Obviously the great cultural/religious myth of the Egyptians was
literally Osirian in nature, but by the dawn of the astrological Age of Pisces
(approximately 260 B.C.), the formula of the Dying God had crystalized
itself as the central myth of countless cultures and civilizations. The gods of
the great mystery cults—Orpheus, Hercules, Dionysus, Attis, Adonis, and
later Christ—all were slain and resurrected. The story of Persephone, the
central figure of the Eleusinian Mysteries which flourished for over two
thousand years, is a perfect example of the evolution of the formula of the
Great Goddess to that of the Dying God.
These cults were wildly popular. To assure one's own resurrection it was
necessary to be an initiate and follow the god's formula of catastrophe, love,
death, and resurrection. Partially patterned after these mystery schools,
orthodox Christianity arose to become the dominant spiritual and political
influence of the world for the last two thousand years.
The formula of sacrifice was born of the mistaken belief that the Sun
came up in the morning and went down in the evening. A more accurate
perception of the universe is now enjoyed by humanity. We know the Sun
does not come up nor does it go down. It does not travel North in the
summer nor does it move toward extinction in the South in the winter. The
Sun stays “on” all the time. The light is continuous. The death of the Sun is
merely an optical illusion, a shifting of shadow.

So universally accepted is this simple fact of nature that today we
seldom give it a second thought. Yet the archetypes that influence the great
cultural and religious forces of today were formulated during those eras of
profound ignorance and superstition. The stories of the dying Sun and the
Dying God were myths created, in part, to help our ancestors overcome
their fear of the dark and their fear of death. The perception of the universe
that initiated the Aeon of Osiris has been forever changed. The formula has
been amended. There is no need to fear the dark. There is no need to fear
death.

The Aeon of Horus
The Formula of the Crowned and Conquering Child: As the child is the
physical and genetic product of both its parents, so too the Aeon of Horus
reconciles and transcends the formulae of the two previous Ages. Since the
turn of the century we have seen the fall of colonialism and the destruction
of the last vestiges of the overtly patriarchal rule of kings in Europe. The
temporal power of the Pope is gone, and the illusion of the omnipotent
spiritual power of the Church has become diluted beyond hope of revival.
The earth-mother worshiping formula of the Aeon of Isis (violently
repressed during the Aeon of Osiris) has been transformed by the evolution
of our consciousness, and resurrected as the earth-respecting environmental
movement, the Woman's Movement, and the resurgence of the cult of the
Goddess.
These developments are seen by the established institutions as
blasphemous examples of spiritual and the unholy degeneration of
humanity. They grossly misinterpret their own scriptures to warn of an
inevitable cleansing conflagration that will reestablish an even greater
Osirian rule.
While a certain amount of conflict probably is inevitable (as it is at the
beginning of every age), the result most certainly will not be a return to the
formulae of the past. Standing, as we are, upon the threshold of the Aeon of
Horus, what we observe happening in the world is rather unsettling. But it is
the natural result of the vested interests of the old aeon resisting the
establishment of the new. It is very much like the strife families experience
when a child grows up and finally leaves home. Eventually the parents

accept the inevitable and, in most cases, form a new and supportive
relationship with their child.
We are the child who has just become self-aware. We still love our
mother and father but we know we will never be happy as long as we exist
only as an extension of their lives. Now that we are conscious of the
continuity of existence, now that we perceive the universe as a process of
continual growth, now that we recognize the individual as the basic unit of
society, we will never return to the flawed and incomplete perceptions of
the past.

CHAPTER THREE

THE BOOK OF THE LAW
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.
The study of this Book is forbidden. It is wise to destroy this
copy after the first reading.
Whosoever disregards this does so at his own risk and
peril. These are most dire.
Those who discuss the contents of this Book are to be
shunned by all, as centres of pestilence.
All questions of the Law are to be decided only by appeal to
my writings, each for himself
There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.
Love is the law, love under will.
—THE PRIEST OF THE PRINCES ANKH-AF-AN-KHONSU

he above “Comment in Class A” appears at
the end of all authorized editions of The Book
of the Law and is an ominous warning to
those who would presume to define or
interpret the contents of the primary Holy Book of Thelema.
In preparing the present work for publication, I have endeavored to the
best of my ability to abide by the above injunction, while at the same time
providing a sufficient amount of information to enable the reader to begin
his or her own line of exploration. This is a bit like walking a tightrope. I
confess that I am not a high initiate, nor am I an exemplary specimen of the
ideal Thelemite. The reader is honor-bound to disregard anything I say if it
appears that I have overstepped my bounds in this regard.
As it is impossible to understand the rituals of Thelema without a basic
familiarity with Liber AL vel Legis, The Book of the Law, it would be unfair
to the owners of this handbook if we did not include it in its entirety. The

T

deities and magical formulae revealed in this small volume are the very
essence of the Aeon of Horus.
Details of how this unique book came into being are outlined in
Crowley's The Equinox of the Gods,1 The Temple of Solomon the King,2 and
in a number of other recent publications which the reader is encouraged to
research. To help put things in historical perspective, I offer the following
brief review of the events that surrounded the reception of The Book of the
Law.
In 1903 Crowley had all but suspended magical workings and had taken
his new wife Rose3 on an extended honeymoon to a score of exotic
locations including Ceylon and Egypt. In December they discovered Rose
was pregnant. Rather than returning to their cold home in Scotland, they
chose to travel back to Cairo where the weather was pleasant. Assuming
romantic identities, they checked into their hotel apartment as Prince Chioa
Khan (Beast) and Princess Ouarda (Rose) and settled in.
Perhaps out of boredom, Crowley performed the “Preliminary
Invocation of the Goetia,” purposing to show Rose the sylphs. (It must be
remembered that Rose had no training or interest in magick.) She did not
see the sylphs but instead fell into a “strange state of mind.” She began
repeating as if in a trance, “They are waiting for you…it is all about the
Child…All Osiris.”4
She then informed her husband that the God Horus was angry with him
for ignoring Him. Irritated by what he at first thought was Rose's childish
behavior, Crowley began to interrogate her as to the technical attributes of
this “God.” To his great surprise, Rose, who had absolutely no knowledge
of Egyptology or Magick, answered even the most technical and esoteric
questions with 100 percent accuracy.
The next day they visited Cairo's Boulak museum. It was Crowley's
intention that Rose point out this God who wanted to talk with him. He
sniggered as she ignored and passed by the most common images of Horus,
but he was quite surprised when she excitedly identified an obscure wooden
funeral stélé of the Twenty-fifth Dynasty as the source of her
communications. Even more stunning was the museum exhibit number…
666. Crowley could not ignore this curious chain of events. He had the stélé
reproduced and began systematically working with Rose as his magical
assistant. (See color images, front and back covers.)5

Space forbids us to detail what followed, and the reader is again referred
to the previously mentioned texts. Suffice to say, that through Rose's
unexpected mediumship, contact was established with a praeter human
intelligence calling itself Aiwass, a messenger of Hoor-Paar-Kraat,6 who
announced the Equinox of Gods (the changing of the age) and the intention
of the “gods” to use Crowley to receive a book that was to be the
fundamental revelation of the new age.
On March 20, 1904, Crowley performed the Supreme Invocation of
Horus which formally initiated the Aeon of Horus. Per instructions,
between noon and one o'clock on April 8, 9, and 10, he entered the same
temple, sat down at a writing table, and wrote what was dictated to him by
an audible voice. The results of these three hours of dictation are the three
chapters of The Book of the Law.
The reader is neither asked nor expected to believe the story. Each must
judge for himself or herself the value of the book. As I mentioned earlier, it
is a fundamental proscription of the text to offer to interpret or even discuss
The Book of the Law. It is entirely up to each of us to fathom its meaning in
relationship to our individual lives.
Note: The reader will notice that Liber AL vel Legis is designated as a
publication in Class A. Crowley originally categorized works which are
“Official publications of A A ” into four7 classifications:
1) Class A consists of books that may be changed not so much as
the style of a letter: that is, they represent the utterance of an adept
entirely beyond the criticism of even the Visible Head of the
Organization.
2) Class B consists of books or essays that are the result of ordinary
scholarship, enlightened and earnest.
3) Class C consists of matter that is to be regarded rather as
suggestive than anything else.
4) Class D consists of the official rituals and instructions.
Some publications are composite, and pertain to more one class.8
The Thelemic rituals which are the subject of this book are Class D.

LIBER AL VEL LEGIS
SUB FIGURA CCXX
AS DELIVERED BY

XCIII = 418
TO

DCLXVI
A A Publication in Class A.

1. Had! The manifestation of Nuit.
2. The unveiling of the company of heaven.
3. Every man and every woman is a star.
4. Every number is infinite; there is no difference.
5. Help me, o warrior lord of Thebes, in my unveiling before the Children
of men!
6. Be thou Hadit, my secret centre, my heart & my tongue!
7. Behold! it is revealed by Aiwass the minister of Hoor-Paar-Kraat.
8. The Khabs is in the Khu, not the Khu in the Khabs.

9. Worship then the Khabs, and behold my light shed over you!
10. Let my servants be few & secret: they shall rule the many & the known.
11. These are fools that men adore; both their Gods & their men are fools.
12. Come forth, o children, under the stars, & take your fill of love!
13. I am above you and in you. My ecstasy is in yours. My joy is to see
your joy.
14. Above, the gemmèd azure is
The naked splendour of Nuit;
She bends in ecstasy to kiss
The secret ardours of Hadit.
The wingèd globe, the starry blue,
Are mine, O Ankh-af-na-khonsu!
15. Now ye shall know that the chosen priest & apostle of infinite space is
the prince-priest the Beast; and in his woman called the Scarlet Woman is
all power given. They shall gather my children into their fold: they shall
bring the glory of the stars into the hearts of men.
16. For he is ever a sun, and she a moon. But to him is the winged secret
flame, and to her the stooping starlight.
17. But ye are not so chosen.
18. Burn upon their brows, o splendrous serpent!
19. O azure-lidded woman, bend upon them!
20. The key of the rituals is in the secret word which I have given unto him.
21. With the God & the Adorer I am nothing: they do not see me. They are
as upon the earth; I am Heaven, and there is no other God than me, and my
lord Hadit.
22. Now, therefore, I am known to ye by my name Nuit, and to him by a
secret name which I will give him when at last he knoweth me. Since I am
Infinite Space, and the Infinite Stars thereof, do ye also thus. Bind nothing!
Let there be no difference made among you between any one thing & any
other thing; for thereby there cometh hurt.
23. But whoso availeth in this, let him be the chief of all!

24. I am Nuit, and my word is six and fifty.
25. Divide, add, multiply, and understand.
26. Then saith the prophet and slave of the beauteous one: Who am I, and
what shall be the sign? So she answered him, bending down, a lambent
flame of blue, all-touching, all penetrant, her lovely hands upon the black
earth, & her lithe body arched for love, and her soft feet not hurting the
little flowers: Thou knowest! And the sign shall be my ecstasy, the
consciousness of the continuity of existence, the omnipresence of my body.
27. Then the priest answered & said unto the Queen of Space, kissing her
lovely brows, and the dew of her light bathing his whole body in a sweetsmelling perfume of sweat: O Nuit, continuous one of Heaven, let it be ever
thus; that men speak not of Thee as One but as None; and let them speak
not of thee at all, since thou art continuous!
28. None, breathed the light, faint & fœry, of the stars, and two.
29. For I am divided for love's sake, for the chance of union.
30. This is the creation of the world, that the pain of division is as nothing,
and the joy of dissolution all.
31. For these fools of men and their woes care not thou at all! They feel
little; what is, is balanced by weak joys; but ye are my chosen ones.
32. Obey my prophet! follow out the ordeals of my knowledge! seek me
only! Then the joys of my love will redeem ye from all pain. This is so: I
swear it by the vault of my body; by my sacred heart and tongue; by all I
can give, by all I desire of ye all.
33. Then the priest fell into a deep trance or swoon, & said unto the Queen
of Heaven; Write unto us the ordeals; write unto us the rituals; write unto us
the law!
34. But she said: the ordeals I write not: the rituals shall be half known and
half concealed: the Law is for all.
35. This that thou writest is the threefold book of Law.
36. My scribe Ankh-af-na-khonsu, the priest of the princes, shall not in one
letter change this book; but lest there be folly, he shall comment thereupon
by the wisdom of Ra-Hoor-Khu-it.

37. Also the mantras and spells; the obeah and the wanga; the work of the
wand and the work of the sword; these he shall learn and teach.
38. He must teach; but he may make severe the ordeals.
39. The word of the Law is θελημα.
40. Who calls us Thelemites will do no wrong, if he look but close into the
word. For there are therein Three Grades, the Hermit, and the Lover, and
the man of Earth. Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.
41. The word of Sin is Restriction. O man! refuse not thy wife, if she will!
O lover, if thou wilt, depart! There is no bond that can unite the divided but
love: all else is a curse. Accurséd! Accurséd! be it to the æons! Hell.
42. Let it be that state of manyhood bound and loathing. So with thy all;
thou hast no right but to do thy will.
43. Do that, and no other shall say nay.
44. For pure will, unassuaged of purpose, delivered from the lust of result,
is every way perfect.
45. The Perfect and the Perfect are one Perfect and not two; nay, are none!
46. Nothing is a secret key of this law. Sixty-one the Jews call it; I call it
eight, eighty, four hundred & eighteen.
47. But they have the half: unite by thine art so that all disappear.
48. My prophet is a fool with his one, one, one; are not they the Ox, and
none by the Book?
49. Abrogate are all rituals, all ordeals, all words and signs. Ra-Hoor-Khuit
hath taken his seat in the East at the Equinox of the Gods; and let Asar be
with Isa, who also are one. But they are not of me. Let Asar be the adorant,
Isa the sufferer; Hoor in his secret name and splendour is the Lord
initiating.
50. There is a word to say about the Hierophantic task. Behold! There are
three ordeals in one, and it may be given in three ways. The gross must pass
through fire; let the fine be tried in intellect, and the lofty chosen ones in the
highest. Thus ye have star & star, system & system; let not one know well
the other!

51. There are four gates to one palace; the floor of that palace is of silver
and gold; lapis lazuli & jasper are there; and all rare scents; jasmine & rose,
and the emblems of death. Let him enter in turn or at once the four gates; let
him stand on the floor of the palace. Will he not sink? Amn. Ho! warrior, if
thy servant sink? But there are means and means. Be goodly therefore:
dress ye all in fine apparel; eat rich foods and drink sweet wines and wines
that foam! Also, take your fill and will of love as ye will, when, where and
with whom ye will! But always unto me.
52. If this be not aright; if ye confound the space-marks, saying: They are
one; or saying, They are many; if the ritual be not ever unto me: then expect
the direful judgments of Ra-Hoor-Khuit!
53. This shall regenerate the world, the little world my sister, my heart &
my tongue, unto whom I send this kiss. Also, o scribe and prophet, though
thou be of the princes, it shall not assuage thee nor absolve thee. But
ecstasy be thine and joy of earth: ever To me! To me!
54. Change not as much as the style of a letter; for behold! thou, o prophet
shalt not behold all these mysteries hidden therein.
55. The child of thy bowels, he shall behold them.
56. Expect him not from the East, nor from the West; for from no expected
house cometh that child. Aum! All words are sacred and all prophets true;
save only that they understand a little; solve the first half of the equation,
leave the second unattacked. But thou hast all in the clear light, and some,
though not all, in the dark.
57. Invoke me under my stars! Love is the law, love under will. Nor let the
fools mistake love; for there are love and love. There is the dove, and there
is the serpent. Choose ye well! He, my prophet, hath chosen, knowing the
law of the fortress, and the great mystery of the House of God.
All these old letters of my Book are aright; but is not the Star. This
also is secret: my prophet shall reveal it to the wise.
58. I give unimaginable joys on earth: certainty, not faith, while in life,
upon death; peace unutterable, rest, ecstasy; nor do I demand aught in
sacrifice.
59. My incense is of resinous woods & gums; and there is no blood therein:
because of my hair the trees of Eternity.

60. My number is 11, as all their numbers who are of us. The Five Pointed
Star, with a Circle in the Middle, & the circle is Red. My colour is black to
the blind, but the blue & gold are seen of the seeing. Also I have a secret
glory for them that love me.
61. But to love me is better than all things: if under the night-stars in the
desert thou presently burnest mine incense before me, invoking me with a
pure heart, and the Serpent flame therein, thou shalt come a little to lie in
my bosom. For one kiss wilt thou then be willing to give all; but whoso
gives one particle of dust shall lose all in that hour. Ye shall gather goods
and store of women and spices; ye shall wear rich jewels; ye shall exceed
the nations of the earth in splendour & pride; but always in the love of me,
and so shall ye come to my joy. I charge you earnestly to come before me in
a single robe, and covered with a rich headdress. I love you! I yearn to you!
Pale or purple, veiled or voluptuous, I who am all pleasure and purple, and
drunkenness of the innermost sense, desire you. Put on the wings, and
arouse the coiled splendour within you: come unto me!
62. At all my meetings with you shall the priestess say—and her eyes shall
burn with desire as she stands bare and rejoicing in my secret temple—To
me! To me! calling forth the flame of the hearts of all in her love-chant.
63. Sing the rapturous love-song unto me! Burn to me perfumes! Wear to
me jewels! Drink to me, for I love you! I love you!
64. I am the blue-lidded daughter of Sunset; I am the naked brilliance of the
voluptuous night-sky.
65. To me! To me!
66. The Manifestation of Nuit is at an end.
1. Nu! the hiding of Hadit.
2. Come! all ye, and learn the secret that hath not yet been revealed. I,
Hadit, am the complement of Nu, my bride. I am not extended, and Khabs
is the name of my House.
3. In the sphere I am everywhere the centre, as she, the circumference, is
nowhere found.

4. Yet she shall be known & I never.
5. Behold! the rituals of the old time are black. Let the evil ones be cast
away; let the good ones be purged by the prophet! Then shall this
Knowledge go aright.
6. I am the flame that burns in every heart of man, and in the core of every
star. I am Life, and the giver of Life, yet therefore is the knowledge of me
the knowledge of death.
7. I am the Magician and the Exorcist. I am the axle of the wheel, and the
cube in the circle. “Come unto me” is a foolish word: for it is I that go.
8. Who worshipped Heru-pa-kraath have worshipped me; ill, for I am the
worshipper.
9. Remember all ye that existence is pure joy; that all the sorrows are but as
shadows; they pass & are done; but there is that which remains.
10. O prophet! thou hast ill will to learn this writing.
11. I see thee hate the hand & the pen; but I am stronger.
12. Because of me in Thee which thou knewest not.
13. for why? Because thou wast the knower, and me.
14. Now let there be a veiling of this shrine: now let the light devour men
and eat them up with blindness!
15. For I am perfect, being Not; and my number is nine by the fools; but
with the just I am eight, and one in eight: Which is vital, for I am none
indeed. The Empress and the King are not of me; for there is a further
secret.
16. I am The Empress & the Hierophant. Thus eleven, as my bride is
eleven.
17. Hear me, ye people of sighing!
The sorrows of pain and regret
Are left to the dead and the dying,
The folk that not know me as yet.
18. These are dead, these fellows; they feel not. We are not for the poor and
sad: the lords of the earth are our kinsfolk.

19. Is a God to live in a dog? No! but the highest are of us. They shall
rejoice, our chosen: who sorroweth is not of us.
20. Beauty and strength, leaping laughter and delicious languor, force and
fire, are of us.
21. We have nothing with the outcast and the unfit: let them die in their
misery. For they feel not. Compassion is the vice of kings: stamp down the
wretched & the weak: this is the law of the strong: this is our law and the
joy of the world. Think not, o king, upon that lie: That Thou Must Die:
verily thou shalt not die, but live. Now let it be understood: If the body of
the King dissolve, he shall remain in pure ecstasy for ever. Nuit! Hadit! RaHoor-Khuit! The Sun, Strength & Sight, Light; these are for the servants of
the Star & the Snake.
22. I am the Snake that giveth Knowledge & Delight and bright glory, and
stir the hearts of men with drunkenness. To worship me take wine and
strange drugs whereof I will tell my prophet, & be drunk thereof—They
shall not harm ye at all. It is a lie, this folly against self. The exposure of
innocence is a lie. Be strong, O man! lust, enjoy all things of sense and
rapture: fear not that any God shall deny thee for this.
23. I am alone: there is no God where I am.
24. Behold! these be grave mysteries; for there are also of my friends who
be hermits. Now think not to find them in the forest or on the mountain; but
in beds of purple, caressed by magnificent beasts of women with large
limbs, and fire and light in their eyes, and masses of flaming hair about
them; there shall ye find them. Ye shall see them at rule, at victorious
armies, at all the joy; and there shall be in them a joy a million times greater
than this. Beware lest any force another, King against King! Love one
another with burning hearts; on the low men trample in the fierce lust of
your pride, in the day of your wrath.
25. Ye are against the people, O my chosen!
26. I am the secret Serpent coiled about to spring: in my coiling there is joy.
If I lift up my head, I and my Nuit are one. If I droop down mine head, and
shoot forth venom, then is rapture of the earth, and I and the earth are one.
27. There is great danger in me; for who doth not understand these runes
shall make a great miss. He shall fall down into the pit called Because, and

there he shall perish with the dogs of Reason.
28. Now a curse upon Because and his kin!
29. May Because be accursèd for ever!
30. If Will stops and cries Why, invoking Because, then Will stops & does
nought.
31. If Power asks why, then is Power weakness.
32. Also reason is a lie; for there is a factor infinite & unknown; & all their
words are skew-wise.
33. Enough of Because! Be he damned for a dog!
34. But ye, o my people, rise up & awake!
35. Let the rituals be rightly performed with joy & beauty!
36. There are rituals of the elements and feasts of the times.
37. A feast for the first night of the Prophet and his Bride!
38. A feast for the three days of the writing of the Book of the Law.
39. A feast for Tahuti and the child of the Prophet—secret O Prophet!
40. A feast for the Supreme Ritual, and a feast for the Equinox of the Gods.
41. A feast for fire and a feast for water; a feast for life and a greater feast
for death!
42. A feast every day in your hearts in the joy of my rapture!
43. A feast every night unto Nu, and the pleasure of uttermost delight!
44. Aye! feast! rejoice! there is no dread hereafter. There is the dissolution,
and eternal ecstasy in the kisses of Nu.
45. There is death for the dogs.
46. Dost thou fail? Art thou sorry? Is fear in thine heart?
47. Where I am these are not.
48. Pity not the fallen! I never knew them. I am not for them. I console not:
I hate the consoled & the consoler.

49. I am unique & conqueror. I am not of the slaves that perish. Be they
damned & dead! Amen. (This is of the 4: there is a fifth who is invisible, &
therein am I as a babe in an egg.)
50. Blue am I and gold in the light of my bride: but the red gleam is in my
eyes; & my spangles are purple & green.
51. Purple beyond purple: it is the light higher than eyesight.
52. There is a veil: that veil is black. It is the veil of the modest woman; it is
the veil of sorrow, & the pall of death: this is none of me. Tear down that
lying spectre of the centuries: veil not your vices in virtuous words: these
vices are my service; ye do well, & I will reward you here and hereafter.
53. Fear not, o prophet, when these words are said, thou shalt not be sorry.
Thou art emphatically my chosen; and blessed are the eyes that thou shalt
look upon with gladness. But I will hide thee in a mask of sorrow: they that
see thee shall fear thou art fallen: but I lift thee up.
54. Nor shall they who cry aloud their folly that thou meanest nought avail;
thou shall reveal it: thou availest: they are the slaves of because: They are
not of me. The stops as thou wilt; the letters? change them not in style or
value!
55. Thou shalt obtain the order & value of the English Alphabet; thou shalt
find new symbols to attribute them unto.
56. Begone! ye mockers; even though ye laugh in my honour ye shall laugh
not long: then when ye are sad know that I have forsaken you.
57. He that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is filthy shall be
filthy still.
58. Yea! deem not of change: ye shall be as ye are, & not other. Therefore
the kings of the earth shall be Kings for ever: the slaves shall serve. There is
none that shall be cast down or lifted up: all is ever as it was. Yet there are
masked ones my servants: it may be that yonder beggar is a King. A King
may choose his garment as he will: there is no certain test: but a beggar
cannot hide his poverty.
59. Beware therefore! Love all, lest perchance is a King concealed! Say you
so? Fool! If he be a King, thou canst not hurt him.

60. Therefore strike hard & low, and to hell with them, master!
61. There is a light before thine eyes, o prophet, a light undesired, most
desirable.
62. I am uplifted in thine heart; and the kisses of the stars rain hard upon thy
body.
63. Thou art exhaust in the voluptuous fullness of the inspiration; the
expiration is sweeter than death, more rapid and laughterful than a caress of
Hell's own worm.
64. Oh! thou art overcome: we are upon thee; our delight is all over thee:
hail! hail: prophet of Nu! prophet of Had! prophet of Ra-Hoor-Khu! Now
rejoice! now come in our splendour & rapture! Come in our passionate
peace, & write sweet words for the Kings!
65. I am the Master: thou art the Holy Chosen One.
66. Write, & find ecstasy in writing! Work, & be our bed in working! Thrill
with the joy of life & death! Ah! thy death shall be lovely: whoso seeth it
shall be glad. Thy death shall be the seal of the promise of our agelong love.
Come! lift up thine heart & rejoice! We are one; we are none.
67. Hold! Hold! Bear up in thy rapture; fall not in swoon of the excellent
kisses!
68. Harder! Hold up thyself—Lift thine head! breathe not so deep—die!
69. Ah! Ah! What do I feel? Is the word exhausted?
70. There is help & hope in other spells. Wisdom says: be strong! Then
canst thou bear more joy. Be not animal; refine thy rapture! If thou drink,
drink by the eight and ninety rules of art: if thou love, exceed by delicacy;
and if thou do aught joyous, let there be subtlety therein!
71. But exceed! exceed!
72. Strive ever to more! and if thou art truly mine—and doubt it not, an if
thou art ever joyous!—death is the crown of all.
73. Ah! Ah! Death! Death! thou shalt long for death. Death is forbidden, o
man, unto thee.

74. The length of thy longing shall be the strength of its glory. He that lives
long & desires death much is ever the King among the Kings.
75. Aye! listen to the numbers & the words:
76. 4 6 3 8 A B K 2 4 A L G M O R 3 Y X 24 89 R P S T O V A L.
What meaneth this, o prophet? Thou knowest not; nor shalt thou know ever.
There cometh one to follow thee: he shall expound it. But remember, o
chosen one, to be me; to follow the love of Nu in the star-lit heaven; to look
forth upon men, to tell them this glad word.
77. O be thou proud and mighty among men!
78. Lift up thyself! for there is none like unto thee among men or among
Gods! Lift up thyself, o my prophet, thy stature shall surpass the stars. They
shall worship thy name foursquare, mystic, wonderful, the number of the
man; and the name of thy house 418.
79. The end of the hiding of Hadit; and blessing & worship to the prophet
of the lovely Star!
1. Abrahadabra! the reward of Ra-Hoor-Khut.
2. There is division hither homeward; there is a word not known. Spelling is
defunct; all is not aught. Beware! Hold! Raise the spell of Ra-Hoor-Kuit!
3. Now let it be first understood that I am a god of War and of Vengeance. I
shall deal hardly with them.
4. Choose ye an island!
5. Fortify it!
6. Dung it about with enginery of war!
7. I will give you a war-engine.
8. With it ye shall smite the peoples; and none shall stand before you.
9. Lurk! Withdraw! Upon them! this is the Law of the Battle of Conquest:
thus shall my worship be about my secret house.
10. Get the stélé of revealing itself; set it in thy secret temple—and that
temple is already aright disposed—& it shall be your Kiblah for ever. It

shall not fade, but miraculous colour shall come back to it day after day.
Close it in locked glass for a proof to the world.
11. This shall be your only proof. I forbid argument. Conquer! That is
enough. I will make easy to you the abstruction from the ill-ordered house
in the Victorious City. Thou shalt thyself convey it with worship, o prophet,
though thou likest it not. Thou shalt have danger & trouble. Ra-Hoor-Khu is
with thee. Worship me with fire & blood; worship me with swords & with
spears. Let the woman be girt with a sword before me: let blood flow to my
name. Trample down the Heathen; be upon them, o warrior, I will give you
of their flesh to eat!
12. Sacrifice cattle, little and big: after a child.
13. But not now.
14. Ye shall see that hour, o blessèd Beast, and thou the Scarlet Concubine
of his desire!
15. Ye shall be sad thereof.
16. Deem not too eagerly to catch the promises; fear not to undergo the
curses. Ye, even ye, know not this meaning all.
17. Fear not at all; fear neither men nor Fates, nor gods, nor anything.
Money fear not, nor laughter of the folk folly, nor any other power in
heaven or upon the earth or under the earth. Nu is your refuge as Hadit your
light; and I am the strength, force, vigour, of your arms.
18. Mercy let be off: damn them who pity! Kill and torture; spare not; be
upon them!
19. That stélé they shall call the Abomination of Desolation; count well its
name, & it shall be to you as 718.
20. Why? Because of the fall of Because, that he is not there again.
21. Set up my image in the East: thou shalt buy thee an image which I will
show thee, especial, not unlike the one thou knowest. And it shall be
suddenly easy for thee to do this.
22. The other images group around me to support me: let all be worshipped,
for they shall cluster to exalt me. I am the visible object of worship; the

others are secret; for the Beast & his Bride are they: and for the winners of
the Ordeal x. What is this? Thou shalt know.
23. For perfume mix meal & honey & thick leavings of red wine: then oil of
Abramelin and olive oil, and afterward soften & smooth down with rich
fresh blood.
24. The best blood is of the moon, monthly: then the fresh blood of a child,
or dropping from the host of heaven: then of enemies; then of the priest or
of the worshippers: last of some beast, no matter what.
25. This burn: of this make cakes & eat unto me. This hath also another use;
let it be laid before me, and kept thick with perfumes of your orison: it shall
become full of beetles as it were and creeping things sacred unto me.
26. These slay, naming your enemies; & they shall fall before you.
27. Also these shall breed lust & power of lust in you at the eating thereof.
28. Also ye shall be strong in war.
29. Moreover, be they long kept, it is better; for they swell with my force.
All before me.
30. My altar is of open brass work: burn thereon in silver or gold!
31. There cometh a rich man from the West who shall pour his gold upon
thee.
32. From gold forge steel!
33. Be ready to fly or to smite!
34. But your holy place shall be untouched throughout the centuries: though
with fire and sword it be burnt down & shattered, yet an invisible house
there standeth, and shall stand until the fall of the Great Equinox; when
Hrumachis shall arise and the double-wanded one assume my throne and
place. Another prophet shall arise, and bring fresh fever from the skies;
another woman shall awake the lust & worship of the Snake; another soul
of God and beast shall mingle in the globèd priest; another sacrifice shall
stain the tomb; another king shall reign; and blessing no longer be poured
To the Hawk-headed mystical Lord!

35. The half of the word of Heru-ra-ha, called Hoor-pa-kraat and Ra-HoorKhut.
36. Then said the prophet unto the God:
37. I adore thee in the song—
I am the Lord of Thebes, and I
The inspired forth-speaker of Mentu;
For me unveils the veilèd sky,
The self-slain Ankh-af-na-khonsu
Whose words are truth. I invoke, I greet
Thy presence, O Ra-Hoor-Khuit!
Unity uttermost showed!
I adore the might of Thy breath,
Supreme and terrible God,
Who makest the gods and death
To tremble before Thee:—
I, I adore thee!
Appear on the throne of Ra!
Open the ways of the Khu!
Lighten the ways of the Ka!
The ways of the Khabs run through
To stir me or still me!
Aum! let it fill me!
38. So that thy light is in me; & its red flame is as a sword in my hand to
push thy order. There is a secret door that I shall make to establish thy way
in all the quarters, (these are the adorations, as thou hast written), as it is
said:
The light is mine; its rays consume
Me: I have made a secret door
Into the House of Ra and Tum,
Of Kephra and of Ahathoor.
I am thy Theban, O Mentu,
The prophet Ankh-af-na-khonsu!
By Bes-na-Maut my breast I beat;

By wise Ta-Nech I weave my spell.
Show thy star-splendour, O Nuit!
Bid me within thine House to dwell,
O wingèd snake of light, Hadit!
Abide with me, Ra-Hoor-Khuit!
39. All this and a book to say how thou didst come hither and a
reproduction of this ink and paper for ever—for in it is the word secret &
not only in the English—and thy comment upon this the Book of the Law
shall be printed beautifully in red ink and black upon beautiful paper made
by hand; and to each man and woman that thou meetest, were it but to dine
or to drink at them, it is the Law to give. Then they shall chance to abide in
this bliss or no; it is no odds. Do this quickly!
40. But the work of the comment? That is easy; and Hadit burning in thy
heart shall make swift and secure thy pen.
41. Establish at thy Kaaba a clerk-house: all must be done well and with
business way.
42. The ordeals thou shalt oversee thyself, save only the blind ones. Refuse
none, but thou shalt know & destroy the traitors. I am Ra-Hoor-Khuit; and I
am powerful to protect my servant. Success is thy proof: argue not; convert
not; talk not over much! Them that seek to entrap thee, to overthrow thee,
them attack without pity or quarter; & destroy them utterly. Swift as a
trodden serpent turn and strike! Be thou yet deadlier than he! Drag down
their souls to awful torment: laugh at their fear: spit upon them!
43. Let the Scarlet Woman beware! If pity and compassion and tenderness
visit her heart; if she leave my work to toy with old sweetnesses; then shall
my vengeance be known. I will slay me her child: I will alienate her heart: I
will cast her out from men: as a shrinking and despised harlot shall she
crawl through dusk wet streets, and die cold and an-hungered.
44. But let her raise herself in pride! Let her follow me in my way! Let her
work the work of wickedness! Let her kill her heart! Let her be loud and
adulterous! Let her be covered with jewels, and rich garments, and let her
be shameless before all men!
45. Then will I lift her to pinnacles of power: then will I breed from her a
child mightier than all the kings of the earth. I will fill her with joy: with my

force shall she see & strike at the worship of Nu: she shall achieve Hadit.
46. I am the warrior Lord of the Forties: the Eighties cower before me, &
are abased. I will bring you to victory & joy. I will be at your arms in battle
& ye shall delight to slay. Success is your proof; courage is your armour; go
on, go on, in my strength; & ye shall turn not back for any!
47. This book shall be translated into all tongues: but always with the
original in the writing of the Beast; for in the chance shape of the letters and
their position to one another: in these are mysteries that no Beast shall
divine. Let him not seek to try: but one cometh after him, whence I say not,
who shall discover the Key of it all. Then this line drawn is a key: then this
circle squared in its failure is a key also. And Abrahadabra. It shall be his
child & that strangely. Let him not seek after this; for thereby alone can he
fall from it.
48. Now this mystery of the letters is done, and I want to go on to the holier
place.
49. I am in a secret fourfold word, the blasphemy against all gods of men.
50. Curse them! Curse them! Curse them!
51. With my Hawk's head I peck at the eyes of Jesus as he hangs upon the
cross.
52. I flap my wings in the face of Mohammed & blind him.
53. With my claws I tear out the flesh of the Indian and the Buddhist,
Mongol and Din.
54. Bahlasti! Ompehda! I spit on your crapulous creeds.
55. Let Mary inviolate be torn upon wheels: for her sake let all chaste
women be utterly despised among you!
56. Also for beauty's sake and love's!
57. Despise also all cowards; professional soldiers who dare not fight, but
play; all fools despise!
58. But the keen and the proud, the royal and the lofty; ye are brothers!
59. As brothers fight ye!
60. There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.

61. There is an end of the word of the God enthroned in Ra's seat,
lightening the girders of the soul.
62. To Me do ye reverence! to me come ye through tribulation of ordeal,
which is bliss.
63. The fool readeth this Book of the Law, and its comment; & he
understandeth it not.
64. Let him come through the first ordeal, & it will be to him as silver.
65. Through the second, gold.
66. Through the third, stones of precious water.
67. Through the fourth, ultimate sparks of the intimate fire.
68. Yet to all it shall seem beautiful. Its enemies who say not so, are mere
liars.
69. There is success.
70. I am the Hawk-Headed Lord of Silence & of Strength; my nemyss
shrouds the night-blue sky.
71. Hail! ye twin warriors about the pillars of the world! for your time is
nigh at hand.
72. I am the Lord of the Double Wand of Power; the wand of the Force of
Coph Nia—but my left hand is empty, for I crushed an Universe; & nought
remains.
73. Paste the sheets from right to left and from top to bottom: then behold!
74. There is a splendour in my name hidden and glorious, as the sun of
midnight is ever the son.
75. The ending of the words is the Word Abrahadabra.
The Book of the Law is Written
and Concealed.
Aum. Ha.

THE COMMENT
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.

The study of this Book is forbidden. It is wise to destroy this copy after
the first reading.
Whosoever disregards this does so at his own risk and peril. These are
most dire.
Those who discuss the contents of this Book are to be shunned by all, as
centres of pestilence.
All questions of the Law are to be decided only by appeal to my writings,
each for himself.
There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.
Love is the law, love under will.
—THE PRIEST OF THE PRINCES
ANKH-AF-AN-KHONSU

A PARAPHRASE OF THE INSCRIPTIONS UPON THE OBVERSE OF THE STÉLÉ OF
REVEALING

Above, the gemmèd azure is
The naked splendour of Nuit;
she bends in ecstasy to kiss
The secret ardours of Hadit.
The wingèd globe, the starry blue
Are mine, o Ankh-af-na-Khonsu.
I am the Lord of Thebes, and I
The inspired forth-speaker of Mentu;
For me unveils the veilèd sky,
The self-slain Ankh-af-an-Khonsu.
Whose words are truth. I invoke, greet
Thy presence, O Ra-Hoor-Khuit
Unity uttermost showed!
I adore the might of Thy breath,
Supreme and terrible God,
Who makest the gods and death

To tremble before Thee:—
I, I adore thee!
Appear on the throne of Ra!
Open the ways of the Khu
Lighten the ways of the Ka!
The ways of the Khabs run through
To stir me or still me
Aum! let it fill me!
The Light is mine; its rays consume
Me: I have made a secret door
Into the House of Ra and Tum,
Of Khephra, and of Ahathoor.
I am thy Theban, O Mentu,
The prophet Ankh-af-an-Khonsu!
By Bes-na-Maut my breast I beat;
By wise Ta-Nech I weave my spell.
Show thy star-splendour, O Nuith
Bid me within thine House to dwell,
o wingèd snake of light, Hadit!
Abide with me, Ra-Hoor-Khuit!

A PARAPHRASE OF THE HIEROGLYPHS OF THE 11 LINES UPON THE REVERSE OF THE
STÉLÉ

Saith of Mentu the truth-telling brother
Who was master of Thebes from his birth:
O heart of me, heart of my mother!
O heart which I had upon earth!
Stand not thou up against me a witness!
Oppose me not, judge, in my quest!
Accuse me not now of unfitness
Before the Great God, the dread Lord of the West!
For I fastened the one to the other
With a spell for their mystical girth,
The earth and the wonderful West,

When I flourishied, O earth, on thy breast!
The dead man Ankh-af-an-Khonsu
Saith with his voice of truth and calm:
O thou that hast a single arm!
O thou that glitterest in the moon!
I weave thee in the spinning charm;
I lure thee with the billowy tune.
The dead man Ankh-af-an-Khonsu
Hath parted from the darkling crowds,
Hath joined the dwellers of the light,
Opening Duant, the star-abodes,
Their keys receiving.
The dead man Ankh-af-an-Khonsu
Hath made his passage into night,
His pleasure on the earth to do
Among the living.

CHAPTER FOUR

THE PENTAGRAM RITUALS
…Equilibrium is the basis of the Work. If thou thyself hast not a sure
foundation, whereon wilt thou stand to direct the forces of Nature?
…Establish thyself firmly in the equilibrium of forces, in the centre of
the Cross of the Elements, that Cross from whose centre the Creative
Word issued in the birth of the dawning Universe.
Be thou therefore prompt and active as the Sylphs, but avoid frivolity
and caprice; be energetic and strong like the Salamanders, but avoid
irritability and ferocity; be flexible and attentive to images like the
Undines, but avoid idleness and changeability; be laborious and patient
like the Gnomes, but avoid grossness and avarice.
So shalt thou gradually develop the powers of thy soul, and fit thyself
to command the Spirits of the elements, For wert thou to summon the
Gnomes to pander to thine avarice, thou wouldst no longer command
them, but they would command thee. Wouldst thou abuse the pure beings
of the woods and mountains to fill thy coffers and satisfy thy hunger of
Gold? Wouldst thou debase the Spirits of Living Fire to serve thy wrath
and hatred?
Wouldst thou violate the purity of the Souls of the Waters to pander to
thy lust of debauchery? Whouldst thou force the Spirits of the Evening
Breeze to minister to thy folly and caprice? Know that with such desires
thou canst but attract the Weak, not the Strong, and in that case the Weak
will have power over thee.
—LIBER LIBRAE

T

he first task of the magician is to master his or
her immediate environment. “If thou thyself
hast not a sure foundation, whereon wilt thou
stand to direct the forces of Nature?”1 On the

mundane plane this means the ability to provide materially for yourself (and
your family if that is your situation) in such a manner as to allow you to
also pursue your spiritual disciplines. This is no mean task, and I doff my
magical cap to anyone who can achieve such a lifestyle.
Our immediate environment is the phenomenal universe, the
microcosm, the “little universe,” of which the mental world forms the
foundation. The key to the mastery of this world is the Pentagram.
Obviously the “magical” elements are not those that appear on the
periodic table of elements of modern chemistry (although they could be
called the building blocks of matter). Neither are they fire, water, air, and
earth as is commonly understood (although their fundamental nature are
manifested perfectly in their literal counterparts).
Perhaps the simplest way for us to understand elements is to think of
them as the sum of all energies, powers and properties of the universe
categorized by characteristics into four general classes: Fire, Water, Air, and
Earth.
For example, if a modern physicist were to use the picturesque language
of the ancients to describe the four fundamental forces of nature, he might
say the strong force is Fire, the electromagnetic force is Water, the weak
force is Air, and the gravitational force is Earth. Or the chemist might
classify nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon in the same order because
of the characteristics these elements exhibit.
The Qabalist (and consequently the Magician) sees the elements as
reflections of the four qabalistic worlds2 and the four letters of the
Tetragrammaton IHVH, (
)—Yod, the Father-Fire; Heh, the MotherWater; Vau, the Son-Air; and Heh (final), the Daughter-Earth. These in turn
are represented in the tarot as the four suits: Wands-Fire, Cups-Water,
Swords-Air, and Disks-Earth.
The reader may be asking at this point why the Pentagram, a five
pointed figure, would be the key to the mastery of the four Elements. The
answer lies in the dual operation performed by a “quintessential” fifth
element. This element is simultaneously responsible for 1) binding the other
elements together to form the infinite variety of the universe, and 2)
keeping them separated enough to maintain their essential individual
characteristics (see figure 1, page 53). This fifth element is known in
Western Hermeticism as Spirit, and the Qabalists represent it by the letter
Shin ( ). When inserted in the ineffable name IHVH (Jehovah) it becomes

IHShVH (Jeheshua). We will later see how this dual nature of Spirit
manifests as two types of Pentagram, active and passive.

Figure 1. The Pentagram
The perpetual combination and recombination of these elements is the
very process of “creation.” From the very beginning of the magician's
career, he or she must consciously take part in this divine juggling3 act and
endeavor to correct any elemental imbalance in his or her life. This is not
easy; but without this fundamental balance, we can never hope to
successfully conquer what lies beyond the world of the elements.
To reconcile the magical formulae of the classic Pentagram rituals with
those of the Aeon of Horus, Crowley designed two rituals: Liber XXV,4 The
Star Ruby and Liber V vel Reguli. Both ceremonies are short and simple in
construction, and can be memorized and performed almost immediately.
The beginning student, however, is encouraged to be intimately familiar
with the traditional Pentagram rituals before exclusively adopting these two
ceremonies as his or her own. The reasons should be obvious.

1) Like every Thelemic Ritual we will discuss the components of the Star
Ruby and Reguli (God names, gestures, words, signs, etc.) conform to the
formulae of the new aeon. These, as we have discussed above, evolved
from the formulae of the previous aeons. If the magician does not have a
basic grasp of the old formulae there is little chance he or she will
understand the subtleties of the new.
2) To successfully invoke or banish the various elements, the magician
needs to know how to correctly “draw” twelve different Pentagrams: one
each to banish and invoke each of the four elements, and one each to banish
and invoke each of the two varieties (active and passive) of Spirit (see
figure 2, below). To be prepared to wield the power of the Pentagram in the
rituals of the Star Ruby and Reguli, it is absolutely necessary that the
magician have a total and unambiguous mastery and understanding of these
twelve diagrams.
As you can see, a simple rule of thumb is invoke toward and banish away
from the element in question.
For practical workings these Pentagrams must not only be memorized
but imprinted firmly upon the unconscious mind. It is not an exaggeration
to warn that you must be able to draw the appropriate Pentagrams in your
sleep—for once you have seriously embarked upon magical practices, you
may be called upon to do just that.
Those familiar with the tarot will recall that, in traditional decks, the
four Kerubic Beasts of Ezekiel are placed in exactly the same positions in
the corners of The Wheel of Fortune and the World cards. The Lion (LeoFire) in the lower right-hand corner, the Eagle (Scorpio-Water) in the upper
right-hand corner, the Man (Aquarius-Air) in the upper left hand corner, and
the Bull (Taurus-Earth) in the lower left-hand corner. When first studying
the Pentagram it is helpful to visually create the Wheel of Fortune card in
the mind's eye and simply “draw” the appropriate star upon it, rather than
trying to memorize all the varieties of Pentagram.

Figure 2. Invoking and Banishing Pentagrams
In the Star Ruby, Crowley assumes that the magician has mastered all
the Pentagrams so thoroughly that he or she can simply create a Pentagram
“…aright in thy forehead” and hurl it toward the appropriate quarter. It is
only reasonable to conclude that if you aren't truly the master of the
Pentagram, the star you hurl forth from your forehead will be anemic and
ineffectual. To prepare for such command of the elements it is necessary to
memorize and perfect the two fundamental rituals from which the Star Ruby
and Reguli are derived; the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram, and the Greater
Ritual of the Pentagram. The magical education these two ceremonies
provide is the key to the power of the Thelemic rituals which follow.

The Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram
Crowley had great respect for the simple Pentagram ritual. In a footnote to
Palace of the World,5 he wrote the following:
Those who regard this ritual as a mere device to invoke or banish
spirits, are unworthy to possess it. Properly understood, it is the
Medicine of Metals and the Stone of the Wise.
The Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram should proceed any magical working or
divinatory exercise. It is the magical equivalent of cleaning, vacuuming,
and dusting the temple before operating. Only one type of Pentagram is
used (Banishing Earth), and the ceremony is very brief. It provides, perhaps

for the first time, the opportunity for the magician to create a magical
environment.
This simple ritual is useful in many other ways as well. It grounds the
magician and establishes a protective circle of operation. If done regularly
the magician will develop his or her powers of visualization and
concentration by drawing the Pentagrams and invoking the archangelic
guardians.
Note: The direction in which the Magician moves in a ritual is very
important. The basic rule of thumb is: move with the Sun (clockwise) to
invoke, move against the Sun (counter-clockwise) to banish. Clockwise is
referred to as deosil, and counter-clockwise is called widdershins. Although
the above formula is never abrogated, there are many rituals which appear,
at first glance, to ignore the rules. Even the simple Lesser Banishing Ritual
of the Pentagram instructs the magician to move deosil around the circle. A
little meditation upon this seeming contradiction will reveal to the student
that the four quarters are properly banished by drawing the Banishing Earth
Pentagrams, but the circle remains sealed and guarded by the four
archangels who are invoked into their places by the deosil movement of the
magician.
In more complex rituals, the logic behind the dictated direction of
movement will be harder to fathom, but it is very important for each
magician to reason out to his or her satisfaction the “method” behind the
“madness.”

THE LESSER RITUAL
OF THE

PENTAGRAM6

Banishing Earth Pentagram

1. Touching the forehead, say Ateh (Unto Thee).
2. Touching the breast, say Malkuth (The Kingdom).
3. Touching the right shoulder, say ve-Geburah (and the Power).
4. Touching the left shoulder, say ve-Gedulah (and the Glory).
5. Clasping the hands upon the breast, say le-OLAHM, AMEN, (To the
Ages, Amen).7
6. Turning to the East, make a pentagram (that of Earth) with the proper
weapon (usually the Wand). Say (i.e., vibrate) IHVH (Ye-ho-wau).
7. Turning to the South, the same, but say ADNI (Adonai).
8. Turning to the West, the same, but say AHIH (Eheieh).
9. Turning to the North, the same, but say AGLA (Agla).

10. Extend the arms in the form of a cross say (see Sign of Osiris Slain in
figure 3a on page 59),
11. Before me, Raphael;
12. Behind me, Gabriel;
13. On my right hand, Michael.
14. On my left hand, Auriel;8
15. For about me flames the Pentagram,
16. And in the Column stands the six-rayed Star.9
17-21. Repeat the Qabalistic Cross (1 to 5).

Figure 3a. L.V. X. Sig

Figure 3b. N. O. X. Signs.

Figure 3c. Signs of the Grades.

Figure 3d. Signs of the Grades (continued).

VIBRATION OF THE DIVINE NAMES
Once the Lesser Banishing ritual of the Pentagram has been committed to
memory the magician should then learn to “vibrate” the Divine Names in
the quarters rather than simply say them. Crowley gave detailed instructions
in Part III of Liber O from which we quote:

a) Stand with arms outstretched.10
b) Breathe in deeply through the nostrils, imagining the name of the God
desired entering with the breath.
c) Let that name descend slowly from the lungs to the heart, the solar
plexus, the navel, the generative organs, and so to the feet.
d) The moment that it appears to touch the feet, quickly advance the left
foot about 12 inches, throw forward the body, and let the hands (drawn back
to the side of the eyes) shoot out, so that you are standing in the typical
position of the God Horus,11 and at the same time imagine the Name as
rushing up and through the body, while you breathe it out through the
nostrils with the air which has been till then retained in the lungs. All this
must be done with all the force of which your are capable.
e) Then withdraw the left foot, and place the right forefinger12 upon the
lips, so that you are in the characteristic position of the God Harpocrates.
f) It is a sign that the student is performing this correctly when a single
“Vibration” entirely exhausts his physical strength. It should cause him to
grow hot all over or to perspire violently, and it should so weaken him that
he will find it difficult to remain standing.
It is a sign of success, though only by the student himself is it perceived,
when he hears the name of God vehemently roared forth, as if by the
concourse of ten thousand thunders; and it should appear to him as if that
Great Voice proceeded from the Universe, and not from himself.

NOTES ON THE RITUAL OF THE PENTAGRAM
by Aleister Crowley

You are supposed to be standing at the intersection of the paths of Samekh
and Pé. You are facing Tiphareth (the Sun), thus on your right hand is
Netzach (Venus) on your left hand Hod (Mercury), and behind you Yesod
(the Moon).
You take one step with the right heel in the hollow of the left foot
towards Tiphareth and vibrate the Divine Name as given in the ritual. You
then carry round the point of the Wand towards Netzach, then take a step
again (always recovering after each forward step so that you remain in the
centre) and vibrating the Divine Name as before.
Continue the process facing Yesod and vibrating; then Hod, and
vibrating; but carry the point of the Wand round to Tiphareth so as to
complete the circle.
As you vibrate the Divine Name the angels, as given in the ritual,
appear, (note well that they should appear and if the ritual is properly
performed do appear).
You are thus standing in a Column which is protected by your
microcosmic invocation. The consequent result, being macrocosmic
response, is that without any effort on your part the hexagram or sixfold star
appears both above and below you. (Note the equilibration 5 = 6.)
In this way you are completely shut off from the outer and Qliphotic
parts of the universe.
Get well into your mind the realization of this Column with its
surrounding pentagrams and its hexagrams above and below you.

Continuous practice is essential if you are to perform this ritual as you
should.
It is particularly important not to slur any part of it; to visualize clearly
and cleanly the forces invoked, with the exception of the Divine Being, who
will not appear, in the ordinary course of events, for such slight cause.
You can figure out for yourself the forms of the angels, or rather
archangels. For instance, Raphael commencing with an “R” will have a
head of solar glory and the Pé which follows shows that the rest of him is
martial: the “Al” which concludes the name (in the case of most angelic
beings) indicates that they wield the sword and the balance.
Once the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram and the vibrations of the God
Names have been perfected the student should then master all the
variations13 of the Greater Ritual of the Pentagram. Unlike the Lesser
Pentagram Ritual which provides a simple cleansing and centering function,
this ceremony taps a far deeper strata of the elemental world and is the key
to the opening and closing of what is known as the Elemental Watchtowers
of the Universe. The basic formula embodied in the Greater Ritual also
provides the fundamental knowledge necessary for the practice of other
branches of the art, including Enochian Magick and Goetia.
The version appearing below is the simplest format constructed from
the information outlined in Crowley's Liber O. More elaborate versions
utilizing additional material such as Enochian words and the Kerubic
symbols of the zodiac can be found in numerous other texts, but I feel the
student would be best served by mastering the essentials first.
The first thing one notices about the Greater Pentagram Ritual is its
similarity to the Lesser Ritual. It opens with the same Qabalistic Cross and
ends with the same invocation of the Archangels. But here the similarity
ends.
Each quarter is ruled by a different element (East-Air, South-Fire, WestWater, and North Earth14) and each is activated by two Pentagrams.
The first is a Spirit Pentagram [an active Pentagram in the quarters of
the active elements of Air (East) and Fire (South); and a passive Pentagram
in the quarters of the passive elements of Water (West) and Earth (North)].
By correctly creating this Pentagram, the magician unlocks the door to the

elemental universe and announces to the spiritual inhabitants of each
quarter his or her authority to command them.
The second is the elemental Pentagram of the quarter (Air in the East,
Fire in the South, Water in the West, and Earth in the North). By correctly
creating this Pentagram, the magician exercises that authority to either
invoke or banish the elemental spirits of the quarter.
After each of these Pentagrams is “drawn,” the magician then
symbolically proclaims his or her dominion of the quarter by making the
proper sign or gesture appropriate to the element in question. These
gestures (which are described in the text of the ritual) are the characteristic
Signs of the Grades of the original Golden Dawn Degree structure (see
figure 3c on page 61):
(The Grade of the Portal, is particularly attributed to the element of
Spirit; it refers to the Sun; the paths of Samech, Resh, and Tzaddi
are attributed to this degree. See “777” lines 6 and 31 bis).
(The Grade of 4° = 7 is particularly attributed to the element Fire; it
refers to the Planet Venus; the paths of Qoph, Ayin and Pé are
attributed to this degree. For other attributions see “777” lines 7 and
31).
(The Grade of 3° = 8 is particularly attributed to the element of
Water; it refers to the planet Mercury; the paths of Resh and Shin
are attributed to this degree. For other attributions see “777” lines 8
and 23).
(The Grade of 2° = 9 is particularly attributed to the element Air; it
refers to the Moon, the path of Tau is attributed to this degree. For
other attributions see “777” lines 9 and 11).
(The Grade of 1° = 10 is particularly attributed to the element of
Earth. See “777” lines 10 and 32 bis).15
It is important to always remember that, on the magical plane, symbols are
living things, and living things are symbols. Therefore it is essential that the
signs be made properly and with the full intent of the magician of
transforming his or her body into a living symbol. In the Greater Ritual of
the Pentagram, these signs are indicative of the elements, but in more

advanced rituals they can represent even greater and more profound
concepts.
The version which follows is formatted for a general invocation of each
element in its appropriate quarter. A comparable banishing ceremony is
accomplished by following the same procedure but utilizing Banishing
Pentagrams. Even though a great deal of elemental energy is generated by
this ritual, it is done safely because the active and passive nature of the
elements and their position in the circle tend to balance each other off quite
nicely. (Active Air in the East is balanced by passive Water in the West,
active Fire in the South is balanced by passive Earth in the North.)

THE GREATER RITUAL
OF THE

PENTAGRAM

1. Touching the forehead, say Ateh (Unto Thee).
2. Touching the breast, say Malkuth (The Kingdom).
3. Touching the right shoulder, say ve-Geburah (and the Power).
4. Touching the left shoulder, say ve-Gedulah (and the Glory).
5. Clasping the hand upon the breast, say le-OLAHM, AMEN (To the
Ages, Amen).
6. In the East make Invoking Equilibrated Active Pentagram of Spirit.
7. Vibrate Eheieh.
8. Give Active sign of the Portal.16
9. Make Invoking Pentagram of Air.

10. Vibrate YHVH.
11. Give the signs of 2° = 9 [Stretch both arms upwards and outwards, the
elbows bent at right angles, the hands bent back, the palms upwards as if
supporting a weight.]
12. Travel deosil (clockwise) and carry point to the South and make
Invoking Equilibrated Active Pentagram of Spirit.
13. Vibrate Eheieh.
14. Give active sign of the Portal.
15. Make Invoking Pentagram of Fire.
16. Vibrate Elohim. 17
17. Give signs of 4° = 7 [Raise the arms above the head and join the hands,
so that the tips of the fingers and of the thumbs meet, formulating a
triangle.]
18. Travel deosil and carry point to the West and make Invoking
Equilibrated Passive Pentagram of Spirit.
19. Vibrate Agla.
20. Give passive sign of the Portal.
21. Make Invoking Pentagram of Water.
22. Vibrate Al.18
23. Give sign of 3° = 8 . [Raise the arms until the elbows are on a level
with the shoulders, bring the hands across the chest, touching the thumbs
and tips of fingers so as to form a triangle apex downwards.]
24. Travel deosil and carry point to the North and make Invoking
Equilibrated Passive Pentagram of Spirit.
25. Vibrate Agla.
26. Give passive sign of the Portal.
27. Make Invoking Pentagram of Earth.
28. Vibrate Adonai.

29. Give sign of 1° = 10 . [Advance the right foot, stretch out the right hand
upwards and forwards, the left hand downwards and backwards, the palms
open.]
30. Travel deosil and return point to the East.
31. Repeat 1-5.
Ceremonies to invoke or banish a specific element can be constructed by
opening and closing as above, but instead of going through the entire
sequence of actions, the magician simply turns to the appropriate quarter
and proceeds with the Pentagrams, Signs, and Names applicable to the
desired element.
As the magician's understanding of the theories and processes evolves,
he or she will design more complex and elaborate variations of the Greater
Pentagram Ritual to access the elemental energies for more specific magical
purposes, such as the consecration of the magical weapons or the charging
of talismans.

CHAPTER FIVE

THE THELEMIC RITUALS OF THE
PENTAGRAM
Stooping down, dipping my wings, I came unto the darkly-splendid abodes.
There in that formless abyss was I made a partaker of the Mysteries Averse.
—LIBER LXV

s stated earlier, mastery of the Lesser and
Greater Rituals of the Pentagram provides
the Magician with the key to the
microcosmic, elemental universe. Logically
one would think the next task would be to gain mastery of the macrocosmic
universe represented in nature by the seven planets of the ancients. In
Western Hermeticism this “Greater World” is symbolically depicted as a
hexagram with the Sun in the center and the six remaining planets—Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Luna—positioned at each point.
Mastery of the Hexagram rituals has traditionally been the next step in the
magician's career.1
The influence of the elemental formula does not end at the borders of
the microcosm. Indeed, it continues to be infused into all levels of
consciousness. The most striking example of this elemental influence upon
the macrocosm can be found in the Enochian magical records of Dr. John
Dee.
In the Enochian view of the universe, each of the thirty Aethyrs, or
macrocosmic heavens2, is ruled by three Governors.3 Curiously, the names
of these celestial Governors are derived from the four microcosmic
elemental tablets of the system, demonstrating a continuing and
fundamental influence of the elemental formulae throughout the
macrocosm.

A

Clearly there exists an untapped form of universal Pentagram which
operates simultaneously upon both the microcosmic and macrocosmic
planes, and that the newly released energies of the new aeon make magical
access to these formulae now possible. To activate this vastly higher order
of elemental power, Crowley created two rituals: (1) Liber XXV, The Star
Ruby, and (2) Liber V vel Reguli. As Thelemic hybrids of the Lesser and
Greater Pentagram Rituals, they function as ceremonial exercises to invoke
the energies of the Aeon of Horus.
In these two ceremonies the focus of the magician's consciousness is
shifted from the Earth to the Sun; from the human to the Divine. No longer
do we view ourselves as standing upon the surface of the Earth (with its
four quarters ruled by the terrestrial winds), or even at the intersection of
Samekh and Pé. We now identify ourselves with the Sun, surrounded by the
zodiacal belt.
In both rituals the divine names attributed to the four quarters have
become overtly Thelemic. The Star Ruby retains the same active/passive
positions established in the Greater Ritual of the Pentagram; the active/male
deities (Therion and Hadit) are positioned in the active quarters (East and
South, and the passive/female deities (Babalon and Nuit) are positioned in
the passive quarters (West and North).
In Liber V vel Reguli the zodiacal landmarks of the four quarters are the
fixed or Kerubic signs: Taurus/Earth in the East; Aquarius/Air in the North;
Scorpio/Water in the West; and Leo/Fire in the South.4 Of the triplicity of
signs, the Fixed signs are the most characteristically representative of the
elements.5

Thelemic Holy Words and Divine Names
Before we proceed to the rituals themselves, let us take just a few moments
and examine the various Holy Words and Divine Names unique to the
Magick of Thelema.
To fathom transcendental concepts, one must possess transcendental
illumination. Consequently the Holy Words and Divine Names of the
Thelemic pantheon defy adequate literary definition. As the magician's
initiatory career evolves, so too will his or her capacity to understand and
exploit the divine principles represented by the words. I do not presume to
offer, nor am I capable of establishing, orthodox definitions of these terms. I

have even been counseled (by those whose opinions I highly respect) that
anything I say on the matter will be pitifully inadequate, and will ultimately
serve only to limit the reader's understanding. While I wholeheartedly agree
this is true, I am also convinced that the reader, if warned that the notes that
follow are the flawed, incomplete, and inaccurate thoughts of one who has
not yet achieved any significant level of illumination, he or she may
nevertheless appreciate a starting point for further study and meditation.
NUIT
See Liber AL vel Legis (especially Chapter I).
The First Deity of the Thelemic Trinity; traditionally the Egyptian
Goddess of the night sky. She is the “…star-goddess, who is the category of
unlimited possibility.”6 Upon the Stélé of Revealing, and in Egyptian art,
She is depicted as an azure goddess, tall and slender, arching over the earth.
(Similar in appearance to the Greek letter Ω.) She is conceptualized as the
infinity of an ultimately expanded universe (the circumference of the
circle). All things, therefore, are contained within her body. Qabalists may
wish to consider the similarities to the Second Veil of the Negative
proceeding Kether, AIN SOPH (No Limit).
HADIT
See Liber AL vel Legis (especially Chapter II).
The Second Deity of the Thelemic Trinity. Lover of Nuit. He is depicted
on the Stélé of Revealing as a winged globe at the heart of Nuit. He is
conceptualized as the infinity of an ultimately contracted universe; the point
in the center of the circle. He is “…the ubiquitous point of view, the only
philosophically tenable conception of Reality.”7 (Perhaps the concept of the
pre “Big-Bang” negative singularity postulated by modern physics.)
Qabalists may wish to consider the similarities to the First Veil of the
Negative proceeding Kether, AIN (Nothing).
RA HOOR KHUIT
See Liber AL vel Legis (especially Chapter III).
The Third Deity of the Thelemic Trinity. The Crowned and Conquering
Child of the union of Nuit and Hadit. As Nuit's expansion and Hadit's
contraction are both infinite, so too must be their points of contact. This
infinite contact creates the basis of possible vibration, (their Child Horus);
the field of operation in which the universe can manifest. “He is, however,
known under his special name, Heru-ra-ha. A double god; his extraverted

form is Ra-hoor-khuit; and his passive or introverted form Hoor-pa-kraat.”8
Spelling variations found in Liber AL vel Legis include Ra Hoor Khut and
Ra Hoor Khu, and are indicative of important facets of the Deity.
Qabalists may wish to consider the similarities to the Third Veil of the
Negative proceeding Kether, AIN SOPH AUR (Limitless Light); also
Kether itself. In one respect He is the fundamental archetype of the GodMan, and the Holy Guardian Angel.
THERION AND BABALON
See Liber AL vel Legis (especially references to the Beast & Scarlet
Woman).
It is clear that from an early age Crowley was spiritually and
psychologically traumatized as the result of his family's fanatical embrace
of Christian fundamentalism. It was perhaps inevitable that an individual of
Crowley's genius would eventually rebel against the stifling restrictions,
and the threats of eternal torment with which such cults terrorize their
members. His childhood identification with the Beast 666 and his “Devil be
my God” bravado was his youthful declaration of independence, and for the
rest of his life he would continue to enjoy shocking the shockable with such
sacrileges. We must point out, however, that there are profound magical and
qabalistic significances to these “blasphemies” that Crowley so cavalierly
embraced in his youth, and these immeasurably overshadow his
mischievous preoccupation with thumbing his nose at Christianity.
The use of the names Therion (Greek for Beast) and Babalon (the
Scarlet Woman or Great Whore) is not unique in the annals of religious
nomenclature. Together they make their first and most notoriously
misunderstood appearance in The Book of the Revelation of John, the finale
of the New Testament. A superficial review of this book presents us with
what appears at first glance to be two shady, if not downright “evil,”
characters. But looks can be deceiving, and as is often the case with books
of the Bible, the villain of the exoteric story is frequently revealed to be the
hero of the esoteric interpretation.
There is no need to enter into the argument as to whether “Beast” refers
to the man Aleister Crowley, or to the “office” of the Beast, or to some
universal principal. At one time or another before his death, Crowley wrote
that they were all of the above.9 For our purposes we will simply attempt to

introduce the concepts by drawing parallels to ideas with which the reader
may already be acquainted:
Therion/Babalon as Chokmah/Binah—To the student of the Qabalah
the easiest way to begin to understand Therion and Babalon is to
conceptualize them as personifications of the second and third Sephiroth of
the Tree of Life, Chokmah and Binah, respectively.
The second Sephirah, Chokmah represents the original concept of
duality, and as such is the chaotic despoiler of the perfect unity of the first
Sephirah, Kether. Chaos is another title of Chokmah and in certain
Thelemic ritual is identified with Therion. Chokmah is also the Divine Will,
the Logos, the Word whose vibration is the creative essence of universe. As
the supernal Father, Chokmah/Therion is the archetype of the lingam, the
universal Male. As TO MEGA THERION10 (his motto as Magus 9°= 2▫),
Crowley is considered by Thelemites to be the Logos of the Aeon of Horus.
The third Sephirah, Binah represents the original reconciliation and
balance of the Divine Self (Kether) and the reflected Not Self (Chokmah).
She is viewed as the all-receptive mate of Chokmah and when they are
united the primal unity of Kether is realized. As Binah/Babalon resides just
above the Abyss, She eventually receives unto Herself the totality of the life
of the evolving universe. This universal life is symbolized as the “blood of
the Saints” which She gathers up into Her great cup (the Holy Graal). This
She shares with the Beast, and they unite in drunken ecstasy. Thus she is
called the Great Whore for in her “shamelessness” she receives all and
refuses none.
Therion/Babalon as Shiva/Shakti—To the student of the Yoga or
Tantric Buddhism, the easiest way to think about Therion and Babalon is to
conceptualize them as the two polar streams of creation, Shiva—the Divine
Will, the Logos, who manifests in creative union with His divine consort,
Shakti—the Divine Power and the underlying and secret force permeating
all of creation.
Babalon/Shakti is the passive, negative stream of nature. She is
magnetic and attracts to Herself, the potentiality of energy. This she absorbs
and stores up (the Holy Graal, the Cup of Babalon). When the
negative/feminine Shakti comes into proper contact with the
positive/masculine Shiva, a dynamic reaction occurs triggering the
transcendence of their individual polarity, transforming them into Brahma,

the changeless One. This is a most important aspect of Therion and Babalon
because it relates to natural energies and forces residing in our own bodies.
Slumbering in the form of a coiled serpent at the base of the human
spine is the Kundalini, a remnant of the universal Shakti. She has been
separated and exiled from Her Lord Shiva (who resides in the human skull)
by the very process of creation. The task of the Kundalini Yogi is to awaken
this sleeping Goddess and direct her ascent up the spine to eventual union
with Her Lord in the cranium.
But one does not have to be a Yogi or a Qabalist or a Ceremonial
Magician to achieve transcendental states of consciousness in the ecstasy of
lovemaking or to temporarily annihilate the ego in orgasm. These are
fundamental male/female realities of existence and consciousness, and they
are an integral part of cosmos from the lowest hell to the highest heaven.
More on this in Chapter Six.
AIWASS
See Liber AL vel Legis, Chapter I.
Alternate spelling AIWAZ. The “minister of Hoor-paar-kraat.”11 Praeter
human intelligence who dictated the three chapters of Liber AL vel Legis.
Aiwass is considered messenger of the Gods of the Aeon of Horus. Crowley
would eventually identify Aiwass as his own Holy Guardian Angel. I was
told by both Israel Regardie and Grady McMurtry that Crowley
acknowledged Aiwass in the Qabalistic Cross portion of the Pentagram
rituals as follows:
1. Touching the forehead, say Ateh (Unto Thee),
2. Touching the heart, say Aiwass,
3. Touching the genitals, say Malkuth (The Kingdom),
4. Touching the right shoulder, say ve-Geburah (and the Power),
5. Touching the left shoulder, say ve-Gedulah (and the Glory).
6. Clasping the hand upon the breast, say le-OLAHM, AMEN, (To the
Ages, Amen).
PAN
Greek for “All.” Originally the lusty and mischievous rustic God of
Thracian shepherds; His audacious and colorful personality captured the
imagination of the entire Hellenistic world, and established for Pan a
permanent place in Greek mythology. Pan is, however, more than a playful
imp. Even in the ancient myths one can see an underlying profundity to his

escapades that hint that Pan may be a deity of a far greater order than His
Olympian contemporaries. His name suggests that He is the Great All; the
God who transcends the gods. The “Comedy of Pan” is the singular reality
of life itself. For those of us who have not yet achieved the levels of
illumination necessary to perceive this greater reality, life is a dizzying
mixture of pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow. Finding one's True Will is the
key to embracing, then transcending these dualities and becoming an
ecstatic and enthusiastic player in the great Comedy of Pan.12 IO PAN is the
traditional invocation of Pan. I (the lingam) joined with O (the yoni) is a
simple yet explicit invitation for the God who transcends duality to couple
with the devotee.
ANKH-AF-NA-KHONSU
See Liber AL vel Legis, Chapters I & III.
Egyptian priest of the XXVth Dynasty.13 The Stélé of Revealing is the
funerary tablet of Ankh-af-na-Khonsu who reportedly painted it himself
upon stuccoed wood. He is depicted on the stélé standing at the table of
offerings before the God, Ra-Hoor-Khuit. Crowley claimed that as Ankh-afna-Khonsu, in a previous incarnation, he was responsible for initiating the
Aeon of Osiris.
LAShTAL
See essay following Liber V vel Reguli (page 100).
AGAPE
Love; in Greek enumerates to 93.
AUMGN
Thelemic expansion of OM (AUM) the creative vibration that sustains
the universe. By replacing M with the compound letters MGN (again 93),
Crowley felt the word more accurately represented the true processes of the
cycle of the universe.14
FIAOF
Thelemic expansion of IAO. Spelled
in Hebrew and FIAOF in
Greek (both 93). By adding a F as prefix and suffix of IAO, Crowley
considered it to be “…a proper hieroglyph of the Ritual of Self-Initiation in
this Aeon of Horus.”15
ABRAHADABRA

The great Magick Word of the Aeon of Horus. Volumes of
commentaries could be written on this word alone, and so I will not project
even the pretense of thoroughness in my comments. References to
ABRAHADABRA are found throughout Crowley's works but the reader is
especially encouraged to study “An Essay Upon Number” found in 777.16
Briefly, its eleven letters (five identical and six diverse) are illustrative
of the Great Work accomplished. It joins that which is above to that which
is below—the microcosmic world of 5 to the macrocosmic world of 6.
It enumerates to 418 the same as the Hebrew letter Cheth spelled in full.
The Path of Cheth crosses the Abyss, joining the fifth Sephirah, Geburah,
with the third Sephirah, Binah (the abode of Babalon). The tarot card
attributed to Cheth is the Charioteer who bears the Holy Graal across the
Abyss where it becomes the Cup of Babalon.
There are other names and words unique to Thelemic Magick which we
will discuss in later chapters. As I explained earlier, these are not orthodox
(or even adequate) definitions.

Thelemic Pentagram Ritual I
THE STAR RUBY
There are at least four published versions of The Star Ruby. Most of them
vary only slightly from one another. For our purposes we will use the
version which appears in BOOK IV, Part Three: Magick in Theory and
Practice.17 We have numbered each line for reference purposes.
It must be noted that the oldest version, which appeared in the 1913 first
edition of The Book of Lies,18 employs Greek Divine Names and other
variations that differ considerably from later versions. Crowley revised the
ritual in the 1920s to conform with Liber V vel Reguli, and to express his
expanded understanding of Thelemic cosmology. We have included the
information from this first version in the endnotes of the text and strongly
recommend that it be carefully studied.
The Star Ruby differs from the traditional Pentagram rituals in many
other ways besides the Divine Names (i.e., parts of the ceremony are in
Greek, the Pentagrams are imagined, not drawn, the magician moves
widdershins around the circle, etc.). Perhaps the most significant innovation
is the introduction of the invocation of Pan by the application of the N.O.X.

formula. This, more than any other part of the ritual, elevates The Star Ruby
above a simple banishing ritual by integrating the formula of the Supernal
Triad.19 The reader is encouraged to carefully study the notes which follow
the text of the ritual for greater insight on this most important aspect of
Thelemic Magick.
Referring to the Greek words employed in The Star Ruby, Crowley
wrote, “The secret sense of these words is to be sought in the numeration
thereof.” To help the student with further research, we have included a table
outlining the numerical equivalents of the Greek Alphabet (see Table 1,
page 81).
Table 1. Numerical Equivalents of the Greek Alphabet.
Greek Alphabet (upper case,
lower case)
A, α
B, β
Γ, γ
Δ, δ
E, ε
F
Z, ζ
H, η
Θ, θ
I, ι
K, κ
Λ, λ
M, μ
N, ν
Ξ, ξ
O, ο
Π, π
P, ρ

Numerical Value
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100

Σ, σ, ς
T, τ
Y, ν
Ф, Φ
X, χ
Ψ, ψ
Ω, ω

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900

LIBER XXV
THE STAR RUBY
A A Publication in Class D.

1. Facing East, in the centre, draw deep deep deep thy breath, closing thy
mouth with thy right forefinger prest against thy lower lip. Then dashing
down the hand with a great sweep back and out, expelling forcibly thy
breath, cry
AΠO ΠANTOΣ KAKOΔAIMONOΣ.
2. With the same forefinger touch thy forehead, and say ΣOI,
thy member, and say Ω ΦAΛΛE,

thy right shoulder, and say IΣXYPOΣ,
thy left shoulder, and say EYXAPIΣTOΣ;
then clasp thine hands, locking the fingers, and cry IAΩ.
3. Advance to the East. Imagine strongly a Pentagram, aright, in thy
forehead. Drawing the hands to the eyes, fling it forth, making the sign of
Horus and roar ΘHPION.20 Retire thine hand in the sign of Hoor-paarKraat.21
4. Go round to the North and repeat; but say NUIT.22
5. Go round to the West and repeat; but whisper BABALON.23
6. Go round to the South and repeat; but bellow HADIT.24
7. Completing the circle widdershins, retire to the centre and raise thy voice
in the Paian, with these words IΩ ΠAN, with the signs of N.O.X.
8. Extend the arms in the form of a Tau and say low but clear:
ΠPO MOY IYΓΓEΣ
OΠIΣΩ MOY TEΛETAPXAI
EΠI ΔEΞIA ΣYNOXEIΣ
EΠAPIΣTEPA ΔAIMONEΣ
ΦΛEΓEI ΓAP ΠEPI MOY O AΣTHP TΩN ΠENTE
KAI EN THI ΣTHΛHI Ω AΣTHP TΩN EΞ EΣTHKE.
9. Repeat the Cross Qabalistic, as above, and end as thou didst begin (1 and
2).

AUTHOR'S NOTES ON THE STAR RUBY
LIBER XXV, THE STAR RUBY: 25 is the square of 5 (the Pentagram).
The Fifth Sephirah is Geburah, whose color is red.
1) APO PANTOS KAKODAIMONOS (Away every evil Spirit!).
2) SOI (Unto you). O FALLE (O Phallus). ISCHUROS (Strong;
Strength). EUCHARISTOS (Eucharist; mystic feast; thanksgiving). I-A-O
(IAO, triune God of the Gnostics; codefined with INRI in various rituals as

a formula of resurrection; Isis (Nature) is ruined by Apophis (forces of
destruction/decay) then reborn as the resurrected Osiris).
3) THERION: “The Sign of Hoor-paar-Kraat”: Right forefinger or thumb
to lips. See Chapter Five. “The Sign of Horus” also known as the “Sign of
the Enterer.” It is described earlier in instructions on vibration of God
Names.
4) NUIT: See Chapter Five.
5) BABALON: See Chapter Five.
6) HADIT: See Chapter Five.
7) IO PAN: An Invocation of the Great All. See Chapter Five. N.O.X.: The
Night of Pan. Contrasted with L.V.X. (Light in Extension), N.O.X. could be
characterized as Light Withdrawn. It is the negative pulse of the
creation/dissolution cycle, much like the Vendantist concept of Pralaya, the
universal sleep that precedes and follows creation. Perhaps the most
significant characteristic of the magical formulae of the Aeon of Horus is
the recognition of this fundamental fact of life, and the joint application of
L.V.X. and N.O.X. in the initiatory career of the magician.
“The Signs of N.O.X.” are named Puella, Puer, Vir, and Mulier:
Puella (girl). Standing with the feet together, head bowed, left hand
shielding the Muladhara Cakkra (area of the groin), and right hand
shielding the breast (attitude of the Venus de Medici).
Puer (boy). Standing with feet together and head erect. Let right
hand (the thumb between the index and medius fingers) be raised,
the forearm vertical at a right angle with the upper arm, which is
horizontally extended in the line joining the shoulders. Let the left
hand, the thumb extended forwards and the fingers clenched, rest at
the junction of the thighs (attitude of the Gods Mentu, Khem, etc.).
Vir (man). The feet being together. The hands, with clenched
fingers and thumbs thrust out forwards, are held to the temples; the
head is then bowed and pushed out, as if to symbolize the butting of
an horned beast (attitude of Pan, Bacchus, etc.).

Mulier (wife). The feet are widely separated, and the arms raised so
as to suggest a crescent. The head is thrown back (attitude of
Baphomet, Isis in Welcome, the microcosm of Vitruvius).
8) PRO MOU IUGGES (Before me the Iynges25);
OPISO MOU TELETARCAI (behind me the Teletarch[ae]);
EPI DEXIA SYNOCEIS (on my right hand the Synoches);
EPARISTERA DAIMONES (on my left, the daemons26);
FLEGEI GAR PERI MOU O ASTHR TON PENTE (for about me
flames the Star of Five).
KAI EN THI STHLHI (and in the column);
O ASTHR TON EX ESTHKE (stands the Star of Six).

Thelemic Pentagram Ritual II
LIBER V VEL REGULI
Now we come to a Thelemic Pentagram ritual about which there is
considerable disagreement and controversy. Unthreateningly described as
“an incantation proper to invoke the Energies of the Aeon of Horus,
adapted for the daily use of the Magician of whatever grade,” its
ambiguities and mysteries nevertheless continue to challenge and intrigue
students.
Crowley's published comments on Reguli are sparse, so I have been
fortunate to have been allowed access to Crowley's notes and several
unpublished versions of the ritual which have been helpful in writing this
chapter.
Crowley introduces Reguli as “the Ritual of the Mark of the Beast,”
which to a great many people, especially those who think they understand
the Book of the Revelation of John, has a decidedly sinister ring to it. But,
as is usually the case with the nomenclature of Thelemic Magick, the
expression that evokes fear and loathing in the hearts of the profane, is
revealed to the wise to be a profound and spiritually wholesome arcanum.
To the Qabalist, the Mark of the Beast (Rev. 13:16) is the New
Testament development of the Mark of Cain (Gen. 4:15), which, contrary to
popular religious interpretation, is not the brand of a cursed sinner, but

instead represents the radiant seal of illumination in the forehead of the
Initiate. Graphically, the Mark of the Beast is represented in its most simple
form as the Sun and Moon27 united ( ) and, among other things, is the
symbol of Babalon and the Beast conjoined, and the Great Work
accomplished.
Therefore, as…an incantation proper to invoke the Energies of the Aeon
of Horus… the Ritual of the Mark of the Beast, if properly executed, serves
to rewire the psychic body of the magician to accommodate these higher
spiritual energies. In fact, the overt employment of the various chakras
makes Reguli as much a yogic exercise as a ritual of ceremonial Magick.
While roughly adhering to the basic format of the Pentagram rituals and
The Star Ruby, there are some fundamental and drastic differences that
distinguish Liber V vel Reguli. Some of these are obvious. Others I feel
need to be addressed.

The First Gesture
The Qabalistic Cross opening found in the previous rituals affirms the three
columns of the Tree of Life: the Middle Pillar (Ateh-Malkuth), the Pillar of
Severity (Geburah), and the Pillar of Mercy (Gedulah). In Reguli this as
been replaced by the “Vertical Component of the Enchantment,” which
affirms the Middle Pillar; and the three “Horizontal Components of the
Enchantment,” which affirms the three horizontal Paths which join the
Pillar of Severity to the Pillar of Mercy. “Thus shall he formulate the Sigil
of the Grand Hierophant.”
Incorporation of the horizontal Paths is perhaps the most notable
innovation of Reguli and sets it apart, fundamentally, from all other rituals
of the Pentagram. This is especially significant in light of the fact that
Crowley maintained that the Aeon of Horus activated the Path of Teth28
(the horizontal Path between fifth Sephirah, Geburah, and the fourth
Sephirah, Chesed) on the Universal Tree of Life. (See figure 4, page 88.)

Figure 4. The vertical and horizontal components of the enchantment
correspond to the Thelemic pantheon and relate directly to the Tree of Life
and the Seven Chakras. a) Sigil of the Grand Hierophant projected on the
Tree of Life; b) The Sigil of the Grand Hierophant created by the Vertical
and Horizontal Components of the Enchantment projected upon the Seven
Chakras.

The Second Gesture
Like the Lesser and the Greater Rituals of the Pentagram, the Pentagrams in
Reguli are drawn in the air. But unlike any of the previous ceremonies, the
Pentagrams employed in Reguli are described as “averse.”
Crowley was a master of the English language and averse is a very
curious word for him to use. What is an averse Pentagram? Is it upside
down? If so, inverted would be a much more accurate word. Is it upright
with the elemental positions reversed? Unfortunately Crowley published no
precise definition.
In 1978, I asked Israel Regardie what he thought Crowley meant. To my
disappointment he told me that he didn't know for certain, but believed
Crowley may have simply wished to shock and outrage the members of the
Golden Dawn whose fear of the inverted Pentagram bordered on phobia.29
Regardie recommended that I use the traditional upright invoking
Pentagrams. Other Crowley experts have been even less helpful on the
subject, suggesting everything from reversed upright Pentagrams to upside-

down Pentagrams formulated in the mind and hurled forth as in The Star
Ruby.

Figure 5. Averse Pentagrams.
The dictionary defines averse as “turned away or backward.” In botany
it refers to leaves which are turned away from the axis or main stem as
opposed to adverse in which the leaves turn toward the axis. By this
definition we might conclude that two Pentagrams, one upright and one
inverted, joined horizontally at the axis of their bases, could both be
considered averse to each other; we could also conclude (though with less
conviction) that two upright Pentagrams mirroring each other right to left
are also averse (see figure 5, above).
Following the qabalistic axiom of polarities (we are negative to the
plane above us, and positive to the plane below us), we might wish to
follow this line of reasoning a bit further. The two Pentagrams with the
horizontal axis could be projected upon the Tree of Life as shown in figure
6.

Figure 6. Two Pentagrams with the horizontal axis upon the Tree of Life.
Granted this arrangement leaves poor Malkuth dangling, (a position not
without qabalistic precedence) but everything else fits quite nicely. Using
the Path of Teth as the base line, all three horizontal paths so important to
Liber V vel Reguli are represented. Also note the two tetrahedrons formed
by this arrangement.

Figure 7. Four averse Pentagrams upon the Tree of Life.
Another method is to project all four averse Pentagrams upon the tree as
shown in figure 7, above. Here we see that the Path of Teth, is unique

among the three horizontal paths. Like a looking glass, it is the point of
reflection; the pivotal axis to all four averse Pentagrams.
Once the four are superimposed upon the Tree, we discover that they
form a double version of Crowley's Unicursal Hexagram, the Hexagram of
the Beast, which is traced in line 20 of the Second Gesture of Reguli (see
figure 8).

Figure 8. Four averse Pentagrams forming Unicursal Hexagrams.
The student wishing to pursue this line of speculation further can
construct Pentagrams based on the Universe card, the five of disks from
Crowley's Thoth30 Tarot deck, the elemental format of those used in the
Greater Ritual of the Pentagram, or by projecting the Pentagrams upon the
Tree of Life, according to the elemental rulership of the Sephiroth. Viewed
in relation to other Thelemic rituals, especially The Star Sapphire, there are
even subtler and more complex considerations to be weighed, including the
concept of employing the N.O.X. formula to access an averse (or reversed)
Tree of Life.
Speculation on this matter could continue indefinitely, and I am not at
all sure that wasn't Crowley's intention. Over the last twenty years, as my
understanding and appreciation of Thelemic rituals has grown, my opinion
on this subject has changed at least a dozen times. Confusion over this

point, however, did not prevent me from learning the ritual and working
with it on a daily basis. It is only by working the rituals, that any significant
degree of understanding can develop. If you wait until you are positive you
understand all aspects of the ceremony before beginning to work, you will
never begin to work.
All conjecture aside, the whole question of the averse Pentagrams seems
to finally have been put to rest by a manuscript bearing Crowley's
handwritten notes and drawings, recently found at the George Arents
Research Library at Syracuse University This typescript, whose provenance
has been tentatively attributed to 1928, includes the entire text of Liber V
vel Regu!i, complete with drawings of the various Pentagrams and symbols.
It reveals without ambiguity that the averse Pentagram is simply the
standard Pentagram turned upside down (see figure 9 below).

Figure 9. Averse Pentagram.
The elements remain in their same positions, and directions for invoking
and banishing are exactly as they would be if you drew a standard, upright
Pentagram on a piece of paper, and then simply turned the paper upside
down.
Now we know for certain what the averse Pentagrams are, but why do
we use them? A clue to our answer might be found in Reguli's unique
positioning of the four fixed signs of the zodiac.

Traditionally the zodiac is thought of as a belt on twelve constellations,
or signs through which the sun passes (from the earth's point of view) in a
counterclockwise yearly journey. We could make a traditional magical
circle of the zodiacal belt, by placing Taurus in the East, Leo in the North,
Scorpio in the West and Aquarius in the South (see figure 10, below).

Figure 10. Traditional view of the zodiac as a magical circle. There are
fixed signs in the quarters. The magician is facing Taurus (East).
As we will see in Reguli, however, this is not the case; Taurus is still in
the East, and Scorpio is still in the West, but the positions of Leo and
Aquarius are reversed. In other words, for this ritual, the signs of the zodiac
are now running clockwise. Has Crowley turned the belt of the zodiac
upside down? No. He has turned the magician upside down.
As I have mentioned earlier, in the Thelemic rituals of the Pentagram
the magician no longer thinks of himself or herself as standing upon the
surface of the Earth (geocentric), but rather, identifies with the Sun
(heliocentric). From the Sun's point of view there is no up or down. In order
to help liberate the magician from the old aeon illusion of restricted
orientation, Crowley now positions us upside down in the center of the
zodiacal belt. In this position the zodiac now appears to run clockwise and,
from the point of view of microcosmic orientation, the Pentagrams we
would draw from this position are naturally averse. If it were possible for
you to actually perform Liber V vel Reguli while standing on your head,
then (from your upside-down point of view) the zodiac would run
counterclockwise, and the Pentagrams would be upright.

Perhaps, for some, the averse Pentagram will continue to be the frightful
symbol of the triumph of matter over Spirit (as the aspirants of the Golden
Dawn are warned). In Reguli, however, it is not a case of matter triumphing
over Spirit, rather, it is a case of Spirit descending into matter.31
I have incorporated Crowley's notes and drawings from the abovementioned manuscript in the text of Reguli that follows. I have also
included, as footnotes, his comments from another manuscript. My own
comments as editor are identified as such.

LIBER V
VEL REGULI
A A Publication in Class D.
Being the Ritual of the Mark of the Beast; an incantation proper to
invoke the Energies of the Aeon of Horus, adapted for the daily use
of the magician of whatever grade.

THE FIRST GESTURE

The Oath of the Enchantment, which is called The Elevenfold Seal.
THE ANIMADVERSION

TOWARDS THE AEON.

1. Let the Magician, robed and armed as he may deem to be fit, turn his face
toward Boleskine32 that is the House of The Beast 666.
2. Let him strike the battery 1-3-3-3-1.
3. Let him put the Thumb of his right hand between its index and medius,
and make the gestures hereafter following.
THE VERTICAL COMPONENT OF THE ENCHANTMENT.
1. Let him describe a circle about his head, crying NUITH!33
2. Let him draw the Thumb vertically downward, and touch the root of his
phallus, crying HADITH!34
3. Let him, retracing the line, touch the centre of his breast, and cry RAHOOR-KHUIT! 35
THE HORIZONTAL COMPONENTS OF THE ENCHANTMENT.
1. Let him touch the Centre of his Forehead, his mouth, and his larynx,
crying AIWAZ! 36
2. Let him draw his Thumb from right to left across his face at the level of
the nostrils.
3. Let him touch the Centre of his Breast, and his Solar Plexus, crying
THERION! 37
4. Let him draw his Thumb from left to right across his breast, at the level
of the sternum.
5. Let him touch his Navel, and the Root of his Phallus, crying
BABALON! 38
6. Let him draw his Thumb from right to left across his abdomen, at the
level of the hips.
[Thus shall he formulate the Sigil of the Grand Hierophant, but dependent
from the Circle.]

THE ASSEVERATION OF THE SPELLS.
1. Let the Magician clasp his hands upon his Wand, his fingers and thumbs
interlaced, crying LAShTAL: THELEMA: FIAOF: AGAPE: AUMGN.
[Thus shall be declared the Words of Power whereby the Energies of the
Aeon of Horus work his Will in the world.]
THE PROCLAMATION OF THE ACCOMPLISHMENT.
1. Let the Magician strike the Battery: 3-5-3, crying ABRAHADABRA. 39

THE SECOND GESTURE
The Enchantment.
1. Let the Magician, still facing Boleskine, advance to the circumference of
his Circle.
2. Let him turn himself towards the left, and pace with the stealth and
swiftness of a tiger the precincts of his circle, until he complete one
revolution thereof.
3. Let him give the Sign of Horus (or the Enterer) 40 as he passeth, so to
project the Force that radiateth from Boleskine before him.
4. Let him pace his Path until he comes to the North; there let him halt, and
turn his face to the North.
5. Let him trace with his wand the Averse Pentagram proper to invoke Air
(Aquarius)

.

6. Let him bring the Wand to the centre of the Pentagram and call upon
Nuith!
7. Let him make the sign called Puella, standing with feet together, head
bowed, his left hand shielding his phallus, and his right hand shielding his
breast (attitude of the Venus de Medici).

8. Let him turn again to the left, and pursue his Path as before, projecting
the Force from Boleskine as he passeth; let him halt when he next cometh
to the South, and face outward.
9. Let him trace the Averse Pentagram that invoketh Fire (Leo)

.

10. Let him point his Wand to the Centre of the Pentagram, and cry
HADITH!
11. Let him give the Sign Puer, standing with feet together, and head erect.
Let his right hand [the thumb between index and medius] be raised, the
forearm vertical at a right angle with the upper arm, which is horizontally
extended in the line joining the shoulders. Let his left hand, the thumb
extended forwards, and the fingers clenched, rest at the junction of the
thighs [attitude of the Gods Mentu, Khem, etc.].
12. Let him proceed as before; then in the East, let him make the Averse
Pentagram that invoketh Earth (Taurus)

.

13. Let him point his Wand to the Centre of the Pentagram, and cry
THERION!
14. Let him give the sign called Vir, the feet being together. The hands, with
clenched fingers and thumbs thrust out forwards, are held to the temples;
the head is then bowed and pushed out, as if to symbolize the butting of an
horned beast (attitude of Pan, Bacchus, etc.) (Frontispiece, Eqx. I - III).
15. Proceeding as before, let him make in the West the Averse Pentagram
whereby Water is invoked

.41

16. Pointing the Wand to the Centre of the Pentagram, let him call upon
BABALON!
17. Let him give the sign Mulier. The feet are widely separated, and the
arms raised so as to suggest a crescent. The head is thrown back [attitude of
Baphomet, Isis in Welcome, the Microcosm of Vitruivius]. (See Book 4,
Part II.)

18. Let him break into the dance, tracing a centripetal spiral widdershins,
enriched by revolutions upon his axis as he passeth each quarter, until he
come to the centre of the circle. There let him halt, facing Boleskine.
19. Let him raise the Wand, trace The Mark of the Beast42, and cry
AIWAZ!
20. Let him trace the Invoking Hexagram of The Beast

.

21. Let him lower the Wand, striking the Earth therewith.
22. Let him give the sign of Mater Triumphans43 [The feet are together; the
left arm is curved as if it supported a child; the thumb and index of the right
hand pinch the nipple of the left breast, as if offering it to that child]. Let
him utter the word THELEMA!
23. Perform the Spiral Dance, moving deosil and whirling widdershins.
Each time on passing the West extend the Wand to the Quarter in question,
and bow:
a. Before me the powers of LA! [to West].
b. Behind me the powers of AL! [to East].
c. On my right hand the powers of LA! [to North].
d. On my left hand the powers of AL! [to South].
e. Above me the powers of ShT! [leaping in the air].
f. Beneath me the powers of ShT! [striking the ground].
g. Within me the powers! [in the attitude of Ptah erect, the feet
together, the hands clasped upon the vertical Wand].
h. About me flames my Father's Face, the Star of Force and Fire.
i. And in the Column stands His six-rayed Splendour!
[This dance may be omitted, and the whole Utterance chanted in the attitude
of Ptah.]

THE FINAL GESTURE
This is identical with the First Gesture.
[Here followeth an impression of the ideas implied in the Paean.]44

I also am a Star in Space, unique and self-existent, an individual essence
incorruptible; I also am one Soul; I am identical with All and None. I am in
All, and all in me; I am, apart from all and lord of all, and one with all.
I am a God, I very God of very God; I go upon my way to work my
Will; I have made Matter and Motion for my mirror; I have decreed for my
delight that Nothingness should figure itself as twain, that I might dream a
dance of names and natures, and enjoy the substance of simplicity by
watching the wanderings of my shadows. I am not that which is not; I know
not that which knows not; I love not that which loves not. For I am Love,
whereby division dies in delight; I am Knowledge, whereby all parts,
plunged in the whole, perish and pass into perfection; and I am that I am,
the being wherein Being is lost in Nothing, nor deigns to be but by its Will
to unfold its nature, its need to express its perfection in all possibilities,
each phase a partial phantasm, and yet inevitable and absolute.
I am Omniscient, for naught exists for me unless I know it. I am
Omnipotent, for naught occurs save by Necessity, my Soul's expression
through my Will to be, to do, to suffer the symbols of itself. I am
Omnipresent, for naught exists where I am not, who fashioned Space as a
condition of my consciousness of myself, who am the centre of all, and my
circumference the frame of mine own fancy.
I am the All, for all that exists for me is a necessary expression in
thought of some tendency of my nature, and all my thoughts are only the
letters of my Name.
I am the One, for all that I am is not the absolute All, and all my all is
mine and not another's; mine, who conceive of others like myself in essence
and truth, yet unlike in expression and illusion.
I am the None, for all that I am is the imperfect image of the perfect;
each partial phantom must perish in the clasp of its counterpart; each form
fulfil itself by finding its equated opposite, and satisfying its need to be the
Absolute by the attainment of annihilation.
The Word, LAShTAL includes all this.
LA—Naught.
AL—Two.
L is “Justice”, the Kteis fulfilled by the Phallus, “Naught and Two”
because the Plus and the Minus have united in “love under will.”
A is “the Fool”, Naught in Thought (Parzival), Word (Harpocrates), and
Action (Bacchus). He is the boundless air, the wandering Ghost, but with

“possibilities.” He is the Naught that the Two have made by “love under
will.”
LA thus represents the Ecstasy of Nuit and Hadit conjoined, lost in love,
and making themselves Naught thereby. Their child is begotten and
conceived, but is in the phase of Naught also, as yet. LA is thus the
Universe in that phase, with its potentialities of manifestation.
AL, on the contrary, though it is essentially identical with LA, shows the
Fool manifested through the Equilibrium of Contraries. The weight is still
nothing, but it is expressed as if it were two equal weights in opposite
scales. The indicator still points to zero.
ShT is equally 31 with LA and AL, but it expresses the secret nature
which operates the Magick or the transmutations.
ShT is the formula of this particular aeon; another aeon might have
another way of saying 31.
Sh is Fire as T is Force; conjoined they express Ra-Hoor-Khuit.
“The Angel”45 represents the Stélé 666, showing the Gods of the Aeon,
while “Strength”46 is a picture of Babalon and The Beast, the earthly
emissaries of those Gods.
ShT is the dynamic equivalent of LA and AL. Sh shows the Word of the
Law, being triple, as 93 is thrice 31. T shows the formula of Magick
declared in that Word; the Lion, the Serpent, the Sun, Courage and Sexual
Love are all indicated by the card.
In LA note that Saturn or Satan is exalted in the House of Venus or
Astarte, and it is an airy sign. Thus L is Father-Mother, Two and Naught,
and the Spirit (Holy Ghost) of their Love is also Naught. Love is AHBH,
13, which is AChD, Unity, 1, Aleph, who is The Fool who is Naught, but
none the less an Individual One, who (as such) is not another, yet
unconscious of himself until his Oneness expresses itself as a duality.
Any impression or idea is unknowable in itself. It can mean nothing
until brought into relation with other things. The first step is to distinguish
one thought from another; this is the condition of recognizing it. To define
it, we must perceive its orientation to all our other ideas. The extent of our
knowledge of any one thing varies therefore with the number of ideas with
which we can compare it. Every new fact not only adds itself to our
universe, but increases the value of what we already possess.
In AL this “The” or “God” arranges for “Countenance to behold
countenance, by establishing itself as an equilibrium, A the One-Naught

conceived as L the Two-Naught. This L is the Son-Daughter HorusHarpocrates just as the other L was the Father-Mother Set-Isis. Here then is
Tetragrammaton once more, but expressed in identical equations in which
every term is perfect in itself as a mode of Naught.
ShT supplies the last element; making the Word of either five or six
letters, according as we regard ShT as one letter or two. Thus the Word
affirms the Great Work accomplished: 5° = 6▫.
ShT is moreover a necessary resolution of the apparent opposition of LA
and AL; for one could hardly pass to the other without the catalytic action
of a third identical expression whose function should be to transmute them.
Such a term must be in itself a mode of Naught, and its nature cannot
encroach on the perfections of Not-Being, LA, or of Being, AL. It must be
purely Nothing-Matter, so as to create a Matter-in-Motion which is a
function of “Something.”
Thus ShT is Motion in its double phase, an inertia composed of two
opposite currents, and each current is also thus polarized. Sh is Heaven and
Earth, T Male and Female; ShT is Spirit and Matter; one is the Word of
Liberty and Love flashing its Light to restore Life to Earth; the other is the
act by which Life claims that Love is Light and Liberty. And these are Twoin-One, the divine letter of Silence-in-Speech whose symbol is the Sun in
the arms of the Moon.
But Sh and T are alike formulae of force in action as opposed to entities;
they are not states of existence, but modes of motion. They are verbs, not
nouns.
Sh is the Holy Spirit as a “tongue of fire” manifest in triplicity, and is
the child of Set-Isis as their Logos or Word uttered by their “Angel.” The
card is XX, and 20 is the value of Yod (the secret seed of all things, the
Virgin, the Hermit, Mercury, the Angel or Herald) expressed in full as IVD.
Sh is the Spiritual congress of Heaven and Earth.
But T is the Holy Spirit in action as a “roaring lion” or as the “old
Serpent” instead of as an “Angel of Light.” The twins of Set-Isis, harlot and
beast, are busy with that sodomitic and incestuous lust which is the
traditional formula for producing demi-gods, as in the cases of Mary and
the Dove; Leda and the Swan, etc. The card is XI, the number of Magick
AVD: Aleph the Fool impregnating the woman according to the word of
Yod, the Angel of the Lord! His sister had seduced her brother Beast,
shaming the Sun with her sin; she has mastered the Lion and enchanted the

Serpent. Nature is outraged by Magick; man is bestialized and woman
defiled. The conjunction produces a monster; it affirms regression of types.
Instead of a man-God conceived of the Spirit of God by a virgin in
innocence, we are asked to adore the bastard of a whore and a brute,
begotten in shamefullest sin and born in most blasphemous bliss.

CHAPTER SIX

THE HEXAGRAM RITUALS
0. O my God! One is Thy Beginning! One is Thy Spirit, and Thy
Permutation One!
1. Let me extol Thy perfections before men.
2. In the Image of a Sixfold Star that flameth across the Vault inane, let
me re-veil Thy perfections.
3. Thou hast appeared unto me as an aged God, a venerable God, the
Lord of Time, bearing a sharp sickle.
4. Thou hast appeared unto me as a jocund and ruddy God, full of
Majesty, a King, a Father in his prime. Thou didst bear the sceptre of
the Universe, crowned with the Wheel of Spirit.
5. Thou hast appeared unto me with sword and spear, a warrior God in
flaming armour among Thine horsemen.
6. Thou hast appeared unto me as a young and brilliant God, a god of
music and beauty, even as a young god in his strength, playing upon
the lyre.
7. Thou hast appeared unto me as the white foam of Ocean gathered
into limbs whiter than the foam, the limbs of a miracle of women, as a
goddess of extreme love, bearing the girdle of gold.
8. Thou hast appeared to me as a young boy mischievous and lovely,
with Thy winged globe and its serpents set upon a staff.
9. Thou hast appeared to me as an huntress among Thy dogs, as a
goddess virginal chaste, as a moon among the faded oaks of the wood
of years.

10. But I was deceived by none of these. All these I cast aside, crying:
Begone! So that all these faded from my vision.
11. Also I welded together the Flaming Star and the Sixfold Star in the
forge of my soul, and behold! a new star 418 that is above all these.
12. Yet even so was I not deceived; for the crown hath twelve rays.
13. And these twelve rays are one.
—LIBER DCCCXII VEL ARARITA

nce the magician has become adept in the
execution of the microcosmic rituals of the
Pentagram, the next step, according to
tradition, is to master the rituals of the Signet
Star of the macrocosm, the Hexagram. The Thelemic ritual of the
Hexagram is Liber XXXVI, The Star Sapphire which first appeared in the
1913 first edition of The Book of Lies. As we will see later, this ritual is
much more than the conventional Ritual of the Hexagram, super-charged
with Thelemic components. In fact there are many who consider it
Crowley's greatest contribution to Western Hermeticism.
But before examining The Star Sapphire we need a fundamental
understanding of classic rituals of the Hexagram. To this end we will first
examine the Lesser Ritual of the Hexagram and Crowley's comments on the
Greater Ritual of the Hexagram as they appear in Liber O, Part IV.1 For the
most part, the rituals are self-explanatory, so I have kept my introductory
comments brief.
The Golden Dawn defined the Hexagram as “…a powerful symbol
representing the operation of the Seven Planets under the presidency of the
Sephiroth, and of the seven-lettered Name ARARITA…a divine name…
formed of the Hebrew initials of the sentences: One is his beginning. One
is his individuality. His permutation is one.”2
Perhaps the most concise definition of ARARITA can be found in the
English translation of the last words of The Star Sapphire: “Six in One
through the names of Seven in One, Ararita.”3 Concerning this sevenfold
word Crowley wrote in his 1909 privately printed edition of θελημα;

O

The use of this Name and Formula is to equate and identify every
idea with its opposite; thus being released from the obsession of
thinking any one of them as <<true>> (and therefore binding); one
can withdraw oneself from the whole sphere of the Ruach.4
The Hexagram itself is illustrative of the union of opposites. In its classic
form it combines the red upright triangle of Fire with the blue triangle of
Water which has its apex pointing downward. (We will learn in the next
chapter this is not the case in The Star Sapphire.)
As we see in figure 11 below, when projected upon the Tree of Life, the
Hexagram includes Sephiroth three5 through nine. Daath-Binah
notwithstanding, this area of the Tree of Life is attributed to the third
qabalistic world, Yetzirah, and the Vav of the Tetragrammaton. If we recall
the allegory of the Tetragrammaton, Princess/Heh-final, (anesthetized and
exiled in the microcosmic world of 5), must be awakened by the kiss of
Prince/Vav (her brother-lover-emissary of the macrocosmic world of 6).
Their union eventually results in the Princess becoming the Supernal
Queen/Heh and the Prince becoming King/Yod. The spiritual roles these
four characters play will become profoundly important to the understanding
of The Star Sapphire.
Vav = 6 and, in this place, representitive of the Holy Guardian Angel.
The first phase of the Great Work is to unite the 5 of the Magician with the
6 of the H.G.A.; and the first step in doing that is to “…equate and identify
every idea with its opposite….”6 Regular performance of the Lesser Ritual
of the Pentagram followed by the Lesser Ritual of the Hexagram is the
symbolic enactment of this process, and continues to be an excellent
ceremonial routine even for the most advanced magician.

Figure 11. The Hexagram projected upon the Tree of Life.
In the Rituals of the Hexagram, the magician stands as the Sun
surrounded by the belt of the zodiac. The zodiacal landmarks of the quarters
are the Cardinal Signs which are oriented on the solar axes of the equinoxes
and solstices:
Aries-Fire in the East; Capricorn-Earth in the South; Libra-Air in the
West; and Cancer-Water in the North. Standing at the intersection, and
representing a vertical line running perpendicular to the two lines of the
cross, the magician sets to work from a position of supreme balance.
The rituals begin with the analysis of the Key Word INRI7 from the 5° =
6▫ ceremony of the Golden Dawn. Considered by the Adepts of the Aeon of
Osiris to be the “new, improved” magical formula of the day, the latinized/
Christian formula of resurrection (INRI) is seen to conceal the great
formulae of the Egyptians and the Gnostics (IAO). As the Qabalistic Cross
section of the Pentagram Ritual affirms the magician's identity as a perfect
reflection of the Tree of Life, this section of the Hexagram Ritual is the
magician's assertion that he or she is an integral part of the evolving
magical formula of the universe.
Only the traditional versions of the Hexagram (see figure 12, below)
were used to illustrate Liber O. For zodiacal and planetary work, as outlined
in Crowley's comments on the Greater Hexagram Ritual, one could just as

easily employ Unicursal Hexagrams (see figure 12, below). This is a
particularly Thelemic form of the Hexagram and will play a large part in
our study of the Holy Hexagram of the Star Sapphire. Table 2 (on page 107)
shows the various Unicursal Hexagrams.

Figure 12. Hexagrams: A) Traditional; B)Unicursal.
Table 2. Unicursal Hexagrams.

THE LESSER RITUAL
OF THE
HEXAGRAM
This ritual is to be performed after the “Lesser Ritual of the
Pentagram.”

1. Stand upright, feet together, left arm at side, right across body, holding
Wand or other weapon upright in the median line. Then face East and say:
2.

I.N.R.I.
Yod, Nun, Resh, Yod.
Virgo, Isis, Mighty Mother.
Scorpio, Apophis, Destroyer.
Sol, Osiris, Slain and Risen.
Isis, Apophis, Osiris IAΩ.

3. Extend the arms in the form of a cross, and say, The Sign of Osiris
Slain. (See figure 3a on page 59.)
4. Raise the right arm to point upwards, keeping the elbow square, and
lower the left arm to point downwards, keeping the elbow square, while
turning the head over the left shoulder looking down so that the eyes follow
the left forearm, and say, The Sign of the Mourning of Isis. (See figure 3a
on page 59.)
5. Raise the arms at an angle of sixty degrees to each other above the head,
which is thrown back, and say, The Sign of Apophis and Typhon. (See
figure 3a on page 59.)
6. Cross the arms on the breast, and bow the head and say, The Sign of
Osiris Risen. (See figure 3a on page 59.)
7. Extend the arms again as in (3) and cross them again as in (6), saying
L.V.X., the Light of the Cross.
8. With the magical weapon trace the Hexagram of Fire (see figure 13, page
111) in the East, saying, ARARITA
. This word consists of the
initials of a sentence which means “One is His beginning: One is His
Individuality: His Permutation is One.”
This Hexagram consists of two equilateral triangles, both apices
pointing upward. Begin at the top of the upper triangle and trace it in a
dextrorotary direction. The top of the lower should coincide with the central
point of the upper triangle.
9. Trace the Hexagram of Earth (see figure 13, page 111) in the South,
saying ARARITA. This Hexagram has the apex of the lower triangle
pointing downwards, and it should be capable of inscription in a circle.
10. Trace the Hexagram of Air (see figure 13, below) in the West, saying
ARARITA. This Hexagram is like that of Earth; but the bases of the
triangles coincide, forming a diamond.
11. Trace the Hexagram of Water (see figure 13, below) in the North, saying
ARARITA. This Hexagram has the lower triangle placed above the upper,
so that their apices coincide.

12. Repeat (1-7).
The Banishing Ritual is identical, save that the direction of the Hexagrams
must be reversed (see figure 13, below).

Figure 13. Elemental Hexagrams adapted from Liber O, Part IV.
To invoke or banish planets or zodiacal signs, the hexagram of Earth
alone is used. Draw the Hexagram beginning from the point which is
attributed to the planet you are dealing with (see “777,” col. xxxiii). Thus to
invoke Jupiter begin from the right hand point of the lower triangle,
dextrorotary and complete; then trace the upper triangle from its left hand
point and complete.
Trace the astrological sigil of the planet in the center of your hexagram.8
For the Zodiac use the hexagram of the planet which rules the sign you
require (“777,” col. xxxviii) but draw the astrological sigil of the sign,
instead of that of the planet. For Caput and Cauda Draconis use the lunar
hexagram with the sigil of or .
To banish, reverse the hexagram.
In all cases use a conjuration first with Ararita, and next with the name
of the God corresponding to the planet or sign you are dealing with.9
The Hexagrams pertaining to the planets are shown in figure 14 below.

Figure 14. Planetary Hexagrams adapted from Liber O, Part IV.

CHATTER SEVEN

THE THELEMIC RITUAL OF THE HEXAGRAM
Thus far then concerning the Pentagram, how it is the Cross, and its
Virtue in the Highest; but the Hexagram is for the most Part a Detail
of the Formula of the Rose and Cross. Already have I shewed unto thee
how the Most Holy Trinity is the Yang; but the Spirit, and the Water (or
Fluid) and the Blood, that bear Witness in the Inferior, are of the Yin.
Thus the Operation of the Hexagram lieth wholly within the Order of
one Plane, uniting indeed any Soul with its Image, but not
transcendentally, for its Effect is Cosmos, the Vau that springeth from
the Union of the Yod and the Hé.
—LIBER ALEPH

he Star Sapphire first appeared in 1913 as
Chapter 36 of The Book of Lies. Like The Star
Ruby and the rest of the material in that little
book, it reflects the extraordinarily high level
of illumination that characterize Crowley's work of that period. It contained
the following commentary:

T

The Star Saphire corresponds with the Star-Ruby of Chapter 25; 36
being the square of 6, as 25 is of 5.
This chapter gives the real and perfect Ritual of the Hexagram.
It would be improper to comment further upon an official ritual of
the A A
As I believe that a book about Thelemic Rituals would be incomplete
without a basic introduction to The Star Sapphire, I feel it necessary to risk
the condemnation of those who maintain that any discussion of the ritual in
print is improper. Since the mid 1970s, at least a dozen works have been

published that have touched upon the subject of this ritual. While many
have been well-intentioned efforts, others have contained what I consider to
be gross distortions and dubious interpretations. After reading them, I
understand the wisdom of Crowley's commentary. Be that as it may, I think
it is important that I offer a brief introduction and a few notes.
Crowley's autohagiography would have us believe that The Star
Sapphire was hastily written as the Thelemic version of the Hexagram
Ritual, and that he had no idea of any deeper implications. He relates how
he received an unexpected visit from Theodor Reuss, the head of Ordo
Templi Orientis, who accused him of publishing the Order's central secret, a
technique of Sexual Magic. When Crowley protested he did no such thing,
and that he didn't even know any secret of Sexual Magic, Reuss produced a
copy of The Book of Lies and pointed to Chapter 36, The Star Sapphire.
Scholars debate the veracity of this story, but there is little dispute that
this ceremony can easily be interpreted as a sex Magick ritual. Be that as it
may, I take exception to those who, with knowing winks and nudges, would
have us believe that The Star Sapphire, or Liber XV, or a host of other
Crowley rituals, are merely elaborate blinds for a variety of exotic sex acts.
All Magick is sexual. Indeed, all life is sexual. It is either overt or
implied, invoked or directed, stored or released. The Mass of the Roman
Catholic Church is every bit as much a pantomime of the sex act as the
“Great Rite” of the witches. The real question is “what is sex symbolic of?”
The Star Sapphire is written as if it could be a complex choreographed
act of ceremonial lovemaking. After all, the Hexagram is symbolic of the
union of opposites. In this ritual, the real challenge of the Magician lies in
the ability to concentrate, to visualize, receive, direct, and exchange the
energies represented by the various “Holy Hexagrams.” This work is
performed on the magical plane which can be accessed by any number of
techniques including (but not limited to) sex. Whenever opposites are
transcended and perfect union is realized, a greater “something” is
achieved. In lovemaking it is the ecstasy of orgasm; in initiation it can be
the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel.
I encourage the student who has mastered the traditional Hexagram
rituals, to learn The Star Sapphire. Practice it first as a nonsexual exercise,
by drawing the Unicursal or traditional Hexagrams (see figures 13 and 14
on pages 111 and 112 for examples). Study and meditate upon the

implications of the signs, the words, and most importantly, the meanings of
the four “Holy Hexagrams.” Your labor will be well repaid.
In Chapter 69 of The Book of Lies, Crowley gives us the only explicit
definition of the Holy Hexagram ever published. We reproduce it and
Crowley's commentary and hope the reader will find it useful.

KEΦAΛHΞΘ1
THE WAY TO SUCCEED—
AND THE WAY TO SUCK EGGS!
This is the Holy Hexagram.
Plunge from the height, O God, and interlock with Man!
Plunge from the height, O Man, and interlock with Beast!
The Red Triangle is the Descending Tongue of grace; the Blue Triangle
is the ascending tongue of prayer.
This Interchange, the Double Gift of Tongues, the Word of Double Power—
ABRAHADABRA!—is the sign of the GREAT WORK, for the GREAT
WORK is accomplished in Silence, And behold is not that Word equal to
Cheth, that is Cancer whose Sigil is ?
This Work also eats up itself, accomplishes its own end, nourishes the
worker, leaves no seed, is perfect in itself.
Little children, love one another!

Commentary (ΞΘ)2
The key to the understanding of this chapter is given in the number and the
title, the former being intelligible to all nations who employ Arabic figures,
the latter only to experts in deciphering English puns.
The chapter alludes to Levi's drawing of the Hexagram, and is a
criticism of, or improvement upon, it. In the ordinary Hexagram, the
Hexagram of nature, the red triangle is upward, like fire, and the blue
triangle, downward, like water. In the magical Hexagram this is reversed:
the descending red triangle is that of Horus, a sign specially revealed by
him personally, at the Equinox of the Gods. (It is the flame descending upon
the altar, and licking up the burnt offering.) The blue triangle represents the

aspiration, since blue is the colour of devotion, and the triangle, kinetically
considered, is the symbol of directed force.
In the first three paragraphs this formation of the hexagram is explained;
it is a symbol of the mutual separation of the Holy Guardian Angel and his
client. In the interlocking is indicated the completion of the work.
Paragraph 4 explains in slightly different language what we have said
above, and the scriptural image of tongues is introduced.
In paragraph 5 the symbolism of tongues is further developed.
Abrahadabra is our primal example of an interlocked word. We assume that
the reader has thoroughly studied that word in Liber D., etc. The sigil of
Cancer links up this symbolism with the number of the chapter.
The remaining paragraphs continue the Gallic symbolism.

LIBER XXXVI
THE STAR SAPPHIRE
A A Publication in Class D.

1. Let the Adept be armed with his Magick Rood [and provided with his
Mystic Rose].
2. In the centre, let him give the L.V.X. signs; or if he know them, if he will
and dare do them, and can keep silent about them, the signs of N.O.X. being
the signs of Puer, Vir, Puella, Mulier. Omit the sign I.R.3
3. Then let him advance to the East, and make the Holy Hexagram, saying:
Pater et Mater unus deus Ararita.
4. Let him go round to the South, make the Holy Hexagram and say: Mater
et Filius unus deus Ararita.

5. Let him go round to the West, make the Holy Hexagram and say: Filius
et Filia unus deus Ararita.
6. Let him go round to the North, make the Holy Hexagram and then say:
Filia et Pater unus deus Ararita.
7. Let him then return to the Centre, and so to the Centre of All [making the
“Rosy Cross” as he may know how] saying Ararita Ararita Ararita.
8. [In this the Signs shall be those of Set Triumphant or of Baphomet. Also
shall Set appear in the Circle. Let him drink of the Sacrament and let him
communicate the same.]
9. Then let him say: Omnia in Duos: Duo in Unum: Unus in Nihil: Haec
nec Quatuor nec Omnia nec Duo nec Unus nec Nihil Sunt.
10. Gloria Patri et Matri et Filio et Filiae et Spiritui Sancto externo et
Spiritui Sancto interno ut erat est erit in saecula Saeculorum sex un
uno per nomen Septem in uno Ararita.
11. Let him then repeat the signs of L.V.X. but not the signs of N.O.X.: for
it is not he that shall arise in the Sign of Isis Rejoicing.
*

AUTHOR'S COMMENTS, TRANSLATIONS, AND NOTES
1. The Magick Rood is the Wand of the Magician; the Lance of the Priest;
symbolic of the Lingam. His Mystic Rose is the Cup of the Priestess,
symbolic of the Yoni.
2. The L.V.X. signs are to be used in the standard version of The Star
Sapphire. But the ritual can also be executed employing the N.O.X. signs if
the Magician is at the point of his or her initiatory career where it is
appropriate and necessary. Since this is less often the case we are warned by
the powers of the sphinx “…if he know them, if he will and dare do them,
and can keep silent about them…” The Sign of Isis Rejoicing is omitted as
it has no correspondent among the Signs of L.V.X. (See figure 3a on page
59 and figures 3b, 3c, and 3d that follow for the Signs of N.O.X and the
Signs of the Grades.)

3. The Holy Hexagram of Fire. The transcendence of opposites which
occurs at the union of Yod and Heh.
Pater et Mater unus deus Ararita (“Father and Mother one god Ararita”).
4. The Holy Hexagram of Earth. The transcendence of opposites which
occurs at the union of Heh and Vav.
Mater et Filius unus deus Ararita (“Mother and Son one god Ararita”).
5. The Holy Hexagram of Air. The transcendence of opposites which occurs
at the union of Vav and Heh-final.
Filius et Filia unus deus Ararita (“Son and Daughter one god Ararita”).
6. The Holy Hexagram of Water. The transcendence of opposites which
occurs at the union of Heh-final and Yod.
Filia et Pater unus deus Ararita (“Daughter and Father one god Ararita”).
7. The “Rosy Cross” is the union of the Magick Rood and the Mystic Rose.
It can be appropriately symbolized in this ritual as the Unicursal Hexagram
with the small five-petal rose in the center.
8. The Sign of Set Triumphant could be interpreted as the Sign of Mater
Triumphans. The product of the union is then treated as a Eucharist.
9. Omnia in Duos (All in Two) Duo in Unum (Two in One) Unus in Nihil
(One in Nothingness) Haec nec Quatuor nec Omnia nec Duo nec Unus
nec Nihil Sunt (“These are neither Four nor All nor Two nor One nor
Nothing.”).
10. Gloria Patri et Matri et Filio et Filiae et Spiritui Sancto externo et
Spiritui Sancto interno ut erat est erit in saecula Saeculorum sex un
uno per nomen Septem in uno Ararita (“Glory be to the Father and to the
Mother and to the Son and Daughter, and to the Holy Spirit without and
within, which was, is, and shall be, world without end. Six in One through
the names of the Seven in One, Ararita.”)
11. The N.O.X. signs are inappropriate at this point for the Epiphany has
occurred as the result of the creation of the Rosy Cross.

CHATTER EIGHT

KNOWLEDGE AND CONVERSATION OF THE
HOLY GUARDIAN ANGEL
The Single Supreme Ritual is the attainment of the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. It is the raising of the
complete man in a vertical straight line.
Any deviation from this line tends to become black magic. Any other
operation is black magic…if the magician needs to perform any other
operation than this, it is only lawful in so far as it is a necessary
preliminary to That One Work.
—MAGICK

o aspect of the Magick of Thelema is more
important than the Knowledge and
Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. It
is the classic and universal personal religious
experience. Until attained, no vision, ritual, invocation, evocation,
conjuration, divination, yogic discipline, or magical practice can be truly
efficacious or trustworthy.
It is the unacknowledged central truth underlying the world's so-called
“great religions” and the key to the understanding of the myths upon which
they are founded. The Holy Guardian Angel is the divine object of devotion
of the Bhakti Yogi; Krishna to the Hindu, and Christ to the Christian. No
matter by what name or in what form, the Holy Guardian Angel transfigures
the devotee and bestows bliss and an expanded consciousness which is
prerequisite to any further spiritual experience or attainment. The Concept
of the “H.G.A.” is ancient, but the term—Holy Guardian Angel—as it is
used in Magick is relatively new.

N

In 1888 Golden Dawn Adept S. L. MacGregor-Mathers translated an
extraordinary fifteenth-century grimoire called The Book of the Sacred
Magic of Abra-Melin, the Mage. Purportedly written in 1458 by Abraham
the Jew, (an enigmatic character not without historical credentials in Central
European court intrigues), this remarkable work proved to be quite unlike
any other magical text.
While contemporary grimoires sent would-be magicians on endless
scavenger hunts (tracking down bats' blood, eye of newt, etc.), in order to
summon the power to bewitch the neighbor's cow or repel the evil eye,
Abra-Melin introduces a novel idea. In order to receive real magical power,
the magician must first actually become an individual of superior spiritual
integrity. To exercise god-like powers, one must be god-like. Pious
affirmations, and the parroting of precomposed magical incantations are
useless unless the magician be truly a holy person. This simple yet profound
theory was a radical departure from the primitive techniques of medieval
European Magick, and elevated the art to a level comparable to the yogic
sciences of the East.
The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin, the Mage postulates that
every individual has a Holy Guardian Angel; a spiritual Being unique to
each of us. This Being, whose true nature can only be adaquately explained
by itself, is more than a projection of our perfected Self. Indeed, until we
have united with this being, we do not even posesss the “equipment”
necessary to comprehend its nature.
By assuming an attitude not unlike that of a love-sick suitor (who can
do nothing but pine for his beloved), we trigger within ourselves an arsenal
of inherent emotional responses which can be focused and amplified to such
a degree that union with this abstract lover is actually achieved. In the
language of the Qabalist, we are the Heh Final (5) of the Tetragrammaton,
and the Holy Guardian Angel is the Vav (6). The H. G. A. is the Prince who
awakens the sleeping Princess. Once this union is realized, both we and our
Angel are transformed into a higher spiritual Being who is capable of truly
mastering the unbalanced forces of the lower worlds. Only then are we
eligible to receive personal spiritual guidance from the only reliable source
in the universe…ourselves.
The qabalistic environment of the H. G. A. is the sixth Sephirah,
Tiphereth. In the A A graded system of initiation, it represents the
attainment of 5° = 6▫, the grade of Adeptus Minor.

The Abra-Melin operation is simple yet arduous. A house or a secured
rustic environment is required. The magician must be sufficiently
independent, and self-reliant enough to continue the operation without
interruption for six consecutive months. Every two months the regimen of
prayer, fasting, and devotional activities increases in length and intensity,
until near the end of the operation, the magician is in a state of perpetual,
all-consuming hunger for the Angel.
Shortly after the Angel's arrival, the magician is instructed to call forth
the “Four Great Princes of Evil,” and compel their obedience and extract
oaths of allegiance. The next day the same is done with the Eight SubPrinces and so on until the entire population of the infernal realms have
sworn their obedience and allegiance to the new “H.G.A.ized” magician.
I am often asked why the first thing the magician does after six months
of pious aspiration for the “higher” spiritual reality, is to summon the
denizens of Hell. The answer is simple. You are not operating in a vacuum.
As above, so below. Your Angel has descended to vouchsafe you the grace
of union. In order to complete the circuit and assure an uninterrupted flow
of this divine current, you must in turn descend and transmit that same
grace to the world beneath you. If you fail to redeem, control, and train the
menagerie of your lower nature, those “demons” will resurface as soon as
the glow of the Angel's presence has faded, and literally “play Hell” with
you. In corporate terms, the workers will eventually revolt if management
does not share with them the benefits of increased profits.
Individuals who admit to attempting the Sacred Magic of Abra-Melin,
the Mage are rare. It is rarer still to find credible individuals who maintain
that they have successfully executed the formal procedure. Israel Regardie
once told me that, with the exception of Crowley, he knew of no one who
successfully concluded an Abra-Melin operation.
Crowley made two attempts before successfully completing it. He
purchased Boleskine House on the shore of Loch Ness for the expressed
purpose of performing the operation. He was interrupted first in 1900, to go
to Mather's aid in Paris during the period of the collapse of the Golden
Dawn, then in 1903, to marry his first wife, Rose Kelly.
When he finally succeeded, it was under the most unbelievably difficult
circumstances. In 1906, while walking across China, he mentally performed
the Invocation of the Holy Guardian Angel. The entire procedure was
internalized; the temple, the furniture, the accoutrements—all visualized

and projected upon the screen of his mind and held there by intense
concentration. The invocations and the prayers were mentally rehearsed day
after day. So focused was his concentration that at one point it took him
several moments to realize that he and his pony had both fallen over a small
cliff.
His success proved to him that the basic formulae and procedures of the
Abra-Melin operation were viable. It also became clear that as long as the
general program of “invoking often” and “enflaming” oneself in prayer was
strictly followed, the particulars of the ceremony could vary considerably
from those laid down in the 1458 text. It was during this period that he
developed the techniques that would form the basis of what he would
consider “the most powerful and exalted of all my magical instructions,”
Liber Samekh.
On the Tree of Life, the Path of Samekh is the second segment of the
Middle Pillar and connects the ninth Sephirah, Yesod (the Moon), and the
sixth Sephirah, Tiphereth (the Sun). In Hebrew the letter Samekh
enumerates to 60 and means a prop or a tent peg or pole. In the traditional
tarot, Samekh is the Sagittarius card, Temperance, which shows Michael,
the Archangel of Tiphereth, reconciling opposites by pouring Water on a
Fire symbol (a lion) and Fire upon a Water symbol (an eagle). Above the
Angel is the rainbow, the biblical symbol of God's covenant with man. This
rainbow represents the Veil of Paroketh which separates Sephiroth 10, 9, 8,
and 7 from the rest of the Tree of Life. The Path of Samekh, like the arrow
of Sagittarius, pierces the rainbow Veil of Paroketh and shoots up the
middle pillar to Tiphereth, the abode of the Holy Guardian Angel.
The version of Liber Samekh with which we are most familiar was
prepared in 1921 for the benefit of Abbey of Thelema1 resident Frater
Progradior (Frank Bennett). Crowley had genuine affection for this
courageous Australian who had traveled to Cefalu for spiritual instruction.
One afternoon while walking together to the beach, Crowley, in the course
of casual conversation, said something to Bennett that instantly unknotted a
personal unresolved internal conflict that had frustrated his spiritual
advancement for nearly thirty years. This event triggered a trance-like state
of exaltation which lasted three days.
Crowley was so pleased with Bennett's receptivity to the program that
he wanted to present him with a master ritual for the invocation of the Holy
Guardian Angel. Liber Samekh is that gift.

The scaffolding of the ceremony is Charles Wycliffe Goodwin's 1852
translation of a Fragment of a Graeco-Egyptian Work upon Magic, which
Mathers included as a preliminary invocation in his translation of the Lesser
Key of Solomon, the Goetia. It was informally known in the Golden Dawn
as the “Bornless Ritual.” To this Crowley added an interpretation of the
Barbarous Names “Entymologically or Qabalistically determined and
paraphrased in English.”
So much for the skeleton of the ritual. Its soul is the running
commentary and visualization instructions of Points II and III. Here we find
detailed directions relevant to the magician's internalized processes. In no
other work is Crowley so explicit as to what should be going on in the mind
of the magician. The ritual is performed entirely on the magical plane in the
magician's “Body of Light.” Everything is visualized and Crowley is clear
on every point.
Also buried in the comments are treasures of magical data found
nowhere else in Crowley's writings—fundamental definitions of terms,
concrete explanations of abstract concepts, and other gems that serve to fill
many holes in the magical education of even the most knowledgeable
student.
My only criticism of Liber Samekh deals not with the ritual but its
original format. I must confess when I first began to study it, I concluded I
would never be able to construct a workable ritual from the material.
Important comments and directions vital to the understanding of the
ceremony are distractingly scattered throughout the two essays (Points II
and III) at the end of the ritual itself, and there are other aspects of its
organization that make initial study awkward and time consuming. Several
years ago I decided to do something about it and organized two versions of
Liber Samekh in my magical diary as follows:
1) A Study Version—which includes Point I exactly as the original but
underneath each section and each line of the text, I copied the descriptive
comments from Point II. This enabled my poor linear brain to actually see
what Crowley is talking about.
2) A Working Version—which serves as a practical script, displaying only
the words, directions, and diagrams necessary to actually memorize and
begin rehearsing the ceremony.

I have taken the liberty of presenting Liber Samekh as I have described
above. For those who may object that this is a blasphemous act of savage
editing, I assure them that not one word of Liber Samekh has been removed,
and that each comment from Point II is placed precisely where it is
referenced by Crowley to Point I.
The Working Ritual which follows is clearly titled as an edited text and
the accompanying comments and diagrams are suggested from Crowley's
notes.
Before we procede to examine Liber Samekh, I feel it is necessary to
say a few words about Crowley's intrepretation of the Barbarous Names
which were part of the original Fragment of a Graeco-Egyptian Work upon
Magic.
Theoretically such “magick words” are efficacious because they are
unintelligible. The rational mind is transcended, and the magical plane is
accessed as the magician babbles a string of strange sounding words and
phrases. Interpreting the words would seem to defeat this process, and there
are many practitioners who feel this was an unnecessary exercise on
Crowley's part.
Personally, being familiar with Crowley's analysis of the Names has
neither helped nor hindered my appreciation of the ritual. The Names still
sound wierd and mysterious and establish a powerful and irrational magical
environment.
If any harm has been done by Crowley's treatment of the Names, it has
not been to the serious student but to the diletante who, thumbing through
the text, sees things like “Thou Satan-Sun…” and “Satan, my Lord! The
Lust of the Goat!” More than one “cult crime expert” has quoted this
section (out of context) on television talk shows in an attempt to prove
Crowley was an evil satanist.
For the dear reader who has come with me thus far, I think it is hardly
necessary for me to take any more time defending Crowley's honor. A
careful study of his work does an infinitely better job than I ever could.
Even a beginning student of the Qabalah can easily see how Crowley
arrived at the various compound meanings to the Names. He analyzed them
by letter as if each where spelled in Hebrew. To each Hebrew letter is
attributed a meaning, a number, a tarot trump, and a host of other qabalistic
correspondences. A = Aleph = the letter of breath; R = Resh = the Sun card;
therefore AR = “ O breathing, flowing Sun.”

Satan usually pops up when the letter O takes center stage. O = Ayin =
the Eye = Capricorn, the Goat = the Devil card. OOO = “Satan, thou Eye,
thou Lust!” repeated three times. It's as simple as that.
As for an initiated interpretation of the word Satan, Crowley gives us
the following from Chapter Five of Magick in Theory and Practice.
“O—The exalted “Devil” (also the other secret Eye) by the formula of
the Initiation of Horus elsewhere described in detail. This “Devil” is called
Satan or Shaitan, and regarded with horror by people who are ignorant of
his formula, and, imagining themselves to be evil, accuse Nature herself of
their own phantasmal crime. Satan is Saturn, Set, Abrasax, Adad, Adonis,
Attis, Adam, Adonai, etc. The most serious charge against him is only that
he is the Sun in the South. The Ancient Initiates, dwelling as they did in
lands whose blood was the water of the Nile or the Euphrates, connected
the South with life-withering heat, and cursed that quarter where the solar
darts were deadliest. Even in the legend of Hiram, it is at high noon that he
is stricken down and slain. Capricornus is moreover the sign which the Sun
enters when he reaches his extreme Southern declination at the Winter
Solstice, the season of the death of vegetation, for the folk of the Northern
hemisphere. This gave them a second cause of cursing the South. A third;
the tyranny of hot, dry, poisonous winds; the menace of deserts of oceans
dreadful because mysterious and impassable, these also were connected in
their minds with the South. But to us, aware of astronomical facts, this
antagonism to the South is a silly superstition which the accidents of their
local conditions suggested to our animistic ancestors. We see no enmity
between Right and Left, Up and Down, and similar pairs of opposites.
These antitheses are real only as a statement of relation; they are the
conventions of an arbitrary device for representing our ideas in a pluralistic
symbolism based on duality. “Good” must be defined in terms of human
ideals and instincts. “East” has no meaning except with reference to the
earth's internal affairs; as an absolute direction in space it changes a degree
every four minutes. “Up” is the same for no two men, unless one chance to
be in the line joining the other with the centre of the earth. “Hard” is the
private opinion of our muscles. “True” is an utterly unintelligible epithet
which has proved refractory to the analysis of our ablest philosopher.
“We have therefore no scruple in restoring the “devil-worship” of such
ideas as those which the laws of sound, and the phenomena of speech and
hearing, compel us to connect with the group of “Gods” whose names are

based upon ShT or D, vocalized by the free breath A. For these Names
imply the qualities of courage, frankness, energy, pride, power and triumph;
they are the words which express the creative and paternal will.
“Thus “the Devil” is Capricornus, the Goat who leaps upon the loftiest
mountains, the Godhead which, if it become manifest in man, makes him
Aegipan, the All.
“The Sun enters this sign when he turns to renew the year in the North.
He is also the vowel O, proper to roar, to boom, and to command, being a
forcible breath controlled by the firm circle of the mouth.
“He is the Open Eye of the exalted Sun, before whom all shadows flee
away: also that Secret Eye, which makes an image of its God, the Light, and
gives it power to utter oracles, enlightening the mind.
“Thus, he is Man made God, exalted, eager; he has come consciously to
his full stature, and so is ready to set out on his journey to redeem the
world. But he may not appear in this true form; the Vision of Pan would
drive men mad with fear. He must conceal Himself in his original guise.”
I hope that the reader will find the following more user-friendly versions of
Liber Samekh helpful adjuncts to their study of this most important ritual
work.

LIBER SAMEKH
THEURGIA GOETIA SUMMA
(CONGRESSUS CUM DAEMONE)
SUB FIGURA DCCC
being the Ritual employed by the Beast 666 for the Attainment of the
Knowledge and Conversation of his Holy Guardian Angel during the
Semester of His performance of the Operation of the Sacred Magick
of ABRAMELIN THE MAGE.
(Prepared An XVII Sol in Virgo at the Abbey of Thelema in
Cephalaedium by the Beast 666 in service to
FRATER PROGRADIOR.)
Official Publication of A A Class D for the
Grade of Adeptus Minor

POINT
I
EVANGELII TEXTUS REDACTUS POINT
II
ARS CONGRESSUS CUM DAEMONE

The Invocation
Magically restored, with the significance of the BARBAROUS NAMES
Etymologically or Qabalistically determined and paraphrased in English.
SECTION A: THE OATH.
[Let the Adeptus Minor be standing in his circle on the square of Tiphereth,
armed with his Wand and Cup; but let him perform the Ritual throughout in
his Body of Light. He may burn the Cakes of Light, or the Incense of
Abramelin; he may be prepared by Liber CLXXV, the reading of Liber
LXV, and by the practices of Yoga. He may invoke HADIT by “wine and
strange drugs” if he so will.2 He prepares the circle by the usual formulae of
Banishing and Consecration, etc.
He recites Section A as a rehearsal before His Holy Guardian Angel of
the attributes of that Angel. Each phrase must be realized with full
concentration of force, so as to make Samadhi as perfectly as possible upon
the truth proclaimed.]
1. Thee I invoke, the Bornless One.
[He identifies his Angel with the Ain Soph, and the Kether thereof; one
formulation of Hadit in the boundless Body of Nuith.]
2. Thee, that didst create the Earth and the Heavens.
3. Thee, that didst create the Night and the Day.
4. Thee, that didst create the darkness and the Light.
[He asserts that His Angel has created (for the purpose of self-realization
through projection in conditioned Form) three pairs of opposites: a) The
Fixed and the Volatile; b) The Unmanifested and the Manifest; and c) the
Unmoved and the Moved. Otherwise, the Negative and the Positive in
respect of Matter, Mind and Motion.]
5. Thou art ASAR UN-NEFER (Myself made perfect): Whom no man
hath seen at any time.
[He acclaims his Angel as “Himself Made Perfect”; adding that this
Individuality is inscrutable and inviolable. In the Neophyte Ritual of G D

(as it is printed in The Equinox I, II, for the old aeon) the Hierophant is
the perfected Osiris, who brings the candidate, the natural Osiris, to identity
with himself. But in the new Aeon the Hierophant is Horus (Liber CCXX, I.
49) therefore the Candidate will be Horus too. What then is the formula of
the initiation of Horus? It will no longer be that of the Man, through Death.
It will be the natural growth of the Child. His experiences will no more be
regarded as catastrophic. Their hieroglyph is the Fool: the innocent and
impotent Harpocrates Babe becomes the Horus Adult by obtaining the
Wand. “Der reine Thor” seizes the Sacred Lance. Bacchus becomes Pan.
The Holy Guardian Angel is the Unconscious Creature Self—the Spiritual
Phallus. His knowledge and Conversation contributes occult puberty. It is
therefore advisable to replace the name Asar Un-nefer by that of Ra-HoorKhuit at the outset, and by that of one's own Holy Guardian Angel when it
has been communicated.]
6. Thou art IA-BESZ (the Truth in Matter).
[He hails Him as BESZ, the Matter that destroys and devours Godhead, for
the purpose of the Incarnation of any God.]
7. Thou art IA-APOPHRASZ (the Truth in Motion).
[He hails Him as APOPHRASZ, the Motion that destroys and devours
Godhead, for the purpose of the Incarnation of any God. The combined
action of these two DEVILS is to allow the God upon whom they prey to
enter into enjoyment of existence through the Sacrament of dividual “Life”
(Bread—the flesh of BESZ) and “Love” (Wine—the blood or venom of
APOPHRASZ).]
8. Thou has distinguished between the Just and the Unjust.
[He acclaims His Angel as having “eaten of the Fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil”; otherwise having become wise (in the
Dyad, Chokmah) to apprehend the formula of Equilibrium which is now
His own, being able to apply Himself accurately to His self-appointed
environment.]
9. Thou didst make the Female and the Male.

[He acclaims His Angel as having laid down the Law of Love as the
Magical formula of the Universe, that He may resolve the phenomenal
again into its noumenal phase by uniting any two opposites in ecstatic
passion.]
10. Thou didst produce the Seeds and the Fruit.
[He acclaims His Angel as having appointed that this formula of Love
should effect not only the dissolution of the separateness of the Lovers into
His own impersonal Godhead, but their co-ordination in a “Child”
quintessentialized from its parents to constitute a higher order of Being than
theirs, so that each generation is an alchemical progress towards perfection
in the direction of successive complexities. As Line 9 asserts Involution,
Line 10 asserts Evolution.]
11. Thou didst form Men to love one another, and to hate one another.
[He acclaims His Angel as having devised this method of self-realization;
the object of Incarnation is to obtain its reactions to its relations with other
incarnated Beings and to observe theirs with each other.]
SECTION Aa.
1. I am ANKH-F-N-KHONSU thy Prophet, unto Whom Thou didst
commit Thy Mysteries, the Ceremonies of KHEM.
[The Adept asserts his right to enter into conscious communication with His
Angel, on the ground that that Angel has Himself taught him the Secret
Magick by which he may make the proper link. “Mosheh”3 is M H, the
formation, in Jechidah, Chiah, Neschamah, Ruach,—the Sephiroth from
Kether to Yesod—since 45 is Σ 1-9 while Sh, 300, is Σ 1-24, which
superadds to these Nine an extra Fifteen numbers. (See in Liber D the
meanings and correspondences of 9, 15, 24, 45, 300, 345.)
45 is moreover A D M, man. “Mosheh” is thus the name of man as a
God-concealing Form. But in the Ritual let the Adept replace this
“Mosheh” by his own motto as Adeptus Minor. For “Ishrael” let him prefer
his own Magical Race, according to the obligations of his Oaths to Our
Holy Order! (The Beast 666 Himself used “Ankh-f-n-khonsu” and ‘Khem'
in this section.)]

2. Thou didst produce the moist and the dry, and that which nourisheth
all created Life.
[The Adept reminds his Angel that He has created That One Substance of
which Hermes hath written in the Table of Emerald, whose virtue is to unite
in itself all opposite modes of Being, thereby to serve as a Talisman charged
with the Spiritual Energy of Existence, an Elixir or Stone composed of the
physical basis of Life. This Commemoration is placed between the two
personal appeals to the Angel, as if to claim privilege to partake of this
Eucharist which createth, sustaineth and redeemeth all things.]
3. Hear Thou Me, for I am the Angel of PTAH-APOPHRASZ-RA (vide
the Rubric): this is Thy True Name, handed down to the Prophets of
KHEM.
[He now asserts that he is himself the “Angel” or messenger of his Angel;
that is, that he is a mind and body whose office is to receive and transmit
the Word of his Angel. He hails his Angel not only as “un-nefer” the
Perfection of “Asar” himself as a man, but as Ptah-Apophrasz-Ra, the
identity (Hadit) wrapped in the Dragon (Nuith) and thereby manifested as a
Sun (Ra-Hoor-Khuit). The “Egg” (or Heart) “girt with a Serpent” is a
cognate symbol; the idea is thus expressed later in the ritual. (See Liber
LXV which expands this to the uttermost.)]
SECTION B: AIR.
[The Adept passes from contemplation to action in the sections now
following B to Gg. He is to travel astrally around the circle, making the
appropriate pentagrams, sigils, and signs. His direction is widdershins. He
thus makes three curves, each covering three-fourths of the circle. He
should give the sign of the Enterer on passing the Kiblah, or Direction of
Boleskine. This picks up the Force naturally radiating from that point4 and
projects it in the direction of the path of the magician. The sigils are those
given in The Equinox Vol. I, No. 7, Plate X outside the square; the signs
those shewn in Vol. I, No. 2, Plate “The Signs of the Grades”. In these
invocations he should expand his girth and his stature to the utmost,5
assuming the form and the consciousness of the Elemental God of the

quarter. After this, he begins to vibrate the “Barbarous Names” of the
Ritual.
Now let him not only fill his whole being to the uttermost with the force
of the Names; but let him formulate his Will, understood thoroughly as the
dynamic aspect of his Creative Self, in an appearance symbolically apt, I
say not in the form of a Ray of Light, of a Fiery Sword, or of aught save
that bodily Vehicle of the Holy Ghost which is sacred to BAPHOMET, by
its virtue that concealeth the Lion and the Serpent that His Image may
appear adorably upon the Earth for ever.
Let then the Adept extend his Will beyond the Circle in this imagined
Shape and let it radiate with the Light proper to the Element invoked, and
let each Word issue along the shaft with passionate impulse, as if its voice
gave command thereto that it should thrust itself leapingly forward. Let also
each Word accumulate authority, so that the Head of the Shaft may plunge
twice as far for Second Word as for the First, and Four Times for the Third
as the Second, and thus to the end. Moreover, let the Adept fling forth his
whole consciousness thither. Then at the final Word, let him bring rushing
back his Will within himself, steadily streaming, and let him offer himself
to its points, as Artemis to PAN, that this perfectly pure concentration of the
Element purge him thoroughly, and possess him with its passion.
In this Sacrament being wholly at one with that Element, let the Adept
utter the Charge “Hear me, and make”, etc. with strong sense that this unity
with that quarter of the Universe confers upon him the fullest freedom and
privilege appurtenant thereto.]

Hear Me:
AR (O breathing, flowing Sun!)
ThIAF6 (O Sun IAF! O Lion-Serpent Sun, The Beast that whirlest forth, a
thunderbolt, begetter of Life!)
RhEIBET (Thou that flowest! Thou that goest!)
A-ThELE-BER-SET (Thou Satan-Sun Hadith that goest without Will!)
A (Thou Air! Breath! Spirit! Thou without bound or bond!)
BELAThA (Thou Essence, Air Swift-streaming, Elasticity!)

ABEU (Thou Wanderer, Father of All!)
EBEU (Thou Wanderer, Spirit of All!)
PhI-ThETA-SOE (Thou Shining Force of Breath! Thou Lion-Serpent Sun!
Thou Saviour, save!)
IB (Thou Ibis, secret solitary Bird, inviolate Wisdom, whose Word is Truth,
creating the World by its Magick!)
ThIAF (O Sun IAF! O Lion-Serpent Sun, The Beast that whirlest forth, a
thunderbolt, begetter of life!)
(The conception is of Air, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-Phallic Bird, ‘the
Holy Ghost' of a Mercurial Nature.)
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me; so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth,
on dry land and in the water; of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire, and
every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me.
[Let the Adept take note of the wording of the Charge. The “Firmament” is
the Ruach, the ‘mental plane'; it is the realm of Shu, or Zeus, where
revolves the Wheel of the Gunas, the Three forms7 of Being. The Aethyr is
the “akasha”, the “Spirit”, the Aethyr of physics, which is the framework on
which all forms are founded; it receives, records and transmits all impulses
without itself suffering mutation thereby. The “Earth” is the sphere wherein
the operation of these “fundamental” and aethyric forces appears to
perception. “Under the Earth” is the world of those phenomena which
inform those perceived projections, and determine their particular character.
“Dry land” is the place of dead “material things”, dry (i.e., unknowable)
because unable to act on our minds. “Water” is the vehicle whereby we feel
such things; “air” their menstruum wherein these feelings are mentally
apprehended. It is called “whirling” because of the instability of thought,
and the fatuity of reason, on which we are yet dependent for what we call
“life”. “Rushing Fire” is the world in which wandering thought burns up to
swift-darting Will. These four stages explain how the non-Ego is
transmuted into the Ego. A “Spell” of God is any form of consciousness,
and a “Scourge” any form of action.

The Charge, as a whole, demands for the Adept the control of every
detail of the Universe which His Angel has created as a means of
manifesting Himself to Himself. It covers command of the primary
projection of the Possible in individuality, in the antithetical artifice which
is the device of Mind, and in a balanced triplicity of modes or states of
being whose combinations constitute the characteristics of Cosmos. It
includes also a standard of structure, a rigidity to make reference possible.
Upon these foundations of condition which are not things in themselves, but
the cannon to which things conform, is builded the Temple of Being, whose
materials are themselves perfectly mysterious, inscrutable as the Soul, and
like the Soul imagining themselves by symbols which we may feel,
perceive, and adapt to our use without ever knowing the whole Truth about
them. The Adept sums up all these items by claiming authority over every
form of expression possible to Existence, whether it be a “spell” (idea) or a
“scourge” (act) of “God”, that is, of himself. The Adept must accept every
“spirit”, every “spell”, every “scourge”, as part of his environment, and
make them all “subject to” himself; that is, consider them as contributory
causes of himself. They have made him what he is. They correspond
exactly to his own faculties. They are all—ultimately—of equal importance.
The fact that he is what he is proves that each item is equilibrated. The
impact of each new impression affects the entire system in due measure. He
must therefore realize that every event is subject to him. It occurs because
he had need of it. Iron rusts because the molecules demand oxygen for the
satisfaction of their tendencies. They do not crave hydrogen; therefore
combination with that gas is an event which does not happen. All
experiences contribute to make us complete in ourselves. We feel ourselves
subject to them so long as we fail to recognize this; when we do, we
perceive that they are subject to us. And whenever we strive to evade an
experience, whatever it may be, we thereby do wrong to ourselves. We
thwart our own tendencies. To live is to change; and to oppose change is to
revolt against the law which we have enacted to govern our lives. To resent
destiny is thus to abdicate our sovereignty and to invoke death. Indeed, we
have decreed the doom of death for every breach of the law of life. And
every failure to incorporate any impression starves the particular faculty
which stood in need of it.
This Section B invokes Air in the East, with a shaft of golden glory.]

SECTION C: FIRE.
[The adept now invokes Fire in the South; flame red are the rays that burst
from his Verendum.]
I invoke Thee, the Terrible and Invisible God: Who dwellest in the Void
Place of the Spirit:
AR-O-GO-GO-RU-ABRAO (Thou spiritual Sun! Satan, Thou Eye, Thou
Lust! Cry aloud! Cry aloud! Whirl the Wheel, O my Father, O Satan, O
Sun!)
SOTOU (Thou, the Saviour!)
MUDORIO (Silence! Give me Thy Secret!)
PhALARThAO (Give me suck, Thou Phallus, Thou Sun!)
OOO (Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust! Satan, thou Eye, thou Lust! Satan, thou
Eye, thou Lust!)
AEPE (Thou self-caused, self-determined, exalted, Most High!)
The Bornless One (Vide Supra).
(The conception is of Fire, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-Phallic Lion of a
Uranian nature.)
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me; so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth,
on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire,
and every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me.
Section D: Water.
[He invokes Water in the West, his Wand billowing forth blue radiance.]
Hear Me:
RU-ABRA-IAF8 (Thou the Wheel, thou the Womb, that containeth the
Father IAF!)
MRIODOM (Thou the Sea, the Abode!)

BABALON-BAL-BIN-ABAFT (Babalon! Thou Woman of Whoredom!
Thou, Gate of the Great God ON! Thou Lady of the Understanding of the
Ways!)
ASAL-ON-AI (Hail Thou, the unstirred! Hail, sister and bride of ON, of
the God that is all and is none, by the Power of Eleven!)
APhEN-IAF (Thou Treasure of IAO!)
I (Thou Virgin twin-sexed! Thou Secret Seed! Thou inviolate Wisdom!)
PhOTETh (Abode of the Light)
ABRASAX (…of the Father, the Sun, of Hadith, of the spell of the Aeon of
Horus!)
AEOOU (Our Lady of the Western Gate of Heaven!)
ISChURE (Mighty art Thou!)
Mighty and Bornless One (Vide Supra)!
(The conception is of Water, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-Phallic DragonSerpent, of a Neptunian nature.)
Hear Me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth:
on dry Land and in the Water of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and
every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me.
SECTION E: EARTH.
[He goes to the North to invoke Earth; flowers of green flame flash from his
weapon. As practice makes the Adept perfect in this Work it becomes
automatic to attach all these complicated ideas and intentions to their
correlated words and acts. When this is attained he may go deeper into the
formula by amplifying its correspondences. Thus, he may invoke water in
the manner of water, extending his will with majestic and irresistible
motion, mindful of its impulse gravitation, yet with a suave and tranquil
appearance of weakness. Again, he may apply the formula of water to its
peculiar purpose as it surges back into his sphere, using it with conscious

skill for the cleansing and calming of the receptive and emotional elements
in his character, and for the solution or sweeping away of those tangled
weeds of prejudice which hamper him from freedom to act as he will.
Similar applications of the remaining invocations will occur to the Adept
who is ready to use them.]
I invoke Thee:
MA (O Mother! O Truth!)
BARRAIO (Thou Mass!9)
IOEL (Hail, Thou that art!)
KOThA (Thou hollow one!)
AThOR-e-BAL-O (Thou Goddess of Beauty and Love, whom Satan,
beholding, desireth!)
ABRAFT (The Fathers, male-female, desire Thee!)
(The conception is of Earth, glowing, inhabited by a Solar-Phallic
Hippopotamus10 of a Veneral nature.)
Hear Me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth:
on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire:
and every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me.
SECTION F: SPIRIT.
[The Adept now returns to the Tiphereth square of his Tau, and invokes
Spirit, facing toward Boleskine, by the active Pentagrams, the sigil called
the Mark of the Beast, and the Signs of L.V.X. He then vibrates the Names
extending his will in the same way as before, but vertically upward. At the
same time he expands the Source of that Will—the secret symbol of Self—
both about him and below, as if to affirm that Self, duplex as is its form,
reluctant to acquiesce in its failure to coincide with the Sphere of Nuith. Let
him now imagine, at the last Word, that the Head of his will, where his
consciousness is fixed, opens its fissure (the Brahmarandra-Cakkra, at the

junction of the cranial sutures) and exudes a drop of clear crystalline dew,
and that this pearl is his Soul, a virgin offering to his Angel, pressed forth
from his being by the intensity of his Aspiration.]
Hear Me:
AFT (Male-Female Spirits!)
ABAFT (Male-Female Sires!)
BAS-AUMGN (Ye that are Gods, going forth, uttering AUMGN. The Word
that goeth from (A) Free Breath, (U) through Willed Breath, (M) and
Stopped Breath, (GN) to Continuous Breath; thus symbolizing the whole
course of spiritual life. A is the formless Hero; U is the six-fold solar sound
of physical life, the triangle of Soul being entwined with that of Body; M is
the silence of “death”; GN is the nasal sound of generation & knowledge.)
ISAK (Identical Point!)
SA-BA-FT (Nuith! Hadith! Ra-Hoor-Khuit! Hail, Great Wild Beast! Hail,
IAO!)
SECTION Ff.
[With these words the Adept does not withdraw his will within him as in the
previous Sections. He thinks of them as a reflection of Truth on the surface
of the dew, where his Soul hides trembling. He takes them to be the first
formation in his consciousness of the nature of His Holy Guardian Angel.]
1. This is the Lord of the Gods:
[The “Gods” include all the conscious elements of his nature.]
2. This is the Lord of the Universe:
[The ‘Universe' includes all possible phenomena of which he can be aware.]
3. This is He whom the Winds fear.
[The “Winds” are his thoughts, which have prevented him from attaining to
his Angel.]

4. This is He, Who having made Voice by His commandment is Lord of
all Things; King, Ruler and Helper. Hear Me, and make all Spirits
subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of the Firmament and of the
Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth: on dry Land and in the
Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire: and every Spell and
Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me.
[His Angel has made “Voice”, the magical weapon which produces
“Words”, and these words have been the wisdom by which He hath created
all things. The “Voice” is necessary as the link between the Adept and his
Angel. The Angel is “King”, the One who “can”, the “source of authority
and the fount of honour”; also the King (or King's Son) who delivers the
Enchanted Princess, and makes her his Queen. He is “Ruler”, the
“unconscious Will”; to be thwarted no more by the ignorant and capricious
false will of the conscious man. And He is “Helper”, the author of the
infallible impulse that sends the Soul sweeping along the skies on its proper
path with such impetus that the attraction of alien orbs is no longer
sufficient to swerve it. The “Hear me” clause is now uttered by the normal
human consciousness, withdrawn to the physical body; the Adept must
deliberately abandon his attainment, because it is not yet his whole being
which burns up before the Beloved.]
SECTION G: SPIRIT.
[The Adept, though withdrawn, shall have maintained the Extension of his
Symbol. He now repeats the signs as before, save that he makes the Passive
Invoking Pentagram of Spirit. He concentrates his consciousness within his
Twin-Symbol of Self, and endeavours to send it to sleep. But if the
operation be performed properly, his Angel shall have accepted the offering
of Dew, and seized with fervour upon the extended symbol of Will towards
Himself. This then shall He shake vehemently with vibrations of love
reverberating with the Words of the Section. Even in the physical ears of the
adept there shall resound an echo thereof, yet he shall not be able to
describe it. It shall seem both louder than thunder, and softer than the
whisper of the night-wind. It shall at once be inarticulate, and mean more
than he hath ever heard.
Now let him strive with all the strength of his Soul to withstand the Will
of his Angel, concealing himself in the closest cell of the citadel of

consciousness. Let him consecrate himself to resist the assault of the Voice
and the Vibration until his consciousness faint away into Nothing. For if
there abide unabsorbed even one single atom of the false Ego, that atom
should stain the virginity of the True Self and profane the Oath; then that
atom should be so inflamed by the approach of the Angel that it should
overwhelm the rest of the mind, tyrannize over it, and become an insane
despot to the total ruin of the realm.
But, all being dead to sense, who then is able to strive against the
Angel? He shall intensify the stress of His Spirit so that His loyal legions of
Lion-Serpents leap from the ambush, awakening the adept to witness their
Will and sweep him with them in their enthusiasm, so that he consciously
partakes their purpose, and sees in its simplicity the solution of all his
perplexities. Thus then shall the Adept be aware that he is being swept
away through the column of his Will Symbol, and that His Angel is indeed
himself, with intimacy so intense as to become identity, and that not in a
single Ego, but in every unconscious element that shares in that manifold
uprush.
This rapture is accompanied by a tempest of brilliant light, almost
always, and also in many cases by an outburst of sound, stupendous and
sublime in all cases, though its character may vary within wide limits.11
The spate of stars shoots from the head of the Will-Symbol, and is
scattered over the sky in glittering galaxies. This dispersion destroys the
concentration of the adept, whose mind cannot master such mulitiplicy of
majesty; as a rule, he simply sinks stunned into normality, to recall nothing
of his experience but a vague though vivid impression of complete release
and ineffable rapture. Repetition fortifies him to realize the nature of his
attainment; and his Angel, the link once made, frequents him, and trains
him subtly to be sensitive to his Holy presence, and persuasion. But it may
occur, especially after repeated success, that the Adept is not flung back
into his mortality by the explosion of the Star-spate, but identified with one
particular “Lion-Serpent”, continuing conscious thereof until it finds its
proper place in Space, when its secret self flowers forth as a truth, which
the Adept may then take back to earth with him.
This is but a side issue. The main purpose of the Ritual is to establish
the relation of the subconscious self with the Angel in such a way that the
Adept is aware that his Angel is the Unity which expresses the sum of the
Elements of that Self, that his normal consciousness contains alien enemies

introduced by the accidents of environment, and that his Knowledge and
Conversation of His Holy Guardian Angel destroys all doubts and
delusions, confers all blessings, teaches all truth, and contains all delights.
But it is important that the Adept should not rest in mere inexpressible
realization of his rapture, but rouse himself to make the relation submit to
analysis, to render it in rational terms, and thereby enlighten his mind and
heart in a sense as superior to fanatical enthusiasm as Beethoven's music is
to West African war-drums.]

Hear Me:
IEOU (Indwelling Sun of Myself)
PUR (Thou Fire! Thou Sixfold Star initiator compassed about with Force
and Fire!)
IOU (Indwelling Soul of Myself)
PUR [Vide Supra]
IAFTh (Sun-lion Serpent, hail! All Hail, thou Great Wild Beast, thou IAO!)
IAEO (Breaths of my Soul, breaths of mine Angel.)
IOOU (Lust of my Soul, lust of mine Angel!)
ABRASAX [Vide Supra]
SABRIAM (Ho for the Sangraal! Ho for the Cup of Babalon! Ho for mine
Angel pouring Himself forth within my Soul!)
OO (The Eye! Satan, my Lord! The Lust of the Goat!)
FF (Mine Angel! Mine initiator! Thou one with me—theSixfold Star!)
AD-ON-A-I12 (My Lord! My secret self beyond self, Hadith, All Father!
Hail, ON, thou Sun, thou Life of Man, thou Fivefold Sword of Flame! Thou
Goat exalted upon Earth in Lust, thou Snake extended upon Earth in life!
Spirit most holy! Seed most wise! Innocent babe. Inviolate Maid! Begetter
of Being! Soul of all Souls! Word of all Words, Come forth, most hidden
Light!)

EDE (Devour thou me!)
EDU (Thou dost devour Me!)
ANGELOS TON ThEON (Thou Angel of the Gods!)
ANLALA (Arise thou in Me, free flowing, Thou who art Naught, who art
Naught, and utter thy Word!)
LAI (I also am Naught! I Will Thee! I behold Thee! My nothingness!)
GAIA (Leap up, thou Earth!) [This is also an agonizing appeal to the Earth,
the Mother; for at this point of the ceremony the Adept should be torn from
his mortal attachments, and die to himself in the orgasm of his operation.13]
AEPE (Thou Exalted One! It [i.e., the spiritual “semen”, the Adept's secret
ideas, drawn irresistibly from their “Hell”14 by the love of his Angel] leaps
up; it leaps forth!15)
DIATHARNA THORON (Lo! the outsplashing of the seeds of
Immortality!)
SECTION Gg: THE ATTAINMENT.
[The adept should have realized that his Act of Union with the angel
implies (1) the death of his old mind save in so far as his unconscious
elements preserve its memory when they absorb it, and (2) the death of his
unconscious elements themselves. But their death is rather a going forth to
renew their life through love. He then, by conscious comprehension of them
separately and together, becomes the “Angel” of his Angel, as Hermes is
the Word of Zeus, whose own voice is Thunder. Thus in this section the
adept utters articulately so far as words may, what his Angel is to Himself.
He says this, with his Scin-Laeca wholly withdrawn into his physical body,
constraining His Angel to indwell his heart.]
1. I am He! the Bornless Spirit! having sight in the feet: Strong, and the
Immortal Fire!
[“I am He” asserts the destruction of the sense of separateness between self
and Self. It affirms existence, but of the third person only. “The Bornless

Spirit” is free of all space, “having sight in the feet” that they may choose
their own path. “Strong” is GBR, the magician escorted by the Sun and the
Moon (See Liber D and Liber 777). The “Immortal Fire” is the creative
Self; impersonal energy cannot perish, no matter what forms it assumes.
Combustion is Love.]
2. I am He! the Truth!
[“Truth” is the necessary relation of any two things; therefore, although it
implies duality, it enables us to conceive of two things as being one thing
such that it demands to be defined by complementals. Thus, an hyperbola is
a simple idea, but its construction exacts two curves.]
3. I am He! Who hate that evil should be wrought in the World!
[The Angel, as the adept knows him, is a being in Tiphereth, which
obscures Kether. The Adept is not officially aware of the higher Sephiroth.
He cannot perceive, like the Ipsissimus, that all things soever are equally
illusion and equally Absolute. He is in Tiphereth, whose office is
Redemption, and he deplores the events which have caused the apparent
Sorrow from which he has just escaped. He is also aware, even in the height
of his ecstasy, of the limits and defects of his attainment.]
4. I am He, that lighteneth and thundereth!
[This refers to the phenomena which accompany his Attainment.]
5. I am He, from whom is the Shower of the Life of Earth!
[This means the recognition of the Angel as the True Self of his
subconscious self, the hidden Life of his physical life.]
6. I am He, whose mouth ever flameth!
[The Adept realizes every breath, every word of his Angel as charged with
creative fire. Tiphereth is the Sun, and the Angel is the spiritual Sun of the
Soul of the Adept.]
7. I am He, the Begetter and Manifester unto the Light!

[Here is summed the entire process of bringing the conditioned Universe to
knowledge of itself through the formula of generation;16 a soul implants
itself in sense-hoodwinked body and reason-fettered mind, makes them
aware of their Inmate, and thus to partake of its own consciousness of the
Light.]
8. I am He, The Grace of the Worlds!
[“Grace” has here its proper sense of “Pleasantness”. The existence of the
Angel is the justification of the device of creation.17]
9. “The Heart Girt with a Serpent” is my name!
[This line must be studied in the light of Liber LXV (The Equinox XI, p.
65).18]
SECTION H: THE “CHARGE TO THE SPIRIT.”
[This recapitulation demands the going forth together of the Adept and his
Angel “to do their pleasure on the Earth among the living.”]
Come thou forth, and follow me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me
so that every Spirit of the Firmament, and of the Ether, upon the Earth
and under the Earth: on dry Land, or in the Water: of Whirling Air or
of rushing Fire, and every Spell and Scourge of God, may be obedient
unto me!
SECTION J: THE PROCLAMATION OF THE BEAST 666.
IAF: SABAF
Such are the Words!
[The Beast 666 having devised the present method of using this Ritual,
having proved it by his own practice to be of infallible puissance when
properly performed, and now having written it down for the world, it shall
be an ornament for the Adept who adopts it to cry Hail to His name at the
end of his work. This shall moreover encourage him in Magick, to recall
that indeed there was One who attained by its use to the Knowledge and
Conversation of His Holy Guardian Angel, the which forsook him no more,
but made Him a Magus, the Word of the Aeon of Horus!

For know this, that the Name IAF in its most secret and mighty sense
declareth the Formula of the Magick of the BEAST whereby he wrought
many wonders. And because he doth will that the whole world shall attain
to this Art, He now hideth it herein so that the worthy may win to His
Wisdom.
Let I and F face all;19 yet ward their A from attack. The Hermit to
himself, The Fool to foes, The Hierophant to friends, Nine by nature,
Naught by attainment, Five by function. In speech swift, subtle and secret;
in thought creative, unbiased, unbounded; in act gentle, patient and
persistent. Hermes to hear, Dionysus to touch, Pan to behold.
A Virgin, a Babe, and a Beast!
A Liar, an Idiot, and a Master of Men!
A kiss, a guffaw, and a bellow; he that hath ears to hear, let him hear!
Take ten that be one, and one that is one in three, to conceal them in six!
Thy Wand to all Cups, and thy Disk to all Swords, but betray not thine
Egg!
Moreover also is IAF verily 666 by virtue of Number; and this is a
mystery of Mysteries; Who knoweth it, he is adept of adepts, and Mighty
among magicians!
Now this word SABAF, being by number Three score and Ten,20 is a
name of Ayin, the Eye, and the Devil our Lord, and the Goat of Mendes. He
is the Lord of the Sabbath of the Adepts, and is Satan, therefore also the
Sun, whose number of Magick is 666, the seal of His servant the BEAST.
But again SA is 61, AIN, the Naught of Nuith; BA means go, for
HADIT; and F is their Son the Sun who is Ra-Hoor-Khuit.
So then let the Adept set his sigil upon all the words he hath writ in the
Book of the Works of his Will.
And let him then end all, saying, Such are the Words!21 For by this he
maketh proclamation before all them that be about his Circle that these
Words are true and puissant, binding what he would bind, and loosing what
he would loose.
Let the Adept perform this Ritual aright, perfect in every part thereof,
once daily for one moon, then twice, at dawn and dusk, for two moons,
next, thrice, noon added, for three moons, afterwards, midnight making his
course, for four moons four times every day. Then let the Eleventh Moon be
consecrated wholly to this Work; let him be instant in continual ardour,

dismissing all but his sheer needs to eat and sleep.22 For know that the true
Formula23 whose virtue sufficed the Beast in this Attainment, was thus:

INVOKE OFTEN24
So may all men come at last to the Knowledge and Conversation of the
Holy Guardian Angel: thus sayeth the Beast, and prayeth His own Angel
that this book be as a burning Lamp, and as a living Spring, for Light and
Life to them that read therein.
666
POINT
III
SCHOLION ON SECTIONS G & Gg
The Adept who has mastered this Ritual, successfully realizing the full
import of this controlled rapture, ought not to allow his mind to loosen its
grip on the astral imagery of the Star-spate, Will-Symbol, or Soul-symbol,
or even to forget its duty to the body and the sensible surroundings. Nor
should he omit to keep his Body of Light in close touch with the
phenomena of its own plane, so that its privy consciousness may fulfil its
proper functions of protecting his scattered ideas from obsession.
But he should have acquired, by previous practice, the faculty of
detaching these elements of his consciousness from their articulate centre,
so that they become (temporarily) independent responsible units, capable of
receiving communications from headquarters at will, but perfectly able 1) to
take care of themselves without troubling their chief, and 2) to report to him
at the proper time. In a figure, they must be like subordinate officers,
expected to display self-reliance, initiative, and integrity in the execution of
the Orders of the Day.
The Adept should therefore be able to rely on these individual minds of
his to control their own conditions without interference from himself for the
time required, and to recall them in due course, receiving an accurate report
of their adventures.
This being so, the Adept will be free to concentrate his deepest self, that
part of him which unconsciously orders his true Will, upon the realization

of his Holy Guardian Angel. The absence of his bodily, mental and astral
consciousness is indeed cardinal to success, for it is their usurpation of his
attention which has made him deaf to his Soul, and his preoccupation with
their affairs that has prevented him from perceiving that Soul.
The effect of the Ritual has been:
a) to keep them so busy with their own work that they cease to distract him;
b) to separate them so completely that his soul is stripped of its sheaths;
c) to arouse in him an enthusiasm so intense as to intoxicate and anesthetize
him, that he may not feel and resent the agony of this spiritual vivisection,
just as bashful lovers get drunk on the wedding night, in order to brazen out
the intensity of shame which so mysteriously coexists with their desire;
d) to concentrate the necessary spiritual forces from every element, and
fling them simultaneously into the aspiration towards the Holy Guardian
Angel; and
e) to attract the Angel by the vibration of the magical voice which invokes
Him.
The method of the Ritual is thus manifold.
There is firstly an analysis of the Adept, which enables him to calculate
his course of action. He can decide what must be banished, what purified,
what consecrated. He can then concentrate his will upon its one essential
element, overcoming its resistance-which is automatic, like a physiological
reflex—by destroying inhibitions through his ego—overwhelming
enthusiasm.25 The other half of the work needs no such complex effort; for
his Angel is simple and unperplexed, ready at all times to respond to rightly
ordered approach.
But the results of the Ritual are too various to permit of rigid
description. One may say that, presuming the union to be perfect, the Adept
need not retain any memory soever of what has occurred. He may be
merely aware of a gap in his conscious life, and judge of its contents by
observing that his nature has been subtly transfigured. Such an experience
might indeed be the proof of perfection.
If the Adept is to be any wise conscious of his Angel it must be that
some part of his mind is prepared to realize the rapture, and to express it to

itself in one way or another. This involves the perfection of that part, its
freedom from prejudice and the limitations of rationality so-called.
For instance: one could not receive the illumination as to the nature of
life which the doctrine of evolution should shed, if one is passionately
persuaded that humanity is essentially not animal, or convinced that
causality is repugnant to reason. The Adept must be ready for the utter
destruction of his point of view on any subject, and even that of his innate
conception of the forms and laws of thought.26 Thus he may find that his
Angel consider his “business” or his “love” to be absurd trifles; also that
human ideas of “time” are invalid, and human “laws” of logic applicable
only to the relations between illusions.
Now the Angel will make contact with the Adept at any point that is
sensitive to His influence. Such a point will naturally be one that is salient
in the Adept's character, and also one that is, in the proper sense of the
word, pure.27
Thus an artist, attuned to appreciate plastic beauty is likely to receive a
visual impression of his Angel in a physical form which is sublimely
quintessential of his ideal. A musician may be rapt away by majestic
melodies such as he never hoped to hear. A philosopher may attain
apprehension of tremendous truths, the solution of problems that had
baffled him all his life.
Conformably with this doctrine, we read of illuminations, experienced
by simple-minded men, such as a workman who “saw God” and likened
Him to “a quantity of little pears.” Again, we know that ecstasy, impinging
upon unbalanced minds, inflames the idolized idea, and produces fanatical
faith fierce even to frenzy, with intolerance and insanely disordered energy
which is yet so powerful as to effect the destinies of empires.
But the phenomena of the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy
Guardian Angel are a side issue; the essence of the Union is the intimacy.
Their intimacy (or rather identity) is independent of all partial forms of
expression; at its best it is therefore as inarticulate as Love.
The intensity of the consummation will more probably compel a sob or
a cry, some natural physical gesture of animal sympathy with the spiritual
spasm. This is to be criticized as incomplete self-control. Silence is nobler.
In any case the Adept must be in communion with his Angel, so that his
Soul is suffused with sublimity, whether intelligible or not in terms of
intellect. It is evident that the stress of such spiritual possession must tend

to overwhelm the soul, especially at first. It actually suffers from the excess
of its ecstasy, just as extreme love produces vertigo. The soul sinks and
swoons. Such weakness is fatal alike to its enjoyment and its apprehension.
“Be strong! then canst thou bear more rapture!” sayeth the Book of the
Law.28
The Adept must therefore play the man, arousing himself to harden his
soul.
To this end, I, the Beast have made trial and proof of divers devices. Of
these the most potent is to set the body to strive with the soul. Let the
muscles take grip on themselves as if one were wrestling. Let the jaw and
mouth, in particular, be tightened to the utmost. Breathe deeply, slowly, yet
strongly. Keep mastery over the mind by muttering forcibly and audibly.
But lest such muttering tend to disturb communion with the Angel, speak
only His Name. Until the Adept have heard that Name, therefore, he may
not abide in the perfect possession of his Beloved. His most important task
is thus to open his ears to the voice of his Angel, that he may know him,
how he is called. For hearken! this Name, understood rightly and fully,
declareth the nature of the Angel in every point, wherefore also that Name
is the formula of the perfection to which the Adept must aspire, and also of
the power of Magick by virtue whereof he must work.
He then that is as yet ignorant of that Name, let him repeat a word
worthy of this particular Ritual. Such are Abrahadabra, the Word of the
Aeon, which signifieth “The Great Work accomplished”; and Aumgn
interpreted in Part III of Book 4;29 and the name of THE BEAST, for that
His number showeth forth this Union with the Angel, and His Work is no
other than to make all men partakers of this Mystery of the Mysteries of
Magick.
So then saying this word or that, let the Adept wrestle with his Angel
and withstand Him, that he may constrain Him to consent to continue in
communion until the consciousness becomes capable of clear
comprehension, and of accurate transmission30 of the transcendent Truth of
the Beloved to the heart that holds him.
The firm repetition of one of these Words ought to enable the Adept to
maintain the state of Union for several minutes, even at first.
In any case he must rekindle his ardour, esteeming his success rather as
an encouragement to more ardent aspiration than as a triumph. He should
increase his efforts.

Let him beware of the ‘lust of result', of expecting too much, of losing
courage if his first success is followed by a series of failures.
For success makes success seem so incredible that one is apt to create
an inhibition fatal to subsequent attempts. One fears to fail; the fear intrudes
upon the concentration and so fulfils its own prophecy. We know how too
much pleasure in a love affair makes one afraid to disgrace oneself on the
next few occasions; indeed, until familiarity has accustomed one to the idea
that one's lover has never supposed one to be more than human. Confidence
returns gradually. Inarticulate ecstasy is replaced by a more sober
enjoyment of the elements of the fascination.
Just so one's first dazzled delight in a new landscape turns, as one
continues to gaze, to the appreciation of exquisite details of the view. At
first they were blurred by the blinding rush of general beauty; they emerge
one by one as the shock subsides, and passionate rapture yields to
intelligent interest.
In the same way the Adept almost always begins by torrential lyrics
panting out mystical extravagances about “ineffable love,” “unimaginable
bliss,” “inexpressible infinities of illimitable utterness.”31 He usually loses
his sense of proportion, of humour, of reality, and of sound judgment. His
ego is often inflated to bursting point, till he would be abjectly ridiculous if
he were not so pitifully dangerous to himself and others. He also tends to
take his new-found “truths of illumination” for the entire body of truth, and
insists that they must be as valid and vital for all men as they happen to be
for himself.
It is wise to keep silence about those things “unlawful to utter” which
one may have heard “in the seventh heaven.” This may not apply to the
sixth.
The Adept must keep himself in hand, however tempted to make a new
heaven and a new earth in the next few days by trumpeting his triumphs. He
must give time a chance to redress his balance, sore shaken by the impact of
the Infinite.
As he becomes adjusted to intercourse with his Angel, he will find his
passionate ecstasy develop a quality of peace and intelligibility which adds
power, while it informs and fortifies his mental and moral qualities instead
of obscuring and upsetting them. He will by now have become able to
converse with his Angel, impossible as it once seemed; for he now knows
that the storm of sound which he supposed to be the Voice was only the

clamour of his own confusions. The “infinity” nonsense was born of his
own inability to think clearly beyond his limits, just as a Bushman,
confronted by numbers above five, can only call them “many.”
The truth told by the Angel, immensely as it extends the horizon of the
Adept, is perfectly definite and precise. It does not deal in ambiguities and
abstractions. It possesses form, and confesses law, in exactly the same way
and degree as any other body of truth. It is to the truth of the material and
intellectual spheres of man very much what the Mathematics of Philosophy
with its “infinite series” and “Cantorian continuity” is to school-boy
arithmetic. Each implies the other, though by that one may explore the
essential nature of existence, and by this a pawnbroker's profits.
This then is the true aim of the Adept in this whole operation, to
assimilate himself to his Angel by continual conscious communion. For his
Angel is an intelligible image of his own true Will, to do which is the whole
of the law of his Being.
Also the Angel appeareth in Tiphereth, which is the heart of the Ruach,
and thus the Centre of Gravity of the Mind. It is also directly inspired from
Kether, the ultimate Self, through the Path of the High Priestess, or initiated
intuition. Hence the Angel is in truth the Logos or articulate expression of
the whole Being of the Adept, so that as he increases in the perfect
understanding of His name, he approaches the solution of the ultimate
problem: Who he himself truly is.
Unto this final statement the Adept may trust his Angel to lead him; for
the Tiphereth-consciousness alone is connected by paths with the various
parts of his mind.32 None therefore save He hath the knowledge requisite
for calculating the combinations of conduct which will organize and
equilibrate the forces of the Adept, against the moment when it becomes
necessary to confront the Abyss. The Adept must control a compact and
coherent mass if he is to make sure of hurling it from him with a clean-cut
gesture.
I, The Beast 666, lift up my voice and swear that I myself have been
brought hither by mine Angel. After that I had attained unto the
Knowledge and Conversation of Him by virtue of mine ardour
towards Him, and of this Ritual that I bestow upon men my fellows,
and most of His great Love that He beareth to me, yea, verily, He
led me to the Abyss; He bade me fling away all that I had and all

that I was; and He forsook me in that Hour. But when I came
beyond the Abyss, to be reborn within the womb of BABALON,
then came he unto me abiding in my virgin heart, its Lord and
Lover!
Also He made me a Magus, speaking through His Law, the Word
of the new Aeon, the Aeon of the Crowned and Conquering Child.33
Thus he fulfilled my will to bring full freedom to the race of Men.
Yea, he wrought also in me a Work of Wonder beyond this, but in
this matter I am sworn to hold my peace.

A figure from Aleister Crowley's Magick (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1974), p. 51.
The above figure is an example of a working script of Liber Samekh,
which includes only the words, directions, and diagrams necessary to
memorize and rehearse the ceremony. I remind the reader that this is my
own innovation of the ritual. It should not be confused with Crowley's
original Liber Samekh or be construed as an official document.

CEREMONY OF THE INVOCATION
OF THE
HOLY GUARDIAN ANGEL
CONSTRUCTED BY
L. M. D. 34
based upon the text and notes of
Aleister Crowley's

LIBER SAMEKH

The preamble: he makes a general concentration of all his magical
forces and a declaration of his will.
The Ar Thiao section. He travels to the infinite East among the hosts
of angels summoned by the words. A sort of “Rising on the Planes”
but in a horizontal direction.
The same remarks apply to the next three section in the other quarters.

At the great invocation following he extends the Shivalingam to
infinite height, each letter of each word representing an exaltation of it
by geometrical progression. Having seen this satisfactorily, he
prostrates himself in adoration.
When consciousness begins to return, he uses the final formula to raise
that consciousness in the Shivalingam, springing to his feet at the
moment of uniting himself with it, and lastly uttering that supreme
song of the initiate beginning: “I am He, the Bornless Spirit, having
sight in the feet; strong and the Immortal Fire!”
(Thus performed, the invocation means about half an hour of the most
intense magical work imaginable—a minute of it would represent the
equivalent of about twelve hours of Asana.)35
—EQUINOX VOL. I NO. VIII.

“Let the Adept perform this Ritual aright, perfect in every part thereof, once
daily for one moon, then twice, at dawn and dusk, for two moons, next,
thrice, noon added, for three moons, afterwards, midnight making his
course, for four moons four times every day. Then let the Eleventh Moon be
consecrated wholly to this Work; let him be instant in continual ardour,
dismissing all but his sheer needs to eat and sleep. For know that the true
Formula whose virtue sufficed the Beast in this Attainment, was thus:
INVOKE OFTEN.”
[Prior to the Invocation, the temple is banished, purified, and consecrated as
the Adept has skill to execute. Upon the temple floor is inscribed a circle
surrounding the inverted Tau Cross of the Sephiroth. The Adept is dressed
as an Adeptus Minor, armed with Wand and Cup and stands in the circle
upon the square of Tiphereth. The entire ritual is performed throughout in
his Body of Light.]
THE OATH
Thee I invoke, the Bornless One.
Thee, that didst create the Earth and the Heavens.
Thee, that didst create the Night and the Day.
Thee, that didst create the darkness and the Light.

Thou art RA-HOOR-KHUIT, Myself made Perfect: Whom no man
hath seen at any time.
Thou art IA-BESZ
Thou art IA-APOPHRASZ
Thou has distinguished between the Just and the Unjust.
Thou didst make the Female and the Male.
Thou didst produce the Seeds and the Fruit.
Thou didst form Men to love one another, and to hate one another.
I am _____________36 thy Prophet, unto Whom Thou didst commit
Thy Mysteries, the Ceremonies of THELEMA.
Thou didst produce the moist and the dry, and that which nourisheth
all created Life.
Hear Thou Me, for I am the Angel of NU, the Angel of HAD, the Angel
of RA-HOOR-KHU: this is Thy True Name, handed down to the
Prophets of THELEMA. [Pass widdershins to East. Make invoking
Pentagrams (active Spirit and Air) with appropriate signs, sigil, and
words.]

Hear Me:
AR ThIAF RhEIBET A-ThELE-BER-SET A BELAThA
ABEU EBEU PhI-ThETA-SOE IB ThIAF
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me; so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth,
on dry land and in the water; of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire, and
every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. [Pass
widdershins to South. Make invoking Pentagrams (active Spirit and Fire)
with appropriate signs, sigil, and words.]

I invoke Thee, the Terrible and Invisible God:

Who dwellest in the Void Place of the Spirit:
AR-O-GO-GO-RU-ABRAO SOTOU MUDORIO
PhALARThAO OOO AEPE
The Bornless One.
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me; so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth,
on dry land and in the water; of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire, and
every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. [Pass
widdershins to West. Make invoking Pentagrams (passive Spirit and Water)
with appropriate signs, sigil, and words.]

Hear Me:
RU-ABRA-IAF MRIODOM
BABALON-BAL-BIN-ABAFT. ASAL-ON-AI APhEN-IAF
I PhOTETh ABRASAK AEOOU ISChURE
Mighty and Bornless One!
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth:
on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire:
and every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. [Pass
widdershins to North. Make invoking Pentagrams (passive Spirit and Earth)
with appropriate signs, sigil, and words.]

I invoke Thee:
MA BARRAIO IOEL KOThA AThOR-e-BAL-O ABRAFT
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth:
on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire:

and every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. [Pass
widdershins and return to Square of Tiphereth. Make invoking Pentagram
of Spirit active with appropriate word and sign; trace the Mark of the Beast
and give L.V.X. signs.]

Hear me:
AFT ABAFT BAS-AUMGN. ISAK SA-BA-FT
[Fall prostrate in adoration].
This is the Lord of the Gods:
This is the Lord of the Universe:
This is He whom the Winds fear.
This is He, Who having made Voice by His commandment is Lord
of all Things; King, Ruler and Helper.
Hear Me, and make all Spirits subject unto Me: so that every Spirit of
the Firmament and of the Ether: upon the Earth and under the Earth:
on dry Land and in the Water: of Whirling Air, and of rushing Fire:
and every Spell and Scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. [Make
invoking Pentagram of Spirit passive with appropriate word and sign; trace
the Mark of the Beast and give L.V.X. signs.]

Hear Me:
IEOU PUR IOU PUR IAFTh IAEO IOOU ABRASAX
SABRIAM OO FF AD-ON-A-I EDE EDU ANGELOS TON
ThEON ANLALA LAI GAIA AEPE DIATHARNA
THORON [Resume standing].
I am He! the Bornless Spirit! having sight in the feet: Strong, and the
Immortal Fire!
I am He! the Truth!
I am He! Who hate that evil should be wrought in the World!

I am He, that lighteneth and thundereth!
I am He, from whom is the Shower of the Life of Earth!
I am He, whose mouth ever flameth!
I am He, the Begetter and Manifester unto the Light!
I am He, The Grace of the Worlds!
“The Heart Girt with a Serpent” is my name!
Come thou forth, and follow me: and make all Spirits subject unto Me
so that every Spirit of the Firmament, and of the Ether, upon the Earth
and under the Earth: on dry Land, or in the Water: of Whirling Air or
of rushing Fire, and every Spell and Scourge of God, may be obedient
unto me!
IAF: SABAF
Such are the Words!

CHAPTER NINE

THE SOLAR RITES
There is a secret door that I shall make to establish thy way in all the
quarters, (these are the adorations, as thou hast written)….
—LIBER AL VEL LEGIS, III, XXXVIII.

ithin a religious context, the Magick of
Thelema could accurately be described as
Solar worship. The only thing new and
revolutionary about it is the “worshiper's”
relation to the Sun. It doesn't take very long for the modern student of
comparative religion to see the countless similarities and parallels inherent
in the world's so-called Great Religions. We might even say (if we allow
ourselves the emancipation of a truly open mind), that the religions of the
past are really only aspects of one religion whose universal object of
worship is the Sun, and whose ceremonies, observances, and holy days are
based upon the recurring yearly passion play that is the solar calendar.
Terrestrial life pantomimes the Sun's life-creating qualities in the
reproductive capabilities of the each organism. Our ancestors drew a direct
parallel between the Sun and the phallus, and between sunlight, blood, and
semen. This correlation assumes increasingly profound dimensions as we
apply our greater understanding of astronomy, physics, and medicine to this
great evolving religion.
The simple “truth” of the death of the Sun was destroyed by the “truth”
of the heliocentric system, which is destroyed by the “truth” that our solar
system revolves around a central something which may very well be a black
and inscrutable negative dimension. Theoretically all of this originated as a
compact, pre-existent, negative singularity (which for some reason could
not contain itself), and in all likelihood will someday withdraw everything
back into nothingness.

W

Meanwhile we are discovering that everything we were, are, and shall
be is encoded upon a chemical “chip” called DNA, which impresses itself
upon our cells, and flows like an eternal river through the blood of infinite
generations whose most important function is to serve as organic “ark” for
this evolving superlife.
All of the Thelemic rituals express the formulae of the new solar
consciousness, but two in particular incorporate the Sun itself as the central
element of ceremony: Liber Resh and The Mass of the Phoenix.
Resh is a simple series of four adorations which are performed at dawn,
noon, sunset, and midnight. These are formatted as classic Egyptian
adorations, but customized to satisfy Crowley's idea of the new magical
formulae. Resh serves as an excellent form of background concentration
which requires us to acknowledge our magical relationship with the Sun at
least four times in our busy day.
The object of this practice is firstly to remind the aspirant at regular
intervals of the Great Work; secondly, to bring him into conscious
personal relation with the centre of our system; and thirdly, for
advanced students, to make actual magical contact with the spiritual
energy of the sun and thus to draw actual force from him.1
The Mass of the Phoenix is a Eucharistic ceremony created to be
celebrated at sunset in order to fortify the magician's awareness of the Sun
during its nighttime journey. Like The Star Ruby and The Star Sapphire, it
first appeared in print in The Book Of Lies where it was positioned as
Chapter 44.2
Because there appears to be an element of self-mutilation in The Mass
of the Phoenix, there continues to be considerable misunderstanding about
the ritual, and outrageous statements by extremists on both ends of the
magical spectrum have caused many serious students to avoid it altogether.
Crowley wrote in chapter 20 of Magick in Theory and Practice, that the
Mass of the Phoenix “…should be performed daily at sunset by every
magician.” Did he really expect us to risk our health by slashing our chests
open each evening?
I confess that as an overzealous young fool, I celebrated The Mass of
the Phoenix by using a surgeon's scalpel in place of the Burin to “…make
the proper sign.” To my amazement the blade painlessly disappeared
almost entirely into the flesh of my chest before I realized what was

happening. The cut was extremely clean, and for a moment there was no
bleeding whatsoever. Then it came…quickly running in a thick stream over
the front of my body. Determined to complete the ceremony, I tried to
“Staunch the blood” with the Cake of Light,3 only to have it disintegrate in
my fingers in a flood of warm blood. The sun was half obscured by the
horizon, and its soft orange light bathed my blood-soaked chest and fingers.
I bolted for the bathroom as I nervously parroted “…with mirth I now go
forth, and with thanksgiving, to do my pleasure on the earth among the
legions of the living.” I was frightened, agitated, injured, and embarrassed. I
did not feel very spiritual.
Let the blood of my sacrifice wash you clean of any temptation to do
such a stupid thing to yourself!
It is obvious from the text that the magician is to actually draw blood in
order to consecrate the Cake of Light before consuming it. But nowhere is it
indicated that pain, scarring, or injury is a required element of the
ceremony. It is a Eucharist, not a ritual of self-mutilation.
An excellent way to “make the proper sign”4 is to use a machinist's
scribe (a rod of steel tapered to an extremely sharp point). It is easy to
sterilize and, if one is careful, it is possible to lightly scratch the symbol on
the flesh. This will remain visible for several hours. By applying just a little
more pressure to a small area of the scratch, the tool will break the skin just
enough for a tiny drop of blood to rise to the surface. This fulfills the literal
interpretation of the ritual without harm to the magician, and allows him or
her to concentrate on the real purpose of the ceremony, namely a solar
Eucharist.
The ideal setting for The Mass of the Phoenix is outdoors, or before a
window opened to accommodate a view of the setting Sun. The ritual is so
brief that the magician can begin as the Sun first touches the horizon and
have time to “charge” the blood on the chest with the last rays of the setting
Sun. This solar-consecrated Holy Blood is then trapped in the Cake of Light
and eaten by the magician. When the Mass is over, the essence of the Sun is
safely sheltered until dawn in the body of the magician. If performed
regularly and over a period of time, the body of the magician will be
renewed, cell by cell, by this divine solar nourishment.
It is rare for someone to have a lifestyle which would accommodate the
perpetual celebration of The Mass of the Phoenix, but it is an excellent
component in the daily regimen of a Magical Retirement. Liber Resh is so

short that it can be performed, at least in an informal format, almost
anywhere, and Crowley urged his students to never omit its observance.5

LIBER RESH VEL HELIOS
SUB FIGURA CC6

0. These are the adorations to be performed by aspirants to the A A
1. Let him greet the Sun at dawn, facing East, giving the sign of his grade.
And let him say in a loud voice: Hail unto Thee who art Ra in Thy rising,
even unto Thee who art Ra in Thy strength, who travellest over the
Heavens in Thy bark at the Uprising of the Sun.
Tahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and Ra-Hoor abideth
at the helm.
Hail unto Thee from the Abodes of Night!

2. Also at Noon, let him greet the Sun, facing South giving the sign of his
grade. And let him say in a loud voice: Hail unto Thee who art Ahathoor
in Thy triumphing, even unto Thee who art Ahathoor in Thy beauty,
who travellest over the Heavens in Thy bark at the Mid-course of the
Sun.
Tahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and Ra-Hoor abideth
at the helm.
Hail unto Thee from the Abodes of Morning!
3. Also at Sunset, let him greet the Sun, facing West giving the sign of his
grade. And let him say in a loud voice: Hail unto Thee who art Tum in
Thy setting, even unto Thee who art Tum in Thy joy, who travellest
over the Heavens in Thy bark at the Down-going of the Sun.
Tahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and Ra-Hoor abideth
at the helm.
Hail unto Thee from the Abodes of Day!
4. Lastly, at Midnight, let him greet the Sun, facing North giving the sign of
his grade. And let him say in a loud voice: Hail unto Thee who art
Khephra in Thy hiding, even unto Thee who art Khephra in Thy
silence, who travellest over the Heavens in Thy bark at the Midnight
Hour of the Sun.
Tahuti standeth in His splendour at the prow, and Ra-Hoor abideth
at the helm.
Hail unto Thee from the Abodes of Evening!
5. And after each of these invocations thou shalt give the sign of silence,
and afterward thou shalt perform the adoration that is taught thee by thy
Superior. And then do thou compose Thyself to holy meditation.
6. Also it is better if in these adorations thou assume the God-form of
Whom thou adorest, as if thou didst unite with Him in the adoration of That
which is beyond Him.
7. Thus shalt thou ever be mindful of the Great Work which thou hast
undertaken to perform, and thus shalt thou be strengthened to pursue it unto
the attainment of the Stone of the Wise, the Summum Bonum, True
Wisdom and Perfect Happiness.

AUTHOR'S NOTES AND COMMENTS
1. The imagery is that of the Egyptian Solar barge (bark), which every
evening at sunset, carries the glorified Osiris from the western horizon
through the land of the Dead, and brings the eternal Sun safely under the
Earth to dawn on the eastern horizon each morning as Ra.
Tahuti (Thoth), the Ibis-headed psychopomp of the Egyptians, is
stationed at the prow, and Horus, the Son of the Sun, acts as divine
helmsman.
2. Ahathoor—the Egyptian Venus whose month of November (Scorpio)
marks the cross quarter of the year when darkness triumphs over the light.
3. Tum, Tmu—God of the West, the setting Sun—God of the Sun at night.
4. Khephra—As the Egyptian desert scarab perpetually rolls a ball of dung
in which her eggs are stored, so too Khephra, the celestial scarab, rolls the
sphere of the Sun across the heavens.
5. According to some accounts, Crowley taught residents of the Abbey of
Thelema to recite the following portions of The Book of the Law as the
adorations:
Unity uttermost showed!
I adore the might of Thy breath,
Supreme and terrible God,
Who makest the gods and death
To tremble before Thee:—
I, I adore thee!
Appear on the throne of Ra!
Open the ways of the Khu!
Lighten the ways of the Ka!
The ways of the Khabs run through
To stir me or still me!
Aum! let it fill me!
The light is mine; its rays consume
Me: I have made a secret door
Into the House of Ra and Tum,

Of Khephra and of Ahathoor.
I am thy Theban, O Mentu,
The prophet Ankh-af-na-khonsu!
By Bes-na-Maut my breast I beat;
By wise Ta-Nech I weave my spell.
Show thy star-splendour, O Nuit!
Bid me within thine House to dwell,
O wingèd snake of light, Hadit!
Abide with me, Ra-Hoor-Khuit!7
6. This is a particularly effective exercise, especially for the magician who
is learning (or already proficient in) the assumption of god-forms.

LIBER XLIV
THE MASS OF THE PHOENIX

The magician, his breast bare, stands before an altar on which are his Burn,
Bell, Thurible, and two of the Cakes of Light. In the Sign of the Enterer he
reaches West across the Altar, and cries:
Hail Ra, that goest in Thy bark
Into the caverns of the Dark!
He gives the sign of Silence, and takes the Bell, and Fire, in his hands.
East of the Altar see me stand
With Light and Musick in mine hand!

He strikes Eleven times upon the Bell 333-55555-333 and places the Fire in
the Thurible.
I strike the Bell: I light the Flame:
I utter the mysterious Name.
ABRAHADABRA
He strikes Eleven times upon the Bell.
Now I begin to pray: Thou Child,
Holy Thy name and undefiled!
Thy reign is come; Thy will is done.
Here is the Bread; here is the Blood.
Bring me through midnight to the Sun!
Save me from Evil and from Good!
That Thy one crown of all the Ten
Even now and here be mine. AMEN.
He puts the first Cake on the Fire of the Thurible.
I burn the Incense-cake, proclaim
These adorations of Thy name.
He makes them8 as in Liber Legis, and strikes again Eleven times upon the
Bell. With the Burin he then makes upon his breast the proper sign.
Behold this bleeding breast of mine
Gashed with the sacramental sign!
He puts the second Cake to the wound.
I stanch the blood; the wafer soaks
It up, and the high priest invokes!
He eats the second Cake.
This Bread I eat. This Oath I swear
As I enflame myself with prayer:
“There is no grace: there is no guilt:,
This is the Law: DO WHAT THOU WILT!”

He strikes Eleven times upon the Bell, and cries
ABRAHADABRA.
I entered in with woe; with mirth
I now go forth, and with thanksgiving,
To do my pleasure on the earth
Among the legions of the living.
He goeth forth.

KEΦAΛHΞB9
TWIG?
The Phoenix hath a Bell for Sound; Fire for Sight; a Knife for Touch; two
cakes, one for taste, the other for smell.
He standeth before the Altar of the Universe at Sunset, when Earth-life
fades.
He summons the Universe, and crowns it with MAGICK Light to replace
the sun of natural light.
He prays unto, and gives homage to, Ra-Hoor-Khuit; to Him he then
sacrifices.
The first cake, burnt, illustrates the profit drawn from the scheme of
incarnation.
The second, mixt with his life's blood and eaten, illustrates the use of the
lower life to feed the higher life.
He then takes the Oath and becomes free—unconditioned—the Absolute.
Burning up in the Flame of his Prayer, and born again—the Phoenix!

CHAPTER TEN

THELEMIC MYSTICISM
The other images group around me to support me: let all be
worshipped for they shall cluster to exalt me. I am the visible object of
worship; the others are secret; for the Beast & his Bride are they: and
for the winners of the Ordeal x. What is this? Thou shalt know.
—LIBER AL VEL LEGIS III., 22

inally we come to two extraordinary works
which are unique among the Class D Rituals.
In fact, all the rituals we have discussed so far
could be considered as preparatory exercises
to the High Magick embodied in them. Liber NV and Liber HAD1 are the
instructional papers for the invocations of the highest concepts of Thelemic
cosmology, Nuit and Hadit.
While these invocations are obviously magical in their execution, they
are undeniably mystical in their essence, for they require that the magician
not only do something but be something. Quite simply put, to invoke Nuit,
the magician must be Hadit; and to invoke Hadit, one must be Nuit.
This is a pretty tall order, and most likely will not become the allconsuming preoccupation of most of the current inhabitants of our planet.
Liber NV and Liber Had are for the “winners of the Ordeal x.”2

F

LIBER NV
SUB FIGURA XI
A

A

Publication in Class D.

(for Winners of the Ordeal X).

000. This is the Book of the Cult of the Infinite Without.
00. The Aspirant is Hadit. Nuit is the infinite expansion of the Rose; Hadit
the infinite concentration of the Rood.
(Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.).
0. First let the Aspirant learn in his heart the First Chapter of The Book of
the Law.
(Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.)

1. Worship, i.e., identify thyself with, the Khabs, the secret Light within the
Heart. Within this, again, unextended, is Hadit.
This is the first practice of Meditation (ccxx. I. 6 and 21).
2. Adore and understand the Rim of the Stélé of Revealing.
Above, the gemmèd azure is
The naked splendour of Nuit;
She bends in ecstasy to kiss
The secret ardours of Hadit.
This is the first practice of Intelligence (ccxx. I. 14).
3. Avoid any act of choice or discrimination.
This is the first practice of Ethics (ccxx. I. 22).
4. Consider of six and fifty that 50 ÷ 6 = 0.12.
0 the circumference, Nuit.
• the centre, Hadit.
1 the unity proceeding, Ra-Hoor-Khuit.
2 the world of illusion.
Nuit thus comprehends All in None.
Also 50 + 6 = 56 = 5 + 6 = 11, the key of all Rituals.
And 50 × 6 = 300, the Spirit of the Child within.
(Note N
72, the Shemhamphorash and the Quinaries of the Zodiac,
etc.)
This is the second practice of Intelligence (ccxx. I. 24, 25).
5. The Result of this Practice is the Consciousness of the Continuity of
Existence, the Omnipresence of the Body of Nuit.
In other words, the Aspirant is conscious only of the Infinite Universe
as a single Being. [Note for this the importance of Paragraph 3.—Ed.]3
This is the first lndication of the Nature of the Result (ccxx. I. 26).
6. Meditate upon Nuit as the Continuous One resolved into None and Two
as the phases of her being. [For the Universe being self-contained must be
capable of expression by the formula (n – n) = 0. For if not, let it be

expressed by the formula n – m p. That is, the Infinite moves otherwise than
within itself, which is absurd.—Ed.]
This is the second practice of Meditation (ccxx. I. 27).
7. Meditate upon the facts of Samadhi on all planes, the liberation of heat in
chemistry, joy in natural history, Ananda in religion, when two things join
to lose themselves in a third.
This is the third practice of Meditation (ccxx. I. 28, 29, 30).
8. Let the Aspirant pay utmost reverence to the Authority of the A A
and follow Its instructions, and let him swear a great Oath of Devotion unto
Nuit.
This is the second practice of Ethics (ccxx. I. 32).
9. Let the Aspirant beware of the slightest exercise of his will against
another being. Thus, lying is a better posture than sitting or standing, as it
opposes less resistance to gravitation. Yet his first duty is to the force
nearest and most potent; e.g. he may rise to greet a friend.
This is the third practice of Ethics (ccxx. I. 41).
10. Let the Aspirant exercise his will without the least consideration for any
other being. This direction cannot be understood, much less accomplished,
until the previous practice has been perfected.
This is the fourth practice of Ethics (ccxx. I. 42, 43, 44).
11. Let the Aspirant comprehend that these two practices are identical.
This is the third practice of Intelligence (ccxx. I. 45).
12. Let the Aspirant live the Life Beautiful and Pleasant. For this freedom
hath he won. But let each act, especially of love, be devoted wholly to his
true mistress, Nuit.
This is the fifth practice of Ethics (ccxx. I. 51, 52, 61, 63).
13. Let the Aspirant yearn toward Nuit under the stars of Night, with a love
directed by his Magical Will, not merely proceeding from the heart.

This is the first practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 57).
14. The Result of this Practice in the subsequent life of the Aspirant is to fill
him with unimaginable joys: to give him certainty concerning the nature of
the phenomenon called death; to give him peace unutterable, rest, and
ecstasy.
This is the second Indication of the Nature of the Result (ccxx. I. 58).
15. Let the Aspirant prepare a perfume of resinous woods and gums,
according to his inspiration.
This is the second practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 59).
16. Let the Aspirant prepare a Pantacle, as follows:
Inscribe a circle within a Pentagram, upon a ground square or of such other
convenient shape as he may choose. Let the circle be scarlet, the Pentagram
black, the ground royal blue studded with golden stars.
Within the circle, at its centre, shall be painted a sigil that shall be
revealed to the Aspirant by Nuit Herself.
And this Pentacle shall serve for a Telesmatic Image, or as an Eidolon,
or as a Focus for the mind.
This is the third practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 60).
17. Let the Aspirant find a lonely place, if possible a place in the Desert of
Sand, or if not, a place unfrequented, and without objects to disturb the
view. Such are moorlands, fens, the open sea, broad rivers, and open fields.
Also, and especially, the summits of mountains.
There let him invoke the Goddess as he hath Wisdom and
Understanding so to do. But let this Invocation be that of a pure heart, i.e., a
heart wholly devoted to Her, and let him remember that it is Hadit Himself
in the most secret place thereof that invoketh. Then let this serpent Hadit
burst into flame.
This is the fourth practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 61).
18. Then shall the Aspirant come a little to lie in her bosom.
This is the third Indication of the Nature of the Result (ccxx. I. 61).

19. Let the Aspirant stand upon the edge of a precipice in act or in
imagination. And let him imagine and suffer the fear of falling.
Next let him imagine with this aid that the Earth is falling, and he with
it, or he from it; and considering the infinity of space, let him excite the fear
within him to the point of ecstasy, so that the most dreadful dream of falling
that he hath ever suffered be as nothing in comparison.
This is the fourth practice of Meditation (Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.)
20. Thus having understood the nature of this Third Indication, let him in
his Magick Rite fall from himself into Nuit, or expand into Her, as his
imagination may compel him.
And at that moment, desiring earnestly the Kiss of Nuit, let him give
one particle of dust, i.e., let Hadit give himself up utterly to Her.
This is the fifth practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 61).
21. Then shall he lose all in that hour.
This is the fourth Indication of the Nature of the Result (ccxx. I. 61).
22. Let the Aspirant prepare a lovesong of rapture unto the Goddess, or let
him be inspired by Her unto this.
This is the sixth practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 63).
23. Let the Aspirant be clad in a single robe. An “abbai” of scarlet wrought
with gold is most suitable. [The abbai is not unlike the Japanese kimono. It
must fold simply over the breast without belt or other fastening.-Ed.]
This is the seventh practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 61).
24. Let the Aspirant wear a rich head-dress. A crown of gold adorned with
sapphires or diamonds with a royal blue cap of maintenance, or nemmes, is
most suitable.
This is the eighth practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 61).
25. Let the Aspirant wear many jewels such as he may possess.
This is the ninth practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 63).

26. Let the Aspirant prepare an Elixir or libation as he may have wit to do.
This is the tenth practice of Magick Art (ccxx. I. 63).
27. Let the Aspirant invoke, lying supine, his robe spread out as it were a
carpet.
This is the eleventh practice of Magick Art (Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.)
28. Summary. Preliminaries.
These are the necessary possessions.
1. The Crown or head-dress.
2. The Jewels.
3. The Pantacle.
4. The Robe.
5. The Song or Incantation.
6. The Place of Invocation.
7. The Perfume.
8. The Elixir.
29. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the necessary comprehensions.
1. The Natures of Nuit and Hadit, and their relation.
2. The Mystery of the Individual Will.
30. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the meditations necessary to be accomplished.
1. The discovery of Hadit in the Aspirant, and identification with Him.
2. The Continuous One.
3. The value of the Equation n + (-n).
4. Cremnophobia.
31. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the Ethical Practices to be accomplished.
1. Assertion of the Kether-point-of-view.
2. Reverence to the Order.
3. Abolition of human will.
4. Exercise of true will.

5. Devotion to Nuit throughout a beautified life.
32. Summary continued. The Actual Rite.
1. Retire to desert with crown and other insignia and implements.
2. Burn perfume.
3. Chant incantation.
4. Drink unto Nuit of the Elixir.
5. Lying supine, with eyes fixed on the stars, practice the sensation of
falling into nothingness.
6. Being actually within the bosom of Nuit, let Hadit surrender
Himself.
33. Summary concluded. The Results.
1. Expansion of consciousness to that of the Infinite.
2. “Loss of all” the highest mystical attainment.
3. True Wisdom and Perfect Happiness.

LIBER HAD
SUB FIGURA DLV
A A Publication in Class D.
(for Winners of the Ordeal X).

000. This is the Book of the Cult of the Infinite Within.
00. The Aspirant is Nuit. Nuit is the infinite expansion of the Rose; Hadit
the infinite concentration of the Rood.
(Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.)
0. First let the Aspirant learn in his heart the Second Chapter of The Book of
the Law.
(Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.)

1. Worship, i.e., identify thyself with, Nuit, as a lambent flame of blue, alltouching all-penetrant, her lovely hands upon the black earth, and her lithe
body arched for love, and her soft feet not hurting the little flowers, even as
She is imaged in the Stélé of Revealing.
This is the first practice of Meditation (ccxx. I. 26).
2. Let him further identify himself with the heart of Nuit, whose ecstasy is
in that of her children, and her joy to see their joy, who sayeth: I love you! I
yearn to you. Pale or purple, veiled or voluptuous, I who am all pleasure
and purple, and drunkenness of the innermost sense, desire you. Put on the
wings, and arouse the coiled splendour within you. Come unto me!…Sing
the rapturous love-song unto me! Burn to me perfumes! Wear to me jewels!
Drink to me, for I love you! I love you! I am the blue-lidded daughter of
Sunset; I am the naked brilliance of the voluptuous night-sky. To me! To
me!
This is the second practice of Meditation (ccxx. I. 13, 61, 63, 64, 65).
3. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as an unextended
point clothed with Light ineffable. And let him beware lest he be dazzled by
that Light.
This is the first practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 2).
4. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as the ubiquitous
centre of every sphere conceivable.
This is the second practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 3).
5. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as the soul of every
man, and of every star, conjoining this in his Understanding with the Word
(ccxx. I. 2): “Every man and every woman is a star.” Let this conception be
that of Life, the giver of Life, and let him perceive that therefore the
knowledge of Hadit is the knowledge of death.
This is the third practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 6).
6. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as the magician or
maker of Illusion, and the Exorcist or destroyer of Illusion, under the figure
of the axle of the Wheel, and the cube in the circle. Also as the Universal

Soul of Motion. [This conception harmonises Thoth and Harpocrates in a
very complete and miraculous manner. Thoth is both the Magus of Taro
(see Liber 418) and the Universal Mercury; Harpocrates both the destroyer
of Typhon and the Babe on the Lotus. Note that the “Ibis position”
formulates this conception most exactly.—Ed.]
This is the fourth practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 7).
7. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as the perfect, that is
Not, and solve the mystery of the numbers of Hadit and his components by
his right Ingenium.
This is the fifth practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 15, 16).
8. Let the Aspirant, bearing him as a great King, root out and destroy
without pity all things in himself and his surroundings which are weak,
dirty, or diseased, or otherwise unworthy. And let him be exceeding proud
and joyous.
This is the first practice of Ethics (ccxx. II. 18, 19, 20, 21).
9. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as the Snake that
giveth Knowledge and Delight and bright glory, who stirreth the hearts of
men with drunkenness. This snake is blue and gold; its eyes are red, and its
spangles green and ultra-violet. (That is, as the most exalted form of the
Serpent Kundalini.)
This is the sixth practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 22, 50, 51).
10. Let him further identify himself with this Snake.
This is the second practice of Meditation (ccxx. II. 22).
11. Let the Aspirant take wine and strange drugs, according to his
knowledge and experience, and be drunk thereof. [The Aspirant should be
in so sensitive a condition that a single drop, perhaps even the smell, should
suffice.—Ed.]
This is the first practice of Magick Art (ccxx. II. 22).

12. Let the Aspirant concentrate his consciousness in the Rood Cross set up
upon the Mountain, and identify himself with It. Let him be well aware of
the difference between Its own soul, and that thought which it habitually
awakes in his own mind.
This is the third practice of Meditation, and as it will be found, a
comprehension and harmony and absorption of the practices of Intelligence
(ccxx. II. 22).
13. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as the Unity which
is the Negative. [Ain Elohim.—Ed.]
This is the seventh practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 23).
14. Let the Aspirant live the life of a strong and beautiful being, proud and
exalted, contemptuous of and fierce toward all that is base and vile.
This is the second practice of Ethics (ccxx. II. 24, 25, 45-49, 52, 56-60).
15. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit according to this
26th verse of the Second Chapter of The Book of the Law. And this shall be
easy for him if he have well accomplished the Third Practice of Meditation.
This is the eighth practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 26).
16. Let the Aspirant destroy Reason in himself according to the practice in
Liber CDLXXIV.4
This is the fourth practice of Meditation (ccxx. II. 27-33).
17. Let the Aspirant observe duly the Feasts appointed by the A A and
perform such rituals of the elements as he possesseth, invoking them duly in
their season.
This is the second practice of Magick Art (ccxx. II. 35-43).
18. Let the Aspirant apply himself to comprehend Hadit as a babe in the egg
of the Spirit [Akasha.—Ed.] that is invisible within the 4 elements.
This is the ninth practice of Intelligence (ccxx. II. 49).

19. The Aspirant seated in his Asana will suddenly commence to breathe
strangely, and this without the Operation of his will; the Inspiration will be
associated with the thought of intense excitement and pleasure, even to
exhaustion; and the Expiration very rapid and forceful, as if this excitement
were suddenly released.
This is the first and last Indication of the Sign of the Beginning of this
Result (ccxx. II. 63).
20. A light will appear to the Aspirant, unexpectedly. Hadit will arise within
him, and Nuit concentrate Herself upon him from without. He will be
overcome, and the Conjunction of the Infinite Without with the Infinite
Within will take place in his soul, and the One be resolved into the None.
This is the first Indication of the Nature of the Result (ccxx. II. 61, 62, 64).
21. Let the Aspirant strengthen his body by all means in his power, and let
him with equal pace refine all that is in him to the true ideal of Royalty. Yet
let his formula, as a King's ought, be Excess.
This is the third practice of Ethics (ccxx. II. 70, 71).
22. To the Aspirant who succeeds in this practice the result goes on
increasing until its climax in his physical death in its due season. This
practice should however, prolong life.
This is the second Indication of the Nature of the Result (ccxx. II. 66, 7274).
23. Let the Adept aspire to the practice of Liber XI. and preach to mankind.
This is the fourth Practice of Ethics (ccxx. II. 76).
24. Let the Adept worship the Name, foursquare, mystic, wonderful, of the
Beast, and the name of His house; and give blessing and worship to the
prophet of the lovely Star.
This is the fifth practice of Ethics (ccxx. II. 78, 79).
25. Let the Aspirant expand his consciousness to that of Nuit, and bring it
rushing inward. It may be practised by imagining that the Heavens are

falling, and then transferring the consciousness to them.
This is the fifth practice of Meditation. (Instruction of V. V. V. V. V.)
26. Summary. Preliminaries.
These are the necessary possessions.
1. Wine and strange drugs.
27. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the necessary comprehensions.
1. The nature of Hadit (and of Nuit, and the relations between them).
28. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the meditations necessary to be accomplished.
1. Identification with Nuit, body and spirit.
2. Identification with Hadit as the Snake.
3. Identification with Hadit as the Rood Cross.
4. Destruction of Reason.
5. The Falling of the Heavens.
29. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the Ethical Practices to be accomplished.
1. The destruction of all unworthiness in one's self and one's
surroundings.
2. Fulness, almost violence, of life.
30. Summary continued. Preliminaries.
These are the Magick Arts to be practised.
1. During the preparation, perform the Invocations of the Elements.
2. Observe the Feasts appointed by the A A
31. Summary continued. The actual Practice.
1. Procure the suitable intoxication;
2. As Nuit, contract thyself with infinite force upon Hadit.
32. Summary continued. The Results.
1. Peculiar automatic breathing begins.

2. A light appears.
3. Samadhi of the two Infinites within aspirant.
4. Intensification of 3 on repetition.
5. Prolongation of life.
6. Death becomes the climax of the practice.
33. Summary concluded.
These are the practices to be performed in token of Thanksgiving for
success.
1. Aspiration to Liber XI.
2. Preaching of θελημα to mankind.
3. Blessing and Worship to the prophet of the lovely Star.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

THE RITES OF ELEUSIS
The Wheel turns to those effectual methods of invocation employed in
the ancient Mysteries and by certain secret bodies of initiates today.
The object of them is almost invariably the invocation of a God, that
God conceived in a more or less material and personal fashion. These
Rituals are therefore well suited for such persons as are capable of
understanding the spirit of Magick as opposed to the letter.
—MAGICK IN THEORY AND PRACTICE

he rituals of Thelema we've discussed so far
are designed primarily for the individual
magician operating alone for the benefit of his
or her own spiritual edification. They are
technical and require a thorough grounding in magical theory. The magician
strives to execute them with great art and scientific precision. At the
conclusion of the ceremony he or she dispassionately examines the results
and duly records them in a journal. It is lonely work, because, in truth, the
only material the magician has to work with is the magician—the only real
changes we can effect with our magical labors are changes in ourselves. But
even though the spiritual effects of Magick are profoundly personal,
Magick itself need not be a solitary exercise.
Drama is also Magick—in fact, it is the oldest form of Magick. We see
elements of prehistoric dramatic ritual painted on the walls of caves and
scratched upon the bones of extinct animals. The tragedies and comedies of
the ancient Greeks were written to be entertaining and thought provoking
but first and foremost they were religious observances (celebrated in the
temple of Dionysus). We may not think of them as such, but the stage, the
screen, even the television are magical temples. As we watch and listen, we

T

become living Triangles of Evocation. Laughter, tears, and terror are
literally evoked into us by the Magick of the play or film.
The magical potential of drama was not lost on our ancestors. Knowing
that only a relatively few individuals of every generation are emotionally
and intellectually equipped to master the natural and spiritual sciences, the
hierophants of the past discovered that it was yet possible to bring a
significant level of enlightenment to the masses. It was very important, for
instance, for the working population of ancient agrarian cultures to know
the best times to plant and cultivate their crops. However, for most of the
labor force it really wasn't important (or even helpful) to understand the
chain of astronomical events that effect the change of seasons.
It was far easier (and on one level more truthful) to personify the forces
and facts of nature as gods, and then make those gods characters in a simple
and unforgettable story or play. In the case of an agricultural drama the
story might simply be intended to reveal the lesson that it is best to plant in
the early spring rather than in the autumn.
A greater spiritual potential of dramatic ritual lies in the fact that as
individuals each of us can actually become the main character in the sacred
drama. This is the method of initiation practiced by mystery schools of the
past and initiatory societies of today. The ancient mystery schools were not
so much schools of instruction, rather they were schools of experiences—
dramatic experiences skillfully designed to induce profound changes in
consciousness to a large number of individuals.
Tradition informs us that the technique of the mystery schools achieved
its highest level of perfection in Greece. From ca. 2000 B.C. to nearly three
hundred years into the Christian era the agricultural mysteries of Demeter
and Persephone were celebrated within the walled citadel at Eleusis. So
strict were the oaths of secrecy imposed upon initiates that we are still not
entirely certain what went on at the ceremonies1 themselves. We know from
indirect sources that one the initiatory cycles began with a purifying bath in
the sea at Athens followed by a ceremonial march from Athens to Eleusis.
The secret activities took place over a span of days and included sacred
food and drink, music, dance, plays, and vignettes.
Most of the events were performed before a large assembly of
participants. The climactic conclusion, however, was conferred privately,
one candidate at a time. Modern scholars point to evidence that prior to this
sublime moment the candidate most probably was given a psychedelic

substance to eat or drink. Whatever their technique, the hierophants of
Eleusis succeeded for over two thousand years in effecting profound
changes in the consciousness of countless thousands of individuals—
individuals who after their initiatory experience proclaimed with the
greatest conviction that they would never fear death again.

The Rite of Artemis
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have,
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bedtime?
—THESEUS—A MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM

One might think that the awe-inspiring ceremonies that took place in the
cavernous Temple of Demeter at Eleusis would have little in common with
the genteel after-dinner parlor diversions of Edwardian London, but that is
precisely the venue where the idea for Crowley's Rites of Eleusis was
conceived.
On a chilly evening in the spring of 1910 E.V., to entertain their host (or
perhaps merely to sing for their supper), Crowley and his lover/disciple
Miss Leila Waddell engaged in curious battle that pitted poetry against
music. First, Crowley recited a poem he felt would put everyone in an
exalted frame of mind. Then he challenged Waddell, a consummate violin
virtuoso, to complement and magnify the mood with a piece of music.
The exchanges soon became wildly intense and rapturous. After only a
few volleys everyone in the room found themselves raised to a tangible
level of ecstasy. Before the bliss of the moment subsided Crowley realized
he had discovered the basic formula of the Eleusinian technique. Moreover,
he now had a vehicle to introduce Scientific Illumination and the Magick of
Thelema to a wider audience. He immediately set to work to create an
ecstasy-inducing dramatic ritual that he would stage publicly.
The Rite of Artemis2 was presented for the public and members of the
press on the evening of August 23, 1910 E.V. at the office of The Equinox in
London. The element of dance was added to the combination of poetry and
music in the person of Victor Neuburg who, aside from being one of the
greatest poets of his generation, possessed the thrilling ability to dance with

bacchanalic abandon until he collapsed unconscious upon the floor. It was
very impressive.
Another addition to the artistic mix was the introduction of the Cup of
Libation that was offered to the audience several times during the ceremony
to better facilitate the rush of ecstasy. The content of the cup was most
likely a potent mixture of herbs, alcohol, fruit juice, and mescal buttons (at
the time perfectly legal). Predictably, everyone felt the ecstasy.
Reaction was remarkably positive. The next day Raymond Radclyffe
wrote in the August 24 issue of The Sketch magazine:
…beautifully conceived and beautifully carried out. If there is any
higher form of artistic expression than great verse and great music, I
have yet to learn it. I do not pretend to understand the ritual that runs
like a thread of magic through these meetings of the A A I do
not even know what the A A is. But I do know that the whole
ceremony was impressive, artistic, and produced in those present
such a feeling as Crowley must have had when he wrote:
“So shalt thou conquer Space, and lastly climb
The walls of Time;
And by the golden path the great have trod
Reach up to God!”
No one was more ecstatic than Crowley. He was on the road to becoming a
magical impresario.

Crowley's Rites of Eleusis
In October and November of 1910 E.V. Crowley, with the assistance of
Waddell, Nueburg, and a handful of disciples, publicly presented a series of
dramatic rituals entitled The Rites Of Eleusis. They were performed on
seven consecutive Wednesday nights at Caxton Hall, Westminster. London
had never seen anything quite like it before. The title notwithstanding, these
rituals were not attempts to reenact the ancient ceremonies of the Eleusinian
mysteries. In fact, the only thing Crowley's Rites of Eleusis had in common
with their namesake was the simple fact that they (like the original
ceremonies) were written and performed in order to evoke a specific variety
of ecstasy in the participants and the audience.

Ambitiously, Crowley chose for his format the seven planets of the
ancients, and he arranged the seven ceremonies according to how the
planetary spheres (Sephiroth) appear on the Tree of Life. Starting at the top,
the third Sephirah, Binah, is sphere of Saturn and the highest planetary
sphere. As we descend the Tree the order of the planetary spheres are
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, and Luna. This is the sequence
of the seven Rites of Eleusis. They are actually seven acts to one master
drama, the story of the descent of spirit (deity) into matter (humanity), and
the secret to our return to Godhead.
Because the rites demonstrate a descent down the Tree of Life, each
ceremony is not so much the story of the planetary god's exaltation but
rather it is the story of its decline and fall. (Luna, the final rite, also hints at
how it all starts over again.) The Rite of Saturn gets the ball rolling by the
suicide of the Saturnian hero at the end of the play. The next rite, Jupiter,
starts out with the declaration:
Be silent and secret! For it is by stealth that we are here assembled.
Know that Saturn hath been deceived, having swallowed a black
stone, thinking it to be his son, the child Jupiter. But Jupiter is here
enthroned, and shall overthrow his father. Beware then lest ye break
silence—until Jupiter be read to make war!
The war, of course, will need the energy of Mars, the next rite in sequence,
and so on.
The following analysis was written by Crowley and was part of the
booklet provided to the attendees of the rites.
Let us add a short analysis of the present series of rites; they may be
taken as illustrating Humanity, its fate both good and evil.
Man, unable to solve the Riddle of Existence, takes counsel of
Saturn, extreme old age. Such answer as he can get is one word.
“Despair.”
Is there more hope in the dignity and wisdom of Jupiter? No; for
the noble senior lacks the vigour of Mars the warrior. Counsel is in
vain without determination to carry it out.
Mars, invoked, is indeed capable of victory: but he has already
lost the controlled wisdom of age; in the moment of conquest he
wastes the fruits of it, in the arms of luxury.

It is through this weakness that the perfected man, the Sun, is of
dual nature, and his evil twin slays him in his glory. So the
triumphant Lord of Heaven, the beloved of Apollo and the Muses is
brought down into the dust, and who shall mourn him but his
Mother Nature, Venus, the lady of love and sorrow? Well is it if she
bears within her the Secret of Resurrection!
But Mercury, too, is found wanting. Not in him alone is the
secret cure for all the woe of the human race. Swift as ever, he
passes, and gives place to the youngest of the Gods, to the Virginal
Moon.
Behold her, Madonna-like, throned and crowned, veiled, silent
awaiting the promise of the Future.
She is Isis and Mary, Istar and Bhavani, Artemis and Diana.
But Artemis is still barren of hope until the spirit of the Infinite
All, great Pan, tears asunder the veil and displays the hope of
humanity, the Crowned Child of the Future. All this is symbolized in
the holy rites which we have recovered from the darkness of history,
and now in the fullness of time disclose that the world may be
redeemed.3
In the late 1970s, under the sponsorship of several local O.T.O.4 bodies in
Northern and Southern California, the Rites of Eleusis were resurrected and
again presented. They were an instant hit. Today, largely through the efforts
of O.T.O. bodies, the seven rites are performed each year in numerous
locations all over the world. They are extraordinarily “producible.” Each
rite requires only a handful of cast members and very limited props and
costumes. They are as easily staged in a living room or a back yard as they
are in a theatre, hall or desert or mountain venue.
If I sound enthusiastic about Crowley's Rites of Eleusis—I am. In the
last twenty-five years Constance and I have had the pleasure of staging the
entire series a number of times and have participated in other group
productions as well. We discovered first hand that these little collections of
poetry, music, and dance are more than plays with a magical theme. In the
purest tradition of the Eleusinian mysteries, they really are initiatory
experiences in which both cast and audience are treated to a highly
personalized change of consciousness.

Unfortunately, space forbids us to reprint all seven of the rituals in this
book. I have chosen the Rite of Sol because it clearly presents the major
landmarks of casting and form that characterize all the rites.

THE RITE OF SOL5
Fourth in the Series of The Rites of Eleusis
First performed at Caxton Hall Westminister
On Wednesday, November 9, 1910 E.V. 9:00 P.M.
by Miss Leila Waddell and Mr. Aleister Crowley
with Distinguished Assistance
Note:The Rites were written and produced by Aleister Crowley except parts
of the Rites of Mars and of Mercury which were written by an adept who
wishes to remain anonymous.
The solos were chosen from her repertoire by Miss Leila Waddell.
Additional notes by Lon Milo DuQuette

OFFICERS
SOL. Leopard skin. Nemyss white-gold over white-sleeved robe.
Spear.
ARIES.6 White robe, spear.
LEO.7 Red robe, spear.
SATAN-TYPHON.8 Violet robe.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS.9 Green robe.
BESZ.10 Black-robe.
FOUR PROBATIONERS.
SOL is enthroned in the East; behind him is a black veil which conceals a
great scarlet cross. Before him is a second veil. He is supported by ARIES
on the right, and LEO on the left. The other officers are without the temple,
in waiting. In presentation in public, a third veil divides the temple from the
congregation.
LEO parts the outermost veil, and advancing, recites chorus from “Atalanta
in Calydon.”11

Before the beginning of years,
There came to the making of man
Time, with a gift of tears;
Grief, with a glass that ran;
Pleasure, with pain for leaven;
Summer, with flowers that fell;
Remembrance fallen from heaven,
And madness risen from hell;
Strength without hands to smite;
Love that endures for a breath;
Night, the shadow of light,
And life, the shadow of death.
And the high gods took in hand
Fire, and the falling of tears,
And a measure of sliding sand
From under the feet of the years;
And froth and drift of the sea;
And dust of the laboring earth;
And bodies of things to be
In the houses of death and birth;
And wrought with weeping and laughter,
And fashioned with loathing and love,
With life before and after,
And death below and above,
For a day and a night and a morrow,
That his strength might endure for a span,
With travail and heavy sorrow,
The holy spirit of man.
From the winds of the north and the south,
They gathered as unto strife;
They breathed upon his mouth,
They filled his body with life;
Eyesight and speech they wrought
For the veils of the soul therein,
A time for labor and thought,
A time to serve and to sin;
They gave him light in his ways,

And love, and a space for delight,
And beauty and length of days,
And night, and sleep in the night.
His speech is a burning fire;
With his lips he travaileth;
In his heart is a blind desire,
In his eyes foreknowledge of death;
He weaves, and is clothed with derision;
Sows, and he shall not reap;
His life is a watch or a vision
Between a sleep and a sleep.
LEO returns.
A pause.
ARIES knocks 333-333.12
LEO knocks 333-333.
ARIES. Brother Leo, what is the place?
LEO. The Temple of the Sun upon the Mountain of Abiegnus!
ARIES. Brother Leo, what is the hour?
LEO. Sunset!
ARIES. It is the hour of sacrifice.
LEO. Brother Aries, what is the sacrifice?
ARIES. It is hidden from me.
Silence.
SOL (from behind the veil) knocks 1-22-22-1.
ARIES. Hark! it is the Summons of the King.
LEO. It is the Lord of Heaven that awakens the Children of the Light.

They draw the veil— full light— and kneel.
ARIES. Let us adore the Exalted One!
LEO recites.
Life of Life, thy lips enkindle
With their love the breath between them;
And thy smiles before they dwindle
Make the cold air fire; then screen them
In those looks, where whoso gazes
Faints, entangled in their mazes.
Child of Light! thy limbs are burning
Through the vest which seems to hide them;
As the radiant lines of morning
Through the clouds, ere they divide them;
And this atmosphere divinest
Shrouds thee wheresoe'er thou shinest.
Fair are others; none beholds thee,
But thy voice sounds low and tender
Like the fairest, for it folds thee
From the sight, that liquid splendour,
And all feel, yet see thee never,
As I feel now, lost forever!
Lamp of Earth! where'er thou movest
Its dim shapes are clad with brightness,
And the souls of whom thou lovest
Walk upon the winds with lightness,
Till they fall, as I am falling,
Dizzy, lost, yet unbewailing!
ARIES. Hail unto Thee, O thou that art exalted in thy strength, that
travellest over the Heaven in Thy Bark in the Splendour of noon!
ARIES and LEO resume thrones.

A PROBATIONER recites The Twelvefold Glorification of God.
I
adore
Thee by the
Twelve Glorifications
and by the Unity thereof.
1. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the Lion
Rampant of the dawn: Thou hast crushed with Thy paw the crouching
lioness of Night, so that she may roar forth the Glory of Thy Name.
2. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the lap of the
fertile valleys: Thou hast adorned their strong limbs with a robe of poppied
corn, so that they may laugh forth the Glory of Thy Name.
3. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the gilded rout
of dancing-girls: Thou hast garlanded their naked middles with fragrant
flowers, so that they may pace forth the Glory of Thy Name.
4. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the riotous joy
of the storm: Thou hast shaken the gold-dust from the tresses of the hills, so
that they may chaunt forth the Glory of Thy Name.
5. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the stars and
meteors of Night: Thou hast caparisoned her grey coursers with moons of
pearl, so that they may shake forth the Glory of Thy Name.
6. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the precious
stones of the black earth: Thou hast lightened her with a myriad eyes of
magic, so that she may wink forth the Glory of Thy Name.
7. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the sparkling
dew of the wild glades: Thou hast decked them out as for a great feast of
rejoicing, so that they may gleam forth the Glory of Thy Name.
8. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the stillness of
the frozen lakes: Thou hast made their faces more dazzling than a silver
mirror, so that they may flash forth the Glory of Thy Name.

9. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the smokeveil'd fire of the mountains: Thou hast inflamed them as lions that scent a
fallow deer, so that they may rage forth the Glory of Thy Name.
10. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the
countenance of my darling: Thou hast unclothed her of white lilies and
crimson roses, so that she may blush forth the Glory of Thy Name.
11. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the weeping
of the flying clouds: Thou hast swelled therewith the blue breasts of the
milky rivers, so that they may roll forth the Glory of Thy Name.
12. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the amber
combers of the storm: Thou hast laid Thy lash upon the sphinxes of the
waters, so that they may boom forth the Glory of Thy Name.
13. O Glory be to Thee, O God my God; for I behold Thee in the lotusflower within my heart: Thou hast emblazoned my trumpet with the lionstandard, so that I may blare forth the Glory of Thy Name.
O Glory be unto Thee through all Time
and through all Space: Glory,
and Glory upon Glory,
Everlastingly. Amen,
and Amen, and
Amen.
Enter SCORPIO-APOPHIS dressed in a filmy white robe, her hair in
disorder.
ARIES and LEO rise and bow.
ARIES. Hail thou! Whence comest thou?
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. From the House of God.13
ARIES. What bringest thou as an offering to our Lord?
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. The House of God is fallen. There is nothing left
therein. Therefore I bring nothing but myself.

LEO. Let us burn her upon the altar of burnt offering.14
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. But in the fire my tears would be dried up; and these
tears are of mine offering to the Lord.
LEO. Let us throw her to the sacred crocodile.15
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. But in the water my heart would be chilled; and this
heart is of mine offering to the Lord.
LEO. Let us throw her to the winds from the Watchtowers of Silence.16
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. But in the wind my hymns would not be heard; and
these hymns are of mine offering to the Lord.
LEO. Let us bury her in the consecrated mountain!17
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. But in the earth the worms would devour my flesh;
and this flesh is of mine offering to the Lord. Oh Lord, let thy servants
return unto their thrones that I may worship Thee as I will.
SOL knocks 22-1-1-22.
ARIES and LEO return to their thrones.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS plays her passionate melody, her siren melody, her
despairing “Venus in Tannhauser” melody. She clasps the feet and knees of
SOL but he gives no sign of life.
At the end ARIES and LEO rise from their thrones.
A pause.
ARIES loudly knocks 333-333.
LEO knocks louder 333-333.
ARIES. The hour of sacrifice is past.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. The hour of sacrifice is to come.
LEO. The sacrifice is not accepted.

SCORPIO-APOPHIS. The sacrifice is accepted.
ARIES. Depart from us, thou unclean thing!
ARIES and LEO raise her and march from the temple,
ARIES leading, LEO following her.
ARIES and LEO re-enter and resume thrones.
A pause.
ARIES knocks 333-333.
LEO knocks 333-333.
ARIES. Brother Leo, this is of evil omen.
LEO. Brother Aries, it is indeed of evil omen.
ARIES. There will be no more sacrifice today.
LEO. There will be no more sacrifice today.
ARIES. The sun is already setting.
LEO. The night birds are already abroad.
ARIES. It grows very dark.
LEO. The path is too steep and dangerous for any pilgrims to come hither.
ARIES. There is no moon tonight.
LEO. I think there will be rain.
ARIES. Let us close the shrine.
LEO. The disk of the sun is not yet quite obscured.
ARIES. But no pilgrims can come now.
LEO. No pilgrims can come now. But it is the rule of the temple that the
shrine is open unto the last spark of sunlight.

ARIES. Brother Leo, I beg that you will close the shrine with me. LEO. It
cannot be.
ARIES. Brother Leo, I know the rule. But evil will assuredly come to us
from this.
LEO. Brother Aries, the Law may not be broken.
ARIES. Brother Leo, the Law is made so that the wise may break it at their
need.
LEO. Brother Aries, in my heart is fidelity—fidelity—fidelity.
ARIES. Brother Leo, a god has whispered in mine ear: it is folly—folly—
folly.
LEO. The sun will be obscured in a moment: and no pilgrims can come
tonight.
ARIES. No pilgrims can come tonight.
LEO. There will be no more sacrifice.
ARIES. There will be no more sacrifice.
SATAN-TYPHON, SCORIPO-APOPHIS, and BESZ enter silently in
procession.
The light grows momentarily dimmer.
ARIES. Hail, brethren! Ye are come to adore the splendour of the sun?
SATAN-TYPHON. We are come to sacrifice.
ARIES. What are the offerings?
BESZ. Dancing.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. Music.
SATAN-TYPHON. Silence and Stillness.
He prostrates himself and remains motionless.

SCORPIO-APOPHIS bows to SOL and plays an adoration.
BESZ dances in adoration in three-time.
SATAN-TYPHON rises and bows.
ARIES. Whence come ye, brethren?
SATAN-TYPHON. From the dwelling-place of the Sun.
ARIES. Who are ye, brethren?
SATAN-TYPHON. I am the twin brother of the Sun.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. I am the beloved of the Sun.
ARIES to BESZ. But who art thou, brother?
BESZ begins to stammer.
LEO. Who art thou?
They threaten him with their spears.
BESZ crouches in terror and lurks toward West.
SATAN-TYPHON. I would have speech with my brother the Sun.
ARIES. It is well.
LEO. It is not well. There is danger herein to my Lord.
He bars the way.
ARIES. Speech cannot harm our Lord.
LEO. Brother, if thou be indeed our brother, what wilt thou say?
SATAN-TYPHON. O Sun, my brother, is it thy will that I have speech with
thee? For I lay with thee nine moons in the womb of our mother; for we
have loved as none have loved; for I am closer knit with thee than light and
darkness, or than life and death!
SOL knocks 2-1-1-2.

LEO gives way and returns to his throne, very sad.
SATAN-TYPHON advances to SOL and ARIES closes the veil on them.
BESZ jumps up and runs off crouchingly.
The lights go out.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS plays her serpent melody.
LEO recites. 18
Mortals never learn from stories
How catastrophe becomes;
How above the victor's glories
In the trumpets and the drums
And the cry of millions “Master!”
Looms the shadow of disaster.
Every hour a man hath said:
“That at least is scotched and dead.”
Some one circumstance: “At last
That, and its effects, are past.”
Some one terror—subtle foe!
“I have laid that spectre low.”
They know not, learn not, cannot calculate
How subtly Fate
Weaves its fine mesh, perceiving how to wait;
Or how accumulate
The trifles that shall make it master yet
Of the strong soul that bade itself forget.
A dim red light dawns. BESZ enters, leading four PROBATIONERS who
bear the Pastos. They place it before the altar.
ARIES. What is this offering?
BESZ. The eater of Flesh is my name.
ARIES. Oh, our Lord, our Lord! Arise in thy might, and let thine enemies
be scattered!

ARIES and LEO draw veil.
The throne has been cast down.
On the black veil is a great red cross, whereon SOL has been crucified.
Before him stands SATAN-TYPHON in the sign of Apophis and Typhon.
ARIES and LEO fall as if slain.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS plays her murder melody.
Meanwhile the PROBATIONERS advance and under the direction of
Typhon, who stabs SOL in the proper manner19 with the spear of Sol, take
down SOL from the cross and lay him in the Pastos. They cover it.
BESZ does his brutal demoniac dance upon the lid of the coffin.
Exeunt OMNIS exc. SOL.
This ends in complete darkness.
Silence.
There is a flash of light, and the stage is shewn empty. Only a glimmer
remains.
Now SCORPIO-APOPHIS steals on to the stage, and plays a low secret
melody.
The red lights increase.
She uncovers and embraces the corpse. Then covers it again, goes to the
throne, and installs herself thereon.
The green light dawns and glows brighter and brighter, as the red light
dwindles and goes out.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS knocks 7777777.20
The PROBATIONERS and other officers enter, erect.

SCORPIO-APOPHIS. Children, array yourselves before me, and worship at
my feet.
ARIES. Our Lord is slain. And who art thou that hast assumed His Throne?
LEO. Our Lord is slain. And who art thou that hast assumed His Throne?
SCORPIO-APOPHIS. I am the Mother of the Gods and the Sister of Time
and the Daughter of Space. I am Nature that holdeth sway when the effort
of man is exhausted.……Brother Leo, I am the goddess that cometh forth
riding upon the Lion. Behold! I strike thee with my wand, and inspire thee.
I command thee to declare me unto the multitude.21
LEO recites. 22
Lo! in the interstellar space of night
Clothed with deep darkness, the majestic spaces
Abide the dawn of deity and light,
Vibrate before the passionless pale faces
Shrined in exceeding glory, eremite.
The tortoise skies in sombre carapaces
Await the expression and the hour of birth
In silence through the adamantine girth.
I rose in glory, gathered of the foam.
The sea's flower folded, charioting me risen
Where dawns rose stole from its pearl-glimmering home,
And heaven laughed, and earth: and mine old prison,
The seas that lay beneath the mighty dome,
Shone with my splendour. Light did first bedizen
Earth with its clusters of fiery dew and spray,
When I looked forth and cried, “It is the day!”
The stars are dewdrops on my bosom's space;
The sun and moon are glances through my lashes,
Long, tender rays of night; my subtle face
Burns through the sky-dusk, lightens, fills, and flashes
With solemn joy and laughter of love; the grace
Of all my body swaying stoops and dashes

Swift to the daisy's dawn of love: and swiftest,
O spirit of man, when unto me thou liftest!
Dawn shakes the molten fire of my delight
From the fine flower and fragrance of my tresses!
Sunset bids darken all my body's light,
Mixing its music with the sad caresses
Of the whole world: I wheel in wingless flight
Through lampless space, the starless wildernesses!
Beyond the universal bounds that roll,
There is the shrine and image of my soul.
I am Nature and God: I reign, I am, alone.
None other may abide apart: they perish,
Drawn into me, into my being grown.
None other bosom is, to bear, to nourish,
To be: the heart of all beneath my zone
Of blue and gold is scarlet-bright to cherish
My own life's being, that is, and is not other;
For I am God and Nature and thy Mother.
I am the thousand-breasted milky spouse,
Virginal also: Tartarus and Gaia
Twinned in my womb, and Chaos from my brows
Shrank back abashed, my sister dark and dire,
Mother of Erebus and Night, that ploughs
With starry-sandalled feet the fields of fire;
My sister shrank and fell, the infernal gloom
Changed to the hot sweet shadow of my womb.
I am: that darkness strange and uterine
Is shot with dawn and scented with the rose;
The deep dim prison-house of corn and wine,
Flowers, children, stars, with flame far subtler glows
Formless, all-piercing, death-defying, divine,
A sweet frail lamp whose shadow gleams and shows
No darkness, is as light is where its rays
Cross, interweave, and marry with the day's!

I am: the heart that flames from central Me,
Seeks out all life, and takes again, to mingle
Its passion with my might and majesty,
Till the vast floods of the man's being tingle
And glow, self-lost within my soul and sea
Of love, the sun of utter light, and single
Keen many-veined heart: our lips and kisses
Marry and muse on our immortal blisses.
I am: the greatest and the least: the sole
And separate life of things. The mighty stresses
Of worlds are my nerves twitching. Branch and bole
Of forests waving in deep wildernesses
Are hairs upon my body. Rivers roll
To make one tear in my superb caresses,
When on myself myself begets a child,
A system of a thousand planets piled!
I am: the least, the greatest: the frail life
Of some small coral-insect still may tremble
With love for me, and call me queen and wife;
The shy plant of the water may dissemble
Its love beneath the fronds; reply to strife
With strife, and all its tiny being crumble
Under my rough and warrior husband-kiss,
Whose pain shall burn, and alter, and be bliss!
I am: no word beside that solemn one
Reigns in sound's kingdom to express my station,
Who, clothed and crowned with suns beyond the sun,
Bear on the mighty breast of foam Thalassian,
Bear on my bosom, jutting plenilune,
Maiden, the fadeless Rose of the Creation!
The whole flower-life of earth and sky and sea
From me was born, and shall return to me!
I am: for men and beings passionate,
For mine own self calm as the river-cleaving

Lotus-borne lord of Silence: I create
Or discreate, both in my bosom heaving:
My lightest look is mother of a Fate:
My fingers sapphire-ringed with sky are weaving
Ever new flowers and lawns of life, designed
Nobler and newer in mine older mind.
I am: I am not, but all-changing move
The worlds evolving in a golden ladder,
Spiral or helical, fresh gusts of love
Filling one sphere from the last sphere grown gladder;
All gateways leading far to the above.
Even as the bright coils of the emerald adder
Climb one by one in glory of sunlight, climb
My children to me up the steep of Time.
I am: before me all the years are dead,
And all the fiery locks of sunrise woven
Into the gold and scarlet of my head:
In me all skies and seas are shaken and cloven:
All life and light and love about me shed,
Begotten in me, in my moving moven,
Are as my tears: all worlds that ever swam
As dew of kisses on my lips: I am.
She draws LEO up to her. The others kneel in adoration.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS plays her soft voluptuous melody.
ARIES. Brother Leo, what is the hour?
LEO. The evening star is arisen.
ARIES. The sacrifice is accomplished.
LEO. What is the sacrifice?
ARIES. Man.
LEO. Who is the priestess?

ARIES. Woman.
LEO. Unto what God?
ARIES. It is hidden from me.
LEO. Let every man depart unto his house.
ARIES knocks 1-333-1-1.
LEO knocks 1-333-1-1.
SCORPIO-APOPHIS knocks 1-1-333-1.

CHAPTER TWELVE

THELEMIC ORDERS
2. In all systems of religion is to be found a system of Initiation, which may be defined
as the process by which a man comes to learn that unknown Crown.
3. Though none can communicate either the knowledge or the power to achieve this,
which we may call the Great Work, it is yet possible for initiates to guide others.
—LIBER LXI VEL CAUSAE

efore I began to organize the material for this handbook of
rituals, I looked back over 30 years to when my struggle to
study the Magick of Thelema began. It was as if I was thrust
into post graduate work without ever finishing grammar
school. I was singularly fortunate to make contact with several of Crowley's personal
students who were kind enough to answer my questions and offer encouragement and
invaluable suggestions. I learned that there is a step-by-step approach to the subjects, and I
have endeavored to organize the material in this text along the same linear scale. Even
though this is by no means a complete compendium of the rituals of Aleister Crowley, I am
hopeful that it will be a valuable tool for both beginning and advanced students.
Because of my association with Crowley contemporaries, I am often asked if it is
necessary to affiliate with an organization in order to become a Thelemic magician. This
question invariably disappoints me because it reveals that the querent is fundamentally
ignorant of what it means to be a Thelemite.
No! One does not have to join any organization, society, order, club, association,
fraternity, collegium, lodge, chapter, temple, coven, tribe, party, league, fellowship, union,
guild, team, troop, or pact to be a Thelemite or practice Thelemic Magick.
There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt. The very term, “Thelemic organization,”
seems to be an oxymoron. A collection of militant individualists all endeavoring to do their
own will—this sounds like a recipe for chaos; and in many instances it is precisely that. Yet
Crowley seemed inspired by the thought of a New Aeon society that could merge the
precepts of complete personal liberty with the necessities of self-imposed spiritual
disciplines. He experimented along various lines but finally settled on two “Orders” which
he hoped would flourish in the millennia following his death: the A A and the O.T.O.

B

A A
The A A 1 was founded in 1907 by Crowley and George Cecil Jones. Based upon the
classic Rosicrucian grade system of the Golden Dawn, the A A . requires the magician

to actually achieve the states of consciousness and powers embodied in each of the ten
Sephiroth (i.e., the magician is only an Adeptus Minor when he or she has actually
achieved the Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel).
The A A is not a lodge system, and is entirely secret. It is a testing order, not a
teaching order. The Aspirant officially knows only one person in the Order, his or her
superior. Each magician is, for the most part, left alone to do the work as he or she sees fit.
Ideally, contact with the superior is brief and infrequent, and can be characterized as being
suggestive rather than instructive. Advancement to the next grade is simply a seal upon
attainment.
The superior is at least one grade ahead of the Aspirant and is theoretically capable of
recognizing the initiatory level of his or her student. The superior is answerable to their
superior, etc. After a certain level of attainment has been successfully achieved and
recognized, the Aspirant can then take on a student and become part of the chain. While
Crowley was alive, it was obvious who was at the top of this chain, and though the
practical did not always align with the ideal, one could be reasonably confident in the
system. Since his death, matters have become more confusing. The present situation is
basically this:
Today there remain a number of individuals who had a formal A A relationship
with Crowley or one of several of Crowley's students. Some of these individuals have
chosen to continue to take on students, who in turn have taken on students, and so forth. As
the nature of these relationships is secret. There is no way, short of affiliation, to gauge the
quality of the magical work done.
There are also a number of publicly advertised A A s (and groups hinting they are
the “doorway” to the A A ) which one may contact simply by answering their magazine
ads. As Crowley stressed the privacy of the system, and particularly prohibited the
exchange of any money (on pain of immediate expulsion) in connection with the A A ,
I tend to view such groups with a level of skepticism.
While I have no reason to doubt the sincerity or the competence of the individuals in
either of the above categories, I must caution the reader against putting too much emphasis
upon pedigrees and paperwork. The real work is always accomplished by the Aspirant
alone. More often than not the student learns in spite of the teacher's effort to help, not as
the result of it.
Answers will come as soon as the student is wise enough to formulate the questions.
There is no reason to wait for an Adept to appear and make the Great Work easier for you.
Anyone who is serious about A A affiliation can immediately begin the work by
reviewing the prescribed material,2 mapping out a regimen of study and practice, and
setting to work. If there is any validity to the concept of Secret Chiefs, such a display of
determined sincerity will most certainly attract their attention and form the required inner
plane contact. A bit of patience and tenacity is often required to locate a flesh and blood
contact, but rest assured, they are out there. The reader is cautioned, however, against
casually boasting of one's “A A ” position or achievements if one is not indeed affiliated
with the A A Such pretense is likely to create a stumbling block to bona fide affiliation,
and is also just bad manners.

Excerpts from One Star in Sight3 follow, which provide a basic outline of the structure
and duties of the graded system of the A A .
The order of the S.S.
Ipsissimus
Magus
Magister Templi

10° = 1▫
9° = 2▫
8° = 3▫

The order of the R.C.
(Babe of the Abyss—the link)
Adeptus Exemptus
Adeptus Major
Adeptus Minor

7° = 4▫
6° = 5▫
5° = 6▫

The Order of the G.D.
(Dominus Liminis—the link)
Philosophus
Practicus
Zelator
Neophyte
Probationer

4°=7▫
3° = 8▫
2° = 9▫
1° = 10▫
0° = 0▫

Student—His business is to acquire a general intellectual knowledge of all systems of
attainment, as declared in the prescribed books. (See curriculum.)
Probationer—His principal business is to begin such practices as he may prefer, and to
write a careful record of the same for one year.
Neophyte—Has to acquire perfect control of the Astral Plane.
Zelator—His main work is to acheive complete success in Asana and Pranayama. He also
begins to study the formula of the “Rosy Cross.”
Practicus—Is expected to complete his intellectual training, and in particular to study the
Qabalah.
Philosophus—Is expected to complete his moral training. He is tested in Devotion to the
Order.
Dominus Liminis—Is expected to show mastery of Pratyahara and Dharana.
Adeptus (without)—Is expected to perform the Great Work and to attain the Knowledge
and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel.

Adeptus (within)—Is admitted to the practice of the formula of the Rosy Cross on entering
the College of the Holy Ghost.
Adeptus (Major)—Obtains a general mastery of practical Magick, though without
comprehension.
Adeptus (Exemptus)—Completes in perfection all these matters. He then either (a)
becomes a Brother of the Left Hand Path or (b) is stripped of all his attainments and of
himself as well, even of the Holy Guardian Angel, and becomes a Babe of the Abyss, who,
having transcended the Reason, does nothing but grow in the womb of its mother. It then
finds itself a Magister Templi.
Magister Templi (Master of the Temple)—Whose functions are fully described in Liber
418, as is this whole initiation from Adeptus Exemptus. See also “Aha!”. His principal
business is to tend his “Garden” of disciples and to obtain a perfect understanding of the
Universe. He is a Master of Samadhi.
Magus—Attains to wisdom, declares his Law (see Liber I, vel Magi) and is a Master of all
Magick in its greatest and highest sense.
Ipsissimus—Is beyond all this and beyond all comprehension of those lower degrees.
In the mid 1940s, Karl Germer, a key administrative officer of the O.T.O., wrote Crowley
asking for a definitive statement regarding the difference between the A A and the
O.T.O. The following is Crowley's reply.
The difference between the A A and the O.T.O. is very clear and simple. The A
A is a sempiternal institution, and entirely secret. There is no communication
between its members. Theoretically, a member knows only the superior who
introduced him, and any person whom he himself has introduced. The Order is run
on purely spiritual lines.
The object of membership is also entirely simple. The first objective is the
Knowledge and Conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel. The next objective,
omitting considerations for the present of the VI = V, and VII = IV degrees, is the
crossing of the Abyss, and the attainment of mastership of the Temple. This is
described very fully especially in Liber 418. Much less is written about the V = VI
degree, i.e., the Knowledge and Conversation, because it is too secret and
individual. It is impossible to lay down conditions, or to describe the experiences
involved in detail.
The O.T.O. has nothing to do with this, except that the BOOK OF THE LAW
and the Word of the Aeon are essential principles of membership. In all other
respects, it stands by itself as a body similar to Freemasonry, but involving
acceptance of a social and economic system which is intended to put the world on
its feet. There is also, of course, the secret of the IX° which is, so to say, the
weapon which they may use to further these purposes.
—666, SEPTEMBER 16, 1946

O.T.O.
In contrast to the
A , the O.T.O. (Ordo Templi Orientis) operates publicly and
semipublicly in a manner not dissimilar to modern Freemasonry. In fact, its founding
father, Karl Kellner was a high-grade Austrian Mason, who patterned the basic degree
structure of the Order after the Blue Lodge, Royal Arch, Council Prince of Jerusalem,
Rose-Croix and Kadosch degrees of continental Freemasonry.
Kellner traveled widely and was fascinated with the magical practices of the East and
Near East. Reportedly, during one of his Burtonesque pilgrimages, he met three Adepts
who progressively revealed to him a series of powerful magical techniques of a sexual
nature. When he digested the full implications of this information, Kellner saw that this
“Secret of Secrets” was the key which unlocked the mysteries of both Freemasonry and
Christian Mysticism. He wasted no time in incorporating this revelation in the higher
degrees of his local lodge. In 1902 the existence of the O.T.O. was revealed in Oriflamme,
a German Masonic publication, and it was announced that the Order taught the “secret of
sexual magic.”
Crowley was given leadership of the O.T.O. in the English-speaking world in 1912 and
reworked the Degree Rituals to conform with the Liber AL and the Law of Thelema. An
excellent history of the Order is outlined in The Equinox Vol. III., Number 104 and I
encourage anyone interested in the O.T.O. to review it.
O.T.O. membership does not, of itself, confer any status in Freemasonry. In recent
years this has led to confusion among the less-informed brethren of both institutions. The
following is an official statement from the O.T.O.'s website which should clear up any
misunderstandings.
Nearly one hundred years ago, when O.T.O. was established in Germany, it was
closely allied to several rites of European Freemasonry. However, in October of
1918, owing to the unique religious teachings of O.T.O., Aleister Crowley
determined it appropriate for O.T.O. to sever all Masonic ties and formally
renounce any claim to “make Masons.” At that time, while retaining the use of
certain convenient customs and terminology used in early Freemasonry, Crowley
revised the O.T.O. rituals, insignia and modes of recognition to avoid infringing
upon the legitimate privileges of the established and recognized authorities of
modern Freemasonry. Further revisions along similar lines have been implemented
in more recent years.
Despite some similarities between names and titles used within O.T.O. and the
names and titles used in Masonry, various churches, and other organizations,
conferral of any degree, rank, office, or status within O.T.O. does not constitute
conferral of any degree, rank, office, or status in any other active organization—
Masonic, religious, or otherwise, any more than the rank of “sergeant” in the
Salvation Army equates to rank of sergeant in the U.S. Marine Corps.
Ordo Templi Orientis is more active today than it ever was during Crowley's lifetime. It has
official bodies in seventeen countries and provides Degree Initiations, Gnostic Masses, and

an assortment of public and semipublic events including Crowley's Rites of Eleusis. The
O.T.O. is without question the most visible Thelemic organization on earth.
There is no doubt that the series of dramatic rituals which comprise the O.T.O.
Initiatory Degrees can have a lasting and profound magical effect upon the candidate. It is
also true that fellowship with other Thelemites can be a rewarding and satisfying
experience. But, as we mentioned above in our comments about the A A , the real work
is done by the individual. No one can reveal to you a real secret. No one can project
enlightenment upon you. If you expect affiliation with any organization is going to lighten
your magical work load, you are mistaken; and if you are waiting for a teacher who
embodies perfection, or a group in which there are no jerks, you will wait forever.
Below is a portion of one of Crowley's letter which first appeared in Magick Without
Tears (Hampton, NJ: Thelema, 1954) which briefly outlines the system of the O.T.O.
…What is a Dramatic Ritual? It is a celebration of the Adventure of the God whom
it is intended to invoke. (The Bacchae of Euripides is a perfect example of this.)
Now, in the O.T.O., the object of the ceremony being the Initiation of the
Candidate, it is he whose Path in Eternity is displayed in dramatic form.
What is the Path?
1. The Ego is attracted to the Solar System.
2. The Child experiences Birth.
3. The Man experiences Life.
4. He experiences Death.
5. He experiences the World beyond Death.
6. This entire cycle of Point-Events is withdrawn into Annihilation.
In the O.T.O. these successive stages are represented as follows:
1. 0° (Minerval)
2. I° (Initiation)
3. II° (Consecration)
4. III° (Devotion)
5. IV° (Perfection, or Exaltation)
6. P.I. (Perfect Initiate)
Of these Events or Stations upon the Path all but three (II°) are single critical
experiences. We, however, are concerned mostly with the very varied experiences
of Life.
All subsequent Degrees of the O.T.O. are accordingly elaboration of the II°, since in a
single ceremony it is hardly possible to sketch, even in the briefest outline, the Teaching of
Initiates with regard to Life. The Rituals V°-IX° are then instructions to the Candidate how
he should conduct himself; and they confer upon him, gradually the Magical Secrets which
make him Master of Life.

While Ordo Templi Orientis is a magical and fraternal organization, within the Order's
matrix can be found a jewel which offers all aspirants a unique and beautiful medium for
Thelemic religious expression. It is the central ritual of the O.T.O., public and private—
The Mass of Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

THE RELIGION OF THELEMA
One of the simplest and most complete Magick ceremonies is the
Eucharist. It consists in taking common things, transmuting them into
things divine, and consuming them.
—Magick in Theory and Practice

t is no accident that I have chosen to make Liber
XV the final chapter of this Handbook of the
Rituals of Thelema. Anyone who has had the
privilege of celebrating the Gnostic Mass will
understand that I have saved the best for last. This eucharistic ceremony
exquisitely expresses the purest element of Thelemic cosmology and
philosophy; and it does so in such a manner that it can be appreciated by the
broadest possible spectrum of truth seekers.
The “Law is for all,” and as fascinating as the study of Thelemic
Magick may be for many of us, the fact remains that the vast majority of the
population will never be attracted to the theories and techniques I've
outlined in this book. Nor should their disinterest in the technical aspects of
Magick exclude them from embracing the Law of Thelema or applying the
formulae of the New Aeon to their lives.
Like the Roman or Orthodox Mass of the Aeon of Osiris, Liber XV
serves to bring the Thelemic community together to affirm a common
creed, and provides an opportunity for all to participate directly in the
magical formulae of the Age. However, in order for all to participate
directly in the magical formulae of Mass, the Mass must be conducted in
such a manner as to actually communicate those formulae. Unfortunately, it
takes only a slight change of focus on the part of the ritual team or

I

congregation to degenerate the Mass from a ceremony of the religion of the
future to a ritual that exalts the spiritual formulae of the past.
The Gnostic Mass temple is a very beautiful and highly symbolic ritual
space. In the East (direction of Boleskine) there is a shrine or High Altar.
This shrine supports the Stélé of Revealing, The Book of the Law, and the
Sacred Elements of the Eucharist. The High Altar is the focal point of the
worship service. This is where the Magick takes place in the Aeon of the
Crowned and Conquering Child. Everything that is said and done in the
other areas of the temple are merely preparatory acts to the Magick that will
take place upon the High Altar.
The High Altar is elevated above the rest of the temple. It is set upon
the top level of a dais of three steps. This is the High Place of the temple
and an appropriate setting for the eventual magical climax of the ceremony.
Once the Priestess has taken her place upon the High Altar and the veil
is drawn before the shrine, the Priest ascends to the High Altar by the three
steps of the dais. As he does so, he halts at each step and he, the Priestess,
and the Deacon poetically reveal a fundamental mystery of this worship
service—that is—the formula of worship in the Aeon of Horus has evolved,
step by step, from the formulae of the two previous Aeons.1
The First Step represents the Aeon of Isis, the Age of the Goddess, and
it is on the first step that the Goddess is worshipped in the Gnostic Mass.
Here the Priestess is identified as the Goddess Nuit. It is on the first step
that the Priest sings: “O Nuit, continuous one of Heaven let it be ever thus
that men speak not of thee as one but as none, and let them speak not of
thee at all since thou art continuous.” And it is while standing on the first
step that he hears the Priestess deliver her beautiful “but to love me is better
than all things” speech.
As worshipers, we could stay on the first step worshiping the Goddess
and adhering to her formula forever. Indeed, many people do just that. But
we, the Children of the Aeon of Horus, adore the Goddess not as an end but
as a means. We linger on the first step only long enough to activate the
formula of the Goddess within ourselves to prepare for a wedding—only
long enough to allow ourselves to be aroused by the essence of her divinity
before stepping up to the next level of worship.
The Second Step represents the Aeon of Osiris, the Age of the Dying
God, and it is on the second step that the Priest is identified as the God
Hadit, the inscrutable lover at the very center of the infinite body of Nuit. “I

am the flame that burns in every heart of man and the core of every star.”
And, reminiscent of Osiris, Krishna, Chirst, and every other dying God, he
goes on to say, “I am life and the giver of life yet therefore is the knowledge
of me the knowledge of death.”
As worshipers, we could stay on the second step worshiping the Dying
God and adhering to his formula forever. Indeed, many people do just that.
But we, the Children of the Aeon of Horus, adore the Dying God not as an
end but as a means. We linger on the second step only long enough to
activate the formula of the Dying God within ourselves; only long enough
to snatch the vibrating pulse of life and death from the patriarchal Lord in
order to prepare for a wedding—a wedding that we will celebrate on the
third and final step.
It is upon the Third Step that we achieve synthesis. It is upon the third
step the mystic marriage will be consummated. It is upon the third step the
true object of worship will appear—Ra-Hoor-Khuit, the Crowned and
Conquering Child, the Child of the Goddess and God of the last two Aeons.
We give thanks and respect to the Goddess and the Priestess who
embodies her. But at the end of the Mass it is not she whom we worship; it
is not she whom we adore; it is not she with whom we commune.
We give thanks and respect to the God and the Priest who embodies
him. But at the end of the Mass it is not he whom we worship; it is not he
whom we adore. It is not he with whom we commune.
As we will soon see, the Mass of the Gnostic Catholic Church is an
enactment of a great and wonderful magical secret. The goal of this secret is
the creation of a Child, whether that child is the material or emotional
object of your heart's desire, or knowledge and conversation of your Holy
Guardian Angel.
It is true, without the Goddess and the God the Child could not be born.
But those who would treat the Gnostic Mass as a ceremony of Goddess
worship are missing the point entirely. With all the other worshipers of the
Aeon of Isis, they cannot rise above the first step of worship
Those who would relegate the Gnostic Mass to a ceremony of phallus
worship are also missing the point entirely. Like worshipers of the Aeon of
Osiris they cannot rise above the second step of worship.
At the end of the ceremony each celebrant should be standing spiritually
on the third step of worship—our attention focused with full concentration
not upon the Priestess, not upon the Priest, but upon the Child, as embodied

in the Host and Wine. Only those who have achieved, then transcended the
arousal of the Goddess; only those who have achieved, then transcended the
concentrated potency of the God; only those who have annihilated both God
and Goddess in ecstasy can stand on the third spiritual step and consume—
then become the child of their union. Only those who have taken the third
spiritual step are worthy to be called Worshipers of the Aeon of Horus.
Today, largely due the tremendous growth of the O.T.O., the Gnostic
Mass is regularly celebrated worldwide. It is used to observe the feast days
of The Book of the Law, and to mark the Thelemic community's births, rites
of passage, marriages, and deaths. For the initiate, Liber XV is a treasure
house of technical information relating to a supreme technique of High
Magick; but for all of us, it is a joyous feast, an act of worship, and the
celebration of a miracle.

LIBER XV
O.T.O.
ECCLESIAE GNOSTICAE
CATHOLICAE CANON MISSAE
Edited from the Ancient Documents in Assyrian and Greek
by The Master Therion2

I
OF THE FURNISHINGS OF THE TEMPLE
In the East, that is, in the direction of Boleskine, which is situated on the
South-Eastern shore of Loch Ness in Scotland, two miles east of Foyers, is
a shrine or High Altar. Its dimensions should be 7 feet in length, 3 feet in
breadth, 44 inches in height.3 It should be covered with a crimson altar-

cloth, on which may be embroidered fleur-de-lys in gold, or a sun-blaze, or
other suitable emblem.
On each side of it should be a pillar or obelisk, with countercharges in
black and white.
Below it should be the dais of three steps, in black and white squares.
Above it is the super-altar, at whose top is the Stélé of Revealing in
reproduction, with four candles on each side of it. Below the Stélé is a place
for The Book of the Law, with six candles on each side of it. Below this
again is the Holy Graal, with roses on each side of it. There is room in front
of the Cup for the Paten. On each side beyond the roses are two great
candles.
All this is enclosed within a great Veil.
Forming the apex of an equilateral triangle whose base is a line drawn
between the pillars, is a small black square altar, of superimposed cubes.
Taking this altar as the middle of the base of a similar and equal
triangle, at the apex of this second triangle is a small circular font.
Repeating, the apex of a third triangle is an upright tomb.

II
OF THE OFFICERS OF THE MASS
The PRIEST: Bears the Sacred Lance, and is clothed at first in a plain white
robe.
The PRIESTESS: Should be actually Virgo Intacta or specially dedicated to
the service of the Great Order. She is clothed in white, blue, and gold. She
bears the Sword from a red girdle, and the Paten and Hosts, or Cakes of
Light.
The DEACON: He is clothed in white and yellow. He bears The Book of the
Law.
Two CHILDREN: They are clothed in white and black. One bears a pitcher
of water and a cellar of salt, the other a censer of fire and a casket of
perfume.

III
OF THE CEREMONY OF THE INTROIT

The DEACON, opening the door of the Temple, admits the congregation
and takes his stand between the small altar and the font. (There should be a
doorkeeper to attend to the admission.) The DEACON advances and bows
before the open shrine where the Graal is exalted. He kisses The Book of the
Law, three times, opens it, and places it upon the superaltar. He turns West.
The DEACON: Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law. I
proclaim the Law of Light, Life, Love, and Liberty in the name of IAΩ.
The CONGREGATION: Love is the law, love under will.
The DEACON goes to his place between the altar of incense and the font,
faces East, and gives the step and sign of a Man and a Brother. All imitate
him.4
The DEACON and all the PEOPLE: I believe in one secret and
ineffable LORD; and in one Star in the Company of Stars of whose fire
we are created, and to which we shall return; and in one Father of Life,
Mystery of Mystery, in His name CHAOS, the sole viceregent of the
Sun upon the Earth; and in one Air the nourisher of all that breathes.
And I believe in one Earth, the Mother of us all, and in one Womb
wherein all men are begotten, and wherein they shall rest, Mystery of
Mystery, in Her name BABALON.
And I believe in the Serpent and the Lion, Mystery of Mystery, in
His name BAPHOMET.
And I believe in one Gnostic and Catholic Church of Light, Life,
Love and Liberty, the Word of whose Law, is θEΛHMA.
And I believe in the communion of Saints.
And, forasmuch as meat and drink are transmuted in us daily into
spiritual substance, I believe in the Miracle of the Mass.
And I confess one Baptism of Wisdom whereby we accomplish the
Miracle of Incarnation.
And I confess my life one, individual, and eternal that was, and is
and is to come.
AYMΓN. AYMΓN. AYMΓN.
Music is now played. The child enters with the ewer and the salt. The
VIRGIN enters with the Sword and the Paten. The child enters with the

censer and the perfume. They face the DEACON, deploying into line, from
the space between the two altars.
The VIRGIN: Greeting of Earth and Heaven!
All give the Hailing sign of a magician,5 the DEACON leading.
The PRIESTESS, the negative child on her left, the positive child on her
right, ascends the steps of the High Altar. They await her below. She places
the Paten before the Graal. Having adored it, she descends, and with the
children following her, the positive next her, she moves in a serpentine
manner involving 3 1/2 circles of the Temple. (Deosil about altar,
widdershins about font, deosil about altar and font, widdershins about altar,
and so to the Tomb in the West.) She draws her Sword and pulls down the
Veil therewith.
The PRIESTESS: By the power of Iron, I say unto thee, Arise. In the
name of our Lord
the Sun, and of our Lord …that thou mayst
administer the virtues to the Brethren.
She sheathes the Sword.
The PRIEST, issuing from the Tomb, holding the Lance erect with both
hands, right over left, against his breast, takes the first three regular steps.
He then gives the Lance to the PRIESTESS, and gives the three penal signs.
He then kneels and worships the Lance with both hands. Penitential music.
The PRIEST: I am a man among men.
He takes again the Lance, and lowers it. He rises.
The PRIEST: How should I be worthy to administer the virtues to the
Brethren?
The PRIESTESS takes from the child the water and the salt, and mixes
them in the font.
The PRIESTESS: Let the salt of Earth admonish the water to bear the
virtue of the Great Sea. (Genuflects.) Mother, be thou adored.

She returns to the West. on PRIEST with open hand doth she make, over
his forehead, breast, and body.
Be the PRIEST pure of body and soul!
The PRIESTESS takes the censer from the child, and places it on the small
altar. She puts incense therein.
Let the Fire and the Air make sweet the world! (Genuflects.) Father be
thou adored.
She returns West, and makes
before.

with the censer before the PRIEST, thrice as

Be the PRIEST fervent of body and soul!
The children resume their weapons as they are done with.
The DEACON now takes the consecrated Robe from High Altar, and brings
it to her. She robes the PRIEST in his Robe of scarlet and gold.
Be the flame of the Sun thine ambience, O thou PRIEST of the SUN!
The DEACON brings the crown from the High Altar. (The crown may be of
gold or platinum, or of electrum magicum; but with no other metals save
the small proportions necessary to a proper alloy. It may be adorned with
divers jewels, at will. But it must have the Uraeus serpent twined about it,
and the cap of maintenance must match the scarlet of the Robe. Its texture
should be velvet.)
Be the Serpent thy crown, O thou PRIEST of the LORD!
Kneeling, she takes the Lance, between her open hands, and runs them up
and down upon the shaft eleven times, very gently.
Be the LORD present among us!
ALL give the Hailing Sign.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.

IV
OF THE CEREMONY OF THE OPENING OF THE VEIL
The PRIEST: Thee therefore whom we adore we also invoke.
By the power of the lifted Lance!
He raises the Lance. ALL repeat Hailing Sign. A phrase of triumphant
music. The PRIEST takes the PRIESTESS by her right hand with his left,
keeping the Lance raised.
I, PRIEST and KING, take thee Virgin pure without spot; I upraise
thee; I lead thee to the East; I set thee upon the summit of the Earth.
He thrones the PRIESTESS upon the altar. The DEACON and the children
follow, they in rank, behind him. The PRIESTESS takes The Book of the
Law, resumes her seat, and holds it open on her breast with her two hands,
making a descending triangle with thumbs and forefingers. The PRIEST
gives the lance to the DEACON to hold, and takes the ewer from the child,
and sprinkles the PRIESTESS, making five crosses, forehead, shoulders,
and thighs. The thumb of the PRIEST is always between his index and
medius, whenever he is not holding the Lance. The PRIEST takes the
censer from the child, and makes five crosses, as before. The children
replace their weapons on their respective altars. The PRIEST kisses The
Book of the Law three times. He kneels for a space in adoration, with joined
hands, knuckles closed, thumb in position aforesaid. He rises, and draws the
veil over the whole altar. All rise and stand to order. The PRIEST takes the
lance from the DEACON, and holds it as before, as Osiris or Pthah. He
circumambulates the Temple three times, followed by the DEACON and
the children as before. (These, when not using their hands, keep their arms
crossed upon their breasts.) At the last circumambulation they leave him,
and go to the place between the font and the small altar, where they kneel in
adoration, their hands joined palm to palm, and raised above their heads.
All imitate this motion. The PRIEST returns to the East, and mounts the
first step of the altar.
The PRIEST: O circle of Stars whereof our Father is but the younger
brother, marvel beyond imagination, soul of infinite space, before
whom Time is Ashamed, the mind bewildered, and the understanding

dark, not unto Thee may we attain, unless Thine image be Love.
Therefore by seed and root and stem and bud and leaf and flower and
fruit do we invoke Thee.
Then the priest answered & said unto the Queen of Space, kissing
her lovely brows, and the dew of her light bathing his whole body in a
sweet-smelling perfume of sweat: O Nuit, continuous one of Heaven, let
it be ever thus; that men speak not of Thee as One but as None; and let
them speak not of thee at all, since thou art continuous!
During this speech the PRIESTESS must have divested herself completely
of her robe. See CCXX I: 62.
The PRIESTESS: But to love me is better than all things: if under the
night-stars in the desert thou presently burnest mine incense before me,
invoking me with a pure heart, and the Serpent flame therein, thou
shalt come a little to lie in my bosom. For one kiss wilt thou then be
willing to give all; but whoso gives one particle of dust shall lose all in
that hour. Ye shall gather goods and store of women and spices; ye shall
wear rich jewels; ye shall exceed the nations of the earth in splendour
and pride; but always in the love of me, and so shall ye come to my joy.
I charge you earnestly to come before me in a single robe, and covered
with a rich head-dress. I love you! I yearn to you! Pale or purple, veiled
or voluptuous, I who am all pleasure and purple, and drunkenness of
the innermost sense, desire you. Put on the wings, and arouse the coiled
splendour within you: come unto me! To me! To Me! Sing the
rapturous love-song unto me! Burn to me perfumes! Wear to me
jewels! Drink to me, for I love you! I love you. I am the blue-lidded
daughter of Sunset; I am the naked brilliance of the voluptuous nightsky. To me! To me!
The PRIEST mounts the second step.
The PRIEST: O secret of secrets that art hidden in the being of all that
lives, not Thee do we adore, for that which adoreth is also Thou. Thou
art That, and That am I.
I am the flame that burns in every heart of man, and in the core of
every star. I am Life, and the giver of Life; yet therefore is the

knowledge of me the knowledge of death. I am alone; there is no God
where I am.
The DEACON and all rise to their feet, with the Hailing sign.
The DEACON: But ye, O my people rise up and awake. Let the rituals
be rightly performed with joy and beauty.
There are rituals of the elements and feasts of the times.
A feast for the first night of the Prophet and his Bride.
A feast for the three days of the writing of the Book of the Law.
A feast for Tahuti and the child of the Prophet—secret O Prophet!
A feast for the Supreme Ritual, and a feast for the Equinox of the
Gods.
A feast for fire and a feast for water; a feast for life and a greater
feast for death.
A feast every day in your hearts in the joy of my rapture.
A feast every night unto Nu, and the pleasure of uttermost delight.
The PRIEST mounts the third step.
The PRIEST: Thou that art One, our Lord in the Universe the Sun, our
Lord in ourselves whose name is Mystery of Mystery, uttermost being
whose radiance enlightening the worlds is also the breath that maketh
every God even and Death to tremble before Thee—By the Sign of
Light appear Thou glorious upon the throne of the Sun.
Make open the path of creation and of intelligence between us and
our minds. Enlighten our understanding.
Encourage our hearts. Let thy light crystalize itself in our blood,
fulfilling us of Resurrection.
A ka dua
Tuf ur biu
bi a'a chefu
Dudu nur af an nuteru. 6
The PRIESTESS: There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.
The PRIEST parts the veil with his lance. During the previous speeches the
PRIESTESS has, if necessary, as in savage countries, resumed her robe.

The PRIEST: IΩ IΩ IΩ IAΩ ΣABAO KYPIH ABPAΣAX KYPIH
MEIΘPAΣ KYPIH ΦAΛΛH. IΩ ΠAN, IΩ ΠAN ΠAN IΩ IΣXYPOΣ,
IΩ AΘANATON IΩ ABPOTON IΩ IAΩ. XAIPE ΦAΛΛH XAIPE
ΠANΦAΓH XAIPE ΠANΓENETOP. AΓIOΣ, AΓIOΣ, AΓIOΣ IAΩ.7
The PRIESTESS is seated with the Paten in her right hand and the cup in
her left. The PRIEST presents the Lance, which she kisses eleven times.
She then holds it to her breast, while the PRIEST, falling at her knees,
kisses them, his arms stretched along her thighs. He remains in this
adoration while the DEACON intones the Collects. All stand to order, with
the Dieu Garde, that is, feet square, hands, with linked thumbs, held loosely.
This is the universal position when standing, unless other direction is given.

V
OF THE OFFICE OF THE COLLECTS WHICH ARE ELEVEN IN
NUMBER
The Sun
The DEACON: Lord visible and sensible of whom this earth is but a
frozen spark turning about thee with annual and diurnal motion,
source of light, source of life, let thy perpetual radiance hearten us to
continual labour and enjoyment; so that as we are constant partakers
of thy bounty we may in our particular orbit give out light and life,
sustenance and joy to them that revolve about us without diminution of
substance or effulgence for ever.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The Lord
The DEACON: Lord secret and most holy, source of life, source of love,
source of liberty, be thou ever constant and mighty within us, force of
energy, fire of motion; with diligence let us ever labour with thee, that
we may remain in thine abundant joy.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The Moon

The DEACON: Lady of night, that turning ever about us art now
visible and now invisible in thy season, be thou favourable to hunters,
and lovers, and to all men that toil upon the earth, and to all mariners
upon the sea.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The Lady
The DEACON: Giver and receiver of joy, gate of life and love, be thou
ever ready, thou and thine handmaiden, in thine office of gladness.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The Saints
The DEACON: Lord of Life and Joy, that art the might of man, that
art the essence of every true god that is upon the surface of the Earth,
continuing knowledge from generation unto generation, thou adored of
us upon heaths and in woods, on mountains and in caves, openly in the
marketplaces and secretly in the chambers of our houses, in temples of
gold and ivory and marble as in these other temples of our bodies, we
worthily commemorate them worthy that did of old adore thee and
manifest thy glory unto men,
At each name the DEACON signs
with thumb between index and
medius. At ordinary mass it is only necessary to commemorate those whose
names are italicized, with word as shown.
Laotze and Siddartha and Krishna and Tahuti, Mosheh, Dionysus,
Mohammed and To Mega Therion, with these also Hermes, Pan,
Priapus, Osiris and Melchizedek, Khem and Amoun and Mentu,
Heracles, Orpheus and Odysseus; with Vergilius, Catullus, Martialis,
Rabelais, Swinburne, and many an holy bard; Apollonius Tyanaeus,
Simon Magus, Manes, Pythagoras, Basilides, Valentinus, Bardesanes
and Hippolytus, that transmitted the Light of the Gnosis to us their
successors and their heirs; with Merlin, Arthur, Kamuret, Parzival, and
many another, prophet, priest and king, that bore the Lance and Cup,
the Sword and Disk, against the Heathen; and these also, Carolus
Magnus and his paladins, with William of Schyren, Frederick of

Hohenstaufen, Roger Bacon, Jacobus Burgundus Molensis the Martyr,
Christian Rosencrentz, Ulrich von Hutten, Paracelsus, Michael Maier,
Roderic Borgia Pope Alexander the Sixth, Jacob Boehme, Francis
Bacon Lord Verulam, Andrea, Robertus de Fluctibus, Johannnes Dee,
Sir Edward Kelly, Thomas Vaughan, Elias Ashmole, Molinos, Adam
Weishaupt, Wolfgang von Goethe, Ludovicus Rex Bavariae, Richard
Wagner, Alphonse Louis Constant, Friedrich Nietzche, Hargrave
Jennings, Karl Kellner, Forlong dux, Sir Richard Payne Knight, Paul
Gaugin, Sir Richard Francis Burton, Doctor Gerard Encausse, Doctor
Theodor Reuss, and Sir Aleister Crowley—Oh Sons of the Lion and the
Snake! with all thy saints we worthily commemorate them worthy that
were and are and are to come.
May their Essence be here present, potent, puissant and paternal to
perfect this feast!
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The Earth
The DEACON: Mother of fertility on whose breast lieth water, whose
cheek is caressed by air, and in whose heart is the sun's fire, womb of
all life, recurring grace of seasons, answer favorable the prayer of
labour, and to pastors and husbandmen be thou propitious.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The Principles
The DEACON: Mysterious Energy, triform, mysterious Matter, in
fourfold and sevenfold division, the interplay of which things weave the
dance of the Veil of Life upon the Face of the Spirit, let there be
Harmony and Beauty in your mystic loves, that in us may be health
and wealth and strength and divine pleasure according to the Law of
Liberty; let each pursue his Will as a strong man that rejoiceth in his
way, as the course of a Star that blazeth for ever among the joyous
company of Heaven.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
Birth

The DEACON: Be the hour auspicious, and the gate of life open in
peace and in well-being, so that she that beareth children may rejoice,
and the babe catch life with both hands.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
Marriage
The DEACON: Upon all that this day unite with love under will let fall
success; may strength and skill unite to bring forth ecstasy, and beauty
answer beauty.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
Death8
The DEACON: Term of all that liveth, whose name is inscrutable, be
favourable unto us in thine hour.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.
The End
The DEACON: Unto them from whose eyes the veil of life hath fallen
may there be granted the accomplishment of their true Wills; whether
they will absorption in the Infinite, or to be united with their chosen
and preferred, or to be in contemplation, or to be at peace, or to
achieve the labour and heroism of incarnation on this planet or
another; or in any Star, or aught else, unto them may there be grated
the accomplishment of their wills; yea, the accomplishment of their
wills. AUMGN. AUMGN. AUMGN.
The PEOPLE: So mote it be.

VI
OF THE CONSECRATION OF THE ELEMENTS
The PRIEST makes five crosses.
alone; 5 on cup alone.

3

1

2 on paten and cup;

4 on paten

The PRIEST: Life of man upon earth, fruit of labour, sustenance of
endeavour, thus be thou nourishment of the Spirit!
He touches the Host with the Lance.
By the virtue of the Rod
Be this bread the Body of God!
He takes the Host.
TOYTO EΣTI TO ΣOMA MOY. 9
He kneels, adores, rises, turns, shows Host to the PEOPLE, turns, replaces
Host, and adores. Music. He takes the Cup.
Vehicle of the joy of Man upon earth, solace of labour, inspiration of
endeavour, thus be thou ecstasy of the Spirit!
He touches the Cup with the Lance.
By the virtue of the Rod
Be this wine the Blood of God!
He takes the Cup.
TOYTO EΣTI TO ΠOTHPION TOY AIMATOΣ MOY.10
He kneels, adores, rises, turns, shows Cup to the PEOPLE, turns, replaces
Cup, and adores. Music.
For this is the Covenant of Resurrection.
He makes the five crosses on the PRIESTESS.
Accept, O LORD, this sacrifice of life and joy, true warrants of the
Covenant of Resurrection.
The PRIEST offers the Lance to the PRIESTESS, who Kisses it; he then
touches her between the breasts and upon the body. He then flings out his
arms upward, as comprehending the whole shrine.
Let this offering be borne upon the waves of Aethyr to our Lord and
Father the Sun that travelleth over the Heavens in his name ON.

He closes his hands, kisses the PRIESTESS between the breasts, and makes
three great crosses over the Paten, the Cup, and himself. He strikes his
breast. All repeat this action.
Hear ye all, saints of the true church of old time now essentially
present, that of ye we claim heirship, with ye we claim communion,
from ye we claim benediction in the name of IAΩ.
He makes three crosses on Paten and Cup together. He uncovers the Cup,
genuflects, takes the Cup in his left hand and the Host in his right. With the
Host he makes the five crosses on the Cup.

He elevates the Host and Cup. The Bell strikes.
AΓIOΣ AΓIOΣ AΓIOΣ IAΩ.11
He replaces the Host and the Cup, and adores.

VII
OF THE OFFICE OF THE ANTHEM
The PRIEST:
Thou who art I, beyond all I am,
Who hast no nature and no name,
Who art, when all but thou are gone,
Thou, centre and secret of the Sun,
Thou, hidden spring of all things known
And unknown, Thou aloof, alone,
Thou, the true fire within the reed
Brooding and breeding, source and seed
Of life, love, liberty, and light,
Thou beyond speech and beyond sight,
Thee I invoke, my faint fresh fire
Kindling as mine intents aspire.
Thee I invoke, abiding one,

Thee, centre and secret of the Sun,
And that most holy mystery
Of which the vehicle am I.
Appear, most awful and most mild,
As it is lawful, in thy child!
The CHORUS:
For of the Father and the Son
The Holy Spirit is the norm;
Male-female, quintessential, one,
Man-being veiled in woman-form.
Glory and worship in the highest,
Thou Dove, mankind that deifiest,
Being that race, most royally run
To spring sunshine through winter storm.
Glory and worship be to Thee,
Sap of the world-ash, wonder-tree!
The First Semichorus, MEN:
Glory to thee from gilded tomb!
The Second Semichorus, WOMEN:
Glory to thee from waiting womb!
MEN:
Glory to thee from earth unploughed!
WOMEN:
Glory to thee from virgin vowed!
MEN:
Glory to thee, true Unity
Of the eternal Trinity!
WOMEN:
Glory to thee, thou sire and dam
And self of I am that I am!
MEN:
Glory to thee, beyond all term,

Thy spring of sperm, thy seed and germ!
WOMEN:
Glory to thee, eternal Sun,
Thou One in Three, Thou Three in One!
CHORUS:
Glory and worship be to Thee,
Sap of the world-ash, wonder-tree!
These words are to form the substance of the anthem; but the whole or any
part thereof shall be set to music, which may be as elaborate as art can
devise. But even should other anthems be authorized be the Father of the
Church, this shall hold its place as the first of its kind, the father of all
others.

VIII
OF THE MYSTIC MARRIAGE AND CONSUMMATION OF THE
ELEMENTS
The PRIEST takes the Paten between the index and medius of the right
hand. The PRIESTESS clasps the Cup in her right hand.
The PRIEST: Lord most secret, bless this spiritual food unto our
bodies, bestowing upon us health and wealth and strength and joy and
peace, and that fulfillment of will and love under will that is perpetual
happiness.
He makes
with Paten and kisses it. He uncovers the Cup, genuflects,
rises. Music. He takes the Host, and breaks it over the Cup. He replaces the
right-hand portion in the Paten. He breaks off a particle of the left-hand
portion.
TOYTO EΣTI TO ΣΠEPMA MOY. O ΠATHP EΣTIN O HYIOΣ ΔIA
TO ΠNEYMA AΓION. AYMΓN. AYMΓN. AYMΓN. 12
He replaces the left-hand part of the Host. The PRIESTESS extends the
Lancepoint with her left hand to receive the particle. The PRIEST clasps the
Cup in his left hand. Together they depress the Lance-point in the Cup.

The PRIEST and the PRIESTESS: HPIΛIY. 13
The PRIEST14 takes the Lance. The PRIESTESS covers the Cup. The
PRIEST genuflects, rises bows, joins hands. He strikes his breast.
The PRIEST: O Lion and O Serpent that destroy the destroyer, be
mighty among us.
O Lion and O Serpent that destroy the destroyer, be mighty among
us.
O Lion and O Serpent that destroy the destroyer, be mighty among
us.
The PRIEST joins hands upon the breast of the PRIESTESS, and takes back
his Lance. He turns to the People, lowers and raises the Lance, and makes
upon them.
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.
The PEOPLE: Love is the law, love under will.
He lowers the Lance, and turns East. The PRIESTESS takes the Lance in
her right hand. With her left hand she offers the Paten. The PRIEST kneels.
The PRIEST: In my mouth be the essence of the life of the Sun!
He takes the Host with the right hand, makes with it on the Paten, and
consumes it. Silence. The PRIESTESS takes, uncovers, and offers the Cup,
as before.
The PRIEST: In my mouth be the essence of the joy of the earth!
He takes the Cup, makes
on the PRIESTESS, drains it and returns it.
Silence. He rises, takes the Lance, and turns to the PEOPLE.
The PRIEST: There is no part of me that is not of the Gods.
Those of the PEOPLE who intend to communicate, and no other should be
present, having signified their intention, a whole Cake of Light, and a whole
goblet of wine, have been prepared for each one. The DEACON marshals
them; they advance one by one to the altar. The children take the Elements

and offer them. The PEOPLE communicate as did the PRIEST, uttering the
same words in an attitude of Resurrection: “There is no part of me that is
not of the Gods.” The exceptions to this part of the ceremony are when it is
of the nature of a celebration, in which case none but the PRIEST
communicate; or part of the ceremony of marriage, when none other, save
the two to be married, partake; part of the ceremony of baptism, when only
the child baptised partakes; and of Confirmation at puberty, when only the
persons confirmed partake. The Sacrament may be reserved by the PRIEST,
for administration to the sick in their homes.
The PRIEST closes all within the veil. With the Lance he makes
people thrice, thus.

on the

The PRIEST: The LORD bless you.
The LORD enlighten your minds and comfort your hearts and
sustain your Bodies.
The LORD bring you to the accomplishment of your true Wills,
the Great Work, the Summun Bonum, True Wisdom and Perfect
Happiness.
He goes out, the DEACON and children following, into the Tomb of the
West. Music. (Voluntary.)
NOTE: The PRIESTESS and other officers never partake of the Sacrament,
they being as it were part of the PRIEST himself.
NOTE: Certain secret Formulae of this Mass are taught to the PRIEST in
his Ordination.

NOTES
Introduction
1
2

Sri Yukteswar was the guru of Paramahansa Yogananda. Together with Lahiri Mahasayaa (guru
of Sri Yukteswar) and Babaji (guru of Lahiri Mahasaya) all four saints appear on the album
jacket.
From the London Guardian article.

Chapter Zero
1

“The Poet,” from “The Stone of the Philosophers,” Konx Om Pax, originally published in 1907 in
a limited edition of 500 copies. First facsimile edition with introduction by Martin P. Starr
published in 1990 (Chicago: The Teitan Press, Inc.), p. 108.
2 There are those, of course, who consider Martin Luther, John Lennon, Mister Ed, and the Pope to
be Satanists, and ballroom dancing and bingo a form of devil worship.
3 Aleister Crowley with Mary Desti and Leila Waddell, Magick: Book Four, Liber ABA, Part III
(York Beach, ME: Weiser Books, second one-volume edition, revised and enlarged, 1997), p.
277.
4 Samuel Liddell and Macgregor Mathers, trans., The Goetia: The Lesser Key of Solomon the King,
edited, annotated, introduced, and enlarged by Aleister Crowley. Most recent edition edited by
Hymenaeus Beta (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1995), p. 17.
5 Crowley v. Constable and Co., Limited and others—informally known as the “Black Magic Libel
Case.” April 10, 1934.
6 Magick, p. 204–210.
7 Magick, p. 210.
8 Magick, p. 206.
9 Magick, p. 207 (footnote).
10 Magick, p. 207
11 Lon Milo DuQuette, Understanding Aleister Crowley's Thoth Tarot (York Beach, ME: Red
Wheel/Weiser, 2003) p. 9.
12 Ian (Lancaster) Fleming (1908–1964)—pseudonym, Atticus—British journalist, secret service
agent, writer, whose most famous creation was superhero James Bond, Agent 007. Crowley and
Fleming were indeed friends. Copies of their correspondence still exist, some of which discuss
matters of occult propaganda and the interrogation of Rudolf Hess.

Chapter One
1 Thelema; by the Greek Qabalah enumerates to 93 as does Aγαπη (Agape) Love.

2 This should not be interpreted as a blanket condemnation of “Holy Scripture.” Indeed, the Magick
of Thelema is based firmly upon its Holy Book, Liber AL vel Legis. This text is unique among
such writings, however, in that it forbids anyone to interpret its meaning for anyone else,
thereby avoiding the pitfalls of doctrine, priestcraft and dogma.

Chapter Two
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

The Great Astrological Year lasts approximately 26,000 years and is divided into twelve periods
of approximately 2,166 years corresponding to each of the twelve signs of the zodiac. Because
the Sun does not quite make it back to its starting point each year, it appears to slowly regress
backwards through the zodiac at the rate of one sign every 2,166 years. This is why the Age of
Aquarius follows that of Pisces, which followed Aries, etc.
Magical and Philosophical Commentaries on THE BOOK OF THE LAW (Montreal: 93
Publishing 1974), p. 271.
Spelled “Nuit” in Liber AL vel Legis, chapter I, verse 1.
Later identified with the Greek goddess Demeter.
Set, later identified with Apophis and the Greek devil-god Typhon.
The sacred phallus, which Seth threw in the Nile, and was eaten by three fishes was never
recovered.
This date, coincidentally, also marked the beginning of the astrological Age of Aries.
Although the systematic destruction of the rainforests is bringing an end to these time capsules of
prehistory.

Chapter Three
1 The Equinox of the Gods (New York: 93 Publishing, 1992).
2 The Equinox I (1–10) (London, 1909; reprinted York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992).
3 Rose Kelly, the sister of his friend Gerald Kelly.
4 The Equinox of the Gods, (New York: 93 Publishing, 1992).
5 The Photographs of the front and back of the Stélé Revealing, along with Crowley's paraphrase
were taken from Volume I, Number VII of The Equinox (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1990) p. 368.
6 Horus in his aspect as the innocent babe; often depicted fearlessly standing upon two crocodiles,
holding his finger or thumb to his lips.
7
For reasons that are not altogether clear, Crowley, after writing the Syllabus, created a fifth
classification, Class E.
8 See “A Syllabus of the official instructions of A A ,” The Equinox, Vol. No. 10.

Chapter Four
1 Aleister Crowley, The Equinox, Vol. I, No. 1 (London: 1909; reprinted: York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992), p. 17.
2 Atziluth, the archetypal world of pure Deity; Briah, the creative-archangelic world; Yetzirah the
formative-angelic world; and Assiah, the elemental world of substance.
3 In many tarot decks The Magician card is called The Juggler.
4 25 being the square of 5.

5

See The Works of Aleister Crowley, The Temple of the Holy Ghost, Vol. I (Homewood, IL: Yoga
Publishing, 1978), p. 204.
6
Crowley's Liber O, part IV, in Magick in Theory and Practice (New York: Magickal Childe,
1990), p. 379.
7 1–5 is referred to as the Qabalistic Cross. The magician actually indicates the three pillars of the
Tree of Life upon his or her body. This affirms the magician's identity as a microcosmic
representation of God and announces that fact to the world.—Ed.
8 6–14 the Divine Names are taken from traditional qabalistic sources; IHVH, the Tetragrammaton;
ADNI, often translated “Lord,” used as a synonym for the Holy Guardian Angel; AHIH, “I
Am.” AGLA is a notariqon of “Ateh Gibor Le-Olahm Adonai” (Thou art mighty forever my
Lord). These names govern their respective Archangels; Raphael (God has healed); Gabriel
(God is my strength); Michael (who is as God); and Auriel (light of God). These Archangels, in
turn, rule a host of Angels and lesser spiritual entities of the Elements.—Ed.
9
The Hexagram.”It flames both above and beneath the magus, who is thus in a cube of 4
pentagrams and 2 hexagrams, 32 points in all.” —Crowley, The Palace of the World.
By creating the four pentagrams at the quarters and positioning the four archangels to stand
as guardians, the magician has sealed the circle, and created a new magical environment. The
microcosm (the “little” world of Five) is now held at bay outside and beyond. A vacuum is
formed within the circle (which has become a column extending infinitely above and below). As
Magick and Nature abhor vacuums, this environment is immediately filled by the inrush of the
macrocosm (the “big” world of Six, represented by the hexagram). It is from this superior
position the magician sets to work.—Ed.
10 This injunction does not apply to gods like Phthah or Harpocrates whose natures do not accord
with this gesture.
11 This gesture is the “Sign of Horus” or the “Sign of the Enterer.” —Ed.
12 Or the thumb, the fingers being closed. The thumb symbolizes spirit, the forefinger the element of
water. (Editor's note: the “Sign of Harpocrates” also called the “Sign of Silence.”)
13 With the Greater Pentagram Ritual, it is possible to Invoke or Banish any of the five elements by
the correct use of the appropriate pentagrams.
14 These are the traditional microcosmic attributions determined by the terrestrial winds.
15 Liber O, Part IV.
16 The Signs of the Portal: Extend the hands in front of you, palms outward, separate them as if in
the act of rending asunder a veil or curtain (actives), and then bring them together as if closing it
up again and let them fall to the side (passives).
17 Divine Name representing the forces of creation (Genesis I, 1). Often mistranslated as the
singular, “God,” (i.e. “In the beginning God created…” it is more accurately rendered “gods,
male and female” for in Hebrew it is a feminine noun (ELOH) ending with a masculine plural
(IM). Elohim thus is descriptive of female potency mated with a masculine idea. Without such a
union offspring, and consequently creation, would be impossible.
18 Divine Name representing the fourth Sephirah, Chesed, in the highest of the four Qabalistic
worlds, Atziluth; often translated God the Creator; root of Eloah, Elohim, Allah, etc.

Chapter Five
1

My original plan for the format of this book was to introduce the hexagram rituals at this point for
the benefit the novice. I reconsidered so as to continue, without interruption, the train of thought
established in the previous chapter. My apologies to beginning students who may wish to now
turn to Part I of Chapter Six and briefly acquaint themselves with the traditional hexagram
rituals before continuing on.

2

The 30 Aethyrs roughly correspond, in groups of 3, to the 10 Sephiroth, of the Tree of Life. For
the Enochian magician, exploration of the Aethyrs is comparable to the Pathworkings of the
Qabalistic magician.
3 With the exception of the 30th Aethyr, Tex, which has four Governors.
4
This clockwise zodiacal arrangement will be explained in the section concerning Liber V vel
Reguli.
5 It should be pointed out that the Zodiacal landmarks utilized in the traditional Hexagram rituals
are the Cardinal signs; Aries/Fire in the East; Cancer/Water in the North; Libra/Air in the West;
and Capricorn/Earth in the South. More on this in Chapter Six.
6 See The Book of Thoth (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1974).
7 lbid.
8 lbid.
9 See Magick Book Four, Liber ABA (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1993).
10 The Great Beast.
11 The Lord of Silence.
12 Liber Aleph (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1991), Chap. 197.
13 Crowley believed it to be the Twenty-Sixth Dynasty, but modern research indicates as above. See
“The Holy Books of Thelema,” in Equinox Vol. III, no. 9. (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1983).
14 See Liber Samekh (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1979). For an entire essay on AUMGN see
Magick, Chap. 7 part V.
15 Ibid. Chap. 5.
16 (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1982).
17 (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1993).
18 (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1986).
19 Kether, Chokmah, and Binah, the first, second, and third Sephiroth located above the Abyss.
Binah is referred to as the “Night of Pan” and the home of the Supernal Babalon.
20 The Book of Lies has “XAOΣ” (Chaos).
21 The Book of Lies has “Hoor pa kraat.”
22 The Book of Lies has “but scream BABALON.”
23 The Book of Lies has “but say EPΩΣ” (Eros).
24 The Book of Lies has “YΨXH” (Psyche).
25 According to the Chaldean Oracles of Zoroaster, each individual, prior to any theurgic ritual,
must gain consciousness of the “agathosdaimon,” a personal guardian spirit or angel who
functions as the mediator between the aspirant and the gods. These guides are called “Iunges” or
“Ferrymen.” Literally “wrynecks,” traditionally the birds of the abyss. Iunges, Synoches, and
Teletarchae comprise the three celestial Intelligences or Archangels of Chaldean cosmology.
26 Diamonos. The geniuses of Platonist philosophy.
27 See The Book of the Law, I, xvi. Crowley developed a more elaborate version which he used as
one of his seals. In that version one easily sees (no apologies to Freud) an aerial view of the male
genitalia.
28 Teth, the 19th Path of the Tree of Life—attributed to Leo (the Beast) and to the tarot card
Strength. In pre-Thelemic decks the card depicts a woman holding the mouth of a lion. In
Crowley's version of the card, which is titled Lust, the woman is Babalon and She sits astride the
Beast (Babalon and the Beast conjoined).
29 “…it is an evil symbol, affirming the empire of matter over that Divine Spirit which should
govern it. See that thou doest it not.” See The Golden Dawn, Vol. IV (River Falls, WI: Hazel
Hills, 1969), p. 9.
30 The Book of Thoth (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1974), pp. 230, 243.

31 “Now is the Pillar established in the Void; now is Asi fulfilled of Asar; now is Hoor let down into
the Animal Soul of Things like a fiery star that falleth upon the darkness of the earth.” LIBER
CORDI SCINC TISER PENTE vel LXV, Chapter V. In Holy Books of Thelema (York Beach,
ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990) p. 76.
32 Boleskine House is on Loch Ness, 17 miles from Inverness, Latitude 57.14 N. Longitude 4.28 W.
33 (Nuit above head) Brain (Brahmarandra).
34 Seed (Muladara).
35 Force & Fire (Anahata).
36 Silence & Speech (Ajna & Visuddhi).
37 Manipura (or also Anahata?).
38 (*Svadisthana the Womb) *or could R.H.K.—the Lord of the system in visible form—be the two
halves of the brain? I think so: then 666 is Anahata.
39 Manipura is the Word of The Aeon itself.
40 See Chapter Four.—Ed
41 Scorpio.—Ed
42 The Mark of the Beast is
, where Sol is Hadit, Luna is Nuith and the Testes 666 and 156.
43 Also called “Isis Rejoicing.”—Ed.
44 The complete version of this essay may be found in Magick Book Four Part IV (York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1993).—Ed
45 This is the Tarot Key XX, Judgement, titled “Aeon” in the Crowley Thoth deck.—Ed.
46 This is the Tarot Key XI, titled “Lust” in the Crowley Thoth deck.—Ed

Chapter Six
1
2
3
4
5

6
7
8
9

Magick (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1989).
lbid.
lbid.
See The Holy Books of Thelema (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990), p. xxxiv.
The third Sephirah, Binah, representing Saturn, is not actually touched by the uppermost point of
the Hexagram, which reaches up to the Abyss and touches the false Sephirah Daath.
Nevertheless qabalists are satisfied with this surrogate relationship as Daath is not an
inappropriate stand in for the inscrutabilities of Binah and the Supernal Triad.
lbid.
Initials of Jesus Nazaraeus Rex Judaeorum; but also, Igni Natura Renovata Integra: Isis Naturae
Regina Ineffabilis, and a host of other sentences.
Note the double sets of numbers for the Solar Hexagrams. To invoke or banish the Sun, all six
planetary hexagrams are drawn in their regular planetary order.—Ed.
The Traditional God Names of the Planets are as follows: -YHVH ELOHIM; -EL, ELOHIM GIBOR; -YHVH ELOAH VE-DAATH; -YHVH TZABAOTH; -ELOHIM
TZABAOTH; and -SHADDAI EL CHAI.—Ed.

Chapter Seven
1
2
3

See The Book of Lies (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1990), Chapter 69.
Ibid.
Isis Rejoicing, which is the same as Mater Triumphans of Reguli.—Ed.

Chapter Eight
1

2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9

In April 1920, Crowley established a Thelemic monastery (theoretically based upon Rabelais'
Abbey of Thelema) just outside of the small Sicilian beach community of Cefalu. Money
problems, scandal, and an expulsion order from Mussolini put an end to the Abbey in May of
1923.
Any such formula should be used only when the adept has full knowledge based on experience of
the management of such matters.
In the 1904 version of the Preliminary Invocation of the Goetia (the text that forms the basis of
Liber Samekh) the name “Mosheh” was used instead of Ankh-af-an-khonsu, and “Ishrael”
instead of Khem.—Ed.
This is an assumption based on Liber Legis II, 78 and III, 34.
Having experience of success in the practices of Liber 536,
.
The letter F is used to represent the Hebrew Vau and the Greek Digamma; its sound lies between
those of the English long o and long oo, as in Rope and Tooth.
They correspond to the Sulphur. Salt, and Mercury of Alchemy; to Rajas, Tamas, and Sattvas in
the Hindu system; and are rather modes of action than actual qualities even when conceived as
latent. They are the apparatus of communication between the planes; as such, they are
conventions. There is no absolute validity in any means of mental apprehension; but unless we
make these spirits of the Firmament subject unto us by establishing right relation (within the
possible limits) with the Universe, we shall fall into error when we develop our new instrument
of direct understanding. It is vital that the Adept should train his intellectual faculties to the
truth, in the measure of their capacity. To despise the mind on account of its limitations is the
most disastrous blunder; it is the common cause of the calamities which strew so many shores
with the wreckage of the Mystic Armada. Bigotry, Arrogance, Bewilderment, all forms of
mental and moral disorder, so often observed in people of great spiritual attainment, have
brought the Path itself into discredit; almost all such catastrophes are due to trying to build the
Temple of the Spirit without proper attention to the mental laws of structure and the physical
necessities of foundation. The mind must be brought to its utmost pitch of perfection, but
according to its own internal properties; one cannot feed a microscope on mutton chops. It must
be regarded as a mechanical instrument of knowledge, independent of the personality of its
possessor. One must treat it exactly as one treats one's electroscope or one's eyes; one influence
of one's wishes. A physician calls in a colleague to attend to his own family, knowing that
personal anxiety may derange his judgment. A microscopist who trusts his eyes when his pet
theory is at stake may falsify the facts, and find too late that he has made a fool of himself.
In the case of initiation itself, history is scarred with the wounds inflicted by this Dagger. It
reminds us constantly of the danger of relying upon the intellectual faculties. A judge must know
the law in every point, and be detached from personal prejudices, and incorruptible, or iniquity
will triumph. Dogma, with persecution, delusion, paralysis of progress, and many another evil, as
its satraps, has always established a tyranny when Genius has proclaimed it. Islam making a
bonfire of written Wisdom, and Haeckel forging biological evidence; physicists ignorant of
radioactivity disputing the conclusions of geology, and theologians impatient of truth struggling
against the tide of thought; all such must perish at the hands of their own error in making their
minds, internally defective or externally deflected, the measure of the Universe.
See, for the formula of IAF, or rather FIAOF, Book 4 Part III, Chapter V. The form FIAOF will be
found preferable in practice.
“Mass,” in the sense of the word which is used by physicists. The impossibility of defining it will
not deter the intrepid initiate (in view of the fact that the fundamental conception is beyond the
normal categories of reason).

10 Sacred to AHAThOOR. The idea is that of the Female conceived as invulnerable, reposeful, of
enormous swallowing capacity, etc.
11 These phenomena are not wholly subjective; they may be perceived, though often under other
forms, by even the ordinary man.
12 In Hebrew, ADNI, 65. The Gnostic Initiates transliterated it to imply their own secret formulae;
we follow so excellent an example. ON is an Arcanum of Arcana; its significance is taught,
gradually in the O.T.O. Also AD is the paternal formula, Hadit; ON is its complement NUIT; the
final Yod signifies “mine” etymologically and essentially the Mercurial (transmitted)
hermaphroditic virginal seed—The Hermit of the Taro—The use of the name is therefore to
invoke one's own inmost secrecy, considered as the result of the conjunction of Nuit and Hadit. If
a second A is included, its import is to affirm the operation of the Holy Ghost and the
formulation of the Babe in the Egg, which precedes the appearance of the Hermit.
13 A thorough comprehension of psycho-analysis will contribute notably to the proper appreciation
of this Ritual.
14 It is said among men that the word Hell deriveth from the word “helan,” to hele or conceal, in the
tongue of the Anglo-Saxons. That is, it is the concealed place, which since all things are in thine
own self, is the unconscious, Liber CXI (Aleph) chap. .
15 But compare the use of the same word in section C.
16 That is, Yod Hé realizing Themselves, Will and Understanding, in the twins Vau Hé, Mind and
Body.
17 But see also the general solution of the Riddle of Existence in The Book of the Law and its
Comment—Part IV of Book 4.
18 Commonly identified as The Equinox Vol. III. No. I (The Blue Equinox) (York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1973).—Ed.
19 If we adopt the new orthography VIAOV (Book 4 Part III, Chap. V) we must read “The Sun-6the-Son,” etc., for “all”; and elaborate this interpretation here given in other ways, accordingly.
Thus O (or F) will now be “The Fifteen by function” instead of “Five,” etc., and “in act free,
firm, aspiring, ecstatic,” rather than “gentle,” etc., as in the present text.
20 There is an alternative spelling TzBA—F where the Root, “an Host,” has the value of 93. The
Practicus should revive this Ritual throughout in the Light of his personal researches in the
Qabalah, and thus make it his own peculiar property. The spelling here suggested implies that he
who utters the Word affirms his allegiance to the symbols 93 and 6; that he is a warrior in the
army of Will and of the Sun. 93 is also the number of AIWAZ and 6 of The Beast.
21 The consonants of LOGOS, “Word,” add (Hebrew values) to 93. And EPH, “Words” (whence
‘Epic’) has also that value: EIΔE TA EΠH might be the phrase here intended: its number is 418.
This would then assert the accomplishment of the Great Work; this is the natural conclusion of
the Ritual. Cf. CCXX. III. 75.
22 These needs are modified during the process of Initiation both as to quantity and quality. One
should not become anxious about one's physical or mental health on a priori grounds, but pay
attention only to indubitable symptoms of distress should such arise.
23 The Oracles of Zoroaster utter this:
“And when, by often invoking, all the phantasms are vanished, thou
shalt see that Holy and Formless Fire, that Fire which darts and flashes
through all the Depths of the Universe; hear thou the Voice of the Fire!
“A similar Fire flashingly extending through the rushings of Air, or a Fire formless whence
cometh the Image of a voice, or even a flashing Light abounding, revolving, whirling forth,
crying aloud. Also there is the vision of the fire-flashing Courser of Light, or also a Child, borne
aloft on the shoulders of the Celestial Steed, fiery, or clothed with gold, or naked, or shooting
with the bow shafts of light, and standing on the shoulders of the horse, then if thy meditation
prolongeth itself, thou shalt unite all these symbols into the Form of a Lion.”

This passage—combined with several others—is paraphrased in poetry by Aleister Crowley
in his Tannäuser. From The Works of Aleister Crowley (Foyers, England: Society for the
Propagation of Religious Truth, 1905–7; reprinted by Yogi Publications Society in Homewood,
IL in 1978).
“And when, invoking often, thou shalt see
That formless Fire; when all the earth is shaken,
The stars abide not, and the moon is gone,
All Time crushed back into Eternity,
The Universe by earthquake overtaken;
Light is not, and the thunders roll,
The World is done:
When in the darkness Chaos rolls again
In the excited brain:
Then, O then call not to thy view that visible
Image of Nature; fatal is her name!
It fitteth not thy Body to behold
That living light of Hell,
The unluminous, dead flame,
Until that body from the crucible
Hath passed, pure gold!
For, from the confines of material space,
The twilight-moving place,
The gates of matter, and the dark threshold,
Before the faces of the Things that dwell
In the Abodes of Night,
Spring into sight
Demons, dog-faced, that show no mortal sign
Of Truth, but desecrate the Light Divine,
Seducing from the sacred mysteries.
But, after all these Folk of Fear are driven
Before the avenging levin
That rives the opening skies,
Behold that Formless and that Holy Flame
That hath no name;
The Fire that darts and flashes, writhes and creeps
Snake-wise in royal robe
Wound round that vanished glory of the globe,
Unto that sky beyond the starry deeps,
Beyond the Toils of Time,—then formulate
In thine own mind, luminous, concentrate,
The Lion of the Light, a child that stands
On the vast shoulders of the Steed of God:
Or winged, or shooting flying shafts, or shod
With the flame-sandals.
Then, lift up thine hands!
Centre thee in thine heart one scarlet thought
Limpid with brilliance of the Light above!
Draw into naught
All life, death, hatred, love:
All self concentrated in the sole desire—

Hear thou the Voice of Fire!”
24 See The Equinox I, VIII, 22.
25 A high degree of initiation is required. This means that the process of analysis must have been
carried out very thoroughly. The Adept must have become aware of his deepest impulses, and
understood their true significance. The “resistance” here mentioned is automatic; it increases
indefinitely against direct pressure. It is useless to try to force oneself in these matters; the
uninitiated Aspirant, however eager he may be, is sure to fail. One must know how to deal with
each internal idea as it arises.
It is impossible to overcome one's inhibitions by conscious effort; their existence justifies
them. God is on their side, as on that of the victim in Browning's Instans Tyrannus. A man
cannot compel himself to love, however much he may want to, on various rational grounds. But
on the other hand, when the true impulse comes, it overwhelms all its critics; they are powerless
either to make or break a genius; it can only testify to the fact that it has met its master.
26 Of course, even false tenets and modes of the mind are in one sense true. It is only their
appearance which alters. Copernicus did not destroy the facts of nature, or change the
instruments of observation. He merely effected a radical simplification of science. Error is really
a “fool's knot.” Moreover, the very tendency responsible for the entanglement is one of the
necessary elements of the situation. Nothing is wrong in the end; and one cannot reach the
“right” point of view without the aid of one's particular “wrong” point. If we reject or alter the
negative of a photograph we shall not get a perfect positive.
27 This means, free from ideas, however excellent in themselves, which are foreign to it. For
instance, literary interest has no proper place in a picture.
28 Liber AL vel Legis, II, 61–68, where the details of the proper technique are discussed.
29 The essence of this matter is that the word AUM, which expresses the course of Breath (spiritual
life) from free utterance through controlled concentration to Silence, is transmuted by the
creation of the compound letter MΓN to replace M: that is, Silence is realised as passing into
continuous ecstatic vibration, of the nature of “Love” under “Will” as shewn by MΓN = 40 + 3 +
50 = 93 AΓAΠH, ΘEΛHMA, etc., and the whole word has the value of 100, Perfection
Perfected, the Unity incompletion, and equivalent to KP the conjunction of the essential male and
female principles.
30 The “normal” intellect is incapable of these functions; a superior faculty must have been
developed. As Zoroaster says: “Extend the void mind of thy soul to that Intelligible that thou
mayst learn the Intelligible, because it subsisteth beyond Mind. Thou wilt not understand It as
when understanding some common thing.”
31 This corresponds to the emotional and metaphysical fog which is characteristic of the emergence
of thought from homogeneity. The clear and concise differentiation of ideas marks the adult
mind.
32 See the maps “Minutum Mundum” in The Equinox 1, 2 and 3, and the general relations detailed
in Liber 777.
33 For the account of these matters see The Equinox, Vol. I, “The Temple of Solomon the King,”
Liber 418, Liber Aleph, John St. John, The Urn, and Book 4, Part IV [The Book of the Law, with
its comment, in preparation].
34 Comments and directions of the present author in brackets.—Ed.
35 Aleister Crowley, The Equinox, Vol. I No. VIII (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992), p. 18.
36 The Motto of the Adeptus Minor.

Chapter Nine
1

The Confessions of Aleister Crowley (London: Penguin/Arkana. 1989).

2 44 = DM = Blood (Hebrew)
3 See Liber AL vel Legis, III. 23.
4 A cross or X within a circle, or the “Mark of the Beast” are both appropriate signs.
5 He also insisted upon doing “Will” before the major meal of the day.
Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.
What is thy Will?
It is my will to eat and drink.
To what end?
That my body may be fortified thereby.
To what end?
That I may accomplish the Great Work.
Love is the law, love under will
Fall to.

6
7
8
9

—From Magick in Theory on Practice (New York: Magickal Childe, 1990), pp.
102, 103. Originally printed in Paris by Lecram Press, 1929.
LIBER RESH can be found in Crowley's The Equinox, Volume I, No. 6 (York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1990).
From Liber AL vel Legis, chap. III, verses 37 and 38.
The Adorations. See line 5 of Liber Resh.—Ed.
Chapter 62 of The Book of Lies (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1981), p. 134. “This chapter is
itself a comment of Chapter 44.” (The Mass of the Phoenix also found in The Book of Lies.)

Chapter Ten
1
2
3
4

Both appeared originally in The Equinox, Vol. I, no. 7.
“The Ordeal x is dealt with in private.” The Equinox, Vol. I, no. 10.
All bracketed editor's comments found within the texts of Liber NV and Liber HAD are
Crowley's.
Liber Os Abysmi Vel DAATH. In The Equinox, Vol. I, no. 7 (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1992), p. 77.

Chapter Eleven
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Even the English word “ceremony” derives from the Rites of Eleusis. Ceres is another name for
Demeter.
The Rite of Artemis would later develop into Rite of Luna, the seventh and last of the Rites of
Eleusis.
Copyright © Ordo Templi Orientis, JAF Box 7666 New York, NY 10116. USA. www.oto.org
See chapter 12, Thelemic Orders.
Copyright © Ordo Templi Orientis, JAF Box 7666 New York, NY 10116. USA. www.oto.org
Sol is exalted in Aries.
Sol rules Leo
Satan (or the Egyptian Set) was brother to Osiris (the Sun) who plotted his assassination. The
Greek equivalent of Satan was the hundred-headed devil Typhon.
At the Autumnal Equinox the Scorpion of Scorpio is said to sting the Sun to death as the hours of
darkness become greater than the hours of sunlight. Apophis is the name for the Egyptian

serpent god Apep who is in perpetual battle with the Sun god Ra. Apep triumphs every evening
and Ra is victorious every morning.
10 Originally a Nubian god, Besz was the Egyptian god of mischief. In each of the seven Rites of
Eleusis there is a character who injects a divine element of chaos into the action. This character
finally manifests as the great god Pan himself in the final Rite, Luna. In the Rite of Sol, SatanTyphon, Scorpio-Apophis, and Besz represent the evil triad of forces that conspire together to kill
the Sun in classic Sun myths. The three ruffians of the Masonic Hiramic myth, and Judas, Herod,
and Caiaphas in the Christian myth are just two examples of many.
11 Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837–1909)
12 Until the closing scene (after Sol is slain), the batteries of knocks add to 6, the number of the
Sephirah Tiphareth, the Sphere of the Sun.
13 In the tarot, “The Destruction of the House of God” is another title for Trump XVI, The Tower,
which represents Mars. As the Rite of Mars was the ceremony preceding the Rite of Sol,
Scorpio-Apophis is demonstrating how each rite is born from the catastrophic end of its
predecessor.
14 A sacrifice of Fire.
15 A sacrifice of Water.
16 A sacrifice of Air.
17 A sacrifice of Earth.
18 From Crowley's “The Mothers' Tragedy,” The Collected Works of Aleister Crowley, Vol. I., p 156.
Copyright © Ordo Templi Orientis, JAF Box 7666 New York, NY 10116. USA. www.oto.org.
Originally published, Foyers, England: Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth, 1905–7.
Reprint. Homewood, IL: Yogi Publications Society [c.1978].
19 In imitation of Christ's spear wound which tradition informs us penetrated his right side and
penetrated to the heart.
20 Scorpio-Apophis has slain the Sun just as Venus the Morning Star rises. She announces herself
with seven knocks representing the seventh Sephirah, Netzach, the Sphere of Venus.
21 This was an obvious device to allow Crowley (who played Brother Leo) to do the actual
recitation the attributes of Scorpio-Apophis.
22 “Nature” from Crowley's “Orpheus,” The Collected Works of Aleister Crowley, Vol. III, p. 155.
Copyright © Ordo Templi Orientis, JAF Box 7666 New York, NY 10116. USA. www.oto.org.
Originally published, Foyers, England: Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth, 1905–7.
Reprint. Homewood, IL: Yogi Publications Society [c.1978].

Chapter Twelve
1
2
3
4

It is commonly believed that A A stands for Argenteum Astnim (Silver Star). I have been
informed in no uncertain terms that this is not the case.
Israel Regardie conveniently compiled most of the necessary material, including the various
Oaths and Tasks of the Grades, in Gems from the Equinox (Phoenix, AZ: Falcon Press, 1982).
Magick (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1989).
(New York: Thelema Publications, 1986).

Chapter Thirteen
1

The following material concerning the Three Steps of Worship written by Constance Jean
DuQuette and myself as part of our seminar, The Miracle of the Mass.
2 Written in 1915 while visiting Moscow. The Master Therion is of course Aleister Crowley. —Ed.

3 These are the dimensions of the sarcophagus in the King's Chamber of the Great Pyramid at Giza.
—Ed.
4 Many of the steps and signs are for the benefit of O.T.O. inifiates only and need not concern
nonmembers.—Ed.
5 The Hailing Sign of a magician: Press the right hand to form a square. Throw the left hand up,
perpendicularly [upward] to form a square. Throw the left hand up, with the left arm horizontal
from the shoulder to the elbow, and perpendicular from the elbow to the ends of the fingers,
with the thumb and forefinger forming a square.
6 Unity uttermost showed! I adore the might of Thy breath, supreme and terrible God, who makest
the Gods and Death to tremble before Thee: I, I adore Thee!”
7 IO IO IO IAO SABAO, Lord ABRASAX, Lord MITHRAS, Lord PHALLUS. IO PAN, IO PAN
PAN, IO powerful, IO deathless, IO woundless, IO IAO. Hail PHALLUS, hail all-devourer, hail
father of all. Holy, Holy, Holy, IAO.
8 “All stand, Head erect, Eyes open.” Magick in Theory and Practice.
9 This is my body.
10 This is the cup of my blood.
11 “Holy, Holy, Holy, IAO!
12 This is my seed. The Father is the Son as the Holy Ghost. AUMGN, AUMGN, AUMGN.
13 HRILIU. The sound of mating doves. The cry of ecstasy.—Ed.
14 I believe this should be “PRIESTESS takes the Lance.”—Ed.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Budge, E. A. Wallis. The Book of the Dead. New York: Dover, 1967.
_____ Osiris, The Egyptian Religion of Resurrection. New Hyde Park, NY:
University Books, 1961.
Campbell, Joseph. The Power of Myth. New York: Doubleday, 1988.
_____ The Hero with a Thousand Faces. New York: Meridian, 1956.
Cammell, Charles Richard. Aleister Crowley—The Man: The Mage: The
Poet. New Hyde Park, NY: University Books, 1962.
Cassaubon, Meric. A True and Faithful Relation of What Passed For Many
Years Between Dr. John Dee and Some Spirits. London, 1659.
Reprint. London: Askin, 1974. Reprint, with introduction by Lon
Milo DuQuette. New York: Magickal Childe Publishing Inc., 1992.
Crowley, Aleister. Book Four, Parts I, II, III, IV. Ed. Hymenaeus Beta. York
Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1993.
_____ The Book of Lies. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992.
_____ The Book of Thoth: A Short Essay on the Tarot of the Egyptians. The
Master Therion. London: O.T.O., 1944. The Equinox III (5).
Facsimile edition. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1991.
_____ The Complete Astrological Writings. Ed. John Symonds and Kenneth
Grant. London: Gerald Duckworth & Co., 1974.
_____ The Confessions of Aleister Crowley. London: Penguin/Arkana,
1989.
_____ Crowley On Christ. First published in typewritten form as a limited
edition of 200 copies as The Gospel According to St. Bernard Shaw,
1953. Rev. 2d edition, Ed. Francis King. London: C. W. Daniel Co.,
1972.
_____ Eight Lectures on Yoga. Mahatma Guru Sri Paramahansa Shivaji.
London: O.T.O., 1939. The Equinox III (4). Rev. 2d edition. Ed.
Hymenaeus Beta. Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1991;
New York: 93 Publishing, 1992.
_____ (Series Editor, 1909-1944). The Equinox. Volume I appeared
semiannually from spring 1909 to fall 1913. Volume II was not

published. Volume III(1), Spring 1919, Detroit was the last regular
serial number issued. Volume III(2) was not published, but like the
whole of Volume II, it is included in the series numbering as if
issued. Subsequent numbers appeared irregularly; most are
monographs best known by their book title. Numbers subsequent to
Volume III(5) were edited and issued posthumously. Last number
issued was Volume III(10). While numbers of a Volume V and a
Volume VII have been issued, these are considered apocryphal
continuations of the original serial.
The Equinox I(1). London, Spring 1909. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(2). London, Fall 1909. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(3). London, Spring 1910. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(4). London, Fall 1910. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(5). London, Spring 1911. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(6). London, Fall 1911. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(7). London, Spring 1912. Ed. Mary d'Este Sturges. Reprint.
York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(8). London, Fall 1912. Ed. Soror Virakam. Reprint. York
Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(9). London, Spring 1913. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox I(10). London, Fall 1913. Reprint. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox III(1) (The Blue Equinox). Detroit, Spring 1919. Reprint. York
Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1992.
The Equinox III(3). Fall 1936, The Equinox of the Gods. See entry under
book title.
The Equinox III(4). Spring 1939, Eight Lectures on Yoga. See entry under
book title.
The Equinox III(5). Spring 1944, The Book of Thoth. See entry under book
title.

The Equinox III(6). Fall 1961, Liber Aleph. See entry under book title.
The Equinox III(7). Fall 1971, Shih Yi. See entry under book title.
The Equinox III(8). Spring 1975, The Tao Teh Ching. See entry under book
title.
The Equinox III(9). Spring 1983, [Thelema] EΛHMA: The Holy Books of
Thelema. See entry under book title.
The Equinox III(10). New York, Spring 1986. Reprint. York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1990.
_____ The Equinox of the Gods. London: O.T.O.; 1936. The Equinox III(3).
Corrected facsimile editions. Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon
Publications, 1991, and New York, 93 Publishing, 1992. Although it
is not so designated in its title, Crowley identified this work as Book
Four, Part IV. No author appears on the title page.
_____ The Goetia of Solomon the King. Ed. Aleister Crowley. Foyers,
England: Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth, 1904.
Reprint. New York: Magickal Childe Publications, 1992.
_____ The Heart of the Master. London: O.T.O., 1938. Reprint. Scottsdale,
AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1992.
_____ Konx Om Pax. Foyers, England: Society for the Propagation of
Religious Truth, 1907. Reprint, with Introduction by Martin P. Starr.
Chicago: The Teitan Press, 1990.
_____ Liber Aleph vel CXI. The Book of Wisdom or Folly. Eds. Karl
Germer and Marcelo Motta. Barstow, CA: Thelema Publishing,
1961. The Equinox III(6) Rev. 2d edition. Ed. Hymenaeus Beta.
York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1991, and New York: 93
Publishing, 1991.
_____ Little Essays Toward Truth. London: O.T.O., 1936. Reprint.
Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1991.
_____ Magick. Eds. John Symonds and Kenneth Grant. London: Routledge
& Kegan Paul, 1973; and York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1974.
_____ Magick In Theory and Practice. Paris: Lecram Press, 1929. Reprint.
New York: Magickal Chide Publications, 1990.
_____ Magical and Philosophical Commentaries of THE BOOK OF THE
LAW. Eds. John Symonds & Kenneth Grant. Quebec: 93 Publishing,
1974.
_____ Magick Without Tears. Ed. Israel Regardie. Scottsdale, AZ: New
Falcon Publications, 1991.

_____ The Qabalah of Aleister Crowley. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1973.
_____ Shih Yi. Ed. H. Parsons Smith. Oceanside, CA: Thelema
Publications, 1971. The Equinox III(7).
_____ The Tao Teh King. Ed. H. Parsons Smith. Oceanside, CA: Thelema
Publications, 1971. The Equinox III(8).
_____ (received by). [Thelema] EΛHMA: The Holy Books of Thelema.
Eds. Hymenaeus Alpha and Hymenaeus Beta. York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1983. The Equinox III(9). Corrected 2nd. printing
Samuel Weiser, 1990, and New York: 93 Publishing, 1990.
_____ The Works of Aleister Crowley. Ed. I. Back. Foyers, England: Society
for the Propagation of Religious Truth, 1905-7. Reprint.
Homewood, IL: Yogi Publications Society, [c.1978].
Douglas, Nick, (with Penny Slinger). Sexual Secrets. Rochester, VT:
Destiny Books, 1989.
DuQuette, Lon Miio (with C. S. Hyatt). Aleister Crowley's Illustrated
Goetia. Scottsdale, AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1992.
_____ (with C. S. Hyatt). Enochian World of Aleister Crowley. Scottsdale,
AZ: New Falcon Publications, 1991.
Eliade, Mircea. A History of Religious Ideas, 3 Volumes. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Forlong, James George Roche, Maj.-Gen. Rivers of Life, or, Sources and
streams of the faiths of man in all lands; showing the evolution of
faiths from the rudest symbolisms to the latest spiritual
developments. London: B. Quaritch, 1883.
Fuller, J.F.C. The Star in the West. New York: The Walter Scott Publishing
Co. Ltd., 1907. Reprint. Mokelumne Hill, CA: Health Research,
1969.
Godwin, Joscelyn. Mystery Religions in the Ancient World. London:
Thames and Hudson, 1981.
Graves, Robert. The White Goddess. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
1978.
Hermes, Trismegistus. The Pymander of Hermes. Ed. W. Wynn Westcott.
Collectanea Hermetica, Vol. II. London and New York:
Theosophical Pub. Society, 1894.
Huysmans, Joris-Karl. En Route. Trans. David Blow. Sawtry, England:
Dedalus, 1989.

_____ La Bas (Lower Depths). London: Dedalus, 1986.
James, William. The Varieties of Religious Experience. London: Longmans,
1910.
Julianus. The Chaldean Oracles. Trans. Ruth Majereik. London and New
York: Brill, 1989.
_____ The Chaldean Oracles of Zoroaster. Ed. W Wynn Westcott.
Collectanea Hermetica, Vol. VI. Wellingborough, England:
Aquarian Press, 1983.
Jung, Carl G. Man and His Symbols. London: Aldus Books, 1964.
King, Francis. The Magical World of Aleister Crowley. New York: Coward,
McCann & Geoghegan, 1978.
Levi, Eliphas. The Key of the Mysteries. Trans. Aleister Crowley. (York
Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1973.
_____ The History of Magic. Trans. Arthur Edward Waite. London: Rider,
1957.
_____ Transcendental Magic: Its Doctrine and Ritual. Trans. Arthur
Edward Waite. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1970.
Mathers, S.L. MacGregor. Trans. The Book of The Sacred Magic Of AbraMelin, The Mage. New York: Dover Publications, 1975.
_____ Trans. The Kabbalah Unveiled. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1974.
Regardie, Israel. The Eye in the Triangle. Phoenix: Falcon Press, 1989.
_____ The Golden Dawn. 6th edition. St. Paul: Llewellyn Publications,
1992.
_____ and P.R. Stephensen. The Legend of Aleister Crowley. Phoenix:
Falcon Press, 1986.
Seckler, Phyllis. In the Continuum, Vol I-V. Oroville, CA: Seckler, 19731993.
Stirling, William. The Canon. London: R.I.L.K.O., 1974.
Suarès, Carlo. The Sepher Yetsira. Trans. Micheline & Vincent Stuart.
Boulder, CO & London: Shambhala, 1976.
Suster, Gerald. The Legacy of the Beast. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser,
1989.
Turner, Robert. Elizabethan Magic. Longmead, Shaftesbury, Dorset,
England: Element Books Ltd., 1989.
Wilhelm, Richard. The Secret of the Golden Flower. Trans. Cary F. Baynes.
New York: Wehmn, 1955.

Von Eckartshausen, Karl. The Cloud Upon the Sanctuary. Kingston, NY:
Societas Rosicruciana In America, 1952.
Yuteswar Gurum (Sri) Jnanavatar Swami. The Holy Science. Ranchi, Bihar,
India: Yogoda Satsanga Society of India, 1963.

