
Skip to main content
Texts
Video
Audio
Software
Images

    Sign up for free
    Log in

    About Blog Events Projects Help Donate 

    Contact Jobs Volunteer 

Full text of "Helios Unbound Theurgy"
See other formats

Helios Unbound: Pagan Theurgy to Connect to Your Higher 
Genius by Nick Farrell 
© 2020 First edition 


All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book, or 
portions thereof, in any form. 


The rights of Nick Farrell to be identified as the author of this 
Work have been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act, 1988. 


Layout: Nick Farrell 
Cover Design: Nick Farrell 


ISBN: 978-1-912241-15-6 
MB0207 


Set in Book Antiqua 


A Megalithica Books Publication 
An imprint of Immanion Press 
info@immanion-press.com 
www. immanion-press.com 


HELIOS UNBOUND: 


PAGAN THEURGY TO CONNECT 
TO YOUR HIGHER GENIUS 


NICK FARRELL 


STAFFORD ENGLAND 


TO PAOLA 
AND 
O00 1piopéytotoc 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This book is drawn from many different sources and influences in 
my life. This book has developed from the magical and academic 
work of: Aaron Leitch, Jake Stratton-Kent, Jeffrey Kupperman, 
Samuel Mathers, Florence Farr, Alistair Crowley, Sam Block, Eleni 
Pachoumi, Hans Deiter Betz, Kieren Barry, Chic and Tabatha 
Cicero, Chris Brennan, David Goddard, Josephine McCarthy, Pat 
Zalewski, Christine Zalewski, Joao Pedro Feliciano, Frater Acher, 
Sorita D’Este, Tony Mierzwicki, Brian Copenhaver, Gareth Knight, 
Stephen Skinner, Joseph Peterson, John Greer, Jane Gibson, Mike 
Magee and Christopher Warnock. I was assisted in developing a 
more credible approach to the Greek language by Dr Alfonso Ricca 
and Eirini Tsotsou. Angelo Albano and Carina Rina were a great 
help with the proofing and thanks to the Magical Order of the 
Aurora Aurea members, and the Facebook Helios Unbound Group 
who acted as guinea pigs and proofers. 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 

Chapter One 

Information You Will Need 
Chapter Two Month One 

The Mysteries Of Purification And Consecration 
Chapter Three Month Two 

The Mysteries Of The Elements 
Chapter Four Month Three 
Mysteries of The Sacred Language 
Chapter Five Month Four 

The Mysteries Of The Seven 
Chapter Six Month Five 

Moon Magic And the Demon Of The Soul 
Chapter Seven Month Six 

The Mysteries of the Twelve 
Chapter Eight Month Seven 
Mysteries Of The Higher Genius 
Chapter Nine 

The Retreat 

Afterwards 

Where Do You Go From Here? 
Appendix One 

Requirements For Each Month 
Bibliography 


11 


17 


There is only Chaos which seeks to know itself. This act of knowing required 
a mirror of condensed ordered patterns where the story of the One Thing 
played out. The mound of Order arose from the ocean of Chaos and became 
the stage for the drama of Understanding. We are creatures of Chaos, 
understanding ourselves through an ordered existence. 


A:.A:.T:. 


INTRODUCTION 


In 2003, I attempted the six-month " Abramelin process" to meet my 
Holy Guardian Angel. I was living in Bulgaria. The system I used was 
based on Alistair Crowley's Liber Resh invocations to the Sun, the 
Order of the Golden Dawn Watchtowers ritual and the long prayers 
required by the Sacred Book of Abramelin the Mage. I had a temple set 
up in the basement of my house in Sofia, and it started well. There 
was a small amount of weirdness at the beginning (for example, 
several red squirrels began paying too much attention to the house. 
They were always staring in the windows and had a habit of tapping 
on them when I was working). However, this settled down. 

The biggest problem was with praying. I had been a Christian 
before beginning my magical path and had no problems with 
Christianity, but my real impulse was towards the Ancient gods. At 
that point, I had not developed my philosophy of the gods and had a 
general agnostic view of a Supreme God. It was a state where I could 
accept anything from elementals to angels but lacked a framework. 
The more I heard myself talking to this abstract Christian god, the 
less I liked it. The prayers contained Christian elements which I had 
rejected for lacking logical sense and felt hollow and like I was goin 
through the motions to obtain the desired end. 

In the second month, I was praying that this god would help m 
have knowledge and conversation with my Holy Guardian Angel, and 
Istarted to wonder what that meant and what were the implications. 
Modern occultists considered that the Holy Guardian Angel was what 
the Ancients call Higher Genius and I realised that was this being that 
I needed to meet. But, I started to feel that the Holy Guardian Angel 
was something else, and while knowledge and conversation with it 
was laudable, it was not going to resolve the central issue which had 
been teased out during the concentration of effort so far during the 
work. I didn't know what I believed, and it was only by meeting my 
Higher Genius that I would get there. 

While I noted these thoughts in my diary, I persisted with the 
Abramelin because I felt that I was getting something from it, and 
it was possible that this thought was a move by my Lower Self to get 
me to give up. The following month's work was dry, and then my 
house was burgled, and my tools were stolen. I took it as a sign and 
abandoned the practice. 

What I had learnt was that the concentrated effort of regular 
focused work over a proscribed period did work. What I needed 


12 HELIOS UNBOUND 


to do was focus on what I wanted to achieve from the process 
rather than sticking religiously to the Abramelin format. Abramelin 
worked like an initiation process with an alchemic formula to 
awaken to the Higher Genius. Over a weekend, I designed a draft for 
a new programme focused on Pagan gods and a more ceremonial 
approach. Rather than prayers, it involved ritual purification and 
consecration and similar techniques but forced the person to follow 
an intense, disciplined approach. It ended up being seven months of 
going upwards through the Moon, planets, stars and finally meeting 
with your Higher Genius. 

Aweek after I had finished this outline, my tools were returned 
with the burglar begging me to remove the bad luck that he felt had 
been placed on him since he stole them. 

Istarted on this newer process and obtained the result I needed. 
However, some of the methods were too tied up with what I knew at 
the time and needed considerable polishing before letting someone 
else try. The idea that you dedicate seven months to this goal based 
around a set of exercises appeared to pay off. The seven-month 
outline sat in a file with the revealing title oldlinuxbackup2003 
which somehow managed to get transferred across many different 
computers over the years. 

The years that followed marked a change in my magical 
approach. While Istill held onto my Golden Dawn training, it became 
increasingly adapted by Ancient magic and the religion which had 
formed its roots. I was not the only one. Many people from my 
generation started working on the same sort of ideas. These ideas 
were threaded through medieval grimoires, Arabic Hermetic books, 
and Ancient Greek papyri. My Neoplatonic Hermetic approach had 
built into a working system which used old texts and systems which 
was being continuously updated. My focus appeared to be set in the 
Roman period Alexandra and what had been agnosticism, had been 
converted into a Pagan syncretism. 

I started writing this system as a Pagan grimoire, but it swiftly 
got out of hand and just kept growing without being released outside 
my own Magical Order of the Aurora Aurea. 

In 2017, I was asked by Jenny Alexander if it were possible 
to create a “boot camp” approach to my Pagan magic system, I 
initially thought it wasn’t because it would require dedication and 

focus which many magical students lack. However, then I thought 
- isn’t that really what the aim of the Abramelin six-month system? 
Remembering that I had written something like that years earlier, I 
did a computer search and found the file. 


NICK FARRELL 13 


What surprised me was that it tightly fitted my current 
thinking. I could see my Hermetic rituals, alongside actual historical 
techniques, slotting in neatly into a structure to unite with the Higher 
Genius. 

Writing this book took more time than I thought. There was more 
magical work and testing to repurpose the different systems to the 
goal. This process started to affect me and bring out new information 
and, in many ways, a new me. I parcelled out bits of the work for 
people to try, and they seemed to get the required results. This was 
important because the seven-month process builds a structure where 
a symbol of unification is repeatedly beaten into the candidate's 
Sphere of Sensation while a purification and consecration process take 
place. This builds up pressure in your sphere of sensation, which 
could draw out any psychological issues you might have and force 
you to deal with them. 

When not working in their temple, the operator finds real-life 
acting as a teacher and helps development. 

For me, the process became about issues of destiny and what you 
were meant to be and do. The result became clearer on the second 
day of the retreat when I experienced Mithras-Aion and understood 
what it was all about — at least for me. The third day then became 
about building and working that experience into life. 

Afterwards, it took another rewrite to make sure that those 
experiences were duplicated for those who try them. 


HELIOS UNBOUND PROCESS OUTLINE 


The Helios Unbound process works by providing consistent an. 
powerful symbols which remind the person that their Higher 
Genius is within them. This process creates "an acceptable illusion" 
that the magician is ascending towards their Higher Genius as it 
simultaneously advances towards them. The reality is that over an 
intense period, you are hammering your Lower Self until it accepts 
the truth of the divine spark within and integrates that knowledge. 
During that time, the magician learns the outline of a Pagan magician 
system which acts as a trellis upon which a spiritual rose can grow. 
They invoke their Higher Genius three times a day for seven months 
alongside a practice called Prima Materia which is a sequence of 
exercises where the person rehearses what it is like if they had 
already obtained their spiritual goals and united with their Higher 
Genius. 


14 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Helios Unbound's first chapter looks at the terms, some of the 
philosophy and the rituals that you will need to conduct the working. 

The First Month: involves confession, purification, consecration, 
and the framing of a vow to carry on the work. The idea is to break 
down what is wrong with a person and their life and return misused 
power towards the will of their Higher Genius. 

The Second Month: invokes the balancing of the elements within 
the sphere of sensation to bring the person into a balance between 
the various aspects of themselves. This balancing mirrors some of 
the work which would typically be done in a magical order. 

The Third Month: shows how the Ancients used the sacred 
Greek language and texts to connect to the more abstract aspects of 
the divine self. It uses an adapted continental German Rosicrucian 
technique to begin the process of drawing the Higher Genius to the 
Lower. 

The Fourth Month: opens the person up to their astrological 
destiny and the seven planetary powers. Using their chart, the 
magician works with the spirits behind the planets to understand 

vow they work, starting with the most abstract expression of the 
‘anetary forces and moving down to their “earthing.” Rather than 
ting back and being a victim to these spirits, the magician opens 
line of communication with those forces and understands how to 
co-operate with them. 

The Fifth Month: works with the Moon, which was a crucial 
spiritual force in the ancient world. Nature and everything within 
it are under the Moon’s direct control. The magician discovers the 
spirits which rule a person as the Moon goes through her mansions 
in the sky throughout the year and invokes their Moon spirit. 

The Sixth Month: expands the astrological work to the spirits 
of the twelve zodiacal signs and the spirits of the decans and the 
underused Hellenistic Lot astrology. The Ancient Egyptians saw the 
Decan spirits as vital forces over a person’s destiny and these spirits 
show the instincts of a person and their life direction. 

The Seventh Month; This is the last month of the seven-month 
programme which ends with a weekend retreat where the magician 
is cut off from the rest of the world to await the arrival of their Higher 
Genius. The first three weeks are equally crucial at building up the 

magical pressure to attain this goal. Ritual work increases as the 
magician encounters more abstract Pagan Angels and invokes the 
forces of Divine Love, which help them unite to their Higher Genius. 


NICK FARRELL 15 


The Retreat: The Retreat is three-day working through an intense 
ritual programme. With the world silenced, you focus entirely on 
the goal of meeting your Higher Genius. 

Day One: The theme of the first day is death and destruction. It 
is a central part of any initiation system to involve the candidate's 
spiritual death so that they might awaken to their new spiritual life 

The first sequence includes the initial invocation and the lighting 
of the sacred candle, which begins the final process. The candle 
acts as a beacon (or Pharos) throughout the entire retreat and is a 
physical symbol of your Higher Genius. This creates an immediate 
reaction where the candidate is forced to confront themselves as 
the God Serapis and dying. The second sequence focuses on the 
death process and the return to the Chaos from which you were 
born. The Third sequence is a journey into the Egyptian underworld 
and meeting the spirits there while seeing your own Higher Genius 
awakening. 

Day Two: Today's theme is of ascension and immortalisation. The 
first sequence involves invoking the higher Pagan angelic forces to 
provide you with a ladder to ascend to more rarefied spiritual states 
which only become accessible after “death.” The second sequence 
attempts to meet the spiritual forces behind all gods and angels 
the seven rays on Helios’ crown. The third sequence is an ascensi 
through the levels to have a vision of a form of your Higher Gen 
and the Fates. This ritual seeks to grant a vision of your immor 
aspects and see the Hero within. 

Day three: The last day of the process is Know Yourself which 
involves a ritual which is designed to cause the barriers between the 
magician and their Higher Genius to break down and for you to begin 
direct communication. The first sequence is a ritual invocation to 
your Higher Genius this then merges into a second sequence in which 
you chant until you have a Higher Genius experience. 

I should warn people who are trying this that such an intense 
approach to magic requires more dedication and focus than many 
will have in them. If they complete it, they will be better magicians 
than I ever was when I started. The process is heavy on the practical 
but is based around a core of ancient theoretical esoteric teaching, 
which I hope to develop in later books so that the full system can be 
seen. 

My advice is to read through the entire book to see the whole 
system from start to finish so that there are no surprises. In your 
spare time read anything you can find from the reading list. I 
also recommend that you take a course in Hellenistic astrology or 


16 HELIOS UNBOUND 


work through Chris Brennan's recently published book Hellenistic 
Astrology: The Study of Fate and Fortune. 

Gather all the equipment in advance and make a few dry runs 
at following the schedule. Once you start you must be stubborn - 
fighting with yourself, your family, work and hobbies to stick to the 
plan for seven months 

Good luck and may you find your destiny. 


Nick Farrell 
Rome 2019 


CHAPTER ONE 
INFORMATION YOU WILL NEED 


his book is based on the Pagan magical systems predominant 

in Ancient Alexandria between the first and fifth century. It 

does include some later Christian and Islamic developments 

which owe much to their Pagan sources. These include 
the Goetia, the Key of Solomon and some (heavily edited) ritual 
systems found within the Order of tlie Golden Dawn. In the magical 
field, magicians like Jake Stratton-Kent* and Aaron Leitcht have 
conclusively proven the dependence of Christian and Islamic magic 
on Pagan myths and systems. 

Ancient Alexandria is not just a historical period or place but 
a philosophical approach to magic called eclectic syncretism. The 
Greeks founded Alexandria on Egypt's black Earth. Under the 
Greek Ptolemies, it became a centre of learning and philosophy 
and a melting pot for different religious and magical thought 
including Egyptian, Greek, Hebrew, Gnostic, Hermetic, Christian, 
Persian, African and Syrian. It is from Alexandria we can see 
Jewish mystics adopting the Greek letter numbering systems and 
Platonic philosophies and creating the early forms of Kabbalah. It 
is possible to see the rudiments of magical systems which would be 
given a Christian gloss and repurposed for the later High Christian 
ceremonial magic. 

There was no such thing as cultural appropriation in the ancient 
world. Pagans respected other gods and used them alongside their 
own, sometimes mixing them into approaches and philosophies in a 
way which would be considered alien today. 

It is from this period we have the Greek Magical Papyri$ [PGM] 
which were magical spells from the Greco-Roman Egypt which 


" Stratton-Kent, J. (2010). Geosophia, [Dover]: Scarlet Imprint/ Bibliotheque 
Rouge. 

‘Leitch, A. (2003). Secrets of the Magickal Grimoires.St. Paul, Minn.: Llewellyn. 
* Throughout this book I have reluctantly used the world "pagan" to 
describe any European or Middle Eastern non-Judaeo-Christian religion. 
Iam aware that is a Christian term of abuse, but it is a handy single word 
term which is recognisable by everyone. 

5 Betz, H. (n.d.). Greek Magical Papyri in translation, including the demonic spells. 


18 HELIOS UNBOUND 


have been collected since the 19^ century. These show the eclectic 
syncretism of the period and are stripped of later magicians! 
fantasies about magic. Thanks to Theosophy, the 20^ century saw 
a rise in magic, where the Christianity of the time was projected 
onto a fantasy Ancient past. In this imaginary history, the Ancient 
Egyptians were heirs to an ancient Atlantean heritage which aspired 
to the highest moral code and magic. However, the Greek Magical 
Papyri were magical manuals which were an anathema to this view. 
In its spells we see magicians strangling cats and drowning birds to 
obtain divine assistants, cursing people, and providing love spells. 
The way that the modern magicians coped with this approach was 
to either ignore them or sniff that the Greek Magical Papyri were 
degenerate “sorcery” after the fall of the great Egyptian temples. 

The Greek Magical Papyri agree with what we know about the 
magic and religion of the period. They fit into an ancient society 
and culture where magicians were outsiders and “amoral” but not 
necessarily bad. They had a role and there were logical reasons for 
most of their actions. Sacrificing an animal was not considered evil, 
although it was falling from fashion as a method to attract a god’s 
attention. However the magician’s sacrifices were more symbolic 
and once it is understood how symbols work, the literal nature of 
he more drastic PGM spells becomes unimportant and the spells 
can be safely adapted to modern life - to the great relief of the local 
feline population. 

Similar programmes to Helios Unbound are part of the magical 
corpus - not only are they found in the Greek Magical Papyri, they 
also appear in later magical documents. The most famous of these 
is the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage* which was a 16"-century 
book designed to contact an entity called the Holy Guardian Angel. 

Such programmes are deliberately tricky and are a remedy 
to the modern world’s assumption that you can do anything by 
pressing a button or downloading an App. They are based on a 
principle of purification and consecration of the Lower Self to enable 
awareness of the spiritual aspects of self and eventually, a union 
with the Higher Genius, 

The discipline required in this book forces the Lower Self to 
give up its control of a person's life and surrender to the needs of 
the Higher Genius. The process is psychologically difficult and is 
opposed at all stages by the Lower Self, which considers its “learnt 
by experience” way safer. Its rebellion will involve opposition to 


* Mathers, S. (2012). The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage. 
Newburyport: Dover Publications. 


NICK FARRELL 19 


the imposed discipline to all-out psychological revolt through fear 
and even hallucinations. When you believe you have quietened 
it, you will see even darker sides of yourself emerging waiting to 
be balanced, purified, and consecrated. Once these shadows are 
integrated, your Higher Genius will emerge to start enacting its 
magical destiny for you. 

The spiritual forces behind this book hope that its use will 
help 21*-century people push past the barriers which are confining 
their spirituality. Rather than making the process easier, which has 
so far has not produced enough adepts, it condenses it makes it 
harder. A 21*-century person must push themselves to overcome 
the weaknesses of their generation so that they can either start their 
magical career or empower their existing spiritual progress. 

The book's power depends on repeating a series of daily 
exercises three times a day without fail. There are three sessions 
connected to various times of the day. Waking, sleeping, and Mid- 
day. One of these can be the "main session" and is likely to be the 
night-time session. The two supporting sessions are half an hour 
each. The initial session is an extra hour long, meaning that you will 
be dedicating two and a half hours a day to the process. The last few 
days of the seven-month process will need you to be isolated from 
other people to begin the work of integrating your Higher Genius. 

You might experience your Higher Genius at any time in tl 
process. However, you should continue for the remaining seve 
months. It is quite possible that an earlier appearance is a Lowe, 
Self trick, an external testing spirit, or a move from your Higher 
to encourage you. It is unlikely that anyone's Higher Genius would 
want them to stop the process under any circumstances. 


RELIGION 


Understand that this is a "religious" process. You are meeting with your 
divine spark, and the way to do that is mystical. It would be best if you 
believed in a divine force which created the universe. Which god you 
follow is irrelevant, but there is little hope for an atheist in this system. 
Each day you will be required to make three prayers to the highest 
aspect of the One Thing (which is primarily abstract and unknowable 
without the aid of your Higher Genius), but this act will help you attune 
to those aspects of your Higher Genius which aspire to that unity. The 
system uses a Neoplatonic view of the universe, but there is no reason 
why it should not translate into any other belief pattern, provided that 


20 HELIOS UNBOUND 
the person is sympathetic to Pagan symbolism. 
EXPERIENCE 


This system is “advanced” in that it uses techniques which are hard 
for beginners. However, it has been written assuming that the person 
following the process knows nothing. Even if your practice is not perfect, 
the momentum will build over time and overcome any experience 
issues. Because these exercises are repeated intensively, they will have 
more impact than many of the initiations in esoteric orders. 

Experienced people will have simple techniques explained and a 
new way of working alongside the more challenging material. 


SPACE 


You will need to set aside some space for a small table which you 
can move around for most of your workings’. It is helpful to see 
the night's sky, the Sun and the Moon in some cases. Most times, 
you can disassemble your sacred space, but in the last few days, you 
will need your altar set up all the time. Ideally, this should be in the 
same place at the same time every day. Some of this work can be 
lone in your imagination during a morning commute, but this is 
ss desirable. 


EQUIPMENT 


Ihave listed the material you will need to make for each month's work 
in Appendix One at the back of this book. While the list is extensive, it 
boils down mostly to different types of candle and incense. 


THE HIGHER GENIUS 


Helios Unbound isa purification and consecration process which leads 
you tocontactanentity called the Higher Genius. The Higher Genusis the 
divine spirit of a human which has the powers of a Numen. According 
to the Roman senator, Cicero, the Numen was part of the Divine 
Mind” (divina mens), a god “whose Numen everything obeys” and a 
“divine power" (vim divinam) “which pervades the lives of men.” It 
was the power of thespiritual aspectof a human making itself known. 

The Higher Genius is your spiritual aspect which rides in the 
lower part of the personality and the body to see the universe and 


“You could use a traditional double cube altar. 


NICK FARRELL 21 


experience the drama of your life. It is the "I" which experiences 
your life, above your emotions and thoughts, and has become so lost 
in the movie of existence it has 
forgotten its true identity. For 
this reason, it needs to "wake 
up" but any process of waking 
up appears like an divine 
encounter for the personality on 
earth. The earth-bound Higher 
Genius cannot remember its 
own face and when it sees itself 
again, it sees God and cannot 
believe this is its own reflection, 

It is a paradox that the | / 

Higher Self is both in and $ 
outside the personality. Part 
of it still looks to the divine 
which created it and is aware of 
its destiny; most of it becomes 
trapped in the dream. In an 
ordinary person's life that is 
not an issue - the Higher Genius 
reintegrates with itself at death, 
but a magician wants to work with their Genius while they are stil! 
living. 

When we invoke our Higher Self, and concentrate on that part of 
ourselves, our localised Higher Self remembers its True Nature, and 
the bigger Higher Self appears. Once experienced, it is life changing 
and enables a magician to take on a form closer to their true destiny. 
Often part of the Lower Self, with its associations and reactions, 
breaks. For example, if a family interfered with your development 
and their behaviour patterns are still doing so, a Higher Self event 
could cause these associations to snap. Sometimes the appearance 
of the Higher Genius can force a personality change. 

While this Genius has been part of the Western Mystery Tradition 
for millennia, during the late-Christian period, it became identified 
with a mere Guardian Angel which was supposed to oversee a person’s 
life. It was only with the rise of psychology that this significant spiritual 
force was re-discovered and bought back into the occult stream. 

Dr Carl Jung described the Higher Self * as a royal archetype 


‘SPHERE OF SENSATION} 


j 


/ 


` Journalpsyche.org. (2019). The Jungian Model of the Psyche | Journal Psyche. 
[online] Available at: http:/ /journalpsyche.org/jungian-model-psyche/ 


22 HELIOS UNBOUND 


of the whole person and said the Self is the totality and purpose 
of the psyche; the Self is the Imago Dei (image of God), the “God 
in us.” He saw the discovery of this Self, the highest authority of 
our personality, as fundamental to the wholeness and balance of our 
selfhood. It oversees our organic, biological, mental, emotional, and 
spiritual centres, in addition to controlling our concept of life and 
the world. It’s the totality of our conscious and unconscious psyche. 

Jung believed most of the problems in our life were rooted in 
an “undeveloped Higher Self.” When the ego behaves excessively or 
destructively, the Higher Self becomes the healing self, responsible 
for re-establishing balance and inner harmony. Its work is to remove 
hidden obstacles and harmonise all dimensions of the person. 

Where Jung differed with magical thinking was seeing this Higher 
Genius as the highest aspect of mind rather than the real self effectively 
driving a vehicle within a Sphere of Sensation. The difference is crucial. If 
the Higher Self were the best part of a personality, as Jung thought, then 
itis much smaller than the indwelling spiritual force seen in magic. Its 
powers are limited to "human powers" - great though they might be. 

tis a situation where a magician and an analyst can explain the same 

uman actions without agreeing. Both agree that contacting the Higher 

elf or Genius is vital for a person's well-being. But a magician does not 
believe that a Higher Genius can be “undeveloped,” instead they would 
think that the rest of a personality and life patterns shut it down to the 
point it has little influence. 

The human who gets up, goes to work, goes home, watches 
TV and goes to bed does not need an active Higher Genius. A 
Higher Genius will have few lessons to learn and will have a minor 
observation role. 

A person living their life to the full developsa closer relationship 
with their Higher Self, which benefits from the many experiences 
they have. Such a life is typically seen as hard because it breaks the 
rules. More magicians end up dying broke and alone despite having, 
lives that would be the envy of many muggles. It does not always 
happen; it depends on the destiny or story of the individual for their 
survival. Money magicians, like Bill Gates, have been known to 

change their story and go from evil software villain to saint without 
needing to give up their wealth, Magicians who are working with 
their Higher Genius tend to find that change is part of their life. 

Working with the Higher Genius gives the magician knowledge 
of their destiny and the instinct to the true story of their life. Their 


[Accessed 16 May 2019]. 


NICK FARRELL 23 


Higher Genius has access to the powers of a god, so making contact is 
vital to a magician even if there is only brief contact. 

According to lamblichus; the Higher Genius is created by 
the Master of Demons or the King of the Underworld, and it is 
essential when trying to contact your Genius to contact this King. 
Unfortunately, there was no god identified as being the Master of 
Demons, and many think Iamblichus was referring to Hades or 
Serapis. 

The iconography of the Higlier Genius is essential not because 
your spirit has a form, but because human minds need something 
to latch onto - particularly in the first stages of the operation. It is a 
cliché that a picture can tell a thousand words, but it is an idea built 
on truth. Symbolic forms provide us with a way to meet something 
infinite. When we see an image covered with symbols, they tell us 
about the subject. If it is the form of a man wearing a belt shaped like 
a serpent eating its tail, we know it is a symbol of infinity, and the 
being is immortal. 

Because humans love forms, it is possible to begin building a 
connection with spiritual beings using an image. Higher Genius form 
help us move from the symbolic to the truth. No real Higher Gen? 
is going to look like anything you have seen before, even “light” 
bit too literal. A symbol helps us understand its nature. A symbc 
like a phone number which connects to a host of other ideas. 

One candidate for a Higher Genius form could be the Egyptian. 
god Tutu (pictured) who related 
(among other things) to the Higher 
Genius of the Pharaoh. Tutu was a 
popular and accessible God to whom 
people could turn for help in their 
everyday existence, 

Tutu appeared in the form of 
à striding royal sphinx composed 
of a lion's body and a human head, 
with usually a snake for a tail. In later 
periods, he was depicted in a more 
pantheistic mode with a crocodile or | — 
lion head attached to His body. He was 
shown ina side view often but with his = 


“See lamblichus’ commentary on Plato's Sophist, the first fragment, as well as 
the translator's notes on that fragment. In Platonis DiaLogos Commentariorum 
Fragmenta. Translated by Dillon, John M. Wiltshire, UK: Prometheus Trust, 
2009. (thanks Jeffrey S. Kupperman) 


24 HELIOS UNBOUND 


head turned to be viewed frontally, emphasising this approachability. 

Many of Iamblichus’ ideas came from the Hermetic current in 
Egypt where Tutu was still accessible, Tutu follows my theme of 
a Higher Genius being a chaotic spirit searching for experience in 
a world of Order. Tutu is the “son of Neith" and "Atum's God." 
Neith is the goddess of the dark and limitless sky and a fitting 
symbol for the underworld of Chaos from which all order sprang. 
The Egyptians said that Neith “bought forth the first land from the 
Chaotic Primaeval waters of Nun." 

Being her son, Tutu is the primal force which wants to know 
itself and it being a human Higher Genius makes sense. 

There was no consistent standard in the depiction of Higher 
Genius, The Etruscans and the Romans depicted it as a divine man 
or a woman with angelic wings. One of the symbols of the Higher 
Genius was the cicada because they were supposed to sing in spiritual 

. They also had other powerful symbolic characteristics. The 
Romans believed that the cicada was “born from the Earth,” and 
was capable of resurrection and a symbol of immortality. This was 
because it shed its skin and sprouted wings on a new white body 
ind must always be in a state of perpetual youth. The Romans used 
o make stylised brooches to represent cicadas. 

The Tithonus myth tells the story of a young man, who fell in 
love with the Dawn Goddess. She granted him the gift of immortality, 
As in all such stories, this divine gift was not a blessing. Tithonus 
got older and smaller until there was nothing left of him but his 
shrill voice and he turned into a cicada. While on the surface this is a 
terrible story about the problems of immortality, it encodes a hidden 
story of a magician who looks for awakening (loves the dawn). He 
realises his immortality, and while his body ages, he becomes more 
like his Higher Genius until finally becoming its symbol. 

The Higher Genius was also associated with snakes. Like the 
cicada, serpents were symbols of regeneration. There are legends 
which associate serpents with primal chaotic forces, which again 
ties them to the earth (like the cicada), They have strong protective 
associations which are proper for any power which aims to ensure 
the fulfilment of destiny. 

The Higher Genius is shown as a human with a lion's head. Lions 
were associated with the Sun and there were many different gods 
who had a lion's head. Chnubis, for example, was a snake with the 

head of a lion. 

One of the more essential Higher Genius symbols is the god Aion, 
who was a feature of the Roman version of the Mithras mysteries. 


NICK FARRELL 25 


Aion had a lion's head and four wings. P 
On his breast was an eye and he had © 
lion heads on his stomach and knees. , y" 
He sometimes had four arms and one y AY 


held a sceptre. Aion is seen by many as 5 
S 


a variation of the Time God Chronos, 
but his name can mean eternity and his 
symbolism suggests infinity in a state 
of limitation. The fact that his symbol 
did not just mean time or was limited 
to Mithras can be found in the Greek 
Magical Papyri Pnouthios spell* where a 
lion-headed magical "assistant" whoisa 
"mighty angel has the same symbolism." 
The Pnouthios process uses a Ny 
magical image of a lion-headed god, bù C 
holding a whip, surrounded by a 7 | 
serpent to be carved on a stone (which 
is an earth symbol). All these things are 
similarities to Aion that suggest it might “4 
be a representative of the divine nature 
of humanity, which was bound by time 
and trapped within the rock of matter. 


M 


“When you go abroad, he will go 
abroad with you; when you are destitute, 


eu BU | 


he will give you money. He will tell you Ne | 
what things will happen both when and Ue | 
what time of the night or day. If anyone > ET 


asks you “What do I have in mind?” or 

“What has happened to me?” or even “What is going to happen?” 
question the Angel, and he will tell you in silence. When you are 
dead, he will wrap up your body as befits a god, but he will take 
your spirit and carry it into the air with him. For no aerial spirit 
which is joined with a mighty assistant will go into Hades, for to him 
all things are subject. Whenever you wish to do something, speak 
his name alone into the air and say, “Come!” and you will see him 
standing near you. Say to him, “Perform this task,” and he does it at 
once, and after doing it, he will tell you, “What else do you want? I 
am eager for Heaven.” If you do not have immediate orders, tell him, 
“Go, Lord,” and he will depart. In this fashion, then, you will see the 


"Papyri graecae magicae 1.54 


26 HELIOS UNBOUND 


god alone, nor will anyone ever hear his speaking, just you alone. He 
will tell you about the illness of a man, whether he will live or die, 
even on what day and at what hour of the night. He will also give 
you wild herbs and the power to cure, and you will be worshipped 
as a god since you have a god as a friend. These things, the mighty 
assistant will perform competently.” 


The “assistant” appears more of a familiar, but his attributes show he 
is more than that. The magical process used to get him is a spiritual 
revelation with strange visions similar to what you will experience 
during the Helios Unbound process. The powers attributed to him 
are the same as the Higher Genius. Had not the writer written that 
it would obey your commands and treated it a servant, the Higher 
Genius attribution would be clear. But this dumbing down could be 
a cover for a mystery which either the writer did not know or was 
deliberately obscuring (something we see in the Egyptian scrolls 
Which might have been based on a Mystery School or Egyptian 
temple practice but simplified for the magical market). It could 
also be possible Pnouthios is creating a “messenger” for his Higher 
Genius, which functions comparably but is simpler to attain and 
comprehend. 


“He will serve you suitably for whatever you have in mind, Oh, 
blessed initiate of the sacred magic (hieras mageias, iepic payeiac), 
and will accomplish it for you, this most powerful assistant. 1 share 
this mystery (mystirion) with no-one else, but conceal it, by Helios, 
since you have been deemed worthy by the Lord god." 


(125-133). 


The concluding lines show that the magician is a mystes (miomo 
or initiate of the Mysteries who uses sacred magic. The magician is 
conscious of being the principal actor in a procedure that is magical 
and sacred. Such a practice must be kept hidden because of the 
exceptional powers that it assures. 

Other symbols of the Higher Genius come in the form of the 
Egyptian God Harpokrates (Heru-pa-Khered) the son of Osiris and 
Isis and destined to become Horus. An example of this form of the 
Higher Self can be found in Athanasius Kircher's copy of a Stele of 
Horus (pictured) which showed a polymorphic Dæmon which he called 
the mind of the Supreme Numen (Power of the Higher Genius) as it 
descends into the breadth of nature (Oedipus Egyptus Volume III). 

Kirche was a little imaginative when describing what he saw in the 
Stele and did not know Egyptology other than from Greek and Latin 


NICK FARRELL 27 


sources. He saw things in the 
stele, which were more artistic 
style rather than anything else. For 
example, he thought his “Numan 
(sic)" was crowned with symbols of 
theSunand hada lion's head when 
itis human. He sees female breasts 
when there are none*. He says that 
the horns stand for the Moon and 
energy and fertility by havinga plait 
twisted into the shape of a horn. 
(The latter was a standard symbol 
of a child’s plat in Ancient Egypt 
and had no symbolic attributions |; 
connected to fertility). The fact 
Heru-pa-Khered holds snakes and 
scorpions show its domination 
over life and death is plausible, 
but Kircher sees a lion and the dog 
when an Egyptian would see an ass 
and a hippopotamus which were 
Set's creatures. He says that the crocodiles were symbols of Typhon (et) 
which is correct. Egyptian temple courtyards often had steles depicting 
Heru-pa-Khered standing on the back of a crocodile and holding snakes 
in his outstretched hands. These steles were immersed or lustrated in 
water for blessing and healing. The divine name Heru-pa-Khered was a 
protective and healing word of power. 

For all his faulty attributions, Kircher correctly intuited that 
Heru-pa-Khered was a good symbol for the Higher Self; this was 
picked up by the Order of the Golden Dawn who saw “Harpocrates 
as sitting upon a lotus flower in the Nile” in its Neophyte ritual and 
marked it as a form of the Candidate's Higher Genius. 

This book uses the Mithraic Aion as a symbol to use as a 
representative of the Higher Genius. It has connections to lots of gods 
including Aion, Chronos, Serapis, Horus and Eternias and Phanes. I 
found an association between my Higher Selfand a lion-headed Aion 
I saw in a Roman museum, and it has shown up in that form ever 
since. However, there is no reason why you could not use the Stele 
of Heru-pa-Khered instead. 


* He was a celibate Jesuit, so probably saw women’s breasts when there 
were none. 


28 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The images of the lion (or Helios headed) god have four wings, 
one for each of the elements. He usually is surrounded by the zodiac 
and entwined by the serpent of nature. He has a lion on his heart 
centre and a staff of rulership in his hand. He holds typically a key 
which allows him to enter or exit matter at will. He either stands on 
a globe or emerges froma rock. The symbolism shows a divine being 
pans in nature and exposed to the planetary and zodiacal 


THE DÆMON IN ASTROLOGY 

— ==, Something as crucial as 
the Dæmon, or Higher 
Genius could not escape 
| making an appearance in 
astrology. While modern 
astrologers might have 
mostly lost its presence, 
the Ancient Greeks 
considered the position 
vital. Fortunately, the 
teaching was passed to 
the Arabs who described 
the Dæmon as one of their 
Arabic Parts of Fortune. 
Recently there have been 
moves to restore ancient 
astrology*, and this is 
proving a gold mine for 
Pagan magicians who 
prefer their astrology 
authentic and stripped 
of 20"-century psycho- 
babble. 
i The Demon's placement on an astrological chart shows the 
influence of the part of the Sphere of Sensation (or aura), which is 
connected intricately to our Higher Genius. It does not show our 
Cosmic Higher Self, but that part of the Genius which decided to 
incarnate in this personality. There is a slight difference between 
the two. The Higher Genius outside of the body is less restricted in 
its vision and less influenced by the life it has chosen. The Dæmon 


* Brennan, C. (n.d.). Hellenistic Astrology. 


NICK FARRELL 29 


shown in astrology is the one which is more personalised through 
our life experience. The Demon's position can show us what our 
spiritual purpose is, the connections of the world inside us. It can 
supply clues as to how our Higher Genius will appear to us, and there 
are several esoteric traditions which can give us a word of power to 
help contact it. 

Hellenistic astrologers were interested in what they called the 
Lot of the Demon and the Lot of Tyche (Fortune), which was its 
opposite on the astrological chart. 

In his Anthology, * the second century Alexandrian astrologer 
Vettius Valens called the Lot of Tyche "archetypal" and the Daemon 
the ‘second.’ The Lot of Tyche helps during a chart interpretation. 
The importance of the two was religious - in Ancient Alexandria 
Agathe Tyche and Agathos Demon were worshipped. Tyche and 
Agathos Demon had assimilated native Egyptian deities like Shai 
(Fate God) and Renenet (a protective snake goddess). Cults of Agathe 
Tyche and Agathos Demon had appeared to propitiate these deities, 
and they were flourishing at the same time as Hellenistic astrology's 
development. 

While the idea of personal Higher Genius had been around at least 
before Plato, the Platonist Plutarch (CE 46 - CE 120), popularised 
the concept of each person having a personal Damon and Tyche. In 
his Parallel Lives, Plutarch? said that each person was aided or not 
by fortune and a correspondingly good or bad, strong, or we 
higher Dæmon. When a Dæmon was “weak” in the chart it meant th 
the life it had chosen would be one where spiritual concerns we, 
insignificant or where the person had to try to communicate with the 
Damon continually or lose contact. 

In the second century book Tabula Cebetis,¢ the unknown author 
interprets an allegorical picture (said to have been dedicated by 
someone in the temple of Cronus at Athens) showing the whole of 
human life with its dangers and temptations. The Dzenion guides the 
entry into being, which contains a Tyche who gives and takes away 
a fortune for those entering. 

The astrological house assigned to the Good Dæmon was the 
11" which symbolises goals, friendships, and group membership. It 


* A full translation of the text by Mark Riley can be found here https:/ / 
www.csus.edu/indiv/r/rileymt/Vettius%20Valens %20entire.pdf 

+ Plutarch., Dryden, J. and Clough, A. (1952). The lives of the noble Grecians 
and Romans. Chicago: Encyclopdia Britannica. 

$ Cebes Thebanus and Parsons, R. (1892). Cebes’ Tablet. Boston: Ginn. 


30 HELIOS UNBOUND 


was associated with the king's (or ruler's) favourites, councillors, 
servants, their associates or allies, parliament, and government 
supporters. It is a house of optimism and confidence, personal 
strength, motivation, and increase. Helios, the Sun god, ruled it. 

However, a house placement for the Higher Genius was not 
enough. It had so much power, which came from several aspects of 
the Chart, that further calculations were required. These were the 
Sun and the Moon. The Moon is associated with the body, and the 
Sun with the mind, the soul and spirit. 

The Moon is the traditional planet associated with Fortune 
because she was a symbol of the cycles of waxing and waning. The 
Sun was part of the Dæmon, in that it is metaphorically associated 
with mind and spirit. 

There was a difference between being born in the day or the 
night. For Lots of Fortune, you take the arc from Sun to Moon ina 
daytime chart and the arc from Moon to Sun in at night and project 
this arc from the ascendant to find the position of the lot. 

You take the degrees of the Asc + Moon - Sun (D) or Asc + Sun 
-Moon (N) 

For the Lot of Dæmon, the formula reverses: Asc + Sun - Moon 
(day) or Asc + Moon - Sun (night) 

Fortunately for people like me to whom maths is a mystery, 
calculating the Lot of Fortune (Tyche) or the Lot of the Spirit 
(Dæmon) can be done on a computer using a programme like Janus* 
in seconds, 

Having obtained the position of your Lot of Tyche and Daemon, 
you can start to understand how your Higher Genius works in your life. 

Say that a magician has their Dæmon in the fourth house at 9.42 
degrees Scorpio and their Tyche 10.58 Taurus in the tenth house. 

Cancer and the Moon rule the fourth house which gets on with 
the Watery Scorpio. The Dæmon is strong, although its more Martian 
aspects are blunted. The Damon is highly spiritual and intense 
(Scorpio). However, Scorpio brings the Moon to its fall so there might 
besome problems for the magician to overcome, such as strong ties to 
anunhealthy or an emotionally unsupportive family or environment 
(fourth house). The Daemon will be seeking to build a spiritual or 

can help other people find meaning, direction, and purpose to life. 
To do that, a magician finds these things for themselves first before 
giving anything to anyone else. The Higher Genius directs them to 
have an “interesting life” which means they will experience great 


* Janus software can be found here https:/ /www.janus5.com/ getjanus5. 
htm 


NICK FARRELL 31 


heights and great depths within their lives. They will seek a spiritual 
family of some sort, although that might not work through the 
traditional means but might be an esoteric group. The Higher Genius 
provides deep, authentic internal emotional roots and contact with 
that family to help open the magician. They will find their Demon 
through intense mystical experiences. This person's Higher Genius is 
more connected to the element of water. 

Another magician has their Dæmon at1026 Ariesin the Ninth house 
of philosophy and their Tyche 18.04 in the fourth house of Sagittarius. 
The Higher Genius supplies practical harmony and wisdom. It brings 
Taurian responsibility to the value of higher knowledge, philosophy, 
psychology, religion, higher education, and sharing this with others. 
The creative talents of Taurus involved in mental pursuits bring an 
ability to expand knowledge, to bring innovative ideas and concepts 
to what is already known. Their Higher Genius is not happy with what 
is known but prefers to expand and grow within the framework of 
whatisaccepted. This innovation is expressed through Aries, although 
there might be a tendency to be too fixed and dogmatic. Sagittarius 
rules the Ninth House so the person's spirituality might be a little 
self-centred, but it could also bring spiritual leadership. Those with 
a Genius in this house are spontaneous people and have enthusiasn 
for ideas and plans which interest them and a unique ability to impar 
that enthusiasm to others. There is a strong ability to communicate 
spiritual ideas to others and initiate action. This person's Higher Genius 
responds to fire. 


THE LOWER DAMON 


The Ancients had the concept of a Lower Dæmon who brought terrible 
luck and harm. It was the shadow of the Higher Damon and was in 
the 12" house in the same way that the Higher Dæmon was in the 
11". The Lower Dæmon is in the next anti-clockwise house. So, if the 
Higher Genius is in the ninth, it will cast its shadow into the tenth. If 
it is in the fourth, the evil demon is in the fifth. 

Just as the Higher Genius turns planets positive, the Shadow is 
harmful and will often blight the house and the planets within it. It 
might make those positive aspects appear detrimental to a person's 
life. Success in one area might come at the expense of the Higher Genius. 

These will be your life’s challenges and the issues you must 
overcome. The closer you draw to your Higher Self, the more these 
problems will appear and demand resolution. These things are 
often your fated story. When the Lower Genius is quietened, then the 


32 HELIOS UNBOUND 


powers which it has locked up will suddenly be available or more 
positive. 

Our first example has his shadow falling in the fifth house of sex 
and pleasure. What this will mean is the closer the relationship with 
the Higher Genius gets, the more he will experience an inability to 
express joy and happiness. There is a danger that the magician will 
become too shut off and mystical for his good. The Lower Dæmon will 
be undermining his happiness until the lesson that spirituality and 
sensuality both need to be expressed appropriately. The fifth house 
is Sagittarius, so the Damon is effectively stopping the magician 
having fun and happiness. It might be that it causes them to move 
around too much to earth their philosophy. 

The fifth house contains the magician’s south node which 
means it is a life lesson he needs to learn, and the shadow will make 
it elusive (as he might not even be aware of the issue). It might be 
that he isolates himself from contact or gets grumpy with others as 
he gets more intimate with his higher. 

In our second example, the Lower Demon is undermining 
the tenth house - the house of work and status. So, the closer the 
magician gets to his Higher Genius, the more problems will erupt 
to distract him. The deeper he gets into his magical world with his 
higher, the more he will be pulled back to deal with matters related 
to work and career and sorting out other people. The person has 
Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, and Sun under the shadow of the Higher 
Genius, which means that they have much to work out to find a 
balance, 

Third example: The magician has Leonine Higher Genius and 

connected to fire, and it focuses on the seventh house. It might 
appear fixed, and as if it knows all the answers and will drive the 
magician to take some leadership role (even if they don't want it). It 
has a strong focus on initiating and starting spiritual relationships 
(which practically means you will be better at this sort of magic than 
other things). Its approach is a little more unusual than most, and 
the Genius can appear less rational and fiercer than the native feels, 
The house of the Higher Genius throws light on Saturn, and the Sun 
in Cancer and these will be enhanced aspects of their spiritual self. 
The life story will depend on making relationships and partnerships 
which will be unusual but stable and long-term (Saturn). What the 
Higher Genius needs them to do requires a degree of patience and 
stability. It might often be at odds with what they feel is right (Sun in 
Cancer is introverted in comparison with Leo) and encourage them 
into the spotlight much more than they want. 


NICK FARRELL 33 


The shadow of the Higher Genius is the eighth house, and these 
are the things which the Higher Genius has incarnated to resolve (by 
bringing the focus onto seventh house relationships). The shadow 
Dæmon is Leo in the eighth house and hits Mars. The eighth house 
is to do with death, and other people's resources and the position of 
Mars gives a drive for significance. Mars in Leo builds a strong need 
to create in some way. They want their lives to have a significant 
meaning. If the Higher Genius focuses on spiritual relationships, the 
shadow wipes all that out with bursts of ego and over-idealism, 
self-righteous behaviour, and quarrels. The Shadow Dæmon might 
prevent necessary spiritual "near death" transformations and 
initiations as it seeks to maintain the spiritual status quo. 


THE HIGHER GENIUS IS SOLAR 


From the classical age to modern magic, the solar nature of the Higher 
Genius is always assumed. The most commonly used current method 
for contacting the Higher Genius is Aleister Crowley's Helios prayers in 
Liber Resh vel Helios where three prayers are provided for the morning, 
noon and night. Few have questioned this logic because the Sun is a 
perfect symbol of the Higher Genius. The Sun is not the One Thing but 
has a crucial role in the physical creation of the world and humanity. 
All life on Earth is dependent on the Sun, making it the physical 
representation of the One Thing in the solar system. The Solar System 
can be seen as the Sun's sphere of sensation or aura. 

The Sun symbolically follows human life. The Egyptians said 
that it was a child in the morning when the Sun rises, an adult at 
noon, and an older man in the evening. Like the Sun, the Higher 
Genius disappears into the chaotic underworld of dreams at night 
only to be reborn the next day. Following the Sun is copying the 
progress of your Higher Genius through your life story. Our bodies 
are made from mostly solar material which goes with us throughout 
our life story and withdraws when it is over. 

Like the Moon, the Sun is a setter of time. In Pagan cosmology, 
Time is the first thing that the Divine Triad created from the dark 
waters of Chaos to provide a frame in which its story of self- 
discovery began. The Sun numbers our days on earth and follows 
us throughout our destined life span and beyond. 

What this tells us is that by aligning ourselves to the Sun by 
ritual, we build an associative form where the Sun is our Higher 
Genius, and through that form, it can communicate with us. 


34 HELIOS UNBOUND 


In the fourth century, the Roman philosopher Emperor Flavius 
Claudius Julianus wrote: 


“I earnestly entreat the Sun, the king of the universe, that he 
will be propitious to me for my affection to his divinity; that he will 
impart to me a good life; more perfect wisdom; a divine intellect; 
and a gentle departure from the present state of my earth life."* 


PARTS OF THE SOUL 


In Phaedrus, Plato implies that the reason that the Higher Genius gets 
trapped in matter is due to factors within the soul that are part of 
being in matter. When the Higher Genius takes on its human space 
suit to enter matter, it finds itself in a three-fold world dominated 
by information gathered from the senses, animal desires, genetic 
programming and social needs. 

Plato believed that the soul (which is what is called the lunar 
body or Lower Genius in this system) was made up of three parts. The 
first was Reason or the logistikon Qoywrikóv), which is the thinking 
part of the soul. The next part of the lunar body is thymoeides 
(Boptoet6éc) or thumos (Bópos), which was our emotional self. The last 
part was the epithymetikon (mOvpntxov) (sometimes called Fros 
(pax), or desire) which was is the animal part of the soul through 
which we experience the sex-drive, hunger, thirst, and cravings. 

The logistikon is the closest to the Higher Genius because it seeks 
to work out what is real, judges what is right and what is false and 
wisely makes just decisions. It is the soul's ruler. However, while the 
logistikon is like the Higher Genius, it is a bit like a computer in that 
itrelies on the data it is given from the other bodies, if it gets wrong 
information from the animal instincts or the senses, it will react 
badly. However, it is through the logistikon that people contact their 
Higher Genius. It feels like whispering to the mind when you think 
about a problem, and you produce a solution which never would 
have occurred to you. 

In Homer's poems, thumos meant emotions, desire, or inner 
urges. A human's thinking and feeling were part of it. Thymos comes 
from the verb thyo or thyno (Bà or 09v) which means “I rush", or 
I “run,” mainly in battle. Derivatives include the following words: 


* Julian and Taylor, T. (1932). Two orations of the Emperor Julian, one to the 
Sovereign Sun and the other to the Mother of the gods. Chicago: Hermetic 
Publishing. 

Yunis, H. and Plato. (2011). Phaedrus. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 


NICK FARRELL 35 


a) thymos (anger), b) thyra (door) because air passes through a 
door and c) thymiama (incense) because the offerings to the gods 
were accompanied by incense, and from that word it received the 
concept of “sacrifice.” Homeric heroes externalise their thumos and 
converse with or scold it when one of them dies their thumos leaves 
the body. Plato saw thumos as “passion” or the emotional element. 
He saw itas a ‘high spirit’, and in the ideal personality, it represents 
a flowering of the ancestral spirit. Ideally, it should ally with the 
logistikon and provide the power for highly intellectual ideas. It is 
similar to the Polynesian concept of mana, which was a person's 
spiritual power, prestige and authority. It contains aspects of the 
soul which come from the ancestors and the higher learning and 
influences which have built up over time. 

In an unjust soul, the thumos ignores the logistikon and aligns 
with the animal desires and demands pleasures of the body. 

Plato used the image of the Charioteer to explain how these 
three bodies worked in the soul. This image is the same as the Tarot 
card The Chariot, one of those things which get missed by many 
Tarot experts. 

The logistikon was the rider, and he controlled two horses. One 
of the horses being noble and immortal (Hiunos) and the other being 
rougher and mortal (¢pithymetikon). 

The mortal horse (epithymetikon) is deformed and obstinate, a 
“crooked lumbering, animal, put together anyhow, ..dark, with grey 
eyes and red complexion”. Plato said that it was the “mate of insolenc: 
and pride, shay-eared and deaf, hardly yielding to whip and spur.” 

The immortal horse (thumos), on the other hand, is nobli 
upright and cleanly made...his colour is white, and his eyes dark, 
he is a lover of honour and modesty and temperance, and the 
follower of true glory; he needs no touch of the whip, but word and 
admonition are its guide.” 

The Charioteer (/ogistikon) must rein in these disparate steeds, guiding 
and harnessing them to propel the vehicle with strength and efficiency. 

The white horse wishes to rise to Heaven, but the dark horse 
pulls the chariot back towards the earth. The Charioteer tries to get 
the horses back into sync, and his chariot goes above the sky and 
drops down again. The rider catches the occasional glimpses of 
Heaven before sinking once more. 

Lower Genius thinking has problems. It can unlock much of the 
secrets of the universe. Plato said that if the Charioteer can get the 
horses working correctly, he can see the world and his place within 
it. However, it is far too hard for most mortals. 


36 HELIOS UNBOUND 


A good Charioteer understands how each of the three forces of 
his soul work together, and he guides them without usurping their 
function. He achieves harmony among the elements. Thus, instead 
of dissipating his energies in opposite and detrimental directions, he 
channels those energies towards his goals. 

In his Republic, Plato said this is a precursor to tackling any 


other endeavour of life: 


“First, having attained self-mastery and beautiful order and 
harmonised these three principles... made himself one man 
instead of many, self-controlled and in harmony, he can turn to 
issues like obtaining wealth, focusing on the body, taking part 
in politics or business. In all such doings, he will follow the just 
and honourable action which preserves and helps to produce this 


condition of the soul,”* 


Fortunately, the Higher Genius is part of the Lower Genius and has 


ZONY 
Fan 


M THECHARIOT $ 


Golden Dawn Temple Dod The Chariot 
(c) Wendrich artt louse 


a perfect view of the universe 
and can supply guidance. 

When inhabiting the 
body, the Higher Genius in its 
purest state is known as the 
Nous (Novs). Homer used the 
term Nous to signify mental 
activities of and 
immortals, but it later came to 
mean an almost divine Higher 
mind. In Philebusé Plato wrote 
that “Nous is king of Heaven 
and earth and sees reality in 
the same eternal way of gods 
and Dæmons. 

In the Fnneads,* the 
Neoplatonic philosopher 
Plotinus said that the Nous was 
the image of God and used 
more descriptions which make 
it the indwelling, Higher Genus 


mortals 


"Plato, Emlyn-Jones, C. and Preddy, W. (2013). Republic. Cambridge, Mass 


Harvard University Press, Line 443d 


t Plato. and Frede, D. (1993). Philebus. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co. 
+ Plotinus. (1989). Enneads. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University. 


NICK FARRELL 37 


within a human. He thought that Nous thinks its thoughts in terms 
of Platonic ideas. Thinking like this is the highest activity of life as 
it actualises forms. This Intellect is the first principle or foundation 
of existence. Intellect is called an emanation of the One. The One is 
the possibility of this foundation of reality. The Solar body or the 
Higher Self, or Nous, has access to a rational mind (logistikon) which 
it whispers driving suggestions but often it is the other two aspects 
which shout it down. In time this three-fold Lower Self takes on a life 
of its own, becoming a self-serving Dæmon of limitation. 

For the Higher Genius to manifest, it must reduce the influence 
of this Lower Genius by working on the logistikon and encouraging 
the epithymetikon to follow it, instead of the animal desires. 

The traditional way to do this was to repress the animal self 
and, to a lesser extent, the epithymetikon. Modern psychology has 
shown the danger of doing this as it amounts to damming within 
the psyche, which eventually causes an explosion. It is easier to try 
to get the animal self onside by making sure that it is happy and that 
it has not learnt any harmful defence mechanisms. The real key to 
bringing the animal self under control is through discipline. 

The Lower Genius can be tamed by careful reward or punishment, 
like any animal. The key to any occult training programme is to 
do regular exercises over a long period. After a while, the lesson: 
that these exercises bring will cause the epithymetikon to act in 
trained way to experience. Since it no longer is distracted by th. 
epithymetikon, the thumos will look more to the logistikon, and the 
chariot will run smoother. Since the Charioteer no longer worries 
about his ill-matched horses, he can listen more closely for the voice 
of the Nous, 

Any discipline, such as this book, is an ideal way to bring 
epithymetikon under control (even if in the initial stages it causes 
problems). 


PROMETHEUS AS A HIGHER GENIUS ALLEGORY 


According to  Hesiod's Theogony*, Prometheus (IIpopmQevc, 
forethought) and his brother Epimetheus (Exymevc afterthought) 
are trickster gods of the Greek pantheon and a thorn in the side 
of Zeus. The Ancients might have seen them as the "spirits of 
humanity." In one tradition, Prometheus shaped humanity out 
of mud, and Athena breathed life into it. Prometheus allowed his 
brother, Epimetheus, to dispense various qualities to the animals 


“Hesiod. and Lattimore, R. (1991). Hesiod. [Michigan]: Ann Arbor Paperbacks. 


38 HELIOS UNBOUND 


and man. Epimetheus gave animals the best traits such as swiftness, 
courage, cunning, stealth, and he had nothing to give to man. 
Prometheus took over and gave humanity an upright posture like 
the gods. This gift enabled humans to survive. Prometheus later 
assumed the role of humanity's protector, although it is unclear if 
this is part of his game of one-upmanship with Zeus. As a Titan, he 
was said to have provided humanity with fire, and all the means to 
survive. Had Zeus got his way, humanity would have been dead a 
long time ago. 

Epimetheus is unfairly depicted as Prometheus’ stupid brother, 
but there are some things about his nature, which provide humanity 
with its specific power. We might 
be quicker thinkers, thanks to 
Prometheus, but Afterthought 
brought humanity other abilities; 
dependency on one another 
sharing, caring, meeting and 
loving. It is for this reason that he 
allows humanity to fall in love 
with Pandora. Prometheus saw 
humanity needed a companion. 

Their two brothers, Atlas 
(Atag) and Menoetius (Mivoiziz) 
shared humanity's quirks. 
Menoetius is humanity's inherent 
conservatism, which forces them 
to be on the wrong side of change. 
Atlas could separate the astral 
from the physical and create the 
divided world in which humanity 
lives. Menoetius is human hubris 
which makes the race believe that they are the centre of the universe and 
blundering on through mistakes ranging from wars to global warming, 
Atlas and Menoetius were on the wrong side of the Titan's revolt (which 
means that they are aspects of humanity which are antagonistic to the 
gods). If we follow Atlas and Menoetius, we will either end up separating, 
our spirituality from the material or, get walloped by a lightning, bolt 
from a highly miffed principal deity. Prometheus is the ability to think 
quickly, intuitively before things happen, and Epimetheus is the ability 
to learn from mistakes. In the weird way that the myths tell us things, 
Hesiod implies that these four Titans are bound up with the way we are. 
During the Greco-Roman period, the Egyptian alchemist Zosimos of 


Sous Boor 
Hiema Gears) 


Nous 


NICK FARRELL 39 


Panopolis (2nd-3* Century CE) developed the idea. He saw Prometheus 
asahuman's Higher Genius while Epimetheus was the physical body. The 
story where Prometheus warns his brother against accepting the gifts of 
Zeus is a Pagan description of the fall of man. Epimetheus says that the 
only thing that he wants from life is a "shapely woman" and wealth. 
Effectively re-enforcing the occult teaching that the Higher Self looked 
towards matter and found it beautiful and “fell into it.” Once incarnate, 
the gods provided him with Pandora who arrived with her jar and forced 
him to conform to “fate” which was all the pains of living in matter. 


“Zeus set yet another fetter upon him- Pandora, whom the Hebrews call 
Eve. For Prometheus and Epimetheus are, by the allegorical method, a 
single man, that is, soul and body; and so Prometheus sometimes takes 
the form of soul, sometimes that of mind, and sometimes that of flesh 
because of Epimetheus’ disregard when he disregarded the advice of 
Prometheus, his foresight. For our Mind says: “The Son of God, being 
capable of everything and becoming everything, when he wills, as he 
wills, appears to each.” * 


The legend told by 5th-century BCE Greek tragedian Aeschylust 
Prometleus Bound said that Prometheus gave humanity fire. This 
"fire" was the divine spark in man. Prometheus effectively was 
the being who brought divine consciousness to the animal-human 
bodv (represented by this brother). Prometheus taught humanity 
civilisation, writing, mathematics, agriculture, medicine, and science. 
These are the tools of the Higher Genius and enabled humanity to 
thrive when Zeus tried to wipe us out. 

As punishment for giving humanity these tools, Zeus sentenced 
Prometheus to eternal torment for his transgression. The immortal was 
bound toà rock, where each day an eagle, the emblem of Zeus, was sent 
to feed on his liver. The liver would grow back overnight to be eaten the 
next day again. (The Ancient Greeks believed the liver to be the seat of 
human emotions). Prometheus’ punishment is the perfect description 
of the Higher Genius being trapped in nature (the rock) and tortured 
because it is an astral creature being made to feel things. 

Hercules, a human, frees Prometheus which means that the work 
of becoming a perfected hero liberates the Higher Genius. Hercules 
drives away Zeus's Eagle with arrows. To the Greeks, arrows were 
symbols of perception and knowledge. 


` Jackson, H. and Zoximos (1979). Zosimos of Panopolis on the Letter Omega. 
Claremont, Calif.: Claremont Graduate School. 

t Aeschylus., Podlecki, A., Aeschylus. and Aeschylus. (2005). Prometheus 
bound. Oxford: Aris & Phillips. 


40 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The implication is that you do not literally rise “upwards” 
towards the Higher Genius to liberate it. By being a hero in your 
life and using your powers of perception, you can find your Higher 
Genius within yourself and liberate it. 


THE SPHERE OF SENSATION 


Throughout this book, I use the old term Sphere of Sensation. These 
days it is called the aura, but the Western concept of Sphere of 
Sensation contains associations which are unconnected to the aura. 
I have gone into detail about the Sphere of Sensation in my book, 
Magical Imagination* which I have summarised in this book. 

The Sphere of Sensation is the energy field through which we 
interact with the physical world. This energy not only colours your 
world but draws to you the experiences you need and acts as an 
unconscious memory for everything we experience. Golden Dawn 
Adept John Brodie Innes wrote that the Sphere of Sensation was an 
egg-shaped aura around the body. Each time we learn something 
new, a little part of our Sphere of Sensation changes to adapt to the 
latest information. From then on, we will see the world through that 
information. If a dog bites you when you are small, your Sphere of 
Sensation will activate all the warning systems when a dog comes 
into sight. It will tell your brain to start all the physical reactions to 
avoid the terrible experience you had before. 

While that can be useful, there are times when it no longer 
becomes right or is wrong - such as when information comes to us 
second-hand from our parents, friends or teachers. A racist father 
who, because of his own experience or lousy programming, tells you 
that Jews were involved in human sacrifice, will get into your Sphere 
of Sensation and dominate your worldview. 

Getting rid of that information is extremely difficult, which is 
why people who learned unhealthy behaviour patterns from their 
families repeat them. If your family upbringing, has programmed 
you to see life as unfair, and that you never getany breaks, then your 
Spliere of Sensation will build you a universe based on those beliefs, 
Historically there are cases of such people who have won the lottery 
and lost it all in a few years because generations of such thinking 
had so corrupted their Sphere of Sensation. 

To make matters worse, your Splere of Sensation builds 
association trees which connected the information it has gathered. 


* Farrell, N. (2013). Magical Imagination: The Keys to Magic. 2nd ed. London: 
SKYLIGHT. 


NICK FARRELL 41 


So if we believe that the Bible is the word of God then everything 
it contains must be historically true. We start to believe that there 
really wasa Moses who crossed the Red Sea and get terribly confused 
when scholars point out that the Red Sea was a mistranslation of the 
“Sea of Reeds” which was more of a swamp to the North of Egypt. 

These associations built a web, which is our impression of 
reality - a unique image of the universe from their perspective. This 
universe is created from many experiences since birth. These are the 
lessons that we have taught ourselves or accepted as gospel from our 
parents, teachers, friends, and society. Over the years, our universe 
becomes more defined, meaning that we can handle more of what 
our life throws at us. 

The New Age movement teaches a half-truth that our mental 
picture of the universe is such a powerful force for stability that it 
eventually creates the circumstances that support it. In other words, 
how we see our world becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. The 
person who is rich either in material or spiritual terms is unlikely 
to be poor, while the poor will be forever locked in their misery. 
Occultism teaches that since the imagination builds such a universe 
under many, it can be changed - and indeed in most cases, it must. 

l said it was a half-truth as is not always accurate or a universal 
law. There are some things in life which are cornerstones of you: 
life which must happen for vour story to take place. For exampl 
no amount of visualising can change your family and your genetics 
and they have a huge influence on your story and Spliere of Sensation. 
Some life changing, events appear in a manner which could even 
have been imagined by the participants. 

Over the millennia, many different techniques enabled people to 
master their universe using their imagination and change the wiring 
of their minds to let in things like success, happiness, and well-being. 

The most common of these tools is pathworking or guided 
meditation, which we will look at ina moment. This technique which 
had long, been part of the western magical tradition was tested in 
the 1970s by scientists who were shocked to discover that it was a 
powerful way to change ways of thinking. 

For example, a friend of mine used a pathworking to visit a 
destructive first relationship to see how it made her feel now. She 
imagined undoing that event so that the plot of her life was no longer 
based on the false lessons that relationship taught her. It unlocked a 
tremendous amount of energy which was locked up in her sphere of 
sensation, and her life path changed. 


42 HELIOS UNBOUND 


It is essential to look at the Neo-Platonist idea of mind and 
symbols to understand the concept of how the Sphere works and 
communicates, Firstly, the Neo-Platonists believed that all things are 
the products of divine consciousness, and the way that an object is 
created by using physical material. The One Thing can do neither 
because it is infinite and cannot take any outside source and can 
only make its universe within its own mind. Once you realise the 
universe works like a mind*, you can use the information to bring 
about change. 

The Universal Mind does not communicate in words - it uses 
symbols, A word is a symbol, but it only generally means one or 
more ideas. A real symbol is understood on many various levels. . 

Likewise, the Sphere of Sensation works on symbols, which it 
uses a bit like a computer language to programme the environment. 
It takes Macrocosmic symbols and converts them into personal ones. 
These reflect the Nephesh and the physical body. Our spiritual side 
communicates with us through the Sphere of Sensation using, symbols. 

Weare born facing the wrong way. Our loyal servant, our Sphere 
of Sensation, shows us a distorted vision of the Universe. It builds 
our lives on incorrect beliefs founded on clouded understandings of 
the symbols. We see symbols but ‘in a glass, darkly.’ Soon optimism 
gives way to depression, the trivial becomes important, and our view 

mes narrow and clouded. People form links with others through 
shared magnetism and corrupted symbols. Their Spheres of Sensation 
become linked, and spiritual energy become depleted. As people age. 
they become more fixed. They either keep symbols of their universe 
or live their lives as they always have done. In such circumstances, 
the higher aspects of the personality lose their ability to influence the 
Sphere of Sensation, it gives up and the person finally dies. 


BASIC RITUALS 


This book uses adapted rituals from Order of the Golden Dawn. W does 
So because they do the job and are publicly available. | see no reason 
not to use something which works and when adapted, brings in the 
same sort of energy. While some of the details of this might sail over 
the head of non-initiates and open me to the accusation that this 
book is a "Golden Dawn" system, anyone who is in that order will 
tell you that this book is nothing like the Golden Dawn. Since this 


* This is not saying that the Universe is a Mind, just that it has similarities 
to one. The difference is like saying my computer is a Stoic philosopher 
because it uses a similar logic in its software. 


NICK FARRELL 43 


system is "Ancient Alexandrian," the eclectic mix of Golden Dawn, 
Greek, Hebrew, and Egyptian systems is perfectly acceptable. 


GREEK CROSS 


All actions during Helios Unbound start with an adaption of the 
Kabbalistic cross which is an excellent method of balancing the Sphere 
of Sensation before and after any working to limit any unbalancing 
that the work causes. I have replaced the Hebrew of the Golden 
Dawn with Greek. Note that the visualisations of the cross are NOT 
a crucifix, but the equal-armed rose cross. 

Reach up and tap between your eyebrows and visualise the crown 
centre above your head (see this as diamond light) realise that this is your 
spiritual centre in your bod 

Say SU EI [SY EE] (XY El) (This means literally “you are" when 
you touch and visualise this sphere you think of your Lower Self, 
placing itself in the hands of the higher. It is acknowledging that the 
divine is indwelling in your body) 

When you have this visualised this take your hand down to your 

belly button while drawing this white diamond light down with it. 
Turn your hand to point to the floor and see this light continue down 
to your feet, See a sphere of dark violet form beneath your feet. 
Say E ARCHE [ʻE AR-CH’E] (H APXH) which means Kingdom. 
alise that your physical world connects the spiritual world 
ything vou see around you is Divine. Now keeping on visualising 
that line of light, tap your right shoulder and see a sphere form ot 
scarlet, 

Say KAI E DUNAMIS [KE 


which means “and the Power. 


"EDY-NA-MEES] (KAI HAYNAMI) 
Think of how you act, how you move 
and every activity vou are doing. How you bring order to your 
universe. Draw a line across your body to your left shoulder. See a 
sphere of bright blue form. 

Say KALE DOXA [KE ^E THO-XA] (KAI H AOZA) which means 
"and the Glory." Think about what you are passively doing in your 
life and how you forgive. Interlock your fingers and touch your 
thumbs together so that they are in an upward pointing triangle 
level to your heart. 

You are balancing Heaven, Earth, mercy, and severity, Order 
and Chaos in your Sphere of Sensation. When you have done this 
rotate your wrist so that your thumbs are pointing downwards. See 
a rose-pink ball of light in your heart centre [turning the wrist opens 
the heart centre]. All feelings to come to the surface (opening the 
heart centre always brings feelings. Note what they are. 


44 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Say AEI [EYE-EE] [Forever] (A-EE) and see yourself as a rose 
cross of white light with a rose centre broadcasting balanced golden 


light 
LESSER RITUAL OF THE PENTAGRAM’ 


Memorise this essential mini-ritual as it is used before any session 
in its invoking form and banishing form as part of the clearing out 
work done on the Spliere of Sensation. 

Trace any image or figure in the air with the finger, dagger or 
another magical instrument. What is critical is the visualisation of 
everything at the right moment is vital. 

Facing Fast perform a Greek Cross. Draw, in the air facing EAST 
an invoking pentagram about three feet across. É bringing the point 
of the dagger to the centre of the Pentagram, vibrate the Name AIQ 
(pronounced AH, EE, AW) 

Imagine that your voice carries forward to the LIMITS of the 
UNIVERSE. 

Without moving the dagger trace a semicircle before vou as vou 
turn towards the SOUTH. Again, trace the pentagram £, bring the 
dagger to the centre of it, and vibrate the name QIA, (pronounced 
AW, EE, AH) 

Again, trace the semicircle with the dagger to the WEST, trace the 
Pentagram, # bringing the blade to the centre, and vibrate the name 
QAI, (pronounced AW, AH, EE) Then, tum towards the NORTEL, while 
tracing the circle, trace the pentagram fz, bring the point of the dapper to 
the centre and vibrate the name AQI, (pronounced either AH, AW, EE) 

Return to the EAST, completing tracing, the circle of brilliant 
white light, bringing the dagger point to the centre of the EAST 
pentagram. 


* This ritual borrows from the Golden Dawn. However, the divine names used 
in this ritual have been changed to those more likely to have been used Greco 
Roman Egypt. Thus the medieval cabbalistic names have been replaced with 
the variants of IAQ, This was a divine name of Jupiter and the Jewish god 
YHVH. Pagan magicians used Archangel’ names, so 1 have kept them but 
replaced the cabbalistic names of YHVH with variations of the name LAQ, My 
personal theory is that the Jewish Kabbalah appeared in Greco-Roman Egypt 
based on an earlier Greek technique. The proof of this can be found in the first 
notable cabbalistic book Sefer Yetzirah in which the universe is created with 
Hebrew letters. The letters used are not YHVH but YHV which is a Hebrew 
variation of IAQ. 


NICK FARRELL 45 


Say BEFORE ME (then vibrate) RAPHAEL (pronounced RA-FA-EL? 

Imagine a scintillating brilliant golden Archangel in front of 
you and facing you. In his/her right hand is caduceus. 

Then, say, BEHIND ME (then vibrate) GABRIEL (pronounced 
WA-VREE-EL) 

Imagine a scintillating brilliant silver Archangel behind you 
and facing you, holding in their right hand a silver chalice. 

Raise your right arm at right angles pointing towards the South 

Then, say, AT MY RIGHT HAND (then vibrate) MICHAEL 
(pronounced MEE-KA-EL) 

Imagine a scintillating brilliant flaming Archangel at your right, 
facing you, and holding a sword of flame. 

Keeping your right hand raised, raise your left arm at right 
angles pointing towards the North so you are standing as a cross. 

Then, say, AT MY LEFT HAND (then vibrate) Souriel 
(pronounced SOO-REE-EL) 

Imagine an Archangel of blue lightning holding a thunderbolt. 

Imagine yourself as a golden cross radiating yellow light to fill 
the room and say, 

ABOUT ME FLAME THE PENTAGRAMS, AND BEHIND ME 
SHINES THE SIX-RAYED STAR. 

Imagine that behind you is a golden hexagram. It is a symbol of 
your Higher Self. See it unite with you and that the room is flooded 
with golden light. 

Vibrate the name IAQ (E, AH, AW) 

Repeat the Greek Cross. 


LESSER RITUAL OF THE PENTAGRAM RITUAL NOTES 


In this system, the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram [LRP] is used in the 
same Way as it was within the Order of the Golden Dawn as a complete, 
classic ‘magical sign’ that the operator drew in four directions. 

The pentagram is associated with the planet Venus because 
when viewed from earth, successive conjunctions of the planet plot 
a perfect pentagram shape around the zodiac every eight years. 
Another attribution is with Mars as that planet is connected to the 
number five. The pentagram represents humanity’s ability to control 
things and spirits because of its five-fold nature. Since elemental or 
purely spiritual beings populate most of the universe, and a human 
is a mixture of both, this gives them considerable protection and 


* In the PGM the names of the Archangels were written in Greek not 
Hebrew. Therefore the pronunciation would follow Greek rules. 


46 HELIOS UNBOUND 


power. As far as occultists are concerned, the pentagram is a symbol 
of a perfected human being. It is a symbol of spirit ruling over the 
elemental nature. 

The LRP has the operator/candidate standing in the centre of 
their universe, between two pillars of Order and Chaos, with his or 
her Higher Genius within the heart centre, flanked by four Archangels 
and on all sides a symbol of the dominion of spirit. All this imagery 
sends a powerful message to the unconscious mind that they are a 
channel for their Higher Genius. 

The LRP changes to the Sphere of Sensation by placing powerful 
symbols within itand each repetition enforces them over time. In time 
the person gradually develops to live in harmony with them. 

The insistence on the LRP before ritual implies that the LRP has 
a hygienic effect and can be used to create sacred space. It does this in 
two ways. The first is by elevating the consciousness of the operator. It 
creates physical change in the environment occupied by the Sphere of 
Sensation, The Sphere of Sensation is spiritualised and expanded to the 
four quarters. The spiritualised sphere produces a high range energy 

ım. This hum prevents lower astral beings which operate on a lower 
Pita note (which cause most of the problems in ceremonial magic) 
mentering the space. 

The Sphere of Sensation is projected outwards and stretched 

nagically to include the entire temple space. Over the years, 
many people, inside and outside the Golden Dawn, have reported 
beneficial effects caused by the regular performance of the LRP. 

Besides drawing other forces to you, the invoking, pentagram 
directly affects the person performing it. Rather than just being 
‘guardians’ and ‘protectors,’ the angels and divine names send their 
transformative energies into your Sphere of Sensation and alchemivally 
transmute and orientate it. 

You will note that throughout what I have described I have used 
the “invoking” ritual of the pentagram. In the last 30 years, Western 

Magic has been obsessively using the “banishing” version of the 
rite. This is the same ritual, but the banishing pentagram is drawn 
from bottom to top *. While the Golden Dawn used banishing 
pentagrams, it was only if they were in space which felt wrong or 
was used for other things. It was never used in a fully consecrated 
temple. The banishing protects by “reversing the polarity” of the 
Sphere of Sensation to push away lower astral nasties while connecting 
the person to their Higher Self. It can be used to remove those parts of 


“Yes I am aware it is a Dr Who reference. 


NICK FARRELL 47 


your personality, such as habits, that you do not want. The invoking 
ritual allows you to bring things into your life that you desire and 
brings about your connection with spiritual forces. Lesser banishing 
pentagrams prevent you drawing these forces to you. 

Once you have performed your ritual, it will stay working until 
Sunrise or Sunset. 

If you want to attract an angel or a god, you will use the 
invoking one before your working. If vou were doing your general 
daily meditation, you would perform the invoking pentagram ritual 
because you would want to gain information. However, if you 
were meditating on your shortcomings, you would do a banishing 
because you would want to get rid of something inside you. 


THE ELEMENTAL PENTAGRAM RITUAL 


The purpose of this ritual is to assist in balancing the elements. 
The mechanies of this ritual will be explained later. It is based on 
the Golden Dawn's Supreme Ritual of the Pentagram, but it has been 
tweaked to fit into this system. It uses the divine names of the gods 
which ruled each element according to Empedocles and the secret 
names of the Elemental Kings from Coptic Egypt. The room is to 
be orientated towards the East. Those who know the Order of the 
Golden Dawn's Ritual of Opening by Watchtowers should notice a few 
key differences. The active and passive spirit pentagrams are called 
Order and Chaos to fit with Empedocles elemental theory. 


1, Face East and perform the Greek Cross 


2. Vibrate: ANLALA LAI GAIA APA DIACHANNA CHORYN 
(AN-LA-LA LAY GUY-AH AH-PAH DEE-ACH-AN-NA CH-OR- 
IN) 

Say, Hear Me and make all spirits subject unto Me so that every 
Spirit of the Firmament and the Aether; upon the earth and under 
the Earth, on dry land or in the water, of whirling air or of rushing 
fire and every spell and scourge of God may be obedient unto Me. 
May the elemental gates open, and may I be free of anything that 
limits me. 


3. Visualise a landscape beyond the East with a tall tower in front of 
it. Draw the Order pentagram € while vibrating PHILOTES (FEEL- 
OT-ES) (®u\otns) and draw a Spirit wheel & in the centre while 
vibrating Logos (Aoyoc). Draw the Chaos pentagram ¥ vibrating 
NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) (Neuxos) and draw a Spirit wheel ® in the 
centre while vibrating KHAOS (Xaos). 


48 HELIOS UNBOUND 


4. Visualise the pentagrams hanging in the air and creating a vortex 
of power (like a spiralling galaxy). See Zeus (man-headed) stand 
before it. 


5. Draw the Air pentagram 3? vibrating AKRAMATHA. In the 
centre draw the sign of Aquarius ^^ and vibrate ZEUS (Zeus). Say, 
Spirits of Air adore your creator. 


6. Face South. Visualise a landscape beyond the South with a tall 
tower in front of it. 


7. Draw the Order pentagram 5 while vibrating PHILOTÉS (FEE- 
LO-T'ES) and draw a Spirit wheel & in the centre while vibrating 
Logos. Draw the Chaos pentagram z* vibrating NEIKOS (NEE- 
KOS) and a Spirit wheel & in the centre while vibrating KHAOS. 
8. Visualise the pentagrams hanging in the air and creating a vortex 
of power (like a spiralling galaxy). See Hades (lion-headed) stand 
before it. 

9. Draw the Fire Pentagram X vibrating the divine names 
ZOROTHION. In the centre draw the sign of Leo & and vibrate and 

DES (Aóry). Say, Spirits of Fire, adore your creator. 


0. Face West. Visualise a landscape beyond the West with a tall 
ower in front of it. Draw the Order pentagram * while vibrating 
PHILOTES (FEE-LO-T’ES) and draw a Spirit wheel G in the centre 
while vibrating Logos. Draw the Chaos pentagram ~ vibrating 
NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) and a Spirit wheel G in the centre while 
vibrating KHAOS. 


11. Visualise the pentagrams hanging in the air and creating, a vortex 
of power (like a spiralling galaxy). See Persephone (cagle-headed) 
stand before it. 


12. Draw the water Pentagram * vibrating the divine name 
PERITON. In the centre draw the sign of Scorpio M. and vibrate 
PERSEPHONE (Ilepoepovn). Say, Spirits of Water, adore your 
creator, 


13. Face North. Visualise a landscape beyond the West with a tall 
tower in front of it. Draw the Order pentagram * while vibrating 
PHILOTES (FEE-LO-T'ES) and draw a Spirit wheel Q in the centre 
while vibrating Logos. Draw the Chaos pentagram ‘ vibrating 
NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) and draw a Spirit wheel ® in the centre while 
vibrating KHAOS. 


NICK FARRELL 49 


14. Visualise the pentagrams hanging in the air and creating a vortex 
of power (like a spiralling galaxy). See Hera (bull-headed) stand 
before it. 


15. Draw the Earth Pentagram ** vibrating the divine name 
PARAMAH. In the centre draw the sign of Taurus 8 and vibrate 
and HERA ('Hpà). Say, Spirits of Earth, adore your creator. 


16. Go to the altar and face east. Say, I invoke the forces of the Spirit 
of Life. Draw the Order pentagram X while vibrating PHILOTES 
(FEE-LO-T'ES) and draw a Spirit wheel & in the centre while 
vibrating Logos. Draw the Chaos pentagram ** vibrating NEIKOS 
(NEE-KOS) and draw a Spirit wheel ® in the centre while vibrating 
KHAOS. 


17. Say, I invoke the Demons of the Celestial spheres, whose 
dwelling is in the invisible. You are the guardians of the gates 
of the Universe, become the guardians of this mystic space. Keep 
far removed any unbalanced forces. Strengthen and inspire me so 
that I may preserve unsullied this abode of the mysteries of the 
eternal gods. Let my sphere be pure and holy so that I may enter in 
and become a partaker of the secrets of the divine light. 


18. Stand in the form of a cross and say, I am a creature of Chaos 
searching for meaning in Order. I stand between the Sun and 
the Moon, the gods and matter, and the Light and the Dark. I am 
balanced and the perfected vehicle for my Higher Genius. 


19. See a line of light coming from each of the quarters and the beings 
there meeting in the centre and forming into a rose. You are at the 
Centre of a Rose Cross. The rose opens with you in the centre from 
its heart emerges is the vision of the Higher Self. Commune with 
it. This is the beginning of Knowledge and Conversation with the 
Higher Selt. 


THE ZODIACAL PENTAGRAM 

The Golden Dawn had a simple and highly effective way of using the 
pentagrams to open zodiacal portals. The method involved drawing the 
elemental pentagram for the zodiac sign and putting the astrological symbol 
in the middle while vibrating the name from the spheres on the Tree of Life. 
Fire (Aries, Leo, Sagittarius) *« 

Earth (Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn) *« 

Air (Gemini, Libra, Aquarius) *£ 

Water (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces) ¢ 


50 


NUM 


S 


ZALAMOIRLALITH 


HELIOS UNBOUND 


If you wanted to open a 
portal to Aries, you would 
face where Aries was at the 
time and draw an invoking 
pentagram of fire. You 
would place the symbol of 
Aries and vibrate the Hebrew 
name Elohim Gibor (God is 
Mighty). 

In our case, though it is 
better to draw the invoking 
pentagram and then draw 
magic sigils of the planets and 
vibrate the mystical name of 
the sign. Thus, for Leo you 
would do an invoking Fire 


Pentagram and vibrate ZALAMOIRLALITH. We will be giving a 
list of these mystical names of the signs later. 


LVX FORMULA 


The LVX formula was a crucial part of the Golden Dawn system of 
magic. It “calls down the light” into a ritual and animates thouyht- 
forms, symbols, and geometric shapes. Over the years it has been 
proven to work, but there are intellectual holes in the process which 
make some things redundant and others clumsy or wrong. It is 
possible to do it the way the GD did it (which was hardwired into 
their 5=6 initiation or using a more "Pagan" approach). 


THE GOLDEN DAWN APPROACH 


INRI 

Yod, Nun, Resh, Yod 

The sign of Osiris slain 

L - the Sign of Mourning Isis 


V - the sign of Typhon and Apophis 


X- the sign of Osiris Risen 
L.V.X Lux, the light of the cross! 


NICK FARRELL 51 


Virgo, Isis, Mighty Mother 

Scorpio, Apophis Destroyer 

Sol Osiris slain and Risen 

Isis, Apophis, Osiris 

(The spirit Enochian names are invoked to equilibrate the 
force") 

Let the Divine White Brilliance Descend 

LA.O. 


The LVX formula is a shorthand version of the Golden Dawn's 
adept ritual which starts with three officers representing the divine 
name IAO cause the light to descend on the candidate. INRI refers to 
the candidate bound on the cross of suffering and becoming Osiris 
slain. The door of Light (LVX) is shown to the candidate, who is 
exposed to the forces which resurrect Osiris, causing the Divine 
White Brilliance to descend from the Crown of God to re-animate 
and bring things to life. 

INRI was the form placed above the Cross of Jesus of Nazareth. 
It is short for "IESUS NAZARENUS REX IUDAEORUM" meaning 
in English “Jesus of Nazareth, King of Jews." John 19:20 states that 
this was written in three languages — Hebrew, Latin, and Greek. 
If vou translate INRI into Greek, vou would get the initials INBI, 
standing for ljsoóz 6 Nacwpaiog 6 Bucüsbg ràv lovàaíov (ee-'e- 
soos nà-Zo-re-os o và ton ee-oo-de-awn). The "traditional" 
translation into Hebrew is “sw niv 1277 mmm this would give the 
acronym Yod, Heh, Vau, Heh but before anyone gets excited this is 
because the words Jesus of Nazareth, King of Jews are not correctly 
translated. Our YHVH translation is Hebrew for "Jesus the Nazarite 
and King of the Jews” and the correct rendering would be www san, 
ww ^2 Yod, Mem, Mem, Heh, Either way, the Hebrew keyword 
is a mess and does not reach the place that Order of the Golden Dawn 
intended. The idea that Yod, Nun, Resh, Yod could be a cypher for 
INRI was found by Israel Regardie in an esoteric masonry paper and 
has been lovingly copied ever since, perhaps because INRI matches 
the rest of the GD's Christian aspects. 

Regardie quotes the Golden Dawn document 777 as the source 
that Apophis represents "death," and equates to Set-Typhon in the 
Egyptian myths. However, Apophis was not part of the Isis and Osiris 
myth. His role in Egyptian magic was not that of the destroyer, which 


“This appears to have been a modern edition to the ritual added by Israel 
Regardie 


52 HELIOS UNBOUND 


was appropriate for Set-Typhon, but a grand opposer of all order. He 
was not so much death as "total oblivion" and "raw Chaos." The 
temple of Karnak dedicated itself to doing hourly workings to ensure 
the weakening of Apophis so the Sun god Ra could defeat him. The 
Egyptians saw death as a good thing, but Apophis had no redeeming 
qualities. Apophis was despised and never worshipped by the 
Egyptians. His main rival was not Isis or Osiris, but Ra. Apophis's 
goal is to snuff out everything and were it not for the actions of Ra, 
creation would cease to be. Mention of his name in the LVX formula 
has always bothered me. It was too powerful and unbalances it - Isis 
and Osiris do not limit Apophis energy. 

Set/Typhon does fit all the attributions given in the formula. 
He was worshipped and was never quite the devil of the Christian 
pantheon. RestoringSet-Typhon makes theissue go away completely. 
My thought was Apophis was bought in as a replacement for Set- 
Typhon, because his Greek name started with the letter A and Set- 
Typhon did not. We will look at this unnecessary red herring later. 


THE LIGHT OF THE CROSS 

This phrase, which is usually accompanied by the magician standing, 
in the sign of the cross or visualising a golden cross does not come 
from the Bible. While it was a common saying, in late-Christian 
terminology, in the Christian tradition the cross does not cast any 
light, Itisa symbol of darkness and polarises against the resurrection, 
which is the source of Light. 

Whatis being referred to here is how the Latin letters of LVN can 
be extended and made into three crosses. Mapically this is because 
light moves through three phases. The three gods Isis, Typhon and 
Osiris represent these crosses. 

The writer of the LVX ritual uses Isis, Apophis and Osiris 
because the letters of their names equal the word of power LAO. 
LAO was an important word. Not only was it a replacement for 
amn in the Greek translation of the Bible, it was a Divine Name of 
Jupiter, the King of the Gods, In the so-called Mithras Liturgy, LAO is 
associated with “fire” and “light.” It is the perfect name tor “calling, 
down the Divine White Brilliance” (think of Zeus with his lightning, 
bolt) 

ut the writer of the GD LVX formula either did not know or 
ignored the fact that IAO was written LA.O. Omega is a different 
vowel from Omicron. Bible based material written around this divine 
name is always associated with Q - the last letter of the alphabet. ^I 
am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning 


NICK FARRELL 53 


and the End." — Revelation 22:13. . "I" was associated with Christ 
and the Sun and Alpha was the first letter and Omega was the last. 
Osiris's name in Greek was spelt with the letter O (omicron) not Q. 

The Order of the Golden Dawn pronounced IAO as Ee, Ah, Oh. Yet 
Omega is pronounced like the AW in "law"; while omicron which 
was like the shorter O in "pot"* Ancient Greek vowels in their long 
form (which is best for vibration) gives us the Ee (e as in bean) Ah 
(a as in father) Aw (as in law). This means that the godforms cannot 
be defined by the first letter of their name. If Osiris is not spelt Osiris 
then A does not need to be the problematic Apophis and could be 
the more logical Set-Typhon. 


THE HELIOS UNBOUND VERSION 


Osophoophe (OS-OR-NOO-F'E) (Ocopvovon) The sign of Osiris 
slain [At shoulder level, hold arms straight out at the sides to form 
an equal-armed cross.] 

L - the Sign of Mourning Isis [Right arm is bent at 90°, upper 
arm parallel with the ground, forearm pointing upwards, fingers 
extended. Left arm is the same, but with the forearm arm pointing 
downwards, Head faces to the left and down. Right foot rests on its 
ball, with the knee bent.] 

V - the sign of Set-Typhon the destroyer [Raise arms above the 
head at an angle of 60° to each other, and throw the head back, as if 
looking upwards.] 

X- the sign of Osiris risen [Standing upright, cross the arms 
over the chest, right over lett, so that the open hands rest on the 
shoulders.] 

L.V.X [repeat the signs for each letter] Lux, the light of the cross 
[Stand in the sign of Osiris slain, visualise yourself as a golden cross 
sending out light] 

Virgo, Isis, Mighty Mother [raise arms slightly] 

Scorpio, Typhon Destroyer [raise arms slightly] 

Sol Osiris slain [sign of Osiris slain] and Risen [sign of Osiris 
risen] 

Isis, Typhon, Osiris [lift arms up again] 

In the name of [Thoth-Hermes, Hekate Jupiter, Zeus, YHVH] 


“In Greek the word “mega” means "big" so we have "o-mega" which 
literally means "o-big" while the greek word "micron" means "small" so 
we have "o-mikron" which means "o-small" and for both the "big" and 
"small" refers to the duration. 

*Use which ever god or goddess you are using as your Light Bringer. 


54 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Let the Divine White Brilliance Descend [Draw your arms 
down quickly] 

LA. Q. (Ee-Ah-Aw) 
[Vibrate IAQ three times while visualising light descending from the 
above to below] 


LESSER RITUAL OF THE HEXAGRAM 


Another ritual which I am lifting from the Golden Dawn corpus, 
is a mini-rite called the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Hexagram. It is 
performed after a LRP by adepts and assorted reasons have been 
provided for its existence mostly centred on an apparent need to 
neutralise any planetary energy before beginning a working. 

Based on the drawing of two different triangles in distinct 
positions in the quarters it is the most used of a collection of “lesser” 
invoking and banishing hexagrams. However, the root of the lesser 
hexagrams might provide us with some clues as to its use and why 
it is an important daily practice for the modern magician. i 

One of the founders of the Golden Dawn took the triangle 

liagrams from a drawing of the Key of Solomon magic Circle where it 
placed in the outside circle along with the highest magical names 
f power. The triangles are not explained, but it seems likely to me 
chat that they are Geomantic symbols. Two of them (in the South and 
West) are variations on the Geomantic symbols for Carcer, the East 
is Fortuna Minor and the last, in the North is Conjunctio. Within the 
circle of Key Solomon, these Geomantic symbols make a preat deal 
of sense. In this case, their role is creating a ring of protection around 
the magician. 

Geomantic figures are a recipe which is fused to create a strony, 
effect. In this case, we have a strony Saturnian flavour which 
separates the inside of the circle from the outside world. Carcer 
means Prison and is attributed to Saturn. The northern hexagram 
is the Geomantic opposite to Carcer, Conjunctio is attributed to the 
mutable Mercury and draws things together rather than separate 
them. However, Conjunctio tends to follow the influence of the 
other hexagrams so that that it is a “good symbol with pood” and 
“bad with bad.” Mercury was also a god of boundaries, so it would 
appear the role of this hex is to unite the other hexayrams to mark off 
and seal the protective circle, 

Fortuna Minor in the East is a unique addition to the magic 
circle. It stands for the setting Sun - the Sun as an old man. It is a 


NICK FARRELL 55 


symbol of the beginning of the night, the light shining in the dark. 
It is the beginning (Genesis counted the day beginning at Sunset) 
and the end, which makes it a good symbol for the start of a magic 
circle. The image of the old man works with the concept of this 
magic circle being Saturnian and marking the passage of time. The 
Sun, in any format, is always going to have some protective aspect 
against darkness, but in this case, it is the herald of night. The East 
is where the Sun rises, so this Geomantic symbol reverses that idea. 
Itis Time as the protector of order (Aion the Roman god of time was 
lion faced) and the continuation of everything that was. 


Drawing Geomantic symbols is a creative art. Traditionally 
they could be drawn by joining up the dots of a Geomantic figure 
differently. Geomantic figures do not have to be constructed using 
lines, they could use shapes and curls. Lines containing the dots 
could be drawn closer or further apart to make more geometrically 
balanced shapes. Golden Dawn members were shown a list of some 
of these Geomantic shapes, but this was only a starter kit so that the 
students were aware of the possibilities. 

Geomantic symbols are important because they represent 
planetary force manifesting in the earth. They bring down power to 
a level where the magican can directly use it. 

The Golden Dawn added to the symbols of this by placing the 
points of each triangle onto the Tree of Life. One of the missing 
parts of Golden Dawn teaching about the Lesser hexagram was 
the placement of the solar symbol in the centre. So far, I have only 
seen this solar symbol in the NISI documents which I published 
in Mather’s Last Secret*. lt might have been unique to the AO, but 
I doubt it, as NISI is early in AO history and did not deviate much 
from early Golden Dawn teaching. 

By doing this, Mathers provided an additional overlay of teaching 
which connected the triangles to the Tree of Life and showed how 
the planetary forces moved around Tiphareth. This enabled another 


* Farrell, N. (2011). Mathers’ Last Secret revised - the rituals and teachings of the 
Alpha et Omega: Rosicrucian Order of the Golden Dawn. 


56 


HELIOS UNBOUND 


Mathers’ innovation - the 
idea of creating a banishing 
and invoking aspect to the 
hexagram. If you wanted to 
remove a force, you drew the 
triangles anti-clockwise from 
the planetary point and if you 
wanted toinvoke you drew the 
towards the planetary symbol 
from the one before it. The 
second triangle is the mirror 
opposite of the first. This 


hexagram 
where the 


triangles were flipped. 

In the Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Hexagram, 
the use of banishing versions of the Geomantic 
symbols makes for an impressive symbolic system. 
Rather than providing a magical circle, which the 
invoking ritual would still do, the banishing breaks 

lown existing restrictions and structures. Rather 
chan allowing the constrictive, separate prisons of 
the double Carcer symbols, it removes barriers to 
change. Rather than setting boundaries or uniting, 
forces in the circle with the Conjunctio symbol it is 
breaking them down or destroying all connections. 
The banishing of the Sun at midnight is the removal 
of the element of time and the divine order. It makes 
the immediate environment chaotic. 

When you perform a magical act, you are 
creating a change in the status quo and challenging, 
the natural Saturnian forces, These energies will act 
to prevent the ritual’s intention from happening. 
Some of these limitations will exist in the magician, 
others from society and the natural flow of the 
universe. By making the space antagonistic to 
Saturnian inertia, you are giving your magic a 
chance. Do not forget that with this ritual you are 
creating Chaos which allows the universe to be 
reassembled in a new image. This means that for 
some types of magic a Lesser Banishing Hexagram 


does not applv to the fourth 


NICK FARRELL 57 


beforehand would not make sense. If you are trying to use magic to 
take control of an already chaotic situation, it would be unwise to 
banish Saturn because it will make matters worse. 

There is an added point which applies more when you have made 
magic your life. That is that continual attempts to change the universe or 
do anything significant creates a backlash from Saturnian forces which 
try to maintain the status quo. The myth of Saturn and Jupiter and the 
war of the Titans applies here. Ata certain point in your magical career, 
you will be a symbol for change and like Jupiter be a target for forces of 
inertia that insist that things stay the same. 

What is worrying is often you are unaware of it or might 
mistake the process for a spiritual test. First, you notice is that your 
magic does not work in the same way as it did, you might find it 
harder to meet your spiritual contacts or find yourself too tired to 
do magical work. It is similar to the inertia that someone has when 
starting magical work. However, unlike that stage of your personal 
development, forcing yourself to be more disciplined does not 
resolve the matter. 

While performing a daily Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Hexagram 
would help prevent this backlash before it becomes too crippling, 
you will always face this issue (it is part of the natural way the 
universe works), but at least it will not harm you as much. 

The Lesser Banishing Ritual of the Hexagram has less to do with its 
planetary attributions and more to do with the forces of Order and Chaos 
and creating the right circumstances for your magic to work, It deserves 
to be performed in most workings (after the first LRP) when the ritual 
requires some change to an existing order. It should be done regularly to 
counteract those forces of normality which restrict evolution. 


THE GREATER RITUAL OF THE HEXAGRAM 


The last Golden Dawn feature used in Helios Unbound is the Greater 
Ritual of the Hexagram which brings in focused planetary force into a 
ritual, The Golden Dawn made this ritual a little too elaborate and I 
have simplified it. In Helios Unbound, they are not needed that often 
and it is best to only draw one. 

The hexagram is based on the arrangement of the spheres on the 
Kabbalistic Tree of Life with each of the points representing one of 
the spheres. A hexagram is made up of two triangles. The triangle 
(point up) is made up of Saturn (Daath), Venus (Netzach) and 
Mercury (Hod). The Triangle pointing downwards is Moon (Yesod), 
and Mars (Geburah) and Jupiter (Chesed). The Sun (Tiphereth) is in 


58 HELIOS UNBOUND 


fh the centre. However, that association 
with the Tree of Life is less critical 
than the fact that there are six planets 
fon O 9| with the Sun in the centre. 
You invoke the force by starting on 
\/ the sphere immediately before the one 
©) you intend to invoke and draw your 
line clockwise towards it. If you wanted 
to involve Jupiter, you would start at 
© È Mars and move to Jupiter and continue 
to complete the triangle. Once you have 
finished the triangle where the planet 
you wish to invoke is found you then do 
the mirror opposite in the other triangle. 
In the above example, you would start your second triangle from Venus 
and go to Mercury. 
The issue is how you draw the solar hexagram. The GD produced 
the inelegant solution of making the person draw all six planetary 
hexagrams. Symbolically this is a mess as the six planetary energies 
do not add up to the Sun. The Sun is a unique energy and not the 
sum of the other planets. Instead, it is better to take the starting, point 
from the mid-points of the top of the lower triangle (before the point 
of the Abyss on the horizontal path of Gimel) and continue to Jupiter 
and complete the triangle. The second point should be started in the 
middle part of the path of Peh (before the veil of Paroketh on the 
path of Sahmek). You can see this in the above diagram. 

Once the hexagram has been drawn a solar symbol should be 
placed in its centre and the divine name of the god of the planet 
vibrated. Once this is completed the IAQ formula is conducted to 
call light onto the hexagram to charge it. 


HEADLESS ONE 
Those who follow Aleister Crowley will be familiar with his use 
of the Bornless One as part of his programme to contact his Holy 
Guardian Angel. It has long been assumed that Crowley adapted it 
from his reading of Charles Goodwin's 1852 A Fragment of a Graeco- 
Egyptian work upon Magic. Golden Dawn researcher Tony Fuller has 
confirmed that Crowley received it from Golden Dawn member 
Allan Bennett and then adapted it for his Thelemic cult. Bennett 
received it as a Golden Dawn adept where it had been adapted for 
that order by Samuel Mathers. It was recommended that the adept 
perform it daily. The Golden Dawn and Felkin’s Stella Matutina 


NICK FARRELL 59 


extensively used it. The Golden Dawn version was different from 
the original and Crowley's and depended on the image of the ankh 
cross to provide an elemental and ritual basis. 

The original ritual can be found in the Greek Magical Papyri 
and superficially appears to be a rite to invoke a being called 
Akephalos(Axégo.oz) to exorcise and drive out an evil spirit which 
is possessing a victim. Towards the end of the ritual the magician 
switches from simply invoking Akephalos to channelling the god. 
The Golden Dawn saw this as a form of self-exorcism, to allow the 
divine presence of Akephalos. 

What Mathers saw, which was unrecognised at the time, is 
that the rite was not just about exorcism and covers banishing, 
empowerment, and an invocation to the Higher Genius. The grade in 
which Mathers gave his version of the ritual out was one where the 
candidate was expected to meet and work with their Higher Genius 
after perfecting their personality (at least as much as possible). 
Mathers interpreted Akephalos as “Bornless” because the Hebrew 
word for “head” can also mean “start” or “beginning.” Something 
which has no head has no beginning or birth and is in a sense 
“bornless” and eternal. It is a nice theory, but denies Occam’s razor 
- the word was Greek and cannot be flipped into Hebrew to sound 
better. Jake Stratton-Kent points out that the ritual was correctly 
titled. Zhe Headless One, 

Fuller said in a private conversation that the title Headless Om 
was used by some Golden Dawn members and was mentioned in 
an annotation of the rituals by Dr. Carnegie Dickson. Dickson uses 
Kabbalistic terms to say that the “Headless One” is a T-shaped 
cross. This represents Malkuth or everything below Tiphareth. By 
pertorming, the ritual and using other higher-Grade material one 
enables the Headless One to recover its “Head,” or the Higher Genius 
which is separated by Daath, 

Once this “Head” is restored to the T Cross we have, of course, 
the Ankh. symbol ot the 774 and of the completed Adept of the 
Third Order. 

Elsewhere Dickson suggests that the “Head” (Vesica, Egg) is 
Xima, the Great Mother of the Headless, or Bornless One. The first 
“step” towards the restoration of Headless Son (Sun) and mother is 
entering, lFiphareth via the Door of Venus. 

The original identity of Akephalos is uncertain. The name is 
connected to áxcouot (akepfaloi, a-ke-fa-lee) who were spirits of 
the Dead who died a violent death, through accident or beheading 
(hence also called fiat (vee-e-ee), Btutoávarot (vee-e-o-tha-na-tee)). 


60 HELIOS UNBOUND 


This might suggest that 
Akephalos was a god of 
violent death. The fact 
that the ritual contains 
a word of power 
associated with Set or 
Typhon has led many 
modern magicians and 
academics to conclude 
that he was an aspect of 
the Egyptian God Set. 
However, David 
Frankfurter from Boston 
| University* has pointed 
out that Akephalos was 
a cypher for the god 
Osiris in his solar form 
which "clearly invokes 
f a form of Osiris —as a 
spirit, not as the august 
temple god we imagine 
Osiris to have been in 
places like Abydos. 


“The epit 
“headless [Akephalos]” seems to have been an esoteric p 
epithet for acclaiming a god's solar nature at a tin 
identification with the Sun was a form of ultimate glor 
for gods all around the Roman Empire.” 


Frankfurter points out though that in the Greek Magni 
Akephalos was an epithet that circulated amony, other gods a 
may even have spawned its own distinct innovation = the Akep! 
Theos (Axépahos Oróc). 

“Reivet Atheleverseth” which means “awesome and invisible 
god" is usually a term for Typhon but other scholars have suyyyyested 
that this description could also be used for other deities. 

The title cited as belonging to Set in the original spell could 
easily apply to any other god. The spell specifically says that the God 


Fairies, Demons, and Nature ‘Small Gods’ at the Margins of 
Christendom The Threat of the Headless Being: Constructing the Dem 
Christian Egypt. Palgrave Macmillan; 2017. 


NICK FARRELL 61 


was OSORONNOPHRIS which is a corruption of Osiris-Onophris 
which means "he who is good, he who is happy." 


THE HEADLESS OSIRIS 


Osiris married Isis, and they ruled Egypt together. but Set, Osiris's 
and Isis's brother, wanted to rule Egypt instead. He tricked Osiris 
to get into a coffin which he sealed and cast into the Nile drowning 
him. Set took the throne while Isis went looking for the body of her 
husband. 

When she found it, she returned home. Set found the body and 
hacked it into 14 pieces and scattered it down the Nile. The Ancient 
Egyptians considered that dismemberment of the body was the 
worst thing vou could do to someone. A dismembered body suffered 
a second death which prevented the person living in the afterlife. 
Death by beheading symbolically killed a human twice, which was 
why Set did it to Osiris. 

Isis, Nephthys and Anubis looked for the body parts, and Isis 
magically rebuilt Osiris’ body. Once the body had been rebuilt, 
Osiris existed as the King of the Underworld. The ancient Greeks 
and Romans loved this legend, and it became an essential feature 
of the Isis cult in Rome. Some elements of the faith appear to have 
found their way into Christianity. 

The idea of a headless god was a symbol of something which was 
impossibly alive, something which existed purely by the magic of 
Isis. By ides g With Osiris, a person could be magically restored 
into their divine self no matter how much a mess they had made of 
their life. Identifying Akephalos as Osiris links him much closer to 
the Higher Genius. Like the Higher Genius Osiris had lived on Earth, 
died, and was resurrected after passing through the underworld. 
Osiris stood for the chance of humanity to recognise its divine self 
and rise with the Sun god Re. 

New Kingdom magical texts such as the Amduat and the Book of 
Gates say Ra is within a dead soul. In them, he travels through the 
Duat and unites with Osiris to be reborn at dawn. Osiris enabled 
rebirth for the dead while renewing the Sun. With some meditation, 
the connection to Osiris, Re and the Higher Genius and the Lower Self 
becomes apparent. 


THE RITUAL 


This version of ritual is based on the original Greek Magical Papyri 
PGM V. 96-172 known as the Stele of Jeu the Hieroglyphist. An original 


62 HELIOS UNBOUND 
English literal text of this stele reads: 


Write the names to a new paper and extend (it) from the one side of 
your temple to the other side of your temple (side of the forehead). 
Face north saying the six names. 

Subject to me all the Demons, to be obedient to me every 
heavenly and ethereal and earthly and underground and of dry 
land and aquatic demon and every enchantment and scourge of 
the god. 

Grant me the god's powers of enchantment, or punishment. 
Compel all Demons to obey me, whether they are in the heavens, 
in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on dry land or in 
the swirling waters or the flashing fires. 


And the Dæmons are always obedient to vou. 
This is the beneficial sign: 


Icall you, the Headless, 

The creator of Earth and Heaven, 

The creator of night and day, 

You, the creator of light and darkness, 

You are Osoronofris, whom nobody has ever seen. 

You are lavas! You are lapos! 

You distinguished the just and the unjust. 

You created the female and the male. 

You showed the seed and the fruits. 

You created the men to love cach other and to hate each other. 
Iam Moses, your prophet who transmitted your mysteries which 
are accomplished in Israel. 

You showed the liquid and the dry and every food. 

Hear me! 

Tam the messenger of Pharo Osoronofris. 

This is your true name which was given to the prophets of Israel. 


Hear me. 


NICK FARRELL 63 


APBAOIAO PEIBET AQEAEBEPZHO APA BAAOA AABEY 
EBENÓOXI XITAEXTOH IB AQO IAQ 


(AR-VA-THEE-A-AW REE-VET A-THFE-LE-VER-S'ETH A-RA 
VLA-THA AL-VE-Y E-VEN-CHEE CHEE-TAS-GO-E EEV 
A-AWTH EE-A-AW) 


ARVATHIAO REIVET ATHELEVERSITH ARA VLATHA 
ALVETH EVENFCHI CHITASWOI IVAOTH IAO 


Hear me and turn away this Demon. 
Icall you with the empty spirit terrible and unseen god. 


APOTOTOPOBPAQ XOXOY MOAOPIQ DAAAPXAO OOO 


(A-RO-GO-GO-RO-VRA-AW SO-CHOO MO-DO-REE-AW FA- 
LAR-CHA-AW O-O-O) 


AROWOWOROVRAO SOCHOU MODORIO FALARCHAO 
000 


Holy Headless! Set him free from the Demon that keeps him. 


POYBPIAQ MAPI O4AM BAABNABAQO ALE AAQNAT A®NIAQ. 
IOQAHO ABPAXAZ AHOOY 


(ROO-VREE-A-AW MA-REE AW-THAM VA-AV-NA-VA-AWTH 
ASS A-THAW-NA-EE AF-NEE-A-AW EE-THAW-L'ETH A-VRA- 
SAKS A-'F-O-AW-Y) 


ROUVRIAO MARI ODAM VAAVNAVAOTH ASS ADONAI 
AFNIAO ITHOLITH AVRASACH AIOOI 


Powerful Headless! Set him free from the Demon that keeps him. 
MABAPPAIO IOHA KOOA AOOPHBAAQ ABPAQO 


(MA-VAR-RE-AW EE-O-E'L KO-THA A-THO-R'E-VA-LAW AV- 
RA-AWTIHT) 


MAVARRAIO IOIL KOTHA ATHORIVALO AVRAOTH 


Set him free/Release him, 
AQO ABPAQO BALYM IZAK LABAQO IAQ 


(A-AWTH AV-RA-AWTH VA-SYM EE-SAK SA-VA-AWTH EE- 
A-AW) 


AOTH AVRAOTH VASIM ISAK SAVAOTH IAO 


This is the Lord of the gods. 


64 HELIOS UNBOUND 


This is the Lord of the world. 

This is who the winds are afraid of. 

This is who created with the command of his voice everything 
himself. 

Lord! King! Master! Helper! 

Save my soul! 


TEOY MYP IOY IIYP IAOT IAHO IOOY ABPAXAZ EABPIAM OO 
YY EY OO YY AAQNAIE 


(EE-E-OO PYR EE-OO PYR EE-A-AWT EE-O-OO A-VRA-SAKS 
SAV-REE-AM O-O E-Y O-O Y-Y A-THAW-NE-E) 


TEOY PIR IOU PIR IAOT IAIO IOOI AVRASACH SAVRIAM 
OO II EL OO II ADONAIE 


Now, now, good messenger of the god. 

ANAAAA AAI TAIA ATIA AIAXANNA XOPYN 

(AN-LA-LA LA-EE GE-A A-PA DEE-A-CHAN-NA CHO-RYN) 
ANLALA LAI GAIA APA DIACHANNA CHORIN 


Iam the Headless Demon, having the sight in the feet. 
Iam the Powerful that has the immortal fire. 

Iam the Truth that hates the unfair acts done in the world. 
Iam the lighting and thunder. 

I am he who is the sweat storm of rain falling upon the Earth to 
fertilise. 

Iam he whose mouth is altogether burned. 

Iam the begetter and the destroyer. 

Tam the grace of the eternity. 

My name is heart girt with serpent. 

Come forth and follow. 


HELIOS UNBOUND VERSION 


There is nothing wrong with using, the literal PGM version, but the 
Helios Unbound version fuses most of the original but arranyyed into 
the Golden Dawn structure which fits into this book by supplying, 
links to the elements. I have also downplayed the words of power 
used for an exorcism and made the text a little less literal. The ritual 
is based on the ankh cross. The base of the ankh is attributed to the 
element of Air, the left arm is the element of Fire and the right arm is 
the element of Water. The element of Earth is at the intersection of the 
three elements, This forms the headless body of Osiris. 


NICK FARRELL 65 


The elements appear to be in an odd position, if you consider 
the normal direction of the elements. The way it was explained to 
me was that the Air element was the foundation of Yesod and the 
middle pillar of the Tree of Life. Because "back into the cross" your 
right hand was the sphere of Geburah and the pillar of Fire, while 
on the left hand to Chesed and the pillar of Water. This leaves the 
Earth quarter which has no function at all (some Golden Dawn 
manuscripts ignore it or just place it in the centre of the cross uniting 
the other three elements). 


| Headless 
\ Body of 
Ak \ Osiris 


HELIOS UNBOUND HEADLESS ONE 


The Greek Magical Papyrus requires a person to make a paper crown 
which is worn on the head during the ritual. On it you write 
AQO ABPAQO BAXYM ISAK XABAQO IAQ 
And this symbol underneath, 
It is not clear what the symbol means, but it might 
refer to the eyes of the Headless One. It is placed on the 
8 forehead. Stand and face north. Place the crown on your 
head and vibrate, 


AQO ABPAQO BALYM IZAK LABAQO IAQ 


(A-AWTH A-VRA-AWTH VA-SYM EE-SAK SA- 
VA-AWTH EE-A-AW)* 


* This is a corruption of BAOTH, SABAOTH, in the name of ISAAC's 
SABAOTH-IAO" and according to T. F. Raaion it is a scribal error which 
was repeated throughout the spell. Through some careful research Raaion 
reached the conclusion that it was supposed to start with a vowel string 
AIÈ AIOI EOLAE AE 10 OF AIEOYEYOAI EAI YO IAO IÓÉ OAY A 
YOYO and then the six word name of power CHABRACH PHNESCHER 
PHICHRO PHNYRO PHOCHO BOCH see Raaion, T. (2019). The Six Names. 
[online] Sublunar.space. Available at: https:/ /sublunar.space/2017-08-the- 
Six-names.html [Accessed 31 Jul. 2019]. It is a case of experimentation and 


66 HELIOS UNBOUND 
Then say, 


Grant me the god’s powers of enchantment, or punishment. 
Compel all Demons to obey me, whether they are in the heavens, 
in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on dry land or in 
the swirling waters or the flashing fire. 


Go to the East draw the Order pentagram * while vibrating 
PHILOTÉS (FEEL-OT-'ES) (buorn;) and draw a Spirit wheel & in 
the centre while vibrating Logos (Aoyoc). Draw the Chaos pentagram 
® vibrating NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) (Neixoc) and draw a Spirit wheel 
A in the centre while vibrating KHAOS (Xaoc). Draw the Earth 
Pentagram % vibrating the divine name PARAMAH. In the centre 
draw the sign of Taurus Ü and vibrate and HERA. Say, 


APBAOIAQ PEIBET AOEAEBEPEHO APA BAAOA AABEY 
EBENOXI XITAZTOH IB AQO IAQ IB AQO IAQ 


(AR-VA-THEE-A-AW REE-VET — A-THE-LE-VER-S'ETH 
A-RA VLA-THA AL-VE-Y E-VEN-PH-CHEE CHEE-TA-SGO-'E 
EEV A-AWTH EE-A-AW) 


Iinvoke, Akephalos - the Headless. 

The creator of Earth and Heaven. 

The creator of night and day. 

You created darkness and light. 

You are Osiris-Onophris who no man has ever yet seen. 
You are IAVAS and IAPOS. 

You separate the fair and the unfair. 

You created men and women. 

You revealed the secrets of seeds and fruit. 

You created humanity to love and to hate each other. 

I speak your will on Earth and channel your mysteries. 
You reveal the moist and the dry, 

the hot, the cold and provide all nourishment. 

Hear me, 

Iam the Angel of Pharaoh Onophris. 

And know your true names which you delight to hear. 


Hear me and grant me the god's powers of enchantment, or 
punishment. Compel all Demons to obey me, whether they are in 
the heavens, in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on 
dry land or in the swirling waters or the flashing fires. 


sticking to one which works for you. 


NICK FARRELL 67 


Go to the South draw the Order pentagram *¥ while vibrating 
PHILOTÉS (FEEL-OT-ES) (@u\otys) and draw a Spirit wheel 
G in the centre while vibrating Logos  (Aoyoc). Draw the Chaos 
pentagram 3t vibrating NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) (Nexos) and draw a 
Spirit wheel ® in the centre while vibrating KHAOS (Xaoc). Draw 
the Fire Pentagram * vibrating the divine name Zorothion. In the 
centre draw the sign of Leo & and vibrate and Hades and say, 


APOFOTOPOBPAO ZOXOY MOAOPIO ®AAAPXAQ OOO 


(A-RO-GO-GO-RO-VRA-AW SO-CHOO MO-DO-REE-AW 
FA-LAR-CHA-AW O-O-O) 


Hear me and turn away harmful Demons. This is your true 
name. Hear me and grant me the god's powers of enchantment, or 
punishment. Compel all Demons to obey me, whether they are in 
the heavens, in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on 
dry land or in the swirling waters or the flashing fires. 


Go to the West draw the Order pentagram X while vibrating 
PHILOTÉS (FEEL-OT-ES) (Woms) and draw a Spirit wheel 
Q in the centre while vibrating Logos (Aoyoc). Draw the Chaos 
pentagram i vibrating NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) (Netxoc) and draw a 
Spirit wheel & in the centre while vibrating KHAOS (Xaoc). Draw 
the Air pentagram vibrating the divine name Akramatha. In the 
ventre draw the sign of Aquarius * and vibrate and Zeus and say, 


POYBPIAO MAPI QAAM BAABNABAQO ALY AAQNAT 
ADNIAQ LOQAHO ABPAXAZ AHOOY 

(ROO-VREE-A-AW MA-REE AW-THAM VA-AV-NA-VA- 
AWTH ASS HO- E AF-NEF-A-AW EE-THAW-L'ETH 
A-VRA-SAKS A-'E-O-AW-Y) 


Hear me and turn away harmful Damons. Holy Headless 
One, hear me and grant me the god's powers of enchantment, or 
punishment. Compel all Damons to obey me, whether they are in 
the heavens, in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on 
dry land or in the swirling waters or the flashing fires. 


Go to the North draw the Order pentagram ** while vibrating 
PHILOTES (FEEL-OT-ES) (Duotng) and draw a Spirit wheel 

in the centre while vibrating Logos  (Aoyoc). Draw the Chaos 
pentagram :* vibrating NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) (Neog) and draw a 
Spirit wheel & in the centre while vibrating KHAOS (Xaoc). Draw 
the Water Pentagram % vibrating the divine name PERITON. In the 
centre draw the sign of Scorpio Ill and vibrate and Persephone. Say, 


68 HELIOS UNBOUND 


MABAPPAIO IOHA KOOA AOOPHBAAQ ABPAOO 
(MA-VAR-RE-AW EE-O-E'L KO-THA A-THO-R'E-VA-LAW 
AV-RA-AWTH) 


I call you with the empty spirit, for you are the terrible and 
unseen god. 

APOTOTOPOBPAO ZOXOY MO^OPIO DAAAPXAO OOO 

(A-RO-GO-GO-RO-VRA-AW SO-CHOO MO-DO-REE-AW 
FA-LAR-CHA-AW O-O-O) 


Holy Akephalos Set me free from Dæmons that restrain me. 


POYBPIA® MAPI QAAM BAABNABAOO ALY AAQNAI 
A@NIAQ IOQAHO ABPALAE AHOQY 

(ROO-VREE-A-AW MA-REE AW-THAM VA-AV-NA-VA- 
AWTH ASS A-THAW-NA-EE AF-NEE-A-AW EE-THAW-L'ETH 
A-VRA-SAKS A-'E-0O-AW-Y) 


Powerful Akephalos! Set me free from the Dæmons that 
restrain me. 


MABAPPAIO IOHA KOOA AQOPHBAAQ ABPAQO 
(MA-VAR-RE-AW EE-O-E'L KO-THA A-THO-R'E- 
:V-RA-AWTH) 


Setmefree.Hearmeandgrantmethe god's powers of enchantment, 
or punishment. Compel all Demons to obey me, whether they are in 
the heavens, in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on dry 
land or in the swirling waters or the flashing fires. 


A-LAW 


Go to the altar. Draw the Order pentagram = while vibrating 
PHILOTES (FEEL-OT- ES) (Poms) and draw a Spirit wheel ® in the 
centre while vibrating logos — (Aoyos). Draw the Chaos pentagram 8 
vibrating NEIKOS (NEE-KOS) (Ncxo:) and draw a Spirit wheel @ in the 
centre while vibrating KHAOS (Xux). Then say, 


TEOY HYP IOY TYP IAQT IAHO IOOY ABPALAE XABPIAM 
OO YY EY OO YY AAQNAIE 

(EE-E-OO PYR EE-OO PYR EE-A-AWT FE-A-b-AW 1-0-00 
AV-RA-SAKS SAV-REE-AM O-O Y-Y E-Y O-O Y-Y A-HHTAW-NI-E) 

Powerful Akephalos. Set me free and send away any Daemons 
that limit me. 

MABAPPAIO IOHA KOOA AOOPHBAA® ABPAQO 

(MA-VAR-RE-AW EE-O-E'L KO-THA A-THO-R'E-V A-LAW 
AV-RA-AWTH) 


NICK FARRELL 69 


Set me free and release me 
Go to tlie west and face East: 


AQO ABPAQO BAEYM IZAK EABAQO IAQ 
(A-AWTH A-VRA-AWTH VA-SYM EE-SAK SA-VA-AWTH 
EE-A-AW) 


Lord of the Gods, 

Lord of the Universe, 

You whom the winds fear. 

You made everything by the power of your words. 
Lord, King, Ruler, help empower and save my soul. 


IEOY MYP IOY IIYP IAQT IAHO IOOY ABPALAE EABPIAM 
00 YY EY OO YY AAONAIE 

(EE-E-OO PYR EE-OO PYR EE-A-AWT EE-A-'E-AW I-O-OO 
AV-RA-SAKS SAV-REE-AM O-O Y-Y E-Y O-O Y-Y A-THAW- 
NE-E) 

Now, now, good messenger of the god. Hear me and grant 
me the god's powers of enchantment, or punishment. Compel 
all Dzemons to obey me, whether they are in the heavens, in the 
aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on dry land or in the 
swirling waters or the flashing fires. 


Stand in the form of a cross with your head bowed 


ANAAAA AAT FATA ATIA AIAXANNA XOPYN 
(AN-LA-LA LA-EE GE-A A-PA DEE-A-CHAN-NA CHO-RYN) 


ause. Visualise yourself in space and slowly build yourself a body out 
of the galaxies, Remember not to give yourself a head. Then speaking as this 
god of the darkness of space say. 


I am the Demon Akephalos with sight in his feet. 

I am power who holds the immortal fire. 

I am Truth that hates the world's unfairness. 

I am lighting and thunder. 

I am he whose sweat is the rainstorm fertilising the Earth. 
I am he whose mouth is eternal fire. 

I create and destroy existence. 

I am the World's Beauty. 


Visualise the egg of creation surrounded by a snake. This is 
your own universe and creation. It is your heart. Now say, 


70 HELIOS UNBOUND 


My name is "HEART ENTWINED WITH A SERPENT" 

kapdia zepwzocpévn ógtv 

(KAR-DEE-A PE-REE-E-ZOS-ME-N'E O-FIN) 
Come forth and follow. For I have the powers of enchantment, or 
punishment. I compel all Demons to obey me, whether they are in 
the heavens, in the aether, on the Earth, or the underworld, or on 
dry land or in the swirling waters or the flashing fires. 

Vibrate IAÓ SABAOTH [seven times] 

TAQ ZABAQO 

(EE-A-AW SA-VA-AWTH) 


GODFORMS 


A magician sees gods differently from religion. The magician knows that 
gods are masks for divine forces. Magicians know them to be big and 
powerful, and activated by worship, but don’t often worship them as such. 

In his book, Witches Abroad, the fantasy writer Terry Pratchett 
put it well when he said: 


“Most witches don't believe in gods. They know that the gods 
exist, of course. They even deal with them occasionally. But they 
don't believe in them, They know them too well. It would be like 
believing in the postman.”* 


A magician respects the gods and will often admire them, but the rok 
of the relationship is different. The magician works with the yy 

This can be seen in the difference between a magical Invocation 
and a prayer. On the surface, they are similar. Both tend to start 
by saying how big and powerful the god is. For the follower, such 
statements are devotion. To quote Monty Python in their tilm [ic 
Meaning of Life: 

“Oh Lord, oooh you are so big. So absolutely h 

all really impressed down here, 1 can tell you. Hor; 


for this dreadful toadying and barefaced flatte ny. 
strong and, well, just so super. Fantastic, Amen.” 


ods. 


Gosh, w'r 
wus, O Lond. 
uL yon are so 


But for a magician, those devotional statements are simply aligning 
themselves to the mask which they are hoping to use in the ritual 
They are taking those divine titles and weaving them into the form 
of a god about themselves. 

A Priest in the Roman Catholic Eucharist rite will take the wafer 


* Pratchett, T. (2013). Wirches Abroad. London: Corgi. 


NICK FARRELL V1 


and wine and ask god to make them into the body and blood of 
Jesus. Compare that with the Golden Dawn Magical Eucharist where 
the "priest" takes on the godform of Osiris and does it himself. 


“Lam Osiris Onnophris who is found perfect before the gods. I 
hath said: These are the elements of my body perfected through 
suffering, glorified through trial. The scent of this dying rose is 
as the repressed sigh of my Suffering. This flame-red Fire as the 
energy of mine undaunted Will. The Cup of Wine is the pouring 
out of the blood of my heart, sacrificed unto regeneration, unto the 
newer life. This bread and salt are as the foundations of my body, 
which I destroy so that they may be renewed.” 


Ina magic ritual, the magician takes on the form of a god to do the 
work. Here is one technique 


GODFORM ASSUMPTION 


Shut your eves and relax and concentrate on your breathing. 

Visualise a small statue of a god or saint or angel which you are 
familiar with. See it as about 30 cm. 

In your mind's eve draw it to your groin centre or chakra. 

Now imagine vour personal divine light (which is a white 
sphere over vour head). This is vour slice of god which you carry 
around with vou. 

Imagine a line of light from that divine source send a line of 
white gold light down vou vour back and connect to the statue. 
Silently say the name of the god vou have visualised. 

See the statue breathe and come alive. 

With each in breath see energy come down that line of light into 
the statue and for it to get bigger 

. and bigger 

Until it has grown to just below your eyes, The statue's eyes are 
shut. 

With your mind reach out to the god form inside you connecting 
with that ancient divine force. 

Now allow your consciousness to enter the statue, so you 
become the god. 

Open vour eyes and see the world as the god sees it. 

You are the god looking through the eyes of a human. 

Now shut your eyes again. Thank the god for taking part and 
withdraw from the statue 

See the white light withdraw from the statue and see it begin to 
shrink. 


72 HELIOS UNBOUND 


And shrink. 
Until it becomes a tiny dot. 
Now open your eyes as a human again. 


The practical use of this experiment is to take on the god's powers in 
a ritual. So that when the magician wants something it is not them 
who is asking, but the god itself. 

After all a human is too small in the scale of the universe to 
make anything happen outside their sphere of control. As a god, the 
magician has the power to negotiate with other gods, or beings. 

Throughout the Greek Magical Papyri we find this technique 
used. The magician says things like: "It is not me who does this but 
the god who does this." "It is not Nick Farrell who orders vou to 
change the orbit of the Sun, but it is Helios the god of the Sun who 
orders this." 

Something you will have realised from your little experiment is 
that while you might have felt the power of the being vou invoked 
into your aura, there was nothing in this technique which could be 
remotely called worship. 

The priest of any religion would say that what you had just done 
was heresy. You are not supposed to USE the god, you are supposed 
to reverentially worship it at a distance and, if you are lucky, that 
god might not smite you, or may give you a blessing, But the truth of 
the matter is that by using that technique, the magician can stand in 
sacred space as the god and re-negotiate creation. 

Sometimes a magician might use one god to order another 
about. You have a paradox - the magician acknowledges the gods 
and their power and yet at the same time is directing, them in the 
same way that someone might turn a stage light onto an actor. 

When a magician uses these divine forces, he or she does 
not care which is the right religion. Instead of taking, a Richard 
Dawkins’ approach saying all religions are wrong, and god does 
not exist, the magician says all religions are in some measure true 
and all gods exist*. 


PLOTINUS' THEURGIC GODFORM 
VISUALISATION TECHNIQUE 


What follows is an ancient theurgic visualisation method. devised 
by the Neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus. I have modernised it and 
addeda few things to make it more practical. It shows a link between 


* I should point out that there is less proof of the existence of Richard 
Dawkins than there is for many Gods. 


NICK FARRELL 73 


our techniques and those of antiquity. 

Place a statue or picture of the god on the altar with a tealight 
before it. Perform a lesser invoking pentagram ritual. Purify and 
consecrate (see later). Light a candle and invoke the god using the 
normal method. 

Visualise yourself as being in a crystal ball with the night's sky 
reflected in it. 

Then visualise yourself as being within that universe. You 
should see planets, stars and know that this is your universe. You 
are a soul at the centre of the shining universe. 

Vibrate the word IAO which calls down the light into your 
universe. As you vibrate it, allow the universe to fade and melt into 
the light. The mass of the universe dissolves. 

Now invite the god into your universe. Not as something small 
but as something which fills the whole sphere. Chant its name or 
proper barbarous name of power until it can be seen and felt within 
your sphere. 

Then you can communicate with the being. When you have 
finished, open vour eves focusing on the statue or picture and be 
aware that the god is with you in your Sphere of Sensation. 

Close with the Greek Cross. 


PATHWORKING 


Pathworking is a visualisation exercise where the person listens to 
story, either on tape or read to them. During the process, they notice 
what symbols or events they see presented symbols and listen to 
what entities say to them. These must be done in a relaxed state so 
that the person can obtain the most significant impact. At its most 
basic, pathworking is a journey through the magician's Spliere of 
Sensation and is training tor more in-depth methods of so-called 
astral projection. 

Pathworking, is the magical use of imagination and has been a 
magical tool since the shamanic period of human history. Some of 
the written descriptions of magical events are literal descriptions of 
pathworkings. 

Mythological journeys to the underworld are pathworkings. 
The Greek poet Homer wrote a vivid description of a magical 
underworld rite where Odysseus journeys to a magical spot, does a 
ritual and then pathworks a meeting with the dead. 

Pathworking can be a mixed bag. Some of pathworkings are 


74 HELIOS UNBOUND 


barely controlled daydreams, but others speak truths about us 
which are more powerful and direct than any oracle or dream. 
Others allow us to interact with divine powers. Unfortunately, 
magic has an issue about separating the sheep from the goats when 
it comes to pathworking. How was it possible to know if you were 
compensating for your poor relationship with your mother in a 
vision, or have met a spirit which wants you to be the new Messiah 
for its new religion?* 

Ifan 18th-century magician dreamt of being attacked by a black 
dog while defending a girl, they would think the dog was the Dog- 
Star, and the girl must be Virgo. In the 20th century, a psychologist 
would ask “who is the dreamer, and what do they understand by 
those symbols?” While the symbolic approach would supply a 
thought-provoking and esoteric response, the psychological model 
would give a more practical answer. 

As I wrote in my book, Magical Imagination, pathworking has 
become more flexible thanks partly to work carried out in the 1970s 
by psychological researchers. By partially applying the psychological 
model to pathworking, we can see that some of what we imagine is 
driven by the desires and wishes of the Løwer Self. Sometimes this can be 
useful, particularly when we are trying to understand our unconscious 
desires, but magically they are less appealing. 

The psychological model started to make an impact on mayic 
in the 1930s, It had champions such as Dion Fortune, Paul Case, 
and Israel Regardie. To them, and modern magicians, it supplied an 
explanation of occult processes of the mind. It was especially pood 
at pinpointing those processes which stood in the way of successtul 
living and magical attainment. 

When doing a ritual and something happens, it is vital to rule out 
any psychological quirks as influencing the working, Divine beings 
rarely say what we want to hear. If spirits tell you that you are the new 
Messiah or the prophet of a New Acon, then it is more likely to be your 
ego doing the talking. You might have visions of a past lite where vou 
were a high Tibetan Lama or High Priest of Atlantis. But, if vou are a 
sad alcoholic while failing to convince others of your superiority, vour 
pathworkings are projecting a desire for success to an imaginary time, 


* If any spirit tells you that you are Messiah, or wants you to form a new 
religion you must ignore and banish it. A surprising number of experienced 
magicians fall for what is a low level astral trick from an entity which wants 
to inflate their ego. Greek legends say that you can only become a god atter 
you are dead and if you want to become a prophet you should seek a non- 
magical path. 


NICK FARRELL 75 


As the 20th century magician W.E. Butler pointed out, a modern 
psychologist would see some of the experiences of Christian saints 
as neurotic complexes often based on sexual repression. 

The psychological approach supplied an excellent explanation 
of the processes that a student suffers during the beginning of their 
training. Teachers with some understanding of what their students 
were dealing with could help them overcome psychological issues 
which might have been misidentified as magical visions. As 
psychologists started to enter in the magical arena and define or 
dismiss all magical experiences in psychological terms, they undid 
essential parts of magic. Magical spirits, contacts, gods suddenly 
became complexes. The complex, and problematic, work of 
mediation with divine entities was written off as a form of elaborate 
talking to yourself. 

Writing off all occult experiences as subjective and, open 
to psychological interpretation is dangerous. A psychologically 
minded occultist can become a narcissistic basket case rather than 
having a tempered ego. If everything is “all in your head,” esoteric 
experiences are just a nihilistic horror, perception is everything, and 
nothing exists outside your mind. 

There is another issue to do with boundaries. Psychologists have 
recently started to comment on the Celestial, which is well above the 
astral, which is their area of expertise. It has crossed the line of being 
helptul and become something to be discouraged. If occultists do 
not believe spiritual experiences with spirits, angels and gods are 
real, they will not have any. 


THE INNER TEMPLE 


An extension of the pathworking technique is the inner temple. This 
is an inner landscape which is built by the magician and used as a 
halfway house to enable spirits to come down the levels. This book uses 
an inner temple desiyn based on a rose cross and helps the realisation 
of the Higher Gentis. Itis a representative of your Sphere of Sensation and 
anything, which happens within that temple is happening within you. 

Once it is built, it is projected onto your physical space and 
rolled up again when you have finished. If you get good at this, you 
should feel that your physical space is much bigger. 

This inner temple is not based on a real physical counterpart, 
although it could be Greco-Roman. It is four chapels united in the 
centre by your Higher Genius. When you start working on this level, 
you will use the following pathworking and description. It might be 
a good idea to place it on tape. 


76 HELIOS UNBOUND 


PATHWORKING 


Sit comfortably and begin your four-fold breathing. After a few 
moments visualise a large door with the image of a lion's head, in 
gold in the centre. Touch the lion's head. 

The door swings open and you enter to find yourself standing in 
a silvery mist. The mist slowly clears, and you find yourself looking 
at a large Roman temple like the Pantheon. The portico is made of 
seven pillars and on the front lintel is the phrase 


TO XAOX EITIAIOKEI TO F'NQOI XAYTON. 
To Chaos epidiokei to gnothi sauton. 


[TO CHA-OS E-PEE-DEE-AW-KEE TO GNO-THEE SAF-TON] 
Which means "Chaos seeks to know itself." 


Before the steps, there is an altar of burning incense and on the left 
isa fountain of water. Consecrate yourself in the incense smoke and 
wash yourself in the fountain of purification. 

Walk up the seven steps of the temple to enter in the lead doors 
whichareinthenorth. The door swingsshutbehind you and, as vour eves 
adjust, you find yourself standing looking at a giant statue of Hera made 
ot Hack obsidian The statue is standing on a cubic altar. Ten golden 

lamps illuminate 
the room and the 
walls are lined 
with frescoes 
of birds, plants 
and animals and 
mountain — scenes. 
The images ar 
Ww unusual because, 
rather than looking 
natural, they seem 
stylised with perfect 
proportions. It is as 
if the artist tried to 
perfect nature. 
Straight ahead 
there is another 
door which you go 
to and enter. 
You blink 


Tyne Temte 


NICK FARRELL TT 


at the brightness. There is an oculus in the room's domed ceiling. 
Sunlight streams downward from the dome onto a golden statue of 
Aion. Beneath the dome, there are seven windows of violet, indigo, 
blue, green, yellow, orange, and red. And then there are 16 windows 
(four in each quarter) beneath them. 

The massive statue of lion-headed Aion is standing on a double 
cubic altar and around him is carved a huge five petalled rose. It has been 
designed to look as if he has emerged froman unfolded rose. He is holding 
a key in his left hand and a staff in his right. A large serpent coils up his 
body. 

A few feet back from the walls are statues of six planetary gods: 
Jupiter, Mars, Saturn, Venus, Hekate, and Mercury all carved to look 
as if they are worshipping the solar force within. 

On your right side is a door. You open it and find yourself in 
the Water temple of Kore. In the centre is her statue. From a vase 
she is holding pours water into a pool. The walls are decorated with 
images of water creatures both from nature and myth. The room 
feels cool. It is lit from a line of blue stained-glass windows which 
surround the temple on three sides. 

You leave and go to the right. This takes you to the South and 
the temple of Fire. The walls of this temple are carved as if they were 
made from lava and it is illuminated by large triangular windows 
of red stained-glass. In the centre is a statue of Pluto emerging fron 
flames. 

Go back to the centre of the temple and your right, behind the 
statue of Saturn, is a door leading to the East. 

This temple is rooted with glass and the walls are painted with 
clouds and sky as if you were in the heavens. There are frescoes of 
the gods of Olympus sitting on the clouds. 

In the centre is a statue of Zeus Euanemos (giver of gentle 
breezes) enthroned and holding a staff, and a lightning bolt. 

Return to the centre and project this room onto your physical 
space so that anything that happens here happens there and as 
above so below. 


THE SUN BREATH 


The Sun breath is an Ancient Egyptian technique which found its 
way into the so-called Mithras initiation in the PGM. There is enough 
evidence to suggest the idea was commonplace, and it is not difficult 
to work out. The effects should be to energise yourself and awaken 
yourself with the same energy used by your Higher Self. Initially, you 
should try it out during a Sunny day where you can see the Sun. Later 


78 HELIOS UNBOUND 


you can just visualise the Sun being above you. 

Sit comfortably and regulate your breathing. Breathe in through 
your nostrils while counting to four, hold your breath for two and 
then breathe out through your mouth. When you have the pattern 
regular enough allow yourself to draw down the light of the Sun 
into your lungs following the same rhythm. When vou are confident 
in doing this, use the 4,2 rhythm and draw the Sunlight to your feet. 
When you breathe out, allow the energy to come up your spine 
and out of your mouth. Do this for ten breaths and then repeat the 
process with your groin centre. Ten breaths and then your solar 
plexus centre. Ten breaths and then your heart centre. Ten breaths 
and your throat centre. Then ten breaths and your brow centre. 

You should see all the centres linked by yellow solar light. Focus 
on your feet centre, breath in and draw the light up your spine to 
your crown centre vibrate [AO and see golden light shower through 
your Spliere of Sensation. Do these six times. 


CHAPTER TWO 
THE FIRST MONTH 

THE MYSTERIES OF PURIFICATION 
AND CONSECRATION 


Each chapter will begin with an outline of the work to be conducted 
that month. It will then provide details of the rituals you follow, and 
the teaching involved with those processes. 


RITUAL WORK FOR THIS MONTH 


Each day vou will perform the invocation to the Sun daily at the 
correct time. However, for one of the sessions, you will carry out 
much longer ritual work. You can select whatever session you wish 
to make vour ^main ritual working". Theonly thing you will change 
is the praver to the Sun which vou will use. If you are doing your 
main ritual in the morning. use the dawn invocation where the 
ceremony calls for the invocation to the Sun. 

You will perform the Prima Materia whenever you get a spare 
moment and at least once a day. 


Week One (first seven days) 

Pertorm the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram, 

l'orform the Sun breath for five minutes. 

Journey to the Inner Temple. 

Recite the invocation to the Sun. 

Perform the confession. 

Perform the Oath ritual and the descent into Hades ritual. 
Perform the binding, ritual. 

Pertorm the spell to become a magician. 

Meditate on your work and write it up. 


Week Two 

Wash your hands and face using the purification prayer (you can do 
this in your bathroom). 

In your Temple, Perform the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram. 

Perform the Sun breath for five minutes. 

Journey to the Inner Temple 

Recite the appropriate invocation to the Sun. 


80 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Perform the confession. : 
Assume the godform of Nephthys and perform the purification 
ritual. 

Having purified the space, go East and say, 


I who am Nephthys purify the Sphere of Sensation of [your 
name] so that it is a fit vehicle for his/her Higher Genius. Let the 
unbalanced forces flee from my purity. 


Meditate on your weaknesses leaving vou. 
Perform the spell to become a magician. 


Week Three 

Wash your hands and face using the purification prayer (you can do 
this in your bathroom). 

In your Temple Perform the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram. 

Perform the Sun breath for five minutes. 

Journey to the Inner Temple. 

Recite the invocation to the Sun. 

Perform the confession. g 

Assume the godform of Isis and perform the consecration ritual. 
Having purified the space go East and say, 


Iwho am Isis consecrate the Sphere of Sensation of [your name] so 
that it is a fit vehicle for his/her Higher Genius. I burn out the dross. 
Let the unbalanced forces flee from my purity. 


Meditate on your weaknesses leaving vou. 
Perform the spell to become a magician. 


Week four 

Wash your hands and face using the purification praver (vou can do 
this in your bathroom). 

In your Temple Perform the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram, 

Perform the Sun breath for five minutes. 

Journey to the Inner Temple 

Recite the appropriate invocation to the Sun. 

Perform the confession. 

Assume the godform of Nephthys and perform the purification 
ritual. 

Having purified the space go East and sav, 

I who am Nephthys purify the Sphere of Sensation of [your 
name] so that it is a fit vehicle for his/her Higher Genius. Let the 
unbalanced forces flee from my purity. 


NICK FARRELL 81 


Invoke and assume the godform of Isis and perform the consecration 
ritual. 


Having consecrated the space go East and say, 


I who am Isis consecrate the Sphere of Sensation of [your name] 
so that it is a fit vehicle for his/her Higher Genius. I burn out the 
dross. Let the unbalanced forces flee from my purity. 


Meditate on your weaknesses leaving you. 
Perform the spell to become a magician. 


here was a fundamental belief in the Ancient World that 

it was impossible to approach a god because they were 

too holy. There were legends such as that of Semele who 

made Zeus promise on the River Styx to grant her anything 
she wanted. She then demanded that Zeus reveal himself in all his 
glory as proof of his divinity. When he did, she was "consumed in 
lightning-ignited flame." Proclus explained it as being to do with 
holiness. A god could not get close to a human because of divine 
contamination, which was why the gods used a network of Demons 
to act as messengers. Purification techniques gave you the ability to 
ascend to heavenly realms the closer you were to a god-like state the 
less matter had a grip on you. 

There is a slight problem with this concept. Firstly, while it is 
fair enough that gods should be huge power sources, it does no 
make sense that they cannot go near matter. The whole idea of à 
Higher Genius indwelling in vour body suggests divine force can 
indwell matter. The Higher Genius is a god, and when you meet it in 
all its glory, it can be equally as blinding. The concept that the gods 
were in the heavens, while we were down here has been disproved. 
As the Soviets dryly pointed out, God is not in heaven because the 
cosmonauts went up there and did not see him. What has replaced 
the idea is the concept that gods and heavens are within a dimension 
which is parallel to this one and the universe is an outward expression 
of internal divine consciousness. All the holiness that melted Semele 
was within her, just on a slightly different frequency. 

When looking at purity, it is vital to consider its opposite - 
impurity. Throughout human existence, impurity has been the 
obsession of organised religion. It mostly sought to define impurity 
in terms of breaking social codes or religious rules. Usually, religion 
makes matters worse by making humans feel guilty for sins that they 
do not commit. Religion can make a good person believe they are 


82 HELIOS UNBOUND 


going to suffer divine punishment for wanting sex, loving another 
human, or desiring bacon. However, what is a sin in one religion can 
be a requirement in others; what one culture finds offensive is fine 
for another. It is impossible to define spiritual impurity in terms of 
religious or social norms. 

Judaism, which is famous for its laws and requirements, has an 
excellent concept of real "spiritual impurity" in its idea of Tumah. 
Tumah is not a sin, but rather an ‘absence of holiness.’ Kabbalists 
consider holiness a form of life, vitality, or spirituality. The opposite 
of it is a dead body or someone not performing actions that are 
disconnected from the One Thing. Purification is the act of making 
an object holy rather than purging or punishing.. 

Purity is still essential. We still live in a dimension which is 
ordered and fixed and we must loosen our mindset to see these 
other dimensions. If you look at all the techniques connected to 
purification, they are symbolic of losing those shackles and creating 
a death-like experience. In death, the Higher Genius, no longer bound 
by its earthly existence, tunes out of the world of matter and retreats 
into the hidden dimensions. Death has purified it enough to move 
on. With the rare exception of the Ancient Egyptians*, this is the 
esoteric reason why societies do their best to quickly get the dead 

sody back to its components to enable this final purification. 

Purification is an emblematic attunement to the spiritual forces 
we wish to contact and a symbolic death to our ordered world. The 
traditional methods of confession, purification, consecration and 
attunementstill are highly effective means of tuning, out of the material 
world, even if the central philosophy behind them has changed. 


OATHS 


There is a proper place for the fear-nsprring and for fear to sit 
high in the soul as its overseer: 1t is benefictal to learn good sense 
under the pressure of distress. 


What man that does not at all nourish lus heart on fear - or what 
community of men, it makes no difference - will still recere Justice? 


Aeschylus, Fumenides 517-25 2 


* Egyptian magical technology was such that the body was simultaneously 
purified and acted as an anchor for a Higher Genius to return to earth if it 
wished to commune with family members. Rougher societies removed this 
nicety by burying the body or burning it. 


NICK FARRELL 83 


In your first working of Helios Unbound, you are required to swear 
an oath and make a personal sacrifice to the process. When I use the 
word "oath", I am referring to the Roman word Sacramentum which 
is an oath or vow “given to the gods." Sacramentum was pledged as 
a sacred bond and could be lost upon the oath's violation. However, 
Sacramentum was an essential part of a Roman consecration. 

Oneof the reasons why magic does not work is because a person 
has not understood what they must sacrifice. In different systems of 
magic, there is the concept of sacrifice - of giving something up to 
achieve a desire or receive something from the gods. Usually, this is 
symbolic; a person killed an animal or poured wine into a trench to 
give something up to achieve a goal. 

The victim could be a universe that vou are desperately grasping. 
Say vou have a problematic relationship with a person, and you 
were always fighting. One day vou both worked out this was self- 
destructive and ended it. You find vourself alone and do a ritual to 
find a new partner. Nothing happens. The answer might be that the 
old destructive relationship is still in vour life. You cannot ask the 
gods to create vou a new universe with a new partner until you have 
a space to put a new person inside it. 

This idea of “having space! to roll out the new universe is vital. 
When the creator gods of magic unfold vour new shiny universe, 
there must be holes cut inside the design for all the things you want 
to remain, After all, if vou invoke for a new job, you do not want 
vour relationship to pack in. or vour dog to vanish overnight, The 
problem is that if something in vour lite is central and antagonistic 
to your goal remains, then the new universe will end up like the old 
one. 

While the creation of a new universe is one idea, with its own 
setot gods, we must ask the important question “what happened to 
the old one?” and what needs to be chopped out of my universe to 
make this work? 

This god ot sacritice is a variation of one of the many underworld 
death gods within religion. They are Satan, Set, Baron LaCross, 
Ly phon, Pluto, Dis Pater and Saturn, Before any creation ritual, they 
must be unleashed onto your existing universe, removing those 
things which stand in the way of what you want. 

Attempting to hold on toa large chunk of your universe while at 
the same time hanging onto your old one is impossible. One change 
should create other dramatic ones and when you do your invocation, 
you unconsciously know what you need to sacrifice. 

The concept of taking an oath is a form of sacrifice where the 


84 HELIOS UNBOUND 


"victim" is the person making it. They can be seen as dying so that 
they can become something more. Making the oath is narrowing 
their life and promising not to do something so that they can be 
more than human. 

This idea of making a commitment and a sacrifice of yourself 
has been a feature of magic since the dawn of time. In ancient 
societies, without the aid of police forces, order depended on people 
keeping their word. If an individual's word were broken, then the 
order would collapse. The gods in charge of oaths were the scariest, 
because the penalty for breaking an oath was high. Some ancient 
societies considered a broken oath equal to waging war on the gods. 

In taking an oath, one called down a conditional curse on oneself 
which takes effect if one lies or broke a promise. 

According to Hesiod in his Works and Days: 


“Whoever wilfully swears a false oath, telling a lie in his testimony. 
he himself is incurably hurt at the same time as he harms Justice, 
and in after times his family is left more obscure, whereas the 
‘family of the man who keeps his oath is better in after times.” 


Anoathisa way of binding chaos and making it ordered. It is creating 
a new universe and setting the rules by which the new universe 
is bound. Making an oath is building a reality where you agree to 
do a certain amount of work in return for a universe where your 
Higher Genius is part of your conscious existence. Breaking, that oath 
will, therefore, send this universe back into the chaos from which 
was created, and you will have to start from scratch. The oath gods 
such as Orcus and Stix were chaotic because if the oath were broken 
the reality which had been created by that oath was automatically 
destroyed and it takes such a god to destroy it.. 

In masonic-style magic orders, such as the Order of the Golden 
Dawn, oaths were a dull thing if you read it out loud and included 
many clauses that are almost legalistic in their phraseology. Strangely, 
it is common for candidates to say in the post-mortems afterwards 
that it was at this point they felt the most. The oath is an act of the 
Lower Self submitting to the Higher. Lower Self which draws down the 
Higher Self to take part. An Oath is being made to your Higher Self and 
not the group which is facilitating and witnessing the spiritual event. 

Oaths are the basis for the grimoire tradition of pacts. In that 
you have agreed with a being to create a new universe together. The 
understanding is that if either one of you backs down and breaks 


* Hesiod. and Cooke, T. (1743). The Works of Hesiod. London: Printed for T. 
Longman 


NICK FARRELL 85 


the oath, they will suffer in some way. It is unlikely that breaking 
an oath might make a demon suffer, but it is likely to obey the pact 
because it depends in part on an ordered universe held together by 
oaths to carry out its work. 

The God of Oaths being used in this book is the Roman God 
Orcus. Orcus was Etruscan and depicted as a bearded giant, and 
sometimes confused with Hades. He was so powerful that the 
Church in Spain had to prohibit the use of his name in oaths as late 
as the eighth century. 

The Greek Dæmon Horkos (Opxos) was a similar being - he was 
the personification of the curse inflicted on any person who breaks 
their oath. Oaths with Orcus acting as a witness are made with the 
understanding that he will act as an enforcer if something goes wrong. 

In this operation, fear is not the motivator for you to keep your oath. 
There are many stories about the horrors that await those who break 
oaths or fail in the Abramelin process, but Orcus is not going to make 
your life a misery because you did not complete the Helios Unbound 
system. He might cause your regular habits to collapse or the work to fail 
(if you continue it). You cannot talk your way out of breaking your oath, 
Orcus will decide if it was intentionally broken and act accordingly. If 
you were hospitalised or could not continue because you were unwell 
Orcus is not going to be an arse about it. However, if you could not face 
your practice. because you 
stayed up all night playing, 
computer games and slept 
until 3 pm he might think 
that is against the oath. 

The oath is made on 
the symbol of the supernal 
triangle which represents 
the highest that the 
magician can aspire. You 
place your right hand on 
the symbol when you make 
the oath and your left hand 
in a bowl of spring water 
which represents the river 
Styx (Exoj). (All Gods were 
required to make their 
oaths on the waters of the 
river Styx). 


86 HELIOS UNBOUND 


THE OATH 
I invoke you who protects the boundaries between life and death, 
darkness and light. 

I call you who keeps away the living and draws the dead into 
his enclosure. Mighty Orcus, king of the shades stand witness to 
this pact between my Higher Genius and me. For I stand between 
the light and darkness, by the banks of the River Styx so that my 
Genius shall stand before the Holy and Secret Triad of the One 
Thing. 

(Place your left hand in the water and your right on the triad. 
Visualise Orcus standing before you) 

In the name of the One Thing 

I (your full name) spiritually commit myself to this magical 
process to contact my Higher Genius and open myself to the 
changes that it will require for me to be a perfect vessel for it to 
manifest through me. 

I swear to do all the exercises involved in this process and to 
see it to its conclusion no matter what darkness is revealed to test 
me. 

I will allow myself to dissolve into the Chaos of what was 
before my birth so that I might be reborn as a more useful vessel 
for my Higher Genius. 

Iwill perform all practical work concealed and apart from the 
gaze of the outer and uninitiated world. 

I will, from this day forward, apply myself to the Great Work, 
which is to purifv and exalt mv spiritual nature so that with the 

Divine aid I may at length 

Dótwp) attain to be more than human, 

and thus gradually raise and 

unite myself to my Higher and 
Divine Genius. 

I will not abuse the great 
magical power entrusted to me 
but will always serve humanity. 
x As my Higher Genius sees the 
unity of humanity, so I too 
shall see all as an expression 
of the One Thing and will not 
discriminate due to gender, 
sexual preference, colour, 
religion or nationality. 


Divine triad of Father, Hekate and Logos 
(based on the Chaldean Oracles) 


NICK FARRELL 87 


In return, my Higher Genius will work with me during this 
process, teach me magic, and how to serve the supernal triad better. 
It shall assist me in this trial and bring me the experiences I need. 

And if I break this oath, I open myself to a wave of Chaotic 
force which will undo all I have done, end any pacts I have made 
and cause my Higher Genius to withdraw. Thus, I will have failed 
in this work and lost the magic I sought to obtain. 

With this Oath, the sky quivers, the Earth quakes before me, 
for Iam a magician, I possess magic. 


THE DESCENT INTO CHAOS 


This follows the oath and represents the descent into chaos, which 
starts the process. Like the concept of the harrowing of hell, it 
invokes Typhon to begin the process of breaking down old and 
outworn ideas in the candidate's sphere of sensation, which will be 
the main feature of the first month of work. 

Ituses the God Ty phon (pictured), who wasa formof chaos which 
nearly overthrew Zeus. In Egypt, he was considered like Set, the 
Egyptian God of Sandstorms who murdered Osiris. In this process, 
they are used to remove blocks and complexes which prevent the 

igher Genius awakening in the magician. It works because humanity 
is essentially a being of chaos which is living in an ordered universe. 
By helping to revert part of the sphere of sensation to its origina’ 
chaotic state, Typhon opens 
the way for a stronger 
ordered universe. The ritual 
is based on a Greco-Egyptian 
Papyrus PGM IV. 154 

Place some incense on 
the burner and say 


Mighty Typhon; 
sceptre-bearing almighty 
power and sovereign, god 
of gods; Lord ABEPAMEN 


EAY OQONEMAPEBA- 
AV-ER-A-MEN 
THAW-OO-LER-THE 
XA-NA-XETH-RE-LY-O 
AWTH-NE MA-RE-VA 


88 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Disturber of the dark, bringer of thunder, sender of storms, 
lighting flasher of the night! You are the one who exhaled the cold 
and the heat. Stone-shaker, wall-breaker earth-quaker, boiler of 
the waters. You are the one who stirs the depths to motion, 


IQ EPBHT AY TAYI MHNI 
E-AW ER-V'ET AY TAY-EE M'E-NEE 


Iam he who searched the world to find the great Osiris, whom 
I brought you bound. I am he who together with you allied with 
the gods (others say against the gods); I am he who shut heaven's 
double door and put to sleep the unseen serpent, who at the edge 
of you kingdom, stopped the sea, the streams, and the flowing 
rivers, But, as your soldier, I was defeated by the gods and was 
cast face down on account of empty wrath. Awaken me, I beseech 
you, I implore you, friend; do not leave me here cast upon the 
earth, Oh lord of gods: 


AEMINAEBAPOOEPPEOOPABEANIMEA 
AE-MEE-NA-E-VAR-AWTH-ER-RETH-AW-R A-VE-AN- 
EEM-EA 


Return me into your world of chaos, break down that which 

itands in the way of unity with my Higher Genius. Fill me with 
power, I beg you, grant me this grace, that whenever I call upon 
any one of the gods, they come to me swiftly and appear visibly 
before me. 
Sit down and set your timer for 20 minutes, Visualise betore vou a 
door opening into the chaotic underworld, Do not think of traditional 
associations here but see it as a universe of pure chaos, with the 
occasional form popping into existence. Step through the door and 
slowly allow yourself to merge with the chaos, Lhe goal the moment 
is to allow your self to feel what chaos is like. Fach time you has 
a thought let it pass through vou. Do not hold onto any thouyhit or 
concept of yourself. Breathing slowly, just let any stress pass into the 
chaotic field allowing you to relax further. You are aiminy, to reach 
a point where the Sphere of Sensation stops generating, material and 
slows. After a while you will start to feel chaos field starting to tug 
at the ordered structures on the outer part of your Sphere of Sensation 
As this happens, thoughts connected to some of your more active 
complexes will start to arise. These are the complexes which will 
be being tugged at by Typhon for destruction or at least looking at. 
Note them. 


NICK FARRELL 89 


When the timer sounds, will yourself to step back into the door. 
Return to your body and say, 


Iam a being of chaos, operating in a world of order. 
Iam clothed in the elements. 

Iam crowned with Spirit. 

The heat in my body is a fire. 

Ihave air in my lungs. 

Ihave water in my mouth and blood. 

The weight of my bones is the earth. 


The sky quivers, the Earth quakes before me, for I am a 
magician, I possess magic. 


In the universe we have created for ourselves, we usually fail in some 
way. It is not, as some religions would have us believe, because we 
are sinful and lured from the path because of some devil or another. 
It is because we have lost sight of who we are in the cosmic scheme of 
things. Magic offers a philosophy that we can find our true destiny and 
work towards it. To do that, we have to recognise the mistakes of the 
pastand rededicate ourselves to our destiny. 

This process is called ‘purification and dedication’ and is 
represented by the elements of water and fire. Purification is the 
removal of everything, that stands in the way of us becoming who we 
are meant to be, while consecration is the dedication of ourselves to 
poal, In magic. objects are also purified and consecrated 
but for now the tocus is the magician. 


our correct 


CONFESSION 


The concept of contessiny sins” is not a Christian process, but 
like many things was borrowed from the Pagan mystery cults. The 
practice can be seen in Ancient Babylon, and in Greece, where 
everyone was required to make secret confessions to the priest, if 
they wanted to be admitted, or initiated, into the “mysteries” of 
their religion. [he mysteries were so high, heavenly and holy, that 
no man with yuilt lying on his conscience, and sin unpurged, could 
be initiated to them. The Gods themselves would be furious if a 
person who had guilt on their shoulders were given the secrets 
of the mysteries. We can see the negative confession of sin in the 
Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead, where the soul tells the Demons in 
the Judgement Hall of Maat that he has not committed one of 42 sins. 


90 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The difference between the Christian and Pagan idea of a "sin 
to be confessed" is marked. A Pagan sin was a transgression against 
the gods or performing acts which makes one feels guilty. There is 
no concept of "all have sinned and fall short of the Glory of God" 
and no original sin which needed to be forgiven or vou will face an 
eternity of hell. 

Redemption was a Pagan concept with several Pagan gods having 
Sotara (savour) in their titles. From the first century before Christ 
onwards the idea of divine help to "save" a person became increasingly 
important. Pauline Christianity was one of many redemptive cults 
which sprang up at the time with the basic idea that we were trapped 
by an earthy nature and needed to be liberated from it. 

Admitting sin, or acts which held you to the earth, allowed a 
spiritual force to liberate you. Stating your sin out loud, generally 
to another person, bought it out into the open so that it could be 
purified or forgiven by a god. 

In the Helios Unbound process, confession is almost used 
psychologically to identify and remove those weaknesses which 
prevent the Higher Genius manifesting. Sin is defined as a self- 
destructive personality flaw which is contrary to the life direction 
intended for the Higher Self. For example, someone who is unable 
to form a proper relationship with another human but instinctively 
pushes them away, a person who shirks responsibly, a racist or 
sexist is unlikely to be a good vehicle for a Higher Genius, The first 
stage of any process is realising that you are doing, it and confession 
is a technique which brings it into focus so that it can be transmuted 
into something more useful. 

When a confession takes place in a ritual space, something 
curious happens. Psychically, a small dark force emerges trom 
the magician’s Sphere of Sensation and is pushed out of the sacred 
space. The purification and consecration of that space keeps the 
darkness dislodged enough for the magician to yet a handle on it 
and understand it better. 

Aleister Crowley wrote a good, if very Christian, conlession ritual 
for his self-initiation system* which went: 

Yea! but I am a Fool, a Flutterer! 

lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 

Tama Liar and a Sorcerer. 

Lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 


* LIBER DCLXXI vel PYRAMIDOS A Ritual of Self Initiation based upon the 
Formula of the Neophyte By Aleister Crowley 


NICK FARRELL 91 


lam so fickle that 1 scorn the Bridle. 
lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Tam unchaste, voluptuous and idle. 
lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Iam a Bully and a Tyrant crass, 

lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Tamas dull and as stubborn as an Ass, 
Tam under the Shadow of the \Vings! 
lam untrusty, cruel and insane, 

Lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lama Fool and frivolous and vain. 
lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lam a Weakling and a Coward: 1 cringe, 
lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lama Catamite and Cunnilinge. 

lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lama Glutton, a besotted Wight: 

Lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lama Satyr and a Sodomite. 

Tam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Lam as changeful and selfish as the Sea, 
Lum under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lama Thing of vice and vanity. 

Lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Tam most violent, and 1 vacillate, 

Tam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Tama blind Man and emasculate. 

Tam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lam a raging Hire of \Wrath no wiser! 
Tam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lam a Blackguard. Spendthrift and a Miser. 
Tam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Tam obscure and devious and null. 
Lam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
Tam ungenerous and base and dull, 
Fam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lam not marked with the white Flame of Breath. 
Jam under the Shadow of the Wings! 
lam a traitor! Die the traitor's death! 


Notice that there is a statement where the Lower Self announces 
that they hold a sin and then they place them under the Shadow of 
the Wings of Divinity. This is a call for divine protection. The only 


92 HELIOS UNBOUND 


weakness in the prayer is that it calls upon you to confess to sins you 
did not commit or are only sins in Crowley’s repressed Christian 
world (sorry Crowley, cunnilingus is not a sin). 

It is far better for a person to sit down and work out their list 
of sins and what they feel guilty about. By doing so, they not only 
understand their weaknesses but will start to work out why they act 
this way. Setting aside time to find a list of the things you recognise 
are self-defeating practices and then using them in a regular ritual 
becomes a powerful tool of purification. 

Make a list of 20 weak points in your personality. If you can't 

think of more than 10 then add "I am self-deluded” to the list. 

Start the confession with a general invocation to the Sun: 


Hail, O Lord, Great Power, Great Might, King, Greatest of 
gods, Helios, the Lord of heaven and earth, God of gods: mighty is 
your breath; mighty is your strength, oh Lord. Mighty Saviour who 
redeems your fragments cast into Earth. Absolve and dissolve my 
weaknesses. 


Write them down and at the end of them say the line “I am under thi 
shadow of the wings of Helios." 
In other words: 


I am unable to speak the truth; 1 am under the shadow of the 

wings of Helios. 

1 pick the wrong friends; I am under the shadow of the wings of 

Helios. 

1 need to be loved by others; 1 am under shadow of the wings of 

Helios. 

You end the prayer with the following: 

O Lord, while being born again, | am passing away; while 
growing and having grown. | am dying; while being, born from a 
life-generating birth, I am passing on, released to death- as you 
have forgiven, as you have decreed, and have established the 
mystery. Iam PHEROYRA MIOYRI. [EE-ROY-RA MI -OY-RI] 


An additional visualisation which will help the process is to 
visualise a door to the chaos realm in front of vou. Allow the door to 
swing open and see the chaotic space. As vou say each line of vour 
confession visualise yourself casting a shadow from your Sphere of 
Sensation through the door and into the chaotic space. Watch as it is 
dissolved into Chaos. After you have chanted PHEROYRA MIOYRI 
shut the door. 

Purification and consecration of the circle must always follow 


NICK FARRELL 93 


the confession. 

The confession's goal is to change the weakness into something 
more useful. Christianity says that even if you believe you have been 
forgiven you are going to have to repent of your actions, or go the 
opposite way. Just confessing we are idiots rarely makes us Einstein. 
As we state our weaknesses before the gods, we attempt to discover 
why we do such self-destructive acts. During the meditation which 
follows a purification and consecration, we must pick one of our 
sins to examine. We look at when we first started acting this way 
and our motivations for doing so. A person who hates homosexuals 
might not have come to terms with their own sexuality. A person 
who beats their partner might have bottled in anger against their 
parents. 

Just as the law or society does not accept such excuses for bad 
behaviour, vour Higher Genius does not either. 

There is no harm about talking about the issues that are dredged 
up during a confession process with a psychologist or counsellor. 


PURIFICATION 

In magic, we ritually clear out the Sphere of Sensation. The closest 
thing to this in organised religion is a baptism where a person is 
held under water and then born anew, usually struggling with 
water in their nose. The magician uses the symbol of water to do 
this, without the need to sneeze. 

Take a large glass and fill it to about halfway. You will notice 
that the water stays where it is put. You will see that it cools the 
glass. If vou knock the glass, after rippling a bit still returns to its 
> to transforming some of those ‘moths’ 
in the Sphere of sensation. In the glass, we are seeing what a perfect 
Sphere of Sensation looks like - it is a clear vessel for the One Thing. 
When it is troubled, it swiftly reverts to its calm still state. 

This is neither possible nor desirable because there are symbols 
in our Sphere of Sensation that we want. If we purified ourselves too 
much, we would lose what makes us unique and human. 

We use the symbol of water because it removes those things 
that we do not want and replaces them with the serene calm of 
the element. We settle those astral moths by becoming calm about 
them. We are not hard on ourselves about our ‘sins’ but we seek 
to transform them one by one until they are useful. We become 
tranquil. A purification is a form of self-exorcism. 

Water is an important symbol which is associated with death 
and putrefaction. Water is primarily cool, which is the active quality 


glass shape. This is the cl 


94 HELIOS UNBOUND 


that binds things together and allows formation and nourishment of 
composite entities. When water evaporates from a bodv, its absence 
causes decomposition. The ancients thought that the moistness 
of water permits the dissolution of structure and the loss of form. 
Water allows the growth and development of form. 

Water was known as the Tears of Persephone and united the 
Earth and Air elements. Indeed, she is the daughter of Demeter 
(Earth) and Zeus (Air) and gets her power to unite (Cool) from 
Demeter and Her power to transform (Moist) from Zeus. So, she 
has the power to join that which is above with that which is below. 
In the Greco-Egyptian tradition, Persephone was associated with 
the Egyptian goddess Nephthys, who was sometimes called 'Black 
Isis.’ Her name means ‘throne,’ and her symbol was a small cup on 
her head, based on the hieroglyph of her name. She was connected 
to the putrification of the body after death. She and her sister Isis 
were instrumental in the resurrection of Osiris and have a similar 
function in the work that we are doing. 


MAKING "HOLY WATER" 
Holy water is used for purifying people or spaces. It works by 
removing negative energy from the area or objects. It does this 
because it is a symbol of death, transition or the original chaotic 
waters. 
Buy some still mineral water 
Fill a bowl with the water and 
| place iton the table top before vou. 
Draw a Lesser Banishing Pentagram 
& and say, 


Creature of Water, I exorcise 
thee and cleanse thee for my 
purpose. 

Draw a lesser Invoking 
Pentagram © over it and say, 


Creature of Water, you are 
now the waters of the Primal 
: —— Chaos. May you reflect the face 
i ui of the One Thing, which moved 
upon the face of the waters of 
Chaos. 


Visualise a golden hexagram 
Nephthys in the centre of the water. Then, in 


NICK FARRELL 95 


your mind's eye, see it boil with white light. Chant the name 

IAQ (Ee-Ah-Aw) 

Visualising the letters in the water until you feel that itis pure. If you 
need to purify yourself, see your Sphere of Sensation as being dark. Dip 
your finger in the water and draw a Greek Cross on yourself. See your 
Sphere of Sensation get more transparent and brighter, then draw an equal- 
armed cross on your forehead and say, 

“I purify with water." 


PURIFYING RITUAL SPACE 
Whenever you carry out a purification, you should always adopt 
the godform of Persephone-Nephthys and hold it throughout the 
process. You do this by invoking her first. 

She is visualised as a beautiful woman in a blue and orange 
robe with a blue cup. She has a headdress with a small cup on her 


head. 
INVOCATION 


I invoke thee, oh Stolistes of the sacred mysteries, 

Come forth, Nephthys, and purify me so that I shall be cleansed. 
Pour the waters of life through my sphere of sensation 

that I may be pure and enter the holy of holies. 

Make me like unto thee, 

a manifestation of the highe: 
Still the stormy waters of my s 
that I might be a perfect image 

of the One Thing. 

Let me drink from thy chalice 

which are the living waters of eternal life. 
Let the dark storm clouds that fill my soul 
be washed away by thy power. 


st 


Assume the Godform of Persephone-Nephthys and go East 

Dip vour fingers in the water and draw an equal-armed cross 
in the air. Go to the south, west and north and do the same thing in 
each. Return to the east, hold the glass on high and say, 


“I purify with water." 


RITUAL ABLUTION 


Before beginning any working, you must first wash your hands and 
face saying the following. 


96 HELIOS UNBOUND 


May you abolish my defilement, 

Oh waters, may you wash my errant Demons. 
Wash the face of Horus, Rub the face of Seth, 
Wash the face of Neith. 

Rub the face of her spinners. 

Loosened my restrictions through Horus, 
Opened are my limits through Seth. 

My impurity is gone. 

My purity is the purity of the divine triad. 
Ishall not fall on some evil obstacle. 

Iam pure. 


CONSECRATION 


Consecration is the term which is used to describe the setting aside of 
something to make it holy. It is an act by which a thing is separated 
from its mundane and profane use and dedicated to magical use. 
Usually, this is done by fire, which is a symbol of the consecration 
process. Fire burns away the dross and converts it into Spirit. Fire 
rises to the heavens, where it becomes the essence of the stars and 
lightning. 

The ancients believed that before a soul can ascend through 
the spheres, Fire must purify it. Fire burns away the transient and 
imperfect, thereby freeing the soul and immortalising it. The Orphic 
tradition believes that if you entered the underworld you would be 
purified in the Earth's Fiery Womb in preparation for rebirth. The 
Zoroastrians believed that a Hero was the one who can make the 
perilous Hero's Journey and survive an ordeal by Fire and molten 
metal. 

Fire has the power of discrimination but because of its dry nature 
it is inflexible. It is similar to a person's will power, which sees its 
purpose and cannot be swayed from it. Ancient elemental theory 
stated that Fire actively imposes a determinate form on things, and 
represents the creative impulse. 

Fire was an integral part of the Promethean myth. To the Ancient 
Greeks Prometheus wasa chaotic being which created us (and became 
later associated with Lucifer). Prometheus created humans by mixing 
Earth and Water to create the gross body; Athena breathed Air into 
it, imbuing it with a Spirit-Soul. Prometheus added the Higher Soul, 
which is the Fire that he took from the Wheel of the Sun and brought 
to humanity in a Narthéx (giant fennel) stalk. When we use fire ina 
ritual it is a symbol of our divine origins. 


NICK FARRELL 97 


The Promethean myth shows us that consecration is a primary 
agent of transformation because it creates a self-determining form. 
It effectively breathes life into it. It takes the dead and chaotic form 
created by water and transmutes it to something more spiritual and 
alive. 

For this reason, consecration followed purification. Once you 
had made something as holy as possible, you set it aside for the 
fire which was a representation of spirit. However, it was a process. 
Fire consecration, usually with incense on red hot coals, is seen as a 
replacement for animal, or even human, sacrifice. Burning creates a 
sacrifice. When incense is sacrificed, symbolicaly the flame and the 
smoke rise to heaven. 

Consecration is a sacrifice, by dedicating ourselves or an object we 
are removing it from its mundane purpose, but this very act ensures that 
it becomes holy and pure. Consecration enables vou to set aside space 
so that it becomes practically useful for magical ritual work. It “sets the 
space or object on fire.” It raises its energy so that it becomes connected 
with the force you want to work with. 

Thus, if a magician walks around a temple with incense, they 
have dedicated that space to the gods and the purpose of their ritual. 
By the nature of its sacrifice. lower astral creatures, ghosts and 
other similar beings cannot enter because, like the Lesser Ritual of 


the Pentagram, consecration lifts - 
the vibration of the area which 
prevents lower astral beings from y 
entering. i 

Yau must select. the right J 
incense. This is partly because ) 
the smell will assist. in opening / 
your senses to subtle influences 
and partly because cach one has 
a specitic planetary attribution 
which can intensify your work. 


Frankincense is one of the best 5* 
general-purpose incenses. It is / 
dedicated to theSun and therefore É 
works well in most rituals. Myrrh yy 


is dedicated to the Moon and 
is therefore good at working 
at the lower astral levels. It is 
also effective when mixed with 
frankincense for healing work 


Isis 


98 HELIOS UNBOUND 


because it makes the Sphere of Sensation easier to manipulate. 

The ancient Egyptians used an incense called kyphi, which 
was made ritually over a long period of time. It had some twenty 
ingredients in it which were magically supposed to do something. 
Alas, we don't know exactly what, but it makes for one of my 
favourite incenses and creates a thick ritual atmosphere. 

This system uses specific incenses for the planets which are 
based on those mentioned in the Greek Magical Papyri. 

Frankincense (Sun), Myrrh (Moon), Storax (Saturn), Indian 
Nard (Venus), Cinnamon (Mercury), Saussurea Costus (Mars) and 
Cinnamomum Tamala (Indian Bay Leaf) Jupiter. These may sound 
exotic but they can be found on Ebay or some herb shops. 

On an hour of the planet draw a banishing pentagram over it % 
and say, 

Creature of Earth I banish thee of all impurity so that you will 
be a perfect sacrifice to [god]. 

Place your hand over the incense and draw an invoking, 
pentagram % and say, 


WET NEBET NEFRIT WEB-IT-ET DED-IT PIT QE-MET TE ÍN- 
NET HOPI NE-HET NETER IM? You are every good and pure thing 
that the Sky gives, the Earth creates, the inundation brings, on 
which the god lives. 


“he thicker the incense smoke in a temple room, the better, This is 
because in a room full of thick smoke it is easier to ‘see’ things. One 
magical technique, called getting a spirit to physical manitestation, 
involves calling a spirit into a triangle of the art which has so many 
incense burners around it that it is possible to see the spirit in the 
smoke. Some theories are that the spirit can use the special planetary- 
tuned smoke to build its physical body. It is more likely that the 
heavy smoke and the intense ritual make it easier for the participants 
to project the image of the spirit upon it. In my experience, people 
seeing physical manifestations all see something, different, which 
would not be possible if the creature had built a body out of smoke. 


SELF-CONSECRATION 


Light the charcoal and place the incense on it. When it is burning, 
draw a cross the same as a Greek Cross in your Sphere of Sensation. 
Then draw an upward-pointing triangle, which is a symbol of fire, 


* This is Ancient Egyptian and is pronounced as it is written. 


NICK FARRELL 99 


starting at the top which would be midway between your eyes, 
going towards your left hip, then your right hip, then returning to 
your forehead. Holding the incense on high, say, 


Iconsecrate with fire. 


CONSECRATION OF SPACE 


If you wish to purify a space before your working, take the incense 
to the east. Draw the fire triangle with the burning incense, from the 
tip downwards as before, in the air. Go to the south, west and north 
and do the same thing in each. Return to the east, hold the incense 
on high and say, 


Iconsecrate with fire. 


GODFORM WORKING 


Whenever vou carry outa consecration, vou should always adopt the 
godform ot Isis and hold it throughout the process. She is visualised 
as à beautiful woman in a red robe with an incense burner and a 
vulture's headdress. Before talking on the godform you should look 
to the west and say the following Invocation. 


INVOCATION 


l invoke thee, oh Dadouchos of the sacred mysteries. 
Come forth, Isis, and consecrate me with fire 

so that the desire for Adonai shall eat me up 

and that through my sacrifice I shall be made whole, 
that my life shall be set aside from the mortal inclination, 
and that I shall walk the path of magic. 

Consecrate this sphere of sensation, 

So that it may be a holy abode of the mysteries. 
Make me like unto thee, 

a manifestation of the highest. 

A perfect image of the One Thing. 

Let me burn with desire for the One 

and be a spark of infinity. 


PRAYERS TO THE SUN 


These prayersto theSunat different parts of the day form the backbone 
of the Helios Unbound process. They are taken from PGM where they 


100 HELIOS UNBOUND 


were a single prayer* and expanded to provide some more meaning. 
You should start each day by waking up and washing your hands 

and face (preferably saying the ablution prayer) and then face the Sun. 

Ideally, you should see the Sun when you make the invocation. 


MORNING PRAYER TO THE SUN 


I invoke You, the Greatest God, Eternal Lord, World Ruler, who 
are over the World and under the World, Mighty Ruler of the Sea, 
rising at Dawn, shining from the East for the Whole World. Come 
to me, You Who Rise from the Four Winds, benevolent and lucky 
Agathos Demon, for whom Heaven has become the Processional 
Way. 

I call upon Your Holy and Great and Hidden Names which 
You rejoice to hear. 

HAPIIENKNYGI ['EAR-PEN-KNY-FEE] 

BPINTANTENO®PI [VRI-NTA- -NO-FREE] 

BPIZEYAMAX [VREES-KSYL-MAS] 

APOYPZOPBOPOBA [AR-OOR-ZORV-ORO-VA| 

MEXINTPIGI [MES-EEN-TREE-FEE] 

NIITTOYMI [NIP-TOO-MEE] 

EMOYMMAO®! [KS-MOOM-MAO-FEE] 

‘he Earth flourished when You shone forth, and the Plants became 
fruitful when you laughed; the Animals begat their Young when 
You allowed. 

Awaken to me Higher Genius so that I may be an awakened 
participant in my own life. 

And be a specialised Channel for you and your Power. 

Give Glory and Honour and Favour and Fortune and Power to me 
as I am purified and consecrated to your purpose. 

I invoke You, Shining Helios, giving Light throughout the Whole 
World. You are the Great Serpent, Leader of all the Gods, who 
control the Beginning of the World and the End of the all that is: I 
awaken thee into my life with the secret names of power. 


PSOI VOI [PSEE] 
PHNOUTHI @NOYOI [F-NOO-THEE] 


NINOEP [NIN-THER] 
You are He who becomes Visible in my life. 


* PGM IV.1600-1715 


NICK FARRELL 101 


Iinvoke you in the First Hour where you have the form of a cat 
@APAKOYNHO [FA-RA-KOO-N'ETH] because you are reborn 
each day. Teach me to be independent and to watch so that I act at 
theright time 

In the second Hour You have the Form of a Dog Your Name is 
XOYOI. [SOO-FEE] For you are my loyal protector. Teach me 
strength and honour. 

In the Third Hour You have the Form of a Serpent your name is 
AMEKPANEBEXEO OQYQ |AM-EK-RA-NEV-ECH-EO THAW-Y- 
AW] For you are the creative life immortal life force. Teach me to 
heal and continually renew my life. 

In the Fourth Hour You have the Form of a Scarab, your name 
is SENTHENIPS XENOENIY [SEN-THE-NEEPS|, for you are a 
symbol of the heavenly cycle. Teach me how to use these cycles to 
transform bodies and souls. 

In the fifth Hour You have the Form of a Donkey your name is 
ENDAN NOY®|EN-FAN CHOOF]. For you provide the power and 
destruction of the world. Teach me how to weld the powers of the 
sandstorm. 

For the sky quivers, the Earth quakes before me, 

for Lam a magician, I possess magic. 


NOON PRAYER TO THE SUN 


Hash your hands (preterably saying the ablution prayer) and then face the 
Sun af possible) 


You God of Life, you Lord of Love, All men live when you shine. 
You are the crowned King of the Gods. 

The goddess ISIS embraces you, 

and enfolds you in all seasons. 

You the King of Truth, the Lord of Eternity, 

The Prince of Everlastingness, 

You Sovereign of all Gods, 

You God of Life, you Creator of Eternity, 

You Maker of Heaven. 

All the Gods rejoice at your rising. 

Giver of all life, 

The Earth rejoices when it sees your golden rays. 
People who have been long dead 

come forward with cries of joy 

to behold your beauties every day. 


102 HELIOS UNBOUND 


You go forth each day over Heaven and Earth*. 

In the sixth Hour You have the Form of a Lion; Your Name is BAI 
EOABAI [VAEE SOLVAEE], the Ruler of Time. Teach me the power 
of leadership and give me confidence to speak your will. 

In the seventh Hour You have the Form of a Goat; Your Name 
is OYMELO2O [0O-MES-THAWTH]. Teach me how to use my 
sexual power wisely. 

In the eighth Hour You have the Form of a Bull; Your Name is 
AIATIOH (DEEA-TEE-F'E| because everyone can see you. Grant 
me passion, power and strength to fulfil my destiny. 

In the Ninth Hour You have the Form of a Falcon; Your Name is 
@HOYE 000YO [F'E-00S FAW-OOTH|, the Lotus Emerged from 
the Abyss. Teach me how to live as a being of chaos in a world of 
order. 

In the tenth Hour You have the Form of a Baboon; Your Name is 
BEZBYKI [VES VYKEE| because of your raw intelligence. Teach 
me to be as clever as Thoth 

Inthe 11th Hour You have the Form of an Ibis; Your Name is MOY 
POO [MOO RAWF| because you bring the word of the Logos to 
Farth. 

In the 12th Hour You have the Form of a Crocodile; Your Name is 
AEPOOH [AER-THO- ʻE] as you prepare to enter the underworld 
and chaos. Protect me as I enter the unknown. 

For the sky quivers, the Earth quakes before me, 

for I am a magician, I possess magic. 


EVENING PRAYER TO THE SUN 
Wash your hands (preferably saying the ablution prayer) and then go and 
face the Sun. This should be done etther at Sunset or before you go to bed 


You who have set at Evening as an Old Man, who are over the 
World and under the World, Mighty Ruler of the Sea, hear my 
Voice in this Present Day, in this Night, in these Holy Hours. Hail 
to you setting Sun, 

Self-made you fashioned your body, 

Creator uncreated. 

Descending into chaos and the unknown, 

Sole one, unique one, who traverses eternity. 

Remote one, with millions under his care; 


* This prayer is taken from the wall of the 900 BCE tomb of Shepenmut: 
priestess of Thebes and then added to the last part of PGM IV.1600-1715 


NICK FARRELL 103 


Your splendour is heaven's splendour, 
Your colour brighter than its hues. 

Ina brief day you race 

Hundreds of thousands, millions of miles. 
A moment is each day to you, 

It has passed when you go down. 

You completed the hours of night, 

You order it without pause in your labour. 
Through you do all eyes see, 

When you stir to rise at dawn, 

Your brightness opens the eyes of the masses; 
When you set in the western mountain, 
They sleep as in the state of death." 
Awaken to me. 


KMH® AOYOEOYO [KM'EF LOO-THE-OOTH] 

OP®OIXE [OR-FOI-CHE] 

OPTIAIBEXOYX [OR-TEE-LEE-VE-CHOOCH] 

IEPXE POYM [EF-ER-CHE ROOM] 

IHEPITAQ YAI PER-EET-A-AW YAEE] 
I conjure Farth and Heaven and Light and Darkness and the Great 
God who created All, XAPOYXIN [SA-ROO-SEEN]. 
You, Agathon Damon the Helper awaken to me and transform my 
life. 
For the sky quivers, the Earth quakes before me, 
for I am a magician and I have magic. 


SPELL TO BECOME A MAGICIAN: 


This is an ancient Egyptian spell which is designed to turn someone 
into à magician. It was carved into the wall of the Great Pyramid. 


I invoke you who are among the nobles of Atum. 

I have come to you, so you respect me in proportion to what you 
know. 

Iam he whom the One made 

Before the sky and Earth came into being, 

When he was alone in the darkness, 

And spoke the words of creation and magic; 

When his myriads of spirits protected his companions, 

He spoke with Khepri the Sun, 


* CT Spell 261. Middle Kingdom. After Faulkner. 


104 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Making him more powerful; 

He took authoritative utterance upon his mouth. 

Iam the son of She who bore Atum, 

Iprotect what the One created, 

Iam he who caused the Ennead to live, 

My name is ‘If-I-wish-I-do’, 

Iam the father of the Gods. My standard is high. 

The gods are endowed by the commands of the eldest, 
Following the command of She who bore Atum, 

Ikeep silence, I acknowledge the Higher. 

Icome into the presence of the Bulls of the Sky, 

I sit among them. 

My name is the ‘Greatest of the Dæmons." 

Iam the heir of Atum. 

I have come to take possession of my throne 

And that I may receive dignity and fulfil my destiny, 
Which belonged to me before you had come into being, 
You Gods; acknowledge me, 

For [insert name] is a noble magician. 


THE MAGIC OF THE PRIMA MATERIA 


CONVERSING WITH YOUR GUARDIAN 
DAMON 


“You will discover for yourself the truth of what E say. if. without 
waiting to behold the outward and visible forms of the gods. you 
are content to behold their works; and with these before yon, to 
worship and honour the Divine authors of them.” 

Socrates 


It has been one of the most basic mistakes amongst the occultists 
to reject the material world in favour of a more spiritual approach 
The assumption of spiritual ascent implies a rejection of the material 
world and yet we will be born into the material world, and it is our 
primary mission for at least the 70 or 80 years that we are put on 
Earth. If it was the duty of every magician to rush to the throne 
of God, then one has to question why you were born at all? The 
implication that the Earth is evil, and that humanity must escape its 
clutches implies a great heresy - that the One Thing makes mistakes, 

The Golden Dawn made the spiritual experience of the 
Kingdom (Malkuth) that of knowledge and conversation with vour 
Holy Guardian Angel. This experience was only attainable, according 
to the Abramelin system, through an arduous process like what vou 


NICK FARRELL 105 


are undergoing in this book. It seemed strange to me that something 
indicative of real spiritual progress was so low on the kabbalistic 
tree of life. However, after working on this material, it started to 
make sense. There were two forces which Abramelin had fused 
the "Guardian Angel or Dæmon” and the Higher Genius into one. 
The Higher Genius was vour Divine Self while Guardian Angel was 
a Dæmon of nature that had been sent to guide you through your 
material destiny. 

The Greek philosopher Socrates pioneered this understanding 
of this being which he called his Demonion (a “divine something"). 
The difference of Dæmon in spelling is important - it is a neuter 
gender of the word. Obtaining knowledge and conversation with the 
Damonion was not indicative of spiritual attainment but something 
natural which he learned as a child. It appeared in fortuitous events; 
its function was to forewarn or to check in matters not so much of 
right and wrong as safety, expediency, or of good fortune. It was not 
the voice of conscience, which many have thought because it did not 
appear to have anything to do with moral choices. Some believed the 
Damonion was a quick exercise of judgment, based on knowledge 
and experience without consciousness of the process. However, that 
was hardly available to Socrates as a child. Others have thought that 
it was his divine sell which in this book we call the Divine Genius. 
However, its action was too inflexible and limited. The consciousness 
of the Divine Genius is much more transcendental. 

In Plato's Apology 31e, Socrates says: “I have a Demonion from the 
god. It began when | was a child, It is a voice, and it turns me away 
from something, | am about to do whenever it speaks. It never turns 
me towards any thiny, It is what has prevented me from taking part in 
politics, and I think it was quite right to stop me. Be sure, gentlemen 
of the jury, 1 should have died long ago otherwise.” 

In the Republic, Socrates suggests thathis Dæmonion enabled him to 
become a true philosopher. This statement puzzled many philosophy 
students because the Damonion does not offer any spiritual insight, 
but only tells Socrates not to do things and warns him. 

In the Euthydemus, Socrates says: “I happened to be sitting alone 
in the place in the dressing room of the Lycaeum, and | thought I 
would leave. When I got up, the Demonion, came and I sat down.’ 
Soon after Euthydemus and his companions arrived. ^ 

In the Theaetetus, he says that the Demonion stops him talking to 
some people and not others. 

In the Phaedrus, Socrates is quoted as saying: “When I was about 
to cross the river, the Damonion restrained me. I seemed to hear a 


106 HELIOS UNBOUND 


certain voice, which did not allow me to proceed until I should have 
expiated myself, as having in some way offended against God." 

The description of the relationship is precisely that of knowledge 
and conversation with his Holy Guardian Angel. The restrictive and 
limited nature of the discussion is what you expect from a guardian 
or protector whose role is to keep you following your life story or 
destiny with the potential to micro-manage the material world in 
such a way to get its message across. 

In his Memorabilia iv 3 13 Socrates’ student Xenophon uses one 
of Socrates dialogues, to give a clue of the nature of this Ruled by 
the Demon: 


“You will discover for yourself the truth of what 1 say, if, without 
waiting to behold the outward and visible forms of tlie gods, you 
will be content to behold their works; and with these before you, 
to worship and honour the Divine authors of them.” 


What that is saying is that Socrates’ Demonion is talking to him 
through the material world and circumstance and since childhood, 
he had worked out a simple way to communicate with it so that 
the whole of nature was providing him with a continuous Oracle. 
When you perform traditional divination in an open and altered 
state of consciousness, you consciously look for some answers in 

je symbols you are using. This usually occurs when you are in 

ome heightened emotional state, and your human failings doubt 

1e intensity of the message that your Higher Self is trying, to convey 
to you. If you have tarot cards, you will decide which symbols are 
correct for the reading. What happens if we apply the same rules to 
the universe that is around us? If reality is a result of the outpouring 
of the mind of ‘God’ what if we try to read it as if à Damon of God 
was speaking to us. 

It would work like this if vou are having, a problem or want to 
try and see what lies ahead go for a walk and make the conscious 
decision to look at the universe unravelling around you as opposed 
to being just a passive subject and a reaction to it. Mentally invoke 
the Dæmonion for guidance. 

Then say something like "by the time I yet to the shops 10 
minutes away; something will have occurred on my path that will 
provide me with some insight about whether or not to quit my job. 
Instead of worrying over the myriad of possibilities in any situation 
concerning one's livelihood, you are throwing it out to the Universe 
and in doing so, allowing yourself to become a more effective 
channel for your own divine Will. 


NICK FARRELL 107 


Your eye might be drawn to some leaves dancing about in a 
gust of wind; something that under normal circumstances, you 
would have barely noticed. It could be inferred that the Demonion is 
telling you that it is time to reform, to change your job. By opening 
to the possibility of receiving divine answers in this way, you have 
enabled your Dæmonion to communicate to you more effectively in 
the same way that occurs when reading tarot cards or using any 
other divination process. However, rather than using someone 
else's symbolic system, you are using your own, and by choosing to 
interact with the world, vou are closer to the mind of ‘God’ for it is 
more clearly reflected there, than anywhere else. 

Another example of this principle in action can be seen in the 
case of two star-crossed lovers who life has decreed are unable to 
be together due to the fact they are married to other people. On 
an illicit drive one day, they decide to throw it out to fate and the 
Gods, to divine life to find out what would happen to them if they 
followed their overwhelming emotional impulses. They turn left 
into a road and find their way blocked by a rubbish truck collecting 
the recycling. 

The truck has an eagle badge on the front which is an astrological 
symbol of Scorpio and intense emotions. The lovers had to pull over 
to the side of the road and wait patiently for the lorry to pass them 
by, As it did, they noticed the word ‘together’ on the side of the 
van, Lhe symbols seemed to be saying that their relationship would 
be stopped dead in its tracks because they were recycling their 
emotional baggage. 

Communicating with the Dæmonion in this way is tricky. It has 
totecl mht, the first emotional response indica connection to the 
Damenieon, and then the intellect explains the message. The intellect 
must be as honed as the mind of Socrates as there is a real danger 
that the person will hear only what their Lower Self wants them to 
hear. The star-crossed lovers mentioned above tried to read the 
message positively saying, that eventually, the rubbish truck passed 
which meant everything, would be ok. The Damonion was giving 
them a simple warning, that the road was blocked, and they could 
yo no further as a couple. Rationally the rubbish truck was always 
ywing, to pass them; it was not part of the message. In hindsight, they 
would admit that their first thought when they saw the truck was 
that they were going to get stuck. 

However, the Daimonion works all the time, always trying to 
communicate its warnings through various circumstances. We must 
be looking at our material universe to enter into a dialogue with our 


108 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Holy Guardian Angel. This essential spiritual process is lost if we try 
to shut out matter and avoid existing successfully in the material 
world. 

The Guardian Dæmon is the guide throughout your life and 
makes sure that you stay on mission throughout it. It appears to be 
formed from everything that influences vou in your environment 
coupled with the forces of Destiny which manage vour life story. It 
is also connected to the Higher Genius and is subordinate to it. What 
is clear from Socrates’ description is that its actions could be good or 
bad depending on the person. It protects you so that you make the 
decisions that shape your fate. However, the fact that some people 
have terrible life stories creates questions: 

Were such people fated by the gods to be miserable? Is this 
because they failed to listen to the voice of their Guardian Dæmon, 
which failed to protect them properly or is even punishing them? 
Certainly, at times the Guardian Dæmon has a dark side, keeping 
people in challenging situations for years so that they can learn a 
lesson. This is noticed when a person starts using magic and notices 
that sometimes it does not work (or does not work in the way it 
is intended). This is because the Guardian Dæmon is making sure 
it fails because, if it succeeds, the person's life story will yo oft 
mission. A person who uses love magic to yet a partner without 
ever researching what is preventing it from happeningy, is missing a 
valuable life lesson. This is one of the reasons that a spell to 
lottery is so unlikely to succeed. A person who has to work ! 
objectives is more use to the One Thing, than the person who has 
drop in their laps. Luck and good fortune are possible, but only 
is not going to get in the way of the real-life lesson, 

Itexplains why those with intimate divine contacts find them sien: 
at times of crucial life decisions when their advice is needed. It 
stories are the sum of our choices, takiny those decisions away trom 
by having our gods telling us what to do would be counterproductis: 

In such cases, The Guardian Damon will merely block any 
magical or divine attempts at intervention until the person has mac 
the important choice or learnt the necessary lesson. Lhe Gu 
Dæmon is also not above creating, adverse events which wall tone 
the person to focus on their life goals. 

It is important to remember that the Guard Daemon is making 
sure your life objectives are met, and you don't yo too tar ott the plot 
If your story is a miserable one, it is because vou are at a point where 
you must escape it, kill a terrible monster, or make some changes 
No one wants to read a story about someone who sits bemoaning 


in 


NICK FARRELL 109 


their fate and stays the same. For a story to work it must be about 
someone overcoming their limits or finding a way to make those 
limits a garden rather than a prison. 


ALCHEMY 


The material world is our mission or story. If your Higher Genius 
didn’t want us to live in matter you would not have incarnated. You 
are here to live whatever mission your Higher Genius has given you 
consciously. To do that you have to awaken your Higher Genius within 
matter so that it has its reigns on all aspects of your life. This mystery 
of nature had to be encrypted in mediaeval alchemy. Throughout 
most alchemical texts we see the term “first matter” used to represent 
the starting point for all transformations. The first matter is seen in 
two contradictory forms - it is holy and profane. Its uniqueness is so 
important that the alchemists say that finding the right stone which 
makes up the first matter is most of the work. 

The Golden Dawn magician Arthur Waite claimed alchemical 
writers concealed the Prima Materia's “true name" because it contains 
all the qualities and properties of elementary things, the names of all 
kinds of things were assigned to it. In the 17th century Theatrun 
Chemicum* it was written: 


“Alchemists compare the “Prima Materia” to everything, male 
and female, a hermaphroditic monster, heaven and earth, body and 
spint. chaos, microcosm, and the Hyle. Within itself, it contains all 
colours and metals. There is nothing more wonderful in the world. 
It begets, conceiees, and gives birth to itself." 


Many alchemists looking at this statement researched rocks that 
contain certain minerals which they thought likely to give the result 
they wanted. Sadly, there was only one thing that could genuinely fit 
a description like that. It had to be a creature that was made of both 
matter and spirit. The first matter was nota rock - it was the alchemist. 

Rather than concentrating on escape, the magician then should 
be looking, at themselves and nature to understand their spiritual 
mission. | believe that the first spiritual awakening happens 
when one focuses on seeing Nature and the body as a way of 
communicating with God and opens a dialogue with the Demonion. 
This can be found in the first exercises of the higher, more secret, 


* Vaughan, R., Cross, T. and Ashmole, E. (1652). Theatrum chemicum 
Britannicum London: printed by J. Grismond for Nath: Brooke, at the 
Angel in Cornhill. 


110 HELIOS UNBOUND 


levels of esoteric European masonry which are part of an alchemical 
process of transformation starting from the first matter which I have 
reworked as "catch" exercises in this book. The aims and results 
will be much different as the goal of this book is to help make a 
conscious connection with your Higher Genus, but I found these 
exercises useful in obtaining that goal. 


PRIMA MATERIA 


This exercise should be performed whenever vou have a spare 
moment. At first, it will be challenging because it uses a very earthly 
mood of consciousness that you spend most of vour life in and there 
are none of the shiny astral objects we associate with meditation 
or spiritual states. After a while, something happens and the scene 
changes. The divine seems to "wake up" deep inside you. It is hard 
to explain, which is why the esoteric lodge which gave me this 
exercise said it needed a master to transmit it. However, as the goals 
for this exercise are more limited its practice is straight forward. 


STAGE ONE 


Sit on a chair with your back straight and relax. There is no need to 
shut your eyes. You just have to be fully aware of your body and 
its presence in the physical space. Breath in slowly and as you di 
shift your awareness deeper into your body. Feel every cell, your 
blood moving around your system, your heart beating, Fach breath 
centres you closer within your physical frame, You might note some 
odd things. For example, when I did it, I found my consciousness 
was not in my body or my brain at all but seemed to be tocused 
close to my face. The exercise drew me into my physical body; Once 
you have reached a certain level of body awareness, allow vourselt 
lo "sense" your physical environment with your entire body, Don't 
move - feel and become more sensitive to the eneries which 
surround you. Vibrate the word [AQ three times (silently if vou are 
in public). 


STAGE TWO 


This stage occurs after you have managed to attain the most definite 
form of body awareness and sensitivity and it might take a week 
or longer before it happens. You start to notice gold flecks, or 
white light moving in your body; sometimes these extend to the 
environment. You might experience flashes of imagery (Sun rising 


NICK FARRELL 111 


isa common one) and feelings of warmth. Do not be too concerned 
about this, in fact, it is better at this stage to ignore it. But they are 
signs that the Prima Materia is starting to be transformed by your 
focus and awareness and the divine self is starting the long process 
of manifesting in matter. 

The overall effect of this ritual is cumulative and will have effects 
the more it is done. We will build on this exercise over the coming 
months until its true nature is revealed along with the powers it 
unlocks. There is another stage of this process which we will look at 
in other months 


CHAPTER THREE 


MONTH TWO 
THE MYSTERIES OF THE ELEMENTS 


WORK FOR THIS MONTH 
Perform your usual solar invocations and Prima Materia exercise at 
the correct time. Then on your main ritual time: 


Week One 


be Inscribe a black candle from top down with the sign of 
Taurus, Paramah, your name, Hera and an Earth triangle. 


2. Draw a banishing pentagram in front if and say, Creature 
of Wax I exorcise you so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to the 
gods of the element of Earth so that I might better manifest the 
powers of this element in my life and be a more aware channel 
for my Higher Genius. As you are sacrificed so shall the elemental 
blocks and barriers which prevent this happening be removed. 


$ Place the candle on the triangle on your altar and wash 
yourself as you did last month. 


4. Invoke the Sun for that time of day. 


5. Commence the solar breath for five minutes. 
6. Perform your confession. 
vg Go northeast and say, 


The purpose of this ritual if it pleases the divine triad is to awaken 
in my sphere of sensation the powers of the element of Farth so that 
I might manifest these powers for my Higher Genius and that these 
will help me to awaken to my spiritual self. 


8. Open the quarters in the element of Earth (in all tour quarters 
using the supreme pentagram ritual). If the Earth element is over 
powered in your chart do not use the pentagrams bul stand and 
vibrate the names. 


9, Purify and consecrate (as last month). 


NICK FARRELL 113 
10. Invoke Hera* as the queen of the Earth. 


Sister and spouse of mighty Zeus, I invoke you Earthly queen. 
You reside in your ancient shrine at Samos, which alone can pride 
itself on your birth and heard your infant cries, and receives your 
nurture. 


You occupy in lofty Carthage, which worships you as the maiden 
who crosses the sky on a lion's back. 


You guard the famed walls of the Argives, by the banks of the 
river-god Inachus, who now sings your praises as the bride of the 
Thunderer and as queen of all goddesses. 


You, whom all the East reveres as the yoking goddess, and whom 
all the West addresses as Lucina, the goddess of childbirth. 


Befor me in my most acute misfortunes Hera the Saviour, and free 
me from looming dangers in my weariness from exhausting toils. 


Awaken your powers within me, raise your Earth spirits to help 
me manifest my Higher Genius' elemental power over Earth. 


I offer you this sacrifice in the hope that you will assist me to 
awaken to my true self. 


1 Light candle and meditate, 
Week Two 


Insc ribe a blue candle trom top down with the sign of Scorpio, 
nton, vour name, Persephone and a water triangle. 


2 Draw a banishing, pentagram in front of it and say, Creature 
of Wax, Lexorcise vou so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to the 
gods of the element of Water so that I might better manifest the 
powers of this element in my life and be a more aware channel 
for my Higher Genius. As you are sacrificed so shall the elemental 
blocks and barriers which prevent this happening be removed. 


s Place the candle on the triangle on your altar and wash 
yourself as vou did last month. 

1 Invoke the Sun for that time of day. 

5. Commence the solar breath for five minutes. 


* Apuleius, 


114 HELIOS UNBOUND 
6. Perform your confession. 
ts Go northeast and say, 


The purpose of this ritual, if it pleases the divine triad, is to awaken 
in my sphere of sensation the powers of the element of Water so 
that I might manifest these powers for my Higher Genius and that 
these will help me to awaken to my spiritual self. 


8. Open the quarters in the element of Water (in all four 
quarters using the supreme pentagram ritual). If the Water element 
is over powered in your chart do not use the pentagrams but stand 
and vibrate the names. 

9. Purify and consecrate (as last month). 

10.  Invoke Persephone* as the queen of the water. 

Persephone, Daughter of Zeus, blessed and gracious Goddess, 
Wife of Hades you are beloved and life-giving, 

You hold the doors of Hades under the depths of the earth; 


Transactor of Justice and the holder of the sacred olive branch of 
peace 


fother of the Eumenides, Queen of the Underworld, You, 
aughter from Zeus through secret begetting. 


Mother of loud-shouting, many-shaped Bacchus. 

Playmate of the moving seasons, light bringing, of beautiful form, 
Ruler of all, maiden, showering fruits, 

Radiant, horned, you alone are longed for by mortals. 

You are Spring, delighting in fragrant meadows 

Your body appears to us in growing fruits and branches. 
You alone are life and death to distressed mortals. 

Persephone, you are forever the nourisher and the death bringer. 


Send up fruits from the Earth and the ever-nourishing waters from 
the underworld. 


* Orphic Hymn To Persephone 


NICK FARRELL 115 
Bring abundant life leading to richness of old age 


Awaken your powers within me, raise your water spirits to help 
me manifest my Higher Genius' elemental power over water. 


I offer you this sacrifice in the hope that you will assist me to 
awaken to my true self. 


11.  Lightcandle and meditate. 


Week Three 


L Inscribe a yellow candle from top down with the sign of 
Aquarius, Akramatha, your name, Zeus and an air triangle. 


2 Draw a banishing pentagram in front of it and say, Creature 
of Wax, I exorcise you so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to 
the gods of the element of Air so that I might better manifest the 
powers of this element in my life and be a more aware channel 
for my Higher Genius. As you are sacrificed so shall the elemental 
blocks and barriers which prevent this happening be removed. 


zd Place the candle on the triangle on your altar and wash 
yourself as vou did last month. 

4. Invoke the Sun for that time of day. 

5. Commence the solar breath for five minutes. 

b. Perform your confession. 


7. Go northeast and say, 

The purpose of this ritual if it pleases the divine triad is to awaken 
in my sphere of sensation the powers of the element of Air so that 
I might manifest these powers for my Higher Genius and that 
these will help me to awaken to my spiritual self. 


8. Open the quarters in the element of Air (in all four quarters 
using the supreme pentagram ritual). If the Air element is over 
powered in your chart do not use the pentagrams but stand and 
vibrate the names. 


9. Purify and consecrate (as last month). 
10. Invoke Zeus* as the King of the Air. 
Nature's great consistent King, 


* A much-hacked version of Cleanthes poem (c. 300 - 220 B.C.) 


116 HELIOS UNBOUND 
Omnipotent and just ruler who controls all, 


King of the Air and mind, Father of Humanity, 
We bear your image when we wander 

And with songs of praise your power. 

From your clouds you wield a two-edged sword 
Pulsates through all that Nature brings to light; 
Chaos by you becomes order. 

Zeus, shrouded by darkness, 

Whose lightning lightens the thunder-clouds; 
You bring universal law for evermore. 


Awaken your powers within me, raise your Air spirits to help me 
manifest my Higher Genius’ elemental power over Air. 


I offer you this sacrifice in the hope that you will assist me to 
awaken to my true self. 


11. Light candle and meditate. 

Week Four 

T Inscribe a red candle from top down with the sign of Leo, 
Zorothion, your name, Hades and a Fire triangle. 


2 Draw a banishing pentagram in front of it and sav, Creature 
of Wax, I exorcise you so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to 
the gods of the element of Fire so that I might better manifest the 
powers of this element in my life and be a more aware channel 
for my Higher Genius. As you are sacrificed so shall the elemental 
blocks and barriers which prevent this happening be removed. 


3. Place the candle on the triangle on your altar and wash 
yourself as you did last month. 


4. Invoke the Sun for that time of day. 


5. Commence the solar breath for five minutes. 
6. Perform your confession. 
7. Go northeast and say, 


"The purpose of this ritual if it pleases the divine triad is to awaken 


NICK FARRELL 117 


in my sphere of sensation the powers of the element of Fire so that 
Imight manifest these powers for my Higlter Genius and that these 
will help me to awaken to my spiritual self. 


8. Open the quarters in the element of Fire (in all four quarters 
using the supreme pentagram ritual). If the Fire element is over 
powered in your chart do not use the pentagrams but stand in each 
quarter and vibrate the names. 


9. Purify and consecrate (as last month). 

10. Invoke Hades" as the King of the Fire. 
Magnanimous Hades whose Kingdom is below the earth, 
You are wrapped forever in the depths of night. 


Zeus Khthonios with the keys to the Earth you unlock the Fires of 
Vulcan upon which all matter is tested. 


You bring forth riches of the world and are the throne of creation. 


Distant, unknown, surrounded by pale ghosts and the shrouds of 
the dead. 

In Akheron's obscure depths you hold the flames hidden within 
everything. 

The life animating, burning, and creating. Awaken your powers 
within me, raise your Fire spirits to help me manifest my Higlier 
Genius’ elemental power over Fire. 

I offer you this sacrifice in the hope that you will assist me to 


awaken to my true self. 


Light candle and meditate. 


Week Five 

L Make four elemental candles as you did in the previous 
weeks and place them at the East (Yellow), West (blue), North 
(black) and South (red). Take a white candle and write on it aiðńp 
(ether) your name and a spirit wheel. Draw a banishing pentagram 
in front of it and say, 


2. Creature of Wax I exorcise you so that you will be a perfect 
sacrifice to the gods of the Aether so that I might better manifest 


* Adapted Orphic Hymn 


118 HELIOS UNBOUND 


my spiritual powers and balance the elements within. Help me be 
a more aware channel for my Higher Genius. As you are sacrificed 
so shall the elemental blocks and barriers which prevent this 
happening be removed." 


2. Place the white candle upon the triangle and perform your ritual 
ablutions. 


3. Invoke the Sun for that time of day. 

4, Begin the solar breath for five minutes. 
5. Perform your confession. 

6. Go northeast and say, 


The purpose of this ritual if it pleases the divine triad is to awaken 
in my sphere of sensation the powers of Spirit so that I might 
manifest these powers for my Higher Genius and that these will 
help me to awaken to my spiritual self. 


1. Open the quarters with Air in the East, Water in the West, 
Fire in the South, and Earth in the North. Do this even if your chart 
is unbalanced. j 


2 Purify and consecrate (as last month). 
3, Invoke zther* as Quintessence. 


Ever untamed zther who reigns high above Zeus’ dominions of 
the sky; glorious Sun with dazzling brightness who gives the Sun, 
Moon and stars their light. 

All taming power, ztherial shining zether, who blasts forth in the 
heat of life; Lord of the elements, light-bearing power, with starry 
radiance shining, y 
I invoke you spiritual life, 

White flower on the crossroads of the elements. 

By this sacrifice balance the elements within me 

And awaken my spiritual self. 

Awaken your powers within me, raise your spirits to help me 
manifest my Higher Genius’ elemental power over Aether. I offer 
you this sacrifice in the hope that you will aid me to awaken to my 
true self. : 


4. Light candle and meditate. 


* Adapted Orphic Hymn 


NICK FARRELL 119 


or most of humanity's history, science consisted of the 

division of the universe into four elements - earth, air, fire, 

and water. Aristotle added a fifth - Aether which was the 

spirit that united them all. Modern magic has tripped over 
itself when adopting the elemental svstem by taking it far too literally 
and seeing the elements as their physical counterparts, rather than 
symbol metaphors. Seeing elemental Fire as something you puta log 
into and keep your house warm, or elemental Water as something 
you would swim in has given esoteric science an outdated feel. 

Oddly, modern science and the elemental theory which would 
have been familiar to the Ancients are still in harmony. Instead 
of the word air a modern scientist would say “gas,” Fire, radiant 
energy, water, liquid and earth a solid. Each element represents the 
state of matter in vibration. Fire is the highest vibration and Earth 
the slowest. 

Where esoteric science and elemental theory part company is 
the association of these states with other associations and parts of 
the body. Water for example is associated with emotions and Air 
is connected to the mind. Thes: ociations found their way into 
astrology where they are said represent certain basic traits and give 
acertam te mperament . 


bach of the tour elements occurs in three states or qualities, 
respectively named the basic (cardinal), static (fixed) and moving 
(mutable). The ditterence can be seen most clearly in water. When 
Water is frozen, it is tied; when it is running it cardinal and when it 
his heated it becomes steam and mutable. 

The ancestor of all elemental thinking was the Sicilian magician 
Empedocles who lived in the in the fifth century BCE. In Tetrasomia, 
or Doctrine of the Four Elements, Empedocles described the four 
elements as the roots of all existence which were controlled by 
two forces Love (Philotes) and Strife (Neikos). Love is the force 
that draws things towards Order while Strife causes them to break 
apart. In this system Philotés is the force which creates order while 
Nvikos creates chaos. Empedocles said that Strife also divided the 
one immortal soul of Love into many individual souls, each making 
up both Love and Strife in some proportion and placed them into 
mortal bodies, which were compounded from different mixtures of 
four elements. 

Like Albert Einstein, Empedocles did not believe that matter 
could be destroyed. In fact, he believed that the four elements were 
Gods: 


120 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Hear the fourfold Roots of all: 

Life bringing Hera, Hades, Shining Zeus, 

And Nestis (Persephone) who moistens the springs of humans 
with tears. 


In his Ancient Philosophy, Mystery and Magic: Empedocles and 
Pythagorean Tradition*, Peter Kingsley worked out that Zeus is Air, 
Hera is Earth, Hades is Fire and Nestis (Persephone) is Water. The 
gods enable the elemental forces to be approached. 

Empedocles equation of the Roots with deities emphasises 
the fact that they were not literal material substances but spiritual 
essences manifesting differently in the material and spiritual worlds. 
They can be land, the sea, the sky and the Sun, and abstract concepts 
like the Underworld (which was said to be subterranean fire). 

Plato (427 to 347 BC) named four "faculties of the soul" based 
on the elements: Imagination, Demonstration, Intelligence, and 
Opinion. A modern psychologist would say that the elements reflect 
components of the human psyche, but they could also represent 
the stages in various processes of growth and transformation or the 
Ascent of the Soul in the Chaldean Oracles. In the process outlined in 
this book an elemental progression from Earth, Water, Air and Fire is 
repeated (sometimes overtly and other times by implication) 

The Elements are archetypes of psychology because they arc 
structures in the collective unconscious, are universal. beyond 
complete analysis; they can be "circumsc ribed but not described". 

In the century that followed Empedocles, Aristotle developed 
the system further by looking at how the elements interacted with 
each other to create the world, Aristotle attributed double qualities 
on each of the elements: Warm versus Cool and Dry versus Moist. 
While these meanings could be used to understand nature, it was still 
important to see these elements as living, spiritual qualities rather 
than just physicals things. One of the biggest mistakes that modern 
scientists make when commenting, on Ancient Science is that they 
assume that Aristotle and those who followed him were using, their 
elemental theory to describe physical reactions, when they were 
really talking about both a spiritual and a physical approach, 

Ineach element, one Power is dominant. Earth is pre-dominantly 
Dry, Water pre-dominantly Cool, Air is pre-dominantly Moist, and 
Fire is predominantly Warm. Unlike the chemical elements, which 


* Kingsley, P. (1995). Ancient philosophy, mystery, and magic. 1st ed. 
Oxford University Press. 


NICK FARRELL 121 


replaced this system, the spiritual elements could be transformed 
into each other. For example, Water is transformed into Air when 
the Water is acted on by a larger quantity of Air because the Water's 
Coolness is “overpowered” by the Air's Warmth. The Moist quality 
is retained through the transformation. This process can be reversed 
as Air can be transformed back into Water by acting upon it with 
sufficient Water. It was a belief that such transformations were 
possible, which allowed the Spiritual path of Alchemy to develop. 

The Greek Magical Papryi also contained words of power which 
were specifically linked to the Elements. When these were vibrated 
they activated the part of the body connected to the element. The 
Magical Name of power which connected the magician to the Divine 
Mind was AEEIOYO. The name of Air was PPP SSS PHR (PPP SSS 
FREE], a popping, a hissing sound. It was common in spells of the 
period). Fire was MMM. EY EIA EE was Water. OOO AAA EEE was 
Earth and YE YOE was the complete Body. 

In Ancient Rome and Greece elementals were seen as nature, 
spirits, which formed in significant places and were acknowledged 
as lesser gods or goddesses. The Romans called these the Genii Loci, 
while the Greeks called them Dæmons. They were seen as being 
guardian spirits connected with the land, but they were everywhere 
including, buildings, corporations, the state, military units, an 
guilds of tradesmen. 

Their elemental nature can be seen in various myths. Fc 
example, € acus was a piant who was a son of Vulcan lived in a cave 
inthe Aventine Hill in Haly, the tuture site of Rome. He ate humans 
and would nail the heads ot victims to the doors of his cave, Hercules 
tried to hill him and Cacus attacked by spewing fire and smoke, 
while Hercules responded with tree branches and rocks the size of 
millstones. Hercules leapt into the cave, aiming for the area where 
the smoke was heaviest. Hercules yrabbed Cacus and strangled him. 
Cacus fits what would be later described as a Fire elemental. 

Another important Roman Goddess who may have been a Fire 
elemental was Vesta, Vesta is the virgin goddess of the hearth, home, 
and family in Roman religion. Vesta's presence is symbolized by the 
sacred tire that burned at her hearth and temples, but she was closely 
related to Cacus. Her sacred fire was kindled in every home in Rome 
and effectively made the whole city sacred. It was her elemental Fire 
which powered the Roman Legions in their conquests, and when it 
was extinguished in 394 CE by the Christian emperor Theodosius I 
in Rome, not only did he die within a year, but the empire swiftly 
collapsed. 


122 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The Romans did not consider any gods or goddesses elemental 
in anyway that would be understood by later occultists, but it does 
give us an idea as to how what we would now define as elemental 
might be divine and worshipped. 


PARACELSUS 


While the use of elements in Alchemy was important throughout the 
Middle Ages it was not until the splendidly named Swiss alchemist 
Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim (1493 

- 1541) that the idea of elementals as creatures entered occult practice. 
Von Hohenheim who was better known as Paracelsus wrote a 
book called Liber de Nymphis, Sylphis, Pygmaeis et Salamandris et de 
Cueteris Spiritibus*. In it, he made a link between the elements and 
all thecreatures of myth and legend including the classical monsters, 
nymphs along with more Germanic creatures and mountain spirits. 
Around this, he built into them a philosophy to explain the existence 
of these beings. 

Each element, Paracelsus claimed, had a type of being associated 
with it. The Water people were nymphs, who are also sometimes 
called undina. Air people are sylphs, and go by the name svlvestres. 
Mountain creatures are pygmies or gnomi. Fire races are salamanders, 
also called vulcani, whose monsters are will-o'-the-wisps. 

Paracelsus told his readers saying that he was usiny, the mythic 
names for these creatures so that people could understand what 
he is trying to describe. When you heard in Roman myth that a 
creature was a nymph it meant they were really talking, about a 
water elemental. Not only did this give vou an idea about what the 
being might be, it created a whole new philosophy which merged 
myth and the beginnings of science. 

Paracelsus thought that elementals were like humans but 
lacked a soul and were half spirit. They could move through objects 
and traveling like spirits needed feeding and could yet sick. In many 
ways, Paracelsus wrote, they were more like animals. However, they 
are to be treated well, and agreements made with them were binding, 
Elementals live completely in the sphere of their respective elements 
Salamanders would live in all things which were manifestations 
of fire. Its word would be a mirror of this one, but with the other 
elements removed. While this means that they cannot enter another 
elemental realm, all of them can interact with this one. 


* Paracelsus. and Blaser, R. (1960). Liber de nymphis, sylphis, pygmaets et 
salamandris et de caeteris spiritibus.. Bern: Francke Verlag. 


NICK FARRELL 123 


Paracelsus said that the world that the elementals live in is totally 
separate from that of humanity, but Earth and Fire elementals could 
serve people and Water and Air elementals could marry them (we 
will look that the marrying an elemental later). 

Elementals were to act as guardians of the unfolding of nature's 
treasures. In his Astronomia Magna* Paracelsus wrote that God did 
not want his secrets to be simply visible; he wanted them to become 
manifest and knowable through humanity. So contacting the 
elemental kingdoms was important to understand nature. 

In Liber de Nymphis Paracelsus wrote that God has set guardians 
over nature, for all things, and he left nothing unguarded and it 
is the nature spirits, who make and protect what Paracelsus calls 

“tremendous treasures, in tremendous quantities”. 

“Everything must come out, creature, nature, spirit, evil and 
good, outside and inside, and all arts, and all doctrines, teachings 
and what has been created.” In other words, these treasures are the 
power and knowledge present in the elements. 

Paracelsus at once created problems as well as solutions in his 
elemental theory. As there is a tendency within modern occultism 
to be literal when it comes to elementals and a trend to see the 
elemental kingdoms as being populated by fantastic creatures 
which can be approached and talked to. The elementals in question 
are similar to Victorian fairies or garden gnomes, which dumbs 
them down to a point where they are nearly useless to a working 
magician, | remember one magician describing her experience with 
Air elementals as being “slow floating pieces of paper" and described 
how a gnome used to march up and down her hallway. 

Butthereality piven by Paracelsus isa little lessanthropomorphic. 
He said that there is as much ditterence between the bodies of men 
and the bodies of the Nature spirits as there is between matter and 
spirit 

Elementals were not spirits, because they had flesh, blood and 
bones; they live and propagate offspring; they can talk, act and sleep, 
&e,, and consequently they cannot be properly called ‘spirits.’ They 
are beings Occupying, a place between men and spirits, resembling 
men and spirits, resembling men and women in their organization 
and form, and resembling spirits in the rapidity of their locomotion.” 

Being a Christian, Paracelsus thought that the Egyptians, 
Chaldeans, and Persians often mistook the salamanders for gods, 
because of their radiant splendour and great power. The Greeks, 


* Daniel, D. (2006). Paracelsus’ Astronomia Magna (1537/38). Ann Arbor, 
Mich: UMI. 


124 HELIOS UNBOUND 


following the example of earlier nations, deified the fire spirits and 
in their honour kept incense and altar fire, burning perpetually, he 
claimed. 


ARTIFICIAL ELEMENTALS 


Paracelsus also gave magic one of its most interesting concepts - 
that of the artificial elemental. He reasoned that since humanity had 
within them the "breath of God" they had the ability to create life. 
They could, with their imagination and emotion, forge an artificial 
elemental and give it life. This was the reality behind the myth of 
the magician's familiar. The magician would create a thought form 
which would act asa servant and carry out his or her bidding directly 
on the material. 

The most physical of these can be seen in the legend of the 
Golem which was created by Judah Loew ben Bezalel in 16th-century 
Prague. In that case, an Earth elemental as animated clay robot which 
was controlled by a kabbalistic divine name. It was used to protect 
the Jews of Prague from anti-Semitic attacks. The concept also had 
echoes in Ancient Egypt where statues or shawabtis were placed 
in the tomb which would act as servants for the dead person in the 
afterlife. The statues were the form taken by the artificial elemental 

Another form of an artificial elemental is created by mayical 
group to protect its members. These look like gods or angels and an 
sometimes "real" elemental beings who are ordered to serve by ther 
Elemental King, who has to be approached by the group. More often 
they are artificial constructs and are less intelligent 

But over the years | have seen that they have often acted ayainst 
members who were causing trouble even before anyone was aware 
of what they were doing, In one group | was involved in a person 
secretly was planning to set up his own yroup, He had made up 
his mind that he was going to wait until he completed the next 
grade, which would have given him the authority to initiate people 
into that system. He could then take as many people who would 
follow him into the new group. At the next meeting, he complained 
that he could not “get into" the ritual because the temple guardian 
had forbidden him, even though he knew the password, Within a 
month, he had snapped and picked a fight with the group leader 
and resigned. In another case a person, who failed an initiation and 
projected his psychological anger onto others, found it difficult to 

get into the temple because the temple guardians did not let him in. 
Eventually they let him enter but his behaviour was closely watched 
until they refused to let him in at all. He left the group. 


NICK FARRELL 125 


These artificial elementals are part of the selection process of 
candidates into the group. When a person applies to join, the group 
leader approaches the guardians and asks the new candidate to be 
tested to see if thev should be admitted. 

Another form of artificial elemental is the one which is created 
by a large crowd of people during a riot. Psychologists have noticed 
that people do funny things when they are amongst such a group 
of people. They suddenly become easily manipulated and can do 
things that thev would not do normally. This is the psychology 
of a mob that suddenly forms and rampages through a city. 
Afterwards people who took part in a riot sometimes wonder how 
they managed to get so excited and do the sort of actions that they 
would not normally have done. In fact, my first experience with an 
artificial elemental was when I was a teen Christian and went to 
a Youth for Christ concert. These were organised by well-meaning 
fundamentalist Christian groups to lure kids away from their 
natural spiritual direction towards sex, drugs and shopping and get 
them back into the same churches as their parents. At the end of 
the concert, there was a long talk and Kids were asked to come up 
and accept Jesus into their lives. People mobbed the stage, even I 
felt compelled to go to the stage. The speaker talked about a spirit 
of God moving among the people and said that he was "leading 
them by their heart” to come forward.” Sure enough, I could see 
a swirling mass of cloud moving like a wave through the crowd 
urging them on. It did not feel like a religious experience, it felt like 
something else - a compulsion. A psychologist would tell you it was 
normal crowd behaviour, but what I was seeing was the artificial 
elemental which was doiny it and it had been accidentally given 
form and a task by the speaker. As a conversion tool, the artificial 
elemental was counter-productive. People who went forward 
lacked the intellectual understanding of what they were doing and 
never really became Christians, if anything they were insulted and 
felt manipulated. The goal of the artificial elemental was not to lead 
them to God, but to get them to the front of the theatre and to give 
their lives to Jesus. 

One thing that is a common belief about artificial elementals 
is that they can get out of control. They are like a computer or a 
machine in that if they are badly programmed they cancarry out their 
tasks literally - much like the brooms in the story of the sorcerer's 
apprentice. In other cases, their elemental side can predominate, 
and they can act in ways that the user might not expect and cause 
general mischief. Earth elementals when out of control cause things 


126 HELIOS UNBOUND 


to go missing or break. Now that we do not have many open fires, 
Fire elementals cannot cause wood or coal to fall onto the carpet and 
burn the house down, so they delight in electrical problems. 


RULES 


Paracelsus built the rules of elemental magic, which are still accepted 
by many modern occultists. For example, elementals did not have 
a soul and when they die their consciousness was not preserved. 
This was because there was no superior vehicle present to contain it. 
They lived to great age and those composed of Earth ether are the 
shortest lived; those composed of Air ether, the longest. The average 
life span of an elemental was between three hundred and a thousand 
years. Paracelsus maintained that thev lived in conditions similar 
to our Earth environments and are somewhat subject to disease. 
Elementals are incapable of spiritual development, but most of them 
are of a high moral character. 

The four fixed signs of the zodiac were assigned to the four 
kingdoms of elementals. The gnomes were Taurian. The undines 
were Scorpios. The salamanders were Leos and the sylphs Aquarian. 

While Paracelsus was ahead of his time in many areas, the 
limitations he placed on the elementals were typical thinkiny for 
the 16th Century. He tended to see them as structured in terms of 
Kingdoms and said that they were capable of way,iny, war upon one 
another. When nature spirits went to war you saw evidence on this 
level. For example, if lightning struck a rock and splintered at, the 
event could be a salamander attacking a gnome. Our world was 
the battleground because they could not attack one another on the 
plane of their own peculiar etheric essences because there was no 
vibratory correspondence between the four clements of which these 
kingdoms are composed. To make matters worse, the elementals 
were fond of Civil Wars. 


ELIPHAS LEVI 


Since the 19th Century, occultists have said that Hementals were 
under the control of four Kings: Paralda (air), Nixa (water), Djinn 
(fire) and Gob (earth). The Kings’ names were invented by the French 
occultist Eliphas Levi (1810 - 1875) whose real name was Alphonse 
Louis Constant. 

Levi was a huge influence in the study of the elementals and his 
work influenced the Order of the Golden Dawn and groups that came 
from it. In a paper called the Conjuration of the Four Elements, Levi 
said that the elementary spirits were like young children and clearly 


NICK FARRELL 127 


he didn't like kids much because he said: “They torment those more 
who busy themselves with them, unless one has control of them by 
means of superior rationality and great severity." 

Elementals prepare nasty dreams, move divining rods, and 
pretend to be dead people with raps on walls and furniture. They 
can never manifest any other thought than our own, and if we are 
not thinking, thev talk to us with all the incoherence of dreams. They 
are without free will and consequently have no responsibility. They 
torment mystics with terrible visions such as the nightmares of Saint 
Antony, and Swedenborg, Levi wrote. 

He warned that any magician who uses them assumes a terrible 
responsibility, all the evil which he makes them do. If you ask an 
elemental to kill someone, it would do it without feeling guilty and 
as far as the universe is concerned it is "not elementals that kill 
people, but people who kill people." 

Fortunately, being able to control an elemental was not 
something a normal muggle could do. Levi said that you had to 
undergo the four trials of the ancient initiations. Since no one knew 
what these were, Levi suggested that you could expose yourself 
without fear to a raging tire, go across a chasm on using a plank 
bridge. or scaling a steep mountain during a storm, or getting away 
trom a cascade, or from a dangerous whirlpool by swimming. 

The man whe fears water ever reign over the undines; he who is 
manders; as long as we are subject to 
ines we must leave the sylplis m peace. and not irritate the gnomes; for 
tenor spirits only obey a power that ts proved to them by showing itself 
their master even m therr own element,” he wrote. 

When the magician has “acquired by boldness and practice 
this incontestable power he may impose upon the elements the 
mandate of his will, by special consecrations of Air, Fire, Water and 
Earth. This is the indispensable beginning of all magic operations. 

Leviwas partly right. While itis true that dealing with elementals 
you cannot be scared of them, facing your fears by performing 
daredevil acts will not cure anything other than a fear of heights, 
tires or drowning, The best way forward is to master the elements in 
your own personality before working with them. 

This was the work of the Outer Order of the Golden Dawn but 
was part of the first degrees of most magical orders. Working on the 
personality was equal to working with the internal elementals. 


of fire cannot command ti 


128 HELIOS UNBOUND 
ELEMENTAL PRAYERS OF LEVI 


These prayers were keys to understanding the elements. Levi did not 
write the first one, which came from a book called Comite de Cabalis. 

On first reading they appear Christian until vou realise that 
they were designed to be invocations to the Elemental Kings. The 
Kings were the Divine Rulers of each element and lore said they 
were angelic. With a little tweaking thev fit into a more overt Pagan 
approach nicely. The Prayer of the Salamanders, for example is 
directed at Hades and the Prayer of the Undines is for Persephone. 


THE PRAYER OF THE SALAMANDERS (HADES). 


Immortal, eternal, ineffable and uncreated Father of all things 
who is borne upon the incessantly rolling chariot of ever-turning 
Worlds. 

Ruler of the underworld immensity where the throne of your 
power is elevated; from whose height your dread-inspiring eyes 
discover all things, and your exquisite and sacred ears hear all. 

Listen to your children whom you have loved from the 
beginning of the ages; for your golden, great, and eternal majesty 
is resplendent below the world and the sulphurous depths. You 
are the great supporter, Oh sparkling fire. There you illumine and 
support yourself by your own splendour; and there comes forth 
from thine essence overflowing streams of light which nourish 
your infinite spirit. 

That infinite spirit nourishes all things and makes this 
inexhaustible treasure of substance ready for generation. It 
receives the forms with which you have impregnated it from the 
beginning. 

Oh Chthonic Father, Hades the Father of blessed mortals 
and immortals. You have specially created. powers who are 
marvellously like thine eternal thought and adorable essence. 


PRAYER OF THE SYLPHS (ZEUS) 


Spirit of light. Spirit of wisdom, whose breath gives and takes 
away again the forms of all things. Zeus, in whose presence the life 
of being is a shadow which changes, and a vapour which passes 
away. You who rises to the clouds and moves on the wings of the 
winds, When you breathe, infinite spaces are peopled. When you 
inhale, all that comes from you returns to you. Endless movement 
in eternal stability, be you eternally blessed. We praise thee and 


NICK FARRELL 129 


bless thee in the changing empire of created light, of shadows, 
of reflections and of images; and we long unceasingly for thine 
immutable and imperishable light. 

Let the ray of your intelligence and the heat of your love 
penetrate us. Then what is movable will become fixed, the shadow 
will become a body, the spirit of the air will become a soul, the 
dream will become a thought. We shall no longer be borne away 
by the tempest but shall hold the bridle of the winged steeds of 
the morning and shall direct the course of the evening winds that 
we may fly into your presence. 

Zeus mighty spirit of spirits. Zeus the eternal soul of 
souls. Zeus the imperishable breath of life. You are the creative 
inspiration. You breathe in and out the existence of all beings in 
the flux and reflux of your eternal Word, which is the divine ocean 
of movement and of truth. 


PRAYER OF THE UNDINES (PERSEPHONE) 


Terrible Queen of the sea. You hold the keys of the cataracts of 
heaven, and who encloses the subterranean waters in the hollow 
places of the Earth. 

Persephone Queen of the deluge and of rains, of springtime. 
Youopen the sources of streams and fountains. You who commands 
the moisture (which is like the blood of the earth) to become the 
sap of plants. We adore and invoke thee. 

Speak to us, you moving and changeable creatures, Speak to 
us in the great commotions of the sea, and we will tremble before 
thee. Speak to us also in the murmur of the limpid waters, and we 
will want your love. 

Immensity in which all the rivers of being lose themselves, 
which ever spring up within us. Ocean of infinite perfections. 
Height which sees you in the depth. Depth which breathes you in 
the height. Bring us to the true life through intelligence and love. 
Lead us to immortality through sacrifice. 


PRAYER OF THE GNOMES (HERA) 


Invisible Queen who has taken the Earth as her support and has 
dug abysses in order to fill them with the omnipotence. You whose 
name makes the arches of the world tremble. You who make the 
seven metals circulate in the veins of stone; Monarch of seven 
luminaries. Rewarder of subterranean workers. bring us to the 
desirable air and to the kingdom of light. 


130 HELIOS UNBOUND 


We watch and work without respite. We seek and hope by the 
twelve Olympians of the Holy Mountain, for the talismans which 
are buried by the magnetic nail which passes through the centre 
of the Earth. Hera, Hera, Hera have pity upon those who suffer. 
Enlarge our hearts. Let us be free and raise up our heads. Exalt us. 

Stability and movement. Day invested by night. Darkness 
veiled in light; you are the Master who never keeps the wages 
of his workmen. Silvery whiteness. Golden Splendour. Crown 
of Diamonds, living and melodious. You bear the sky upon your 
finger, like a ring of sapphire. You who hide under the earth, in 
the kingdom of gems, the wonderful seed of stars. 

All hail. Reign; and be the Eternal Dispenser of riches, of 
which you have made us the guardians. 


The divinity of the elements appeared in other cultures too - initially 
by implication. The four holy creatures are already mentioned in 
Ezekiel. This book was written during the Babylonian captivity 
around 600 - 560 BCE so pre-dated Empedocles and had little to 
do with the elements. At that point, the four holy creatures were 
symbols of the four directions. 

The attribution of these forces to the elements meant that the 
oncept of four beings in charge of the elements was universal. In 
'ncretic Roman Egypt, these spirits were given names, which 

iad been lost to the Western Mystery tradition until the discovery 
of an obscure Coptic manuscript they are Akramatha (Anyel-Air). 
Zorothion (Lion-Fire), Periton (Eagle -Water) and Paramarah (Bull- 
Earth). These are not names you can really invoke as they are divine 
names of an Angelic collective and a hive mind of divine force 
However, they can be used on angelic talismans as the highest name. 
Each of these four creatures has an archanyelic force which enables a 
better interaction. These are the classical archangels of the elements 
Raphael (Air), Gabriel (Water), Michael (Fire) and Uriel (Earth). 
These Archangels were used by Ancient Payans and it is fair to say 
that much of the lore associated with them comes from Pagan rather 
than Jewish or Christian sources. 

By the time of the astrologer Ptolemy, 85-165 AD - each of the 12 

zodiac signs is assigned the four elements. 


Fire - Aries, Leo, Sagittarius 
Earth - Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn 
Air - Gemini, Libra, Aquarius 
Water - Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces. 


NICK FARRELL 131 


When mapped onto an astrological chart it is possible to see a 
person's elemental bias. A person who is lacking in water planets 
might not have much in the way of empathy, someone who has too 
many fire planets might be impulsive and aggressive. 

Greek physician Galen (physician of the Emperor Marcus 
Aurelius and a contemporary of astrology's Ptolemy) gave credit 
to the fifth Century BC Greek physician Hippocrates when naming 
his four temperaments: Choleric, Melancholic, Sanguine, and 
Phlegmatic. 

In Galen's On tlie Elements* Hippocrates is quoted as being the 
first to determine "the qualities of the elements - qualities according 
to which one thing acts on others and is affected." 

In the Renaissance, the 16th century AD physician, alchemist, 
and astrologer Paracelsus more created the concept of each element 
energy being a living creature. With the four elements being a race 
of nature spirits. These were Salamanders (fire), Gnomes (earth), 
Sylphs (air), and Nymphs (water). 


FIRE 


Fire is the senior element and the primal force of animation. Fire 
is the desire for life, the will to be and become. Fire signs embody 
leadership, initiative, and courage. People with a fiery emphasis 
tend to be impulsive. spontaneous, creative, and enthusiastic. Fire 
signs inspire others, stimulating creative action based on lofty ideals. 

fire can create an over-emphasis on self-expression without 
consideration for others teclings, resulting in selfishness, egotism, or 
fanaticism. Hf someone ts lacking in Fire, they may need to cultivate 
sell-contidence, energy, bravery, and desire, Indeed, in alchemy Fire 
is considered the primary apent of change, and Empedocles said 
that Fire was the Ayent ot Action (Ametike) among the Elements. He 
said fires burn beneath the Earth and that Volcanic Fire shoots to 
the Heavens and licks the stars, Fire is the highest and the lowest 
clement. It would be a mistake to take this literally as there is some 
important teachiny here. He is saying that fire exists in all matter, 
even when it is unseen and like a volcano it can erupt so that fire 
may connect with the heavenly fire. Empedocles was said to have 
died by throwing himself into a volcano which seems to imply that 


* Galen. and Johnston, I. (2011). Galen on diseases and symptoms. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 


132 HELIOS UNBOUND 


he was using that internal fire to ascend to the stars. Diodorus of 
Sicily (8.75) wrote*, 


"Thou, Empedocles, didst purify thy body with the Living Flame 
and Fire didst thou drink out from Immortal Craters... he leapt 
into the Craters of Fire and drank of Life.” 


In Tantra, Fire is the kundalini sexual energy coiled like a sleeping 
serpent at the base of the spine or coiled around the feet. 

Fire is separate from the rest of the elements because it corresponds 
to energy, while the other three Elements correspond to states of matter. 

Hades, the brother of Zeus is the God of fire. His associations 
with death and the underworld make this attribution odd to modern 
minds. However the early Greeks did not have the same concept of 
universe that we have today. There was the Earth and the sky and that 
was it. Hades connection with volcanic fire and being Persephone's 
husband (a union of fire and water) make the attribution viable. A 
volcanic crater is filled with rivers of fire, which suggests a union of 
Fire and Water. Craters were a place of power and magic, for it is an 
entry to the Underworld. The “Fires of Hades” might have survived 
into Christianity with hell being a place of punishment. Empedocles 
thought that Hades’ fire was the source of all life, order and creation 
(Aidélon) and chaos, destruction (Aides). 


AIR 


Air is the energy of the mind and communication. Air enables 
connections linking different people and with new ideas and 
information. Air energy is intellectual, objective, inquiriny:, social 
supportive and communicative. Air enables detachment and 
perspective, 

However sometimes it can be superficial and take impartiality to 
the extreme and become cold and distant. It tends to be all talk and 
not actually doing anything. The person who puts up a wall ot words 
that mean nothing is channelling air (in more wavs than one) 

Air is important as a mediating, element, which unites Fire 
and Water. Air also constitutes the cosmic breath, which unites the 
trapped aspects of the Higher Genius with its more aspects 

Zeus is a storm or sky god and associated with the turbulent 
air. There are invocations for him to bring fertilising rain which was 
Moisture from the Air. Like air, Zeus can shift into any shape and so 
air is a symbol of transformation. 


* Diodorus (1985). Bibliotheca historica. Lipsiae: Teubner. 


NICK FARRELL 133 


Air's power as a mediator means that Zeus has an essential 
role in uniting the Higher Genius with the body. Empedocles says 
the Breath-Soul or Spirit (Psukhé he associated with Air), unites the 
Body (Sóma) with the Principle of Motion (Kinétiké). This is one of 
the reasons we use the name IAO which was a secret name of Zeus 
so much in this system. 


WATER 


Water is the realm of emotions and creates feeling and sensitivity 
in people. It creates empathy, psychism, intuition, compassion, 
creativity, and imagination. 

However, fear is also an emotion and pain. Water often lacks 
direction and seeks extreme controls to avoid pain. It can over- 
react, cause paranoia and escapism. It is also connected to death 
and purification. This is because it can dissolve material because 
it's Cool (uniting) quality allows the Water to attach to solid matter 
of all sorts and its Moist (conforming) quality causes the result to 
have no fixed form. Dissolution is a passive loss of form and objects 
lose their rigid structure and identity. This is one of the reasons why 
Chaos was depicted as water in many Egyptian and Greek myths, 

Inthe Greek tradition vou tind water sources being considered as 
important. They appear as central to the Eleusinian and Persephone 
Mysteries because springs were entrances to the Underworld. In 
the story of Persephone, Hades took her down the Kuané spring. 
Persephone was the Queen of the Nymphs, the daughters of Ocean 
who are the spirits of springs and stream 

Persephone unites the Earth and Air. She is the daughter of the 
Earth Goddess Demeter and Zeus (who corresponds to Air and the 
Sky). Persephone obtains her power to unite (Cool) from Demeter 
and Her power to transtorm (Moist) from Zeus. In the Eleusinian 
Mysteries, Persephone joins the Underworld to life above the Earth 
and mediates between them. 


EARTH 

Earth is the lowest element and represents manifestation in the 
physical world. Earth is the spiritual principle of stable but inflexible 
synthesis, and the foundation of physical being. Earth is the energy 
of pragmatic building and physicality. It is the action of bringing 


134 HELIOS UNBOUND 


dreams into reality. Earth focuses on the physical aspects of life and 
establishes structures and systems to increase security and comfort. 
Stamina, patience, practicality, determination, and sensuality are 
connected to the Earth-sign. 

However, it can lead to materialism, greed, over-indulgence, 
stagnation and fear. In many ways losing our awareness of our 
Higher Genius is due to a fascination with the Earth element and a 
restriction to the five senses. However, without Earth it is much 
harder to bring ideas into form. 

The Element is associated with Hera as protectress of the stable 
foundation of fertility. Empedocles called Hera pheresbios or "life- 
bringing" to emphasise the fact that the Earth element is just as holy 
and living as anything else. Earth is unchanging, and Hera is the 
protectress of the stable family and home, and social order. Hera is 
a more conservative fertility goddess since she provides the stable 
foundation of sex within an ordered family. 


UNITING THE ELEMENTS 
Occult theory says that when you balance the elements you create 
a fifth element of spirit (or Aether). This was called quintessence by 
edieval alchemists because it was beyond them and transcended 
fe limitations imposed by the Four Elements. 
Sir Isaac Newton wrote in his incomplete Index Chemicus that: 


“Quintessence is a thing that is spiritual, penetrating, tingling 
and incorruptible, which emerges anew from the four elements 
when they are bound to each other... This perfect substance or 
balsam, thought to be beyond the realm of change and decay, was 
believed to be a panacea with miraculous healing properties and 
the power to transform the impure into the pure, the perishable 
into the imperishable.” 


Quintessence was luminous but invisible to ordinary sight. 
Paracelsus believed the stars were made of Quintessence and that 
within every living thing there exists a hidden star that was that 
thing's Quintessence. 

In Taoist alchemy, the Quintessence is known as chi, an unseen 
energy that flows through the body and can be accumulated and 
directed in moving meditations. 

In all these traditions, both Fast and West Quintessence is the 
uniting divine aspect behind matter. 

In our system the Higher Genius displays elements of 
Quintessence. The Quintessence of all the elemental aspects of your 


NICK FARRELL 135 


body and personality is your Higher Genius. The discovery of this 
element within your physical body or personality is therefore part 
of discovering your Higher Genius. 

To find our personal Quintessence itis vital to find our elemental 
balance. The easiest way to do that is to look at your astrological 
chart. Note the position of each planet and its zodiacal position and 
give each one of the score based on the following. 


ELEMENTS 


[Fire | Ar [WATER EARTH | 


Look at the element that the Sun and Moon is positioned and award 
it two points. So, if you have Sun in Leo (fire) and Moon in Scorpio 
(water) you have two points for fire and two for water. 

Now give a point for the element of Rising Sign (the Ascendant), 
the mid-heaven, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn sign 

Now add an extra point for each for the element of the sign 
ruling Ascendant (use traditional ruling planets). If the Ascendar 
isin Leo, which is ruled by the Sun, which is fire. 

Now add an extra point for the element ruling the zodiac whel 
the Sun is found. 

lf a planet is within the 29th degree of any sign (on the cusp) 
split the point between that element and the element of the next sign, 
since it is so close to 0° of the nest sign. 

So if we have a person with Ascendant in Leo, Sun in Leo, Moon 
in Scorpio, Mercury in Leo, Venus in Virgo, Mars in Libra Jupiter in 
Gemini and Saturn in Pisces, MC in Aries it will add up like this 

Fire: Ase (+ 1+1), Sun (2+1), Mercury (+1), MC (+1) =7 

Air: Mars (+1), Jupiter (+1) = 2 

Water: Moon (+2) and Saturn (+1) =3 

Earth: Venus (+1) =1 


An element is dominant if it gets five or more points. Having six 
or more points is unbalanced. In the above example the person is 
unbalanced towards fire and is weak in Earth. 

It is important to realise that this is not bad. This person was 
clearly born to manifest the Fire element, but it is done at the 
expense of Earth. They will tend to be autocratic, arrogant and 


136 HELIOS UNBOUND 


inclined to put their excessive amount of energy into what they do. 
They may have difficulty seeing other people with their own valid 
ideas, needs and desires. Weak Earth types are materially unstable, 
disorganised and not that good with money. What this person will 
find is that they have a lot of energy and can do things extremely 
quickly and creatively, but they will lack the focus and organisation 
to bring things to fruition. For a Higher Genius to function in such 
a person effectively they must strengthen the material aspects and 
slow down the some of the over-bearing fire. 
Heraclitus of Ephesus, a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher, 
described the balancing process thus: 


“Fire lives in the death of Earth, and Air lives the death of Fire; 
Water lives the death of Air, and Earth lives the death of Water.” 


In our case study it means that the person should not just attempt to 
emphasise Earth qualities but sacrificing some of his fire to air and 
some of his water to Earth. 

When this person effectively communicates, interacts or 
expresses themselves with others, the worse aspects of their fire 
will become mitigated. Sacrificing water to obtain more Earth 
means giving up some of their emotion-based ideas so that thev 
can be more practical. It suggests that the reason why they fail t 
be balanced might be an emotional vulnerability, sensitivity or 
intensity which prevents them from being, earthed. They might bs 
emotionally dependant on another person to provide that Earth side 
of themselves as a sign that person cares about them, 

All of these things are “issues” which prevent the sort of 
elemental balancing that the Higher Genius needs before it can use 
the personality asa vehicle. One might argue that the Higher Genius 
should have gotten its astrology right when it manifested in this 
body, but you will usually find that the imbalance was necessary 
for the person's life story to unfold. In the case of the above, the 
person might have had the sort of life where women did everything 
practical for him and he was happy to let them do that, perhaps 
because his mother had showed her affection by doing material 
things for him. The Higher Genius would want that sorted out as 
part of any balancing. 

Magic offers a method of balancing using ritual. There are two 
ways itcan do this. The slower way is the most common. It provides 
the unconscious with a symbol of a balanced elemental personality 
by opening four elemental gates in the sphere of sensation. This 

balanced approach enables the unconscious to see what the 


NICK FARRELL 137 


energies should look like and slowly move towards them. While 
this is effective it does take some time and regular practise to work 
properly. 

The faster way, although potentially more dangerous and 
dramatic, is to concentrate only on the elements which are out of 
balance and not invoking those which are already reasonable. The 
person in our case study would invoke only the gates of Air, Water 
and Earth. Invoking Air would help kill of the overbalance of Fire 
while water and Earth would balance the weakness of Earth. 

Before moving on we will use another example. 

This person has Leo Asc, Sun and Venus in Gemini, Moon in 
Libra, Mercury, Jupiter and the MC in Taurus and Saturn and Mars 
in Leo, 

Adding up the numbers we have: 

Fire: Asc (+1+1), Saturn (-1) Mars (+1) =4 

Air: Sun (+2+1), Venus (+1), Moon (+2) =6 
Water: nothing 
Earth: MC=(+1), Mercury (71). Jupiter (+1) =3. 


This person is balanced in Fire and Earth, overbalanced in Air 
without any Water, 

Those without any Water have an emotional vacuum which 
they attempt to till by turning to spiritual realms or universal truths. 
They have difficulty remaining in touch with and expressing their 
technys may lead them to term relationships with overly emotional 
people or to become addicted to excitement and intensity. They try 
to prove their sensitivity by carrving out nurturing activities. With 
the heavy balance towards air this person lives in their head. They 
restlessly seek. knowledge and sharing their thoughts with other 
people. Impersonal (emotionally detached), yet they thrive on 
communication and social interaction. 

To fix this imbalance they would have to invoke Water, Fire 
and Farth. Atter a while the Air will slowly die down and bring in 
more Water. 

A person who suffers from no over balances or lacks simply 
invokes all tour yates to adjust any difficulties which might have 
developed over time. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


MONTH THREE 
MYSTERIES OF THE SACRED LANGUAGE 


THE WORK FOR THE MONTH 
Each day you will perform the invocations to the Sun each day at 
the correct time. However, for one of the sessions each day vou will 
carry out much longer ritual work as outlined in the letters exercise 
later. You should also carry out your Prima Matera exercise when 
ever you get the chance. 


t is one of those occult myths that the Hebrew alphabet is the 
most magical and ancient. Certainly, it has had a significant role 
in the development of Western Magic, and it is the key to the 
mystical understanding of the Old Testament. Yet hist rically 
e Hebrew alphabet was not handed to Adam by God. We can see 
its roots as a development of Phoenician, whic! h in turn borrowed 
ideas from the Ancient Egyptians. The Hebrew that we know of now 
is not the version of the Ancient Israelites but appears to have been 
tidied up into the neat square script during the Babylonian captivity 
But we also know that a mystical belief in the letter's power did not 
exist until much later. 

The Greeks took their alphabet from the Phoenician traders, 
which they adapted it to suit their speech, but they had vowels, and 
came to associate each letter with a number. The Hebrew letters did 
not become associated with numbers until after the Greeks invaded 
Israel and Egypt After the Maccabees threw out the Greek rulers 
their leaders had a problem. Greek was the most Common language 
and the nation’s entire financial system used its number system. The 
last thing you want, when you have spun the Greeks as oppressors 
is to continue using their number system so the Maccabees took 
Hebrew letters and gave it the Greek number system based on the 
similarity. 

In Alexandria, where there was a huge Jewish population which 
mixed with the Greeks, Platonic ideas were added into the Hebrew 
mystical mix. It is from here that the first notably Kabbalistic work- 


NICK FARRELL 139 


the Sefer Yetzirah was compiled. Not only did it use the Greco- 
Hebrew letter/ number system it was also fused with the advanced 

Greek philosophy which was being developed in the City. It is those 

elements which evolved into modern kabbalah. It is worthwhile 

pointing out that the world Hebrew gematria comes from the Greek 

yeapetpia, “geometry.” 

But Greeks and Romans used a gematria of their own in magical 
texts. We can see Greek letters being used magically and as means 
to encode ideas in the same way as Kabbalah. In the Greek Magical 
Papyri, the letters themselves have a power and a meaning similar to 
what is seen in Kabbalah and can be used the same way. 

Greek gematria could be used to build magical phrases out of 
Greek classical texts and the titles of Gods - in the same way as 
the Kabbalah was used in by the Jews to explore their holy texts. 
That tradition ended with the fall of the Roman empire and the rise 
of Christianity. It is unclear where it would have ended if it could 
continue. Hebrew kabbalah went on to develop into a spectacular 
flowering of Judaic mysticism and magic. The question is what 
would have happened if Greek gematria had continued. Judaism 
was a religion which used its gematria to explain and experience 
mystical states. But Greek gematria was used to unlock the secrets o 
its philosophy and magic. It was used to work with the Egyptian texts 
and a Greek variant of Ancient Egyptian - Coptic was developed. 

lo resurrect this tradition then it is necessary to take the ancient 
tradition and incorporate what has been developed in the Jewish 
tradition since. This is not enormous difference, but once the door 
is unlocked then it is hoped that the new strain will enable Ancient 
Magie to be used more practically. 

This is not to sav that we replace the Jewish kabbalah or even 
create a Greek Kabbalah. 1 am one who believes that Kabbalah is 
inherently Jewish and exclusively tied to Judeo-Christian ideas. 


HOW IT WORKS 

The Greek Alphabet to function like gematria has to 
1 Add up. 

Work out astrolopically. 

Have an Oracular power. 

4. Be useful magically. 

5. Each letter must mean something. 


THE MEANING OF THE LETTERS 


Phoenician script has 22 letters, the same 22 as modern Hebrew; 


140 HELIOS UNBOUND 


there's a one to one mapping between those two scripts. The Ionian 
Greek script, however, got rid of three of the letters (digamma/ 
waw, qoppa, san/sampi), added four (phi, khi, psi, omega), and 
moved the position of the derived form of waw (which became 
upsilon) further back in the alphabet. Each of the Phoenician letters 
had their own name, many of which provided the names for their 
corresponding Greek letters. These names referred to, in many 
cases, earlier Egyptian hieroglyphs or related words that provided 
a basis for what the letter looked like. Many of these names were 
maintained in Greek, often in derived forms, such as Alpha from 
' Alp, Béta from Bet, Gamma from Gimel, and so forth. 

Many of the meanings of the Greek letters for Hebrew are 
therefore going to be the same with a few additions. 


p —] 
[p — [Ba — [House .— ^. |] 
[r — [oim — [Tivowingsick — — ——À 
|^ —— [bate Door 
[p [me — — [indo 
Zain 

[H [Heh 


Meaning 


Wall, yard, thread 
9 Wheel, good 

I Hand, finger 

[apt] Hand pat — | 
Lamedh Goad 
M | Mem Water 
[N [Nun [Fist, serpent, whale 


Simketh or | Fish, tent peg, prop support 
Sümekh 


Eye 


o | 

[n m — - ]Mek — — — — —] 
[e [e — He o 0 || 
S(Simketh) — | Tooth 


NICK FARRELL 141 
Qoph Back of the head, sewing needle, 
eye of a needle, monkey 
x ow o [po o —] 


|_| 
[n — [From Omicron + 


By the time the Ionian Greek script was adopted and spread 
throughout Greece, many of the letter forms were so far removed 
from their Phoenician counterparts (if any existed) that many of 
these meanings became meaningless or detached from the letters. 


NUMBERS 


Greek isopsephy (icovijoiz, literally “same pebble”, is another 
system like Hebrew gematria when applied to the Greek alphabet. 
The Greek alphabet, having come from the same origin as the 
Hebrew alphabet. also used letters as numerals, and did so earlier 
than Hebrew. A big difference is the number of characters: Hebrew 
has 22 letters with tive extra, adding to 27, while Greek has 24. To 
make up tor the lost characters, Greek used three obsolete letters fo 
the sole purpose of transcribing numbers: digamma (F) for 6, goppp 
(Hor 90, and sampi (>) for 900. Digamma was a ^w" sound, qopp 

à uvular ^k sound like Hebrew qoph, and sampi was probably ¢ 
engthened "s" or "ks" sound. 


Value Letter Value Letter Value Letter 
1 A 10 l 100 P 
2 B 20 K 200 = 
3 r 30 A 300 T 
4 A 40 M 400 Y 
5 E 50 N 500 o 
6 F 60 ze 600 X 
x X 70 [9] 700 wv 
8 H 80 II 80 Q 
9 0 90 Q 900 7) 


142 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The Greek alphabet comes into better use in astrology since, with 
24 letters not counting the obsolete ones, it matches up well with 
divisors and multiples of 360. 

Itis possible to use the same Kabbalistic Nine Chamber method 
to reduce all Greek letters to their basic elements. This becomes vital 
for the construction of sigils, magic squares and other “kabbalistic” 
designs. 


Thus if we were to take the magic square of Saturn: 


4 92 
à x7 
816 
Jsing the Nine Chambers you could convert it to Greek letters: 
AOB 
T EZ 
HAF 


Now say you wanted to create a sigil of the Goddess Hera to create 
a happy marital home. Saturn would be the physical building while 
Hera (Hpa), would be the Goddess of the Marriage and. Home 
Hera’s name would be H= 8 P=100 A=1. Using the Nine Chambers 
we would have 8, 1, 1 and the following Sipil which Could be placed 
ona talisman or drawn in the air as part of a may ical ritual 


NICK FARRELL 143 


ASTROLOGY 


The Greeks, Copts, and other Hermetic magicians are well-known for 
having attributed the seven vowels of the Greek alphabet to the seven 
visible planets and their spheres. The attribution of these letters can be 
seen throughout the Greek Magical Papryi and ancient Greek forms 
of gematria, especially in certain holy names and voces magicae. This 
is where the attributions change dramatically between the Hebrew. In 
this system, the attributions are: 


A, alpha, for the Moon 
E, epsilon, for Mercury 
H, eta, for Venus 

I, iota, for the Sun 

O, omicron, for Mars 
Y, upsilon, for Jupiter 
Q, omega, for Saturn 


The elements can be worked out as the following: 


© for Aether or the Quintessence 
T for Earth 

A for Water 

P for Air 

N for Fire 


There are 12 “simple” consonants: 


* Bfor Aries 

* Z for Taurus 

* KlorGemini 

* LforCancer 

* Mor Leo 

. N tor Virgo 

* E for Libra 

* YX for Scorpio 

© T tor Sagittarius 
* (p tor Capricorn 
* Nor Aquarius 
* WV for Pisces 


The following table describes the different attributions of all the 
letters of the Greek alphabet: 


144 HELIOS UNBOUND 


PN sday 
[Hades [Ps [Noon — | 


ps e 
Dawn 


sovember 


December 


Thursday 
January 


February 
March 


Gonos 


* = was not pronounced by the Greeks. The letter had no sound in the 
Greek speech so was abandoned. It was kept for numeric reasons. 


NICK FARRELL 145 
GEMATRIA OF GODS 


If you look at the literary and magical works of the Greeks, you are 
struck by how much effort they go to giving their gods titles. These 
titles start to make sense when you apply Gematria to them. 

So let's have a look at the name Zeus Zevc. He is made up of Zeta 
(Taurus), Epsilon (Mercury), Upsilon (Zeus) and Sigma (Artemis). 
His numbers add up to 7+400+300+200= 907 (reduces down to seven 
which is the letter Z, zeta which is Apollo). The number 907 is also 
the same as the word “Constant.” From this we can see that Zeus's 
basic nature (because we have not included any of his “titles,”) is 
practical, fixed and directed toward matter. Zeus is a constant power 
which expresses itself in Nature and through the Sun and through 
oracles. The fact that the upsilon is there, means that Zeus is present 
in his own name. 

When Homer added a title to that name, the energy of Zeus 
changes to show a different side of his nature. Father Zeus is 
Tlazcp (Pater) adds the Pi (Fire, Hades), alpha (Moon, Hekate), Tau 
(Sagittarius. Vesta), Epsilon, (Mercury, Hermes) Rho (air, Zeus). 
This version of Zeus fiery and closer to Earth, It communicates 
through the air. The number is 80+ 1+300+5+100=486 which reduces 
to 9 or Theta which is the Aether. When we invoke Father Zeus we 
want something, powerful, fiery and closer to our material selves 
that unites the elements. 480 is also the same number as the word 
Stone’, “Honey” and “Gladness. ` By calling Zeus Father you are 
bringing happiness through sacritice (honey was a popular sacrifice 


to the Greek Gods), The Stone has interesting masonic associations 
too. 


This use of vowels and letters also explains some of those 
strange sounding, names in the Greek Magical Papyri which are mostly 
made up of vowels. Each one is focusing the influence of a planet 
in the ritual, Thus, the famous IAO would be the Sun, the Moon 
and Saturn, This name, which appears in the Greek version of the 
Old Testament instead of the Hebrew YHVH does put an interesting 
spin on Tetrayrammaton. 

Vowel words like this shown in the Greek Magical Papyri would 
be vibrated or Sung, using their musical notes to a certain number of 
counts. So you would vibrate the bottom line for a count of four, for 
example, the next line would be vibrated to a count of eight, divided 
by two letters with four beats each. 


146 HELIOS UNBOUND 
AEEIOUO 
EEIOU 
EIO 
10 
o 
I 


The divine name used here is made up of the Moon, two Mercury, 
one Sun, two Mars and one Jupiter. It was used in a magical binding 
spell. The two Mars letters bind the beneficent Jupiter and the 
Mercury is emphasised. During the process of the chant, Jupiter is 
liberated from the powers of the Moon and Mars; Mercury and Mars 
then contain the Sun; then Mars expresses itself with the Sun and 
then finally all things have been dissolved into the Sun as the great 
god. You will have chanted an invocation to the Sun, Mercury and 
Mars five times and the Moon once. 


CONDENSING POWER 


‘tis possible to take a Homeric verse and convert it into a powerful 
ribratory chant. Write down all the vowels from the line in order. 
Thus: 


Qeid dow hae dua. iov [aw ec-aw a-ce-o e-e^ eae aw yea ec-oo] 


This gives a magically condensed version of the verse which is 
particularly good at charging objects or moving, mayjical/ divin: 
energy. If vibrating each vowel is a mini-invocation to the seven main 
gods we can see that the verse is made up of a formula of Saturn (3) 
Mercury (2), Sun (4), Moon (2), Mars (3) and Venus (1). Saturn would 
represent the obstacle, or the boundary Mars matches it, [he Sun 
supplies most of the power for the chant while Venus less so. This 
would not be a good chant to overcome an obstacle in a relationship 
but would be good for overcoming depression. 

You can use the musical notes for each vowel to make the chant 
even more interesting. 


*  A,alpha, for the Moon, musical note A 
*  E,epsilon, for Mercury musical note G 


*  H,eta, for Venus musical note F 


NICK FARRELL 147 


* Liota, for the Sun musical note E 

LI O, omicron, for Mars musical note D 
*  Y,upsilon, for Jupiter musical note C 
*  Q,omega, for Saturn musical note B 


Each letter should be Sung or vibrated on a single breath and in the 
order they are given. To be done properly the line of vowels should 
be vibrated once for every letter so in this case 18 times. While you 
vibrate or sing vou should focus on the intention of your working. 

I suspect that the use of vowels by themselves in the Greek 
Magical Papyri and other magical texts might represent this form of 
magical reduction to create a chant of power. They could represent 
divine names or phrases that have been boiled down to their vowel 
essence to create a more potent magical effect. If this is the case, it 
is a magical use of Greek which is impossible in Hebrew Kabbalah. 
The vowels are gods so care should be taking in using this method. 

It does create some interesting theological questions if applied 
to divine names. The essence of Zeus are the letters E and Y which 
are Mercury and Jupiter. Zeus then combines the expansive Jupiter 
force with the communication, speed and "many turning" ways of 
Mercury. Hera combines the Venus, Mercury and the Moon and 
Hermes is made up of Venus and a double helping of Mercury. This 
would mean that the qualities of these gods are not “pure” powers 
The process of humanising them has given them an interesting 
mixture of qualities. Zeus is Jupiter-like but has a mercurial streak. 
His wife is not at all Jupiter-like, but does have her husband's 
mercurial side. She also is a mother and magic goddess who has a 
sexual and creative side 


NOTE ON COLOURS 
The vowels are also associated with colours, a fact which might be 
useful when drawiny, talismans or magical images of the gods. 
* AL alpha, tor the Moon, Colour Violet 
* E, epsilon, for Mercury, Colour Orange 
* dieta tor Venus, Colour Green 
L iota, for the Sun, Colour Yellow 
O, omicron, for Mars, Colour Red 
Y, upsilon, for Jupiter, Colour Blue 
Q, omega, Colour Indigo. 


Say we were drawing Zeus. His two essential vowels are eb. You 
would therefore draw him from the colours Orange and Blue. The 


148 HELIOS UNBOUND 


same would apply to a spell as is described above Q eid) doi mae 
Óva iov. 

If you were to visualise a Daemon who would carry out your 
spell's work, you could visualise him in the colours of the vowels. 
This would mean six colours, but you would be more Yellow and a 
bit less Red and Indigo because there are more vowels with those 
colours and hardly any Green. On any talisman you could also 
colour each vowel in its appropriate colour. 


MAGICAL TEXTS 


One of the areas that the Judo-Christian-Islamic magical tradition 
had over more ancient methods of magic was that it was centred 
on written magical texts. There was a Bible, Mishnahs and a Koran 
which, being inspired by God and written in holy letters, was 
therefore magical already. But this underestimated how the Ancient 
Greeks and Romans saw certain texts. Homer's Odyssey and Iliad 
were not just treated as beautifully written poems but sacred texts 
which explained how the universe worked and just as spiritually 
important as the Bible. 
The Iliad opened with this invocation to the Goddess: 


“Sing, goddess, the anger of Peleus’ son Achilles and its 
devastation, which put pains thousand fold upon the Achaeans, 
hurled in their multitudes to the house of Hades strong souls of 
heroes, but gave their bodies to be the delicate feasting of dogs, of 
all birds, and the will of Zeus was accomplished since that time 
when first there stood in division of conflict Atreus’ son the lord 
of men and brilliant Achilles.” 


The Odyssey opened with this invocation to the Muse: 


“Tell me, Muse, of the man of many ways, who was dricen far 
journeys, after he had sacked Troy's sacred citadel. Many were 
they whose cities he saw, whose minds he learned of, many the 
pains he suffered in his spirit on the wide sea, struggling for lus 
own life and the homecoming of his companions.” 


While this might seem like a poetic device it really was not. It was 
a sign that the words were channelled from the Muses themselves 
and were divine and true, The sentences were holy and could be 
taken out of context and used to make a point, in the same way that 
Bible verses were, Plato borrowed so many themes and phrases from 
Homer that the ancient Alexandrian writer Ammonious authored a 
book showing how much of a debt the philosophy owed to the poet. 


NICK FARRELL 149 


This is ironic because philosophers of the time were running down 
Homer. Aristotle was fond of quoting Homer in his works too. He 
wrote an early work called Homeric Questions which looked at the 
problems with some of the words, phrases or stories with answers 
to them. This concept shows that the great minds of the age were 
seeing Homer as something to be dissected with the ideas depicted 
in them as something to be seriously looked at. 

Homer was taught to the Greek and Roman upper classes. 
Partly for the purity of the Greek and partly for the moral lessons 
learnt. A child was expected to have memorised some, if not all of 
the Homeric verses, in much the same way that lettered children of 
the 18^ century was expected to quote verbatim much of the Bible. 

With the letters meaning something magical and coming 
directly from God the Iliad and the Odyssey have the potential to 
be powerful “spells” and mantras. These can be seen in the Greek 
Magical Papyri, and the principle used is not difficult. You look 
through either of these books for a sentence which reflects the need 
vou have. Ideally the sentence should fit into context so that it is not 
isolated too much from its original meaning. If Homer is weaving 
words, vou do not want to unpick his threads too much. Next it 
should bea complete line and written entirely in Greek. You can 
find literal texts of Homer with English and Greek above them. You 
can double check the meaning of the words with an Ancient Greek 
Dictionary. It might sound a lot of work and it is. But the payoff is 
worthwhile. 

Here is a spell which was used to help a slave escape. The spell 
ears in PGM IV 2145 and it is taken from the Iliad book 10 line 564 


Thus speaking he drove the single-hooved horses through the 
trench.” 


Qe vizén ragporw Oujraoe wavoyas ixroug 
Jaws eepon tafreco dec vlase mawnychas eepoos] 
[Thus horses trench through single-hoof driven] 


Within the Iliad, single-hoot horses are associated with speed. The 
trench referred to an obstacle placed around the Greek camp to stop 
enemy troops breakiny, into the Greek camp. When it was breached, 
it was a military disaster. In a spell to help a slave escape, boundaries 
are vital because if they got far enough away they would be safe. In 
this case the spell is designed to help a slave escape quickly. 

In modern times, it could also be used to quickly overcome an 
obstacle and get us away from problems. When problems hit us, we 


150 HELIOS UNBOUND 


often wish we can get through them quickly and move on. This spell 
could be used in that way. 

It can be chanted as a mantra. Homer was written in Dactylic 
hexameter to create a poetic rhythm. Each line was carefully written 
soit could be divided into six feet; each foot would be a dactyl made 
up of a long and two short syllables. These could be substituted by 
a “spondee” of two long syllables instead. The fifth foot is often a 
dactyl. The sixth foot can be filled by either a trochee (a long then 
Short syllable) or a spondee. When vou learn, a phrase is easier to 
clap it in, one hard, two soft. 

A dactylic line most normally looks as follows: 

=<" pa" yu] mj uu|- X 

So you have to chant your mantra according to these forms. 

Qe (the first stress is on omega) cindy záopoto oua pervuzus iTzV 


Os eipon taphiroio dielase monychas ippous (this is read ippus) 
[Os Ei pon] [Ta phro-io] [die la-se] [mo-nychas] [ip pus] 
(It sounds like òs eipon tafroio diélase monychas ippus) 


If you are feeling brave you can sing it in a 3/3 time using the notes 
I have given above playing only the lead vowels thus: [E,C, AJ, [D. 
GA] [A,D,C] [GED] [A,A] 

Throughout the ancient world, we see these verses from the Mat 
or Homer used for divination or the basis of spells. This use of Homeri 
verses pre-dates and suggests many of the same uses that modern 
magicians find for Psalms and Bible verses. 

For example, a Roman lawyer put this phrase, in small print 
in Greek on one of his writs in the hope of sending, his opponent te 
sleep so that he made a mistake. 


“The other gods, and the charioteer and indeed men dul sleep all 
night, But sweet sleep did not bind Jupiter.” 


A lawyer friend of mine tried this as several experiments, For the 
first he wrote out the phrase on a piece of paper and then stuck it 
under the chair where his legal opponent would sit during, a dithicult 
negotiation. On that occasion the rival started off the meeting, with 
a great deal of bluster assuming he was going, to win. However, he 
quickly unraveled, started making mistakes in his aryuments, and 
rapidly gave up. On another occasion, the lawyer used the same 
verse written in a Word document. He coloured the lettering white 
so that while it was there it could not be seen. This worked on several 
different legal letters to help the lawyer win the cases. 


NICK FARRELL 151 


Homeric verses appear in the Magical Papyri as a prelude to the 
especially important Mithras Liturgy which was an ancient ritual of 
ascension to heaven. While the verses were not considered as part of 
the ritual, the entire ritual was placed between several verses. The 
first was Iliad 10.193 which was "seize any man, lest we become a cause 
of rejoicing to our foes." And was used as a spell to get friends. The 
second verse was the one we mentioned above which was used to 
escape from danger. The third verse was “and men gasping out their 
lives amid the terrible slaughter", which comes from Iliad 10.52. This 
was used as a protective spell. While the verses are not connected to 
the liturgy itself, thev are designed to protect and aid the reader in 
carrying it out. The three verses might make a good mantra before 
the actual working. After the ritual, the line about the single-hoofed 
horses, and the other about the men gasping among the slaughter are 
repeated, along with Iliad 10.572 which is another popular magical 
Homeric protection and victory verse "And they washed their profuse 
sweat in the sea.” It is concluded with Iliad 8424 "You will dare lift up 
your mighty spear against Zeus” which was used to restrain the god’s 
anger. This was presumably because the magician had just tried to 
storm Mount Olympus by performing this ritual and might earn a 
lightning, bolt for their presumption. 

The historian Hans Dieter Betz who did tremendously we’ 
when translating the Greek Magical Papyri hit à rock when it carr 
to the Homeric Verses. While he could understand that they wer. 
used for specific magic purposes, he could not work out why whole 
` not used, or why some of the sentences were broken 
up to obtain their magical effect. The reason might be because the 
gematria of the sentences required the deletion of some words to 
make a more significant number. 

The vowels and letters of the sentences might have the number 
of planetary forces in the vowels, or meanings in the consonants to 
bring, about the requests effect, What is more possible is that the 
verses lines “spoke” to the magician in a personal revelation. When 
reading, Homer images appear as the scene is described and the 
words can be tied into those meanings. While there might be those 
who feel it odd that an epic poem should be used as a sacred text 
in this way, it is exactly the way many monotheists use the Bible 
stories, particularly the Old Testament, which were committed to 
paper around the same time in human history. 

The following exercise is based on a European Rosicrucian 
technigue which also involved placing the Greek letters and 
associations on the body. It mixes this with a Tantric method and 


lines wel 


152 HELIOS UNBOUND 


then builds an upper astral body which can be used by the Higher 
Genius to connect to the lower. It also uses the esoteric teaching 
connected to the Hanged Man Tarot card. All this is involved but 
makes it easier for the Higher Genius to awaken in the Sphere of 
Sensation. There are several stages to the exercise and while the early 
stages are straight forward, particularly if you have experienced 
Israel Regardie's Middle Pillar the latter stages are dissociative and 
start to split your consciousness into two so that both created bodies 
are purified and consecrated and then integrated. 

The lower body is the Sphere of Sensation and is under the rulership 
of the Moon. The upper created body is solar and is designed to attract 
the Higher Genius. The rarified astral part of the Higher Genius, which is 
outside the body, uses it as a temporary transformer through which it 
contacts that part of itself which is mostly asleep within the self. When the 
two bodies are integrated it should provide a spiritual jolt which awakens 
the Higher Genius within the Sphere of Sensation. But even if this does not 
happen, through repetition of the exercise the lunar self becomes aware 
of the Higher Genius's over shadowing and starts remembering, its solar 
nature. This is the symbolism of the Alchemical Marriage between the Sun 
and the Moon. 

Making this contact is an important part of a mayician’s life 
which will help stabilise their magic and life theme. However, the 
Sphere of Sensation is a death trap for many thouyht-forms having 
been built from out-of-date thoughts and wrongly interpreted 
experiences. These can serve to overturn any real ritual experienc 
and replace it with the same pre-initiation universe. 

The Indian Tantrics worked their way around this concept by 
installing the godform of the contact into each energy centre so that 
it could work on the energy centres to purge the Sphere of Sensition 
The godform would be an intelligent force which would teach the 
Sphere of Sensation how to use the different energies, Adapting, the 
Tantric technique is not difficult, particularly as the modern western 
magic already has taken on some of the Tantric attitudes to spiritual 
energy (Kundalini). The normal technique is to place a ditferent 
Godform for each of the spheres, but in this one we will use the 
single godform of the Higher Genius as that is the being we wish to 
make our connection. It is better to rely on it to make the changes it 
wishes than rely on any correspondence theory. 

Western magicians are used to the Kabbalistic Tree ol Life to 
place energy centres in the Sphere of Sensation by limiting them to 
five basic ones (feet, groin, heart and throat and crown). In doing 
this they lost the alignment with the physical centres and attempts 


NICK FARRELL 153 


(by the likes of Dion Fortune) to put them back largely failed. This 
system abandons the Tree of Life attributions completely and 
returns to the older Tantric positions. It does keep the centre based 
in the feet, which aligns with the European Rosicrucian teaching 
and the Western planetary colours. This might alarm the purists of 
both systems, but as an Indian guru once pointed out to me - the 
symbols are subjective anyway and it is better to use those which 
are closer to what you want. 


CENTRES 


For this system we will use seven energy centres one for each of the 
planets 

The first is the brow centre: It is visualised as a pale blue sphere 
with an orange Conjunctio sign. It is attributed to Jupiter and is your 
connection to your Higher Self. When it is open it allows you to "see" 
things on the astral. It is the ruler of the mind. It is activated by the 
Greek Vowel Y. Placing a godform in the centre of this centre allows 
you to hear your contact. You might experience some visionary 
experiences while this centre is open. 

The second is the Throat centre: This is visualised as an orange 
sphere in a pale blue octagon. It is attributed to Mercury and governs 
communication, It is through this centre that the Logos speaks it 
creation for the universe. Your universe is built by the words yo 
chose to describe it — good or bad. The Tantrics say that this force 
is divine ambrosia and in a normal person it fuels their destructive 
side. However, it could equally be nectar to help you grow. Placing 
a godform here starts to build your universe according to what the 
godform sees as vour destiny. It is activated by the Greek vowel E. 
When this centre is open you are more articulate, but you must be 
careful about vour words. Make sure your sentences are truly what 
vou want. 

The third is the Heart centre (the upper part of Tiphareth): 
This is visualised as a red ball with a green six rayed star in the 
centre, It is attributed to Mars and it brings about what you want. 
It is here that the desires and thoughts are actualised as actions. 
This particular thing is a blessing and a curse. It is the place of the 

“wishing tree” which in Tantric myth was the place where you got 
what you wanted. In a normal person what they want is what they 
think they want and is based on the desires and thoughts of their 
ancestors. It is more likely that a person's fears will manifest here - 
when someone says with the throat “I knew this would happen” it is 


154 HELIOS UNBOUND 


the heart centre which has bought it about. Placing a godform here 
can give you faith that only the right things will happen, it is one of 
the reasons that this centre has to be opened before a ritual. Note 
that in Western magic we tie this centre with the Navel centre and 
open both. It is activated by the Greek vowel O. 

The fourth is the Navel centre (the lower part of Tiphareth): 
This is a bright yellow sphere with an equal-armed cross of blue. It 
is attributed to the Sun and provides the sphere with all the energy 
of life and power. It is your personal fire and provides vou with the 
energy. It is said that it is this centre provides vou with “awakening” 
which happens when the fires of your Lower Self become transformed 
into those of the higher. Kundalini rises to this centre and takes its 
throne for ever. Seeing this centre tied to the Heart centre and both 
being connected to Tiphareth makes a great deal of sense. When 
opened together they provide you with the desire and the power to 
make what you want happen. When a godform is installed here, you 
should experience a balance of your energy, you start to understand 
how everything is really one thing and there are often feelings of 
7ompassion and love. It is activated by the Greek vowel I. 

The fifth centre is the sacred centre which covers the sexual 

rgans: This is green sphere enclosed with a red ouroboros. It is 
ittributed to Venus and it is the home of the unconscious. This is 
the intelligence that rules our patterns of behaviour and most of 
our automatic life. It is the consciousness that most people live in. 
The Tantrics call it the animal consciousness but it is really all the 
programming that we have developed over life which is pood or bad 
Note the association with the sex drive, which predates Freud by 
2000 years, One of the things which is supposed to happen when the 
centre is under control is that fears are overcome. When a yodtorm 
is installed in this centre it will unpick unconscious association trees 
ata deep level. This could create some tensions as these associations 
rise to the surface so that the person becomes aware of them, and 
then explode. When these associations are removed it is possible 
that a person loses a lot of things that were dependant on them. It 
can also assist the person in seeing those things which have been 
shut down in childhood. So if you have childhood visions you might 
start experiencing these psychic events again. The centre is activated 
by the Greek vowel H (like a breath). 

The sixth centre is in the feet. This centre is violet with a green 
square in the centre and it is ruled by the planet Saturn. There is 
some confusion with this centre because it is associated with the 
anus in Tantra, but as Dion Fortune pointed out, this is because in 


NICK FARRELL 155 


Indian Yoga the feet are tucked under the bottom. This represents 
the physical body, or rather the structure that interfaces between 
itand the Spliere of Sensation. Physical illnesses are often caused by 
thoughts which existed within the Sphere of Sensation which were 
unresolved and having a physical effect on this sphere (it is one 
of the reasons that this, with the sexual organs were tied together). 
This centre is the result of all the others but it also the voice of the 
psychical body crying out what it needs. The centre is activated by 
the Greek vowel 2 (Aw). 

The crown centre: This is not properly a centre but is the divine 
spark in human. It is put above the head and is attributed to the Moon. 
The colour of this sphere is indigo. This might seem odd, particularly 
as we associate the crown with the highest god and white light. But 
the Sphere of Sensation is astral and sub-lunar. What we are working 
with is an astral body and this is ruled by the Moonand Hekate. When 
the centres are fully functioning and balanced they reflect the power 
of the universe. From the Moon we can look out beyond our limited 
spiritual understanding and see the chaos from which order was 
created. This centre connects to the highest mind, the Higher Self, and 
isconsidered the gate to the void. Occult teaching says that humanity 
was always meant to be astral and that our Highe If looked at the 
beauty of the world and decided to play outits story in that. Therefor: 
n we connect to the crown, we are looking at who we really are, 
r than the person who incarnated. Placing a godform in this 
centre allows us to focus our magic on the contact and allow it to 
conna t to the third eve where it is united with the rest of the Sphere 

‘sensation. The Greek letter associated with the crown is the letter A. 
Thus when we vibrate LAO we are stating a mantra to switch on the 
Sun, then the Moon and then to bring it to earth), 


PRACTICE 


It takes a tew weeks to pet each sphere open properly (sometimes 
longer) but it is possible to yet results quite quickly. In your temple 
space light a single tea light before the picture of your Higher Genius. 

Start with the feet, move to the sexual centre, the solar plexus, 
the heart, the throat and then the third eye before moving onto the 
crown. Focus on one centre a day. 

The procedure for each sphere is to breathe in through the nose and 
visualise the air going to the centre. As you breathe out, you visualise 
the negative or locked up energy being expelled from the centre. As 
you do this, vibrate the Greek vowel for the centre. What you are doing 
is removing the negative energy with a word of power which reflects it 


156 HELIOS UNBOUND 


and breathing in new energy to replace it. Do 
this for five minutes 

Do the sign of silence. 

Then invoke vour Higher Genius to 
dwell in that centre. 


I invoke My Higher Genius to indwell and 
take its throne in my [name of centre]. I 
surrender to its will so that I will find my 
own. 


Breathe in and absorb the image into the 
centre. Set your timer for 20 minutes 


CSSSCOSSSSE] 


Vibrate PHÉOUS PHOOUTH (FE-OOS 
FAW-OOTH) [lotus emerged from the Abyss] 
Vibrate the name and see the statue come to 
life inside the centre. Do this for 30 minutes 
while focused entirely on the sphere. The 
goal here is to surrender and accept that the contact is going, to help 
you. As you vibrate you let go a little part of your thinking and allow 
new ideas to emerge. You might find your Higher Genius. talking 
to you and giving you advice but the real thing, here is to feel that 
centre alive with the energy of the god. You should allow feelings 
to come up and experience them. You should note any strange 
ideas you might have. You might experience flashes of power; these 
are normal. In some cases you will experience negative things like 
physical pain. These are all the rebellions of the Lower Self. 

Set your timer for ten minutes and sit for a few moments in 
silence (if you open your eyes you mipht experience some interesting 
psychedelic sensations). The idea is to feel what it is like to have the 
centre open and commune with the god. 

Do the sign of silence and a Greek Cross. 

If you want to develop this further you can also pathwork into 
the centre to further talk to the godform which has now taken up 
their throne. 


STAGE TWO 


With the development of Tarot as a magical and mystical tool in 
the late 19th century attempts were made to interpret the symbols 
of the major arcana. Ideas were taken from the basic symbolism (or 


Ke 


NICK FARRELL 157 


symbolism was added) to fit the various schools of esoteric teaching. 
One success for this emerged from the European Rosicrucian 
groups based around Alois Mailander and J. B. Kerning with their 
interpretation of the Hanged Man’. They reasoned that Hanged 
Man was the Higher Genius reversed and suspended into Matter and 
integrated it into teaching based around placing Greek letters on the 
body. 

"The solar body is shaped like the image you have been using of 
the Higher Genius. It is immediately above the lunar body and sharing 
the same crown (see diagram). You follow the same procedures as 
you did with the lunar body, only you start with the crown and 
move upwards to the feet. 

Unlike the lunar body the centres are not physical but when you 
focus on them they resonate to the physical centres. This creates an 
odd split feeling of consciousness as if you are seeing out of both 
centres at once. This is to be encouraged but your chief focus should 
be the centres on the Solar Body. 


PRACTICE 


Take one centre a day. Start with the crown, move to the throat, heart 
the solar plexus, groin and then the feet of the Solar form. 

The procedure for each sphere is to breathe in through the nose anc 
visualise the air going to the centre. As vou breathe out, you visualis 
the negative or locked up energy being expelled from the centre. As you 
jo this, vibrate the Greek vowel for the centre. Do this for five minutes. 
Then invoke vour contact to dwell in that centre. 


linvoke My Higher Genius to indwell and take its throne in this 
solar body which I have prepared for it. | surrender to its will so 
that I will find my own. 


Breathe in and absorb the image into the centre. Set your timer 
for 20 minutes. 

Vibrate LAL and see the statue come to life inside the centre. 
Do this tor 30 minutes while focused entirely on the sphere. Set 
vour timer for ten minutes and sit for a few moments in silence 
contemplating, what vou have done. 

Do the sign of silence and a Greek Cross. 


THE MYSTICAL MARRIAGE 


The final stage, which is not tried until at least week three, is to 
slowly draw the image of the Higher Genius downward into your 


158 HELIOS UNBOUND 


lower Sphere of Sensation. This is done with visualisation and mantra 
work based around the Greek vowels. 

It is not a straightforward process and takes some serious 
visualisation. 

First slowly vibrate each of the vowels to open the centres. Start 
with the feet move up the lunar body, and to the feet of the Solar 
body. (Q, H, I, O, E, Y, A, Y, E, O, I, H, Q). 

When you have done this allow the crown of the Higher Genius 
to descend to the brow centre and the brow centre of the Higher 
Genius to descend to the crown) 

Focus on your brow and vibrate A Y as a mantra. At this point 
you should be imagining the crown of your Higher Genius connecting 
to your mind. You should do this for five minutes (set the timer), 
then stop and meditate on the quiet for five minutes. 

Then focus on the brow of the Higher Genius connected with 
your crown. Vibrate Y A for five minutes and then spend another 
five minutes meditating on the voice of the Higher Genius working 
on your crown. 

That should be enough for the first day. On the second day 
vibrate each of the vowels as before. This time allow the crown of 
the Higher Genius to descend to the throat centre, the brow centre of 

he Higher Genius to descend to the lunar body brow and the throat 
af the Higher Genius to become the lunar centre's crown. 

Focus on your throat and vibrate A E as a mantra. At this point 
you should be imagining the crown of your Higher Gemius connec tiny 
to your communication centre. You should do this for five minutes 
(set the timer) then stop and meditate 
on the quiet for five minutes. 

Focus on your brow and vibrate 
Y Y as a mantra, At this point vou 
should be imagining the brow ot 
your Higher Gentis. connecting to 
your inner vision. You should do this 
for five minutes (set the timer) then 
stop and meditate on the quiet for 
five minutes. 

Focus on your crown and vibrate 
E A as a mantra. At this point you 
B should be imagining the brow of 
your Higher Genius connecting, to 
7 your spiritual being. You should do 
this for five minutes (set the timer) 


NICK FARRELL 159 


then stop and meditate on the quiet for five minutes. 

On the third day activate all the centres as before and allow 
your Higlier Genius to descend until its crown falls to the heart centre, 
its brow to your throat, its heart to vour crown. 

As before vibrate A O and then meditate, Y,E and meditate, E, Y 
and meditation and O, A and then meditate. 

On the fourth day, activate all the centres and allow your Higher 
Genius to descend until its crown falls to the solar plexus centre, its 
brow to your heart, its throat to your throat, its heart to your brow 
and its solar plexus to your crown. 

Vibrate A 1 and then meditate, Y,O and meditate, E, E and 
meditation, O, Y then meditate and I A and then meditate. 

On the fifth day, activate all the centres and allow your Higher 
Genius to descend until its crown falls to the groin centre, its brow to 
your solar plexus, its throat to your heart, its heart to to your throat, 
its solar plexus to your brow and its groin to your crown. 

Vibrate A, H, and then meditate, Y,I and meditate, E, O and 
meditation, 1, Y then meditate and H A and then meditate. 

On the sixth day activate all the centres and allow your Higher 
Genus to descend until its crown falls to the feet. Its brow will be on 
your groin, its throat on your solar plexus, its heart on your heart, its 

solar plexus on vour throat, its groin on your brow and its feet or 
your crown. 

Vibrate A Q and meditate. Y, H and meditate, E, I and medita: 
OO. then meditate, L E and meditate. H.Y and Q, A and meditate. 

On the seventh day repeat the exercise and end it by visualising 
yourselt becoming a golden hexagram and chanting the following 

A.Q, Y, H, E. L OO, L E, HY, 0, A 

And saving: 

As above is below and below is above. 

Meditate on this. 


CHAPTER FIVE 
MONTH FOUR 


THE MYSTERIES OF THE SEVEN 


WORK FOR THIS MONTH 


This month is about activating the rays, the planets and the gods 
connected to your Sphere of Sensation, purifying, and consecrating 
them so that they become forces at the disposal of the Higher Self. 

In addition to your salutations, and Prima Materia exercise do 
the following ritual daily for four days for each of the seven planets. 


1. Take an appropriately coloured candle and inscribe it with your 
name, the name of the god and the names of all the planetary 
spirits from the Picatrix. After you have inscribed it draw a 
banishing pentagram at it and say, Creature of wax I exorcise 
and cleanse you for my purpose so that you shall be a perfect 
sacrifice to the spirits of [name planet] so that | will be a more 
effective channel for their powers, and those of my Higher Genius. 


m 


p 


pi 


1 


12. 


NICK FARRELL 161 


Place your astrological chart on the altar (orientated so that your 
ascendant is in the East) before a statue or picture of the god you 
are invoking. Place the candle on top of vour chart. Place the 
planetary tarot cards ina circle about the altar where they would 
be in your chart. Make seven copies of the King’s Pentacle for 
that planet. Place one under the altar, and one in the East, South, 
West and North of the circle. Make a paper crown and place one 
pentacle on it. Place the last seal on the small table which you are 
calling the spirit along with its tarot trump and the court card 
(which will be either the day or night card depending on the 
time) Place a saucer on the table, along with a tealight and have 
a bottle of red wine to hand. 

Perform the lesser invoking ritual of the pentagram and the solar 
breath. 

Say, I am a creature of chaos searching for meaning in Order. 
Istand between the Sun and the Moon, the gods and matter, I 
am balanced and the perfected vehicle for my Higher Genius. 
Do the invocation to the Sun for that time of day. 

Visualise vour Higher self descending and chant the following 
A. Q (feet), Y, H, (Groin) E. I (solar plexus), 0,0, (Heart) I, E 
(Throat) H.Y (Brow), £2. A (crown). Becoming a golden hexagram 
and yolden light pouring from your heart. 

Open the quarters and balance the elements, 

Goto the small altar and draw the planetary hexagram to open 
a portal tor the god to appear. 

Pertorm the invocation to the planetary god and light the candle 
on the central altar. Ask this yod that it might open your Sphere of 
Sensit to espress its powers better and vour destiny following 
the will of vour Higher Genius 

Assume the yodtorm ot the planetary god. 


Go to the small altar and say 

In the name of [planet god] I invoke you spirits who manifest 
the powers of [planet] under the Moon and within my Sphere 
of Sensation. I call King [name of planetary spirit] who brings 
forth the powers of [Planet] within me. Awaken those powers 
again so that my Higher Genius may make use them to achieve 
its mission on Earth. I offer you flame (light candle) and wine 
(pour into the saucer) which is a symbol of life blood. Come 
forth as I chant your holy names. 


. Circle the altar six times each time chanting the seven names of 


the king followed by Egeiro (éyeipm) which means "awake." So, 
for an invocation for the Sun you would say, Bandalus Egeiro; 


162 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Dahimas Egeiro; Abadulas Egeiro; Dahifas Egeiro; Atiafas 
Egeiro; Maganamus Egeiro and Gadis Egeiro. 

14. Stop before the small altar see yourself as contained in a cube in 
the colour of the planet with the King before you. Draw the day 
or night geomantic symbol (depending on the time) and allow 
him to form into the image of the tarot court card. Ask him to 
reveal his part of your destiny. Ask him questions about your 
chart and finally ask him to help you awaken your Higher Genius. 

15. Meditate on what you have experienced. 

16. Say, I free all beings seen and unseen who make have been 
trapped by this ceremony. May you go with the blessing of the 
[planetary god]. 

17. Say, Janus has closed 
the Eastern Gate in Peace. 
Janus has closed the 
Western Gate in Peace. 
Janus has closed the 
Northern Gate in Peace. 
Janus has closed the 
Southern Gate in Peace. 

18. Say, The sky quivers. 
The Earth quakes before 
me, for I am a magician 
and I possess magic. 


Bing a agical — systems 
ug  tÀÀá y B ur 


make a great deal 

E about the seven 
~ ?) astrological 

39" planets, but few really explain 

why those enerpies are so 
important. 

We may assume there is a Neo-Platonic over-god or goddess 
who is above all things and is so profound it is known only by what 
itis not. Its roots might be traced to Ancient Egypt where all things 
were created from a primal chaos god called Nu who was the "father 
of the gods" which surrounds a bubble of Order in which the sphere 
of life is encapsulated. 

All wecan becertainaboutthis god is that it wants to understand 
itself, and an aspect of itself formed for the creation of the universe. 
Thisaspectin various magical, philosophical, and religious traditions 


NICK FARRELL 163 


was called the Logos (Móyoc). Logos means "word", "speech", 
"account", "reason", and "proportion,"but it became a technical 
term in philosophy beginning with Heraclitus (c. 535-475 BCE), 
who used the term for a principle of order and knowledge. Logos is 
the logic behind an argument and is the persuasive technique often 
used in writing and rhetoric. From this it came to mean the divine 
ideas which were spoken by the One Thing to build the universe. 

In the Greek magician tradition these words were the seven 
vowels. These vowels were not just sounds, but the ideas of sounds; 
in fact they are much closer to light. These are the seven rays which 
split from the one central light. This has some similarities to an idea 
suggested bv Alice Bailev who suggested a similar concept in her 
Treatise on the Seven Rays as we know them but the seven primal 
ideas of light. 


SEVEN HIDDEN GODS 


This created seven hidden gods, which flow throughout the universe. 
These are seven have never been properly named (the Elohim in 
Genesis is close). For reasons described later, these seven correspon? 
to the seven planets of the ancient solar system and the seven bar 
colours of the spectrum, However, they are more complex than thi 
They weave themselves throughout creation and build a framewor! 
of ideas and a narrative (or stories) upon which creation and things 
like plots and destiny untolds. The closest description of these forces 
occurred during the Middle Ages with the idea of the Olympic Spirits 
although the concept was a corrupted image. The Olympic Spirit 
concept recreated the Olympic gods within a Christian framework, 
but by boiling down such things to seven basi ” the creators 
mimicked the original concept of the seven hidden gods, The hidden 
gods encompass the four elemental forces and the concepts of Love 
and Strife as suyyested by Empedocles. 

This was mirrored in one of the earliest Zeus myths, in which 
Zeus takes the bull-torm known as Taurus to win the heart of Europa 
and his face “gleams with seven rays of fire.” 

The idea of seven rays appears in the Mysteries of Mithras and 
Dionysus, the Chaldean Oracles. The Gnostics and others worshipped 
a God of Seven Rays. It is not clear what these rays were, and they 


* Bailey, A. (1993). A Treatise on the Seven Rays. New York: Lucis Publishing. 


164 HELIOS UNBOUND 


were often seen as an expression of the Sun. In fact, Helios (as 
pictured) was often crowned with seven rays. 
According to the Hermetic work Sermon of Isis to Horus: 


"Seven wandering stars are there which move in the spheres 
before Olympus’ Gate... To these stars’ humanity is committed. 
We have within us Mene, Zeus, Ares, Paphie, Kronos, Helios and 
Hermes, By this means are we destined to draw from the living 
Aether of the Kosmos our tears, mirth, anger, our parenthood, our 
conversation, our sleep and every desire.” 


These rays are not gods, but divine forces working throughout 
creation. If you could reach a state where communication between 
these forces was possible, they would be abstract, non-negotiable, 
alien to the human mind - and yet at the same time annoyingly 
familiar. 


[HE GODS OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM 


The Cosmic Rays might have created the universe, but our solar 
system is special - life exists here. In some ways, it is best to see it asa 
big laboratory with the world as its focus. The goal of the experiment 
is to create a species of life in which the Logos could manifest the 
more complex aspects of itself. The Logos chose to manitest through 
the solar force and each of the seven rays of the planets closest to the 
Earth and thus influence its fate. Their influence was gradual and at 
first dominated by the primal gods and gradually the higher aspects 
of the hidden gods kicked in as life evolved. 

The Sun is therefore the chief god of the solar system while 
the planet called Jupiter is the representative of the chief ruler of 
humanity. The Moon force dominates humanity, mediates the will 
of the Solar Logos, and brings it down to an acceptable level. The 
Over Mind has an idea, it passes this idea to the Cosmic Logos who 
transmutes it to the Solar Logos who adapts it for ils solar system, 
The Moon then mediates it to the Earth. The descent of the middle 
pillar on the Kabbalistic Tree of Life shows this process. 

Note that the hidden gods are not the planets, just that the 
planets are symbols of part of them. 

Obviously, there are more than seven gods or goddesses, but 
there are only seven archetypal forces from which the others are 


NICK FARRELL 165 


derived. We can see them using the above list or build our own 
based on archetypes. The consort of each god is seen as being an 
extension of them. So, Zeus and Hera are polarities of each other as 
the King and Queen archetype. 

The Seven are: 


The Night/Mother/Alternation (Violet Ray) (Exemplified by 
Hekate) 

The Limiter/Time/ Law giver (Indigo Ray) (Exemplified by Kronos ) 
The Wise and Knowledgeable, Ruler (Blue Ray) (Exemplified by 
Athena, and Zeus) 

The Trickster/Communicator/Magician/Poet (Orange Ray) 
(Exemplified bv Hermes) 

The Lover and Creators (Green Rav) (Exemplified by Aphrodite and 
the Mother Goddesses) 

The Warrior and Destrover (Red rav) (Exemplified by Aries and 
Typhon) 

The Healer and the Prophet (Yellow Ray) (Exemplified by Apollo 
and Asklipios) 

Itcan be seen from this list that each of the gods could fit into many 
different archetypes. This is one of the reasons that the gods were 
given titles such as Zeus the Destrover, or Zeus the Wise to tune the 
energy of the godform to suit the power invoked. 

In our solar system the point of contact with these beings wa. 
the Sun, Helios or (later) Mithras or the Yellow Ray. The Sun acts as 
a physical reference point to all those beings who might be cosmic. 

These too might normally be too abstract for most humans, so 
they have another mediator the Moon (Violet Ray). 

These find expression in the seven planets in the solar system 
and the days of the week which is where we see them in magic. 
INDIGO RAY (SATURN) 

Fate, time, the past, limits and boundaries, form, structures 
includiny houses, old aye, serious, ambition, bones, knees, skeleton, 
shins, ankles and circulation, rheumatism, arthritis, envy, suffering, 
fear, guilt, toxins, repressed aspects of the self, death, vermin and 
lice, politicians, scientists, architects, teachers, mines, mountains, 
discipline and wastelands. 

BLUE RAY (JUPITER) 

Water, lawmaking, opportunity, growth, progress, evolution, money, 
banks, rulers, royalty, faith, hope, charity, redemption, freedom, 
spiritual wisdom and development, hypocrisy, hips, thighs, feet, 


166 HELIOS UNBOUND 


lawyers, priests, counsellors, actors, open spaces, public places, and 
panoramic views. 


RED RAY (MARS) 

Fire, wars, anger, action, sexual desire, physical energy, quarrels, 
Courts, justice, courage, protection, transformation, revenge, 
destruction, surgery, the head, genitals, excretory system, rashes, 
red spots, migraine, predators, soldiers, surgeons, athletes, furnaces, 
foundries, and metal work. 


EMERALD RAY (VENUS) 

Earth, love, eroticism, desire, pleasure, inspiration, joy, partnerships, 
peace, laughter, friendship, creativity, the arts, beauty, evaluation, 
promiscuity, over-indulgence, lewdness, gentle animals, the 
throat and neck, kidneys, lower back, diplomacy, artists, fashions, 
bedrooms and gardens. 


ORANGE RAY (MERCURY) 

Communication, movement, messages, computers, the media, 
language, trade, theft, magic, skill, learning, intellect, psychology 
as a science, rationality, cunning and mischievous animals like 
monkeys, the digestive system, arms and hands, merchants, clerks, 
accountants, scholars, universities, examinations, shops, schools, 
airports and train and bus stations. 


PURPLE RAY (MOON) 

The unconscious, habits, instinct, sea, rhythm, the astral realm, 
mysteries, women (particularly their health), mothers, childbirth, 
psychism, menstruation, mental health, the stomach, breasts, warts, 
sterility, obsessions, delusions, insanity, cleaners, brewers, midwives, 
sailors, and harbours. 


YELLOW RAY (SUN) 

Air, leadership, general health, healing, organisation, arrogance, 
display, disdain, drama, fathers, power, individualisation, the heart, 
the back, the lungs, kings, directors, managers, actors, palaces and 
theatres. 


The Yellow, Blue, Red and Green rays are the elemental colours 
which are used to build creation, and these represent the elements. 
Yellow is air, Blue is Water, Red is Fire and Green is Earth, Orange 
is a direct expression of the Logos and represents consciousness. The 
Purple ray represents the force of flux and reflux while the Indigo 
ray restriction and Time. 


NICK FARRELL 167 


Ray/ Day of the 
LEE 46-2 


With these rays of light, the Logos created the four elements of 
air, water, fire and earth and used them to create Chaotic Hyle 
which is a form of proto-matter that is behind all change. Its 
nature is discordant, and it causes expansion and anti-structure. 
It appears random, but given time, it will eventually form an 
ordered system trom its various parts, which it will act to break 
down as soon as it formed. This ordering action, which draws 
together the different chaotic parts into working systems was 
called Eros. The world of Order formed within the world of Chaos. 


THE MASKS 


The seven ‘gods’ might have created humanity, but humanity's first 
experience was with the primal gods. Primitive humanity moved 
about the planet trviny to survive and it developed relationships 
based on fear of the natural forces around it. Built from the seven 
hidden yods, they had the power to create masks for these primal 
forces, These masks allowed them to understand the forces, build 
up myths around them, and relate to them. Like many relationships 
based on fear these were not too successful. Humans created 
monsters that haunted their nights and needed supplication and 
sacrifice. Gradually humanity evolved past these fears enough to 
develop those higher emotions and could slowly replace the primal 


168 HELIOS UNBOUND 


gods with those more intricately linked to the hidden seven. 

The lesson of the masks was still valid. Humanity could not 
understand the seven forces except through the masks that they 
created. One man, or culture, might see Venus as a harlot while 
another would see her as fertility. All gods are an aspect of the seven 
including those that claim to be monotheist. True monotheism is 
a difficult concept to imagine. Monotheists might think they are 
worshipping the One God, but they all give that God different 
attributes. Jesus can have paradoxical masks of being love and yet 
being a harsh unsympathetic judge who tortures people for eternity. 
In terms of the hidden gods, these are two different rays with a 
similar mask. 

The hidden gods have an enormous number of masks in fact every 
human can create one for all the forces they create. Some are stronger 
and more important than others. The strongest are those that have the 
largest number of people who emotionally agree on their composition 
and over the longest period. A mask might be retired if the religion is 
extinguished, but its power will simply sleep. It can be reawakened if 
the circumstances that created it are stirred. 

Humanity continues to give masks to gods that are increasingly in 

heir own image. This is not necessarily bad. The masks have power to 
seak, act and carry out the will of the hidden god they stand for. Built 
om human minds, they can sometimes act in human ways or have 
1uman functions that the hidden god may not express particularly well 
Zeus may be the symbol of the perfect ruler, but in the Mad, he makes 
mistakes particularly in the way he treats Hera. Some gods also feature 
elements of others - Athena is the Goddess of Wisdom and vet she has 
a trickster element like Hermes. Athena the trickster (seen as the guide 
of Odysseus) becomes a different "hidden god." This is one reason 
why the titles of the gods and goddesses are so important in magic. 
The titles help us correctly tune the magic so that it reaches the correct 
hidden god (or group of them). All gods and goddesses fit into one ot 
the seven hidden god or goddess categories even though they might 
have different names or myths. For example, Vesta is connected to the 
same hidden god as Vulcan, Mars and Hades. 


DAMONS 


The hidden god is the divine force, the mask stands for the best 
aspect that humanity can make of that force, but neither can work 
with humanity on a physical level. A hidden god, wearing its mask, 
stirs up a form within the astral matter which surrounds the Earth. 


NICK FARRELL 169 


This is a thought-form or entity that can influence material matters. 
This thought-form is created in the same way that a human is built, 
which is why it can influence matter. 

A hidden god wishing to create a storm will use a mask of itself 
in storm god mode. It will form an image of this storm god on the 
astral and this will attract all the proper elements on the astral plane. 
Once it has enough momentum in the stirring on the astral, it will 
start to influence the physical sphere. This image is a demon. This 
is an important formula to understand how physical magic works 
but for now it is important to realise that 99.99 per cent of what a 
magician works with is an astral dæmon and not anything else. 


THE CREATION OF HUMANITY 


A human is created in the same way as a dæmon and they are similar. 
The Logos creates an idea for a human and the hidden gods weave 
that idea into the life pattern. This divine idea supplies consciousness 
and a soul for human life. It enters a narrative (or destiny) and 
experience to help the Logos understand some aspect of itself. Most 
life stories are mundane because the Logos needs to understand itse! 
in ordinary contexts far more than it needs to understand itself 
special situations. Magicians and philosophers in small numbers 
the process. A trained magician can act like a dæmon on Earth 
co-operating, with the divine forces. It does this to restore a balanci 
and ensure that the narrative does not become too dystopian (or if it 
does that humanity has the means to move from it). 

Trained magicians are rare, and it takes time to work out their 
role, As davmons, magicians reflect the mask of the god who trains 
them. Their life in some way follows the path of that god. Thus, those 
on the path of Thoth tend to be writers or similar communicators; 
Anubis tends to attract those who have something to do with death; 
Hekate those who have the job of guiding others; Horus is connected 
to the military or police; Isis tends to have a path where the mother 
is dominant. This is complicated by the concept of the “Hero” which 
may also serve as a trainer and a contact. 


THE MAGICIAN AND THE GODS 


\ magician is not a priest. A priest's role is to mediate the powers 
of the god or goddess into their community and awaken in that 
community an understanding of that mask. They may perform 
miracles in the name of that god, but their goals are one of worship. 
They look to mobilise humanity to a general evolution through 


170 HELIOS UNBOUND 
belief in a higher power. 

A magician does not need belief in a higher power; they know 
it is there. Their relationship with their contact means they step 
outside the norms of society and often must perform magic that is 
outside what such a community thinks it needs. 

Whena magician performs magic for someone else, it is not part 
of a general pious hope but to help him or her towards a specific 
goal or destiny. A magician is like Thoth, always on the balance 
point, and sometimes needs to side with Set as often as Osiris. Such 
a person does not fit with the desires of a community for stability. 

A magician may worship a god, but it is something they do 
in their spare time and part of their own personal devotion. What 
is more common is that they perform rituals to bring them closer 
to those gods so that they can help each other. This relationship 
is precarious, as the chosen mask will only co-operate with the 
magician while there is work to be performed and there are none 
of the rewards that the mask offers its worshippers available to the 
magician. 

Another aspect of the relationship is, when working with the 
Higher Genius, the magician uses the power of the god to bring about 

nange either in their own lives or that of the wider world. It is 
assible because a human is made from combinations of the seven 
ays and are effectively masks of divine forces themselves. It makes 
sense then that the Higher Genius within the personality should be 
reminded of its powers under the seven rays as they manifest in the 
solar system and the sphere of sensation. 

A magician can do this by performing, planetary attunement 
rituals which awaken the ray, planet and god within. A ritual will 
result in a purification and consecration but will mostly remind the 
Higher Genius of its powers. 


PLANETS AND DAYS OF THE WEEK 

The Greeks and the Romans said that a god ruled each day of 
the week. It makes sense then that the best days to contact those 
planetary spirits are on that day. 


Luna/Selene ruled Monday 

Mars/ Aries ruled Tuesday 
Mercury/Hermes ruled Wednesday 
Jupiter/Zeus ruled Thursday 
Venus/ Aphrodite ruled Friday 
Saturn/ Kronos ruled Saturday 


NICK FARRELL 171 
Sol/ Helios ruled Sunday 


The invocations to those spirits are: 


SUN 


HELIOS* 


HEAR golden Titan. King of mental fire. 

Ruler of light; to you supreme belongs 

The splendid key of life's prolific fount; 

And from on high you pour harmonic streams 

In rich abundance into matter's worlds. 

Hear! for high raised above the aethereal plains, 
And in the world's bright middle orb thou reigns, 
Whilst all things by your sovereign power are filled 
With mind-exciting, providential care. 

The starry fires surround your vigorous fire, 

And ever in unwearied, ceaseless dance, 

Over the wide dew bearing Farth. 

By thy perpetual and repeated course, 

The hours and seasons in succession rise; 

And hostile elements their conflicts cease, 

Soon as they view your fearful beams, great king, 
From deity ineffable and secret born. 

Ihe steady Parcae, at your high command, 

Ihe fatal thread of mortal life roll back; 

For wide-extended, sovereign s is yours. 

As famed Adonis, delicate and fair. 

Ferocious Daemons, noxious to mankind, 

Dread the dire anger of thy rapid scourge; 
Demons, who machinate a thousand ills, 
Pregnant with ruin to our wretched souls, 

That merged beneath life’s dreadful-sounding sea, 
In body's chains severely they may toil, 

Nor ever remember in the dark abyss 

Ihe splendid palace of their fire sublime. 

Oh best of gods, blessed Dæmon crowned with fire, 
Image of nature's all-producing god 

And the soul's leader to the realms of light. 

Hear! and refine me from the stains of guilt; 


* Proclus, Five Hymns translated by Thomas Taylor. 


172 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The supplication of my tears receive, 
And heal my wounds defiled with noxious gore; 
The punishments remit 

And mitigate the swift, sagacious eye 

Of sacred justice, boundless in its view. 

By thy pure law, dread evil's constant foe, 
Direct my steps, and pour thy sacred light 

In rich abundance on my clouded soul: 

Dispel the dismal and malignant shades 

Of darkness, pregnant with poisoned ills, 

And to my body proper strength afford, 

With health, whose presence splendid gifts imparts. 
Give lasting fame; and may the sacred care 

With which the fair-haired muses gifts, of old 
My pious ancestors preserved, be mine. 

Add, if it please thee, all-bestowing god, 
Enduring riches, piety's reward; 

For power omnipotent invests thy throne, 

With strength immense and universal rule. 


MOON 
HEKATE-SELEN E* 


Come to me, beloved mistress, Three-faced 

Selene; hear my sacred chants; 

Night's ornament, young, bringing light to mortals, 
Child of dawn who rides upon fierce bulls, 

Queen who drives your car on equal book 

With Helios, who with the triple forms 

Of triple Graces dance in revel with 

The stars. You're Justice and the Moira's threads: 
Klotho and Lachesis and Atropos. 

Three-headed, you're Persephone, Megaira, 

Allekto, many-formed, who arm your hands 

With dreaded, murky lamps, who shake your locks 
Of fearful serpents on your brow, who sound 

The roar of bulls out from your mouths, whose womb 
Is decked out with the scales of creeping things, 
With poisonous rows of serpents down the back, 
Bound down your backs with horrifying chains. 
Night-Crier, bull-faced, loving solitude, 
Bull-headed, you have eyes of bulls, the voice 


* PGM IV.2785-2890 


NICK FARRELL 


Of dogs; you hide your forms in shanks of lions, 
Your ankle is wolf-shaped, fierce dogs are dear 
To you, wherefore they call you Hekate, 
Many-named, Mene, cleaving air just like 
Dart-shooter Artemis, Persephone, 

Shooter of deer, night shining, triple-sounding, 
Triple-headed, triple-voiced Selene. 
Triple-pointed, triple-faced, triple-necked, 

And goddess of the triple ways, who hold 
Untiring flaming fire in triple baskets. 

And you who oft frequent the triple way 

And rule the triple decades, unto me 

Whom calling you be gracious and with kindness 
Give heed, you who protect the spacious world 
At night, before whom Demons quake in fear 
And gods immortal tremble, goddess who 

Exalt men, you of many names, who bear 

Fair offspring, bull-eyed, horned, mother of gods 
And men, and Nature, Mother of all things, 

For you frequent Olympus, and the broad 

And boundless chasm you traverse. Beginning 
And end are you, and you alone rule all. 

For all things are from you, and in you do 

All things, Eternal one, come to their end. 

As everlasting band around your temples 

You wear great Kronos' chains, unbreakable 

And unremovable, and you hold in 

Your hands a golden sceptre. Letters round 

Your sceptre Kronos wrote himself and gave 

To you to wear that all things stay steadfast: 
Subduer and subdued, mankind's Subduer, 

And force-subduer; Chaos, too, you rule. 
APAPANAPA Hd: IKHPE 
JAR-AR-ACH-AR-A*EF-TE EEK-'ER-E| 
Hail, goddess, and attend your epithets, 
Dart-shooter, heavenly one, goddess of harbours, 
Who roams the mountains, goddess of crossroads, 
O nether and nocturnal, and infernal, 

Goddess of dark, quiet and frightful one. 

O you who have your meal amid the graves, 
Night, Darkness, broad Chaos: Necessity 

Hard to escape are you; you're Moira and 


173 


174 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Erinys, torment, Justice and Destroyer, 

And you keep Kerberos in chains, with scales 

Of serpents. Are you dark, you with hair 

Of serpents, serpent-girded, who drink blood, 

Who brings death and destruction, and who feasts 

On hearts, flesh eater, who devours those dead 

Untimely, and you who make grief resound 

And spread madness, come to my sacrifices. 

Come, Hekate, of flaming council, 

Iinvoke you with these incantations. 

BOYOP®OPBH IIAN®OPBA ®OPBAPA AKTIOGI HPEXXITAA 
NEBOYTOLOYAAHO 

[VOO-OR-FOR-V’E PAN-FOR-VA PHOR-VARA AK-TEEO-FEE 
*ERE-SCHI-GAL NEV-0O-TO-SOO-AL-'ETH] (nine times). 


MARS 
ARES* 


Ares, exceeding in strength, chariot-rider, golden-helmed, 
Doughty in heart, shield-bearer, 

Saviour of cities, harnessed in bronze, 

Strong of arm, unwavering, mighty 

With the spear, O defence of Olympus, 

Father of warlike Victory, ally of Themis, 

Stern governor of the rebellious, leader of righteous men, 
Sceptred King of manliness, who whirl your fiery sphere 
Among the planets in their sevenfold 

Courses through the aether, 

Wherein your blazing steeds ever bear 

You above the third firmament of heaven. 


* The Greek Magical Papyri have few. references to Ares (pretering to use 
Set-Typhon for the Mars function). I have used the Homeric Hymn to Ares 
(Anonymous. The Homeric Hymns and Homeri with an English Translation 
by Hugh G. Evelyn-White. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, MA. Harvard 
University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.) with the words 
of power using PGM IV 850 which was taken from Homers [aad 5 386. This 
means “Ares endured when Otos and mighty Ephialtes ... him.” Homer 
included the world bound but the PGM writer dropped the word in that 
spell and in another which uses the same verse. It refers two giants who 
bound Ares ina bronze jar until Hermes liberated him. Dropping the word 
appeared to be a deliberate use of word magic. Instead of binding Ares (as 
this verse would do, the sentence makes him strong in the face of adversity. 


NICK FARRELL 175 


Hear me, helper of men, giver of dauntless youth! 

Shed down a kindly ray from above upon my life, and strength of 
war, that I may be able to drive away 

Bitter cowardice from my head and crush 

Down the deceitful impulses of my soul. 

Restrain also the keen fury of my heart which provokes 

me to tread the ways of blood-curdling strife. 

Rather, Oh blessed one, give you me boldness to abide 

within the harmless laws of peace, 

avoiding strife and hatred and the violent death Demons. 

TAH MEN APHE OTE MIN QTOE KPATEPOX 

TE@IAATHE 

[IL'E MEN AR-'ES O-TE MEEN AW-TOS KRA-TE-ROS T E-FEE- 
AL-T'ES] 

(Five times.) 


MERCURY 
THOTH-HERMES 


Icall upon the great translator of the word from which all creation 
was formed. Mind of the One Thing, 

Come forth from your home in Mount Kyllene in Arkadia. Be 
present amongst your sheep, of which you are the great shepherd. 
Come forth Champion of Akakesion, who rules the marketplace 
and the crafts. Who teaches the way of business, and upon whom 
all fortune rests. 

Guide, Minister, Messenger who brings the highest to the lowest, 
and the lowest to the throne of the One Thing. 

Messenger of the Blessed Ones who holds the map of the universe 
in your caduceus and knows all the ways, even to the darkest 
Hades. 

Guardian of the three-fold cross-roads, Slayer of Argos, the 
Trickster, Contriver whose mind and tongue can destroy all. Wily, 
Shifting, Many-Turning, is your name, patron of writers and 
magicians. 

I will invoke thee by thy name ERINNES, the giver of good 
fortune for that is what you have done, and I will tell others of 
your powers so that they shall lean upon thee as I have. 

And they will say, Great are the deeds of Thoth-Hermes. 

For you are a god amongst gods, one of the seven mighty ones. 
Come forth Pronaos and lead us into the portico of your Mysteries. 
For I know your forms. In the East you are an Ibis, in the West you 


176 HELIOS UNBOUND 


are a Dog-faced baboon, in the South you are wolf and in the north 
you are a serpent. 

I know that you come from Hermopolis. 

Come to me Thoth-Hermes as I chant the holy name which you 
rejoice to hear 


ABEPAMENOQ Q@NEMAPEBA* 
(A-VE-RA-MEN-THAW AWTH-NE-MA-RE-VA) 
(Eight Times) 


JUPITER 
EUS 


Most glorious of Immortals, mighty God, 
Invoked by many a name, sovereign King 
Of universal Nature, piloting 
This world so it is in harmony with your Law. 
It is good that mortals should invoke you, 
For we are your offspring, and souls of all 
Created things that live and move on earth 
eceive from you the image of the One. 
Therefor I praise you, and shall hymn your power 
Unceasingly. Thee the wide world obeys, 
As onward ever in its book it rolls 
Where ever you guide, and rejoices still 
Beneath Thy sway: so strong a minister 
Is held by your unconquerable hands, — 
That two-edged thunderbolt of living fire 
That never fails. 
Under its dreadful blow 
All Nature reels; when you direct it. 
The Universal Reason which, with all the greater 
and the lesser lights, 
Moves through the Universe. 
How Mighty you are, 
The Lord supreme for ever 
No work is formed apart from you, O God, 


* This 12-letter word means “Lord of the Waters" and is a reference to 
Thoth as the creator. The world of 12 letters is reflected. 

T Hymn to Zeus by Cleanthes of Assos (330 BCE - 232 BCE), translated by E. 
H. Blakeney (1927) and slightly updated by me. 


NICK FARRELL 177 


Or in the world, or in the heaven above, 

Oron the deep, save only what is done 

By sinners in their folly. 

You can make the rough smooth, 

bring forth wondrous order 

From chaos, and in your sight unloveliness 
Seems beautiful; 

for so you have fitted things 

Together, order and chaos, so that there reigns 
One everlasting Reason in all. 

Most bounteous God that is enthroned 

in clouds, the Lord of lightning, save mankind 
From grievous ignorance! 

Oh, scatter it 

Far from their souls, and grant them to achieve 
True knowledge, on whose might you rely 

To govern all the world in righteousness; 

That so, being honoured, we may thee requite 
With honour, chanting without pause thy deeds, 
As all men should: since greater guerdon ne'er 
Befalls or man or god than evermore 

Duly to praise the Universal Law. 

"I call upon you, master of the gods, high-thundering 
Zeus, sovereign Zeus 

AION IAQ OYEE 

AY-ON EF-AH-AW OO-EE 

(Vibrate four times.) 


VENUS' 
APHRODITI- BARZAN 


Linvoke Golden Aphrodite, 

Who wakens with her smile the lulled delight 

Of sweet desire, taming the eternal kings 

Of Heaven, and men, and all the living things 

That fleet along the air, or whom the sea, 

Or earth, with her maternal ministry. 

I call upon You, the Mother and Mistress of Nymphs. 

Foam-born Aphrodite, ethereal and Chthonic mother of gods and 
men. All-Mother Nature, goddess unsubdued. You hold together 


* The first part of the invocation is Percy Bysshe Shelley's (1792 - 1822) 
adaption of a Homeric Hymn and the second part is PGM IV 2916 


178 HELIOS UNBOUND 


things and cause the Great Fire to revolve and keep the ever- 
moving BAPZAN (VAR-ZAN*) in its unbroken course. 

You accomplish everything from beginning to end. 

By your will the holy water is mixed and with your hands POYZO 
(ROO-ZAW)f is moved amid the stars. You control at the world's 
midpoint and move holy desire into human and draw men and 
women together and make them desirable. 

Through all the days to come, our Goddess Queen. Come to these 
chants, Mistress 


APPQPI@PALI (AR-RAW-REE-FRA-SEE) 

TQOQHTINI (GAW-TH'E-TEENEE) 

KYIIPOTENEIA (KY-PRO-GE-NEE-A)t 

ZOYI HE ONOBOXOY(SOO-EE ‘ES THNO-VO-CHOO) 
OOPIOE (THO-REE-THE) 

EOENEIIIO (STHE-NE-PEE-AW) 

Come in, Holy Light, and give Answer, showing Your Lovely 
Shape!" 


SATURNS 
KRONOS 


Oh Kronos, you who restrain the thumos of all mortals. 

Icall you, the great, holy, the one who created the whole inhabited 
world, against whom transgression was committed by your own 
son , you whom Helios bound with adamantine fetters lest the 
universe be mixed together, you hermaphrodite, father of the 
thunderbolt, you who hold down those under the earth 

AIE OI IAIAAAIX (E-E EE PE-DA-LEES) 

@PENOTEIXEIAQI (FRE-NO-TEE-CHEE-DAW-EE) 

ETYTAPAHE (STY-GAR-D'ES) 

ZANKAEON (SAN-KLE-ON) 


* Betz drops the v in his edition and writes the word Barza and says it is Old 
Persian meaning "shining." Preinsendanz keeps the v making, BAR-ZAN 
which is Old Persian and means quarter or street. It came to mean division 
of a city. This means the word refers to the Zodiac divided into quarters 
+ Betz reads the first letters Rh while Preinsendanz just sees an. R. POYZ2 
could be a corruption of the Persian magic world "Zouro^ could mean 
"purity." None of these words describes anything which can be clearly 
understood. It could represent the fire of passion. 
+ Word means Cyprus born 
8 Adapted from PGM IV 3086 


NICK FARRELL 179 


TENEXPONA (GE-NE-CHRO-NA) 

KOIPAWAI (KEE-RA-PSE) 

KHPIAEY (K'E-REE-DEF) 

OAAAMNIA (THA-LA-MNEE-A) 

Come, master, god, and tell me your mysteries for I am the one 
who revolted against you. 

Appear before me calm to speak about the things I ask. Help me 
to understand your mysteries for I am like unto you part of Aion a 
creature of chaos seeking knowledge in Order so that the universe 
be maintained. 

Be gracious to me lord. 


THE SEVEN KINGS OF THE EARTH 


The Seven Kings of the Earth are identified by the 16th century 
magician Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa in his Three Books of Occult 
Philosophy” (De Occulta Philosophia libri III) as the planetary spirits 
Zazel, Saturn, Hismael, Jupiter, Bartzabel, (Mars), Sorath, (Sun), 
Kedemel, Venus, Taphthartharath. Mercury, and Chashmodai, 
(Moon). While most people associate these with being outside the 
sphere of the earth, the Kev of Solomon makes it clear that they are 
beneath the firmament” and not celestial. The names are Hebrew, 
and some seem to be sourced from Paracelsus but there seems te 
be some contusion to their nature and some of this was becaus: 
Agrippa wanted to create names which fitted into his magic squares 
and had to change some ot the names to fit into the gematria of each 
square 

Zaz, which is a Hebrew name meaning "go away", was part 
of the word “Mezuzah” which was what the Israelites put on their 
doors in Egypt: “death” (Mavet) “go away" (Mavet and Zaz) The 
words appeared on a lot ot Hebrew amulets. It is also a variant of the 
name of Zeus} with Mount Zeus being Mount Zast. The Grimorium 
Verum uses Zazel as a spirit to torment someone in a love spell. Some 
vurrently think that his name was originally the Azazel who was an 
important part ot the Hebrew scapegoat ritual, in which the sins of the 
people were piven toa goat that was run into the wilderness. Bartzabel 
is possibility a corruption of Za'al Zobül, a Semitic god whose name 


* Agrippa von Nettesheim, H. (1982). Three Books of Occult Philosophy or 
magic. New York: AMS Press. 


1 Mierzwicki, T. (2006). Graeco-Egyptian magick. Stafford: Megalithica Books. 


+ Pherecydes (6^ century BCE) developed a cosmogony, derived from 
three divine principles, Zas (Zeus), [ Cthonie (Earth) and Kronos (Time), 


180 HELIOS UNBOUND 


means "lord of the dwelling." Hismael is close to a corruption of 
Ishmael, who was the first son of Abraham, the founder of the Arabian 

race. Sorath could be a Hebrew transliteration of the Arabic "Surat" 
(aka "Surah") which is the word for "chapter" in the Koran. Kedemel 
means “East,” "ancient" or "old god." Taphthartharath could come 
froma corruption of Thaphaboath, a gnostic demon whose name was 

based on the Hebrew name for Tartarus or the place of punishment". 
Chashmodai is rather too close to the name of Ashmodai, an important 
demon who appears to have been the Syrian Hamathites God Ashima, 
who was based on the Akkadian fate goddess Shimti. 

While only some of these "roots" may be accurate it shows that 
these names come from a variety of different sources, traditions and 
levels, none of which were especially planetary or natural. I was 
trained in the Agrippa system and it dovetails nicely into the Key of 
Solomon work, it also has the power that magicians have used it for a 
few hundred years and thus created an adequate mask for the forces 
they represent. However for this system it lacks a logical coherence 
for the nature spirits. 

I look to a much older system found in the Arabic Picatrix* 
which may date to the first part of the ninth century and synthesised 
Sabianism, Ismailism, with Greek Hermetic texts of magic and 

istrology with more ancient Chaldean systems. Its Latin form was 

ugely influential on the magical systems of Renaissance, As à 
source for these spirits Picatrix quotes the Liber Autimuquis which 
was a Latin translation of the Arabic Kitab al-Istamatis. This book 
was important as it proved the survival of a Hermetic Tradition ot 
magic within the Muslim culture? based around the mysterious 
Sabianists. § 

It mentions seven planetary spirits, which are made up of six 
others - one for each direction, North, South, East, West, the sky and 


* Thaphahaboath appeared in Origen's Contra Celsum which Agrippa 
quotes from. 

+ Greer, J. and Warnock, C. (2010). The Piatra. Place of publication not 
identified: Adocentyn Press. 
$ See Hermann of Carini and the Kitab al-Istamatis: Further Eentene 
for the Transmission of Hermetic Magic Charles S. F. Burnett Jonrnal of the 
Warburg and Courtauld Institutes Vol. 44 (1981), pp. 167-169 

§ The Picatrix quotes ibn Wahshiyya's The Nabatean Agriculture which is the 
chief source for the Sabians, and was translated in 904 in time for it to be 
an influence on the writer of the Picatrix. The Sabians were considered the 
inheritors of the Ancient Babylonian system of magic along with Hermetic 
Greek systems. 


NICK FARRELL 181 


the Earth. While many might see these as celestial figures there are 
several reasons to discount that: 
Each planetary force is a cube, a symbol of matter. 


* They need offerings which implies they are Demons. 

* Their functions are all material. 

*  Theyrule the six parts of the seven climes of the Earth which 
come from the ancient Greek astrologer Ptolemy who listed 
parallels, starting with the equator, and proceeding north at 
seven intervals. This system was adopted in Arabo-Persian 
astronomy and eventually bv al-Razi, the author of the 16th- 
century haft iglim ("seven climes"). Ptolemy's work, which 
was based on half-hour differences in the length of the 
solstitial day was a development of Aristotle who thought 
there were five zones (from north to south) Arctic, European 
(northern temperate) Africa (Equator) Antipodes (southern 
temperate zone) and Antarctic. 

* They are not depicted as being either ordered or chaotic but 
hold the same balance as humanity and natural forces. 

+ These are extremely “physical spirits" according to Liber 
Antimaguis trom these spirits “a spiritual virtue enters into 
every part of the world. From them come good and ev 
fortune and mistortune to all creatures, as each one (of tl 
spirits) is moved in its sphere, its sign, and its powers. Fro, 
them come prayers, and by them (the influence of) magica 
workings are received, and those miracles performed that 
man can do, and they are assigned to the men of every part 
of the world, and to every man according to the share of 
intellect he has, and to the offices that are used by men.*” 


To complicate the concept slightly, Liber Autimaquis says that none 
of the spirits are embodied. In fact three of them (above front and 
behind) have "nothiny terrestrial" in their composition but the other 
spirits do. What this says is that three spirits actas the soul of nature 
and dwell above the firmament close to their celestial planetary 
source. While the other three (those of left right and below) are 
compounded with terrestrial things. 


The superior spirits are above, in front, and behind because the 
virtues of these spirits foretell the complexion and birth of man. 


* Renaissanceastrology.com. (2018). Spirits from the Liber Antimaquis. 
[online] Available at: http:/ / www.renaissanceastrology.com/ 
liberantimaquisspirits.html [Accessed 1 Apr. 2018]. 


182 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The other three, which are assigned to the right, the left, and 
below, are embodied and conjoined to diverse bodies and plants in 
the manner which we have described." 


In modern magical terms the spirit above is the Higher Self of the 
planetary spirit, the spirit before is its direction or fate; the one behind 
is its memory. The spirit on the right hand is its active force and the 
one on the left its passive, and the one below is its physical body. 
These add up to its total identity. In addition, both sources give the 
name of an eighth spirit which represents the motion of the planet 
when it interacts with other forces. This name becomes important 
when we are attempting to transform one element to another. 

For example, the spirit of Saturn's name is Barimas. Its Higler 
Self is Tus; the spirits fate is Tamas; its memory Darus, active force 
Darjus; passive force Qajus and its body is Harus. 

This shows a hexagram of lower and higher forces which can 
be expressed on the Kabbalistic tree of life and a cube of matter. The 
name of Barimas in transformation or motion is Tahitus. 

The name of the Jupiter spirit is Damahas, its Higher Self is 
Darmas, his body is Matis, its ordering force is Magis, the chaotic 
self is Daris, its fate is Tamis, and its memory is Farus. The name of 
Damahas in transformation or motion is Dahidas. 

The name of the Mars spirit is Dagdijus, its Higher Selfis Hayidis 
his body is Gidijus, its active force is Magras, the passive self is 
Ardagus, its fate is Handagijus, and its memory is Mahandas. The 
name of Dagdijus in transformation or motion is Dahidas 

The name of the Sun spirit is Bandalus, its Higher Self is Dahimas, 
his body is Abadulas, its active force is Dahifas, its passive is Atiatas 
its fate is Maganamus, its memory is Gadis. The name of Bandalus 
in transformation or motion is Tahimaris. 

The name of the Venus spirit is Didas, her Higher Self is Gilus 
her body is Hilus, her active power is Dahifas, her passive power is 
Ablimas, her fate is Basalmus and her memory is Arhus, The name 
of Didas in transformation or motion is Dahtaris. 

The name of the Mercury spirit is Barhujas, his Higher Self is 
Amiras, his body is Hitis, active power is Sahis, passive power is 
Daris, his fate is Hilis and memory is Dahdis. The name of Barhujas 
in transformation or motion is Mahudis. 

The name of the Moon spirit is Garnus, her Higher Self is Hadis, 
her body is Maranus, active power is Maltas, passive power is Timas, 
her fate is Rabis and her memory is Minalus. The name of Garnus in 
transformation or motion is Dagajus. 

These spirits can be made in a pentacle with the names of the 


NICK FARRELL 183 


seven names in the outer ring with the main name of the spirit along 
with their sigil drawn on the magic square of the Sun. For the sake 
of not having to write the letters in Arabic they should be written in 
Theban (see page 190). 

In the Picatrix these names are words of power and can be used 
assuch in any magic working. A ritual invoking Garnus could focus 
on the chanting of her names to raise power from the matter in the 
immediate environment. The number of times you chant is not fixed 
and continues until vou feel that there is enough energy in the room. 

For the activation of a single force, the name of transformation 
or motion is not required. However, if vou want to transform one 
force into another, perhaps using the geomantic symbols, then you 
should use the name of transformation or motion of the force which 
represents the status quo. So if vou were feeling blocked or depressed 
(which is a state caused by Barimas) vou would invoke all the names of 
Barimas but add the spirit which represents its transformation before 
invoking the names for Jupiter (lov and expansion) or the Moon (the 
way forward). You would not have to invoke the eighth name for the 
second planet because vou do not wish it to transform yet. 

Itis important to remember that these spirits are close to natural 
forces so in many respects you are speaking to physical objects and 
drawing the power out of them. That power needs BS alway? to by 
balanced which is 
why the Kings of the 
Earth need offerings 
The Puatriv insists 
on some. particularly 
unpleasant. offerings: 


including monkey 
brains, leopard's 
blood, and the 


occasional burnt 
human skull, but 
these can be replaced 
by similar symbols 
(such as a skull candle, red wine, and figurines of an animal). The 
offerings should not be given during the first ritual but should be 
made after the spirits have delivered on your rite's intention (after 
all if the spirit has ignored you then there is nothing which needs to 
be balanced). 

In the Picatrix these names are words of power and can be used 
assuch in any magic working. A ritual invoking Garnus could focus 


184 HELIOS UNBOUND 


on the chanting of her names to raise power from the matter in the 
immediate environment. The number of times you chant is not fixed 
and continues until you feel that there is enough energy in the room. 

Being spirits which rule the material level, they are not 
completely ordered or chaotic. I have a theory that the name of the 

"active power" is the spirit who orders matter while the "passive 
spirit" is chaotic, but this needs further experimentation. 

In their natural state spirits are not at all anthropomorphic. 
When they are called, they appear in their positions above, below, 
left, right behind and before the circle. They appear as a presence 
rather than using any form and space; vibrate and focus on the 
centre of the room. When the names are chanted the power is drawn 
up from the floor into a cone of spiralling energy. It is a good idea 
to use this centre of power to place vour pentacle of the spirit, any 
candle or offerings. This power can be focused using the geomantic 
symbols mentioned below. However, it is possible to use forms 
based on their associated tarot court card if they are used alongside 
geomantic forces. 

In my book Making Talismans 1 say that using planetary Earth 
spirits is like negotiating with the electricity to turn on an electric 
light and recommend working with "safer" planetary angels 

instead. While I still see working with the planetary Earth spirits 
as harder, working with them sometimes becomes vital. There is à 
need to "earth" higher workings, particularly those which need a 
physical effect. The Kings of the Earth can make that happen. Initial 
offerings should be made during the ritual, particularly wine or 
meat or incense, to draw the spirit to the ritual. The main offerings 
should not be given after the spirits have delivered on your rites 
intention (after all if the spirit has ignored you then there is nothing, 
which needs to be balanced). Don't make the mistake | did and give 
the full offering of thanks at the first sign of a result, The Planetary 
Kings are not angels or gods who will “know what vou mean” and 
automatically continue their work, The spirits have absolutely no 
sense and will say “thanks every much" and down tools. Ht is helpful 
to think of them like computer data which has an on-off switch and 
controlled by the other beings vou invoke. 

For the activation of a single force, the name of transtormation or 
motion is not needed. However, if you want to transform one force 
into another, using the geomantic symbols, then you should use the 
name of transformation or motion for the force which represents the 
status quo. So, if you were feeling blocked or depressed (which is a 
state caused by Barimas) you would invoke all the names of Barimas 


NICK FARRELL 185 


but add the spirit Tahitus which stands for its transformation before 
invoking the names for the Jupiter (Joy and expansion) or the Moon 
(the way forward). You would not have to invoke the eighth name 
for the second planet because you do not wish it to transform yet. 

During any invocation make seven copies of the King's pentacle. 
Place one under the altar, and one in the East, South, West and North 
of the circle. Make a paper crown and place one pentacle on it. This 
will provide you with some protection from the spirit hurting you 
while at the same time helping vour Spliere of Sensation adapt to the 
spirit's force. Place the last seal on the altar which you are calling 
the spirit. 


BANDALUS 

Planet: Sun 

Divine Names: 

Bandalus answers to the divine names of Helios. 

Names of Parts: 

His Higher Self is Dahimas, his body is Abadulas, his active force is 


Dahifas, his passive is Atiafas, his fate is Maganamus, his memory is 
Gadis. His name in transformation or motion is Tahimaris. 


Names of Power: 
Bandalus, Dahimas, Abadulas, Dahifas, Atiafas, Maganamus, Gadis. 
The other name used to transform or move him is Tahimaris. 


Elemental Nature: 

Fire. 

Gods: 

He is a direct reflection of Helios Apollo and the Sun Gods. 

Ray: 

Yellow: 

Tarot: 

By day (ie.a day chart) Bandalus takes the form and nature of the 
Knight of Wands. By night takes of the form and nature of the 
Princess of Swords. 

Functions and Nature: 


Bandalus rules all birds in the earth, Water, Air, Earth or Fire. He 
is naturally honest, punctual and has a great desire to rule, and 


186 HELIOS UNBOUND 


command. He gives great and wise judgement and is hard-working. 
He speaks slowly, with confidence, and great gravity, but is inclined 
towards secrets. Bandalus sees what thoughts enters a person's 
heart and respects honour. He makes humans proud, arrogant, 
domineering and interested in show. Yet such influenced humans 
follow Bandalus's lead and believe that evervthing is ruled by them. 
Plants: 

Plants attributed to Bandalus are those which smell pleasant or have 
lotsof flavour. They have yellow or reddish colours. He tends to like 
sweet and sour herbs which are sharp and a little bitter. They have 
the effect of dissolving malignant magic, clear the eve, strengthen the 
heart, or resist poison. These include Saffron, Laurel, Pome Citron, 
Vine, St Johns Wort, Amber, Musk, Ginger, Marigold, Rosemary, 
Cinnamon, Eyebright, Pyony, Barley, Lignum, and Aloes. 

Trees: 

Bandalus rules the Ash, Palm, Laurel, Frankincense, Cedar, 
Heliotrope, Orange, Lemon and Sunflower. 

Animals; 

Lion, Horse, Ram, Crocodile, Bull, Goat and Glow-worms. 

Fish: 

Sea calf, Crabs, Starfish. 

Birds: 

Eagle, Cock, Phoenix, Nightingale, Peacock, Swan, Buzzard, 
Goshawk and Flies. 

Minerals, Metals and Stones: 


Gold, Hyacinth, Crisolite, Adamant, Carbuncle, Stones found in 
Eagle's Nests and Ruby. 


Seasonal Associations: 


Bandalus can be seen in the spring, flowers, in the summer heat, 
autumn mists and gentle winter rain. 


Countries: 
He rules Italy and the Czech Republic. 


Days and Hours: 
Bandalus is strongest in the first and eighth houses of Sunday. 


Colours: 
He likes the colour of yellow, gold, scarlet and all reddish colours. 


NICK FARRELL 187 


Enemy: 
Baramus. 


DIDAS 


Planet: 
Venus. 


Divine Names: 
Didas answers to the divine names Aphrodite, Venus and Hathor. 


Names of Parts: 


Her Higher Selfis Gilus, her body is Hilus, her active power is Dahifas, 
her passive power is Ablimas, her fate is Basalmus and her memory 
is Arhus. The name of Didas in transformation or motion is Dahtaris. 


Names of Power: 
Didas, Gilus, Hilus, Dahifas, Ablimas, Basalmus and Arhus. The 
other name used to transform or move her is Dahtaris. 


Elemental Nature: 
Earth 


Gods: 

She is a direct reflection of Venus and the Love Gods. 

Ray: 

Green. 

Tarot: 

By day she takes the form and nature of the Princess of Cups. By 
night she uses the form and nature of the tarot card King Of Swords 


Functions and Nature: 

Didas rules the South Wind. She stands for humour, mirth and the 
mating instinct in nature. She brings a pleasant feeling and calms all 
quarrels, She is involved in any process which requires the bringing 
together of people. 

In her most earthly aspect, she is dangerous and leads to 
obsession, but at her highest she brings the highest divine impression 
to Earth. 

Didas brings a love of beauty and sensuality, but situations 
of jealousy and passion. She has expensive tastes and is the same 
persistent current which has bought pornography to the world 


188 HELIOS UNBOUND 


and made prostitution its oldest profession. However, she is the 
inspiration behind all arts and craft which upholds beauty of form 
She is the spirit behind the fashion and entertainment subculture 
with all the depth that entails. 

Plants: 

Anything which has a sweet flavour, white Flowers, Green Myrtle, 
Apples, Rose, Fig, White Sycamore, Wild Ash, Turpentine Tree, 
Olive, Orange, Mug Wort, Ladies Mantle, Balm, Vervain, Walnut, 
Almonds, Amber, Musk, Peaches, Apricot, Plums and Raisins. 
Animals: 

Hart, Panther, Small Cattle, Coney, Calf, and Goats. 

Birds: 

Sparrow, Wagtail, Stockdove, Hen, Nightingale, Thrush, Pelican, 
Partridge, Wren, Swan, Owl, Blackbird, Parrot, Swallow and Magpie. 
Fish: 

Dolphin. 

Minerals, Metals and Stones: 

Copper, White Brass, Cornelian, Sky Sapphire, White and Red Coral 
Lapis Lazuli (because it banishes melancholy) and Bory! 


Seasonal Associations: 

Insummer she manifests as clear weather but in winter rain or snow 
Countries: 

Arabia, Austria, Iran, Iraq, Turkey, Cyprus and North Africa 

Days and Hours: 

Didas is strongest in the first and eighth houses of Friday. 

Enemy: 

Baramus. 


BARHUJAS 


Planet: 
Mercury 


Divine Names: 
Barhujas answers to the divine names Hermes, Mercury and Thoth. 
Names of Parts: 
His Higher Self is Amiras his body is Hitis, his active power is Sahis, 
his passive power is Daris, his fate is Hilis and memory is Dahdis. 


NICK FARRELL 189 
The name of Barhujas in transformation or motion is Mahudis. 


Names of Power: 
Amiras, Hitis, Sahis, Daris, Hilis Dahdis. The name of Barhujas in 
transformation or motion is Mahudis. 


Elemental Nature: 
Air. 


Gods: 
Heisa directreflection of Thoth, Mercury, and the godsof knowledge 


Ray: 

Orange. 

Tarot: 

By day takes the form and nature of the Queen of Swords. By night 
he uses the form and nature of the tarot card Knight of Disks. 


Functions and Nature: 

Barhujas is the divine mind in creation. He supplies a subtle mind 
which is the source of intelligence. He is the force which drove 
humanity to develop speech, communication, and higher thought. 
Because of his communicative nature, he also can help with providing 
the power behind divination, which is a method of communication 
with the gods. Barhujas rules the marketplace and travel. He į 
apt to find faults in others and exploit them and he has a stron 
trickster” clement. He also tends to transform when he is close t 
other spirits. So if he is used with Didas he will take on a merry 
nature, but can be heavy and pessimistic if used with Barimas. He 
vontrols, merchants, scientists, astrologers, administrators, writers, 
lawyers and messengers. 


Plants: 

Any flowering, plant which likes sandy barren places. They often 
bear seeds in pods. They rarely smell and are often connected to 
the brain, This includes, Walnut, Filbert Tree, Nut, Elder, Adders- 
Tongue, Dragon-Wort, Lung-Wort, Aniseed and drugs used to aid 
divination. 


Animals: 

Hyena, Baboon, Fox, Squirrel, Weasel, Spider And Greyhound, Wolf, 
and Serpent. 

Birds: 

Linner, Ibis, Parrot, Jay Swallow, and Crane. 

Fish: 


190 HELIOS UNBOUND 


EG > 
lisi: b 
^ q e 
[= rA 
Ia A 
E Z 
a x 
5 S 
i gy, DIDAS d we 
ELE” d 
King of Venus Didas 
4 v 
" A ANAS 
DETRAS Ay, tS 


Kisg ef the fagiter Daraahas 


$, A 
67); GARNUS w 


NICK FARRELL 191 


Mullet and Forkfish. 


Minerals, Metals and Stones 
Mercury, Millstone, Firestone, Topaz, and stones with many colours. 


Seasonal Associations: 

Windy, stormy and violent weather, hail, thunder at any time of the 
year. In hot countries he is said to cause earthquakes. 

Countries: 

Southern Greece and Egypt. 

Days and Hours: 

He is strongest during the first and eighth hours of Wednesday. 
Enemies: 

Bandalus (the Sun overwhelms him), Garnus (who is too emotional) 
Dagdijus (who is too violent) 


GARNUS 


Planet: 

Moon. 

Divine Names: 

Garnus answers to the divine names Hekate, Selene, Artimus, 
Persephone, Isis and Diana. 


Names of Parts: 
Her Higher Self is Hadis, her body is Maranus, her active power is 


Maltas, her passive power ts Timas, her fate is Rabis and her memory 
is Minalus. The name of Garnus in transformation or motion is 
Dagajus. 

Names of Power: 

Garnus, Hadis, Maranus, Maltas, Timas, Rabis, Minalus. For rituals 
involving Garnus in transformation or motion add the name Dagajus. 


Elemental Nature: 
Vir / Earth. 


Gods: 
Hekate, Diana, Artimus, Persephone and all the Moon gods. 


Ray: 
Violet. 


192 HELIOS UNBOUND 

Tarot: 

By day Garnus takes the form and nature of the Princess of Cups. By 
night she uses the form and nature of King of Cups. 


Function and Nature: 

Garnus is a complex figure in that she is has a double function as 
the unseen ruler of all the Earth who moves the others. This power 
can be seen in her two geomantic symbols which are the most 
important. She delights in new things and is in continual motion. 
She creates sudden and irrational fear and tends to love peace at all 
costs. Garnus rules the addictive personality and the metaphorical 
gypsy who refuses to settle anywhere or with anyone. In modern 
terms she is the unconscious self. She teaches all skills but to a basic 
level.She rules all women and the astral shells of the dead. She is the 
emotional and instinctive nature. 

Plants: 

Any plant with soft, thick ivory leaves with a watery or slightly 
sweet taste. Plants which grow in watery places and grow quickly. 
Or those with shady, great spreading leaves. This includes, Colwort, 
Cabbage, Melon, Gourd, Onion, Garlic, Mandrake, Poppy, Lettuce 
Rape, Lindon and Mushrooms. 

Animals: 

All fish or creatures that live in the water, Frogs, Otter, Snakes, Dogs 
Weasels, and Snails. 

Birds: 

Seagulls, Gannets, Geese, Ducks, Owls, and Cuckoo, 

Fish: 

Cockle, Shell-Fish, Crab, Lobster, Tortoise and bel. 

Minerals, Metals and Stones 

Silver, Selenite, Soft Stones, and Crystals, 


Seasonal Associations: 

Garnus works with the different spirits to create different weather 
patterns. She takes the energy of Mars to create violent wind and 
red clouds, Venus to create rain, Mercury wind gusts, Saturn dark 
clouds and cold winds, Jupiter gentle winds and light rain. Garnus 
works with the Sun to create specific seasonal weather. 


Countries: 
Holland, Scotland Denmark, Norway, Sweden. 


Days and Hours: 


NICK FARRELL 193 
He is strongest during the first and eighth hours of Monday. 


Enemies: 
Barimas (restricts her movement and represents a more celestial 
rather than "local" time) and Dagdijus (more aggressive and active). 


DAGDIJUS 


Planet: 

Mars. 

Divine Names: 

Dagdijus answers to the divine names Aries, Mars, Set and Typhon. 
Names of Parts: 

Dagdijus, his Higher Selfis Hagidis, his body is Gidijus, his active force 
is Magras, the passive self is Ardagus, his fate is Handagijus, and his 
memory is Mahandas. The name of Dagdijus in transformation or 
motion is Dahidas. 


Names of Power: 

Dagdijus, Hagidis, Gidijus, Magras, Ardagus, Handagijus, 
Mahandas. For rituals invelving Dagdijus in transformation or 
motion add the name Dahidas. 


Elemental Nature: 
Water. 


Gods: 

Mars, Aries, Hephaestus, the war and metal working gods. 
Ray: 

Red. 

Tarot: 


By day Daydijus takes the form and nature of the King of Wands. By 
night he uses the torm and nature of Knight of Cups. 


Functions and Nature: 

Daydijus is masculine, hot, dry and fiery. Be brings everything to 
conflict and creates quarrels. He is the ultimate warrior and is full of 
courage and bravery but lacking in reason. He will not obey anyone 
and is extremely proud. At his best he is a chivalrous knight or 
honourable Achilles, but at his worst he is a psychopathic thug and 
a pirate. He is easy to summon but difficult to control. Calm wisdom 
usually works sometimes summoning Didas. Dagdijus is good for 
practical assignments than spiritual attainment. That said he has a 
talent for strategy and dominates other people. Dagdijus is the spirit 


194 HELIOS UNBOUND 


of sports. 

Dagdijus can be incautious, impulsive, indiscreet, reckless, 
brutal, jealous, rancorous, and cynical. In nature he is the force 
which drives conflict which is normally about resources. He is also 
the natural drives and energy. Dagdijus is action, and desire. It is 
the survival instinct and is the animal nature. Everything that sticks, 
cuts or penetrates belongs to Dagdijus, syringes, surgical operations 
and surgeons. He can be invoked to make a surgeon skilful. 

Plants: 

Any red, yellow or fiery colours, like Saffron, or whose taste is bitter 
sharp or burns the tongue, or love to grow in drv places, corrode, 
or sting such as Nettles, Thistles, Harrow, Cammock, Devils Milk, 
White And Red Brambles, Onions, Horehound, Leeks, Dittany, 
Pepper, Mustard Seeds, and Raddish. All prickly trees such as te 
Thorn and Chestnut. 

Animals: 

Panther, Tiger, Hunting Dog, Vulture, Fox, Horse, Wolf, Leopard, 
and Ass. 

Birds: 

Hawk, Vulture, Kite, Crow, Owl, Raven, Comorant, and Magpie. 
Fish: 

Pike, Sharks, Forkfish and Jellyfish. 


Minerals, Metals and Stones: 

Iron, Antimony, Arsenic, Brimstone, Ochre, Adamant, Loadstone, 
Bloodstone, Jaspar, Touch Stone, and Vermilion. 

Seasonal Associations: 

Dagdijus creates red clouds, thunder, lightning, hot air, tair weather, 
and the western winds. 

Countries: 

Germany, Israel, North Korea, Japan, Mongolia. 

Days and Hours: 

He is strongest during the first and eighth hours of Tuesday. 
Enemies: 
All the other Spirits are his enemy other than Didas. 


DAMAHAS 
Planet: 


NICK FARRELL 195 
Jupiter. 
Divine Names: 
Damahas answers to the divine names Jupiter, Zeus, YHVH, IAO 
and Amon. 


Names of Parts: 

Damahas' his Higher Self is Darmas, his body is Matis, his active 
force is Magis, the passive self is Daris, his fate is Tamis, and his 
memory is Farus. The name of Damahas in transformation or motion 
is Dahidas. 

Names of Power: 

Damahas, Darmas, Matis, Magis, Daris, Tamis, Farus. When 
Damahas in transformation or motion Dahidas. 


Elemental Nature: 
Water. 


eh Zeus, YHVH, LAO and all the lightning gods or rulers of the 
gods. 

Ray: 

Blue. 

Tarot: 


By day Damahas takes the form and power of Queen of Wands. By 
night he uses the same form and nature of Queen of Cups. 


Functions and Nature: 

Damahas is an expansive force which looks to rule and dominate. 
However, unlike Mars it does this by the power of its natural 
authority. He is a creator and desires to create new forms. He 
appears as a man in his prime, usually seated on a throne or in a 
chariot, He has the winged eagle of victory about him and he holds 
a thunderbolt. Although he is a supreme force in nature, he is still 
bound to uphold fate. He will supply oracles. 


Plants: 

The plants of Jupiter include edible fruits and nuts as well as those 
with a pleasant odour. Agrimony, Alexander, Almond, Anise, 
Apple Tree, Apricot Tree, Ash Tree, Arnica, Aparagus, Basil, Bay, 
Beet, Balm, Betony, Blueberry, Borage, Bodhi, Carnation, Chestnut 
Tree, Chicory, Comfrey, Colstfoot, Current, Clove, Dandelion, 


196 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Eglantine, Elecampagne, Endive, Fennel, Fig Tree, Fir Tree, Ginseng, 
Houseleek, Honeysuckle, Hyssop, Irish Moss, Horse Chestnut, 
Liverwort, Maple Tree, Masterwort, Meadowsweet, Mistletoe, 
Mulberry Tree, Myrrh, Nutmeg, Oak Tree, Peppermint, Raspberry, 
Roses, Sage, Sandalwood Sorrel, Sugar Cane, Sumac, Sycamore Tree, 
Tomato and Witch Grass. 


Animals: 

Human, domestic animals and those with cloven hooves such 
as Sheep, Oxen, Deer, those which are speckled and beautifully 
coloured, and edible, or speaking, or trained such as Lions, Cheetahs, 
and Leopards. 


Birds: 

Birds with straight beaks, grain eating, which are not black, pigeon, 
Francolin, Peacock, Domestic Fowls, Hoopoe, Lark and Eagle. 

Fish: 

Anchia or the Sheath fish. 


Minerals, Metals and Stones 

Marcasite, Tutty, Sulphur, Red Arsenic, All White And Yellow 
3tones, Stones Found In Ox-Gall. Tin, White Lead, Fine-Brass, and 
diamond 


Seasonal Associations: 

Dagdijus rules July and brings gentle breezes. He can also bring 
storms which have forked lightning which strikes the ground. 
Countries: 

Tuscany. France, Spain, Arabia, Turkey, Cilicia, Antalya, Paphlagonia, 
Central Greece, and Libya. 


Days and Hours: 
He is strongest during the first and eighth hours of Thursday. 


Enemies: 
Barimas. 


BARIMAS 
Planet: 
Saturn. 


Divine Names: 
Barimas answers to the divine names Saturn, and Kronos and 
YHVH. 


NICK FARRELL 197 


Names of His Parts: 

Barimas's Higher Self is Tus; the spirit's direction Fate is Tamas; its 
Memory Darus; Active Force Darjus; passive force Qajus and its 
body is Harus. In transformation his name is Tahitus. 


Names of Power: 
Barimas, Tus, Tamas, Darus, Darjus, Qajus and Harus. When 
Damahas in transformation or motion add the name Tahitus. 


Elemental Nature: 
Earth. 


Gods: 
Saturn, Kronos and YHVH and all the time gods and Law givers. 


Tarot: 
By day Barimas takes the form and power of Queen of Disks. By 
night he uses the form and nature of King of Swords. 


Functions and Nature 

Barimas is a restrictive force behind nature and matter. He expresses 
most obviously as time and the actual form that life takes around 
us. As a limiter he is associated with death and is seen as malefic in 
trology, but the Romans associated him with agriculture, which 
asats function the death of plants. He brings about endings and 
limits. 


Plants: 

The plants of Saturn include the Daffodil, Dragonwort, Rue, Cumin, 
Hellebore, Benzoine, Mandrake, Opium, and any plants which give 
a “high”. Also, any plants which do not require sowing, and never 
bear truit, Plants which bring forth dark berries, or black fruit, as 
the Black Fiy-tree, the Pine-tree and Cypress. Yew, or any tree with 
a rough, or a bitter taste, strong smell, or which has a black sap. Any 
poisonous plant. 


Animals: 

Lone, Solitary, Nocturnal Creatures and those which eat their own 
young. Ape, Cat, Hog, Mule, Camel, Bear, Mole, Asses, Wolf, Hare, 
Dragon, Basilisk, Toad, Serpents, And Creeping Insects, Scorpions, 
Pismires, and such things comefrom putrefaction, in water, or in the 
ruins of houses such as Mice, And Vermin. 


198 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Birds: 

Birds which have long necks, and harsh voices, as Cranes, Ostriches, 
and Peacocks, which are dedicated to Saturn, and Juno. The screech- 
Owl, Horn-Owl, Bat, Lapwing, the Crow and Quail. 


Fish: 

Eel, Lone Fish, Lamprey, Dog-Fish, Tortoise, Oysters, Cockles, and 
Sea-Sponges. 

Minerals, Metals and Stones: 

Lead, and Gold, by reason of its weight, and the Golden Marcasite. 
Onyx, Sapphire, Brown Jasper, Chalcedon, Loadstone, and all dark, 
weighty, earthy rocks. 

Seasonal Associations. 

Dagdijus rules July and brings gentle breezes. He can also bring 
storms which have forked lightning that strike the ground. 
Countries: 

Macedonia, Bulgaria, Serbia, India, lesser Asia, Iran, Iraq and 
Ethiopia. 

Days and Hours: 

Dagdijus is strongest during the first and eighth hours of Saturday. 
Enemies: 

Damahas. 


NICK FARRELL 199 
GEOMANTIC SYMBOLS 
pr]ems —— CT Gams 
[rmeme —  — [ s | Pw | 


Admissio (Loss) 
Albus (White) 


| # | Rubeus (Red) 
% | Aquisitio (Gain) 


Carcer (Prison) 


= 
^ 
^ 


# | Lactita (oy) 


Cauda Dragonis (Dragon's Tail) 


Caput Dragonis (Dragon s Head) 
Fortuna Major (Greater Fortune) 
SAT [ o | diis 
Populus (People) 


Geomancy is better Known as a form of Earth divination, but the 
magical use of the symbols has been known since the Dark Ages and 
at various points was inteyrated with Western alchemical systems 
and mapie. It is included here as a way of working with the planetary 
Earth spirits mentioned above and although it is much later than the 
pagan period the astrology it is associated with is more Hellenistic 
than Modern and it has worked well for me. 

Each symbol is created from four binary lines much like lines of 
a tiny computer code. The Earth spirits are symbolically made up of 
each of these lines of code which works a V little like DNA. 

The Kings of the Earth are built from and focus the magical ideas 
of these bits of binary code. They are also transformed by interaction 
with other pieces of binary code to create other patterns. 

Each Geomantic sign has four elemental levels which follow the 
platonic order of Fire, Air, Water and Earth. Each elementis present 


200 HELIOS UNBOUND 


in some form in each. This elemental state can be active 

The top line is fire, the second line is Air, the third is water and the 
fourth is Earth. When there is a single dot, the element is active, but 
two dots mean that it is passive. Via (1) with four dots is considered the 
perfect elemental balance. There is an occult maxim which states when 
all four elements are in balance then it creates a fifth, that of spirit, which 
enables movement. Populus (1) has all the elements passive which 
means that it is inert. Geomancy says that Populus needs the energy 
of other symbols to give it any direction. A spirit rules each geomantic 
symbol. Normally these are the Agrippa spirits but this book uses the 
names in the Picatrix to keep a degree of consistency. 

Within the structure of these symbols it is possible to add 
another to them to transmute them. If we were feeling trapped or 
stuck in a rut that would be the symbol Carcer (2). If we wanted 
a way out we could work with the Conjunctio symbol (Z). The top 
and bottom lines would be 1+2=3 or an odd number and one. It 
would leave Carcer's active fire and Earth as it is. But the water 
and air lines (2+1=3 or one) would be transformed from passive to 
active. The new symbol which would be created because of work 
with Conjunctio would result the Via symbol (1). In this example the 
action of invoking or contemplating what Conjunctio means suyyest 
the process of uniting opposites, making contact, doing the absolute 
opposite of whatever you are doing now. Invoking, that force would 
give you the power to do that and create your own way. 

You could also do anair and water rite with the intention of flicking, the 
switch on the parts of Carcer (with Tahitus) which are latent. This would 
transform the natural force you are facing into a different yeomantic patem. 


Name 


Word ol 
Power 


Part of 


Mantra 


the body 


NICK FARRELL 201 
Astrology | Element | Court Spirit 
Card King 
Fireof | Queen | Dagdijus 
Fire of 
Wands 


Symbols of Puer reflect active, raw energy symbolic of 
the first dav of spring. It is the force if initiation when 
life starts to awaken after winter. It represents male 
sexual energy and testosterone and activates aggression 
and general competitive behaviour. It can bring about 
sudden change, normally through conflict. It can also be 
used for creativity, energy, enthusiasm, physical prowess 
and courage. It is a symbol for the enforcement of justice 
and it can be an effective requirement of a rite to promote 
leadership qualities (although certainly not on its own as 
it lacks the power to plan). 

It is unstable and does not last. It is a perfect 
energy to invoke before exercise or sport, but it will 
burn out quite quickly. Most of this energy will be 
directed to nature rather than the intellect or emotions. 

Puer insists on a physical result with the least 
engagement of the brain. The symbol activates the ego, 
which sometimes can be important, it can be useful at 
times when vou have no personal ability to stand up for 
vourselt, Or if vou desperately need to start a project, or 
end procrastination, It is not compatible with any magic 
which requires things like reconciliation, or even to get 
on very well with people. 

The symbols ot Puer have a strong influence over 
the physical body ot a living being, its personality, ego 
and natural tendencies. However they are weakened. 
by matters which require co-operation with others, 
Partnership or any torm of relationship or dependence. 
This includes enemies or predators where the solitary 
nature of Puer would be overcome. 


OB (OB) 


Meaning 


Lett Shoulder 


HELIOS UNBOUND 


Name | Meaning | Astrology | Element | Court Spirit 
Card E 
[eem Loss | Venusin | Water 
Taurus |ofearth REI "Eod 


This symbol causes anything good or bad to be 
pushed away or to lose power. It is a good symbol for 
a banishing or to use in the exorcism of a room. If it 
is attached to a name it will have the effect of causing 
that individual to be removed from the person's life. 
Itis also useful to remove negative people or get over 
a broken relationship. 

In nature it represents any repelling force (such 
as repelling magnets). It is the force which causes 
loss - particularly financial loss. It obviously could 
be used negatively as part of a curse or to attempt 
to bring another ruin. However it is easy to detect, 
and counter and it is not so strong at taking things in 
which you do not have a personal stake. It is good for 
clearing the ground to allow new growth. 

Magic using amissio must be carefully focused as it 
is negative. So, while you could use it to banish poverty, 
whatit would do is create a vacuum or limbo when vou 
really wanted wealth. 

Amissio symbols are more powerful in magic 
focused on making material possessions and objects 
go away and is less effective at moving, things like hate 
or revenge. It is also weak at banishir 
possessions which do not belong to vou. While it is good 
at dealing with a break-up it is not so strony, at breaking, 
up existing relationships or dealing, with bad sexual 
habits. 
Mantra/ | HZ (aspirate z) (‘eh z) 


Partof | Right hand 
the bod 


[Ray [Green 


E 


he dead or 


3 


NICK FARRELL 20. 
Astrology | Element | Court | Spirit 
Card King 
ol 


This symbol represents consciousness, which exists in 
everything in nature. It might be consciousness which 
works at another level, or slower than humanity but it is 
still there. Invoking this natural form of consciousness can 
beused toenhance your ownnaturalintelligence,itcanalso 
beused to understand the awareness of vour environment. 
This is not the same as animistic thinking when inanimate 
objects have a personality. Having consciousness does not 
mean that vour toaster believes in Silicon Heaven, it just 
means that it is aware and alive at a certain level. 

Albus is a good symbol to assist in Psychometry, a 
form of extrasensory perception which allows you to make 
relevant associations from an object of unknown history 
by making physical contact with that object. It is useful 
in magic which involves communication. As a reversed 
Rubus it can be used to resolve disputes and conflicts, 
through communication and diplomacy. 

It is stronger when used in magic which involves 
your immediate surroundings because it enables 
communication with the spirits behind objects which 
are close to vou. It is strong in magic to help in school 
= in language and communications. Albus is weakened. 
when attempting, to carry out its function over a long 
distance. You cannot invoke it to aid communication 
between Israel and Palestine unless you lived in those 
countries. Iis not useful for magic involving the higher 
human mind aspects such as abstract mathematics, 
philosophy or yeneral magical practices. This is because 
\lbus comes trom a less abstract form of intellect. 

EK (ai(r) kay) 
Part of 


Solar Plexus 
the body 


Ray Orange 


Albus 


Mantra 
Word of 
Power 


HELIOS UNBOUND 
Element | Court Spirit 
Card King 
People | Moonin | Fireof | Queen | Garnus 
Cancer Water Of 
Cups 


This symbol represents the lunar memory of the world 
and is connected with ancestors and the dead. It is a 
good symbol to use when dealing with ancestors or 
hero contacts as Populus creates a psychic dial tone 
which you can use to make a communication. Heroes 
and ancestors were important contacts for a magician 
in ancient times, often being the force which was used 
to deliver the magic to the place it had to go. 

It has a practical effect on human group-minds. 
Theseare powerful elemental collective entities which 
can build into gods under the right circumstances. 
The relationship that football fans have with the spirit 
of their club is a similar concept. Some businesses 
have attempted to create similar group-minds with 
their customers or within the company. Populus can 
be used in magic designed to control yroup-minds 

While Albus was the mind of the nature, Populus 
is the memory of its experiences which is contained 
in the cells. It might also be the force which causes 
hauntings and atmospheres in some places. 

Populus is strony in matters relating, to your 
own family and home because these are the spirits 
to which you are closest. It is weaker at dealing, with 
problems relating to authorities (such as your boss, or 
the government) because these automatically control 
proups of people. 


Mantra/ | AL (Ah I) 


204 
Use: 


Part of | Left side of ribs 
the body 


Mantra/ 
Word of 
Power 


Part of 
the body 


NICK FARRELL 205 
Meaning | Astrology | Elemental} Court Spirit 
Card King 
Greater | Sunin | Waterof| King | Bandalus 
Fortune Leo Fire Of 
Wands 


Symbols of Fortuna Major provide the very important 
solar force within matter. The Sun is the distributor of 
spirit and the “ Higher Self“ for the entire solar system. 
This symbol has come to be associated with good luck, 
presumably because of a belief that if you are working 
with the spirit of the universe not much can go wrong 
for you. The goddess Fortuna represented fate, or the 
divine destiny for each person. 

This symbol represents the Wheel of Fortune 
as it rises and is in your favour. Fortuna Major 
represented the rising Sun of the new day. Because 
of this position it means that the magic will start 
slowly and improve over time as the solar force 
becomes more powerful. It can be a powerful symbol 
of invoking spirit or new ideas into life (particularly 
if vou use it alongside a Sunrise ritual). 

While Acquisitio is where an object is already 
present and needs to grow and develop. Fortuna 
Major can be used to make a person “invincible, and 
honourable”. According to Agrippa it can “bring their 
businesses to a good end, and drive away vain dreams." 

Fortuna Major is stronger when used in magic 
connected with anything to do with pleasure and 
happiness. It is also strong in the creation of life, including 
children and pregnancy. Itis weakened when being used 
in mapic which interactions with other groups of people, 
triends or to enhance reputation (no-one likes a winner). 
The power of Fortuna Major is individualised fate and 
not for groups which would appear to be more fixed. 
IM (ee m) 


HELIOS UNBOUND 
Conjunctio | Union MOT Knight = 
ie 


Symbols of Sains draws opposites together tocreate 
a union. These are objects which are so different they 


would not otherwise make a connection. This applies to 
people, places, or material things. This makes Conjunctio 
useful in relationship magic, although it is important to 
realise that this sort of union is more one of the head than 
the heart (which mean Conjunctio is better for a marriage 
than a passionate fling). It is good at bringing resources 
for projects or finding the right way to resolve a crisis. 
Mercury wasa god of boundaries, which is the place 
were two regions connect In the case of Janus, Conjunctio 
was the place where past met the future or where inside 
became outside. The Romans saw it as a destiny point 
This makes the symbol important for transmutations 
where you want one thing to become another. The 
element of boundaries makes it an ideal symbol for a 
magic circle, because it draws the opposites of spirit 
and matter into the ritual. It is useful for alchemical 
transmutation, or to assist in mystical mayic where 
you are seeking to make a divine connection. 
Conjunctio is stronger when used in mapic 
connected with anything to do with other people, 
employees, animals, or situations where contact and 
interaction is required. It is not so useful in magic 
where the target is isolated and unable to interact 
with other people. Something, about the magic 
depends on contact which allows Conjunctio to 
work. For some reason it is not so good in magie to 
end debt problems. 


EN (pronounced as you see it) 


Part of the | Right side of ribs 
bod 


NICK FARRELL 207 


Venus Fire ‘ei | ie | 
of Air 
Libra Swords 


Puella is connected to the feminine power. This is the 
nurturing nature can be applied in any area of life 
which supports and assists growth. It has a dark side. 
Mothering is based on the concept of protecting a child 
from themselves and this can be controlling, constricting 
and patronising. Puella is a symbol of passive control. It 
does not seek to conquer by direct physical means, nor 
does it come from the head. Loving, sensual, passionate, 
playful, intense, light, dark, sad, joyful, embracing, 
connection, love, touch. the senses, merging into life, 
pleasure and through surrender. 

This makes it useful for romantic magic, and rituals 
which work through that emotional state. It can be used 
to put desires into constructive thought, calling for 
inspiration or diplomacy. It is good for magic relating 
to women, divorce, lawsuits and public disputes. It can 
create a magical glamour or improve a person's beauty. 
Such à glamour is likely to be an illusion based on the 
Viewers perception of the person rather than a physical 
change. Puella tinds it ditticult to change the personality 
or the physical body. 

The energy is instable and fickle and it needs 
to be linked to other forces to hold for any length of 
time. It is stronger when used for magic relating to 
partnerships such as marriage, business relationships, 
contracts, legalities, negotiations, and agreements, It is 
a cosdependant energy and is weaker at dealing with 
situations where someone needs to act independently. 
lhis makes it less useful at healing the physical body. 


HN (aspirate x) ('ex) 


Meaning 


Mantra 
Word ot 
Power 


Partof | Right thigh 
the body 
Ray Green 


208 HELIOS UNBOUND 
Name | Meani 


Astrology | Element | Court Spirit 
Card King 
King 


Mars Water Dagdijus 
of Water 


Rubeus symbols are connected to the darker side 
of Mars. On the positive side they can empower 
someone to do the impossible and allow someone to 
throw themselves into whatever they decide to do 
with concentrated energy and awesome willpower. 

In nature it is represented by violence, or the need 
to kill and hunt. Although to humans this is considered 
“wrong”, in nature it is just part of life. Rubeus provides 
the total package behind that energy including the 
need to dominate the environment, suspicion of others, 
revolution, removing out-of-date systems. 

Rubeus symbols are good at manipulation magic 
or to provide the drives for a person to escape a bad 
situation, particularly when they are being manipulated. 

One side effect of Rubeus is addiction; the symbol 
can be used as part of a cure. It can be used to provide 
passion, for example, in a relationship where that appears 
to be lacking. It is a good symbol to use when a creative 
project becomes hard work and mundane and the drive 
to finish it is waning. Rubeus symbols are pood for 
talismans to make intuition stronger as they help develop 
gut feelings. They are useful for those who are working, 
with death magic or helping people make transitions. 

Their strong Scorpio power means that Rubeus 
is stronger when used for magic relating to death, 
sex, and rebirth - anything, that propels a person 
from a safe cocoon. It is weakened in magic involving, 
your personal possessions or money = anything, that 

revents freedom of movement and action. 


Mantra/ [OE (OS) 
Word of 

Power 

Partof | Throat 
the bod: 


[Ry — [Rd — — — —— — — — — ——1 


NICK FARRELL 209 


Name Meaning | Astrology |Element |Court | Spirit 
Card  |King 


Acquisito| Gain Jupiter Air Knight | Damahas 
In of Fire Of 
Sagittarius Wands 


Use: | Acquisito symbols take objects and draw in 
substance from the outside environment to make 
them bigger. It is a material force which expands 
existing situations for good or bad (imagine a terrible 
situation extended). 

With Jupiter in Sagittarius we are talking about 
good fortune and success. It is a symbol which gives 
knowledge through experience and often can assist 
in travel. It can be used to expand outside known 
limits. Acquisito is a good svmbol for gaining 
knowledge and can be used to assist studies. It can 
also be used to tind 2 good teacher or obtain skills. 

Traditionally it is used tor material gain, however the 
structure of Acquisto makes it less useful for this purpose 
because it is the sort of material gain which does not fulfil 
desire. The power of the symbol just brings more of the 
same rather than a lottery win. It can be used to develop 
good lupiterian habits such as tolerance or patience, 

IL is stronger tor magic relating to philosophy, 
travel, occultism and tinding out answers, It's also 
good tor magie involving vour extended family and 
the Higher Courts. It is less powerful when trying 
to intluence vour intellect, being better at subjects 
requiring natural wisdom rather than clever thinking. 
It is more high mathematics rather than helping you 
remember your times table. It is also less effective 
in mapic working with your brothers and sisters or 
rotecting computers. 
Yl (vou T) 


Mantra; 
Word ot 
Power 
Part of 
the body 


Left hand 


Blue 


210 HELIOS UNBOUND 
Card King 
Fire | Queen i 


B ll 


Use: Carcer Symbols confine and limit forces. This can be 
useful if the magician wants to protect a boundary, 
such as a magic circle, or to bind or limit a being's 
actions. It could be used to make a structure more 
solid, but it might have some restrictive aspects to it. 
You might use it to prevent your house walls falling, 
but you might be unable to leave (or sell it). 

The symbol is marked by worldliness and has 
an impact on your legacy - your enduring impact 
on society, by your actions and what you create. It 
could be monuments, books, buildings, theories, or 
the shaping of young minds (as a teacher). 

Itisasymboltocreatehabitsand re-enforce discipline. 
On the negative side it can create an obsession with ritual 
and depression. It is excessively materialistic. Despite 
being limiting, it can encourage material growth, and 
money through hard work. However, it can represent 
a block or barrier which needs to be overcome before 
any progress can be made. It is stronger when used tor 
magic relating to long-term planning, or something 
which will take a long, time to come to fruition. It is 
strong in building a public persona (as opposed to 
your private one). It helps to create a strong, focused 
and disciplined leader. It can be used in magic to work 
for (or against) authority figures, Itis weaker in mapic 
connected to your immediate family and house, It is 
too cold, damp, austere and autocratic for family lite. It 
can create black mould and damp. 


Mantra/ | OPh (Oo F) 


Mantra / 
Word of 
Power 


Part of 
the body 


NICK FARRELL 211 


Symbols of Tristitia depress and slow natural objects 
and the force has a greater impact on emotions. While 
Carcer imprisons, Tristitia is a reaction to limitation. It 
is related to melancholia which is Saturnian and caused 
bv obsessions, fears, delusions and fixed ideas. It is 
an important part of intellectual life. The Italian Neo- 
Platonists Marsilio Ficino wrote a book devoted to the 
melancholy of a man of genius, suggesting that Saturn 
imbued those with unusual sensitivity of soul, 

Tristitia helps counter melancholia, and change its 
intellectual and creative abilities to become more positive. 
Tristitia with its Aquarian connection helps face negative 
situations in creative ways. It is through opposition that we 
develop and evolve. If carefully used it can be a symbol of 
positive change, or reverse a bad situation. Normally it has 
a negative short-term result which forces change. 

Tristitia has uses in negative magic, where you 
want someone to react out of fear or delusions or to 
get caught up in a painful situation and not see what 
is really happening. It could be a component in an 
invisibility ritual where you do not want to be noticed 
by another.lt is stronger when used in magic for groups, | 
and triends when we want to create a communal sense 
of responsibility and seriousness for the work. When we 
work with others we sacrifice our own aims and goals 
for something, bigger. It is weaker when it is used for 
mapie which will bring personal happiness as its nature 
is to work through sadness. It will not work on children, 
or anything to do with non-serious relationships or fun 
sexual pleasures. 


ON (Oo chi) 


Genitals 


212 HELIOS UNBOUND 


In 
Pisces 


Symbols of Laetitia expand and speed-up slow natural 
objects, like Tristitia, and the force has a greater impact 
on emotions. Laetitia was the Roman goddess of 
gaiety. It brings happiness and mystical and spiritual 
experiences. The earthy nature of the element suggests 
a practical and physical joy and happiness. If vou are 
after a job or intellectual satisfaction rather than pure 
joy for its own sake then this is not the symbol to use. 

Laetitia provides mental health when energy levels 
are low, or snaps a person out of a funk which has kept 
them from enjoying life. Itspeeds up situations in a positive 
direction or for magic related to buildings. It is good for 
a ritual to do with construction which will bring you 
joy. It improves self-image and and beauty particularly 
to the face. Laetitia is changeable and fickle. The symbol 
often needs to be tied to something else to hold it down. 
In Ancient Roman society, the goddess was linked to 
other objects such as the Emperor (Laetitia Auyusta) 
the People (Laetitia Publicae) or the sensible words like 
Fundala, “Established” or “Well-Founded,” Lactitia is 
stronger when used for magic in a limited and focused 
environment. [t is strong when used tor depressing 
subjects such as frustration, anxiety, confinement, slavery 
sickness, and imprisonment. It can be used against blind 
spots in the personality, and poor self-csteum. 

It is weaker when used for physical health, or 
coping with adversity, crises, and reversals ot fortune 
or employment. It does not mean it does not work; it 
is just that these things are alien to Laetitia. Laetitia is 
about the joy of the moment and cannot be applied to 
long-term important things. 


Mantra/ 
Word of 


NICK FARRELL 213 
bl Meaning | Astrology | Element | Court Spirit 
Card a 


di Dragon's | South Node| Earth vee 
Draconis Tail of Fire 
oils 


Use: Symbols of Cauda Draconis represent the threshold 
where one thing moves to another, or out of someone's 
life. It represents change and transmutation but often 
does not care if the result is positive. Moon, the force 
behind Cauda Draconis is fluid. While it can bring 
destruction and change, the transitions are unlikely 
to be entirely destructive or to influence every aspect 
of a person's life. It can be used, normally with 
other symbols, to bring about a change in one area, 
particularly if it is part of a person's life which they 
don't want. It could be a good symbol to bring about 
the ending of a destructive relationship without 
damaging the rest of one's life. Some care is required. 
If vou are in a miserable job and you used Cauda 
Draconis to take vou awav from it, you are more likely 
to see yourself tired or resigning. 

Something this destructive could be used for curses, 
magical defences and protective talismans, if you were 
being attacked. [ts Saturnian nature makes it useful as a 
barrier protection on boundary. It could stop anything 
that blocks growth. or prevents things from improving. 

Positively. it can be used to collate experience and 
remind yourself what vou are good at and what you 
have obtained. It is good for magic which requires you 
to remember something already learnt. 

It is weaker when it is used for magic connected 
to tamily (vou cannot really get rid of relatives) 
or neighbours. It is stronger when used for magic 
connected to travel, or religion and occult philosophy 
(thinys which alter old perceptions). 


ATOR (Eh Te o Oh) (A-TO-AW) 


Mantra 
Word of 
Power 


Right Foot 


214 HELIOS UNBOUND 
eed King 


Caput | Dragon's | NorthNode| Earth | Princess | Damahas 
Draconis} Head of earth 


Caput Draconis symbols represent new beginnings, 
initiations, and concrete starts. The Moon/Jupiter/ 
Venus force behind Caput Draconis suggests material 
expansion and growth. It is the time when the seeds 
start to show forth and the strongly earthy nature 
improves minerals, soils, root crops and anything 
underground. A good symbol for a baby’s cot, or a 
first day at a school or a new job. 

It can be used to increase life powers and fortune 
(particularly with Fortuna Major). It cancels the 
drama of the endings started by Caput (although it is 
not able to undo them). In fact if you want a bad patch 
to end and a new beginning, magic involving Cauda 
and Caput would be a good technique. 

Caput Draconis is connected to your life destiny 
and can be used to help get vou moviny, again. In fact 
meditating on the symbol and performing, the mantra 
can help keep your life on book. Surprisinyly this 
take us out of our comfort zone and force us to try ni 
things. It can be used for assisting, life changes when 
we begin new careers or change track after a diver: 
Caput and Cauda Draconis briny, unpredictabl 
events which force people to learn throuyh them 

Itis weaker when it is used for magic connected 
to anything which is restrictive, or things you cannot 
see (ie, will not have a tangible result). It is stronger 
when used for magic connected to health and healing 
as it provides the energy to start setting, better 


Mantra/ | ANHY (Eh eN (aspirate e) uu) sounds like Ah-en-who 


Left Foot 


Blue 


NICK FARRELL 


Name | Meaning | Astrology | Element | Court Spirit 
Card King 


Lesser Sun Earth Paice Bandalus 
Fortune | in Leo of Air 
ke 


Symbols of Fortuna Minor represent the forces of Sunset. 
It is a symbol of the beginning of the night, the light 
shining in the dark. It is the beginning (Genesis counted. 
the day beginning at Sunset) and the end. The Sun is 
always going to have some protective aspect against 
darkness, but it is the herald of the dark. The east is 
where the Sun rises, so this geomantic symbol reverses 
that idea. It is the process of time as the protector of 
order (Aion the Roman god of time was lion faced) and 
the continuation of everything that was. 

It provides swiftness, protection, and outside help. 
It can provide external success and prestige. Fortuna 
Minor is for cases when you need outside help rather 
than something that draws on your own reserves and 
inner power. Anything obtained using Fortuna Major 
can be easily lost. You should not use it for anything 
that requires a long-term solution as it is a transient and 
unstable power. You can use it to achieve a short-term. 
goal. 

It is a goad symbol to help build teamwork ona short- 
term project, particularly if used with Populus. It could 
temporarily resolve a work c with a boss, although it 
might briny, in outside powers which put the person in their 
place (which in the long-term does not resolve anything). 

It is Weaker when it is used for anything needing 
a long-term approach, such as major hopes or dreams. 
It is less successtul working directly on large groups of 
people or triends. Any outside help will have to be for 
vou or no-one else (Leo is a rather egotistical sign). It 
Is stronger when used for magic connected to pleasure 
and happiness as no-one expects these to last. 


IM (Ee M) 


Mantra 
Wodat 
Power 


Part 
of the 
body 


Left Thigh 


2 HELIOS UNBOUND 


strology | Element Court Spirit 

Card King 

Way Earth Princess | Garnus 
of Water | Of Cups 


Symbols of Via represent life's journey. It can be 
used when we have somehow lost sight of what we 
are supposed to be doing and have become bogged 
down in living life. In nature, it is the driving [e 
which creates movement whether it be for migration 
patterns or evolution. It can manifest when we desire 
to leave a house or country and live somewhere new. 
Via symbols create a natural change or movement. 
It is good for magic to protect a person while travelling 
or even when trying to learn something new. It can help 
in the rehabilitation process following an injury. It can 
be placed on cars or other means of transport to prevent 
inconvenient breakdowns. It is a good symbol to use if vou 
are looking for a way through a problem and need ideas. 
It is associated with the waning Moon. Magically 
this is normally a time that you do the rituals to make 
things go away, but Via is the force that makes everything, 
change. It changes anything active to something, passive 
and vice versa It is one of the most dynamic figures as 
it changes everything around it. It has a lot in common 
with the chaotic daemons in that it exists to create change 
as its main reason for existence, It is always moviny to be 
stable. It can assist in pathworking, and astral projection. 
Itcan adapt aspects of yourself to help you move past any 
restrictions or blocks you might have about such things 
Itis weaker when itis used for magic connected to 
social status, establishment or career, This is because 
wanderers do not really fit into established society 
and companies do not like people to be constantly 
moving. It is stronger when used for personal space, 
your home and immediate family. 


16 
Use: 


my Via — — — —— E 


NICK FARRELL 217 


CREATING GEOMANTIC SYMBOLS 


When used magically, geomantic symbols are built from the dots 
which make up the four lines. There are many ways that a symbol 
can be drawn and in most magical books there is a lack of conformity 
or much in the way of logic. The rules are: 


One dot can be drawn as a small unconnected circle or a small line. 
Two dots can be drawn as a line or a crescent. 
Three dots can be drawn as a triangle or a V shape in any direction. 
Four dots can be drawn as a circle or a square. 


These rules give us a wide range of magical symbols which can be 
used to represent the Earth energy and its pattern. Above is a good 
diagram below is from a 19^ Century book The Magus by Francis 
Barrett*. 

Each symbol is a different aspect of the Earth pattern that the 
hexagram represents. It probably does not matter which one you use as 


it will ultimately be part 5 = 

of the same geomantic 3 = B968- 

symbol but the symbols TT UIN AW | 

UE aos BEXDYADOAY 

subtly different t 4 1 

about the fate of the -T RAV | 

yeomantic haracter * 

Usa es BXEXÉDRRAÓD 

meditated upon. For i ` QS YVV 

ample, Fortuna Major + «i 

has one symbol which goYVVOx&AAAASE 

showsaorbor 4 » 

rici dom r? AAA  pregUy 
QUPXVINYEVO | 

BRAO 


Fortuna Major's divine 
solar nature, However, 
it can also be a cross 
over a lunar crescent 
which emphases its 
importance — revealing 
the hidden and obscure. 
Under rstanding, the 51. 
meaning behind each of ^ | 


* Barrett, F. (n.d.). The Magus, or Celestial intelligencer. Wellingborough, 
England: Thorsons Publishers. 


218 HELIOS UNBOUND 
these symbols is the key to unlocking their magical uses. 


MAGICAL USES OF GEOMANTIC SYMBOLS 

This section is only a summary of the magical meanings based on my 
own research. It would be better for research if magicians detail their 
own experiences with each geomantic symbol. The order of the symbols 
is zodiacal starting with Aries, but in an esoteric sense the symbols 
should really begin with Via (waxing Moon) and end with Populus (the 
waning Moon). The reason for this is that all the symbols are aspects of 
these two lunar symbols. The lunar nature of these planetary energies 
working in matter is the key to understanding them. The only reason 
we know that they are not completely lunar is that there are 16 of them 
which highlights the other symbolism of the elements. 

Geomantic symbols are the elemental powers of the spirits of 
nature. Each geomantic symbol acts as a type of wand for the nature 
spirit. When a nature spirit takes up a geomantic symbol its nature 
changes. For a while I could not understand how when I invoked one 
nature spirit alongside his or her geomantic symbol the form changed. 
This became more marked when | carried out an added invocation to 
the Enochian spirit of the symbol. I then realised that the yeomantic 

ymbols were in effect turning the spirits into the forms of ‘the vurt 
ards in Tarot. 

The Tarot and elemental attributions here come Irom Pat and 
Christine Zalewski* and interlock nicely with the Pricatrix and the Golden 
Dawn system. For example, when Dapdijus controls the Puer (Eire ot Lire) 
symbol he manifests as the Queen of Wands. But when he takes up the 
(Water of Water) symbol of Rubis and he manifests as the King, ot Cups 

A name of power or mantra can be developed using, the Creek 
vowel for the planet and the consonant for the zodiac sign and toyether 
encapsulate the essence of the geomantic symbol. The attribution ot the 
part of the body (for medical magic) comes from an 18" century Arabic 
manuscript found in the Bibliotheque National by Stephen Skinner. 


ASTROLOGY IS THE KEY 
An astrological chart acts as a blueprint for the personality and 


maps out its powers and outlines its earthly mission. Its use has 
been a feature of magic since Hellenistic times. This does not mean 


* Zalewski, C. (1994). Enochian f the Golden. Dawn. St. Paul, Minn 
Llewellyn Publications. Zalewski, C&P The Magical Tarot ot the Golden 
Dawn Aeon (2008). 

t Skinner, S. (1991). Terrestrial astrology. Arkana. 


NICK FARRELL 219 


you have to be a great astrologer. Astrology is a specialisation and 
besides there are lots of great computer programmes out there like 
Janus to help. 

I am a reluctant astrologer in that I have learnt just enough to 
get by and skip over a lot of detail which a “proper” astrologer uses. 
This book uses the concepts of Hellenic Astrology as these align best 
with this type of magic. It does so in a general way as the goal is to 
invoke your Higlier Genius and not become the best astrologer in the 
world. However I recommend going further by reading the large 
and excellent Hellenistic Astrology bv Chris Brennan. 

Itis important to have a computer program draw up your chart. 
The most useful are Delphic Oracle or Janus which have most of the 
settings you need. The chart itself has considerable magical power 
in that it has all the personal information for you and how the gods 
are working in your life. We use a copy of vour chart as a magical 
image and place it on the altar so that it takes all the energy froma 
ritual and places it in your sphere of sensation. 

For now we are going to use the astrology fairly basically so 
that we can work out what the gods are doing with your life. 

Decide if vou have a day or night time chart. 

Ihis is not difficult, if vou were born between Sun rise and 
Sun set vou will have a day time chart, which is ruled by the Sun 
Otherwise vou have a night chart which is ruled by the Moon. 

The Ancients called these sects, and the planets and the gods 
behaved differently depending which one they were in. The Sun and 
Jupiter briny, pood things in a day chart, while Saturn brings bad 
things. Moon and Venus brings good things in a night chart while 
Mars brings bad. Mercury is neutral in both day and night houses 
and takes on the nature ef those planets and houses it occupies. 


Celestial Body 
[ s [ ams Yeu 
[x [ Gem | Menu 
[S | Cm [ Me 
[a | du f o] 


D 


Sun 
Pm [ Vig | Mercy | 


220 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Symbol Sign Ruling 
Celestial Body 


[= | Aavaras | Sum — 


Divide your chart in two from the ascendant. Anvthing that is above 
is connected to the day sect and the Sun while anything below is 
connected to night. If a planet is in its own sect (For example Jupiter 
is in the top half of the chart) it is happy and will express its power 
positively. If it is not it will be unhappy and express its powers less 
beneficially. If Saturn is in the side of the night, it will be hugely 
malefic and an important problem for the person. Likewise if Mars 
is in the side of the day it will cause problems. 

Note if any planet is within 16 degrees either side of the Sun. 
TThis planet is under the beams of Helios and becomes hidden. This 
means that some aspect of the person will be hidden. So if this is 
Mars they might be racked with hidden conflict. If it's Venus their 
crue feelings might never be known. If the planet is moving out of 
the Sun's rays within seven days then things will yet better, However 
if they are moving into the Sun's rays things will get progressively 
worse. Porphyry in his Introduction said that this does not apply it 
the planet is in its own zodiac sign (such as the Sun in Leo), exalted 
or in bounds. This was called “being in the chariot” which meant 
you were protected from the Sun's rays. 

See the zodiac sign the planet is in and if the planet is happy 
within it. It will be happy if it has its home there (domicile means 
home). When a person is at home, they have access to all their 
resources and are in their own element. When it is not in its home 
it is the guest of another planet and this might make it stronger or 
weaker. 

According to Firmicus just as you enter the house of a person 
who has good fortune, so you are blessed. But if the person is 
suffering from poverty you end up as a partner to their grief. The 
more planets you have in their right home, the more brilliant vour 
life will be (because itis closer to the archetypal Thema Mundi which 
was the ideal chart of God) 


NICK FARRELL 221 


Note if the planet is exalted or depressed. The Sun is exalted 
or finds its highest expression in Aries, the Moon in Taurus, Saturn 
in Libra, Jupiter in Cancer, Mars in Capricorn, Venus in Pisces, 
and Mercury. The Sun becomes depressed in Libra, the Moon in 
Scorpio, Saturn in Aries, Jupiter in Capricorn, Mars in Cancer, 
Venus in Virgo, and Mercury in Pisces. The planet will have more 
power in your chart when it is exalted and less influenced when it is 
depressed. Depression means that it has less influence. One ancient 
source referred to the exalted planets as enthroned, while depressed 
planets as in prison. If a malefic appears in a sign that entire sign is 
blighted along with all the planets in it. 

Note any conjunctions, oppositions, or sextiles for each planet. 
A conjunction is a positive union between two planets, an opposition 
is a conflict, a square is a difficulty and a ile is an accord or an 
alliance. When trving to understand aspects it is sometimes better 
to see them as gods in part of a myth. Sun opposes Jupiter would 
make a story of Helios standing in the way of Jupiter's plans. Venus 
squaring (having difficulty) with Mars would be a story of a row 
between the two lovers (normally about sexual matters). A good 
planet (such as Saturn and lupiter in a day chart) will be weakened 
by being tied to à bad planet such as Mars. 

Check if any planet is retrograde. This weakens the planet, 
making its results illusionary or delayed or otherwise hindered. A 
person who has Mercury retrograde mightnot beable tocommunicate 
their ideas effectively. A person with Venus retrograde will be too 
withdrawn and never make the first move to find love. Retrograde 
hides abilities so it might be that the person needs to discover them. 
Some research is needed here, because if the planet was retrograde 
it was technically out of its proper place, so it is important to count 
forward a tew days to see how long it takes to get back to its proper 
house, In cases of Mercury, that is quite quick, so it will mean that 
the person will have Mercury issues earlier in life but may overcome 
them. 


THE PLANETS’ TRADITIONAL MEANINGS 
AND IMAGES 

THE SUN - HELIOS 

The Sun shows a person's authority, mind, intellect, height of fortune, 
dealings with the gods, judgement, ego, and fame. It also rules the 
head, the right eye, the heart, life-breath and nerves. He appears as 
a beautiful naked man holding a staff. By day he has a chariot of fire; 
by night he sails a golden bowl. His Tarot card is the Sun. 


222 HELIOS UNBOUND 


THE MOON - SELENE 

The Moon reveals a person's physical life, body, mother, conception, 
home, fortune, city, possessions, ancestors, expenditures, marriage, 
travel, way of life. She rules the left eye, stomach, breasts, spleen, 
membranes, and bone marrow. She appears as a woman with a 
Moon crown, carrying a bow and flanked by a white and black wolf. 


SATURN - KRONOS 

Saturn makes people petty, paranoid, and full of anxieties. He creates 
those who put themselves down and makes them solitary, secretive, 
and deceitful. Such people can be sullen, miserable but prone to 
travel, particularly by water. They will meet obstacles and restraints, 
imprisonment, accusations, tears, being orphaned. However, he 
makes good farmers and gardeners or those who depend on the 
soil. He also creates those who acquire great reputation, high status, 
guardians, and administrators. He is a good father to other people's 
children. He rules the legs, knees, tendons, watery parts of the 
body, phlegm, bladder, kidneys and all things hidden. He can bring 
violent deaths by water or strangulation. He appears as an old man 
dressed in black sometimes holding a scythe and hour-ylass. His 
Tarot card is the Universe. 


JUPITER - ZEUS 

Jupiter signifies child-birth, desire, love, alliances, knowledge 
abundance, payments, profits, justice, authorities, yyovernments, 
priests, friendships, freedom, wealth, and inheritances, He rules the 
outer thighs, the feet, semen, the womb, the liver, the right-hand 
side of the body. He appears as a fit and strony, man in his 40s with a 
lightning bolt and holding, a staff of authority. His Tarot card is the 
Wheel of Fortune. 


MARS - ARES 

Mars stands for violence, wars, robbery, insolence, and adultery. 
theft, banishment, exile, estrangement from parents, rape, abortions, 
sex, marriages, loss of good things, separations, lawsuits, and hate 
However, he is the power to work with one’s hands, masons, and 
engineers. He supplies leadership abilities and rules soldiers and 
generals and hunting. He rules the head, buttocks and the genitals, 
blood, seminal passages, bile and excretion. He can create hard 
and abrupt changes. His tarot card is the Tower. He appears as a 
muscular soldier in full armour carrying a sword or spear and a 


shield. 


NICK FARRELL 223 


VENUS - APHRODITE 

Venus stands for desire and love and can represent the Mother and 
wet nurse. She creates priesthoods, fashion, friends, decorating, 
reconciliations, marriages for love, arts, music, singing, beauty, 
painting, and cleanness. She rules shops, measurements, weights, 
and games. She supplies help from women, or relatives, and she 
can supply a good reputation. Her tarot card is the Empress and she 
appears as a beautiful naked woman wearing a necklace (or girdle) 
and a crown. 


MERCURY - HERMES 

Mercury stands for education, writings and learning. He supplies 
the power to debate issues, use language, mathematics, and 
geometry. It is the force of commerce, youth, play and theft, 
Commerce, profit, discoveries, messages, hearing. He supplies 
logical and critical thinking. He creates writers, teachers, doctors, 
lawyers, philosophers, weavers, and those in charge of strategies 
and planning. Mercury makes good actors and those who make 
a living without being stable. They are astrologers and magicians. 
However, he brings an irregular fortune and distractions. Mercury 
rules the hands, shoulders, tingers, joints, belly, hearing, intestines, 
tongue, and windpipe. He appears as a young man with winged 
sandals, and a caduceus. His tarot card is The Lovers. 


EXAMPLE 


This is a daytime 
chart (the person 
was bom at 10.30 
am) and most of 
the planets are in a 
day sect (only the 
Moon is not). This 
means that Mars's 
malefic power is 
enhanced) but the 
Sun, Satum and 
Jupiter's good sides 
am emphasised. 
Venus's power 
is weakened 
although the Moon 2 

isstillstrong. Venus Rc 


224 HELIOS UNBOUND 


however is under the rays of the Sun. Everything associated with 
Venus is hidden; it has a weaker connection (a trine) to the Moon 
which supplies a little respite. Mercury is in its home of Gemini and 
is safe from the Sun. Meanwhile the Sun is OK in Gemini and in 
a strong position close to the mid-heaven. The Sun is sextile Mars 
which as we said before is a malefic and a main problem for the 
person. Mars is in Leo, which is not a problem for it, so it might be 
that the sextile might create egotistical outbursts of anger. Saturn is 
in Leo which is OK and since this is a day chart will express more 
positive aspects of itself. Jupiter is in Taurus which is OK, and it 
is close to the mid-heaven and sextile with Mercury. Mercury has 
become a benefic because it is in an acceptable position (once it 
escapes the Sun's rays) Meanwhile the Moon is isolated in a strong 
position in the night side of the chart. It does have a weak trine with 
Jupiter. Saturn is sextile to Mercury and since this is a day chart is 
showing his more benign qualities. However, Saturn and Mars are 
malefic, thus weakening the whole zodiac sign. Fortunately, in this 
chart they are weakening each other. One person suggested to me 
that they spend all their time fighting that they have no energy to be 
nasty to anyone else. In this situation the person's energy and anger 

night be slowed by Saturnian limitations, but this balances out as 

aturn is forced to move. 

The person was born with Leo as ascendant, which is ruled by 
the Sun, and the Sun seems to dominate the person's chart. Es 
will have considerable authority, mind, self-imaye, and intelliyencs 
This solar self will manifest in the areas of mind and communication 
often shouting down feelings, love, emotion and creativity. This 
issue will get worse as time progresses. The person miyht have 
anger issues connected to ego which they will find ditticult to 
suppress. They might resolve a lot of their issues by being, busy. 
Their communication skills will come to the fore later in lite and 
become an important part of their life. This means that the person 
will be a precise communicator and administrator, a little too fussy 
and anal about their work, but nevertheless a good reliable worker. 

From this we can see the roles that the gods play in this person's 
life and will look at the stage that they will perform on next month, 
From this we can see the key dynamics in their lite. Helios and 
Hermes dominate their chart with a well-placed Jupiter capable of 
bringing good fortune. If anything, their Sun is too strong and the 
person too much in their head, a problem which will get worse as 
they get older. If Helios could be encouraged to turn down his light 
just a little, it would allow more of the person's hidden imagination 


NICK FARRELL 225 


and creativity to show forth. Care would be needed on the Aries/ 
Helios sextile as the person will aggressively respond to any 
challenge to their ego. If this were transmuted the same force could 
be used to create and build. 


CHAPTER SIX 
MONTH FIVE 


MOON MAGIC AND THE DÆMON OF THE SOUL 


The Moon was a ghostly galleon tossed upon cloudy seas. 
Alfred Noyes The Highwayman 


TASKS THIS MONTH 


The goal this month is to attune to the lunar forces and the relevant 
mansions of the Moon. Take your chart and place it on the altar with 
the ascendant orientated towards the east. Take 12 zodiacal tarot 
cards and place in them a circle around your altar. The cards should 
be arranged to match the positions on vour chart. 

A small table or chair should be set aside for the mansion 
with a tealight which is placed as an offering to the Dæmon. There 
should be a tealight placed on the centre of your chart, you will need 
consecrated water and myrrh incense. Place a picture or statue of 
Hekate on the chart and the candle and the key. 

Work related to the Moon is normally done at night, so you will 
have to do this ritual every evening. Normally you would take a year 
on this one phase and use the mansion of the Moon which was in the 
aight’s sky at the time. This is not possible within a six month "boot 
camp” so what we suggest is that you start with the mansion of the 
Moon which is in the night's sky now. The next day you move to the 
next mansion and continue around the zodiacal wheel tor the next 
28 days. While this will not give you the full impact of the mansions 
energy, it will allow you to meet and understand the spirits which 
guard each one. 

You will perform your normal solar invocations and. Prima 
Materia exercise as normal. 


NIGHT SESSION 
1. Face the setting Sun and perform your normal salute to the 
setting Sun. 


2. Perform the cross and the lesser invoking ritual of the pentagram. 

3. Perform the confession (this time saying that vou are under the 
wings of Hekate) 

4. Purify and consecrate. 


o 


16. 


NICK FARRELL 227 


Depending on the phase of the Moon invoke Hekate (if the Moon 
is waning use the waning invocation etc) and light her candle. 
Take the kev to the mansion altar. Draw a zodiacal pentagram 
where the mansion is based. When it is drawn see it dissolve into 
a whirling vortex. Draw a lunar hexagram and vibrate the name 
Hekate six times. 

In the name of Hekate I invoke the spirit of the [number of the 
mansion] mansion of the Moon. Come forth [name of spirit] 
from your abode the [name of mansion]. Bring your powers to 
me so that I might know you and continue your work on Earth. 
Pour a small amount of wine into the dish 

Ioffer you this wine as a symbol of sacrifice to be an offering 
so that you will help me awaken my lunar self and master it. 


. Light the tea light 
. I offer you this flame as a symbol of sacrifice to be an offering 


so that you will help me awaken my lunar self and master it. 
Come to my offerings [name of spirit] and teach me your 
mysteries as I chant your name 


. Chant the name of the spirit for ten minutes watching the vortex 


over the mansion. Allow the spirit to appear as their magical 
image. When you have a clear image speak to the spirit and allow 
it to show you how it impacts on your Lower Self. Ask it what it 
needs to work better in your life where you are strong and where 
you are weak, You are interested in how you can use that spirit 
better in the future. 

When you have tinished, thank the spirit and ask it to return if 
vou call it. 

Say, "I free all spirits seen or unseen who make have been 
trapped by this ceremony. Return to your abodes and 
habitations with the blessing of Hekate.” 

p ask the god Janus to close the doors of this ritual in the 
vast, West, north and south and the gates to the [name of the 
mansion of the moon]. 


he Moon is the most important planet for Magic. Much of 
the press about magic screams “spiritual” when most of the 
work that happens either takes place on the astral, or physical 
levels. These are known as the sub-lunar levels and ruled by 


the Moon. This level has everything that is underworld and above it 


228 HELIOS UNBOUND 


and it extends to the Moon. The Moon's involvement with magic is 
so significant that some modern magicians, for whom I have a great 
respect, such as Jake Stratton-Kent see celestial symbols as derived 
from the primal and earthly and see the Moon, the four directions, 
the Earth and the subterranean as making up the original seven 
main magical forces and the planets being their later reflection. 

The Moon was formed when the early universe was formed 
when a Mars sized planet crashed into the proto-Earth and turned 
the planet to vapour. As the vapour cooled , a new planet was 
created and its Moon. The Moon is like the earth's twin which 
emerged from the underworld and exerts considerable power over 
both. In late antiquity, it was believed that the spirits of the dead 
lived on the Moon and the air between the Earth. 

There are three goddesses which are important to the Moon. 
Selene who was the Titan who was the Moon, then there was 
Artemis, the Hunter Goddess and then there was Hekate. In the 
Greco-Egyptian texts these three were often compounded and their 
demons and imagery confused. However, from our perspective it 
was Hekate, the Goddess of Magic, who is the most important. 


HEKATE 


Hekate was one of the “Great Goddesses” who appeared in Anatolia 
at the dawn of Greek civilisation. Her worship spread to Greece 
before the eighth century BCE when it was established enc ugh tor 
Hesiod almost to be an evangelist for her. She was goddess of may 
witchcraft, the night, Moon, ghosts and necromancy, She was the 
only child of the Titans Perses and Asteria from whom she received 
her power over heaven, earth, and sca. 

Hekate assisted Demeter in her search for Persephone, guiding 
her through the night with flaming, torches. After the mother- 
daughter reunion, Hekate became Persephone’s minister and 
companion in Hades. 

Two metamorphosis myths describe the origins of her animal 
familiars: the black she-dog and the polecat (a house pet kept tor 
hunting vermin). The bitch was originally the Trojan Queen Hecuba, 
who leapt into the sea after the fall of Troy and was transtormed by 
the goddess into her familiar. The polecat was originally the witch 
Gale who was transformed to punish her for incontinence. Other 
say it was Galinthias, the nurse of Alkmene, transformed bv the 
angry Eileithyia, but received by Hekate as her animal. 

Hekate was usually depicted in Greek vase painting as a woman 


NICK FARRELL 229 


holding twin torches. Sometimes she was dressed in a knee-length 
maiden's skirt and hunting boots, much like Artemis. In statuary 
Hekate was often depicted in triple form as a goddess of crossroads. 

Hekate was identified with a number of other goddesses, 
including Artemis and Selene (Moon), the Arkadian Despoine, 
the sea-goddess Krataeis, the goddess of the Taurian Khersonese 
(of Skythia), the Kolkhian Perseis, and Argive Iphigeneia, the 
Thracian goddesses Bendis and Kotys, Euboian Maira (the dog-star), 
Eleusinian Daeira and the Boiotian nymph Herkyna. 

Hekate was one of the “old gods” and her parents were Asteria 
(night) and Perses (Destruction). Unlike the other “old gods” who 
did not become Olympians. Hekate was respected by the Olympic 
gods. Hesiod’s Theogony said she was favoured by Zeus and retains 
her sovereignty over the earth, the heavens and the sea even after the 
Titans are overthrown. What is odd is that all the roles of running 
the universe were taken by the Olympics and Hesiod implies that all 
of the other gods’ actions must take place according to her will. So in 
other words if vou pray to Hera it is with Hekate's agreement that 
it happens. All this makes sense when you consider that the other 
stial and to make their will happen on Earth they have 
to manitest through the sub-lunar level, which is ruled by Hekate. 
It is her who ettectively makes the thought forms that their energy 
must travel. 

During, the late classical period Hekate becomes more lunar 
and becomes an underworld goddess of ghosts and magic. She is 
the goddess of oracles of the dead and the practices of necromancy, 
povehagoyor and Goetia. Her “old magic" nature started to come 
to the fore ayain in the second century of the Christian era, In the 
Chaldean Oracles she becomes a super-cosmic entity who mediates 
the powers of the One Thing to Earth, She is the ruler of destiny and 
saviour. 

In the Greek Magical Papyri Hekate's image is connected to both 
Celine; Artimus and Persephone. From these three goddesses we 
can see her being, Moon (Selene), hunting and animals (Artimus) 
and death and the underworld (Persephone). 

Hekate was the goddess of crossroads and for this reason was 
often "married" to Hermes. They make a good couple for both are 
associated with mapic. 

Hekate is the great mediator of cosmic forces. She brings all the 
solar forces to earth, but she also acts as a mediator of the cosmic 
forces of the planets and the zodiac. There are enough similarities to 
her and the soul to believe that they are connected. Both: 


gods are ce 


230 HELIOS UNBOUND 


1.Represent divine forces which are working in matter. In 
the Chaldean Oracles there are two Hekates - one is part of 
the divine triad and the second is the Queen of Nature. The 
soul is formed from the Higher Genius which is operating in 
matter through the Soul. 

2. Bring higher forces into matter. Hekate draws powers of 
the Sun and the zodiac while the soul reflects these forces 
into its life. 

3. Hekate is the mistress of beasts and sometimes seen as 
the force behind all nature. The soul, being the divine force 
within nature, deals with all those natural forces as part of 
its destiny. 

IMAGERY 


Hekate is clad in a long robe, holding burning torches. Hesiod's verses 
did not contain any allusion to a triple goddess. Her earliest known 
representation comes from the sixth century BCE where the goddess is 
seated ona throne with a chaplet bound round her head. 

Later she becomes triformis, “triple-formed,” (in the 5th century 
BC) with three bodies standing back to back - corresponding, according 
to those who regard her as a Moon goddess, to the new, the full and the 
waning Moon. In her six hands are torches, sometimes a snake, a key, 
her top, a whip, or a dagger. 

The Magical Papyri say she has the head of a dog, one serpent, and 
one horse. In other representations her animal heads include those ot a 
cow and a boar. 


INVOCATION TO HEKATE ON A WANING 
MOON 


This ancient invocation is to be used each time you invoke Hekate 
from the time of the full Moon to the day before the new Moon, The 
Waning Moon is used for all magic which requires something, to 
be reduced or banished - bad habits, or destructive people, poverty 
etc. The invocation involves the darker aspects of Hekate and when 
used you will find it bringing out the darker aspects of your soul 
These are useful for some sorts of magic and should be noted rather 
than feared or rejected. As they arise you should meditate upon 
them and allow them to be placed under the control of Hekate. In 
this way Hekate becomes the goddess of your Lower Genius in the 
same way that Helios becomes symbolic of your higher. You will 


* PGM VI 2241-2358 


NICK FARRELL 231 


need a candle with the name Exéty engraved on it and an old ornate 
house key which you paint silver with 'Exárr painted on the shaft. 
While the titles of Hekate in this invocation might seem strange, 
or unnecessary, they are actually micro-invocations to the various 
demons who serve her. 


Hail Holy Light, Ruler of Tartaros, 
You who strikes with rays; 
Hail, Holy Beam, who whirls up from darkness 
and disrupts all things with aimless plans. 

I'll invoke and may you hear my holy words 

For awesome destiny is always subject to you. 
Thrice-bound goddess, set yourself free. 
Come and rage against those things which stand in the way of 
my destiny. 

For Klotho will spin out her threads for you. 
Assent, oh blessed one, God in maiden form. 
Awaken to me your powers to control my soul 

Which is of your nature. 
For I know your light in detail, 
l am your magician, your minister and fellow witness 
Maid. 
I now adjure you by this potent night 
In which your light is last to fade. 
Kerberos opens and does not close its mouth. 
The bar of Tartaros is opened. 
Raging Kerberos, armed with a thunderbolt, appears. 
Stir yourself, Mene, 
You who need the Sun, 
guard of the dead, 

I implore you, Maid, by your strange beams, 
You I implore, Oh cunning, lofty, swift, 
crested one, by your demonic epaulettes of power. 
You who draws valiant swords, 

Healer, with forethought, far-famed, goading 
one, 

Swift-footed, brave, Darkness, 

Brimo, Immortal, heedful, Persian, 
Pastoral, Akyoue, gold-crowned, elder goddess, 
Shining, sea-goddess, ghostly, beautiful, 

The one who shows, sailer, aimer, 
Self-gendered, headband wearing 
Glorious, leader of hosts, goddess 


232 HELIOS UNBOUND 


of Dodona, and of Ida, with sorrows fresh, 
wolf-formed, 
Humanity fears you for you have been destructive, 
quick, grim-eyed, shrill-screaming, 
Thasian, Mene, nethermost one, beam-embracer and saviour, 
dog-shaped, spinner of Fate, all-giver, 
Long-lasting, glorious, helper, queen, bright, wide-aimer, 
vigorous, holy and benign. 
You are all these things, 
Immortal, shrill-voiced, glossy-locked, 
in bloom, divine, with golden face, delighting in humanity, 
Minoan, goddess of childbirth, Thuban, long-suffering, astute, 
malevolent. 
With rays for hair, shooter of arrows, 
You are full of cunning and the deliverer from fear; 
as Hennes, The Elder, chief of all magicians, 
Iam Isis' father. 
Hear: 
HQ ®OPBA BPIMO LAXMI NEBOYTO LOYAAHO 
*E-AW FOR-VA VRIM-AW SACH-MEE NE-VOO-TO SOO-AL- 
‘ETH 


For I have hidden your magic symbol [hold the candle in left hand] 
within myself. I have your key [hold key] and opened the bars of 
Kerberos, 

the guard of Tartaros and premature night. 

I plunged into darkness. I whirl the wheel for you; 

Gaze at me as you gaze at yourself: 

For I am your mirror, the love 

charm of the Nile goddess, 

Until you cast the shadowy light from your eyes. 

Mare, Kore, dragoness, lamp, lightniny, flash, star, lion, she-wolf 

I know your good and great majestic names, 

Which illuminate the heavens. 

The Earth drinks dew and is pregnant; 

The universe increases and declines; 


EY@OPBA ®OPBA 
EY- FOR-VA FOR-VA 
«QOPBOPEOY ®OPBA 


FOR-VO-RE-OO FOR-VA 
@OPBOP ®OPBOP ®OPBOP 


NICK FARRELL 233 
FOR-VOR FOR-VOR FOR-VOR 
BOPBOR®A HP®OP 
VOR-VOR-FA ‘ER-FOR 
®ORBAIQ POPBOR POPBOR BOPO® 
FOR-VE-AW FOR-VOR FOR-VOR VO-ROF 
BOP ®OPBOP AQ IOH 
VOR FOR-VOR AW EE-AW=E 
@OPBOP®OP EU®OP 
FOR-VOR-FOR EY-FOR 
BO@OPEYOIE® 00 12020 12020 
VO-FOR-EF-EE-E-AW FAWTH EE-AW-FAWTH EE-AW-FAWTH 


OROIN AQOOOO0 NAIN IO EOOIO 
FAW-THEE-AWF  AH-AW-AM-AW-THAW — AW-A-EE-AW — EE-AW 
E-AW-AW-EE-AW 


AAA FE HH IOYY 220 OYYYY AEHIOYO. 
AH-AH-AH EE *E^E. EE-OO-Y AW-AW-AW OO-Y-Y-Y AH-E-E-EE-O- 
YAW 


YYY (UUL) Mistress, Harken-Techtha, who sits beside Lord Osiris, 
Michael, Archangel, the god who lights the way, 

Awaken my awareness of you within me. 

Allow me to speak to your spirits so that they see you in me. 


INVOCATION TO HEKATE 
ON THE WAXING MOON» 


This ancient invocation is to be used cach time you invoke Hekate 
trom the time et the new Moon to the day before the full Moon. The 
waung Moon is used tor all magic which requires something to 
added into vour lite. [he invocation involves the brighter aspects of 
Hekate and this can bring, out some of your more positive aspects, 
You will need a candle with the name ‘Exdty engraved on it and an 
old ornate house key which vou paint silver with Exétn written on 
the shatt 


* PGM IV. 270 


234 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Come giant Hekate, Dione's guardian, 
Persia, Baubo Phroune, dart-shooter, 
Unconquered, Lydian, untamed one 
Divinely born, torch-hearing, guide, who bends down proud 
necks, 
Kore, you who've parted 
Unbreakable steel gates. 

O Artemis, who, too, were once procuress, mighty one, 
Mistress, who burst forth from the earth, dog-leader, crossroad 
goddess, triple-headed, 

Bringer of light, august one, virgin, 

I call you fawn-slayer, crafty, infernal one, 
Many-formed. Come, Hekate, goddess of three ways, who with 
your fire-breathing phantoms 
Rules dreaded roads and harsh magic. 

Hekate, I call you with those who have died before their time, 
Heroes who have died without a wife and children, 
hissing wildly, with yearning in their hearts. 

Come forth mighty Hekate and teach me my soul's secrets. 
Awaken to me your powers to control my soul, 

Which is of your nature. 

Hekate, of many names, 

Virgin, Kore, Goddess, come, I ask, 
guard and shelter of the threshing floor, 
Persephone, triple-headed goddess, 

You who walk on fire, cow-eyed. 


BOYOP®OPBH, IIAN(OPBA (OPBAPA 

[VOO-OR-FOR-V'E, PAN-FOR-VA FOR-VA-RA] 

AKTIQQOI, EPEXXIFAA 

[AK-TEE-O-FEE ER-ES-CHEE-GAL | 

Beside the doors NEBOYTOLOYAAHO 

[NE-VOO-TO-SOO-AL-'ETH| 

Gate-breaker ITYIIYAHAEAEZQ [PY-PY-L'E-DE-DE-Z. AM | 

Come Hekate, of fiery counsel, I call you to my sacred chants.You 
who burst forth from the Earth. 

MAEXKEAAI MAXKEAAO : PNOY KENTABAOO - OPEOBAZATPA 
IHEIXOON 


[MAS-KEL-LEE MAS-KEL-LAW FNOO KE-NTA-VA-AW TH O-RE-O- 
VA-ZA-GRA EE-'E-KSEE-CHTHAWN| 


NICK FARRELL 235 


Earth mare OPEOIIHT AN AOPMOPON TOKOYMBAI 
| OR-EO-P^EG-AN-YKS MOR-MOR-ON TO-KOOM-VAEE] 


Teach me the powers of the Moon so that I might behold the Sun. 
OENOB - TIOEAHB : HNOP : TENOHNOP 
[THEN-AWV TEE-THE-L'EV *EN-AWR TEN-TH'EN-AWR] 


MANY-NAMED ONE, KYZAAEOYEA IIAZAOYE [KY-ZA-LE-0O- 
SA PA-ZA-OOS| 


KALLIDÉCHMA and PSAB 
[KAAAIAHXMA KAI VAB] 
[KAL-LEE-D'ECH-MA KE PSAV| 


Hekate of the unresting burning fire. awaken within my lower soul the 
desire to unite with the higher with ORION [O-REE-ON] and MICHAEL 
[MEE-CHA-EL] who sit on high. 


You hold the seven waters and the earth, keeping in check the one they call 
the great serpent. 

AKPOKOAHPE  MOYIXPO  XAPXAP  AAONAL ZEUS AH 
AAMNAMENE CYNOBI OY APPA 

AK-RO-KOD-ER-E. MOY-EES-RAW CHAR-CHAR AD-AW-NA-EE 
ZEES D'E DAM-NA-MEN-EFS KY-NO-VEE-OO EZ-AG-RA 


12 [Ec- Av | all-powerful goddess and IQ [Ee-Aw] all-guarding one; 


HL [Ec-Ec-Av |, all-sustaining one. 


ZHSANNAKADLYZAAA[ Z'E-LACH-NA KE 


LABIQOH © NOYMIAAON : NAOOMEINA 
[SA-VEE-AW-TEPE NOO-MEEL-LON NA-THO-MEE-NA| 


Always, KEINHO [KE E-N'E FH] 


Stalwart OHXUFX ONYE [TI E-SYES O-NYKS| 
Theseus ONYX, [ON-Y CH] 
Prudent \AMNAMENEYY [DAM-NA-ME-NEFS| 


Avenging goddess, strong goddess, 
XEBAPA, AKPA. |SE-VA-RA AK-RA] 


of ghosts, Persia. 


Great Hekate, who spins the web of the stars and governs the 
spiral of life. 


Guide me through towards pathways of understanding. 


236 HELIOS UNBOUND 


I open my mind to thee so that I can learn of your mysteries. 
Awaken my lunar soul so that I might behold the solar genius. 


EVIL MOON 


“The Moon replenishes the earth; when she approaches it, she fills 
all bodies, while, when she recedes, she empties them.” 
Pliny the Elder Natural History 


What is clear from the ancient Egyptian magical manuscripts is that 
there wasa certain amount of a love-hate relationship with the Moon. 
Much of the imagery associated with the Moon was fearful and there 
was an impression given that she was to be avoided if trying to do 
some types of magic. The spells within the PGM can be distributed 
between Sun and Moon spells. The Sun is seen as a heavenly power 
capable of providing the magician with great heavenly wisdom. The 
Moon, however is used for curses, sex and working with the dead. 
Some of the more dangerous spells involve working when the Moon 
is full. Some magic solar magic such as the Mithras Liturgy cannot be 
performed while the Moon is in the sky. 

The reason for this is because while the Moon was powerful, 
she was the force which kept nature functioning, and spirits within 
her orbit. She was the force which bought souls into incarnation 
Since many religions and philosophies of the period saw matter 
as something terrible to be ascended away from at the earliest 
opportunity then the Moon could be the dweller on the threshold 
and the great limiter of spiritual progress. The Chaldean Oracles said 
thata theurgist should not look upon the face of Physis (the goddess 
of nature) and Proclus warned that the face of the Moon was Physis 
which should not be gazed upon because she was like Fate. Such 
thinking drew a clear line between the theuryists (god workers) and 
the goetics (damon workers) which still exists today. 

However, the division is based on a pessimistic dualistic 
philosophy which does not reconcile matter and spirit and falls into 
the trap of believing all matter is evil and spirit is good. If this duality 
is removed and a middle path taken, then both philosophies work 
side-by-side. The Moon can still be the force which drives souls into 
manifestation; it is just that this is an important part of the process of 
the one thing trying to understand itself rather than torturing, poor 
souls with a punishment of incarnation. The Sun is not a superior 
state to the Moon, just spirit working at a different level, which is 
closer to the divine connection that the soul still craves. 


NICK FARRELL 237 


The Moon is also a symbol of our soul - the spirit of the Higher 
Genius which is lost in the illusion of matter. Rejecting it is rejecting 
the destiny that our Divine Genius wanted. Fleeing from nature is 
trying to escape our destiny and ultimately counter-productive. By 
working with the Moon, and our “Lower Self” we are following the 
pattern that our Higher Genius wanted to investigate when it chose 
to incarnate. The more we respect our natural and lunar selves, the 
more we start to see it as a reflection of spirit. 


DAMON OF THE SOUL 


While the focus of our concentrated programme is to awaken the 
Higher Genius, it needs us to understand the Damon of the Soul which 
rules our life while we are in incarnation. It is the same solar spirit 
but has been transformed through the actions of incarnation and is 
effectively a lunar (astral) spirit attached to a physical body. As such it 
takes on characteristics of the person's Moon sign. Each Soul Dæmon 
is different as it holds the influence of the solar self, but all of them 
have an archetypal source based on the stars which were connected 
to the Moon when it was passing through that part of the night's sky. 

By communicating, with that archetypal source, we can connect 
and communicate with our soul and find out our mission on Earth 
and help to awaken it to its solar genius. The soul Demon has 
powers of its own and remembers much about the Higher Genius. It 
acts as its ambassador gathers information and experience from the 
material world. However, it is lost inside that material world at least 
until death, 


THE GHOSTLY GALLEON 


One of the stranger attributions of Hekate was as a protector of 
sailors and while the sea was important to Mediterranean culture it 
does not explain why her mysteries were so important to people who 
had little to do with the ocean. More recent research has suggested 
that the ancients saw the ocean as both a metaphor for the night's 
sky and life itself. This has opened a deeper level of meaning to 
those who read Homeric works, such as the Iliad and Odyssey, where 
sea journeys can be understood as astrological events in the night's 
sky and by default events and aspects of our life. There are moments 
when our life is tranquil and other moments when we fear that life’s 
waves crush us. It made sense to understand the mysteries of the 
Moon as the boat which sails through the skies and to pray to it for 


238 HELIOS UNBOUND 


protection and safe keeping. The Mysteries of Samothrace appear 
to have centred on this allegory and the freeing of the chains of 
destiny. 

The Moon was an important time-keeper. Most ancient 
civilisations used the Moon as the basis for the calendar. Thoth, the 
Egyptian god of magic was also a Moon god and one of the Lords 
of Time. While the solar clocks were ruled bv zodiac and the decans, 
the Moon's path was measured in 28 stations (later called mansions 
by the Muslims who preserved and developed this tradition). They 
were important in magical timing to make sure that a person's rituals 
were correctly aligned to the Moon. This was because the mansions 
related the Moon's position compared to different important stars. 
These stars, such as Regulus and Aldebaran, are rarely are looked at 
in modern magic but were an important part of the ancient systems. 
This is because are the highest aspect of the rays having been stepped 
down and transformed by the Moon. As the Moon journeys through 
the night's sky she takes the star's energy and mediates it in a way 
that creates another family of Demons unique to that mansion and 
reflecting its influence on that time. These Damons have an influence 

n our personalities and life. By opening a form of communication 
ith them though Hekate we not only understand their powers but 
n negotiate with them to ward off some of life’s lessons before we 
teed to experience them physically. 

The Greco-Egyptian ancient names of these mansion Damons 
have been lost, but names of the Dæmons were preserved by thy 
same people who created the Picatrix along, with the mayical imayes 
In addition to that we can find some remains of their meaning, trom 
the Greek magical Papryi and the powers of the stars they retlect 
Other details were fleshed out by going, on the astral and seeing 
them in action. They are soul spirits and guides who not only have 
magical powers but also guide the soul through the ditlii ult aspects 
of their destiny. The soul becomes heavily influenced tor yood or 
bad by its Moon Dæmon. 

Because the position of the fixed stars has changed over the 
centuries the degree which represents the mansions has changed, 
So, a star which was once in Ari now in Taurus. Ihe attributions 
are still the same; it is just that working out which mansion of the 
Moon is working at a time is different, Normally I don't bother with 
using a corrected or sidereal time (which represents the night sky 
as it is now rather than tradition) for the zodiac, but in the case of 
the mansions of the Moon they are connected to specific stars and 


* RUCK, C. (2018). Great Gods Of Samothrace And The Cult Of The Little 
[S.1.]: REGENT PRESS. 


People. 


NICK FARRELL 239 


supposed to be a clock. It is therefore important that have them set 
right. I have supplied both degree settings and I suggest you pick 
one and stick to it. 

To find the Dæmon for your own mansion of the Moon look 
at the exact degree the Moon is in your chart. You could also use 
Christopher Warnock's Mansion Tracker, Lunar Mansions Software 
"The traditional meanings for these mansions are hints and starting 
points and not meant to be taken literally. Their powers are those 
of a soul and need to be understood in the widest possible sense. 
For example, Enedil is traditionally said to find treasures and 
underground streams which isa reference to it being a teaching spirit 
who helps find patterns and information which is hidden from sight. 
His power to “destroy buildings being constructed” is a reference 
to breaking down false thought patterns and bogus thinking. The 
danger is that he upsets the status quo and relationships (no one 
likes a smart-arse). While he could be magically used for traditional 
literal things, it limits the powers of these Dæmons. 


FIRST MANSION: ALNATH (TWO HORNS) 

Zodiac degree: Traditional 0° Aries QU - 12° Aries 51’ Sidereal 3° 
Taurus to 18° Taurus. 

Alnath means “the two butting horns” which refers to the stars 
Sheratan and Mesarthim which are the head of Aries. 


Stars: Sheratan and Mesarthim. 

Mesarthim is a binary star in the northern constellation of Aries and 
the first horn of the Ram. 

Sheratan is a star system and the second-brightest star in the 
constellation of Aries is the second horn of the Ram. According to 
Ptolemy, Sheratan merges the powers of the two malefic Mars and 
Saturn; it causes bodily injuries, defeat, destruction by fire, war and 
earthquakes. Mesarthim is the opposite order of Saturn and Mars 
which means the power of Mars is constrained and protective by a 
more powerlul malefic. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Geriz. Depicted as a dark man with red- 
orange eyes and an iron helmet. He has a spear in his right hand and 
his left a crescent shield with the symbol of Saturn on it and a cloak 
of sheep’s fleece. His boots are of sheepskin. 


* https:/ / ww 


enaissanceastrology.com/mansiontracke 


240 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Elections: When the Moon is in this sign it is the right time to 
begin a journey, buy livestock, create discord between individuals, 
and imprison someone. It is bad for marriage, partnerships, or the 
foundation of a meaningful friendship or alliance. 


Magical Powers: Curses, black magic, crimes of violence, 
overcoming depression and a lack of motivation, finishing projects, 
protection from violence and travel. He is the root to break up 
couples and set friends and allies against each other. 


Note: this mansion is dual in nature alternating between extreme 
violence and murder and positive defence. Its power is hard to 
balance once invoked. A person born when the Moon is in this 
mansion will have much energy but be prone to outbursts of 
aggression. They will however be protective of people with whom 
they are attached. Geriz can show those under his protection when 
it is good to strike and when it is important to defend. His soul 
follows the way of the warrior. 


SECOND MANSION: ALBOTAYN (BELLY) 


Zodiac degree: 12° Aries 51' - 25° Aries 42" 18° Taurus to 29° Taurus 
Star: Botein 


Botein is the tail or flank of the Ram. It is about 170 light-years from 
the Sun. It has a Martian nature but is more of a natural energy and 
drive - much in the same way as libido. Ptolemy considered the 
mansion to be connected more to Venus. This energy is less likely 
to attack someone else, but more likely to want sex no matter what. 


Ruled by the Demon: Enedil appears as a crowned and armoured 
king, with long red hair in a scarlet robe holding, the sceptre of 
Agamemnon. He has a golden sheep skin shield with a shield boss 
with a symbol of a dove upon it. He is seated on a Throne. 


Elections: the proper time for planting, and journeys, but bad tor 
marriages and keeping movable property. 

Magical Powers: Enedil's power is to drive away anger at all 
costs. This might not be the desired result unless vou want to stop 
someone being angry at you (normally vou want them to stop 
being angry and do something else). However, if vou wanted to 
stop someone beating their partner Enedil might help or might just 
split the relationship up to avoid any more conflict. Traditionally 
Enedil can find treasures and underground streams, destroy 


NICK FARRELL 241 


buildings, wheat planting, end all building work (ie. causing a 
collapse during construction), cause strife in relationships, enrage a 
person against another and to keep people prisoner. 


Notes: There is an unpredictable nature to this force as Enedil like 
a barbarian king, in that it will manifest its force in its own unique 
(and potentially destructive wav). A person born under Enedil will 
be full of sexual energy and drive. They might have difficulty in 
monogamy and might encourage break ups in other relationships 
through their actions. Many old-style politicians and diplomats 
would have an Endedil soul as it is intricately connected to power. 
Endedil also creates the souls of successful lawyers. 


THIRD MANSION: AZORAYE (PLEIADES) 
Zodiac degree: Traditional 25° Aries 42’ - 8° Taurus 34’ 29° Sidereal 
Taurus to 10° Gemini. 


Star: Alcyone. 

Alcyone is a multiple star system in the constellation of Taurus. It is 
H0 light years from the Sun, it is the brightest star in the Pleiades 
open cluster. The Pleiades were the seven daughters of Atlas 
turned into a group of stars. Alcyone was their leader. Plotinus said 
that their role, then, is to help seekers become consciously aware 
vt Divine Knowledge and Wisdom. The Pleiades are a spiritual 
station” where the Higher Genus is energised and awakens on Earth. 
Venus strongly influences the Alcyone energy. Ptolemy attributed 
them to Moon and Mars. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Annuncia is depicted as a beautiful woman 
holding a book in her left hand, dressed in red with an emerald 
green cloak. She is seated on a golden sheepskin and holds her hand 
above her head and often appears to be holding a lit torch. Around 
her are seven asps and four pillars.* 

Elections: 

A time to buy animals, travel (but not by sea), hunting, alchemical 
works, and doing good. Itis a tough time for marriage as partnerships 
will be between unequals and more about romantic love and physical 
attraction than anything which can last. A time for planting. 


Magical Powers: Annuncia protects a person on the sea (in other 


* These are taken from the PGM refer to the seven fates, which were 
attributed to the Pleiades. 


242 HELIOS UNBOUND 


words life in general) , she imprisons captives, teaches magic and 
alchemy and "all works connected to fire." She is also an expert on 
hunting and can help a man and a woman fall in love. Acquisition 
of all good things. Safe travel or holding individuals captive, success 
in hunting and alchemical experiments. She brings abundance in all 
things and the flowering of art, creativity, wealth, and beauty. 


Notes: This is a particularly lucky and talented soul who can have 
what they want and will be extremely lucky in anything they do. It 
would make for a soul of a magician, artist or writer. But Annuncia 
does have her darker side. Just because vou have those natural 
abilities, it does not mean that you will bring them to light or be 
able to exploit them. If you are lucky enough to have an Annuncia 
soul, it is imperative that you work with her to obtain advice on 
how to fulfil this destiny. The Higher Genius will be expecting a lot 
from this person and their life might be hard but interesting. This 
might be why they are said to make their natives wanton, ambitious, 
turbulent, optimistic and peaceful; to give many journeys and 
voyages (experiences), success in agriculture and through active 
intelligence but to cause blindness, disgrace and a violent death. 


FOURTH MANSION ALDEBARAN (FOLLOWER) 
Zodiac degree : Traditional 5* Taurus 35' - 21° Taurus 25' Sidereal 
10* Gemini to 24* Gemini. 


Star: Aldebaran. 


Aldebaran is an orange giant star found about 65 lipht-vears trom 
the Sun, it is the bull's eye of Taurus. It is a fortunate star portendiny 
riches and honour particularly from war and conflict, It was one of 
the four Royal Stars, or Guardians of the Sky. Ptolemy connected the 
star with Mars which makes it good for generals and war. Maternus 
writes that Aldebaran "...when aspected by a maletic portends 
sudden and unexpected involvement in riots and sedition resulting 
in justly being condemned by the people." 


Ruled by the Demon: Assarez appears as an armoured horse-rider 
with black hair and red eyes. He holds a serpent in his right hand. 
He has a round red shield with the head of a bull upon it. He has a 
flame coloured cloak and a gold crown. His horse is chestnut brown 
and has golden chest armour. 


Elections: good for employing others, building, investing, and 
obtaining offices. Bad for marriage and makes traveling difficult and 
potentially dangerous. 


NICK FARRELL 243 


Magical Powers: destruction, creation of enmity, eradication of pests. 
He causes the destruction and hindrances of buildings, fountains, 
wells, gold mines, the flight of creeping things, and begets discord. 


Notes: Some of the magical material tend to emphasize the malefic 
side of this mansion at the expense of its positive side. As a Persian 
royal star it was protector and bought considerable good luck 
through activity such as war. A soul influenced by Assarez will 
be defensive, always on guard and under stress and in a constant 
state of anxiety, but their ability to concentrate and get up and 
move makes them successful in making money. Assarez souls are 
potentially charismatic and charming. Aldebaran comes across as 
the knight in shining armour even when they do not earn the title. 
The darker side of Assarez is his need for sacrifice which, because 
he is a soldier's Dæmon, can mean loss of life. The Greco-Romans 
associated the horse with war and attributed it to symbolism such 
as power, victory, honour, domination and virility. 


THE FIFTH MANSION ALMIZEN (CROWN) 

Zodiac degree: Traditional 21° Taurus 26’ - 4° Gemini 17’ Sidereal 24° 
Gemini to 9* Cancer. 

Star: Meissa (Al Hakah). 


Almizen is formed by three small stars from the head of Orion 
which are close together that they look like one nebula. According 
to Ptolemy it has the nature of Jupiter and Saturn. With gives a 
strong and dignified nature, self-confidence, inconstancy, arrogance, 
violence, impiety, prosperity in trade and particularly by voyages 
or abroad, but danger of treachery and poison. Meissa is one name 
given to this star another (more interesting) was Al Hakah (which 
in Arabic means “White Spot” but could be derived from the name 
of the Ancient Egyptian god of magic Heka). Orion was Osiris to the 
Ancient Egyptians and it makes sense that he was crowned with Heka. 


Ruled by the Damon: Cabil appears as a floating crowned 
disembodied head surrounded by stars. On his forehead is a white 
star. He is a teaching spirit and favours those who want to learn 
magic, philosophy or trade skills. He speaks to people in their 
dreams and often helps review situations. 


Elections: good for marriage, education, making medicine, travel, 


employment, building, getting your hair cut, and washing your hair. 
Bad for business partnerships. 


244 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Magical Powers: Learning, healing and love magic which is 
designed to bring a couple together permanently. 


Notes: This mansion is very much focused on the head and intellect 
in the widest sense. A person who has this as their personal mansion 
has a natural inner contact and access to information. They should 
pick up information quickly and understand it, due mostly to their 
inner voice explaining information to them in a manner they can 
understand. One danger is that such a person might not have a 
practical bone in their body being too much in their head. In fact 
their life destiny might be to take the intellectual knowledge they 
have and make it practically work. Their Higher Genius might have 
entered into incarnation to test some theories out. 


THE SIXTH MANSION ACHAYA (MARK) 

Zodiac degree: 4° Gemini 18’ - 17° gemini 08’ Sidereal 9 Cancer 
to 20 Cancer. 

Star: Alhena. 

Alhena is a brilliant white star located on the left foot of the Twin 
Pollux. Castor and Pollux (Dioskouroi ) were twins and while 
Castor was mortal, Pollux was immortal. This makes them another 
excellent symbol for the Higher Self. Alhena then can be seen as the 
foot of the Higher Genius. Ptolemy said that Alhena was a peaceable 
Mercury with a slight influence of Venus, and the Picatrix uses it for 
love magic. 


Ruled by the Damon: Nedeyrahe appears as two people embracing. 
The Picatrix suggests that it should be a man and a woman and that a 
person should make two talismans, one for the man and one for the 
woman and attach them for love magic. The more ancient sources 
hint that Pollux would make a better image for non-romantic magic. 
Nedeyrahe would then appear as a young, man holding, a club 
and riding a horse with his twin shown behind him (once Castor 
appeared as Pollux's shadow). Double symbolism tends to appear 
(two snakes, two vases and cross beams) in any visions. 


Elections: good for actions of war and seeking justice (“pursuing 
enemies and evildoers”), travel, forming partnerships, and hunting. 
Bad for planting and agricultural work, borrowing money, or 
depositing something for safekeeping, also bad for taking medicines 
and treating injuries. 


NICK FARRELL 245 
Magical Powers: Love and attraction. 


Notes: The Arabic interpretation of the mansion suggests more 
romantic magic while the imagery of Castor and Pollux suggests a 
deeper sort of love built on dedication and commitment. Manilius 
said that a person born under this star will have an easier life. 
“Those so endowed find even work a pleasure. They would banish 
war, the trumpet's call, and the gloom of old age: theirs is a life of 
ease and unfading youth spent in the arms of love. They discover 
paths to the skies, complete a survey of the heavens with numbers 
and measurements, and outstrip the flight of the stars: nature 
yields to their genius, which it serves in all things. So many are the 
accomplishments of which the Twins are fruitful.” 


SEVENTH MANSION: ALDHIRA (FOREARM) 
Zodiac degree: 17° Gemini 09" - 0° cancer 00’ Sidereal 20° Cancer 7° 
Leo. 


Star: Castor. 

Castor is a bright white binary star and is on the head of the Northern 
Twin. Castor was the mortal twin, famous for his skill in taming and 
managing, horses. There are some differences between the sixth and 
seventh mansion even if they are “twins.” Ptolemy said that Castor 
was more influenced by Mercury. This means thatit gives distinction, 
a keen intellect, success in law and many travels, fondness for horses, 
sudden fame and honour but often followed by loss of fortune and 
disprace, sickness, trouble. and great affliction, Its natives are said to 
be mischievous and prone to violence. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Siely appears as a robed man, praying with 
his arms up-stretched to heaven. However this image is inconsistent 
with the meaning of the star, its location, myth and meaning. A better 
magical imaye would be of a youth holding a bow in his right hand 
and a lyre in his lett with his arms outstretched to heaven. Behind 
him is a horse. Like his brother, double symbolism tends to appear 
(two snakes, two vases and cross beams) in any visions. 


Elections: this mansion is good for agricultural pursuits, and for 
making peace with enemies should one choose to do so (it's good 
for getting an advantage on them). Siely is bad for buying property 
although good for selling it. (Siely is the archetypal Estate Agent.) He 
is not good at healing the sick. He is favourable for gain, friendship 
and for lovers, however he undermines the law and establishment. 


246 HELIOS UNBOUND 
Magical Powers: abundance and acquiring good things 


Notes: Arabic and modern astrology has ignored a lot about the 
Castor legend associated with this mansion and its connections to 
the last one. In some ways Castor is the dark twin in that he is more 
influenced by the needs of Earth and is more equipped to survive 
within it. He is the archetype for a perfected soul. While his brother 
expresses perfect love, Castor is more pragmatic and earthier. He has 
to be, as he is mortal and is prone to suffering and death. Someone 
born with the Moon in this mansion will be successful, particularly 
in business. It can be an indicator of wealth and abundance, but it 
might come at a personal cost. Mercury is also the god of magic so 
the image of him lifting arms above his head is a form of invocation. 


EIGHTH MANSION ALNATHRA (GAP) 


Zodiac degree: 0° cancer 00’ - 12° cancer 51’. Sidereal 7° Leo to 18° 
Leo. 


Star: Praesepe. 

Praesepe is a star cluster with the nickname of the Crib. It has the 
nature of Marsand the Moon, and causes disease, disgrace, adventure 
insolence, wantonness, brutality, blindness, and industry. It makes 
its natives fortunate, but liable to loss through others. It can help 
them to be founders of large businesses. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Annediex appears as an eayle. with the 
bearded face of a man. This is the Ancient Egyptian symbol for the Ba 
which was the personified impression that individuals make on the 
world around them or their effect on others, It was like the person's 
mana and it had a life which was separate from the physical body. 
This explains why, while the Star's attributions are a little bleak, the 
meanings of the mansion are positive with Annediex being, invoked 
for victory. Annediex also rules the longest day of the vear when the 
Sun is at its strongest. 


Elections: good for healing, buying new yoods, and travel. Bad tor 
marriage, partnerships, and employ ment, 


Magical Powers: love and friendship, forging, alliances and military 
success. 


Notes: Alnathra is the force which shows a person's reputation and 
personal power. It is the drive to carry a person through their life and 
striving for success. A person born with the Moon in this mansion 


NICK FARRELL 247 


will have considerable drive to succeed and will be status orientated. 
They should also have considerable personal power and charisma. If 
these things are lacking then it is vital to awaken them as part of the 
Higher Genius's life plan. There are many risks following the path of 
Alnathra as shown by the meanings of Praesepe and it is easy to see 
why. A person who looks for victory, prestige and power for their 
personality is going to run into trouble occasionally. 


NINTH MANSION ALTARF (LION'S GLANCE) 
Zodiac degree: 12° Cancer 51’ - 25° Cancer 42’ Sidereal 18° Leo to 
28° Leo. 

Star: Alterf. 

Alterf is an orange to red giant star. Ptolemy said that the star was 
a mix of the malefic planets Mars and Saturn. It brings misfortunes 
and tragedies and was a portent of earthquakes, landslides, and 
famine. There is not a lot of good which comes from this star, but 
a lot of death and war. Warnock suggests that after the victory and 


success of the last mansion, the Moon is moving to a phase of defeat 
and illness. 


Ruled by the Damon: Raubel appears as a eunuch with his hands 
over his eves in terror, This is a cryptic symbol to modern minds as 
eunuchs, while reviled in Rome, were trusted advisors throughout 
the rest of the Middle East. Eunuchs served Hekate in her mos' 
important sanctuary, Llagina, which was a theocratic city-state ir 
what is now modern Turkey. They are mostly a symbol of devotior 
(in Llayina to the yoddess) but to government administration as 
most courts were based around a bureaucracy of eunuchs. Raubel is 
the established order breaking down. 


Elections: do not try to construct or plant anything. There might be 
deceit in partnerships during this time, and it's not safe for journeys 
or intlictiny evil on others, Good for capturing individuals to have 
them languish in captivity and good for fortifying gates. 


Magical Powers: curses, particularly for sickness and bringing 
down divine wrath. 


Notes: The mansion is a period where the established order has 
become sick and fearful and is collapsing in on itself. This may be 
a good thing except when it is looked at through the eyes of the 
existing order. On the plus side Raubel can show how to handle 
such crisis and to go with the flow. A person born with the Moon 
in Altarf can find negativity in their most joyful moments. As a 


248 HELIOS UNBOUND 


result they often create their own woe even when the universe is not 
flinging bad experiences at them. That is not to say that the universe 
does not send an unfair amount of rubbish their way. They might 
be born into an environment which is corrupt or weak which needs 
to be reformed or to be escaped. Much of their happiness depends 


on them either doing or accepting good things and finding a mental 
balance. 


TENTH MANSION ALJABHA 
Zodiac degree: 25° cancer 42' - 8° Leo 34’ Sidereal 28° Leo to 12° 
Virgo. 
Star: Regulus. 
Regulus is one of the brightest stars in the night sky and is a multiple 
star system composed of four stars that are organised into two pairs. 
One of the Persian Royal Stars it is one of the protective forces in the 
universe and is the Watcher of the North. Ptolemy said that Regulus 
has the nature of Mars and Jupiter. Which means its energy brings 
power, prestige, strength, and the ability to rule and lead. 


Ruled by the Demon: Aredafir who appears with the head of à 
Lion and he is the solar force of healing. It supplies natural strength 
and power to lead and take control. Aredafir presides over curing 
infirmities and easing childbirth, placing love between man and 
wife, strengthening, and completing, buildings, and to obtain the 
love of allies and mutual help. However, since he is still a yuardian 
Aredafir destroys enemies, and incarcerates captives so they cannot 
escape. 


Elections: A good time for healing, marriage, partnerships and 
construction. Not a good time for travel or lendiny, 


Magical Powers: Leadership, self confidence, desire ot the heart. 
Starting projects. 

Notes: Those who are born under this mansion are high spirited and 
articulate. They are good leaders, but also practical natural healers 
Their methods are of healing, although not that of the surgeon but 
more homoeopathic in their approach. They have a wicked sense of 
humour and the nature of a trickster. They are loyal and protective 
to those under their protection. 


ELEVENTH MANSION ALZUBRA (LION'S MANE) 


Zodiac degree: 8^ Leo 35' - 21? Leo 25' sidereal 12 Virgo - 22 Virgo. 


NICK FARRELL 249 


Star: Zosma (Delta Leonis). 

Zosma is 58.4 light-years from the Sun and the word is Greek for 
girdle. Ptolemy said that the star is a negative Saturn-Venus mix. It 
causes selfishness, immorality, meanness, melancholy and gives an 
unreasonable and shameless egotism. On the plus side it does give 
an alert mind and the ability to prophesy. (The Sumerians called the 
star Kakkab Kua, the constellation of the God Kua, the Oracle.) In 
medieval times this star portended many problems connected with 
the planetary Venus. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Necol appears as a man riding a lion with a 
spear in his right hand while his left holds the lion's ear. The lion is 
riding over a corpse. lt is a form of the god Abraxas and the Higher 
Genius of a dead person wafting away from the Earth on his way to 
a higher life. 


Elections: good for planting, building, partnerships, and battle, 
mediocre for journeys and trade. 


Magical Powers: to be feared and vet to receive good things, having 
requests made to authority figures answered favourably, increased 
wealth, fortifving buildings, assisting in battle, rescuing captives, 
and protit in trade. 


Notes: This mansion brings power and respect. A person who 
born with the Moon in this mansion tends to manifest the mor 
aggressive and eyotistical sides of the Sun. They have great courage 
but will often ride over the top of people without thinking. They also 
have profound magical abilities to connect and channel the gods and 
are natural oracles. They tend to present this message too bluntly 
and are often ignored because of their lack of tact. They can become 
depressed because they are ignored and that makes the issue worse. 
Once they have integrated their powers, they can guide and protect 
people. 


TWELFTH MANSION ALSARFAH 
(TRANSFORMER) 

Zodiac degree: 21° Leo 26’ - 04° Virgo 17’ Sidereal 22° Virgo to 27° 
Virgo. 

Star: Denebola. 

Denebola is second-brightest star in Leo and is a blue double star 
which appears as one to the naked eye. The Greek name for the 
star was Alkaia, who was one of Queen Andromache’s Amazon 


250 HELIOS UNBOUND 


generals. Her name means, "Mighty One." Denebola was unlucky 
in astrology, portending misfortune and disgrace. Ptolemy said 
that the star was a Saturn and Venus mix. It gives swift judgment, 
despair, regrets, public disgrace, misfortune from the elements of 
nature, and happiness turned to anger, and makes its natives noble, 


daring, self-controlled, generous, and busy with other people's 
affairs. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Abdizu who appears as a Dragon which can 
be seen fighting a man. While some books tend emphasis the "man" 
in this image itis the Dragon which is the active symbol. She is likely 
to be Scylla the daughter of Hekate who was turned into dragon 
(Hesiodic Megalai Ehoiai says she was the daughter of Hekate 
and Phoebus Apollo). Scylla was a tragic romantic hero who who 
was claimed by Poseidon, but the jealous sea goddess, Amphitrite 
turned her into a monster by poisoning the spring where she bathed. 
She became a force which sank ships and was killed by Hercules 
(and resurrected by Phorcys). 


Elections: good for building, renting lands, agriculture, marriage 
and putting on new garments. Bad for travel and employment 


Magical Powers: separation of two lovers, increases harvest and 
causes plants to prosper, destruction of riches, destroying, ships and 
reinforcing the loyalty of allies, employees, and captives. 


Notes: The Picatrix sees this mansion as highly dangerous and 
Christopher Warnock says that it causes a person to projecting, their 
evils outward. In the Odyssey though, Odysseus when sailing, in the 
Straits of Messina between Scylla and her counterpart Charybdis 
was recommended to steer towards 5 ylla. The reason was Sella 
would only kill six sailors while Charybdis would sink the whole 
boat. She represents a life misfortune which does not end in 
destruction. A person born with the Moon in this mansion will 
be strong and dangerous and with a tendency toward chaos and 
destruction. They will be great undoers of the established order and 
can bring about change, but not in a comfortable way. 


THIRTEENTH MANSION ALAWWA (HOWLER) 
Zodiac degree: 4° Virgo 18' - 17° Virgo 08’ Sidereal 27° Virgo 24° 
Libra. 


NICK FARRELL 251 


Star: Zavijava. 

Zavijava is a pale-yellow star on the Wings of Virgo. Its name means 
either the corner or the dog's kennel. A barking dog was considered 
a good omen of Hekate, but in this case it might have something 
to do with the naturalistic sex drive of dogs on heat. According to 
Ptolemy it had the powers of Mars and Mercury which implies a 
more Leonine nature. It would create a person who has intelligence 
and energy to be sent out and work under his own authority. This 
can create a formidable force of character with a competitive nature. 


Ruled by the Damon: Azerut is a form of Priapus, the son of 
Aphrodite bv Dionvsus, and he appears as a man (sometimes as a 
gnome) with a huge erection. He holds a scythe in his right hand 
which is used to threaten thieves with castration. He was sometimes 
equated with Hermes and could carry a caduceus. He was a rustic 
fertility god, protector of livestock, fruit plants, gardens, and male 
genitalia. Priapus was also the patron god for merchant sailors and 
was supposed to assist in navigation. 


Elections: good tor planting and tilling, journeys, marriage, taking 
medicine, employment, petitioning authority, and cutting hair. 


Magic Powers: creating love between two people, increase of trade 
and profit, assisting with crops. good and safe journeys, completing 
buildings, protecting property, curing sexual dysfunction and 
freeing, captives 

Notes: This mansion stands tor sexual desire and lust, while this 
might have symbolically been a “male thing” Priapus is not fussy. 
]t is pure libido and it does not matter what form it takes. In fact, 
one of the traditional meanings of this mansion in a natal chart is 
that the native has an almost “feminine nature", mostly based on 
the ancient prejudice that women were prone to giving in to their 
sexual desires more than men. lt supplies a considerable amount of 
drive to a person with the Moon in this house. This can be extremely 
negative it repressed (or over expressed) but when controlled can 
produce an extremely passionate and protective individual. 


FOURTEENTH MANSION ALSIMAK 
(UNARMED) 


Zodiac degree: 17° Virgo 08’ - 00° Libra 00’ Sidereal 24° Libra 4° 
Scorpio. 


Star: Spica. 


252 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Spica is the brightest star in Virgo and is a whirling double star 
in the virgin's wheat. Ptolemy said it had the nature of Venus and 
Mars. It was the star of the grain harvest and the provider of material 
needs. Spica is also noted for its spiritual and religious qualities and 
psychic awareness. It gives honours and fame. Spica is of marked 
good fortune for scientists, writers, artist-painters, sculptors, and 
musicians. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Erdegel appears as a dog with its tail in its 
mouth which has a similar meaning to Ouroboros. It is a spirit which 
shows the cyclic nature of life, it brings beginnings and endings. 
With the power of Spica it brings the harvest which is a reward to 
the person who grew the wheat, the ending of one cycle and the 
beginning of the next. 


Elections: good for marriage, healing, agriculture, employment, 
partnerships, and traveling by ship. 


Magical Powers: Trade and profit, increase in harvests, completion 
of buildings, travel, driving people apart, creating love between 
spouses, destroying lust, harming crops, assaulting travellers, 
helping kings, and developing goodwill between allies. 


Notes: Alsimak is called “unarmed” because it is a star that is out 
on its own and lacking any others which would form “weapons 

The Picatrix emphasises this mansion’s ability to create endings and 
uses it to break a couple up. However, the implication is that such 
an ending will create a new beginning. This mansion is really about 
that critical part of a cycle where the dog (or snake) bites its own 
tail, enabling the cycle to begin again. A person who is born with 
the Moon in this mansion should strongly feel the cycles in their 
life. They might experience extremes of fortune and can notice what 
stage a cycle is at. They might have the natural ability to predict 
the consequences of action and even have a natural oracular nature. 
They might also be creatures of routine. 


FIFTEENTH MANSION ALGHAFR 

(COVERING) 

Zodiac degree: 00° Libra 00' - 12° Libra 51’ Sidereal 4° to 15° Scorpio. 
Star: Syrma. 

This is a binary star in the train of the Virgo's dress. The name 
refers to the covering of nature and was said to represent occult 
sciences, secret wisdom, and a sharp, penetrating mind that can 


NICK FARRELL 253 


extract hidden truths. Ptolemy said the star was like Mercury, and 
moderately Mars and it was considered a fortunate star. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Achalich appears as a young man seated at a 
library desk reading scrolls and books. He makes a good contact for 
understanding magical knowledge, divination, or seeing what is not 
obvious. He is useful for concealing things and invisibility magic. 
Outside of that he teaches business, writing and the Mercurial arts. 
He has proved useful at manipulating public opinion and being the 
guiding force behind Public Relations and Marketing often at the 
expense of another's reputation. 


Elections: Good for all sorts of business, commerce and studying. 
Favourable for illnesses caused by windiness, employment, 
moving to a new house, and buying and selling. Bad for journeys, 
partnerships, and marriage. 


Magical Powers: Magic to increase the success of finding material 
or intellectual treasures and working spells to protect friends and 
injure enemies’ acquisition of friendship and good will. Also, digging 
of wells, finding buried treasure, impeding travellers, separating 
spouses, and destroying the reputation of enemies. 


Notes: A person born with the Moon in Alghafr was said to be well 
mannered and know the right things to say. They are aware of the 
forms of approach that people tind pleasing and project them. Such 
people are natural academics and intellectuals in their approach, but 
do not really live in an ivory tower. The dark side of this personality 
is that it otten lacks à moral code and will deceive to improve their 
own (or other's) reputation. It is à position for a researcher, scientist, 
PR or marketer. 


THE SIXTEENTH MANSION ALZUBANA 
(SCORPION S CLAWS) 

Zodiac degree: 12° libra 51 - 25° libra 42’ sidereal 15° Scorpio 3° 
Sapttarius, 

Stars: Zubenelyenubi and Zubeneschalami. 


Libra was not considered a separate constellation by the ancients 
and was called Chelae, or the Claws of Scorpio. Zubenelgenubi was 


254 HELIOS UNBOUND 


called the Insufficient Price and Ptolemy said it had the nature of 
Saturn and Mars. It causes malevolence, obstruction, an unforgiving 
character, violence, disease, lying, crime, disgrace, and danger of 
poison. The stars at the points of the claws of Scorpio work like 
Jupiter and Mercury. Zubeneschamali, or the Northern Scale, was 
considered a fruitful star. The Chaldeans believed that when this 
star was clear the crops would be good. It gives riches, honour, and 
good fortune. It had the power of the two benefits Jupiter and Venus. 
When the Moon is in this mansion it unites these two stars. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Azeruch appears as a man seated on 
a throne holding a scale in his hands and he is a good figure to 
explain economics and business. He brings wealth, normally 
through investment and banking. The scales here have nothing to 
do with justice but were an ancient symbol of the merchant in the 
marketplace. He is a good financial advisor, however a love of money 
is inauspicious for love. The scales here are more symbols of the 
balance that a person must have when working with this mansion. 
Azeruch is really good at showing them how to find this balance so 
that they do not blight themselves with too much Zubenelgenubi. 


Elections: bad for travel, healing, making deals, planting crops, 
marriage, and partnerships. Good for employment. 


Magical Powers: making money, destruction of merchandise and 
crops, causing hostilities in relationships, impeding, travellers, and 
freeing captives. 

Notes: This mansion is bad for anything other than making, money. 
The claws of a scorpion are not a good place to be and lead to anger 
and conflict. This is the concept of “competition.” 


THE SEVENTEENTH MANSION ALIKLIL 
(SCORPION'S CROWN) 

Zodiac degree: 25° Libra 42' - 08° Scorpio 34’ Sidereal 3 Sagittarius 
to 10° Sagittarius. 

Stars: Acrab and Deschubba. 

Acrab and Dschubba are the two stars on the forehead of the 
scorpion. Ptolemy thought that both stars had the nature of Mars 


NICK FARRELL 255 


and Saturn and caused sudden assaults, malevolence, immorality, 
and shamelessness. These stars were the brains of the scorpion 
and said to create a fighter of great skill who had a patient and 
wary approach to any situation, but this will belie their skilled 
determination. Scorpio is famous for the surgeons born in it and this 
star shows up just the qualities which they need to have. The same 
applies to generals, police officers, private investigators, and secret 
agents. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Adrieb appears as a dog-faced baboon which 
isa form of Thoth-Hermes. He has his arms above his head as if he is 
worshipping the Sun. The ancient Egyptians observed that baboons 
would bark at the rising Sun, and this was turned into images of 
baboons with raised arms in the act of worshipping the Sun. The 
Egyptians trained baboons to catch thieves and shoplifters, making 
Adrieb a protective force, especially for property, shops, and material 
goods. He can advise when there is the possibility of loss and how 
to avoid it. 


Elections: good to buy livestock, besiege estates, put on new clothes, 
building, love, medicine, and travel, even though the traveller will 
be anxious. Bad for partnerships, haircuts, and employment. 
Magical Powers: keeping thieves from entering a home, committing 
deceptions, besieging cities, reinforcing buildings, protecting 
travellers, creating lasting love and friendship. 

Notes: Warnock notes that seen in the light of the earlier mansions, 
in which material wealth is gathered, Aliklil shows it being 
protected. AliMil is a disciplined and intelligent force defending the 
soul, It was said that a person with the Moon in this mansion will 
do great evil deeds, which ties in with the “secret agent” symbolism 
associated with this mansion. However, this is a protective force; 
unbalanced it might create a miserly ultra-conservative person who 
never takes any risks. Or someone who enforces rules long after they 
have stopped being, valid. 


EIGHTEENTH MANSION ALQALB 

(SCORPION'S HEART) 

Zodiac degree: 08° Scorpio 34’ - 21° Scorpio 25’ sidereal 10° 
Sagittarius to 24° Sagittarius. 

Star: Antares. 

Antares is a red super-giant star that is nearing the end of its life. 


256 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The word "Antares" means "anti-Ares" or "anti-Mars," because the 
reddish star looked similar to the red planet. In Persia it was named 
one of four royal stars in the sky. In Egypt, Antares was a symbol 
of the scorpion goddess Selkit. In her Fixed Stars and Constellations 
im Astrology, Vivian E. Robson says: "It causes malevolence, 
destructiveness, liberality, broad-mindedness, evil presages and 
danger of fatality and makes its natives rash, ravenous, headstrong 
and destructive to themselves by their own obstinacy." As a royal 
star, Antares gives worldly success with a ruthless ambition. It is 
prone to obsession. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Egrebel appears as cobra with its tail above 
its head, its head like a scorpion. In one of humankind's earliest 
temples, Góbekli Tepe (10th-8th millennium BCE) the snake was 
depicted in this way to indicate falling rain and fertility. But the 
associations of death and poison to this mansion show Egrebel as a 
rather darker Dæmon of destruction similar in concept to the tarot 
key Death. Snakes are symbols of renewal due to the shedding of 
their skin. Egrebel isalso a healer but more surgical, which consumes 
(or cuts out) the source of the illness. Egrebel has a strong guardian 
role particularly in keeping evil out of the house. He can also warn 
of danger and show us how to take precautions. 


Elections: good for building, renting and purchasing land, getting 
promoted, useful for journeys where the destination is to the east, 
good for planting, and taking medication. Bad for partnerships and 
employment. 


Magical Powers: relieving fevers and diseases of the stomach, 
conspiring against kings, vengeance against enemies, reinforcing 
buildings, freeing prisoners, and separatiny, friends. 

Notes: Algalb is a complex force which can be rough for those who 
expect everything spiritual to be sweetness and light. It is a positive 
force, which can be obsessive and nasty in its methods. A person 
who has an Egrebel Damon as a house guardian is not messing, 
around and does not care if someone gets hurt. It is said that great 
light casts the greatest shadows, and a person who is born with the 
Moon in Algalb was destined to do great deeds and help a great 
many. Warnock says that the anger of Scorpio will be present in 
this person, but it will be turned inward. The fact that they express 
a Royal Star means that they will be fated to have a certain amount 
of protection and guardianship. They would make good surgeons. 


NICK FARRELL 257 


NINETEENTH MANSION: ALSHAULA 


(STINGER) 
Zodiac degree: 21° Scorpio 25' - 04° Sagittarius 17’ Sidereal 24° 
Sagittarius 13° Capricorn. 


Star: Shaula. 

This star is made up of two to three stars which appear as a single 
sting in the tail of Scorpio. It was considered unlucky. Ptolemy said 
that it had nature of Mercury and Mars. It gives danger, desperation, 
immorality, and malevolence, and relates to acid poisons. 


Spirit Annucel appears as a woman with her hands over her eyes 
and she appeared to me as a Demon of Ishtar. The connection 
appears to be with the hand of Fatima which is a hand with an 
eve the centre, used to ward off evil. It was based on the hand of 
Ishtar which lacked the eve. Ishtar was a Mesopotamian goddess 
associated with love, beauty, sex. desire, fertility, war, justice, and 
political power While her hand was an auspicious symbol it was 
used to see off negativity, Annucel s image is both the cause and the 
cure of the problem, She can show how to conduct conflict profitably 
and with the minimum of fuss. She will be better in conflict which 
requires a long-term game. 


Elections: good for sieges, litigation, journeys by land, and planting 
trees. Bad for partnerships, employment, and travel by sea. It is bad 
for anything, that needs a liberation or ships. 


Magical Powers: restoring uterine health, protection during 
pregnancy and childbirth, besieging cities, destroying wealth, 
expelling, people trom a place, cursing, travellers, and increasing 
harvests. Talismans made with her image are useful in long term 
magical attacks, when detences need to be overcome or long-term 
defences are required against a tenacious attacker. 


Notes: The traditional attributions of this mansion focus on 
protecting, women and ensuring childbirth goes smoothly, but it is 
popular in the manufacture of Scorpio-based curses. The fact that 
it is yood at battles and sieges is symbolic for the arguments and 
contlicts that come from this mansion. To be fair these things are 
necessary and inevitable in life and it is better to have a plan to deal 
with them. Traditionally a person who was born with the Moon 
in Alshaula will cause their parents great evil and while it is true 
they can cause much pain, they have a function of preventing harm 
coming to others. 


256 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The word " Antares" means "anti-Ares" or "anti-Mars," because the 
reddish star looked similar to the red planet. In Persia it was named 
one of four royal stars in the sky. In Egypt, Antares was a symbol 
of the scorpion goddess Selkit. In her Fixed Stars and Constellations 
in Astrology, Vivian E. Robson says: “It causes malevolence, 
destructiveness, liberality, broad-mindedness, evil presages and 
danger of fatality and makes its natives rash, ravenous, headstrong 
and destructive to themselves by their own obstinacy.” As a royal 
star, Antares gives worldly success with a ruthless ambition. It is 
prone to obsession. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Egrebel appears as cobra with its tail above 
its head, its head like a scorpion. In one of humankind's earliest 
temples, Góbekli Tepe (10th-8th millennium BCE) the snake was 
depicted in this way to indicate falling rain and fertility. But the 
associations of death and poison to this mansion show Egrebel as a 
rather darker Dæmon of destruction similar in concept to the tarot 
key Death. Snakes are symbols of renewal due to the shedding of 
their skin. Egrebel is also a healer but more surgical, which consumes 
(or cuts out) the source of the illness. Egrebel has a strong, guardian 
role particularly in keeping evil out of the house. He can also warn 
of danger and show us how to take precautions. 


Elections: good for building, renting and purchasing land, getting 
promoted, useful for journeys where the destination is to the vast, 
good for planting, and taking medication. Bad for partnerships and 
employment. 


Magical Powers: relieving fevers and diseases of the stomach, 
conspiring against kings, vengeance against enemies, reintorcing 
buildings, freeing prisoners, and separating, friends. 


Notes: Algalb is a complex force which can be rough for those who 
expect everything spiritual to be sweetness and light. It is a positive 
force, which can be obsessive and nasty in its methods. A person 
who has an Egrebel Dæmon as a house guardian is not messing 
around and does not care if someone gets hurt. It is said that great 
light casts the greatest shadows, and a person who is born with the 
Moon in Alqalb was destined to do great deeds and help a great 
many. Warnock says that the anger of Scorpio will be present in 
this person, but it will be turned inward. The fact that they express 
a Royal Star means that they will be fated to have a certain amount 
of protection and guardianship. They would make good surgeons. 


NICK FARRELL 257 


NINETEENTH MANSION: ALSHAULA 


(STINGER) 

Zodiac degree: 21° Scorpio 25' - 04° Sagittarius 17’ Sidereal 24° 
Sagittarius 13° Capricorn. 

Star: Shaula. 

This star is made up of two to three stars which appear as a single 
sting in the tail of Scorpio. It was considered unlucky. Ptolemy said 
that it had nature of Mercury and Mars. It gives danger, desperation, 
immorality, and malevolence, and relates to acid poisons. 


Spirit Annucel appears as a woman with her hands over her eyes 
and she appeared to me as a Demon of Ishtar. The connection 
appears to be with the hand of Fatima which is a hand with an 
eye the centre, used to ward off evil. It was based on the hand of 
Ishtar which lacked the eve. Ishtar was a Mesopotamian goddess 
associated with love, beauty, sex, desire, fertility, war, justice, and 
political power While her hand was an auspicious symbol it was 
used to see off negativity. Annucel's image is both the cause and the 
cure of the problem. She can show how to conduct conflict profitably 
and with the minimum of fuss. She will be better in conflict which 
requires a long-term game. 


Elections: good tor sieges, litigation, journeys by land, and planting 
trees, Bad for partnerships, employment, and travel by sea. It is bad 
for anything, that needs a liberation or ships. 


Magical Powers: restoring uterine health, protection during 
pregnancy and childbirth, besieging cities, destroying wealth, 
expelling, people trom a place, cursing travellers, and increasing 
harvests, Talismans made with her image are useful in long term 
magical attacks, when detences need to be overcome or long-term 
defences are required against a tenacious attacker, 


Notes: The traditional attributions of this mansion focus on 
protecting, women and ensuring, childbirth goes smoothly, but it is 
popular in the manufacture of Scorpio-based curses. The fact that 
it is good at battles and sieges is symbolic for the arguments and 
conflicts that come from this mansion. To be fair these things are 
necessary and inevitable in life and it is better to have a plan to deal 
with them. Traditionally a person who was born with the Moon 
in Alshaula will cause their parents great evil and while it is true 
they can cause much pain, they have a function of preventing harm 
coming to others. 


258 HELIOS UNBOUND 


THE TWENTIETH MANSION AL-NAAM 

(BEAM) * 

Zodiac degrees: 04° Sagittarius 17’ - 17° Sagittarius 08. Sidereal 13°- 
16 °Capricorn. 

Star: Ascella. 

This is a binary star in the armpit of the Archer, constellation 
Sagittarius. The name Ascella is from a late Latin word meaning 
armpit. However, while you might expect it to be malefic, Agrippa 
said it had the nature of Jupiter and Mercury and created a religious 
and thoughtful mind and those born under its influence tended to 
be philosophical and writers on religious or similar subjects. It gives 
good fortune and happiness. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Queyhuc appears as a centaur holding a 
bow. While the Picatrix says the figure should be the traditional 
centaur with the head and arms of a man, body of a horse with 
four feet, Queyhuc may be another name (or a Damon of) Chiron 
the wounded healer. Older depictions of Chiron gave him a front 
part that was human with a horse’s body and hindquarters. Chiron 
was the spiritual teacher to heroes. His students included Asclepius, 
Aristaeus, Ajax, Aeneas, Actacon, Caeneus, Theseus, Achilles, Jason, 
Peleus, Telamon, Perseus, sometimes Heracles, Oileus, and Phoenix, 
While Centaurs were normally violent and bestial, Chiron's 
bow was only used for hunting and there are no signs of savage 
behaviour. Queyhuc is a gentle guide and inner teacher. He has à 
specific interest in taming animals (a teaching, role) and can teach 
how to handle animal passions. 


Elections: Taming wild beasts, travelling, networking, of people, 
trapping enemies and keeping them locked up, and bringing, evil 
to your enemies. 


Magical Powers: Inner plane guidance and wisdom, rituals where 
passions must be controlled, hunting magic, in its widest terms. It 
is also useful in magic where you need to learn a useful piece of 
information. It is suitable for healing, love, and reconciliation magic. 


Notes: The medieval manuscripts say that this mansion creates à 
strong person who can do great deeds for good or for evil. It is the 
classic description of a hero or anti-hero. It implies that a person 


* Now seen as the bow of Sagittarius. 


NICK FARRELL 259 


born under this mansion is naturally connected to forces of wisdom 
and can be a guide for others. They will always be tempted to use 
this natural wisdom for self-gain. Like Chiron's bow, wisdom can 
be used to put food on the table or to kill. This mansion is useful for 
figurative and literal hunting and for attaining goals. 


THE TWENTY-FIRST MANSION: ALBALDAH 
(BRIGHTEST OF THE TOWN.) 

Zodiac degrees: 17° Sagittarius 08’ - 00° Capricorn sidereal 00’ 16° 
Capricorn - 4° Aquarius. 

Star: Albaldah. 

This is a triple star system in the zodiac constellation of Sagittarius. 
Itis the archer's head. Manilius said that “He will give birth to hearts 
renowned in war and will conduct the conqueror, celebrating great 
triumphs in the sight of all, to his country’s citadels. Such a one will 
build high walls one moment and pull them down the next. But if 
Fortune favours them too generously with success, the mark of her 
envy is to be seen on their faces, for she works cruel havoc upon 
their features s it that a dread warrior (Hannibal) paid for his 
victories at the Trebia, Cannae, and the Lake, even before the hour 
of his retreat, with such disfigurement.” Albaldah is a double-sided 
force which brings about good and bad luck in equal proportion. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Bectue appears asa Janus figure with two faces, 
one facing forward and the other behind. He is the moment of chaos 
between past and future - the chaotic now. Unlike Janus, Bectue is a 
force of cosmic balance, bringing good and evil depending on what 
is deserved. Warnock points out that his position in the mansion 
cycle is as the herald of the “beginning of the end" however that 
does not fit with his traditional functions. 


Elections: good tor building, planting, and making big purchases or 
investments, however not good for employment. 


Magical Powers: causing destruction, strengthening buildings, 
increasing, harvests, making a profit, and separating lovers. 


Notes: There is some confusion as to the meaning of this mansion 
as while some handbooks say that it causes destruction, electional 
functions suggest it is the right time to build, plant or make big 
investments. If the “beginning of the end” is starting, none of the 
above things should be done. However, the mansion is in the 
Jupiter ruled part of Sagittarius and is benefic and expansive. What 
is suggested is the Janus point, the delicate balance between where 


260 HELIOS UNBOUND 


things are still good but distant storm clouds are rising. So, in other 
words, things are good now but winter is coming. A person born 
under this mansion will be a “problem to their father" which means 
that they will not be as successful or lack their good business sense 
or will coast on their father's fortune. They were also said to be an 
alcoholic, which was symbolic of general Jupiter over-indulgence. 
President Donald Trump was born under this mansion. 


THE TWENTY-SECOND MANSION AL SAD AL- 
DHABIH (LUCKY SACRIFICER) 


Zodiac degrees: 00° - 12° Capricorn 51’ Sidereal 4°-12° Aquarius. 


Star: Prima Giedi. 

This is two stars which are four minutes apart, in the Goat's right 
horn. They have been separating since ancient times but during the 
Babylonian period were thought to be a single star. Ptolemy said 
that the stars in the horns of Capricorn are partly Venus, and part 
Mars in their influence. He said that it gives beneficence, sacrifice 
and offering. The Arabs saw the star as a sheep suitable for sacrifice 
(which was why the sacrifice was considered lucky). 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Geliel is a Daemon of Hermes Kriophoros 
and appears with winged sandals, wearing a helmet and carrying à 
ram. Hermes Kriophoros was the “good shepherd” who protected 
his flock. The image was later co-opted into Christianity. Gehel is 
a liberator, protector, and healer. He brings about change tor those 
who have been come too set in their ways. 


Elections: good for healing, journeys, partnerships, it caught a 
captive will quickly escape. Bad for marriaye and employment 


Magical Powers: to suppress rumours, free captives, cure illness, 
create hostilities or goodwill between individuals. 


Note: One of the important aspects of this mansion is the concept 
of sacrifice bringing about liberation. While some think this is 
a Christian concept it was typical of ancient religious thought. 
Hesiod's idea that the gods smelled the smoke of the sacrifice 
and were somehow appeased had been developed into an idea ot 
redemption through the religious act. The belief that this mansion 
was bad for marriage came about probably because estrangement 
from a partner was one of the sorts of things which was a sacrifice 


NICK FARRELL 261 


to more important concerns. The mansion does bring the luck of 
Hermes as a trade-off for any sacrifice you might make. A person 
born with their Moon in this mansion was said to have a balanced 
life with good and bad happening to them. 


TWENTY-THIRD MANSION SA'D BULA 
(SWALLOWER'S LUCK) 

Zodiac degrees: 12° Capricorn 51' - 25° Capricorn 42’ Sidereal 12-23 
Aquarius. 


Star: Al Bali. 

This is a star in the left hand of the Water Bearer, Aquarius. It was 
said to give good fortune but warn of impending danger. Ptolemy 
said the star operates like Saturn and Mercury. It earnt its name 
the Swallower, according to the 13th century Persian astronomical 
writer Al Kazwini, because the stars seemed to swallow, or absorb, 
the light of the other. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Zequebin appears as a cat with the head of a 
dog. Symbolically he is a force of destruction which can be directed 
but is difficult to control when released. He brings about population 
decrease and destruction over a wide area. He destroys things 
which promote stability, such as marriage, and will actively mak 
sick people sicker. 


Elections: good for putting on new clothes, forming partnership 
taking, medicine, and ensures quick escape for those caught. Bad for 
marriage as it implies abuse, journeys, and depositing something 
with someone for satekeeping, 


Magical Powers: destruction and devastation, healing illness, 
improving friendship, ruining marriages, and freeing captives. 


Notes: This mansion was said to create a person who was moderate 
between all things pood and evil. This would appear to be at odds 
with the magical meanings of both the star and Zequebin. But the 
magical image supplies a clue to this paradox. It is a destructive 
power of a cat under the head of a loyal dog. It chooses to be either, 
but its default state is to be neither. What it can’t dois build something 
new — it can only destroy. A person who knows that they have this 
ability swiftly learns that using it is a bad idea and since they find 
building difficult they usually follow a path of temperance instead. 
This mansion can be used to destroy bad things such as an illness 
but some care is needed here. It is a heavy-handed force which could 


262 HELIOS UNBOUND 
make the patent sicker. 


TWENTY-FOURTH MANSION SA'D AL SU'UD 
(LUCKIEST OF THE LUCKY) 

Zodiac degrees: 25° Capricorn 42' - 8° Aquarius 34’ Sidereal 23 
Aquarius to 4 Pisces. 


Star: Sadalsuud. 

This is a pale-yellow double star in the left shoulder of Aquarius. 
Ptolemy said that it had the nature of the nature of Saturn and 
Mercury. The fact it was yellow suggested a solar nature and was 
the star of “mighty destiny” bringing great honour and riches. 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Abrine appears as a woman breastfeeding 
a child. She brings fulfilment and tranquillity. She nurtures and 
supports. Abrine will not provide you with the winning lottery 
numbers but will make sure you receive what you need. She is 
useful to invoke when you are beginning a new project and it needs 
backing. She can also help with fertility issues. 


Elections: an appropriate time to take medicine, dispatch troops, 
employment, and free captives. Not so good for travel, marriage oF 
partnerships. 


Magical Powers: abundance, fertility, support, and motherhood 


Notes: This mansion focuses on increase and multiplication. While 
this is seen as positive it is possible to use this force to increase 
problems and nurture neurosis. Unbalanced it can create a “mother 
complex" which is one of the reasons it is not a pood mansion to by 
married under. It enforces fourth house matters and makes travel 
away from a base less successful. Those born under this mansion 
were said to be well mannered and have a natural luck. The French 
emperor Napoleon had his mansion here and he was said to be one 
of the luckiest of generals who cared for his troops, bringing, about 
considerable loyalty from them. 


TWENTY-FIFTH MANSION SA'D AL-AKHBIYAH 
(LUCK OF HIDDEN THINGS) 

Zodiac degree: 8° Aquarius 34° - 21° Aquarius 
Pisces. 


" Sidereal 4-23 


Star: Sadalbachia. 
Sadalachbia, is a greenish star in the right arm of Aquarius, and the 
westernmost star, at the inner edge of the jar he carries. The name 


NICK FARRELL 263 


has been translated as the Lucky Star of Hidden Things or Hiding- 
Places. This was said to be because when it appeared from the Sun's 
rays all worms and reptiles, buried during the preceding cold, creep 
out of their holes. The world is a plural of H'iba' which means Tent. 
It could also mean that star was named from its spring rising when 
nomads' tents were pitched on new pastures. Ptolemy was not 
specific on the value of this particular star but it would appear to be 
strongly Saturnian with a general hint of Mercury 


Ruled by the Damon: Aziel appears as a man planting trees which 
is part of Saturn's strong agricultural role. However, the name 
was that of an angel associated with the Jewish scapegoat rite. In 
Leviticus 16, two male goats were to be sacrificed for the sins of the 
people. One goat is selected by lot and sent into the wilderness as 
a sacrifice to Azazel taking the sins of the people with it. Azazel 
occurs in the Ancient Book of Giants, which was found at Qumran. 
In this legend Azazel is one of the Watchers who taught men the 
art of warfare, of making swords, knives, shields, and coats of mail, 
and taught women the art of deception by ornamenting the body, 
dyeing the hair, and painting the face and the eyebrows, and also 
revealed to the people the secrets of witchcraft and corrupted their 
manners, leading them into wickedness and impurity. It seems 
that Azazel was a pre-lewish god of the Earth and nature which 
ed humanity from their heavenly god. 


distra 
Flections: pood tor sieges, seeking tights, taking revenge on enemies, 
pood for safety in travel but causes delays, also good for fortifying 
buildings. Bad for marriage, planting, partnerships, purchasing 
animals and employment, 


Magical Powers: protection ot crops, attacking enemies, cursing the 
body. destroying, harvests. protecting messengers on their travels, 
and separating spouses, 


Notes: Ihis mansion shows the problems that ancient societies had 
with Saturn. He could be a great god of nature and agriculture, but 
he was also the torce which “ate its own children” and an astrological 
maletic. Modern astrology has tried to downplay this malefic 
influence, making, Saturn a teacher of sometimes unpleasant lessons, 
but this is missing an important aspect of nature and its relationship 
with ancient civilisation. Nature obeys rules and if these rules are 
not followed then people died of starvation. This mansion focuses 
on the more destructive aspects of Saturn. Warnock points out that 


264 HELIOS UNBOUND 


the mansion is a force of isolation and solitude which makes it bad 
for relationships. Traditionally a person born under this mansion 
was said to be good-natured, presumably because they follow their 
own rules which are benign. 


TWENTY-SIXTH MANSION ALFARGH 

ALAWWAL (FIRST SPOUT) 

Zodiac degrees: 21° Aquarius 25’ - 04° Pisces 17’ Sidereal 23 Pieces 
to 9° Aries. 


Star: Markab. 

This is a white star on the wing of the Winged Horse. The word 
means anything which is ridden upon and was used to mean saddle, 
ship or vehicle. According to Ptolemy it had the nature of Mars and 
Mercury. It portended events concerning ships and the ocean and 
weather changes (which as I have said before was used as an ancient 
symbol of emotions). 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Tagriel appears as woman in a red dress 
washing her hair and mixing it with perfumes. The name was used 
by a Kabbalistic angel, was one of the guardians of the second 
palace of heaven, but I am not convinced she is the same being. She 
is more of a force of Platonic love which involves rising, through 
levels of closeness to wisdom and true beauty. Although she can be 
used for love magic hers is the sort of magic which creates deeper 
loving relationships rather than anything physical, which is why the 
elections suggested that it is difficult for marriage as it would lead to 
one which was deeply committed but too idealistic. 


Elections: good for employment, building, and journeys. Difficult 
for marriage. 


Magical Powers: creation of love, protection for travellers, 
strengthening buildings, and holding people in prison. 


Notes: Medieval astrology said that people born under this mansion 
were good and well mannered. One of the difficulties understanding, 
this mansion is because of the change in attitude about the nature 
of romantic relationships. The Ancient Greeks considered romantic 
love between a man and woman superficial insanity and preferred a 
higher love (normally between men) as a better goal to strive for. Itis 
this higher love which is being suggested in this mansion which may 
or may not work in a relationship. This mansion supplies a deeper 
form of love for established relationships which is unshakeable, but 
itis less hearts and flowers and pet-names. 


TWENTY-SEVENTH MANSION ALFARGH 
ALMUAKHKHAR (NEXT SPOUT) 

Zodiac degrees: 04° Pisces 17’ - 17? Pisces 08’ Sidereal 9° Aries 0° 
Taurus. 


Star: Algenib and Alpheratz. 

These are stars in Andromeda’s head. According to Ptolemy the 
constellation is like that of Venus and it was said to bestow purity 
of thought, virtue, honour and dignity upon its natives, but to cause 
battle with chimerical (wildly fanciful, highly improbable) fears 
and a tendency to become easily discouraged. It gives love between 
husband and wife and reconciles adulterers. It gives independence, 
freedom, love, riches, honour, and a keen intellect. 


Ruled by the Damon: Abliemel appears as a winged man holding 
an empty perforated dish and raising it towards his mouth. He is 
good for business but will use any means to obtain this success. The 
magic associated with him includes poisoning the spring of a rival's 
well. He helps to obtain benefit at the expense of another. In fact 
his aid is dependant on doing that as he cannot interfere with the 
balance too much and will ruin to the same measure that someone 
else will pain. Some of this will always backfire on the person who 
sends him so that in some way the suffering ends up shared with 
the victim 


Elections: pood tor planting, business, and marriage. Bad for travel, 
employment, and yiving or taking loans. 


Magical Powers: destroying, springs and wells, increasing 
merchandise, acquiring, profit, increasing harvest, healing illness, 
impeding, buildings, harming, resources and curses. 


Notes: The darker side of material Venus, this mansion is two-faced 
bringing, great pood or evil to a person. A person born under this 
mansion will do evil according to the medieval manuscripts. They 
will have a narcissistic view of the universe, which means it does 
not matter if they hurt another, just that they benefit. Manilius in 
his Astronomica said that a person born under this star “will prove 
merciless, a dispenser of punishment, a warder of dungeon dire; he 
will stand arrogantly by while the mothers of wretched prisoners 
lie prostrate on his threshold, and the fathers wait all night to catch 
the last kisses of their sons and receive into their inmost being the 
dying breath. From the same constellation comes the figure of the 


266 HELIOS UNBOUND 


executioner, ready to take money for a speedy death and the rites of 
a funeral pyre. For him execution means profit, and oft will he bare 
his axe; in short, he is a man who could have looked unmoved on 
Andromeda herself fettered to the rock. Governor of the imprisoned 
he occasionally becomes a fellow convict, chained to criminals so as 
to save them for execution." 

While this over dramatic, however looking at the list of people 
who have the Moon in this mansion, they do tend to feature those 
who see the end justifying the means or who obtain success or 
fame at a cost. For example, Benjamin Franklyn who once said "A 
full belly is the Mother of all Evil" neglected his wife, Deborah, 
estranged himself from his illegitimate son, William and negotiated 
deals with the hated French to win the American revolution. His 
writings, too, have been derided for what critics consider their 
strait-laced Puritanism and materialism. His almanacs are all about 
getting money or saving it. 


TWENTY-EIGHTH MANSION BATN ALHUT 
(FISH'S BELLY) 

Zodiac degrees: 17° Pisces 08’ - 00° Aries 00' Sidereal 0-3 degrees 
Taurus. 


Star: Mirach. 

This is a yellow star in the left hip, or girdle of Andromeda, The 
traditional name Mirach is a corruption of (Mizar) which means 
girdle. Mirach is of the nature of Venus. It gives beauty, a brilliant 
mind, a love of home, great devotion, beneficence, forpiveness, love, 
overcoming by kindness, renown, and good fortune in marriage 


Ruled by the Dæmon: Anuxi appears as a fish or a man with a fish 
face wearing a cloak of many assorted colours. He teaches how to 
read dreams, prophecies, and how to develop empathy. He is the 
opposite of Abliemel in that he always sees the other's perspective 
and invoking him will result in a personal sacrifice (normally this 
is harmless, such as the loss of a point of view but it can also bring, 
pain). He can be a useful contact for exploring, the mystical path. 


Elections: good for trade, planting, healing, and marriage. Bad tor 


lending or taking loans. Mediocre for travel. Partnerships begun 
here start well but end poorly. 


Magical Powers: bringing fish together in one place, inflicting 
damage on sailors at sea, increasing merchandise, besieging cities, 


NICK FARRELL 267 
increasing harvests, causing things to become lost, destroying areas, 
bringing safety to travellers, mystical understanding, increasing 
love between spouses, and keeping captives imprisoned. 


Notes: Water is symbolic of resources, wealth, emotions and growth 
and the symbol of the fish/man/ god such as Dagon were important 
in ancient civilisations. A person born in this mansion might suffer 
in life, but they will also be a great emphatic teacher. Warnock 
suggests that this mansion is a force which brings things together. 
However my view of this mansion is that it is more passive and 
brings great things but thev exist in a raw state and need effort to 
harvest them. It might show vou a good business idea, but you must 
actto take advantage of it. 


For ALL ACTIONS UNDER THE MOON it is better to follow these 


rules where possible: 


When you wish for something to go away from vou or someone else, 
then use the WANING MOON. 

When vou wish somethiny to come to vou, then do the work on the 
WAXING MOON. 

Make offerings to Hekate on the NEW MOON and important rituals 
that need considerable energy and effort, anything that requires a 
physical manifestation or similar effect on the FULL MOON. 

Make all equipment as close to the NEW MOON as possible. 

All rituals that have a sub-lunar or underworld effect must, b 
necessity, invoke Hekate to bring them to fruition, 


CHAPTER SEVEN 
MONTH SIX 


THE MYSTERIES OF THE 12 


RITUAL WORK THIS MONTH 

Your rituals will be longer. The goal is to attune to the zodiacal forces 
and the relevant decan Demons in your chart. Take your chart and 
place it on the altar with the ascendant orientated towards the east. 
Take 12 zodiacal tarot cards and place them in a circle around your 
altar. The cards should be arranged to match the positions on your 
chart. Place the card for the decan vou are about to invoke on a small 
table or chair with a tealight which is placed as an offering to the 
Demon. There should be a tealight placed on the centre of your chart. 
You will need consecrated water and incense (use the incense for 
planet which rules the decan). 


STAGE ONE: THE CENTREPINS 


Wer the next 12 days you should invoke the four Damons v 
yake up your centrepins devoting three days to each, starting, v 


h 
loroskopis, then the underground, then the setting, Sun and finally 


the mid-heaven. The ritual is the same for all of them although th 
names change. You must spend some time before each rite studying 
your chart and thinking about how you either express or do not 
express this power in your life. If you have any planets in those 
centrepins think about how the decan Damons are intluencing them 


1. Perform the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram. 

2. Invoke the Sun for that time of day (and lipht the contre tealight). 

3. Say, I purify and consecrate my Sphere of Sensation to liberate 
it from all the mistakes and misunderstandings caused by me 
failing to understand my true self. 1 clear the way so that I 
will truly express my ascendant in the manner that my Higher 
Genius wishes. 

4. Go to the east and draw a large zodiacal pentagram with the 
planetary symbol and invoke the Dæmon of the zodiac saving: 

5. "In the name IAQ I invoke you [name of the Dæmon of the 
zodiac] you who are the ruler of the sign of [zodiac sign of your 


NICK FARRELL 269 


Asc] Come forth and lend your power to this rite. I open my 
Sphere of Sensation to your power so that you might purify and 
consecrate the forces under the rule of the Lord of my Horizon 
so that I might better express the life that my Higher Genius 
wishes. Come forth as I chant your secret and sacred name. 
Chant the name of the zodiacal Dæmon for five minutes. 
Pause and briefly meditate on meaning of the zodiac Demon and 
its influence on your life. 
8. Circumambulate three times and return to the station of the 
ascendant. 
9. Draw a hexagram of the planet which rules the decan of your 
ascendant. 
Invoke the Damon of the decan for the centrepin being aware 
that you are aligning yourself to it. Say three times “In the name 
of [zodiacal spirit] invoke [name of decan Demon ], revered 
god, decan of the sign of [zodiac name] bring your influence 
upon the world of necessity. Come to me in this very hour and 
very moment to orientate my Sphere of Sensation to the will of 
my Higher Genius so that I might better express its will in 
my life. Go swiftly and quickly [name of Demon ] for I am 
like you, an off-spring of the immortal Aion, a being of chaos 
searching for wisdom in order.” 
11. Vibrate the name of your Decan Damon for ten minutes. 


Ne 


10. 


Pause and meditate on the symbolism of your centrepin and see tl 
Damon being, properly expressed. Ask it how you can express it 
powers better and what vou need to do. Ask it to help you transform 
so that vou will be a better expression of your Higher Genius and ask 
it to help you remember who vou really are. 


STAGE TWO: THE HERMETIC LOTS 


Set up your sacred space as before with the small table before the 
Damon ot the Hermetic Lot vou intend to call in the place in which 
itis in chart. The ritual is identical until point 10. 


10. Vibrate the name of your Decan Demon for five minutes. 


11. Invoke the god of the Lot using one of the planetary invocations for 
basis. 


270 HELIOS UNBOUND 
DAMON 


I invoke you mighty ruling Demon. 

I invoke you MURAI, MURIBI, BABEL, BAOTH, BAMWI, the 
great Agathos Dæmon , MURATHO, the form of soul that rests 
above in the heaven of heavens. 

TATOT, BOUEL, MOUIHTAHI, LAHI, BOLBOEL, I, AA, TAT, 
BOUEL and YOHEL You are the first servant of the great God, he who 
giveth light exceedingly, the companion of the flame. You in whose 
mouth is the fire that is not quenched, the great God who is seated in 
the fire, he who is in the midst of the fire which is in the lake of heaven, 
in whose hand is the greatness and the power of God. 

Reveal thyself to me here today for I will glorify thee in Abydos, I 
will glorify thee in heaven before Pre, I will glorify thee before the 
Moon, I will glorify thee before him who is upon the throne, who 
is not destroyed, he ( = thou) of the great glory, PETER, PATER, 
ENPHE, O God who is above heaven, in whose hand is the beautiful 
staff, who created deity, and whom a deity did not create. 

Come down (in) to me into the midst of this flame that is here 
before thee, thou of BOEL. Let me see it, let me hear it, O great 
God SISIHOOUT, otherwise said ARMIOOUTIL, come in 
before me. 

Help me to understand you and to express the powers of my 
Higher Genius which are yours. 


FORTUNA* 


I invoke you strong Tykhe. Come forth with your auspicious 
mind and rich abundance. 

Never have sceptres obtained calm peace or certainty; care on 
care weighs them down, and ever do fresh storms vex their souls. 
Great kingdoms sink of their own weight, and Fortune gives 
way beneath the burden of herself. Sails swollen with favouring 
breezes fear blasts too strongly theirs. 

The tower which rears its head to the clouds is beaten by rain 
storms. Whatever you raise you bring low. 

The ordinary human has a longer life and is content with the 
common lot, with safe breeze hugs the shore, and, fearing to 
trust his skiff to the wider sea, with unambitious oar keeps 
close to land. 


In you, our mortal life is found, and you copious wealth; 


* A mixture of the Homeric Hymn to Tclike and Seneca's chorus to Fortuna 
in his tragedy Agamemnon, 


NICK FARRELL 271 


While others mourn thy hand averse to bless, in all the bitterness 
of deep distress. 

Help me to understand you and to express the powers of my 
Higher Genius which are yours. 


NECESSITY 


I invoke you Ananke mighty Necessity for you are the great 
goddess who I cannot refuse. 

Like a fish on your line I might resist, but in the end I must 
surrender. 

You bring all the sweetness and the bitter in your wreathed spindle 
spinning my fate with spider threads of iron. No god can fight you, 
for you declare what they must do. 

By your law, the immemorial ordinance of the gods made fast for 
ever, bravely sworn and sealed that should any human, daemon, 
or god, born to enduring life stray from your path, you can punish 
it with the sea, the earth, cast it into the Sun and fling it into the 
heavens to fall by all abhorred. 

Writer of the story of my life show me what I must to fulfil my 
destiny. Bind me to a fate where I can be the perfect vessel for my 
Higher Genius. 

Help me to understand you and to express the powers of my 
Higher Genius which are yours. 


COURAGE 


invoke Arete, which mortals win only through great suffering. 
You are life's most beautiful reward of life. 

Because of your radiance, oh young woman, 

It is enviable to die for you 

and, in so doing, to suffer furious, ceaseless labours. 

For you inspire such courage within us, 

Your fruit is godlike and greater value than gold 

or children and leisurely sleep. 

Because of you, Iraklis and the sons of Zefs and Lida 

Endured difficult labours to acquire your strength. 

Yearning for you, Akhilléfs and Aias 

Journeyed to the house of the dead. 

And on account of your friendly form, this great one from the city 
of Atarnéfs forsook the light of the Sun. 

Come forth, power of Archilles, 

May I express your powers in my life, may I aid your mission on 


272 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Earth. Help me to understand you and to express the powers of 
my Higher Genius which are yours. 


EROS* 


I invoke the author of all creation, who spread your own wings 
over the universe. You, the unapproachable and unmeasurable 
who breathe into every soul life-giving reasoning, who fitted all 
things together by your power, first-born, founder of the universe, 
golden-winged, whose light is darkness. You who shroud 
reasonable thoughts and breathe forth dark frenzy, clandestine 
one who secretly inhabit every soul. 

You engender an unseen fire as you carry off every living thing 
without growing weary of torturing it, having with pleasure 
delighted in pain from the time when the world came into being. 
You also come and bring pain, who are sometimes reasonable, 
sometimes irrational, because of whom men dare beyond what 
is fitting and take refuge in your light which is darkness. Most 
headstrong, lawless, implacable, inexorable, invisible, bodiless, 
generator of frenzy, archer, torch-carrier, master of all living 
sensation and of everything clandestine, dispenser of forgetfulness, 
creator of silence, through whom the light and to whom the light 
travels, infantile when you have been engendered within the 
heart, wisest when you have succeeded; 

I call upon you, unmoved by prayer, by your great name: 


AZARACHTHARAZA LATHA IATHAL Y Y Y LATHAIL AIHA 
LLALAPH IOIOIO AI AI AI OUERIEU OIAI LEGE LA RAMAI 
AMA RATAGEL. 


May I express your powers in my life, may I aid your mission on 
Earth. Help me to understand you and to express the powers of 
my Higher Genius which are yours. 


VICTORY 


I invoke the daughter of Night and Doom and mother to human 
Helen to reveal her mysteries. 

Eternal, much revered, you alone rejoice in what is just and right. 
You influence every mortal and tie us with chains of righteous 
bondage. 

I invoke you, oh Powerful Nike, you who are desired by all 


* Papyri graecae magicae IV.1716-1870 


NICK FARRELL 273 


humanity with fire in their hearts towards adversity. 

linvoke whose name quells contending rage, violence, and harm. 
Itis you who confers the crown amid battle, you who 

Distributes the victor's prize. 

You rule all things, Nike divine whether it be strife, 

or joyful shouts. 

Come, mighty Goddess and bring me success 

May my deeds be under the shadow of your wings, may I claim, 
and find your immortal Fame. 

May I express your powers in my life, may I aid your mission on 
Earth. Help me to understand you and to express the powers of 
my Higher Genius which are yours. 


NEMESIS 


I invoke the goddess who enacts retribution against those who 
succumb to hubris. Come forth Nemesis, daughter of Nyx, and 
implacable justice. 

You supply aid to those in need and 

Abundant strength to the reasoning power; 

And far avert the dire, unfriendly race of counsels impious, 
arrogant, and base. 

Oh Nemesis, and your deep-roaring thunderclaps. Vengeance, 
justice, outrage, divine jealousy, fortune. You are executioner of 
braggarts, who pursued them with justice. 

Nemesis who opposes the arrogant and watches the things of the 
Farth. Nemesis the overseer, chastising proud and disdainful 
ways. 

Unnoticed you snap the haughty neck of the proud, and hold sway 
over my sustenance, 

May I express your powers in my life, may I aid your mission on 
Farth. Help me to understand you and to express the powers of 
my Higher Genius Which are yours. 


STAGE THREE: THE D/EMONS OF THE PLANETS. 


Find the Demons ot the decans for each of the planets. Starting on 


the day ruled by that planet invoke the Damon with the intention of 
understanding, how it modifies the power of the planet in your chart. 
Set up your sacred space as before with the small table before the 
Damon of the Hermetic Lot you intend to call in the place in which 
itis in chart. The ritual is identical until point 8. 


Draw a hexagram of the planet which rules the decan of the invoked 


274 HELIOS UNBOUND 

planet. 

Invoke the Dæmon of the decan for the decan being aware that you 
are aligning yourself to it. Say three times In the name of [zodiacal 
spirit] invoke [name of decan Demon ], revered god, decan of 
the sign of [zodiac name] bring your influence upon the world 
of necessity. Come to me in this very hour and very moment to 
orientate my Sphere of Sensation to the will of my Higher Genius 
so that I might better express its will in my life. Go swiftly and 
quickly [name of Daemon ] for I am like you, an off-spring of the 
immortal Aion, a being of chaos searching for wisdom in order. 

Vibrate the name of your Decan Dæmon for ten minutes. 

Pause and meditate on the symbolism of your decan daemon 
and see the Damon being properly expressed. Ask it how you can 
express its powers better and what you need to do. Ask it to help 
you transform so that you will be a better expression of your Higher 
Genius and ask it to help you remember who you really are. 


WEEK FOUR 


It is necessary to strengthen and protect the Sphere of Sensation using 
the arrows of Apollo. Consult your chart and find the decan where 
your Sun is based. That will be your first and most important arrow 
The next day you will involve the Dæmon ruling, the third decan 
away from that centre to the left. The next the second and finally 
the decan on the left of the Sun. Next day start with the decan ot the 
right of the Sun, the day after the second decan on the right of the 
Sun and then the third. You might have called these decans betore 
but on this occasion, you are activating, them for protection, Perform 
the rituals as normal to point eight. 


9. Draw a hexagram of the planet which rules the decan of the 
invoked arrow Damon. 


Invoke the Arrow Damon of the decan. Say three times In the name 
of [zodiacal spirit] invoke [name of decan Daemon |, revered god, 
decan of the sign of [zodiac name] bring your influence upon the 
world of necessity. Come to me in this very hour and very moment 
to stand guard on my Sphere of Sensation so that no being seen, 
or unseen may violate my holy sphere of the mysteries, Let those 
who would do me harm be cut down by your arrows of light from 
the Sun itself. 

For the mightiest cannot stand against Apollo's swift arrows, 
They who fight me fights with Apollo. 


NICK FARRELL 275 


His golden bow strikes them from afar. 

One swift arrow after another. 

The star's cry Hie hie Paian! Shoot the arrow! 

For I know Thee and I know Thy secret name: 

(Name of decan) 

Iknow your symbols and that you appear as (describe symbols). 
I ask you to stand your watch on my Sphere of Sensation so that 
all harmful forces may kept away from me. 

For your powers are my powers, 

For I am like you an off-spring of the immortal Aion, a being of 
chaos searching for wisdom in order. 

Take your station in my Sphere of Sensation as I vibrate your holy 
name. 


9.Vibrate the name of your Decan Dæmon for ten minutes. 
10. Pause and meditate on the symbolism of your decan Demon and 
see the Dæmon in the form of an archer in your Sphere of Sensation. 


he Odyssey and the liad were treated as sacred texts by 

the ancients and the stories studied for arcane secrets. The 

second poem of Homer, the Odyssey tells the story of the 

Greek hero, Odysseus returning to his kingdom, Ithaca, after 
the destruction of Troy. 

Odysseus left the nymph Calypso (KaXoyo) on a raft and 
followed her instructions to “navigate by the stars”. Poseidon 
sent a storm and Odysseus was shipwrecked on the island of the 
Phaeacians, (Mataxez), Skheria ( 1a). It was a happy land where 
nature always produced flowers and fruits, much like the Elysian 
Fields. Twelve kings ruled the island, and a thirteenth one reined 
over all of them, It was in a Phaeacian ship Odysseus finally landed 
at Ithaca 

The number 12 was associated with the signs of the zodiac, so 
it becomes important that we work with them as part of our path of 
return. The Phaeacians say of themselves: " No living person ever 
born would come to our Phaecia with a hostile mind, since we are 
much beloved by the gods. Our island is remote, washed around by 
sea; we have no human contact.^* which sums up the signs of the 
zodiac and their distance from Earth. The Greek name aiaxes is 
derived from phaiós ((pards " gray") so from this we can read that the 


* See Odyssey book six. 
1 Homer, Odyssey, 6.200-205 


276 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Demons of the zodiac are neither good nor evil but a mix of both*. 

Skheria means "sea coast" which poetically means the rim of the 
cosmic ocean. The "zodiac" is ruled by the thirteenth king Alcinous 
(A2xivooc) whose name means “mighty mind” which is a reference 
to the Logos and Odysseus's way into it is through his daughter 
Nausicaa Navoiwxaa (whose name means to burn a boat, which 
could be both be a reference to the stars or a magical technique to 
approach them). 

Thanks to popular astrology most people are familiar with the 
signs of the zodiac. These are the division of the ecliptic in twelve 
equal sectors. Each of the parts of the sky have certain patterns 
of stars associated with different mvths which tune the planetary 
energy when each of these planets moves through them. Zodiac signs 
originated in Babylonia. The Greeks first adapted the concept and it 
was fused with Egyptian ideas. The zodiac is divided into twelve 
signs, each occupying 30* of celestial longitude and corresponding 
to the constellations Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, 
Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces. 

Each human has elements of all the 12 signs, yet some powers are 
stronger and more obvious than others because they are enhanced 
by the presence of the planets and the decans. 

In PGM VII.795 —845 GM VIL795 — 845 we find a list of may 
names of the zodiac and the Daemons which are associated with thy 
Handily it also supplies some sigils which we can use to access som 
of this zodiacal power. Each name and sign is written on a laurel leat 
as part of the ritual 

On his research blog, Sam Block points out that this attribution 
of magical names and characters to the zodiac sins is unlike anything 
else in the PGM. Normally in the PGM the zodiac is mentioned in a 
direct and non-magical about it (much like astroloyy). 

"To have a magical approach to these signs with barbarous 
words and characters would be a massive boon for deploying, other 
kinds of zodiacal invocations or conjurations in the style of the 
PGM," Block wrote. 


* Magically we will use part of'the above 
Evi nóvto, écyatot, ObSE tic Gyn Bporo As part of our quest 

T On the Zodiacal Names and Characters of PGM V11.795 — 845 https:/ / 

digitalambler.com/2018/05/31/on-the-zodiacal-names-and-characters- 
of-pgm-vii-795-845/ 


With: 04 UN ADO TID 


NICK FARRELL 277 


Unfortunately, the papyrus had been misinterpreted by the 
scholars who had translated it up to that point. As a result, the list 
of characters didn't make sense. Some signs had several characters, 
others none, and some seemed to be clustered together in weird 
ways. Block went back to the original manuscript and came up with 
the following list: 


a Zalamoirlalith 

ZAAAMOIPAAMO (Zalameerlaleeth) 

Vir EIAESIAAPMOY Qal | Eilesilarma Phai 
(Eeleseelarmoo Faee) 

eee Tantinürakhth 
A XYPANOG 

ra TARTINOYEAKG (Tanteenürachth) 

Ckhorkhornath 
orpio )PNOPNAG = 

KOPXORNAG! (Chorchornathee) 
Phanthenphyphlia 

Sayittarius s YY | (Phanthenphyphleea) 
Ksyy (Ksy: 
Azazaeisthailikh 

} xo, 
AZAZAEIXOALMX (Azazaeesthelich 

i Mennythyth laO 

/ ENNY@YO L 

wewevora [envio - 

spy: Serycharralmió 

beca SEPYXAPP, 

LEPYXAPPAAMIQ (Serycharralmeeaw 


Car 


278 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The sigils of the Zodiac are as follows: 


y-| € 


a 


ZODIAC TAROT CARDS 


Although there is absolutely no evidence for Tarot cards before the 
middle ages and no link to them for esoteric purposes before the 18°, 
they remain a good symbolic focus for different forces. If you want a 
good primer into the magical use of Tarot look at either Paul Case's 
Tarot or Pat and Christine Zalewski's Magical Tarot of the Golden 
Dawn. Tarot cards can be placed on an altar during, a ritual to aid 
magical focus and meditation. In my view they create a better effect 
than using the traditional zodiacal imayes 
The tarot cards which rule the different zodiac signs are: 


Zodiac sign Tarot Card 
[ceo [seg] 


NICK FARRELL 219 


[Aquarius — — [Sr — — —À 


REFINING ASTROLOGICAL IMPACT 


Last month you looked at the effects of the planetary powers in 
isolation. They were effectively how strong the seven rays were in 
your life, However, this is a little like watching actors perform in 
front of a black screen. We might know who or what they are, but 
we have little idea of the context in which they are working. We also 
do not know how that scenery influences their acting choices - if the 
backdrop were an office it would provide a different context for our 
script than being on top of Mount Everest. Our lives have 12 Places 
or scenes, The ancients realised that the seven planetary powers 
operate differently in each scene. 

In some scenes they found that their powers flowed better than 
normal and the ancients called these joys. The Sun is at its happiest 
in the Ninth House which is the house of spirit and magic, while the 


280 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Moon finds its joy in the third which is the house of relatives. 

The Ancient Place meanings are a little different from modern 
astrology which has simply added more meanings to its houses, 
often losing the original point. 


FIRST PLACE 


This place is called the Hour-Marker and the Helm. The Helm is the 
command section of a ship. Proclus said that when the Higlier Genius 
decided to incarnate into matter it chose the Helm as the place to 
enter the personality. The Helm is the place which is closely related 
to who you are. Mercury has its joy here because it is the place of 
the dawn and the boundary where sky means the Earth. lt was 
also known as the place of life and signifies y your body, health, and 
constitution. It was sometimes believed to reveal appearance. It is 
the total of the Lower Self and the contents of the Sphere of Sensation. 
Itcan represent the beginning of a person's life. 


SECOND PLACE 


The Second Place was called the Gates of Hades and there is some 
esoteric ideas in this title. It is the last house which the planets must 
»ass through before they rise into the heavens. This station was also 
nentioned in Ancient Egypt in the Book of the Dead. From a human 
perspective it shows a descent into the material world. Its what 
happens after your soul as been made and you enter matter at birth 
It covers issues like livelihood and the resources you need to live 
Money and resources that a person will have are dealt with in this 
place. Hades was the god of riches and wealth so it makes sense that 
this is where the association with money came from. 


THIRD PLACE 


The Third place was called the "Goddess" and the Moon has its 
joy here. It was said to represent brothers and sisters, friends, short 
distance travel and the extended family. An important association 
was religious observance (which modern astrology tends to place in 
the ninth house). This means worship, sacred places, temples, and 
priests and priestesses. Malefic signs here would often mean that the 
person would blaspheme against the gods (and suffer punishment 
for their efforts). This is more of the administration of worship (the 
ninth is more the spiritual nature of it all). 


NICK FARRELL 281 


The third place indicated power over cities or people. This 
meant governors, queens and administrators. These are people with 
followers. 


FOURTH PLACE 


The fourth place was called the underground because it represented 
the lowest part of the chart which was under the Earth. This is the 
place where the person has their roots and their foundation. Like 
the underworld it is intricately connected to the ancestors and the 
dead. For this reason, it was said to representa person's parents and 
inheritance. 

Because itis the most hidden and private part of the chart itcame 
to be associated with the home, the house in which you were born 
and private property. It also shows a person's sense of permanence. 
A logical extension of this can be the secrets a person might have. 

Unlike modern astrology it is connected to death and funerals. 
Some ancient astrologers (such as Ptolemy) say this place is 
connected to children, 


FIFTH PLACE 


The Fitth Place is the place ot good fortune and is the joy of Venus. 
It is associated with increases, particularly of material wealth, It 
shows how successtul vou are going to be. Historically success was 
otten vour “genetic success” so the house began to be associated 
with children. 

The house makes benetics even better and reduces the negative 
effect of maletic planets. However negative placements can show a 
fortune, Vettius Valens says that 
the house relates to any good act including generosity or friendship. 


SIXTH PLACE 


The Sixth place is the place of bad fortune and it is the joy of Mars. 
It is associated with injury and sickness and troubles. It shows 
enemies, plots and wars. Travel is sometimes shown but it is not the 
sort of trip you would voluntarily do. It can cause someone to be 
born disabled, low-born or naturally unlucky. It is the house of the 
oppressed. 


loss of personal assets through n 


282 HELIOS UNBOUND 
SEVENTH PLACE 


Thisiscalled the house of setting and itis connected to things outside 
you. The most obvious of these are relationships, sex, and marriage. 
It is another house which is to do with death, but in this case the 
quality of death normally in old age. Valens tells us it indicates long 
periods travelling too. Rhetorius the Egyptian said that if there are 
malefics in this house there could be injury, or a violent death but 
good planets here suggest inheritance and acquiring the property 
of others. 


EIGHTH PLACE 


The Eighth Place is called the idle place. Some astrologers said that 
this was the place of death and anything that could be derived from 
things such as inheritance. Valens suggested that it represented the 
livelihood of the marriage partner. 

Generally, it was associated with idleness and weaknesses, 
inactivity and wasted opportunities. Valens adds that it might also 
be the place of punishment or Justice. 


NINTH PLACE 


The Ninth Place was the place of God and it was the joy of the Sun. 
It was associated with travel and foreigners and journeys. It was 
associated with philosophical ideas, mysticism, mapic, astrology. 
piousness, oracles and prophets. There are similarities with the third 
house in that this house represents status, kings and authorities, In 
my belief, the third represented the form while the tenth represents 
actual temporal and spiritual authority. An armchair occultist 
would be third house while the working, magician would be in the 
ninth. 


TENTH PLACE 


The tenth place is called the mid-heaven and shows the peak of vour 
life and career. It is often used to mean your occupation. It shows 
your reputation and rank, advancement, change and improvements. 
It shows how effective you are. 


ELEVENTH PLACE 
The eleventh place is the place of the good Damon and it is the jov 


of Jupiter. It is associated with friendship but this is more to do 
with the ancient idea of patronage (so these are friends which are 


NICK FARRELL 283 


useful to your life goals). It is also connected to hopes, desires and 
expectations. It can be what you see for yourself and therefore bring 
future benefits. This is also the house of the Higher Genius so this can 
represent some important parts of your destiny. 


TWELFTH PLACE 


The Twelfth Place is called the house of the evil spirit and it is thejoy 
of Saturn. It stands for everything that happened before birth both 
for the mother and the child during pregnancy. Itis a half-way house 
between different cycles, but it also shows a degree of weakness. For 
this reason, it is associated with sickness, death, injuries and other 
trouble. 

It relates to confinement or restraint. Ancient societies did not 
havea prison system so confinement was less of an option. There are 
however elements of justice and punishment connected to this place. 


CENTREPINS 


The centrepins are the main orientating houses and are known as 
the cardinal points in modern astrology. The first one (in the first 
house) is called the Horoskopis or the hour-marker. In modern 
astrology it is called the ascendant). It defines the life of a person. It 
stands tor vour starting point where you took your first breath. It 
is sud to represent the vital energy that vou put out into the world. 
Ancient astrologers said that if the planetary ruler of the house of the 
ascendant was in the 2nd, eth. Sth or 12th houses the person lacked 
a clear sense of direction. The Lord of the Ascendant was said to be 
your advocate when talking to the gods so having it away from the 
ascendant was a terrible thing. Things are much better if the Lord 
of the Ascendant is exalted because it would have more power to 
direct the person's lite: 

The other centrepins fourth house was known as the 
underground | because this is the place closest to the Earth and is 
where things most naturally come to rest. It symbolises burial and 
what we leave behind when we die. Itis old age, ancestors, and our 
security 

The seventh was the house of the “setting Sun” It gives signs 
tor the quality of death, wedding preparations, long terms abroad 
and the elderly age. However, it was associated with long journeys. 
Some ot this might be down to the fact that the seventh house is 
the furthest from the ascendant and therefore life and your “self.” 
The association with partnerships and romance arrived later but 
it makes sense in a Hellenic system because it was also a place of 


284 HELIOS UNBOUND 


confrontation with our darker sides. Most relationships are about 
projection and the resulting confrontation is how relationships 
become friendship, partnership, and marriage. 

The last is the mid-heaven or work. It stands for authority and 
practical hierarchy. Itis our highest potential, and our best achievements. 
It was associated with fame, social responsibility, status, and character. 
The lord of the 10th show the person's honour and reputation, the 
native and the nature of their work or profession. It will be the public 
perception of them rather than what thev really are. 

If the lord of the mid-heaven happens to be in the fourth 
house and a malefic should be present with it, or make a diameter 
(opposition), it creates evil-doers. 

Invoking the Dæmons of these places, along with any attendant 
planets orientates the Sphere of Sensation to its correct pattern. 

In the last month you attuned yourself to the planets and their 
Dæmon s, but the ancients considered the Damons which ruled the 
decans vital. It is my personal belief that it is these that became the 
demons of the grimoire tradition, mostly because of their multi-part 
symbolic nature and division of function. 


DECANS 


The decans are 36 proups of stars (small constellations) used 
Ancient Egyptian astronomy. Each rising, marked. the bey; 
of a new decanal "hour" (Greek hora) of the niyht tor the « 
Egyptians, and they were used as a sidereal star clock be 
by at least the 9th or 10th Dynasty (c. 2100 BCE). A ditterent des 
in the eastern sky at dawn right before the Sun rises, the anm 
Greeks called them dekanoi (6: Kavot pl, of © naves deks 
“tenths.” 

Originally, they had their basis in the Ancient Ey pun calendar 
with each decan under the name of a pod, When the Greeks arrived 
the decans were incorporated into astrology and the names of the 
rulers became more mysterious Danois. 

As we have seen each star was a physical manitestation of à 
god, so the knowledge of the decans could name the pods which 
were a major influence on your life. The Daemons tune the zodiacal 
influence so that it becomes something slightly different. A person 
might be a light-hearted Sagittarius but the influence of a Saturnian 
Demon of the third degree might turn that force into a more rigid 
and disciplined format. The Dæmon will take the Sagittarian energy 
and create a set of ethical rules that the person will live by. However 
rather than being a fundamentalist neo-biblical approach they will be 


Yos) er 


NICK FARRELL 285 
open to review. When faced by a crisis the Dæmon will force the person 
to follow the most honourable book. They will take Jupiterian issues 
like law, race, culture, religion, education, spirituality, and philosophy 
very seriously and approach them with a certain discipline that a normal 
Sagittarian lack. 


The decans and their rulers are assigned as follows: 


d degrees 
| Leo | Satum | Jupiter | Mars | 
| libra | Moon | satum | Jupiter | 
Meu 


The names of the Da 


Sign 


were found in the Sacred 
Book of Hermes to Asclepius which survived in medieval manuscripts 
but dates to the 1” to 4° centuries CE. The book gave the names 
of the Donors ot the decans, their magical images and plants and 
stones attributed to them. The version I consulted was translated 
by Joao Pedro Feliciano.* This supplies the secret names of the 
Damons which rule each decan and appear closer to the names 
of the Eyyptian gods. These forces are extremely useful when it 
comes to understanding, the self and healing. Jake Stratton-Kent, in 
his lestament of Cyprian the Mage, has managed to find the modern 
names tor the stones and plants. Although this information is less 
usetul to this work, it is important for any future planetary work 
involving these spirits. 

I have expanded the meaning of each based on the symbol of the 
planet and the symbolism of the Damon. Some of the associations 
such as the Tarot cards and the titles are based on the Shem Angels 


* The Hermetic Tablet: Journal of Western Ritual Magic Winter Solstice 2016. 


286 HELIOS UNBOUND 


which fulfil a similar function.* The specific Tarot titles come from 
my Shem Grimoire book and are based on my own Tarot researches. 


ARIES 


First decan of Aries is ruled by the Daemon KHENLAKHORI and 
it is a messenger for the God. It has the face of a young child with 
hands raised upward. He bears a sceptre, holding it above his head. 
His feet are wrapped to his knees. He rules illnesses that afflict the 
head. KHENLAKHORI's Tarot card is the Two of Wands and he is 
the Lord of Resolution and Belligerence. The stone sacred to him 
was the Babylonian Stone? and the plant was an Isophru: 

Khenlakhóri creates a more active, longer lasting and sometimes 
aggressive form of Aries. The person will have a lot of energy but 
be inclined to rage when things go wrong. In many ways they will 
be more childlike - prone to temper tantrums and sulking. They are 
extremely stubborn. 


The Second decan is ruled by the Damon KONTARET or KAU and 
he has a dog's face. He holds a sceptre in his right hand and a disk in 
his left. He is covered in wrappings down to his ankles. He governs 
the temples and the nose. Its Tarot card is the Three of Wands the 
Lord of Initiation and Intimidation. His stone is a Siderite, and plant 
is Wild Rue. 

Kontaret encourages those under his power to start something 
new and makes it difficult for them to stay still. He inspires pioneers 
in whatever they do and press on taking risks where others would 
not, Those influenced by Kontaret might he less. long-term 
staying power and are more ego driven. They can be torcetul guides 
and at times intimidating. Kontaret-influenced people can be the 
scary teacher at school who some people learn the most trom, while 
others were paralysed with fear, 


The Third decan is ruled by the Damon SIKET and is depicted as a 
woman with a drum on her head and a sceptre in her right hand, 
with a flask in her left. She is covered in wrappings down to her 
ankles. She rules over the ear, uvula, and teeth. The Tarot card is the 
Four of Wands, the Lord of Perfected Work and Insensitivity. Her 
stone was a bostrychite$ and plant Plantain. 


* The Shem Grimoire by Nick Farrell 
+ A Bloodstone according to Stratton 4 
$A Heliotrope according to Stratton-Kent 


8 Either Iron alum or satin asbestos according to Stratton-Kent. 


NICK FARRELL 287 


Siket makes Aries more childlike, fun-loving and a little self- 
centred. She causes them to hate vagueness and prefer people to 
be direct and blunt with them. They crave novelty and thrive on 
competition. In relationships Siket influenced people need to take 
the lead but also crave dynamism in a partner. 


TAURUS 


The first decan of Taurus is ruled the Demon SOOU, who looks like a 
man with the head of a ram. He wears aSvrian robe down to his feet 
and holds in both hands sceptres which he rests on his shoulders. 
This decan governs the neck. Its Tarot card is the five of pentacles 
and he is the Lord of Convention and Mental Inertia. Its stone is a 
Selenite* and plant is a Spherical Cypress*. 

Sóou encourages Taurus towards practical and rational thought. 
He might help a person focus on the material and be clever in 
business. But he does not encourage original thought. Sóou's ideas 
and communication may lack innovation, but they will be more 
practical. Sóou influenced people avoid conflict and want peace and 
harmony in their dealings. They are slow to make decisions or change 
their minds. They are mentally conservative and can sometimes be 
lazy. As a force, Sóou sometimes tries to stop intellectual systems 
breaking, down before they have time to be tested. 


The second decan of Taurus is ruled by the Dæmon ARON who looks 
like a woman holding a sceptre with both hands, standing upright, 
her feet together, covered with wrappings down to her feet like 
Osiris; She governs the tonsils and the neck. Her Tarot card is the 
Six of Pentacles, the Lord of Security and Greed. Arón's stone is 
Aphrodite's Stone®, and her plant is Dittany. 

Aron encourages a tocus on the home and comfort. She creates 
people with a strony conservative streak who avoid “messy” or 
unpredictable: situations, crises, and emotional displays. Arón 
van cause a lack ot understanding for a partner's need for change, 
yrowth, or emotional stimulation. Arón can make a person desire to 
own wealth and goods, without giving them any satisfaction. 


The Third decan of Taurus is ruled by the Dæmon HROMENOS. He 


appears as a dog-headed man with curls on his head. In his right 
hand he holds a sceptre and his left hand touches his buttocks. He 


* Gypsum according to Jake Stratton-Kent 

+ Based on the original Greek, Jake Stratton-Kent believes this to be a citrus 
fruit. 

+ Yellow zircon, according to Stratton-Kent 


288 HELIOS UNBOUND 


wears a belt that falls at his knees. It rules the mouth and throat. 
Hrómenós stone is a Hyacinth and his plant is a Bugloss. His Tarot 
card is the Seven of Pentacles which is the Lord of Limitation and 
Materialism. 

Hrómenós makes Taurians even more conservative and 
restricted. He can make a person feel less secure or make security 
a high priority. Hrómenós will make someone hardworking and 
reliable, but it will only provide them with limited success. If they 
succeed it will be because they have worked hard rather than come up 
with something new. Hrómenós-influenced people are preoccupied 
with the physical and tend not to believe in anything they cannot 
see. They can lack creativity, but Hrómenós makes people humble, 
grounded, and unaffected by celebrity or social status. While they 
are obsessed with money the Hrómenós-influenced are more 
interested in what it does for them rather than showing it off. 


GEMINI 


The first decan of Gemini is ruled by the Dæmon XOKHA who is a 
messenger for the god Set, which looks like a man with the head 
of a donkey. He holds a small key in his right hand, and his left is 
dropped. He is covered in wrappings down to his knees. He governs 
the shoulders. His stone is a Diamond and plant is an Orchid. His 
Tarot card is the Eight of Swords, which is the Lord of Words and 
Stress. 

Xokhá aids people attract the most good fortune through wit 
and ingeniousness. He makes Gemini people even more versatile 
sociable, curious, and able to put others at case with friendliness 
and sincere curiosity. They become more mentally adventurous 
ready and willing to learn, into “mind expansion”, and less 
attached to their own values than others because they are impartial 
and open-minded. Xokhá encourages expression through written 
communication and has a connection to the Egyptian. pod Thoth 
His force creates stress to enable performance under pressure 


The second decan of Gemini is ruled by the Damon OU ARI who 
looks like a man with the head of a goat. He holds a stick (or statt) 
in his right hand, and his left hangs over his thigh. He is covered in 
wrappings down to the knees. He governs the arms. His stone is a 
Pankhrous* stone and his plant is Cinquefoil. Ouari's Tarot card is 
the Nine of Swords, which is the Lord of Analysis and Interrogation. 


* Opal, according to Stratton-Kent 


NICK FARRELL 289 


Ouarí encourages intellectual genius and enables skill planning 
and strategising. This means a person can take a nebulous idea 
and see the steps they must take to bring it about. Innovation and 
creation come easy to them when they set their mind to it. The down 
side is Ouarí creates frustration in routine and a constant quest for 
new things. Ouarí-influenced people can be fun and social and need 
something going on in their lives. He creates good journalists and 
barristers who use their skills to obtain information from people. 


The third decan of Gemini is ruled by the Demon PEPISOTH. It has 
the form of a woman holding thunder(bolts) in her right hand and a 
flask in her left. She has wings which go from the middle of her body 
to her feet and has a crown on her head. She governs the hands. Her 
stone is a Heliotrope and her plant is Rosemary. Her Tarot card is 
the 10 of swords which is the Lord of Mutability and superficiality. 

Pepisóth creates a person who strongly needs to express 
themselves. She encourages people to collect and distribute 
information. It emphases flexibility and evolution which enables 
a quick adaption to any situation. Such people enjoy intellectual 
conversations but become bored if they are not getting enough 
mental stimulation. However, there is a lack of specialisation or 
depth to this Damon due to Ouari s short attention span. 


CANCER 


The first decan of Cancer is ruled by the Damon SOTHEIR. It looks 
like a man with the head of a dog; his whole body has a spiral shape 
like that of a serpent. He is seated on a pedesta and governs illnesses 
that manifest in the sides ot the trunk. Its stone is a Dryite and plant 
is Artemisia®. Sótheir's Tarot card is the Two of Cups which is the 
Lord of Love and Vulnerability, 
Sotheir transtorms Cancer people making them more emotional 
and home focused. He makes love incredibly important and romance 
everything. This means sentimentally looking for that mythical “One” 
who you will settle down with and live happily ever after. This makes 
a person incredibly vulnerable. This means that the person is often 
hurt. This emotional sensitivity does help magically, making a person 
intuitive with the instinctual ability to work out others' needs. 
The second decan of Cancer is ruled by the Daemon OUPHISIT. This 


spirit looks like a woman with the body of a bird. Her wings are 
outstretched as if she was about to take flight. She has a tress on her 


* Mugwort, according to Stratton-Kent 


290 HELIOS UNBOUND 


head. this decan governs afflictions of the lung. Her stone is Green 
Jasper and its plant is Selenogone.* Her Tarot card is the Three of 
Cups which is the Lord of Expression and Fulfilment. 

Ouphisit gives people good minds, which are sometimes too 
influenced by their emotions. It creates a situation where someone 
thinks about something and feels another wav about it. The mind is 
overwhelmed by unconscious desires w. hich biases any objective 
thinking. This may cause a person to look at some facts but ignore 
others just because they lack appeal. This Damon supplies a great 
intense memory and the ability to subliminally absorb and learn. The 
Ouphisi-influenced havea good psychic ability because of those mental 
processes, however they must express what thev feel. This is because 
Ouphisit is a Dæmon of Abundance who brings ideas into matter. 


The third decan of Cancer is ruled by the Dæmon KHNOUPHOS 
who has two female heads turned away from each other. One wears 
a small hat, the other a diadem. Dragons surround her neck. Her 
whole torso is set on a pedestal. She governs the spleen and her 
stone is Eukhaité* and plant is a Spherite.: Her tarot card is the Four 
of Cups which is the Lord of Sensitivity and Emotion. 

Khnouphos creates a version of Cancer which is even mor 
psychic than normal, although it can be more obsessed with the 
past. It will cause someone to hang onto pain for decades. There is a 
complete inability to detach from people or places and there will is 
a tendency to accumulate objects or emotionally manipulate to tol 
secure. The Khnouphos-influenced can be victims of habit. Iti reates 
a moody person with a baffling, sense of humour. 


LEO 


The first decan of Leo is ruled by the Daemon KHENOUMCGOS, He has 
the head of a lion, from which issues seven solar rays. His whole 
body is that of a spiralling serpent, yoiny, upwards. He rules over 
afflictions of the heart, His stone is Agate and the plant is Edelweiss. 
Its Tarot card is the Five of Wands, which is the Lord of Animal 
Power and Ego. Its name was associated with healing, (otten of 
digestion) and appears on lots of different talismans — particularly 
outside Egypt. 


* Peony, according to Stratton-Kent 

t Eagle Stone, according to Stratton-Kent 
t Citrus fruit, according to Stratton-Kent 
§ Alchemilla, according to Stratton-Kent. 


NICK FARRELL 291 


Khnoumoscreates some difficulty for Leonine energy asitcreates 
Challenges and opportunities throughout life. These challenges 
are not meant to defeat a person - but help create opportunities. 
Khnoumos makes Leos more authoritarian and autocratic. It creates 
a more egotistical form of Leo, but one with focused energy and 
drive. The image is one of a running lion and Khnoumos appears 
to influence the animal drives and cause strife through competition. 


The second decan of Leo is ruled by the Demon IPI and looks like a 
naked man with a sceptre in his right hand, a whip in his left, and a 
lunar crescent (selénén) on his head. He governs the upper back. His 
stone is a Selenite and plant is a Chrvsogone*. His Tarot card is the 
Six of Wands which is the Lord of Success and Excess. 
Ipiisaprotective Daemon whoaidssuccessthroughorganisational 
skills, he can equally resolve a situation by overdoing it in terms of 
strength and drama. He brings good fortune through magnanimity 
and inspiring confidence in others. Success can be found in creative 
areas such as entertainment, children. and recreation. Ipi makes Leo 
more optimistic, pragmatic, practical, calm, loyal, and thanks to 
Jupiter — feel hopeful and re-energised. However, they have issues 
with those who do not recognise their abilities and need praise. 


The third decan of Leo is ruled by the Dæmon PHÁTITI. It looks like 
a wild faced man with his right hand held up in a greeting position. 
He holds a flask in his lett. He governs the liver. Its stone is a Helitet, 
and there was no ancient attribution for his plant. Phátiti's Tarot 
card is the Seven ot Wands which is Lord of War and Violence. 
Phatiti is a Damon who destroys old and outworn structures 
with little subtlety. It tends towards violence to justify any solution. 
Sometimes this is good, when it comes to destroying something 
seriously rotten, but it can also be the mindless thug, genocide, or 
total war. Passions and desire run high and this Dæmon creates a 
strong, willpower, Phatiti creates a sense of a "calling" and forces 
people to act with authority, power, and their personal magnetism. 


VIRGO 


The first decan of Virgo is ruled by the Demon ATHOUM. Its face 
is that ot a dog with a crest on his head. His body is red and fiery 
and stands on a pedestal. and governs the belly. Athoum's stone is 


* Chrysanthemum, according to Stratton-Kent 
1 Halite, according to Stratton-Kent 


292 HELIOS UNBOUND 


a Corallite* and his plant is Weasel Eye. Athoum's Tarot card is the 
Eight of Pentacles which is the Lord of Practicality and Pedantry. 
Athoum brings about material wealth and happiness through 
hard work. Virgo becomes more methodical and pickier. On the 
plus side it becomes more patient and gets results by doing things 
properly. It can force Virgo to hang onto projects when they should be 
abandoned. Athoum creates is a pedantic force which enables a person 
to see details but sometimes at the expense of the bigger picture. He 
brings practical skills, talents and abilities, with an emphasis on being 
useful. Athoum makes Virgo more self-effacing and discriminating. 
He creates a need to be useful rather than the need to be recognised. 


The second decan of Virgo is ruled by the Damon called BRUSOUS 
and looks like a man with a horned goat's head, dressed down to 
his heels, bearing a sceptre in his right hand and a flask in his left. It 
governs illnesses of the bowels. Brusous' stone is a Dendrite* and its 
plant is Liquorice. Its Tarot card is Nine of Pentacles which has the 
titles Lord of Material Gain and Criticism. 

Brusous-influenced people take an analytical, reserved and 
practical approach to relationships. Brusous creates is the form of 
love that listens and sees. Brusous does not like show-offs and know- 
it-alls. He can brings material gain, although any result goes as fast 
as it arrives. Brusous influences Virgo to be is hyper-critical which 
can be useful in some environments. When he is critical Brusous 
is truly trying to help but sometimes they come across as bey 
negative, particularly if another person is hanging, onto delusions 
Brusous can see a person in their true colours. 


The third decan of Virgo is ruled by the Dæmon AMPHATHAM 
and looks like an standing, man, covered chest to feet in wrappings. 
bearing a sceptre with both hands, and having, a small hat on his head. 
He governs the navel and his stone is an Euthlizouti and his plant 
is a Katanankét. Amphathám's Tarot card is the Ten of Pentacles 
which is the Lord of Established Wealth and Intellectualisation, 
Amphatham influences Virgo to keep wealth and protect material 
possessions. He defends against material curses and penetic illnesses. 
Amphatham's is a force that can abstract anything, which is not the 
truth. He is a great revealer and intellectual, creating sharp minds that 
can easily understand complex patterns, processes, and problems 


* Could be Coral. 
t Dendrite Agate, according to Stratton-Kent 
Vetch, according to Stratton-Kent 


NICK FARRELL 293 


Communication tends to be direct and focused rather than creative. It 
is force of a journalist rather than a novelist. There might be a struggle 
with perfectionism. Amphatham's is serious when he speaks but can 
have a great wit with dry or sarcastic humour. 


LIBRA 


The first decan of Libra is ruled by the Demon SPHOUKOU. He 
looks like an old man with a belt, his left hand raised as if to receive 
something, therighthand hanging down. He holdsa flask. Sphoukou 
governs the buttocks and rectum. Its stone is Jasper-Agate and its 
plant is a Polium.* His Tarot card is the Two of Swords which is the 
Lord of Peace and Indecision. 

Sphoukou is a great reconciler and bringer of peace. He 
transforms Libra into a peace-keeper and a diplomat between 
warring parties. Because he demands peace at all costs it can make 
those under his influence indecisive, vague, or confused. However, 
thev are focused on the truth. Sphoukou creates a strong need for 
partnership mostly because he draws out the need for security 
through others. Sphoukou teaches charm and manners. It is an 
idealistic force. which sees flaws in their environment and their 
relationships and seeks to change them. 


The second decan of Libra is ruled by the Damon NEPHTHIMES, He 
looks like a man standing on a fountain from which issue streams 
which unite into one. He is covered from his chest to his ankles in 
wrappings. He has a curl in his beard and holds a flask. Nephthimés 
governs the urethra, bladder, and the urinary tract. His stone is a 
Red Onyx and his plant is Vervain. His Tarot card is the Three of 
Swords which is the Lord of Sorrow and Bureaucracy. 

Nephthimes rules all laws created by humanity and the ties that 
hold human societies together. While these are shadows of the laws of 
creation they are key factors in humankind's evolution. This Demon 
insists that the rules are followed, and those under his influence are 
either law-abiding citizens or those who end up being caught by 
their own unconscious sense of Justice. Nephthimés creates a sense 
+, particularly in relationships, and will create life lessons 
relationship choices. Nephthimés creates fears of rejection 
however he can stabilise Libran characteristics, making them more 
decisive and constant. 


The third decan of Libra is ruled by the Dæmon PHOU. He has the 


* Felty Germander according to Stratton-Kent 


294 HELIOS UNBOUND 


face of a serpent with a man's body. He bears a crown on his head 
and stands upright in wrapped trousers. He governs illnesses that 
afflict the anus, like haemorrhoids, calluses, and fissures. Phou's 
stone is an emerald and its plant is Vervain. His Tarot card is the 
Four of Swords which is the Lord of Liberty and Chaos. 
Phouisamuch moreliberated active form of Libra. Itoverthrows 
tyranny and destroys old and outworn systems. He appears the 
opposite of much of Libra force but is really the balancing nature of 
the sign and the desire to restore harmony. If systems become too 
corrupt Phou desires to destroy them so that they can be rebuilt. It 
can be a more idealist drive than something which is practical. It 
might believe in a revolution but will only do so if people are not 
going to get hurt (which limits options). Phou influenced people 
have an intense sense of justice and the ability to mobilise others. 


SCORPIO 


The first decan of Scorpio is ruled by the Dæmon BOS. He looks like 
a man with the head of a bull and has four wings. He has a belt, 
holds a flask in his right hand and a sceptre in his left. Bós relieves 
pains that afflict the penile orifice and inflammatory oedemas. His 
stone is Hematite, and he is connected to any mercurial plant. Its 
Tarot card is the Five of Cups which is the Lord of Intensity and 
Revenge. 

Bós brings out the intense and violent nature of Scorpio. He can 
bring intense mystical experiences, but often acts like a Fury. Bós 
provides focus which can be an obsession. There is no forgiveness 
only revenge with this Dæmon. On the positive side Bos forces a 
person to challenge themselves to do the impossible and supplies 
concentrated energy and willpower. It will use its powers to see 
through others to exploit them. It is a strongly sexual force, which 
is strongly part of its power complex. Bos is a dangerous force for 
those with low self-esteem as they can project their self-loathing, 
outward and end up manipulating others and feeling, resentful. 


The second decan of Scorpio is ruled by the Dæmon OUSTIKHOS. 
He looks like a man standing in a robe atop a scorpion. Oustikhos 
rules over warts and infections of the genitals. His stone is a Pyrite 
and his plant is a Sunflower. His Tarot card is the Six of Cups which 
is the Lord of Desire and Manipulation. 

Oustikhos supplies the energy to pursue goals, particularly 
those which are based on sensual needs and pleasures. On the 
positive side this provides drives for spiritual goals, but it can turn 


NICK FARRELL 295 


Scorpio into an extremely controlling and manipulative force. It is 
a useful force to use against slander. While not as aggressive as Bés, 
Oustikhos' actions are more ego driven and arrogant. He emphases 
the subtle and the profound and is motivated by a need to create 
emotional closeness with others. Oustikhos influenced people 
penetrate the core of reality, to see things and others as they truly 
are. This Damon rules crisis, life and death decisions and emergency 
services. Oustikhos is also Dæmon of liars, back-stabbers, traitors, 
thieves, and sexual criminals. It builds impenetrable defences and 
can beguile opponents into underestimating their resilience. 


The third decan of Scorpio is ruled by the Demon APHÉBIS. He has 
the body of a man with the head of a goat. He holds reins with both 
hands and is covered in wrappings from chest to heels. He governs 
the testicles and heals inflammation in the area, whether in one 
or both. Aphébis's stone is the Egyptian Sardonyx and his plant is 
Liquorice. Its Tarot card is the Seven of Cups which is the Lord of 
Attraction and Obsession. 

Aphébis emphasises the attractive and obsessive side of Scorpio 
and it finds its greatest power in relationships. It is a charismatic 
and magnetic force which draws a person towards their heart's 
desire. Its power is to take a form and make someone want it. On 
the negative side Aphebis creates compulsive desires and he could 
be the Damon behind drug or alcohol addiction. Aphébis takes love 
seriously and it is extremely picky and sceptical of others at first. 
Aphebis influenced people are good at unlocking a person's secrets 
and petting, them to talk about their issues. He creates an aura of 
mystery that other people can t help but be attracted to. 


SAGITTARIUS 


The first decan of Sagittarius is ruled by the Dæmon SEBOS. He 
looks like a clothed man, his left hand open and lowered, bearing a 
needle in his right. Next to him are several spears. Sebose is covered 
ina net trom chest to feet, and his head is wrapped. It governs sores 
that atthet the thighs. His stone is Phrygian,his plant is Sage. Its 
Tarot card is the Eight of Wands which is the Lord of Swiftness and 
Inconsistency. 

Sebos creates flexibility by quickly moving from one thing to 
another. Sebos can make things happen but tends to be inconsistent. 
Sebos breaks unhealthy habits and intransient thinking and can be a 


* Alunite according to Stratton-Kent 


296 HELIOS UNBOUND 


great catalyst for change. Sebos can be a Dæmon of intellect and trade, 
data and communication and transport. But his Mercury nature 
makes him prone to lies, swindling and theft. Sebos influenced 
people have a curious nature, as the individual is always ready 
to receive information and learn foreign languages. Sebos causes 
Sagittarius to amass information and sometimes embrace junk data. 
It blocks filters when absorbing information and they will often do 
not check if something is correct or true. 


The second decan of Sagittarius is ruled by the Demon TEUKHMOS. 
He has the head of an Ichneumon bird, and a man's body. He holds 
a flask in his right hand and a sceptre in his left. Teukhmos governs 
the bones and sends the fractures that afflict them. His stone is an 
Amethystand his plantisa Adraktitalos. Teukhmos Tarot card is the 
Nine of Wands which is the Lord of Adventure and Impulsiveness. 
Teukhmos creates change by introducing an element of risk and 
he needs people to have a sense of adventure. Teukhmos-influenced 
people are obsessed with travel and could be entrepreneurs and 
other risk takers.. Teukhmos-influenced people are always upbeat 
but inconsistent, and competitive. They are usually natural athletes, 
or if not, they appreciate athleticism in others. Teukhmos rejects 
routine and does not tend to be there if anything, gets too dull. It can 
make Sagittarius optimistic and less likely to make detailed plans 


The third decan of Sagittarius is ruled by KHTHISAR who appears 
as an old man with a crown on his head, covered in wrappings from 
chest to heels, holding a flask in his right hand and a sceptre in his lett 
Khthisar governs the thighs where he sends pain and corrosion, His 
stone is an Aerizon and his plant is Centaury, His Tarot card ts thi 
Ten of Wands which is the Lord of Disciple and Oppression. 
Khthisar tames Sagittarius by forcing it into a discipline which 
gives a positive way forward. It is a philosopher Damon which 
whispers truth when the natural Sapittarian way is to accept all ideas 
however stupid. It helps in times of trouble and oppression, but 
often causes a form of self-martyrdom by hanyiny, onto situations 
which should be abandoned. Khthisar creates ethical rules that 
those under his influence person will follow. Rather than haviny a 
fundamentalist neo-biblical approach Khthisar-intluenced people 
will review these codes. When faced by a crisis the Damon will force 
the person to follow the most honourable course. It takes Jupiterian 
issues like law, race, culture, religion, education, spirituality, and 
philosophy seriously and approaches them with a discipline that 


* Dracunculus vularis according to Stratton-Kent 


NICK FARRELL 297 


a normal Sagittarian lacks. Sometimes Khthisar's Saturnian nature 
will oppress that Sagittarian energy which will still wonder why it 
cannot be free and innocent all the time. 


CAPRICORN 


The first decan of Capricorn is ruled by the Daemon TAIR. He is 
headless with a man's body. Around his chest is a girdle made from 
scarab shells. In his right hand he has a flask and his left is extended 
on his thigh. Tair rules the knees and the illnesses that affect them. 
Its stone is an Ophite and its plant is a Delphinium. Tair's Tarot card 
is the Two of Pentacles which is the Lord of Harmonious Change. 

Tair is a force which brings about slow and gradual change. It is 
à spirit of diplomacy which is effective at dealing with authority. It 
teaches how to fix mistakes through the correct use of control. Tair 
creates workaholics who find a great deal of joy from work. It is 
orderly and subdued and likes to be in control of things. Tair creates 
planners and goal-setters who might be ambitious but need security. 
Tair influenced people can be extremely materialistic, conservative, 
and sceptical of innovative ideas. It is difficult for it to break old 
habits. He makes Capricorns pessimistic and too serious. While 
they are extremely sexual, if they are too career focused they can 
suppress their sexual drive completely. Tair-influenced people have 
a lot of endurance. 


The second decan of Capricorn is ruled by the Damon EPITEK. He 
has the head of a pig, and his body is like that of the first (decan). 
Epitek has a belt; a flask in his right hand and a sword in his left. It 
rules the back of the knees. Its stone is a Karkhedonios (chalcedony) 
and its plant is an Anemone. Epitek's Tarot card is the Three of 
Pentacles which is the Lord of Material Works and Debauchery. 
Epiteh makes. things happen, particularly for work and 
business. Everything he does is mostly work related and those 
he influences can be perfectionists and natural materialists. That 
said Epitek is more interested in a job well done, than the money 
made, The overbalance towards the material can create an excessive 
over indulgence in sensual pleasures and material wealth. Epitek 
sometimes becomes bogged down and isolated in a material world 
which offers no depth or spirituality. Epitek-influenced people can 
become lazy and hope that someone else will bail them out of their 
problems. This is rare, though, as generally there is powerful need 
to stay in control. Epitek-influenced people express anger in a cool, 
level-headed way. They fear disorder and “letting go”. 


298 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The third decan of Capricorn is ruled by the Daemon EPIKHNAUS. 
He wears a mask, holds a flask in his right hand and a needle in his 
left. He wears a belt. Epikhnaus governs the same areas as previously 
shown in the second decan. His stone is an Anankite and his plant 
isa Thistle. Epikhnaus' Tarot card is the Four of Pentacles which is 
the Demon of Earthly Power and Depression. 

Epikhnaus controls material things, people, relationships, 
money, health, or situations. He tends to hang onto old, outdated 
states longer than it should. Epikhnaus-influenced people are 
conservative and like things the way they are. It can lead to a form of 
melancholia in which the world seems superficial. This is difficult for 
Epikhnaus-influenced as they are rubbishing their own Capricorn 
material worlds and leads to depression. Epikhnaus creates practical 
Capricorns in life and at work which usually brings success in career. 
Aserious approach towards their duties usually reduces the fun they 
might have. Epikhnaus is far less able to have funas the other Demons 
of Capricorn and wants a structured reality rather than a chaotic one. 


AQUARIUS 


The first decan of Aquarius is ruled by the Dæmon ISU, or THRO 
He is a dog-headed man, covered in wrappings from the chest to 
heels. Isu rules over tibias and all abscesses and lesions found there 
Its stone is a Knékité?, its plant is an Asarz. His Tarot card is the Five 
of Swords which is the Lord of Revolution and Neophilia (change 
for its own sake). 

Isu overthrows old systems so that they can be replaced with 
new ones. It does so violently and without subtlety. Whatever 
happens though Isu brings about a defeat the status quo or ends the 
revolutionary. Isu creates conflict which is sometimes unnecessary 
and can force Aquarius to be too distant and idealistic. Other times it 
isa force which insists on novelty or change for its own sake, This can 
help adaption to change but can be a killer for traditions and routines 
It is a good force to call on if you are blocked creatively. Isu makes 
Aquarians have an original, independent outlook on relationships. lt 
likes to break boundaries and tends to see others as souls rather lana 
being whohasa gender. tmightmake relationships whichconcentrate 
less on the carnal level and sex, and more on the intellectual level 


* In this case pick one and stick to it. Personally, 1 would use ISU. 
T Grey porphyry according Stratton-Kent 
tAsurum, Hazel wood and Wild Spikenard according to Stratton-Kent 


NICK FARRELL 299 


The second decan of Aquarius is ruled by the Demon SOSOMNO. He 
looks like a man covered in wrappings from chest to heels. He bears 
an agkhia (which is likely to be an Egyptian ankh) in his hands and 
wears a crown. He governs the knees and leg fat. Sosomnó's stone is 
a Lodestone, and its plant is a Gladiolus. His Tarot card is the Six of 
Swords and which is the Lord of Science and Intellectual Arrogance. 

Sosomnó is a healing spirit who is focused on material science. 
It enables an open mind to deeper areas of study. He is the Demon 
of the scientific method which desires proof for theories based on 
evidence. Sosomnó' s downside is that sometimes those he influences 
can assume that whatever treasured theory they hold is correct. He 
sometimes activates the mad scientist view that the ends justify the 
means and encourage all sorts of atrocities. Sosomnó brings out the 
intellectual qualities of the Aquarian, making them less idealistic 
and more logical. He still inspires unconventional ideas, but these 
will be more rational. Sosomnó provides detachment and the grace 
of objectivity. He is more interested in facts than feelings, and those 
under his influence come across as aloof or unemotional. 


The third decan of Aquarius is ruled by the Dæmon KHONOUMOUS. 
He looks like a man covered in wrappings from chest to heels. He 
Wears a crown and holds a flask in his right hand and a sceptre in his 
lett. He governs the same parts of the body as Sosomnó. His stone isa 
Median? and his plant is a Catananche. Khonoumous' Tarotcard is the 
Seven of Swords which is the Lord of Intuition and Impracticability. 

khonoumous obtains information without logic or reason and 
supplies an inner perception aboutany givensituation. His psychism 
is no that of feelings masquerading as intuition. Khonoumous- 
influenced people need logical thought before arriving at any 
conclusion. When his force is unbalanced it creates an internal faith 
which is less reliable. Khonoumous-influenced Aquarians are not 
in touch with their physical reality, who will come up with great 
ideas which are unworkable. Khonoumous-influenced people are 
outsiders who teel “different” and are loners. They might have 
strony, epos and defence mechanisms. While they have a broad 
compassionate philosophy their kindness and concern for others is 
at odds with their drive for independence. 


PISCES 


The first decan of Pisces is ruled by the Demon TETIMO. He looks like 
a man dressed in a dark blue robe. He's covered in wrappings from 


* Ink stone, according to Stratton-Kent 


300 HELIOS UNBOUND 


chest to heels. In his right hand he holds a flask, while the left hangs 
beside his thigh. Tetimó rules the feet and sends them abscesses. Its 
stone is Beryl and his plant is Vervain. His Tarot card is the Eight of 
Cups which is the Lord Dissolution and Depersonalisation. 

Tetimó breaks down artificial structures within the psyche by a 
total immersion in the unconscious. It is a force without ego which 
allows the gradual surfacing of buried unconscious material. This 
lack of ego causes the loss of personal identity to a bigger force. 
While this is important in mystical work, where the personality can 
act like an anchor, it is less useful in mundane existence. Tetimó- 
influenced people seeks isolation to avoid the pain of interacting 
with others because of their sensitivity. They often feel defenceless, 
vulnerable, and paranoid. Tetimo makes victims or martyrs who 
are compassionate and pragmatic. Thev can be artistic, spiritual, or 
psychic. It is found in those who need religion to provide them with 
structure and security. 


The second decan of Pisces is ruled by the Dæmon SOPPHI. He looks 
likea man, naked, but bearing a coat on his shoulders, thrown behind 
him. He holds a flask in the right hand, his left index finger is raised 
to his mouth, and he wears a crown on his head. Sopphi s stone 1s 
a Perileukios Onyx and its plant is a Libanotis. His Tarot card is the 
Nine of Cups which is the Lord of Happiness and Escapism 

Sopphi is a Jupiterian force which produces happiness. It 1s 
also the Greek concept of Eudaimoma which means a good lite or 
flourishing rather than just emotion. The word means pood D^ 
which makes Sopphi one of the more obvious gifts of vour Highe 
Genius. It can produce escapism to avoid pain. If true P udamonti is 
unavailable, a Sopphi-influenced person will look towards shallow 
pleasure as a compensation. Sopphi attracts yood luck when they are 
tender, devoted, giving and compassionate, It creates a love tor the 
less fortunate. Sopphi is an empathic force which feels the world’s 
pain and provides a desire to do all they can to relieve this pain and 
make it better. Sopphi draws people to spiritual matters. It makes 
Pisceans under his influence kinder and provides psychic abilities. 
Negatively, they may drift into fantasy or drugs to escape reality, 


The third decan of Pisces is ruled by an Dæmon called SURO, He is 
called the coiling dragon. He has a beard and a crown on his head. 
His stone is a Hyacinth and its plant is a Chamomile. Suro’ 
card is the Ten of Cups which is the Lord of Perfected Succes 
Stillness. 


Tarot 
and 


NICK FARRELL 301 


Suró concludes all projects perfectly even when they look a mess 
to start with. Perfect completion often does not mean that it finishes 
as it is intended (other than by hindsight). Suró encourages some 
perfectionism. He suggests not acting when no action is needed 
when stillness obtains the most positive outcome. Suró-influenced 
people are likely to have feelings of guilt about their anger, and 
difficulties with asserting themselves, preferring to "go with the 
flow." The danger is that if creative expression for this energy is 
bottled up it can create indirect aggression and game playing. Suró 
is happiest when creatively expressing desires, compassion, and 
anger freely and imaginatively. 


THE ARROWS OF APOLLO 


The Ancient Egyptian decan system had the concept of arrows 
which were the seven decans closest to the Sun. They have been 
found on the bracelet of Prince Harnakhte and the tomb of Osokon 
Ilr. Magically they were the arrows of protection sent by the gods to 
protect the Pharaoh but there is no reason why they would not do 
the same thing to any human. 

Based on the sacred Book meanings above, the seven Demonic 
torces could stand for and could cause illnesses and be asked t 
prevent it. This system appears to have fallen out of use in magi 
perhaps because it was lost when the Egyptian temples closed. Its 
vhte nature might have been the reason as the only proof we have 
of it being used is for the Roval Family. However, it is an elegant 
system which unlocks many issues connected to the Higher Genius. I 
have called them the arrows of Apollo, 

It worked in the following way. Note the Sun sign and the Dæmon 
which rules that devan. Then do the same for each of the three decans 
on either side of it. That should give you the names and planetary 
spirits who oversee vour protection (or who will make you sick). 

It a person has their Ascendant in Leo, and their Sun in the 
middle decan of Leo, the arrows of Apollo, that means they will 
have the following Daemons Ipi (Jupiter, Khnouphos (Saturn), 
Ouphisit (Moon), Sotheir (Mercury),Phatiti (Mars), Athoum (Sun) 
and Brusous (Venus). 

Another who has their Ascendant in Leo and their Sun in the 
4" degree of Gemini has the following Damons acting as Arrows of 
Apollo. Xokha (Jupiter), Horomenos (Saturn), Aron (Moon), Soou 


* Here they are shown as serpents with lion's heads and the gods which 
rule the planets. 


302 HELIOS UNBOUND 


- 
my 
M 
Lots as an interaction betucen 
Sun (Demon). It shows ther 


This shows the Scion Herm 
the Moon (Fortuna; and Hi 
ruling planets (and gods) with their roots on Busty 


(Mercury), Ouari (Mars), Pepisoth (Sun) and Sotheir (Venus). 

The Arrows would have several functions. Collectively they 
supply protection (see below) and may be invoked duriny times of 
crisis. Individually they are an aspect of the seven rays and their 
role changes for each person. In the example piven above, the same 
Dæmon brings one person the powers of Venus and the other Mercury 
because they were both born at separate times of the year. They 
might encourage the first person to express its powers intellectually 
and through communication and the other throujh creativity er 
relationships. It will also defend that person differently, For the first 
person it would protect the mind and for the second it would protect 
their creativity. In this role they are more specific and personal than 
the planetary spirits of Agrippa. 

EXAMPLE OF A USE FOR THE ARROWS 
To use them to protect you from any form of attack buy seven 
wooden arrows with sharp metal tips. They can be bought trom any 


re-enactment equipment maker and should not have any branding 
on them. Each arrow will represent one of the decan Da’mons. 


NICK FARRELL 303 


For each arrow, either with a wood burner or an indelible marker, 
print the sigil of the zodiac sign, the secret name of the zodiac, your 
name, and the Dæmon 's name on each of them and finally a symbol 
of the Sun and the name Apollo (AzóAAov). 

Perform the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram and purify and 
consecrate the space. Then invoke Helios-Apollo depending on the 
time of day. Sprinkle each candle saying: 


In the name of Apollo, I purify you weapon of air so that you will 
defend me from my enemies from afar. For as even as the greatest 
hero can be despatched by a single arrow so shall my seen and 
unseen enemies fall. 


Pass each arrow through the flame and say, 


In the name of Apollo, I consecrate you, weapon of air, so that 
you will defend me from my enemies from afar. For even as the 
greatest hero can be despatched by a single arrow so shall my seen 
and unseen enemies fall. 


Pause 


A beggar, that came on his wanderings, easily strung the bow, and 
shot through the iron.* 


ld each arrow in your left hand and say, 


Apollo expresses his power through [astrological name] and 
[decan name] so that this arrow shall defend me against my seen 
and unseen enemies, Awaken [decan name] to bring this arrow to 
life. 

Chant the name of the Dæmon while visualising it taking its position 
with a bow and arrow to protect vou. Do this for five minutes (the 
longer the better), Atter doing this for all seven arrows lash them 
into a heptagon with vellow or gold thread. All the arrows should 
point the same way 


Lay the arrows on your altar and place a statue or picture of Apollo 
in the centre and light a tealight as an offering to him and say, 


How Apollo's laurel sapling shakes! 
The temple shakes. Away, away with the profane! 
For the bow is the weapon of Lycoreian Phoebus. 


* This is a magical phrase taken from the Odyssey. 
t This is a paraphrase from the Homeric Hymn number two to Apollo. 


304 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Thetis mournfully laments Achilles 

If she hears, "Hie Paian, Hie Paian.” 

For the mightiest cannot stand against Apollo's swift arrows. 
They who fight me fights with Apollo. 

His golden bow strikes them from afar. 

One swift arrow after another. 

The star's cry "Hie hie Paian! Shoot the arrow!" 

With my chant I place myself under the project of the arrows of 
Apollo so that those who strike me shall be struck by his Demons. 
Let no sickness touch me for I am under the protection of Apollo's 
arrows 


Create a chant built from the following: Apollo, [zodiac name], [the 
name of one of the seven], [the decan Darmons] and Henosis* 

Chant for ten minutes during which you should see yourself 
and Helios in the centre of the heptagon protected by the Damons 
(who might be coloured in planetary colours). The scene should be 
full of Sunlight with rays from Apollo's head binding and uniting 
them. You should visualise the arrows glowing with power. 

When you have finished, thank the gods and the Damons, and 
close your temple normally. The arrows should be placed under 
your bed, Once a year the arrows should be recharged. 


USING THE DECAN D/EMONS FOR HEALING 
This method is an adaptation of was taught to me by Joao Pedro 
Feliciano and is highly effective for healing, work. 

First work out which Damon is causing, the illness. Take a candle 
and write the patient's name, the secret name and sigil of the zodiac 
sign, and the name of the decan Dæmon. When the decan is rising, 
place a picture the person (or their astrology chart) on the altar with 
a magnet on top. Then place the candle on top of that. 

Prepare your ritual space with the Lesser Ritual of the Pentagram 
and the opening of the gates. Open all four elemental gates with 
their normal elements. 

Purify and consecrate the candle and say, 


Creature of Wax I purify and Consecrate you so that you will 


* A word which means to unite, but to the Neo-platonic it also meant a uniting 
with God. 

t You will need to use a computer programme to find out when this is. It 
is important that the invocations are performed while the decan is rising 
so might need to open your temple a ten minutes earlier so that you reach 
that point when the decan is rising. 


NICK FARRELL 305 


bea perfect sacrifice to appease [name of decan Demon] so that 
rather than harming [name of patent] it shall heal them instead. 


After a moment's pause, say the following three times: 


In the name of [zodiacal spirit] invoke [name of decan Dzemon], 
revered god, decan of the sign of [zodiac name] bring your 
influence upon the world of necessity. Come to me in this very 
hour and very moment to send a healing to [patent name] to 
heal his/her, so that (s)he may swiftly recover and be healed 
of all pain and suffering. Go swiftly and quickly [name of 
Dæmon] for I am like you, an off-spring of the immortal Aion, 
a being of chaos searching for wisdom in Order. 


Visualise the person vou want to heal and then slowly vibrate the 
name of the decan Dæmon 365 times. This should take you about 40 
minutes. 

When you have finished. thank the Damon , let the candle burn 
down. 

The most important decan Dwmons are those which rule houses 
which contain the seven planets, the four centrepins and the seven 
Hermetic lots. 


GOOD DÆMON AND GOOD FORTUNE 

The Place of the Good Demon (which is the 11" house) and the 
place of Good Fortune (fifth house) is influenced by the decan and 
any planets that are in them. Invoking these provides the Sphere of 
Sensation with the best spiritually and materially fortunate path in 
lite 


THE LOT OF THE DAMON 

The decan Demon intluences the nature of the lot of the Dæmon and 
takes on many of the powers being expressed by it. In this system 
itis invoked to unite the entire chart and therefore important and 


done last 


THE DEMONS OF THE HERMETIC LOTS 

The ancients squeezed more information from astrological charts by 
seeing the influence of planets as part of a mathematical formula which 
could generate added information to unlock a person's destiny. These 
were preserved and extended by the Arabs in their Arabic parts, but in 
Hellenistic times the most important were the Hermetic lots. The lots 
are theoretical points in a chart which are derived by synthesising 
the zodiacal positions of planets or points to highlight another part 


306 HELIOS UNBOUND 


of the chart which focuses on a topic. To do this you need to know if 
your astrological chart is a nocturnal (night) or a diurnal (day) chart. 
This is based on if you were born during the day or the night. 

The most exact way* to calculate a lot is to take the longitude of 
the ascendant (A) which is then added to the longitude of a planet (B). 
A longitude of a second planet (C) is subtracted from that number to 
determine the specific position of the lot in the chart. (Lot = A+ B - C). 

In 378 AD in his Astrological primer Introduction, Paul of 
Alexandria cites a Hermetic work on the seven lots called Panaretus 
(Tlavapetos). He wrote: 


The First is the lot of Fortune which, for those born by day, it 
will be necessary to count from the solar degree to the lunar 
degree, and one must cast out the collected number from the 
degree number of the ascendant, giving 30 degrees to each sign. 
And where the collected number leaves off, that place is the lot 
of Fortune. For those at night, the reverse, that is from the lunar 
degree to the solar. And likewise, one must cast out the rest from 
the degree of the ascendant. 


Second is the lot of Dæmon. You will count for a diurnal birth 
from the Moon's degree to the Sun's degree, and one must cast 
out the collected number from the degree of the ascendant, again 
likewise apportioning up to 30 degrees from each sign. Aud where 
the number leaves off, there will be the lot of Spirit. Thus, by day 
but the reverse by night. 


Third is the lot of Eros. You will count for those born by day front 
the Lot of Demon to the degree of Venus and an equal amount 
from the ascendant, but the reverse for those at night 

Fourth is the lot of Necessity. You will calculate tt for those born 
by day from the degree of Mercury to the lot of Fortune und an 


equal amount from the ascendant, but the reverse for those at 
night, 


Fifth is the lot of Courage, which you will work out from the 


* It is the most accurate but it was not the way the ancients did it. In a 
diurnal (day) chart measure the distance from the Sun to the Moon, and 
then measure the same distance from the ascendant. In a nocturnal (night) 
chart measure the distance from the Moon to the Sun, and then measure 
the same distance from the ascendant. Most modern magicians will use a 
computer program, such as Janus to do it, so knowing how is not exactly 
that important. 


NICK FARRELL 307 


degree of Mars to the lot of Fortune, and an equal amount from 
the ascendant for those born by day, but the reverse for those at 
night. 


Sixth is the lot of Victory. You will count for those born by day 
from the lot of Spirit to the degree of Jupiter, and an equal amount 
from the ascendant, but the reverse for those at night. 


Seventh is the lot of Nemesis. You will count for diurnal births 
from Saturn to the lot of Fortune, and an equal amount from the 
ascendant, but by night the reverse. 


In an astrological sense, it is possible to see how the interactions of 
the planets create these different points. The lot of Eros for example 
includesa relationship between the ascendant, the Demon and Venus. 
However, a magical approach reveals the interaction between the 
Sun (Higher Genius) and the Moon (Fortune) to create the structures 
upon which a life is made. While an astrologer might see these as 
points on a chart, a magician would see them as planetary Demons 
connected to a person's fate. 

The most important are the lot ot Fortune which is ruled by the 
Moon and based on the goddess Fortuna. The next most important 
is the lot of the Damon , ruled by the Sun and the Higher Genius 
suse through them the others are calculated. From this we 
n see that our life is à complex reaction 
wants, and 


tween what the Higher Ge 
what Fortune provides. 


Lot of Fortune: [Day] Fortune = 
* Moon - Sun, [Night] Fortune 
* Sun - Moon. 


scendant 
Ascendant 


Fortuna is the story that the fates and your 
Higher Gentis have planned for vou in this 
life. This includes money, and the way 
that an individual physically reacts to the 
surrounding, environment, the body, health 
and general vitality. It stands for what is 
the result of your actions, 

Paulus Alexandrinus wrote that 
fortune “signifies everything that concerns 
the body, and what one does through 
the book of life. It becomes indicative of 
possessions, reputation and privilege.” 


Fortuna 


308 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The goddess connected to this lot is Fortuna or Tyche. She 
was associated with the Moon because she waxed and waned. She 
appeared as a woman holding a cornucopia in her right hand and a 
ship's rudder, a ball or a wheel in her right. 


Lot of Dæmon : Day Spirit = Ascendant + Sun - Moon Night Spirit 
7 Ascendant * Moon - Sun 


We met the lot of Dæmon in the earlier chapter. The Hermetic lot 
however is more about how our Higher Genius is focused in the 
world. It shows intentions, and gives signs related to career. He will 
appear in whatever form you have selected for your Higher Genius. 

Paulus wrote: “Damon is the lord of soul, temper, mindfulness, 
and every power; and sometimes it cooperates in the determination 
concerning what one does.” 


Lot of Basis: Day Lot = Ascendant + Fortune - Demon Night Lot = 
Ascendant + Spirit - Fortune 


Lot of Necessity: Day Lot = Ascendant + Fortune - Mercury and 
Night Lot = Ascendant + Mercury - Fortune. 


This lot is based upon Mercury. Paulus wrote: “Necessity signifies 
constraints, submissions, struggles, and wars, and makes enmities, 
hatreds, condemnations 
all the other restrictive 
things befalling, men as a 
result of their birth 
This lot is a Dæmon of 

the goddess of Necessity 
or Ananke. Homer said 
that she was the force 
which needed events 
to happen, compulsion 
and inevitability. In his 
Fragments Empedocles 
wrote that Ananke 
(Necessity) wrote laws 
that even the gods must 
obey. She was depicted as 
a winged woman holding 
a spindle and a whip. 
She was the bringer 

of experiences which 
cannot be avoided. 2nd- 


Necessity 


NICK FARRELL 309 


century Hellenistic astrologer Vettius Valens said Necessity revealed 
the enemies a person would have in their life. If it is near a malefic 
itcreates lawsuits, deaths, trials, and condemnations. She could also 
be what you must sacrifice. 

She shows what your Higher Genius needs in this life and can 
outline the story we want to follow. The connection to Mercury is a 
little odd, but if you remember that Mercury, as the protective god of 
boundaries, had a Saturnian side it starts to make sense. 


Lot of Eros: Day Lot = Ascendant + Venus 
- Spirit and Night Lot = Ascendant + Spirit 
- Venus 


This lot is based upon Venus. Paulus wrote: 
“Eros signifies the appetites and the desires 
It becomes a contributing cause of friendship 
and mutual favour.” 

He was depicted as a winged youth 
holding a bow, or whip, and sometimes 
riding a dolphin. 

This Lot reveals and enables what we“ 
desire. It is not just about love and sex but 
what we are drawn to. It can encourage a 
good moral purpose and a love of beauty. If 
the person has a planet near this lot, vou can 
say that person has a love of that god and 
what it represents, Mercury would mean a 
love of words and communication (or more 
negatively thievery), while Mars would love 
fighting, and conflict. Venus can unbalance it 
the person a poisoner, adulterer, and murderer. The lot can show 
friends. Eros is the polarity of Necessity because he represents choice 
and the things we can do something about, 


Lot of Bravery (Virtus): Day Lot = Ascendant + Fortune - Mars 
Night Lot = Ascendant + Mars - Fortune 


This lot is based upon Mars and so far, it seems to gives signs for 

the natives fortitude and actions. Where this lot is placed by house 

seems to show what you must face and what you most fear. But 

it also shows how bravery enables you to overcome the challenges 

your Higher Genius wants you to experience Paulus wrote: 
“Bravery becomes a contributing cause of boldness, treachery, 
might, and every villainy.” 


310 HELIOS UNBOUND 


This lot was a Demon of the god Virtus who involves all the abilities 
and potentialities available to humans. In Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, 

"arete" is used to describe heroes and nobles and their mobile 
dexterity, and especially their strength and courage. Penelope's 
arete, for example, relates to co-operation. 

Virtus appears as a beautiful naked man or woman wearing 
nothing but a scarlet cloak, a helmet and carrying a spear or sword. 
(S)he teaches you what you have to overcome and in a manner 
which will not harm your honour. 


Lot of Victory: Day Lot = Ascendant + Jupiter - Spirit. Night Lot = 
Ascendant * Spirit - Jupiter 


This lot is based upon Jupiter. Paulus said: 


"Victory becomes a contributing cause of trust, good expectation, 
contest, and every association; but sometimes it contributes to 
penalties and rewards." 


This lot shows fame and eminence. Often however it shows what 
a person is happy doing or areas in which they find it easy to be 
successful. 

Victoria was shown as a beautiful winged poddess holding a 
victory wreath, sometimes standing on a globe. Her Greek form 
was Nike the goddess of strength, speed, and victory. Victoria was a 
symbol of victory over death and decided who would be successful 
during war. She can show you how to overcome problems: 
particularly conflicts. 


Lot of Nemesis: Day Lot = Ascendant + Fortune - Saturn. Night 
Lot = Ascendant + Saturn - Fortune 


This lot is based upon Saturn. It shows what is most likely to bring, 
the native down. Paulus wrote: “Nemesis becomes a contributing, 
cause of subterranean fates and of everything, which is ice-cold, ot 
demonstration, impotence, exile, destruction, grief, and quality of 
death." 

It was said that where Nemesis falls would be the natives 
undoing and these are the negative qualities of the zodiac siyn. In 
Aries it would be death in battle, or through anger or impatience; 
Taurus will be undone through the love of money or material 
possessions; Gemini: slander, communication or duplicity; Cancer 
will be undone by insecurity or attachment, or their family; Leo: 


NICK FARRELL 311 


pride, arrogance, and excessive visibility; Virgo: lack of faith, 
jumping to conclusions; Libra: legal matters, divorce; Scorpio: 
through murder, jealousy, scheming, lack of trust; Sagittarius: 
intemperance, intolerance, entrapment; Capricorn: sexual illnesses, 
carelessness, neglect; Aquarius: isolation, disconnection from others; 
Pisces: indiscretion and gullibility. 

Nemesis was the goddess who enacts retribution against those 
who succumb to hubris. She was the winged balancer of life and 
a daughter of Justice who restrained mortals’ frivolous insolences 
with her adamantine chains. 

She appears as a beautiful woman dressed in black and carries 
either a measuring rod, scales, a sword, and a scourge. She rides in 
a chariot drawn by griffins. She is the equaliser and can help fight 
against those who are otherwise untouchable. 


The Lot of Basis: Day Lot = Ascendant + Fortune - Dæmon (or) Lot 
= Ascendant + Dæmon - Fortune so that it always falls below the 
horizon. 


The lot of Basis was not one of the seven Hermetic lots but was an 
important one for Hellenic Astrologers and it fits well as a lot which 
varths” the chart. It is the god which gives breath to the body and 
signifies long journeys. It a Damon of the same god as the ascendant 
Sv, if vour ascendant is the second decan of Leo it is a Dæmon of 
Jupiter. It is the entire result of the movement of your Higher Genius 
and fortune as it relates to your material world, 

Using the Donors ot the Decans we can understand these issues 
in considerable clarity and so invoking them and meditating upon 
them becomes part ot trying to understand our Higher Genius. The 
seven Hermetic lots along with the centrepins will build a Sphere of 
sensation Which is closer to what the Higher Genius wants. 


EXAMPLE 
Using the example trom last month we can see how these houses set 
the stage for the planetary forces 
\ person has Leo as their ascendant in the third decan and the 
Damon PHATITL who gives her a strong willpower and aggression. 
She will act with authority, power, and their personal magnetism 
and be a little bit scary. This Ascendant is sextile to the Sun which 
means that her personality is even stronger. This means that they 
could make good friendships and suggests that the Sun in Gemini 
is a hugely important part of their chart. The Sun is in the second 
decan of Gemini ruled by the Damon OUARI who encourages 


312 HELIOS UNBOUND 


intellectual genius and enables skill, planning and strategising. This 
makes them a good organiser and manager and inquisitor. 

The ascendant is sextile the Moon which is in the middle decan 
under the influence of NEPHTHIMÉS, who will insist on rules being 
followed and provides an unconscious sense of Justice. He tends to 
create a sense of struggle, particularly in relationships. In fact, it will 
tend to create life lessons through relationship choices. The sextile 
between the Leo ascendant makes this aspect of the person stronger 
and a good part of their character. They will follow the rules of a 
religion and it will give them the friends and recognition they want. 

The Sun's rays will prevent the good aspects of Venus helping 
the person. Venus would normally be strong in this position but in 
this case the Sunoverwhelms it, making any serious romance be more 
like friendship and a meeting of minds more than anything else. The 
ascendant is sextile to beleaguered Venus, which is damaged by the 
Sun’s rays. However, it is important that, in this case, this person is 
prevented from being from being turned into a loveless robot by the 
fact that both the Sun and Venus share the same bounds. In this case 
Venus is sheltering from the Sun. The ancients called this a chariot 
and says that the person is protected from the Sun's rays if it is in 
its own domicile, exaltation, or bounds. This means that they do not 
lose the power to express themselves creativ It can also enable 
them to project beauty and elegance. It is possible that if the person 

"becomes too Sun Gemini" they will lose their Venus side, and it 
might be useful for the person to work with OUARI to pet a balance 

Mercury is strongly placed in the tenth house but not early in 
life. Jupiter in the 10" makes the person respected and well known 
(even famous); however it is square Mars. While it is in such a strong 
position it limits Mars’ negative aspects, It will mean that the person 
works hard and will be rewarded and recognised. They will do well 
in the communications industry, writiny or talking. The sestile ot 
Mars and the Sun might mean that Gemini energy will help relieve 
some of the sickness which the malefic will briny, to the 12^ house. 
Since a sextile is rarely bad, it is possible that Mars will provide 
her with internalised energy reserves, but it might lead to bursts of 
egotistical anger and a more masculine approach. Mars and Saturn 

in the 12^ meant that there would have been difficulty during the 
pregnancy and the person or the mother would be lucky to survi 
Saturn will bring the person internal pains. 

The Moon is in her joy in the third house in Libra, sextile Mars, 
trine the Sun and Venus. This means that there is an appearance 
of sexuality and confidence and assertion. While this is not enough 


NICK FARRELL 313 


to save Venus, it might mean that there is a need to find a stable 
relationship (something the burnt-out Venus in Gemini would 
not bother with) and hang onto it once they have it. The emotions 
and the will are at peace with one another, suggesting a balanced 
personality. Normally they will put others before themselves, unless 
(as is the case here) they have a strong personality. 

Based on this positioning we see that the person's Sun is 
extremely powerful but is much more balanced by the Moon, 
Mercury and Jupiter. Their Higher Genius clearly wants them to 
Communicate and be up front. Thev might suffer from sickness, 
and a lack of romantic connection or imagination. There might be a 
tendency to be too concerned with form rather than feeling in their 
magical life. However, there is a lot of opportunity for success. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
MONTH SEVEN 


MYSTERIES OF THE HIGHER GENIUS 


‘Suren-crusstut 
The Seven Geha 


Anthangele 
Age“ HIERARCHY 


[o 
Fized Stan 


Mercury 
Mun 


Sua-tneas 


ofthe 
REALM 
of 


ORDER 


This is the last month of the seven- 
month programme, which ends with a 
weekend retreat when you are cut off 
from the rest of the world to await the 
arrival of your Higher Genius. 

During the month leading up to 
the retreat you should be as isolated 
from the world as possible in the 21 
century. This means no television or 
social media. Conversations should 
be limited only to what is considered 
necessary. While it is OK to yo te 
work you should consciously restrict 
conversations, to avoid talking, about 
trivia. You should also avoid stress at 
all costs. If these things are impossib? 
then you should take time to pertor 
the emptying of the cup exercise. When 
you get spare moments the Sun breath 
is also an asset. You should abstain 
from all forms of intoxicants and vat 
lightly, You should also not eat red 
meat or pork during this month 


The first three weeks of this month you should do your usual 
solar rituals during the day. Then in the main session: 


SIP wy SF 


Perform the Less 


er Ritual of the Pentagram 

The correct invocation of the Sun for that time of day 
The headless ritual. 
The elemental pentagrams and balance them. 

Purify and consecrate. 

And then perform the Activation of Divine Love (below) 


The last week involves three days of preparation and then the three 
days of retreat. 


NICK FARRELL 313 
RISING THROUGH THE LEVELS 


n the last few months, you will be aware that at different times 
you experience different states of consciousness. Before going 
on it is important to explain these as this month you are going 
to enter another level. 

Traditionally, when you look a theosophical or Neoplatonic 
philosophy, they became unnecessarily complicated so what follows 
below is a simplification. 

The One Thing's mind is split in three divisions: the conscious, 
the unconscious and matter. The matter level is what we see with 
our senses while the divine unconscious is depicted in concepts like 
the underworld. The conscious mind is the animating force, which 
unites creation. It brings new ideas into being. This conscious mind 
is divided into four levels. None of these levels are more important 
or superior to the other. They are what they are. No one says the 
brain is a superior organ to the heart - they have different functions 
and without either the human would die. 


THE SUB-LUNAR LEVEL 


The sub-lunar level encompasses matter and the astral and the 
lowest level of the underworld. It is the realm the Goetic magician 
who uses magie drawn from nature, the elementals, the dead and 
terrestrial Dwmons, They also take power from the symbolism of the 
Moon gods such as Hekate and Diana. These channel celestial and 
divine power into the material and astral realm, 

Note the word Goetia does not just mean demonic magic. It 
is the most common ferm of magic as its function is to affect the 
material plane, the thoughts and minds of people, and the Demons 
of the yods and work with the dead. Although many magicians 
claim to aspire to celestial, or divine forms of magic, the bulk of their 
work is Goetia. 

It needs little in the way of purification. Sub-lunar magic is 
powered by elemental energy from below, or from "the Moon." Its 
rituals often feature calls to nature or the elements to bring about 
their goals. Its magic depends on some form of sacrifice to transmute 
one type of energy to another. It is enhanced by repetition and 
chanting. Its rituals are best conducted at night according to the 
waxing and waning of the Moon. The magical use of pathworking or 
astral takes place at the highest aspect of the sub-lunar level, where 
itcan influence the celestial or divine level closer to their source. 


316 HELIOS UNBOUND 
THE CELESTIAL LEVEL 


The celestial level is the realm of the divine gods or archangels. They 
have their foot on the lunar levels but are divided into seven broad 
categories as expressed by the planetary forces. The celestial forces 
manifest in the upper parts of the sub-lunar level as the different 
masks of god. At this level, they are closer to their energetic and 
functional nature. It is their job to bring the divine ideas from above 
so that Hekate can properly experience them in the sub-lunar realm. 
Magic at this level is the work of the theurgist or god worker. It has 
been the level we have been working at throughout this book. 

To achieve the levels of consciousness necessary, the theurgist 
must separate their soul from matter and purify it so that it may 
respond to the energy of at least one of the seven energies found on 
this level. Rituals seeking to attain this level are called ascensions 
and through periods of attunement to the divine energy the theurgist 
starts to embody that divine energy. 

Such rites might start on the sub-lunar level, which provides a 
bedrock for an astral ascension. Symbolically this level is under the 
control of the Sun, although others see it under the rule of Jupiter or 
its equivalents such as YHVH. Note the purity required to attain this 
level is not the sort of purity demanded by religious abstinence, fasting 
or other taboos. These are symbolic of the true purity, which is the 
adoption of a mindset that operates at the celestial level and not at the 
material. The work of the theurgist is to provide a conduit tor these 
powers into the astral and then use them to ascend still higher into the 
super-celestial level. 


SUPER-CELESTIAL LEVEL 


This is the level we will attempt to work at now. This realm is the 
closest that a human mind can go to entering, the mind of the one 
thing. It is not something that can be managed all the time, but it can 
be glimpsed. This is a world without form, from which the seeds ot 
reality are formed. Attaining it requires another change of mindset 
from Microcosmic to Macrocosmic and it is the realm of the mystic, 
Stepping into this world requires the aid of the celestial forces and 
further purity. 

There is no ritual that will help, other than working at the celestial 
level and having its forces aid you. As in the celestial level you should 
become more like the one mind to truly understand it. This level is 
symbolically controlled by the stars, which in ancient times meant the 
fixed stars. Realistically they are far above that and is the place where 


NICK FARRELL 317 


the ideas come from. Stepping into this divine mind is what is meant 
by crossing the abyss. 

What is important is that this level is much more abstract than 
those previously. It is less personal and harder to put your finger on 
and be definite about. It is more mystical and means attempting to 
connect to concepts rather than things. 


PAGAN ANGELS AND DAMONS 


The beings identified in later Christian magic as angels and Demons 
are more abstract understandings of divine force, Angels represent 
the pinnacle of abstract divine order while demons take on the role 
of the chaotic shadows. This process can be seen in the Testament of 
Solomon, where demons are invoked but angels control them. 

What 1 might say next will anger those who reject symbolism 
whichis considered "Christian" or Jewish withina neo-pagan context. 
In Rome, during the first and second century, it was common for 
pagans” to adopt Christian and Jewish religious symbols in their 
altars. Cynics have said 
that they were hedging 
their bets, but the reality 
is that they felt free to 
worship those similar 
pantheons alongside their 
own, 

Some of this was 
because of the eclectic 
nature of the pagan 
religion. The Hellenes, 
which broadly covered 
the Romans and Greeks 
and all they conquered, 
saw all religions as aspects 
of their own. So, Amon 
in Egypt was Jupiter, as 
was YHVH of the Jews 
(although some Romans 
thought they worshipped 
Saturn). Jesus could be Osiris, Adonis, Antonis or any number of 
redemptive gods, just as the Christians worshipped him. Rome was 
full of these cults, and they only ever fell foul of the authorities if 
they advocated illegal acts. 


318 HELIOS UNBOUND 


In antiquity, pagan writers moaned that Christianity had taken 
the best bits of their religion and merged it into their own. They 
are not difficult to spot, and not even the Protestant and Catholic 
counter-reformations thought to remove these pagan elements 
which had become the cornerstone of their religion. Sharing went 
both ways. Between the first and fifth century, there was a move to 
incorporate Jewish angels into the Greco-Egyptian magical system. 
This coincided with a more monotheistic approach amongst pagans. 
The idea, following neo-platonic lines, was that there was a central 
unity which expressed itself through many different gods. What I 
am describing is not One God in the Christian, Jewish or Muslim 
sense. 

There was a monotheistic cult of Theos or Zeus Hypsistos, 
which was a pagan version of Judaism. However, the pagans of 
the time had a more sophisticated way of reconciling all their 
pagan gods with a more abstract unifying being. Plutarch’s 
teacher, Ammonius, equates God with Being and says it lives in 
instant eternity, ruling, and conserving the world. Ammonius 
saw traditional Apollo as a shadow or image of this reality. In 
Plutarch’s Essay On Isis and Osiris Osiris is an image of the true 
God, identified with Plato's Good and Beautiful, and as the 
destiny of the soul. This god, too, rules the world through his 
powers (dynameis, ówvàpiiz) which include traditional pods. 

In the Greek Magical Papyri, we can see these monotheistic 
deities being formed by merging or promoting, pods like Phanes- 
Aeon, Helios, Set-Typhon, and Thoth-Hermes. These entities 
stood for the Transcendental One Thing, who is unknowable but 
must be sought; it is that which is the creator, or the divine spark 
within humanity. The Chaldean Oracles even sugested: the One 
Thing had three aspects, much like the Christian idea of a trinity 

Such an abstract divine being created a problem tor existing, 
religions, which saw their gods as haviny, forms and human 
personalities and able to work within matter. While it was possible 
to abstract this One Thing, it created a substantial philosophical 
gap between the gods and the One Thing”, something vital it vou 
were going to follow the Neo-Platonic ideas of emanation. The 


* In Kabbalistic view is that there are four broad states; God at the top 
(Atzaluth), then the archetypal world (Briah), the World of Formation 
(Yetzirah) and the matter (Assiah). The gods had a form and therefore 
were attributed to Yetzirah. This left a gap in Briah between the highest 
unknowable God and the gods. 


NICK FARRELL 319 


magicians who wrote the PGM filled this gap with the concept of 
angels. Angels had the advantage that they did not have a function 
rather than a myth and lacked an agreed form. While it is clear from 
some of the Roman curse tablets that in popular magic angels were 
already being used magically, their nature was like those “unnamed 
gods" in that you invoked them because you wanted abstract power 
untainted by perception and form. 

They were powerful beings who were manipulated to carry out 
therequest. Greek versions of the Jewish names of God became useful 
in this sub-set of pagan magic. [AO SABAOTH (IAQ XABAQO) for 
example was a name of the abstract One Thing which was called to 
invoke angels and control the gods. By the second century, pagan 
intellectuals were seeing angels as celestial * and abstract. One has to 
remember that there was never any organised “church” for the idea 
nor any real universal or central doctrine. Some pagan magicians 
sometimes treated angels as gods or had Pagan gods send angels 
(although these might be lesser angels), but to an ancient Pagan, the 
use of Judeo-Christian angels was not a problem. In fact, a tomb 
of a priest of Sabazios Vincintius in Rome has a depiction of the 
dead person being led to a post-mortem banquet by an angel. He is 
hown in other scenes as being accompanied by Mercury. Sabazios 
s equated with Jove and mentioned with Mercury. 


l'AGAN ANGELS 
Modern magicians who tollow the Abramelin system (or have re 
about it) mistakenly tend to equate the Holy Guardian Angel wit. 
their Higher Self or what the ancients called their Higher Genius. In 
doing, so, they make this angel into something much more important 
than itis. That is not saving that it is not a great spirit, but it is not 
vour real higher spiritual self. Another mistake associated with the 
Guardian Angel is that it is a Christian (or at least Jewish) concept. 
Ancient payans used angels to fill a gap between Demons or 
gods and matter. They acknowledged that Damons and gods were 
different, operating on different levels; it was just that a spirit of 
the raretied aether had no chance of influencing an object of dense 
matter. What was needed was a half-way spirit which could be the 
“messenger” of the god. The name of the angel was unimportant 
as it was the “hand of the god.” Ancient Alexandrian magicians 
sometimes borrowed Hebrew names for pagan angels (which has 


* See Ancient Angels: Conceptualising Angeloi in the Roman Empire By Rangar 
Cline 


320 HELIOS UNBOUND 


in my view led to some confusion of the nature of some of the 
Kabbalistic angels, such as Uriel). 

The concept of a guardian angel, or a spirit assigned to you at 
birth to protect you is connected to the idea of fate and destiny. If 
the guardian angel had a function, it was to ensure that you lived 
out your fate and did not suffer from accidental death before your 
time. Knowledge and conversation with the Guardian Angel were 
largely unnecessary as you could see its activity through what was 
happening in your life. If you could speak to it, the Angel would 
tell you that it had intervened to stop something happening, which 
would have prevented an essential part of your story unfolding. 

There were moves to develop the “theology” of guardian angels. 
On the island of Santorini, graves had a circled cross and the first 
name of each person prefixed with the word “Angelos.” For centuries 
the graves were considered to be Christian, but the discovery that one 
grave dated from the first century and the last was in the fifth seemed 
to suggest that they were part of a pagan cult. The circled cross once 
thought to be a Christian sign was more likely to be a stylised rosette 
which appears on many pagan tombs. 

Understanding that the graves were pagan gave rise to a few 
other assumptions. The reason that names and details were put on 
gravestones by pagans was so that people would read them out loud 
and give the dead person a new life. Other reasons to do so was to 
establish them as heroes in the underworld where they would lc 
a blessed life between human and divine, So a person readiny 
Santorini graves was declaring that the person was an anyel 

In his book Ancient Angels, Ragar Cline points out that then 
was an ancient belief that you were your guardian angel. In Acts 12 
people surprised to see that Peter had escaped from prison, mistook 
him for his Guardian Angel. 


“The guardian angel could be seen as anything from the 

manifestation of the individual, to the point that the wlentity of 

the soul and guardian angel were merged, and in the case of Peter 

the individual's angel could be mistaken for the inidiculuil 
This was not the Higher Genius because it was too close to matter = an 
expression of the soul. 

The question then remains as to why the people of Santorini 
wanted identification with their guardian angels after death. 

Guardian angels had the roles of psychopomps after death, which 
explains some of this, but gravestones were for long after this process 
was over. Placing the world Angelos on the tomb suggest that in 


NICK FARRELL 321 


some form the Guardian Angel guarded the dead body. We know 
of invocations in Melos and Thessaly where the Angelos was called 
upon as a tomb guardian. If the guardian angel was part of the self 
which aligned a person to their destiny, it seems unfair to have the 
spirit guarding a tomb for eternity. 

One answer to this could be the following scenario: when a 
person incarnates the part of them that keeps them on the mission 
of their destiny is angelic. Bv the time they die, they have fulfilled 
whatever fate the gods required and have become their angel. That 
destiny takes them to whatever part of the afterlife their story needs. 
However, the physical part of that angel (remember guardian angels 
are supposed to operate at a physical level) remains attached to the 
dead body until it is decomposed and forgotten. This would explain 
why the ground around graves was sacred as it was full of the energy 
of what was left of guardian angels. 

Because the guardian angel is so bound up with you and your 
fate, and you eventually become it. it is unlikely that knowledge and 
conversation is that necessary. Your spiritual path would be looking 
for your Higher Genius. 

The angels used by pagans were part of a dissimilar system 
and had a ditterent flavour to Jewish or Christian angels. The name 
might have been the same, but they were nor propping up the sam 
theology. This is one of the reasons | have recommended using the 
ancient Greek pronunciation of their names so that they have a 
slightly ditterent teel. 


ANGELIC AND DAMONIC SYSTEMS 


Untortunately, the ancient systems connected to angelics were not 
as thorouyh and complete as later systems. Ancient magicians have 
used archangels and angels without much thought of hierarchy or 
function which are so loved by modern” Kabbalistic” magicians. In 
POM angelic names often appear for effect without much logic. It took 
1000 years of ludaeo-Christian magic to create the elaborate system 
ot archangel, angel, intelligence and spirit described by Agrippa. It 
1s possib le to see the roots of the system in some of the early proto- 
jyrimoires such as the Testament of Solomon or the writings of Pseudo- 
Dionysus and they were just as useful to the pagan magician. 

Looking at the diagram which starts this chapter, we see the 
unknowable divine triad at the top and emerging from these the 
seven primal colours or energy rays. These are the most abstract 
forces in the universe and provide power for the rest. 


322 HELIOS UNBOUND 


FOUR HOLY CREATURES 


The next level are the kerubs. In the Bible, these appeared in 
Ezekiel, Isaiah and Revelations. They were described as the four 
holy creatures - additionally, they are seen as Bull, Lion, Eagle and 
Human. Sometimes they have wings. 

The assumption in modern magic is that thev were Jewish 
angels from which all the other angels derived, but they were much 
older than the Bible and appeared to have a place in many non- 
Jewish cultures. In Vietnam they are known as "Tu Linh", and are 
named Long - Lan - Quy - Phung, four sacred animals representing 
the tremendous power of the universe. Four gods at world-quarters 
have similar roles in Indian, Aztec, Chinese, Japanese and Icelandic 
religion. They might not have the same responsibly given to the 
Four Holy Creatures, but their archety pal presence is there. 

They arrive in European systems from Persian and Babylonian 
star lore. The iconography if the Hebrew kerubs was made during 
the time of the Babylonian captivity around 600 - 560 BCE. In 
Babylonia, they were known as the Watchers of the Directions and 
were connected to different constellations. The image of the Great 
God on his throne often had the title “lord of the four creations. ^ 

The importance of these four stars and their constellations 
comes from the fact that they were marking, points of the solar year 
and the dominant constellation in the sky. The symbolic animals 
represented the constellations. People could look at them and know 
the season. 


* For the last four centuries it had been believed that the Babylonians 
borrowed the idea from the Indo-Iranians who settled in the area between 
2000 - 1500 BCE. Around 3000 BCE they decided that there were Four 
Royal Stars or Watchers of the four directions or the Persian Royal Stars 
which were Aldebaran (lascheter) - Vernal equinos (Watcher of the 
East); Regulus (Venant) - summer solstice (Watcher of the South): Antares 
Satevis) - autumn equinox (Watcher of the West): Fomalhaut (Haftorang) 
- winter solstice (Watcher of the North). The symbols of these were 

Aldebaran- Bull, Regulus - Lion, Antares - Scorpion, Fomalhaut - Southern 
fish (Aquarius). However, the Babylons tended to associate the equinoxes 
etc more with the fixed constellations and the winds rather than one star 
In 1945 George Davis in a. Popular Astronomy article pointed out that there 
was no proof of Persian Royal Stars or watchers in any historical text. Stars 
that important should rate a mention in the MUL.APIN astrological tablets, 
but they do not. It would appear that Davis found the much repeated 
concept was an invention. 


NICK FARRELL 323 


Themagicalobsessionwith 
directions, and seasons, and 
winds is somewhat confusing 
for modern magicians. For the 
ancients the move through 
the seasons was a vital part of 
life, and the forces directing 
this ticking astral clock were 
logically the most important. 
The ancient myths show the 
gods expressing these forces 
and trying to explain their 
mysterious actions. The myth 
of Demeter and Persephone 
tells the cvcle of seasons and planting, but they are effectively giving 
form to a more powerful force, which is the season itself. 

The four kerubs are the four primal directing forces for all life. 
The four great coordinators wield tremendous archetypal powers to 
direct form and create order. To them are attributed the ideas of the 
elements, directions, and seasons, and the four of them contain the 
totality of the directing force of the divine triad throughout all levels. 
They use and focus the powers of the seven rays. 

In the mysteries of Hermopolis in Ancient Egypt, the four were 
even more abstract and divided into their male and female polarities 
making eight. The ancient Egyptians considered the universe to be 
made from chaos by four gods and their consorts (the number four 
was supposed to represent completeness). Each pair represented the 
male and female aspects of the four creative powers or sources. Nun 
and Naunet represented the primaeval waters of chaos (which would 
later become water): Huh and. Hauhet represented the currents of 
these waters of chaos (the energy which will manifest as fire); Kuk 
and Kuaket represented darkness itself (which would later manifest 
as earth); and Amun and Amunet represented air (or “that which is 
hidden”). These eight elements interacted causing an explosion, and 
the burst of energy which was released caused the Primaeval Mound 
(located at Hermopolis, but also knownas the “Isle of Flame”) to rise 
from the waters of Chaos. 

From this act of creation order (Maat) was established within the 
sea of chaos. This chaos was always trying to undo the rule of Maat 
and needed to be fought by the gods. This chaos became personified 
by the great serpent Apep who fights a night-time battle with most 
of the gods. If Ra loses then chaos swallows creation. 


324 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The names of the four Holy Creatures, according to an Ancient 
Coptic text* are Paramara (earth) (Pag&páet), Zorothion (fire) (Zopoerow), 
Periton (water) (Peprton) and Akramata (air) (AKpa.s14.74.). These spirits 
are rarely invoked because their powers are too close to the One Thing 
for a magician to get a handle on them. They can be used to provide 
background energy to a working. More understandable versions of 
these beings exist on each of the five levels. The four “creatures” exist in 
the realms of order and chaos and appear to be the forces which bring 
about order from chaos and return it to chaos to complete the cycle. 


ARCHANGELS 


Archangel comes from the words archon (4pyov) and aggelos (ŭyyetog. 
Archon means ruler, commander, chief, leader*. The word aggelos means 
messenger?, and it comes from the verb aggelo (àrr7£249) which means 
announce, report, bring news, bring the messages. Aggelo derives from 
the verb ago (rgo) which means lead, carry, fetch, bring, convey**, 
and in another form anagomat (aváyogay which means | lead up from 
the lower to the higher, raise, ascend to, bring up 

The idea for them probably comes from Zoroastrian Amesha 
Spentas. These were seven beings who inhabit immortal bodies that 
operate in the physical world to protect, guide and inspire humanity 
and the spirit world. They represented a stepped down power of the 
light god Ahura Mazda so that it could manifest in the denser levels 
of creation. Amesha means" eternal” and “spenta” means brilliance: 
There were seven, and they were the attributes of the single god 
itself: 

Spenta Mainyu (Bountiful Spirit), Asha Vahishta (Highest 
Truth), Vohu Mano (Righteous Mind), Khshathra Vairya (Desirable 
Kingdom), Spenta Armaiti (Holy Devotion), Haurvatat (Pertection) 
and Ameretat (Immortality). 

Despite there being a dearth of biblical mentions for archangels, 


*A spell to protect a mother and child, Berlin! 1347, published in Meyer, M. 
and Smith, R. (1994). Ancient Christian Magic. San Francisco, Ca: Harper San 
Francisco. 


t Liddell-Scott, üpyov, 

$ Liddell-Scott, ayyehos 

§ Liddell-Scott, ayyéAw 

4 Etymologicum Magnum, áyyeżos 
** Hesychii Alexandrini Lexicon, üyet 
tt Liddell-Scott, avayonar 


NICK FARRELL 325 


there was a detailed tradition for them among Alexandria's Jewish 
community. This filtered into the magical community and found its 
way into the Greek Magical Papyri. Unlike modern occultists who knock 
themselves out using Hebrew lettering, the Alexandrian magicians 
used the Greek version of the archangelic names. The pronunciation 
is slightly different from traditional Kabbalah Hebrew. In Greek, the 
letters are all pronounced, and we have the written versions of the 
words to work it out. The el is spelt with a ij (eta), which is breathed 
out and not transposed to an «e «, so the vowel sounds a bit like the 
word air. This means that the el sound at the end of each name would 
sound like ^il" when said quickly. The “a” sound in Greek is short 
like ^up" or "aha." Raphael would sound like Ra-fa-il instead of the 
longer sounding Rah-fay-el of the Golden Dawn. 

There was some argument in antiquity about who the seven 
archangels were. While most agreed that Michael, Raphael, Gabriel 
and Uriel were the basic four, there was an extensive body of opinion 
about the other three. The Book of Enoch says that the seven were 
Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, Uriel, Saraqael, Raguel, and Remiel. 

The Eastern Orthodox Tradition believed the other three were 
most often named Selaphiel, Jegudiel, and Barachiel. The Coptic 
Church called Uriel Suriel. and the other three were Zedekiel, 
Sarathiel and Ananiel, Closer to the pagan/Christian magical 
tradition, Pseudo-Dionysius gives them as Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, 
Uriel Camael, Jophiel, and Zadkiel. 

PGM X 30-50 gives the following list Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, 
Souriel (Uriel), Zaziel, Badakiel, and Svliel. 
rel) “Who is like God?” 
el) "God's medicine.” 
el*) "God's strength." 

God's light." 


Michael (Mig (Mee-t 
Raphael, (Pagans) (Ra 
Gabriel (Lappin) (Wa-vre 
Souriel (toppu) (500 
Zaziel (Zuma) (Za-2 Hidden God.” 

Badakiel (Busunuy) (Va-tha-kee-'eli) "God Plans.” 
Syliel (Luanda) (Sv-lee-‘el) "God's Throne." 


The PGM list provides a list of God names, barbaric names of power, 
and their associated vowels. The vowels begin with the planetary 
vowel associated with each. It is possible to see what planetary force 


* Here the sounds are soft which means that it sounds like Wa-vri-il with 
the W like w in what, womb, were, was and v like v in very, victim etc. 

1 The oo like oo in book, look, and cook. 

+ With th like th in that, there, then, and though. 


326 HELIOS UNBOUND 


the Alexandrian magicians' ancients associated these angels with 
and make some logical assumptions. For example, Syliel (of whom 
we know little about), is connected to the divine name Adonai (Lord) 
(Aava) A-tho-ne), and responds to the vowel string QAEHIOY and 
the barbaric name of power has a long series of omega vowels in the 
middle. Everything about him suggests Saturn and the archangel of 
materiality. Less obvious is the association of Michael with the Moon, 
instead of the Sun and Zaziel who was always associated with the 
mysteries being connected to Mars. This implies that the "pagan" 
magician view of these archangels was different from conventional 
Jewish thinking. The planetary attribution to the archangels has 
always been weak with little reason to attribute them to any. Like 
the colours, their powers are considered too wide to be planetary. 
Any planetary attribution can be included as part of their abilities 
and not their totality. 

In the PGM X structure, Michael is an angel who stands between 
the sub-lunar world and the celestial. His role is a guardian to keep 
the darker and unbalanced forces rising into the more purified 
realms of spirit. His name “Who is like God?" is like a question 
which everything must answer before he lets them journey. Raphacl 
maintains his traditional role as communicator and healer. Gabriel 
becomes a love angel, which is appropriate when you remember he 
was the “messenger” for the birth of Jesus. Souriel, is an extended 
version of the name of the archangel Uriel and is a pood ct 
for the solar angel. According to the Jewish Encyclopaedia’, h 
tradition made Uriel “as the source of the heat of the day in winter 
and the Angel of Sunday, suggestiny, that the myth that Michavl 
was always the Jewish angel of the Sun" is incorrect, Uriel means 
"God's fire" and the Sun is a good symbol, Zaziel is better known 
for his demoted role as a spirit of Saturn in later occultism and is 
associated with the Kabbalistic sphere of Binah, The word could 
be derived from Zaza which means "brightness: which works well 
as a meaning for a "Mars" angel. It would mean that he is a polar 
opposite of Gabriel in terms of Archanyelic physics. 

Badakiel means "God checks" or “God plans” sois the creative 
force which sets long term goals for the universe and makes sure 
they happen. The administrative role makes a great deal ot sense 
when you consider similarities to Jupiter. 

All seven angels answer to the God Abrasax who is invoked 
using the Barbaric Name of Power IOXYX 


* Roth, C. and Wigoder, G. (1970). The new standard Jewish encyclopedia 
[encyclopedia]. Jerusalem: Massada. 


NICK FARRELL 327 


Vowel Divine 
Name 


Name of 


Archangel Power 


Michael 


(MixagX) 
Mi-ha-il 


Nyseu 
(Nvoev) 
(Ny-sef) 


AEHIOYQ 


Raphael 
(Papan\) | EHIOYOA | (Novev) Pax. 
Ra-fa-il Ny-chee-ef i y 


Gabriel Aéche 
(app) | HIOYOAE | (A@yn) | Venus 
Wa-vre-il A-aw-ch’e 


Bayayoy 
Vachachych 


Souriel Mecheu 
(Sovpuy\) IOYOAEH = | (Meyev) 
Soo-re-il Me-chet 


Baxadiyoy 
Vakazeechych 


1A0 ü 
Baapayvyx 
OVOAEHI ant AW Vazavachych 
E ay a 
Badakiel Sabvaoth Badytopmd 
(Badaniy\) |YQAEHIO —[(Xapaec) | Jupiter |Vad'etop- 
Vaedacke-il Sevaawth thaw 
f Bm 
Svliel Adonai Bawyoxoox 
(Lo\uy\) QAEHION | (Adwvat) Vaeencha- 
Si-li-il 


A-tho-ne 
a L 
bach Angel is ruled by a divine name and is drawn towards you by 
vibratiny the barbaric name of power and the vowel string. If we 
wanted to invoke Michael we would write the words: 


\brasay 1O-Chych Michael (Mai) AEHIOY Q Nysef (Nooev) Chych 
(wz) on a white or violet candle. 


wawawch 


Atter opening the temple, you would say, I invoke you Abrasax 
who unites the seven by the powers of your name. 


I conjure thee by the name IQXYX (Ee-aw-chych) so that you will 
awaken to me the mighty Archangel Michael. 


Light the candle and say, 


328 HELIOS UNBOUND 


In the name of Ny-sef, I invoke the Archangel Michael, who is 
the guardian between the world and the celestial world. Come 
forth mighty Michael, for I know your secret barbaric name of 
power which you rejoice to hear. 


Vibrate the name Chych for five minutes. 


Iinvoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word which was 
spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Awaken 
to me, Michael, in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate AEHIOY® for five minutes. 


The appearance of Michael will not be a form, or, if it is it is, not 
something with which you can communicate. Archangelic forms 
tend to be swirling energy patterns and an overall presence. 
Sometimes, you get hit by a force or emotion which is so strong it 
stays with you for days. However, the effect is more mystical, and 
words don't seem to do much. If vou wish to frame a question, 
meditate on it in the presence of the archangel and allow all the 
images you can associate with the question to be broadcasting it 
It will reply but it will not be in words. Sometimes vou will see a 
picture or a scene, but the image will be cryptic and impossible to 
decode straight away, but you will know that you have re d 
it. Communication between you might take place, but often it wall 
take days or weeks for the message to yet through = either throujdh 
dreams or just real life events explaininy them, 


THE RULES OF WORKING AT THIS LEVEL 


Just because you are trying to work at a higher level docs not mean 
you are, Many people have come off the rails working at this point 
because they end up tricked into thinking, that their / 
is telling them something that it is not. At this point, your Hidier 
Genius is not an entity; it is part of everything, else 


1. If you see a form, it is sublunar and not supera celestial, The 
real thing is the above form. Any connection vou get at this 
level is going to be difficult to understand intellectually 
Once in desperation to explain something, the supercelestial 
entity played a movie. It said, “it is like this.” All it was the 
image of a bird landing on a river. That was the form, which 
intellectually had no meaning; it arrived with a wave of feeling 
and understanding, which still shakes me 15 years later. 


NICK FARRELL 329 


2. Ifa being tells vou that you are important it is not your Higlier 
Genius; it is likely to be your Lower Self. The same thing applies if 
something tells you that you are destined to be a great prophet 
or found a new religion. When I first entered a Higher Genius 
state, I asked, “what do you want me to do?" hoping to get some 
specific life direction. I got two words “live” and “experience.” 
Sure, you can make a religion around those two words, and you 
would be missing the point. 

3. You may not get a message, visions, or any astral fireworks. What 
you should receive is a presence which brings with it those effects. 


ACTIVATION OF DIVINE 
LOVE 


One of the most notable features of 
the divine self is love. Romantic love 
isa shadow of the sort of love which 
is needed in this operation. The 
ancient Greeks saw erotic 
a form of madness. In the E 
Socrates savs that although this 
iness can be an illness. it can 
be the source of man's greatest 


is 


blessings 

Socrates listed four types 
of ‘divine madness.” There was a 
prophecy trom Apollo, holy pravers 
ind mystic rites from Dionysus and 
Muse-inspired poetry. However 


the highest form ot madness was 
love from Aphrodite and Eros. This sort of love arises from seeing 
the carth’s beauty and remembering the true and universal harmony. 
He said that most earthly souls are so corrupted by the body 
that they lose all memory of the universal beauty. When their eyes 
fall upon the beauty of the earth, they are merely given over to 
pleasure. 
When love becomes spiritual and “Platonic,” it helps the soul 
as it gazes upon the universe as a lover looks into the eyes of his 
beloved and reverence it. 


“The parts of the soul out of which the wings grew, and which 
had hitherto been closed and rigid, begin to melt open, and small 
wings begin to swell and grow from the root upwards.” 


330 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Symposium, Socrates argues that love must not be confused with the 
Object of love, which, in contrast to love itself, is perfectly beautiful 
and good. A person who understands this is not a god but an angel 
who intermediates between gods and men. 


“As such, he is neither mortal nor immortal, neither 
ignorant, but a lover of wisdom (philosophos, yizdcoyos). 


The PGM contains a ritual initiation into this concept called the 
Sword of Dardanos. The spell has been twisted into a love spell 
which “immediately bends and attracts the soul of whomever you 
wish.” While there is no doubt that while it could have such a use, 
it is a sledgehammer to crack a nut as the imagery is cosmic rather 
than individual. 

The rite requires the use of a magical image of Aphrodite as 
a dove. Above her head is writing “ACHMAGE RARPEPSEE 
(AXMATE PAPTIIE'VEI)." Below are Psyche and Eros embracing 
one another and beneath Eros's feet these letters: "SSSSSSSS 
and beneath Psyche's 
:EEEEEEE (HHHHHHHH).” 
The image is then of the Goddess 
d oí Love acting as the H 


ther Genius 
tting the 
person's Psyche on fire with the result 
that Psyche and Eros unite. The image 
described is different from the legend 
of Psyche and Eros as it was written in 
Metamorphoses in the 2nd century AD by 
Lucius Apuleius Madaurensis, The lirst 
image is not part of the myth (where 
Eros never burns Psyche, but it is her 
2| fire which reveals him). Both images 
are implied in Rider-Waite Lovers Tarot 
card with the Angel above being Venus 
with flames of desire (encoded in the 
symbol of the Sun) radiating, from 
her with Eros and Psyche below. The 
Christian Waite would never show Adam (Eros) and Eve (Psyche) 
embracing, but he would have been aware ot the Golden Dawn 
association of a different part of the myth to this tarot card. 


After making the image, invoke Eros: 


NICK FARRELL 331 


Icall upon you, author of all creation, who spread your wings over 
the whole world, you, the unapproachable and unmeasurable, 
who breathe into every soul life-giving reasoning. You who 
fitted all things together by your power, first-born, founder of the 
universe, golden-winged, whose light is darkness, who shroud 
reasonable thoughts and breathe forth dark frenzy, clandestine 
one who secretly inhabits every soul. You engender an unseen 
fire as you carry off every living thing without growing weary 
of torturing it, having with pleasure delighted in pain from the 

time when the world came into being. You come and bring pain, 
which is sometimes reasonable, sometimes irrational, because of 
whom men dare beyond what is fitting and take refuge in your 
light which is darkness. Most headstrong, lawless, implacable, 
inexorable, invisible, bodiless, generator of frenzy, archer, torch- 
carrier, master of all living sensation and of everything clandestine, 
dispenser of forgetfulness, creator of silence, through whom the 

light and to whom the light travels, infantile when you have been 

engendered within the heart, wisest when you have succeeded, 


I call upon you who is unmoved by prayer, by your great name: 
AZARACHTHARAZA LATHA EEATHAL Y Y Y LATHAEE ATHA 
LLALAPH OIOIO AI AL Al* OOEREEEF OEEAEE LEGETA 
RAMAEE AMA RATAGEL, (^ PAXOAPAZA AAQA IAOAA YYY 
AAOAT AOAAAAAAO IOIOIO AL ALALATOYEPIEY OIAÍAETETA 
PAMAT AMA PATAFEA) 


First-shi 


g. night-shining, night rejoicing, night-engendering, witness. 
FROFEREESEETHPH'E ARARACHARARA *EPHTHEESIK'ERE 
EFAVEZEVYTH FFAW 

(EPHKIZIOQH APAPANAPAPA HDOXIKHPE IABEZEBYO IQ) 


You in the deep: VREEAMVRAW VEREEAMVEVAW 
(BPIAMBPQ BEPIAMBEBO), 


You in the sea, MERMERGOO (MEPMEPTOY). 


Clandestine and wise, ACHAPA ADAWNE-E VASMA 

CHARAKAW FEAKAWV EEAAW CHAROO'ER AROO'ER 

LAEELAM SEMESEELAM SOOMARTA MARVA KARVA 

MENAVAWTH 'E-EE-EE-A 

AIE BAZMA XAPAKO IAKOB IAQ XAPOYHP 
AAIAAM XZEMEXIAAM ZOYMAPTA MAPBA KAPBA 

MENAB2OO HIIA). 


* Betz has the ^AI" three times while some other writers have it four times. 


332 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The next phase is to involve the soul of the person you want to fall in love 


with you, but the following invocation turns the intention towards your 
higher. 


Burn me, oh Eros, oh Demon of Venus, so that I might love my 
Higher Genius and attract it to my conscious mind. 
Love creates order from chaos. 


By love we are united and separate we have become lost. Awaken 
to me the passion and desire so that we shall be mystically 
married. Awake this to me as I chant your great name born by the 
Archangels* of the Holy Triad MICHAEL, GABRIEL, RAPHIEL, 
URIEL, CAMAEL, JOPHIEL, ZADKIEL 

NEPHERIERI (for seven minutes) 


I summon the immortal and infallible strength and love of God. I 
submit my soul to Divine love. 


Chant NEPHERIERI (seven times) while imagining Venus above 
and Eros flying from her and touching you with a torch. You shor 
yourself on fire with love and passion. It brings pain and desire but much 
more. You should see Venus descend and merge with you. Allow plenty of 
time to meditate on this, 


THE THREE DAYS OF PREPARATION 


In the three days leading up to the retreat, you should restrict vour 
activities considerably and avoid contact with others at all. At this 
point, it does not matter if you have to talk to people vou hive with 
but even this should be limited. You should sleep separately and 
abstain from sex. You should drink only water and certainly noteat 
heavily. 
After you have done your Divine Love ritual, you should add 
the following invocation. 
“I call you, who is higher than all, the creator of all, you, the self- 
begotten who sees all but is unseen. You gave Helios the glory 
and the power, Selene the privilege to wax and wane and have 
fixed courses. You took nothing from the earlier-born darkness 


* The writer used corrupted names of Jewish archangels which 1 have 
clarified using the contemporary Pseudo-Dionysius. Ihe writer clearly 
wanted to raise the level of the ritual from the world of torm to the more 
abstract forms of Jewish archangels. Many modern pagans might consider 
this too Christian (something their ancient counterparts did not). If you 
wish to avoid this you can chant the seven vowels instead. 


NICK FARRELL 333 


but apportioned things so that they should be equal. When you 
appeared, order and light arose. All things are subject to you, 
whose true form none of the Gods can see. You change into all 
things, and yet you are invisible, Aion of Aion. 


I call you Lord, to appear unto me in good form, for under your 
orders I serve your angel, 


VEEATHEEARVAR VERVEER SCHEELATOOR 
VOOPHROOMTROM (BIAOIAPBAP BEPBIP EXIAATOYP 
BOY®POYMTPOM) , and your fear, DANOOPH CHRATOR 
VELVALEE VALVEETH EEAAW 

(AANOY® XPATOP BEABAAI BAABIO IAQ). 


Through you arose the celestial pole and the Earth. I call you Lord, as 
do the Gods who appeared under your order, that they may have power, 
ECHEVYKRAWM (EXEBYKPOM) of Helios, to whom belongs the 
glory, AAA EEF OOO III AAA 000 SAVAAWTH ARVATHEEAAW 
ZAGOOR'E (AAA HHH QQQ III AAA QQQ ZABAQO APBAOIAD 
ZAFVOYPH), the god ARATHY ADONE-E (APAOY AAQNAIE). 


I call you in the secret languages 

In ‘birdglyphic’, ARE (APAI); 

In hieroglyphic, ELAM (AAIAAM]; 

In Hebrew, ANOCH VEEATHEEARVATH — VERVEER 
ECHEELATOOR (ANOX BIAOIAPBAO BEPBIP EXIAATOYP) 
VOOPHOOLFROM (BOY@OYTPOM); in Egyptian, ALDAVAEEM 
(AAAABAEIM); 

In baboon, AVRASAX (ABP? 
In falcon, CHEE CHEE CHEE CHEE CHEE 
CHET CHEL TEEPH TEEPH TEEPH 
(XE XI XI XI XI XI XI TIP TI® TIG); 

In hieratic, MENEPHAL-FEPHAWTH CHA CHA CHA CHA CHA 
CHA CHA. (MENEDQIDQO XA XA XA XA XA XA XA)» 


Clap your hands three times. Say ‘pop pop pop’ 33 times and then 
take a deep breath and hiss, 


Serap 
Jiad “Come to me Lord, faultless and unflawed, 
who pollute no place, for I have been initiated into your Name.” 


CHAPTER NINE 
THE RETREAT 


he retreat begins at Sunrise on Friday and ends on Sunday 

night. During which there should be no contact with the 

outside world. Neither should vou speak other than to 

perform the invocations. You should also have sorted out 
your practice room and made sure it is cleaned thoroughly. 


FRIDAY 


Awaken 15 minutes before Sunrise wash and say the following 
Ancient Egyptian Temple purification prayer“: 


Oh Water may you remove all my impurities. 

Oh inundation, may you wash off my errant D:emons. 

May you wash the face of Apollo, may you rub the face of Typhon, 
May you wash the face of Persephone, may you rub the face of the 
spinners of fate, 

May you rub my face as I invoke my crown 

Loosened are my bonds through Apollo 

Opened are my bonds through Typhon 

My purity is the purity of God. 

I shall not fall on some evil obstacle. I am pure. 


Put on your white robe and go to the temple door. 
THE SPEECH BEFORE THE DOOR 


Walk to your temple room door and visualise Hermanubis standing 
before it and holding a sword. Say the following; to him 


Doorkeepers of the gateway, 

Secret Great Gods who separate the God in his chapel, 

Who strike upon his offering altar, 

Make way for me so that I can enter the holiest of places, 
ForlIamone of you, lam Serapis, and I have entered the underworld 
and risen with the Sun. 


* It comes from an unusual copy of the Book of the Dead which was tor a 
priestess in the Temple of Dendra see J.-Cl. Goyon, Confirmation du pouvoir 
royalau Nouvel An, BdE 52, Le Caire 1972 


NICK FARRELL 335 


Here me, for I am on the path of return. 
For I follow the Supereme Triad* 
Irespect the gods. 

Irespect my ancestors. 

Iam fair. 

Iknow what I have learnt. 

I understand what I have heard. 
Iknow myself . 


See Hermanubis stand aside and enter your temple. 
THE FIRST RITE 


The purpose of this rite is to kindle the flame of your Higher Self. For 
this you will need a large thick candle which 
will burn for at least. three days. On it vou 
should print your full name along it and the 
following words and symbols. 

At the top (near the wick) draw this 
symbol (left) of the Solar spirit? 

Then below it draw a snake 
with dyavodsainon (Agathos 
Daemon) and NNOANNGQAEKPO 
(NCHTHANCHTHAWLEKRO) 
ANOKAEP@POEPAL (ANOKLERFROERE) 
along itsbody. ANOKappearsinthe beginning. 
ot a lot of Magic Words and correspond to 
v Copite word meaning “1 AM." Homer 
scribes drpat as a Holy City belonging to Agamemnon. During 
the period that the ball was made it was famous for its temple of 
Poche and it had always been that way, Certainly “I am Fortune" 


makes sense in association with with Agathos Damon (Aya06g 
Natpon) 


Mony the length write the following: 
NAAEAEZBENBENBAQONOMAZOMOHP 
(ADANANVENVENVLAWTHNAWMAZOMO’'ER). 


Benben was one of the most potent symbols of ancient Egypt 
symbolizing the primeval mound and housed the spirit of the Sun 
god Ra. The word is ancient Egyptian. Adaxax (Ada§ag) might 


* What follows are some of the Delphic Maxims. 

+ Although this is the symbol for the Olympic Spirit of the Sun (Och) it also was used 
to represent Helios on ancient talismans, The most dramatic is found on the Magic Ball 
of Apollo found near the Theatre of Dionysus on the Acropolis. 


336 HELIOS UNBOUND 


be a fusion of the Greek words ADA (AAA) means "virgin" or 
“untouched” and AXAX (AZAZ) meaning “dry heat." Blawthnawm 
(BAQONOM)[but the word is blothnom] is Semitic, possibly 
corrupted Hebrew, the word appears to be connected to drving out 
through age although it could also bea root word for “lord. Azomo'er 
(AGoponp), Azo is “dry.” This would mean that the magic word is 
about Ra, the Lord of the Benben drying out the waters of creation 
in the Ancient Egyptian myth. This idea is to invoke the powers of 
your Higher Genius to bring about a new order for your life. 
Finally place these symbols on what is left of the candle. 


ava 


These are symbols associated with Helios Apollo. 

Draw an invoking pentagram at the candle and say, 

Creature of Wax I exorcise you in the name of Helios, so that you 
will be a perfect sacrifice to my Higher Genius and the light of your 
sacrifice will guide me to it. 

Purify the candle with water saying: 

Creature of Wax I purify you with water you in the name of Helios, 


so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to my Higher Genius and the 
light of your sacrifice will guide me to it. 


Place some laurel leaves on your burner and pass the candle through 
the smoke saying: 


Creature of Wax I consecrate you with fire you in the name of 
Helios, so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to my Higher Genius 
and the light of your sacrifice will guide me to it. 


Anoint the candle with Oil of Abramelin saying: 


Creature of Wax I anoint with the oil of the holy, setting you aside 
from the mundane. so that you will be a perfect sacrifice to my 
Higher Genius and the light of your sacrifice will guide me to it. 


Place the candle in the east. 


NICK FARRELL 337 
Say your morning prayer to Helios. 
Say the following praver seven times: 


Icall on thee who surround all things. I call in every language and 
in every dialect, as he first hymned thee, who was by thee appointed 
and entrusted with all authorities, Helios ACHEVYKRAWM 
(AXEBYKPQM), whose is the glory, AAA EEE OOO (AAA HHH 
QQQ) because he was glorified by thee, thou who set the winds in 
then places and then, likewise, the stars of glittering forms, and 
who, in divine light, created the Universe, 


EE EE EE AAA AW AW AW (III AAA QOO) in which thou hast set 
in order all things. 

SAVAAWTH, ARVATHEEAAW, ZAGOOR'E 

(XABAQO, APBAOIAQ, ZATOYPH) 

(These are the angels who first appeared.) 


ARAGA ARATH ADONE VAS'EM EEAAW 
(APATA APAO ANONAI BAXHM IAQ). 


I call thee Helios to reveal to me the secrets of the universe 
1 call thee by your ancient name LAEELAM (AATAAM), 
and in Hebrew by your own Name, 


ANAG VEFATHEEARVAR VERVEER SVHEE LA 
IOORVOOPHROOMIRAWM (36 letters); 
(ANAL BIAOIAPBAP BEPBI XXI AA TOYPBOYDPOYMTPOM) 


Come forth and show me creation. I kindle this flame. 


Sav. Behold that light which shines in the darkness, the lamp of 
Hermanubis which guides me to my true self. 


he LV N formula on the candle and meditate on the flame. 


I invoke You, the Greatest God, Eternal Lord, World Ruler, who 
are over the World and under the World, Mighty Ruler of the Sea, 
g at dawn, shining from the east for the whole world, setting 
in the west. 


Come to me, Thou who risest from the Four Winds, benevolent 
and lucky Agathos Daemon, for whom Heaven has become the 
Processional Way. I call upon Your Holy and Great and Hidden 
Names which You rejoice to hear. The Earth flourished when 

You shone forth, and the plants became fruitful when you laughed; 


338 HELIOS UNBOUND 


the animals begat their young when You permitted. 
Illuminate me this day with a vision from the Underworld 
which will show me the way to unite with my Higher Genius.. 


I invoke You, the greatest in Heaven, E'I LANCHYCH AKA RE'N 
BAL MISTHRE'N MARTA MATHATH LAILAM 

('e-ee Lan-chych A-ka-r'en Val Mees-thr/n mar-ta ma-thath la-ee- 
lam) 


(HI AANXYX AKAPHN BAA MIZOPHN MAPTA MA@AO 
AAÍAAM) 

MOUSOUTHI SIETHO' BATHABATHI IATMO'N ALEI 
IABATH ABAO'TH 

(Moo-soo-thee see-e-thaw va-tha-va-thee ee-at-mawn al-e-ee ee-a- 
vath A-va-awth) 


(MOYXOYOI XIEOO BAGOABAOI IATMON AAEÍ IABAO 
ABAOQO) 

SABAO'TH ADO'NAI 

(Sa-va-awth A-daw-na-ee) 


(EABAQO AAONAI), the Great God, 

JRSENOPHRE' ORGEATE'S TOTHORNATE'SA  KRITHI 
JIO'THI IADMO’ 

(Or-se-no-fr'e or-ge-a-t'es to-thor-na-t’e-sa kree-thee vee-aw-thec 
ee-a-dmaw) 

(OPZENO®PH OPTEATHE TOOOPNATHXA KPIOI BIQOI 
IAAMO) 

IATMO'MI METHIE'I LONCHOO' AKARE' BAI. MINTHRI 
BANE 


(Ee-at-maw-mee me-thee-'e-ee lon-cho-aw a-ka-r'e val meen-thr'e 
vane) 

(IATMQMI MEOIHI AONXOQ AKAPH BAA MINOPH BANE) 

BAINCHCHYCH CHOUPHRI NOTHEOUSITHRAI ARSIOUTH 
ERO'NERTHER, 

(Va-eech-chych choo-free no-the-oo-see thra-e¢ ar-se 
ner-ther) 

(BAIXXYX XOY@PPI NOGEOYXI OPAL APXIOYO FPQNEPOE?) 
You are the Shining Helios, giving light throughout the whole 
world. You are the Great Serpent, Leader of all the Gods, who 
control the Beginning of Egypt and the end of the whole inhabited 
world, who mate in the ocean. 


ooth e-raw- 


NICK FARRELL 339 


PSOI PHNOUTHI NINTHE'R 
(pso-ee fnoo-thee neen-th'er) 
(YO! PNOYOI NINGHP). 


You are He who becomes visible each day and sets in the northwest 
of Heaven, and rises in the southeast. 

You who have set at evening as an old man, who are over 
the world and under the world, Mighty Ruler of the Sea, hear 
my voice in this present day, in this night, in these holy hours, 
and illuminate me this day with a vision from the underworld 
Illuminate me this day with a vision from the underworld which 
will show me the way to unite with my Higher Genius. 


Please, Lord KME'PH LOUTHEOUTH OR PHOICHE 
ORTILIBECHOUCH. 

(Kmeef ^ Loo-the-oo-th Or — Fee-che — Or-tee-lee-ve-chooch) 
(KMH® AOYOEOYO OP MOIXE OPTIAIBEXOYX) 

IEPXE POYM ITIEPITAO YAT 

(Ee-er-Che Room Ee-pe-ree-ta-aq Y-a-ee) 


I conjure Earth and Heaven and Light and Darkness and th 
Great God who created All, |SA-ROO-SEEN) (ZAPOYEIN), You, 
Agathon Daimonion the Helper, to accomplish for me everything 
done by the Use of Vision. 

"The one Zeus is Serapis!" 


Hail Osiris, King of the Underworld, Lord of 
Burial, whose head is in Thinis, whose feet are 
in Thebes, the one who gives answer in Abydos 
and whose glory is in Pshilom. You are in the 
nub tree in Meroe, you are in the mountain of 
Pora Nous , you are upon my house forever. 
You whose face is the face of a hawk, whose 
tail is serpents and his back is that of a dragon. 
You have the hand of a man who is covered 
in the bandages of death and resurrection, You 
hold the palm staff of command. 

Hail IAHO SABAHO ATONAI MISTEMY 
IAYIY 

(EE-AR-HO SAR-BAH-HO Ah-TON-AI MIS. 
TEM-EE EE-AH-YAY-EE) 


Hail MICHAEL SABAEL, Hail Anubis in the 
nome of the dog faces, he to whom the Earth 


342 HELIOS UNBOUND 


After an hour or so the meditation will change direction. You 
will find yourself in a landscape and before you will be a Demon 
of Typhon. It will guide you through images which are associated 
with your weaknesses. They could be scary fragmented dreams. 
In death you must face your inner demons. What Typhon reveals, 
you can stand and can destroy. You can ask your guide to help you 
obliterate each complex or situation or show you how to deal with 
it. Take your time over this. It will be time to stand up only when 
you have a vision of a sea falcon flying down and striking you on the 
body with its wings. 

Slowly arise and put on your white robes burn frankincense on 
a censer while saying this: 


Mighty Typhon have been attached to your holy form. I have been 
given power by your holy name. I have acquired your emanation 
of the goods, Lord, god of gods, master, Demon. 


AOO@OYIN GOYOOYI TAYANTI AAQ AIITATO , 
AThThOUIN ThOUThOUI TAUANTI LAO  APTATO. 


Now considering what the Demon of Typhon showed you, visualise 
each weakness that was presented to you and visualise it as a living 
being which has weakened your life. 

Say to it: 

In the name of the Hekate who is below the seven, who is within 
the seven. In the name lao Sabaoth may your power issue forth 
from me and drive away this Demon which is in me, I adjure 
you, Daemon , whoever you are, by this god Sabarbarbathioth 
Sabarbarbathiouth Sababarbathioneht Sabarbarbaphai 


(ZABAPBAPBAOIQO LABAP BAPBAOIOYO 
XABAPBAPBAOIONHO XABAPBAPBA«DAI), 
SA-VAR-VAR-VA-THEE-AWTH SA-VAR- VARVA-THEEOOTH 
SA-VAR-VA-THEE-AW-N’ETH SA-VAR-VAR-V A-FA-EF). 
Come out, demon, whoever you are, and stay away from me, 
hurry, hurry, now, now, Come out, Dæmon , since I bind you with 
unbreakable adamantine fetters, and I deliver you into the black 
chaos in perdition. 


See the image being cast from your Sphere of Sensation. Do this for 
each thing that the Demon of Typhon showed you. When vou have 
finished, perform your confession and then a lesser banishing ritual 
of the pentagram and purify and consecrate. 


NICK FARRELL 343 


Having done this, meditate on it until noon. If you find yourself 
unable to meditate further and have time write down your 
experiences and realisations. 


Noon: 
Perform the Noon prayer followed by the solar breath. 


NIGHT 


Perform the Lesser Ritual of tle Pentagram and then the night time 
prayer to Helios. Then: 


PATHWORKING INTO LANDS OF THE NIGHT 


The purpose of this pathworking is to enter the underworld, 
experience the Dæmon which might be there and have the first 
division of your Higher Genius. It is based on the ancient Egyptian 
Book of Breathing and takes you through the 12 hours of night. Thy 

imagery shows a Greek influence - especially the influence of Hel 

as the ruler of the sub-lunar world. While Hades and Serapis ar i 
kings of the underworld, thev are a subset of her*, 

In an ideal world you would start doing the pathworki 
the setting Sun. You would then take one hour for each sectior. 
is too much to expect a person who has technically six months oi 
mapical experience to be able to manage such a long pathworking 
at night. As it is there would be a danger of falling asleep and never 
completing the pathworking. 

I would si est recording the pathworking and playing it back 
while you listen, You can turn it off to allow 10 to 15 minutes to 
explore cach stage ot the pathworking you can set your alarm to 
prevent vou from falling asleep. 

Each stage of all gates will introduce you to the Demon that 
rules that part of the underworld. There will be a certain amount 
of testing, of your personality. The Dæmon might want you to 
understand something that you would otherwise have repressed. 
This is important because it will be something that prevents you 
from making a good solid connection with your Higher Genius. You 
should not tear these Damons if they will work to help you beyond 
whatever limitations you have set yourself, However, it is important 


* This pathworking is syncretic and parts of it are based on my own 
visionary experience of the particularly inner landscape. 


344 HELIOS UNBOUND 


to realise that they are not psychological functions but very real 
spiritual forces deep within the unconscious mind. This pathworking 
supplies a processing of a person's life up to this point and follows 
Greco-Egyptian approaches to the afterlife. It is important that you 
take your time and think hard about the challenges that these forces 
give you. 

THE PATHWORKING 


Perform the following invocation to Selene-Hekate as the Goddess 
of the Underworld. 


Icall upon you, Mistress of the World, ruler of the cosmic system, 
powerful goddess, gracious daemon, Lady of Night, who travels 
through the air, 


PHEROPHOIRÉ ANATHRA RECTHRA 
(@EPE®OPH ANAOPA OYOPA) 


Help me this night as I enter your kingdom with the setting Sun. 
Open the ways for me that I might not get lost in the underworld 
and might awaken my Higher Genius within the deepest recesses 
of myself. 


Heed your sacred symbols and give a rustling sound and give a 
sacred angel or a holy assistant who serves this very night, in this 
very hour, PROKYNE BAUBO PHOBEIUS MEHE to help me find 
my Higher Genius in your kingdom. 


Lie down and play pathworking tape: 
FIRST HOUR 


You stand facing the west toward the setting, Sun. Before you is the 
desert and to your right hand is the god Hermanubis. He holds in 
his left hand the ankh cross and, in his right, a winged caduceus 

“Know this," he says. "You are about to enter into the lands of 
the dead in what will be a trial for vou. You have experienced many 
deaths in your life and each one has led to a new awakening, This is 
no different, but you will find it harder... Are you ready to proceed?” 

You agree, and the scene changes. You are bound like a mummy 
strapped to a throne on a boat which hovers above the desert sands. 
You are aware of dark figures moving around the boat - preparing 
for its departure. 

Hermanubis stands in front of you, holding a large heliotrope 
flower. 


NICK FARRELL 345 

“This is symbolic of your life and personality,” Hermanubis says. “For 
the last six months, you have turned to follow Helios as he rode his chariot 
through the sky. Through repetition, you have tuned yourself to him, and 
now itis time to begin the dissolution of all that stands in the way. “ 

As he speaks the heliotrope bursts into flames and dissolves into 
dust. You feel your life force bleeding away. 

“The Sun has set. You are ashes. What you were is no longer. 
Who you were is irrelevant. You are the corpse of Serapis mourned 
by Black Isis sailing towards the west, toward the setting Sun. " 

The boat begins to move deep into the desert following Helios 
as he sets in the west. After a few moments, you see a range of hills 
as the boat floats towards it. In the centre of one of the hills is The 
Horn of the West. It is a colossal cave through which your boat sails. 

Images of your life flash by you. You acknowledge them, but 
they are passed. There is a song as if the gods of this realm are 
singing your praises. For you are the dying Sun and you are still 
very much in charge. 

You hear a voice of challenge. 

“Where are you?” 

You reply: ^L am in the Waters of Helios and the first realm of 
the underworld. 1 am the dying Sun who seeks his awakening as 
Helios, | am the magician in search of the Higher Genius." 

Betore vou emerges from the darkness and the waters, a vast 
armoured Gorgon, whose hair is all snakes. 

You cannot pass through the waters of the underworld unless 
you can tell me my name,” she says. 

You reply 


Smashiny the toreheads of Helios enemies" is your name. You 
are MENEBAIN the tirst goddess of the hour of the night. You are 
my defender and puide. 

"Open vour pates tor me. Open wide your gateways for me. 

Mluminate tor me what I have made. I commended you to my 
corpse. 

Guide me as | enter the underworld. For I am the creator lost in 
his creation. 

I made a soul and set myself under the spinners of destiny. 

| created you for my magic power. 

1 have come that | may greet myself with myself. 

Let my limbs breathe when they rise. 

l exterminate him who acts against it. 


I am the foremost of the Westerners and cause my image to 
breathe." 


346 HELIOS UNBOUND 


You are aware that the boat is full of Baboons - Daemons of 
Thoth-Hermes. 

MENEBAIN tells you that these are the images by which you 
have lived your life so far. Each baboon is a word within your Sphere 
of Sensation which dictates your life. These need to be examined to 
see if they are relevant. For even at the earliest part of this quest, a 
new person is being formed. 

Now it is time to pause and review each of these images with 
MENEBAIN’s help. 

(pause) 


SECOND HOUR 
The boat sails on. You hear a voice of challenge. 
“Where are you?" 

“I am in the Place of the Soul of the underworld and the 
second realm of the underworld. I am the dying Sun who seeks 
his awakening as Helios. | am the magician in search of the Higher 
Genius." 

A vast armoured coiled snake emerges from the darkness and 
the water. Everything goes quiet. 

"You cannot enter the Place of the Souls of the Underworld 
unless you can tell me my name,” she says. 

You reply: 

"The wise who protects her master" is your name, You are 
NEBUN (NEBOYN) the goddess of the second hour of the miht 
and you are a defender and guide to me. 

Lining the river are the gods. They are here to see your tadiny, 
ht. Around you are the shells of the dead. They are the workers 
Wernes and the souls of the underworld who are here to receive 

«e food from your boat. You know their names tor you have lived 
amongst them; shone down on them. You have awarded them fields 
in the afterlife. They sing to vou: 

“O appear, great soul. The underworld has received the fesh 
belonging to heaven. You are now living, flesh and the Earth is 
protected for You. Come indeed, Helios, that You live in vour name 
of “Living One.” You traverse the fields, protector. You bind the 
serpent of Chaos (Xo), and You strike “Horrible of Face”. Joy and 
jubilation are in the Earth to (You) who reveals his corpse. Shine, 
great illuminator. Be radiant, uraeus-serpent on the head ot Helios. 
Drive away the darkness in the hidden realm in your name “He who 
chases him away with the secret arm". Illuminate thick darkness, 
that the flesh may live and be renewed by it. ^ 


NICK FARRELL 347 


The light around you glows brightly and casts light into the 
darkness of this place. It lights up the underworld with a warm. 
fluorescence. 

You feel at peace and calm. NEBUN tells you that in this place, 
the dead are at peace. Here are shades of your ancestors and those 
in your life who have already died. There are some here who wish 
to talk to you to process those things which were not dealt with 
life that can be dealt with now. These dead are now bought before 
you so that you can talk. 


THIRD HOUR 
The boat sails on and you find yourself in a canal lined on both 
sides by beautiful temples to the various gods. You see shades of 
the dead moving within these temples. You can also make out that 
these temples have the divine presence within them. This part of 
the underworld is where those who were devout meet their gods, 
For many devout shades. this is heaven. The shades of the heroes 
who loved the gods and were loved by them. 

You hear a voice of challenge. 

Where are you? 

1am in the Place of the Water of the Unique Master, whic 
brings forth offerings and in the third realm of the underworld, 
am the dying Sun who seeks his awakening as Helios. 1 am the 
m n in search of the Higher Genius. 

Betore vou. another armoured woman emerges from the 
darkness and the waters. 

You cannot enter the Place of the Water of the Unique Master, 
which brings forth otterings unless vou can tell me my name. 

She who cuts Souls is your name. You are LEMNEL 
CMIMNED the goddess ot the third hour of the night, and you are 
a defender and puide to me 


The gods ot the underworld surround your boat. They sing 
lo vou, 

Come to us, vou whose flesh is being towed, and who is 
guided by his own body, interpreter of the underworld, Lord of 
Breath, whose body speaks, who supports his life. 

Your soul appears, and your power flourishes. 

The sky belongs to your soul, the Earth to your corpse. The 
unique one rises for You, 

Alone at the two-ropes which the jackals moor. 

The arms of the Westerners receive You in your protected 
form of ‘Old Man’. 


348 HELIOS UNBOUND 


How beautiful is it, that the Westerners can see. 

How satisfying it is, when those of the Underworld can hear 
Serapis, when he sets in the West, when his light is put into the 
region of dark images. 

Come indeed to us, Helios of the horizon, gold beetle, seed of 
the gods. You sail by the banks of the underworld. You traverse 
your hidden fields, and you make transformations in Earth. " 

You are aware that you are fragmented. Instead of one boat, you 
are shining weakly on four. You feel fragmented and out of focus. It 
is as if you want to fall asleep. 

LEMNEI (AHMNEI) (L'EM-NEE) speaks to vou: “this place 
contains the images of what you offered others in your life. It is the 
place where you can see how much difference it made the universe. 
Here you meet your perception of God, however obscure it might be. 
Here is made an offering to you. Allow these images to come before 
you so that you might understand them." 


FOURTH HOUR 
The boat sails on. Now you are aware, through the fading in and 
out of your vision, that you are in a cavern and rooted in the world 
of dreams. Here you start to become aware of how close you are to 
the God Chaos and how difficult it is to hold together any sense of 
order. Chaos is not evil, but all you know depends on order. As the 
Sun gets weaker, Chaos is more likely to assert itself. The Egyptians 
considered the state of chaos the end of all things and equated it 
to the most terrible of gods, Apophis, and they feared that one day 
he serpent of chaos would swallow the Sun, and all would fall into 
haos from which it sprang. 

You hear a voice of challenge. 

“Where are you?” 

“Tam in the cavern with living forms. | have passed through the 
Gate of That which Hides the Towing, I am in the fourth realm of the 
underworld. I am the dying Sun who seeks his awakening, as Helios. 
Iam the magician in search of the Higher Genius.” 

From the darkness and the waters emerges a huge armoured 
woman. She has in her hand a staff of dominion which has power 
over the creatures of the underworld. On her arm is a shield with a 
serpent shaped in the form of the North Node Q.. This shows the 
connection to Isis Renenutet, the great protector. 

You cannot enter this cavern with living forms unless you can 
tell me my name. 

MORMOTH (MOPMO6) “The Great One of Hades” is your 
name. You are “She who is mighty in her power.” You are the 


NICK FARRELL 349 


goddess of the fourth hour of the night, and you are a defender and 
guide to me. 

Lying back in your boat, vou see that it is being towed through 
a vast dry cavern of sand. Your boat transforms into a huge snake 
which sails through the cavern. You can see the people on the boat 
move around you, and they appear to be caring for you. But you 
are invisible to them. Thev continue to care for you out of habit, 
knowing that one day you will be reborn. 

You raise vour hand weakly. In it, vou are holding a serpent 
wand. Snakes rise and fall in the narrow water, and you are aware 
that the river has become dangerous. 

MORMOTH says vou: "These paths here are in confusion. 
Everv one of them is opposed to one another. Those who know 
them who will find their paths. Thev are as high as the flint walls of 
Memphis, which are on water and land." 

As vou sail, vou find huge knives block your way and chop the 
path into different ways, There is no right path, just your path, but 
it is possible for vou to choose the wrong one. As each new path 
opens you say the following spell 

lopen the path of the underworld that I may ease the suffering 
of Serapis. 
MORMOTH says to vou: “For the light of Serapis is hidden in 
ness with fire about it. 1t tell from him was lost in the desert 
sand. And now it has been placed within the dark place." 

The stress ot all this has caused vou to be awake. You realise 
it vou have become black and without any solar power. You 
v that vou are sate and protected bv MORMOTH (MOPMO6). 
But vou also know that vou are close to the merging with chaos. 


FIFTH HOUR 

The boat sails on. In vour weakness you are starting to feel an 

awareness of a dark but not untriendly presence. You become aware 

of the various aspects of vour life as a story made from threads of 
destiny that you decided at a point before you were born. You feel 

that cord in your lett hand. This was vour old story of everything that 
is passed up until this moment. The last six months are woven into 

the final stages of that rope and now instinctively you know it is time 

to letit go. Your story has carried you to this point, and now itis time 
Jor à new story. Sure, it will contain elements of the old one. But the 
central theme of your future life will not be represented by your back 
story. Think about the things that make you hold on to that thread. 
Are there people you think you will lose? Have you hung on to a 
career because you fear to rely on your skills? Are there people who 


350 HELIOS UNBOUND 


are of no use to you who you hang onto out of fear of being alone? At 
this point, where order and chaos are balanced, it is time to let go of 
all the things you no longer need or want. When you are ready to let 
go of the rope in your left hand, you will then become aware of the 
rope in your right hand, which is slowly beginning to form. A new 
Story free from the limits of your past. 

You hear a voice of challenge. 

“Where are you?" 

"I am in the Cavern of the West. I have passed through the gate 
of the "station of the god”.” I am in the fifth realm of the underworld. 
Iam the dying Sun who seeks his awakening as Helios. | am the 
magician in search of the Higher Genius." 

From the darkness emerges an armoured woman. She has three 
heads, and she holds the tools of a weaver. 

You cannot enter Cavern of the West unless you can tell me my 
name. 

“She who Guides in her Bark" is your name. You are NUPHIER 
(NOY®IHP) (NOO-FEE-'ER), and vou are the goddess of the fifth 
hour of the night, and you are a defender and guide to me. 

"[n the greatest darkness of Chaos, fate and destiny are formed," 
NUPHIER says: “The ancient Egyptians considered this place the 
temple of the invisible god Sokar. He was the god of death and 
oblivion. He was more ancient than Hades, and he sleeps within the 
heart of Serapis. 

You are now travelling on the secret way, the way of destruction 
and Typhon. It is the darkest winter, the coldest death, betore vou 
notice that the cavern has taken on a reddish glow tlickeriny darkly 

Before you, it opens out into a lake of fire; You can see burning, 
in the flames millions of souls. This is the basis behind the Christian 
concept of hell. 

NUPHIER says: “the ancient Egyptians said the Lake of Fire 
was a fiery punishment for the damned but cryptically added that 
the blessed dead drink from it as if it were icy water. These fires 
are the alchemical fires of transformation and regeneration. You are 
about to regenerate entirely in the deepest layers of the underworld, 
in the thick darkness of the sinister land of Sokar so that vou can 
awaken to a new destiny. 

The flames engulf the boat, burning everything, mortal, but since 
the boat and its passengers are gods the flames do no damage. The 
fire causes your sphere to tingle, but vou are aware at à profound 
level something is burned away from you. 

NUPHIER says: "I am a Daemon of the forces of fate. I grant you 


NICK FARRELL 351 


this vision of what you will become. " 

You have the flash of an image of a golden child with the face 
ofa lion. 

The gods sing their magic. 

“This image is like this in the thick darkness. The cavern 
belonging to Sokar is illuminated by the two eyes of the heads of 
the great god serpent. His two feet shine in the coils of the great God 
while he protects his image. 

A noise is heard in this cave after this great God has passed by 
them, like the thundering ground of the sky ina storm.” 

You are aware that the bark is protected by the Uraeus snake, 
which guarantees the endurance of your rule. It rears up to strike 
with fire any of your enemies. This cobra-goddess was also called 

^Wadjet." 


SIXTH HOUR 
The boat sails on. You hear a voice of challenge. 

"Where are vou? 

“Lam at the depths, in waterhole of the Underworld. The name 
of this Cavern is West. I have passed through the Gate of the “sharp 
knives." L am in the Sixth realm of the Underworld. I am the dying 
Sun who seeks his awakening as Helios. | am the magician in search 
of the Higher Genius. 

A huge armoured woman with the head of a crocodile appears 
trom the darkness and the waters. 

You cannot enter Cavern of West unless you can tell me my 
name 

She who arrives is your name. You are KHORBORBATH 
(NOPBOPBAQ) (CHOR-VOR-VATH) the "Arrival that shows 
the right way. You are the sixth hour of the night, and you are a 
defender and guide to me. 

This cavern is dark. The dark in which the universe was born. 
All around you are the waters of Nun, the primordial ocean. It is the 
waters of potentiality which hold regenerative powers heated by the 
fires vou lit in the earlier cavern. 

You are now the corpse of Serapis, you are the dead heliotrope 
plant in the clay. Unable to move or feel. 

The gods of this Cavern sing their spells 

"This great God travels in this region on the water. He rows 
through this field to the place of the corpse of Serapis. This great 
God addresses the gods who are in the fields. He moors at these 
mysterious tombs which contain the image of Serapis. This God 


352 HELIOS UNBOUND 


calls out above these mysterious tombs, and it is his voice which 
this God hears. Then he passes on after he has called out.” 

You are back in time to the beginning, before creation was 
formed. In the darkness, you see the god Thoth. He is forming a 
word. It is the word of creation, a world of destiny, and it is the word 
of your primal idea. It awakens within your corpse vour True Soul, 
your fiery and solar self. The word is: 

HELIOROS 
As the name is vibrated, the infinite darkness creates the form of a 
new soul and a new life. It lightens the chamber. You see the form 
hovering above you. It is an image of a serpent eating his tail. The 
gods sing the spell. 

“This is the body of Helios as his flesh. ‘Many Faces’ guards him. 
His tail is in his mouth; he is stretched out beneath this image of the 
body of Helios. All the gods of the Underworld come to him without 
him going to any other place in the Underworld and lend him their 
power. The voice of Helios is what comes to the image." 

Within the serpent is formed a young man with the face of a 
golden lion. The eyes of the lion are like Suns, and his mane is of fire. 
He has in his right hand a whip which he uses to shape the universe, 
and in his left, he holds the globe of the world. He is the ruler and 
the shaper. He turns to lie on his back and sinks slowly into vou. 

You have within you an image of the universe, of the underworld 
and Re. You are reborn from the holy waters of Nun, from the first 
time, deep in the darkness of the underworld. You are the tery 
'Atum-Kheperer" and Helioros, 


SEVENTH HOUR 
The boat moves on. You hear a voice of challenge 

“Where are you?" 

“Tam in the Mysterious Cavern, I have passed through the Gate 
of Serapis. | am in the seventh realm of the underworld. Lam Helios 
awakening in the body of the magician. Iam the magician in search 
of the Higher Genius.” 

From the darkness and the waters, a vast serpent emerges She 
speaks with the voice of a woman. 

You cannot enter Mysterious Cavern unless you can tell me my 
name. 

"She who repels the gangs of Seth" is vour name. You are 
ORBEETH (OPBEHO) “She who repels the Evil One and slaughters 

‘Horrible of Face". You are the goddess of the seventh hour of the 
night, and you are a defender and guide to me. 


NICK FARRELL 353 


ORBEETH coils around you and protects the boat. 

The boat is in a sea of darkness. The only light comes from your 
glow. There are things in the darkness. You can hear something 
massive, moving, like a trillion scales rubbing on each other. The 
Wamemty-serpent spits a tongue of fire and then rearing before the 
boat is the colossal serpent of Chaos Apep. 

His mouth opens and becomes a black hole, sucking in the river 
and drawing all matter into his jaws. 

The gods spring to attention. Isis and Thoth are on the prow of 
the boat casting magic at Apep. The Wamemty-serpent spits fire at 
the snake. All this magic binds the snake, and it snaps its jaws shut. 
Typhon hurls his spear at it, and it falls back wounded. 

You are transformed into a giant cat. You are the god Mau. 
Bigger than the serpent vou stride towards it with a giant knife in 
your hands and slice it into many pieces. The pieces writhe and twist 
and then sink into the darkness of Nun. 

You return to your bark and shapeshift into Helios. The light 
Shines in the darkness because the darkness could not overcome it. 


EIGHTH HOUR 

The boat moves on. This symbolises that, with the defeat of Apophis 
in the previous hour, Chaos is left behind and the order of creation 
has been reinstated. You are starting to feel your powers return, and 
You can now stand. About vou, vou see gods moving and starting to 
use their powers to bring about a new creation or, more specifically 
in this instance, re-creation, 

You hear a voice et challenge 

Where are vou? 

I am at the “Sarcophagus of her gods”, | have passed through 
the Gate of “Standing without getting tired". I am in the eighth 
realm ot the underworld. | am Helios awakening in the body of the 
mapician. Lam the magician in search of the Higher Genius.” 

Botore you. huge armoured woman emerges from the darkness 
and the waters 

You cannot enter “Sarcophagus of her gods" unless you can tell 
me my name 

She ot the midnight” or "Mistress of the deep night" is your 
name. You are PANMOTH (FIANMQ®9) (PAN-MAWTH) You are 
the goddess of the eighth hour of the night, and you are a defender 
and guide to me. 

You see before you that the boat is being towed through the 


354 HELIOS UNBOUND 


night's sky. In front is the god Apis and behind him come the Fiery 
Serpents, On the ship are Typhon, Horus, Isis, Thoth and legions of 
the followers. There are righteous ancestors and souls and magicians. 
The universe is pulling you into manifestation and power. You raise 
your arms, and they are all transformed by your light. They have new 
clothes, and their powers are refreshed as yours have been. In this 
place, everything receives its power for the day from Helios. 


NINETH HOUR 
The boat moves on. You hear a voice of challenge. 
“Where are you?" 

“I am at the "Place where the Images Flow". I have passed 
through the Gate of "Guardian of the flood". I am in the ninth 
realm of the underworld. I am Helios awakening in the body of the 
magician. I am the magician in search of the Higher Genius.” 

Before you from the darkness and the waters appears a huge 
woman in armour made from seashells. She is dressed in gold and 
pale white light, and she has blue butterfly wings. 

You cannot enter “Place where the Images Flow” unless you 
can tell me my name. 

“Protector of her eye” is your name. You are THYMENPHRI 
(©YMEN®@PI) (THY-MEN-FREE) “She who adores and protects her 
Lord". You are the goddess of the ninth hour of the night, and you 
ire a defender and guide to me. 

There is a new determination. You now have twelve oarsmen 
and a new power to journey through the underworld. You are 
lighting up the whole underworld now. The gods are distributiny: 
food to the dead, and you have the feeling, of à seed which is burst 
into the Sunlight for the first time, You notice flying, above the boat 
isa star. You ask THYMENPHRI who it is, and she says: 

“All ideas are born at this hour. This is the idea of vou being, 
connected and working with your Higher Genius. It is the united 
spirit of what is to come, and your power to manifest mapie in the 
realm of the living. Here it is an idea, becoming, born deep inside 
your unconscious, but it is due to happen in another place and time, 
for itis an idea which may not dwell in the land of niyht. 

Around you see Thoth's baboons once more, creating, more 
images of what will become in the coming, day. 


TENTH HOUR 
The boat moves on, and you are transformed into a hawk-headed 
snake. Above you is the scarab of regeneration. 


NICK FARRELL 355 


You hear a voice of challenge. 

“Where are you?" 

“Iam at the “With deep water and high banks". I have passed 
through the Gate of Great Manifestations, giving birth to forms". I 
am in the tenth realm of the underworld. I am Helios awakening in 
the body of the magician. I am the magician in search of the Higher 
Genius.” 

Before you from the darkness and the waters emerges a huge 
armoured woman. She has the face of a lioness. 

You cannot enter “With deep water and high banks” unless you 
can tell me my name. 

“She who rages” is your name. You are SARNOCKOIBAL 
(EAPNOXOIBAA) (SAR-NO-CHEE-VAL) You are the goddess of 
the tenth hour of the night, and vou are a defender and guide to me. 

SARNOKHOIBAL stands before vou, and she holds in her hand 
a caduceus. He places it on your left eve, and it is regenerated. This 
is symbolic of your magical power. She then touches your right eye 
so that it too is completely restored. 

She says: “Your eyes are the givers of forms and you place them 
in the sky and the world of the living. You are the creator; you ar’ 
the form maker.” 

You look up, and vou see the star still following you. Ir 
centre is a lion-headed god holding a whip and a globe, You rec 
that it is an embodiment of your power and that of something el: 

The Gods sing to vou: 

They are like this in the Underworld as forms and shapes of 
Khepri when he carries his oval to this place to go forth afterwards 
to the eastern horizon of the sky. 


ELEVENTH HOUR 

The boat moves on. You are teeling now fully restored and ready for 
your new lite; but vou lack focus. Images come and go; they have 
emeryed trom the chaotic sea but lack any central coordination. You 
realise that the act of creation is bringing about Order. Chaos is too 
abstract to be usetul. It is helpful to know that these things are going 
on behind what we do even if we do not need to be entirely aware of 
it Chaos is not just the infinity of the universe; itis also beyond time 
and space. God betore anything we can understand as God. 

This cavern is where, ultimately, all human memories end up. 
Swimminy in a sea of Chaos in God's unconscious. The divine part 
has returned to its awakened conscious. Swimming in this chaotic 
memory will be parts of the entire memory of nature, of every 


356 HELIOS UNBOUND 


human, each atom which has ended its story - resting for eternity 
while the universe's true self understands others. 

You hear a voice of challenge. 

"Where are you?" 

"Iam at the "Mouth of the cavern which examines the corpses". 
I have passed through the Gate of "Resting place of those of the 
Underworld". I am in the eleventh realm of the underworld. I am 
Helios awakening in the body of the magician. I am the magician in 
search of the Higher Genius.” 

Before you from the darkness and the waters emerges a huge 
armoured woman. 

You cannot enter “Mouth of the cavern which examines the 
corpses” unless you can tell me my name. . 

"The starry one" is your name. You are BATHIABEL 
(BAOIABHA) (VA-THEE-A-V'EL) You are the starry lady of the 
boat, who repels the enemy when he appears. You are the goddess 
of the eleventh hour of the night, and vou are a defender and guide 
to me. 

BATHIABEL turns to you and gives you a crown and an ankh 
cross and says: 

“I give you control over the Aion. You are the Lord of Time.” 

The gods sing the spell: 

"Time swallows her images in front of the seer who is in this 
place. She gives them (back) afterwards for the birth of Khepri in 
the Earth. 

“Time is she who takes away the hours She is upon ‘He who 
takes away the hours’, What she has to do: To live through the voice 
of Re, day after day. She swallows her images at this place.” 

Thoth says: “At this place, the ideas for the new day take torm 
and are placed into time. The Sun has nearly risen, and in the 
morning, those ideas will be born in time.” 

A colossal serpent "World-encircler" is carried in front of the 
Sun boat in anticipation of the final rejuvenation of Helios. 

You notice that around you are countless burning, bodies. 
BATHIABEL tells you that these are the bodies of those ideas which 
do not survive the test of time. They are the followers of Ivphon 
which are destroyed every night so that they do not impede the 
ascent of Helios. 

The gods sing the spell that destroys them. 

You look up and the star, which is the assistant, is still following, 
the bark. It has survived the test of Time and will move on to 
manifestation. 


NICK FARRELL 357 


TWELFTH HOUR 
This is the last hour of your underworld journey, where Helios will 
emerge renewed and visible again to all. Around you, the colours of 
the dawn gather. They have become more fixed and stable. There is 
a feeling of anticipation. 

The boat moves on. You hear a voice of challenge. 

“Where are you?” 

“Tamat the "Place with emerging darkness and appearing births” 
in the Cavern of the End of thick darkness”. I have passed through 
the gate of "That which raises the gods". I am in the twelfth realm of 
the underworld. I am Helios awakening in the body of the magician. 
Iam the magician in search of the Higher Genius.” 

Before you, a huge armoured woman emerges from the darkness 
and the waters. You cannot enter “Place with emerging darkness 
and appearing births” in the Cavern of the End of thick darkness” 
unless you can tell me my name. 

“She who beholds the perfection of her Lord” is your name. You 
are ABRATHIABRI (ABPAOIABPI) (A-VRA-THEE-A-VREE) 

You are the goddess of the twelfth hour of the night, and you are 
a defender and guide to me. 

Although vou have your powers, you must leave what you wer 
in the underworld to be reborn. Part of vou lies back on the bark ana 
takes the form of the dead Serapis. You have freed yourself from 
it. and vou look back at your body with detachment. This was the 
total of what you were before vou began this journey, and now you 
feel vou are something different. Thank the old self. It is battered 
and decayed by the events that shaped it, but it carried you to this 
point where vour new selt will arise. Your solar self is liberated from 
the past, and vou see that the mighty world serpent has formed an 
ellipse above vour head. 

ABRATHIABRI takes you by the shoulders and lifts you 
through the serpent ellipse and into the sky. You hear the gods and 
goddesses sing their morning spells. 

We worship this great God at dawn when he rests in the eastern 
gateway of the shv. "Born is he, who is born, who has emerged, has 
emeryed venerated of the Earth, soul of the Lord of Heaven. The 
sky belongs to your soul that it may rest in it. The Earth belongs 
to vour corpse, Lord of Veneration. You have seized the horizon, 
that you may rest in your shrine, the two goddesses raise you with 
their bodies. Acclamation to you, the soul which is in heaven. The 


358 HELIOS UNBOUND 


beginning is light, and the end is thick darkness. The star flies with 
you, through the ellipse and into this time and place." 

Arise as your holy solar self to the dawn of a new day. Now you 
may meditate on your journey and allow yourself to sleep. 


SATURDAY 


MORNING 
EKKLESIA OF THE ARCHANGELS 


ABPAZLAX 


The Ekklesia was the assembly of a Greek city-state, and the function of 
this ritual is to create a similar a meeting of the seven Archangels in your 
Sphere of Sensation. This will help you ascend to your Higher Genius, You 
should make or copy the Ekkliesia seal. The Seal is a complex symbol 
which brings the forces we have been discussing into one place. 


NICK FARRELL 359 


Carefully draw the seal (or simply photocopy it) and sign your 
name in the centre of the pentagram. If you want to be a real drama 
queen, you can sign your name in blood, but the result will be the 
same. You are identifying the seal with you and your Sphere of 
Sensation. The next stage is to ritually awaken it. 

This ritual is performed in the morning of the second day of 
your retreat. After you have awoken and eaten something, perform 
your ritual ablutions and enter your sacred space. Place the signed 
seal on the altar and the three-day Higher Genius candle on it. 

Take a red, black, yellow and blue candle. Write the names of 
the four holy creature on the appropriate candle, and your name 
and place them in their correct positions. . : 

Paramara (earth) (Papapapa), (North) Zorothion (fire) 
(Zuruwyun), (South), Periton (water) (Perytun) (West)and Akramata 
(air) (Akramata), (East). 

Take seven white candles and write the name of each Archangel 
in Greek, along with the divine name and the Barbaric name of 
Power. So for Michael, vou would write Myan, AEHIOYO, Nvoto 
and Nox. Place each candle on the boundaries of your circle so that 
they match the position of the seal. 


1. Perform the lesser invoking ritual of the pentagram and the Less 
Banishing Ritual of the with the IAO formula) — 

2 Perform the Prima Materuil exercise. the solar breath extension an 
then the Genius Abiding exercise. 


3. Purity and consecrate the space. 
4. Do vour ritual to the Sun rising. 
>. Invoke Abrasas* 


ARNEBOUAT, BOLLOCH, BARBARICH, B, BAALSAMEN, 
PIIDAIOY, AR-NEBOUAT 


(APNEBOY AT BOA \OX BAPBAPIX B BAAAXAMEN IITIAAIOY 
\PNEBOYAT) 


(AR-NE-VOO-AT VOL-LOCH VAR-VAR-REECH V VA-AL-SA- 
M'EN PTEE-DE-OO AR-NE-VOO-AT 

Come to me, you from the four winds, ruler of all, who breathed 
spirit into men for life, whose is the hidden and unspeakable 
name, unutterable by human mouth, at whose name even the 


daemons are terrified when they hear it! You whose right eye is the 
Sun, 


* This is taken from PGM 13 760-790 


360 HELIOS UNBC 


ARNEBOUAT, BOLLOCH, BARBAK 
PTIDAIOY, AR-NEBOUT 


and left eye is the Moon 
ARSENPENPROOUTH BARBARAIONE C 


(APXENIIENIIPQOYO BAPBAPAIQNH OXPA 
(AR-SEN-PEN-PRAW-OOTH . VAR-VA-RE 
MEM-PSE-CHEE) 


They are ever watching eyes shining in the E 
Teaven is your head, aether the body, Ea, 
nvironment the water, for you are all things A, " 
u are the ocean, begetter of good things ar 
ilized world. Yours is the eternal procession; 
rr seven-lettered name is established for the à 
"n sounds of the planets which utter their vojc. 
8 forms of the Moon, 


APHARA ARAPHA I ABRAARM A RAPHA 
10MECH AKMECH 


OYEH IAO OYE FIOY AHO 


APAAPA® A ABPAAPM APADA ABPA AY 
MHX AKMHX IAQ OYEH IA OYE FIOY 4j 


EL 


RA A-RAF A EE AV-RA-ARM A-RA-I 4 A-Vh 
--M'ECH |. AK-M'ECH. I-A-AW OO-L4 H 
JO A-'H-AW E-'H-OO EL-A-AW 
beneficent coming forth of the stars, Demon 
ttes, by whom is given wealth, right old age, 
"uck, a proper burial, ^s 


wf the heavens and the Earth and all liv ing things 
ustice is not turned aside, you whose glorious nar, 
- whom the eight guards attend who are ! 


ZH NOUN NAUNI AMOUN AMAUNI 
N NAYNIAMOYNAMAY NI) 
ZH NOON NA V-NFE A-MOON A-MA V-NI 


-hat never lies. You who are the seven made 


ls 
R 
tan y NICK FARRE— 
e* your EE 


as one. I ask that you reveal tom 


My, M 
T NECS with f. 
R E) Hg M 'our faces and six wings. 
ls " Se, Ipha, Leon, Phone, Aner, 
ek aramar: " . 
ode A i: So that € Zorothion Periton Akramata, 
Fo Laet anig, heir reser ti, stretch out their four spiritum 
va der "to ang uplifted to my, in my seal and the Sphere of Ses 
mW in n Go to the £ y Higher Genius. 
7, te Ensi - 
ac y opick ginte A eee light the yellow calle sang AL— 
Org; th SOM brigh MATA eight times while visualising aim 
‘ng n S Go 4 714 yellow light. 
L o 0 to the ial 
BRA P pe Ze Bro ud light the red candle saying LE! or 
ACY E HH] made frp sepia e times while visualising™ 
no 0 fo th m bright 
lit oip t Vest ay] í 
lio is rate PEROS the blue candle while saying PHON 
" ot the North ON agit ime i ga hexagon 
it t og, m» . 
Hoy trays PÁR, and light . ying ANER- 
"LT nb AMARA ei 7 jg a ack 
d emin an T 
AAT H / SII oc v thee form at the, four quarters na 
AAW MOLY creak EN ang back curtains). Allow yo 
ki yur koly creatures. 
at 
and Peak aaas who are the seven 
-0 : abriel, 5s reveal to me your sever rehangels Mi 
od their p y may ap tel Hen. Zaziel, Badakiel, and Syli¢ 
be phi in ae out their four spiritual fingers and awi 
Lies ted to my Hi n and the splen: of Sensation 80 that Im 
æn i WHE the Vt pd Ni er Genius. 
pe Mi the nam canile and say, 
MICI ame of NYSE : 
and D AED (M n SEU (Ny-Sef), I invoke the Archang 
he celestial wold who is the guardian between. the worl 
. Come forth, mighty Michael, for J knov 


Your ice to hear 
Secret b, ou rejo! 
BT ic which 
rbaric name of power which y! jjoice t 


Vibr r tes. 
ate the ` 
te name CHYCH (chych)for five minul 


ken from Berlin 11347 


* The invo. 
vocation fo the four holy creatures is ta 
tures is taken from the 


t The us 
ue Use of platonic solids fc 
Practical work of adept. ine oe Nene 


362 HELIOS UNBOUND 


I invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word which was 
spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Awaken to 
me Michael in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate AEHIOY® for five minutes. When you have finished, 
allow yourself to be more sensitive to the Michael force. Light the 
Raphael candle and say, 


In the name of NYCHIEU (Ny-chee-ef), I invoke the Archangel 
RAPHAEL (Ra-fa-'el), who is the communicator of the divine word. 
Come forth, mighty Raphael, for I know your secret barbaric name 
of power which you rejoice to hear. 


Vibrate the name CHYBACHYCH (Chy-va-chych) for five minutes. 


I invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word which was 
spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Awaken to 
me Raphael in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate EHIOYQA for five minutes. When you have finished, 
allow yourself to be more sensitive to the Raphael force. 


Light the Gabriel candle and sav, 


In the name of AOCHE (A-o-hi), I invoke the Archangel GABRIEL 
(Wa-vree-'el), who is the embodiment of the love which unites 
all things. Come forth, mighty Gabriel, for I know your secret 
barbaric name of power which you rejoice to hear. 


Vibrate the name BACHACHYCH (Va-Cha-chych) for five minutes 


I invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word which was 
spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm, Awaken to 
me Gabriel in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate HIOYOAE for five minutes. When vou have tinished 
allow yourself to be more sensitive to the Gabriel force, Fight the 
Souriel candle and say, 

In the name of MECHEU (M'e-chef), I invoke the Archangel 
SOURIEL (Soo-ree-'el), who is the divine energy linking the 
universe. Come forth, mighty Souriel, for 1 know your secret 
barbaric name of power which you rejoice to hear. 


Vibrate the name BAKAXICHYCH (Va-kazi-hih) for tive minutes, 


I invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word which was 


NICK FARRELL 363 


spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Awaken to 
me Souriel in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate IOYOAEH for five minutes. When you have finished, 
allow vourself to be more sensitive to the Souriel force. 


Light the Zaziel candle and say, 


In the name of IAO, I invoke the Archangel ZAZIEL (Za-zee-el) 
who the brilliant light of the holiest. Come forth, mighty Zaziel, 


for I know your secret barbaric name of power which you rejoice 
to hear. 


Vibrate the name BAZABACHYCH (Va-za-vachych)for five minutes. 


I invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word sus wa 
Spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Awaken 
me Zaziel in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate OYOAEHI for five minutes. When you have finished, 
allow yourself to be more sensitive to the Zaziel force. 
Light the Badakiel candle and say 


In the name of SABVAOTH (Sa-va-awth), I invoke the ipd 
BADAKIEL (Va-da-kee-el), who the brilliant light of ei rbaric 
Come forth, mighty Badakiel, for I know your secret bar 
name of power which you rejoice to hear. " 
obe the name BADETOPTHOTH (Vade-o-awth)for five 


minutes 


À . ich was 
V invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word poet 
spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Aw 

me Badakiel in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate VOALLDO for five minutes. When you have finished, 
allow vourselt to bo more sensitive to the Badakiel force. 
Light the Syliel candle and say 


In the name of SABVAOTH (Sa-va-awth), I invoke the Archon ge 
SYLIEL (Sy-lee-‘el), who the mystery of the limits. Come forth, 


mighty Syliel, for 1 know your secret barbaric name of power 
which you rejoice to hear. 


Vibrate the name BAINCHOOOCH (Va-een-chaw-aw-awch ) for 
five minutes. 


1 invoke you by the arrangement of the sacred word which was 
spoken by Thoth to create you and the celestial realm. Awaken to 


364 HELIOS UNBOUND 
me Syliel in a manner I can comprehend. 


Slowly vibrate OAEHIOY (AW-A-E-E-EE-OO) for five minutes. 
When you have finished, allow yourself to be more sensitive to the 


Syliel force. Return to the centre relax and see the archangelic forces 
around you. 


In the name of Abrasax, I allow the seven holy archangels and the 
four sacred creatures of the word, to enter my Spliere of Sensation 
and transform me so that I might ascend to my Higher Self. 


Sit and wait and open yourself to the invoked energies. Whatever 
happens, will be unique to you and mystical. 


SATURDAY 
AFTERNOON 


THE SEVEN RAYS 

After working with the seven archangels, it is time to rise still further 
to the more abstract level of the seven rays and the vowels. It is 
important to remember that these seven rays are not the same 19th- 
century theosophical concept as espoused by Helena Petrovna 
Blavatsky and Alice A. Bailey, although they could be a development 
of the ancient ideas. Nor should the fact that there are seven rays 
being looked at, that their powers are planetary or that because they 
are represented by a colour, they are the literal power of that colour 
Those forces are simply expressions of those rays (in fact in ancient 
gem talismans and art they are not given any colours), The Chaldean 
Oracles of the 2nd century CE feature the seven rays as purifying, 
agents of Helios and they do have that function, but not just that 
They are the primal divine energy which is behind the universe and 
are united by the One Thing. They are closer to the concept of the 
vowels. Vowels give "life" to a word and enable it to be pronounced, 
Until a vowel is added a word is dead clay 

They appear as we get close to an understanding, of our Higher 
Genius. They give us the final purification before the vision of the 
Higher Genius and the discovery of our divine self. 

What this exercise does is open your Sphere of Sensation to 
those powers of life. When they are correctly approached, they will 
resonate with the corresponding parts of your Sphere of Sensation 
and transform them. 

You might see forms while doing this exercise, but vou should 


NICK FARRELL 365 


try and push past them as they are not really the ray. You might 
have feelings about each colour, but you should try to push past 
these too. You will know when you have reached the power of 
the ray when you become it, and it is hard to explain unless you 
have experienced it. It is worth pointing out that each of these rays 
was said to represent a "heaven", which can be seen to mean the 
progressively rarefied states of holiness. 

This level of consciousness is not easily obtained, and for the 
purposes of this experience, vou donothaveto- you justmust do the 
process and achieve to your highest level you can. The work of the 
last six months has been to build your ladder upwards, continually 
refining vour Sphere of Sensation and giving your Higher Genius a 
stronger foothold in your awareness. 


THE EXERCISE 


er invoking ritual of the pentagram and the Lesser 
Banishing Ritual of the Hi with the IAO formula). 
2. Perform the Prin ercise. the solar breath extension and 
then the Genius Abiding exercise. 
Purity and consecrate the space. 
4. Do vour ritual to the Sun at noon. 

vu could prepare seven coloured cards to help you visualis 
hould be marked with the following vowels ^ 


i 
[1 —] 


1. Perform the les: 


lera 


D 


4. Set vour timer tor halt an hour. 


5. Laytht a single white candle marked with the name Abrasax and 
say the following, invecation, 


I invoke you Abrasax who unites the seven by the powers of 
your name. | conjure thee by the name IQXYX (E-Aw-hih) so that 
you will awaken to me the mighty the powers of the seven rays 


366 HELIOS UNBOUND 


which emerge from your head. So that I will experience the seven 
heavens behind all things. 


Look at each card or just shut your eyes and visualise yourself 
swimming in a sea of that colour. Vibrate the vowel for half an hour 
as a mantra. As you do, you allow yourself to become lighter, so 
you appear to be floating upward. Feel yourself dissolving into 
the colour. Take your time, but you should start to feel infinite and 
sensitive. Then other forces and ideas will arrive; note these but 
remain passive. This mission is not to gather intellectual information 
but tune yourself to the ray. Once your timer has bleeped move on 
to the next ray in sequence. Each one will get harder, but the more 
you leave behind in terms of thinking and feeling, the easier it will 
become. The order of the rays is Violet, Orange, Emerald, Yellow, 
Red, Blue, and lastly Indigo. You can stop chanting when you have 
reached a deep enough state, but if you lose focus, you should return 
to the chant. 


SATURDAY 
NIGHT 
IMMORTALISATION 


This ritual uses the Mithras Liturgy from the Great Magical Papyri of 
Paris. To fit this book's magical goals, | changed some aspects and 
expanded some of the prayers to make the symbols more more 
obvious to modern magicians. In this, | was aided by Hans Deiter 
Betz's book’ which is an extensive academic study on the ritual 

The ritual immortalises or deifies the magician by showing 
them a vision of their relationship with the Sun. It mixes many 
different ideas, including Platonism, Stoicism, and the mystery 
cults. The Roman Philosopher Emperor Julian, who was an initiate 
of Mithras, wrote of a similar structure in his Hymn to King Helios 
Julian mentioned three levels of creation - the physical, which is 
ruled by the visible Sun, a middle world, governed by the spiritual 
Sun Mithras, and the intelligible world of perfection, ruled by the 
supreme Helios. Mithras acts as a mediator between this remote 
divine world and the physical. The Great Magal Papyrt of Paris 
ritual was not as concise as Julian's and was based on an earlier, less 
elegant idea involving a hybrid god Helios-Mithras. Since it makes 


* Betz, H. D., 2003. The Mithras Liturgy. Tubingen: Mohr Seibeck. 


NICK FARRELL 367 


no odds magically, I have opted for Julian's system. 

The original ritual was built around a formula from another 
mystery religion or cult and had enough similarities to suggest it 
originates from parts of a Roman Mithras ritual. It is like the Golden 
Dawn's Z documents which use the formula of the 0-0 initiation to 
perform other magical rituals. In the Great Magical Papyri of Paris, the 
ritual immortalises the person so they can receive an oracle from the 
Sun (gods are more likely to talk to immortals rather than humans). 
However, it can be used to immortalise the magician to build and 
strengthen the links to their Higher Genius in its solar form. 

The rite is a mixture of ritual and pathworking and alternating 
between the two techniques. This will take time but be aware there 
is no hurry. 


THE RITE 


Inscribe a white candle with your name and AIIAOANATIZMOZ 
(Apathanatismos) (which means immortalisation). Place this on 
your altar and place a chair before it. Evenly space seven tealights 
in a line behind and another in front of your ritual space. These 
should be arranged, so vou have a capital letter H (lying on its side) 
of candles, Take vour lit Higher Genius candle and carefully place 
it east of the altar. You should be holding your astrological chart*. 
l. Perform the lesser invoking pentagram. 

2. Perform your prayer to the Sun at his setting. 

3. Perform the third Sun breath process. 

4. Open the quarters and purify and consecrate the space. 


Facing east say, 


Be gracious to me, Oh Providentia and Psyche for as a child of 
the mysteries I request immortality which is granted to initiates 


* In the original ritual, this chart was for the date and time of the ritual. In 
this case it ts the date and time of birth of the person conducting the ritual. 
1 The original invocation addressed Providentia and Psyche to ask them to 
overlook the tact that he has written down the mysteries (something which 
Was forbidden), Providentia was the embodiment of foresight. This might 
because the ritual had been tuned to obtain an oracle and if he misused the 
mysteries by writing them down, she would not only stop the rite working, 
but punish him. Psyche was a goddess who represented life and the Soul 
who might have featured in his initiation. Although it was not part of the 
actual ritual, the call to Providentia and Psyche as the goddesses of vision 
and the soul provides an opportunity to state the ritual's intention, 


368 HELIOS UNBOUND 


so that they may ascend into heaven as an inquirer, behold the 
universe and see the Sun behind the Sun - my Divine Genius and 
thus, better fulfil my destiny. 


Look up: 
Iinvoke that which was the origin of my origin, AEHIOYQ 
I invoke that which was the beginning of my beginning, 


(Make a popping sound by smacking your lips three times, hiss three times, 
and spit out the sound fult.) 

Go to the east and draw an invoking active spirit pentagram Y vibrating the 
name Zeus. Then draw an invoking Air pentagram % Vibrate (MMM) for 
a full breath. Visualise divine air pouring from the pentagram and flooding 
your Sphere of Sensation, Then say, 


Air given to me by Zeus, which mixed within me. You are the 
supreme breath within me. 


Go to the south and face south. Draw an invoking active spirit pentagram 
¥ vibrating the name Hades. Draw an invoking fire pentagram % and 
vibrate HY HIA EH. Visualise divine fire pouring from the pentagram 
and flooding your Sphere of Sensation. Then say, 

Fire given to me by Hades, which mixed within me. You are the 
supreme fire within me. 

Go to the west and face west. Draw an invoking active spirit pentagram 
¥ vibrating the name Persephone c. Draw an invoking water pentagram 
Vibrate QQQ AAA EEE and visualise divine water pouring from the 
pentagram and flooding your Sphere of Sensation, Then say 


Water is given to me by Persephone, which mixed within me. You 
are the supreme water within me. 


Go to the north and face north. Draw an invoking active spirit pentagram 
W vibrating the name Hera. Draw an invoking Larth pentagram X Vibrate 
YH YQH and visualise the Earth element pouring from the pentagram and 
connecting your Sphere of Sensation. Then say 


Earthy substance, given to me by Hera. You are the supreme earthy 
substance in me. 
Return to the altar and face east. 


Oh you divine gods of the elements make a perfect body for me 
(your name) whose mother is (your mother’s name), transform me 
by a divine arm and an eternal right hand as you did at my birth 
to exist in a world without light and yet radiant a world which 


NICK FARRELL 369 


appears soulless and however is alive and divine. For the world 
is comprised of the soulless and ensouled and I unify opposites. 


Be aware of your body and carry out the first exercise of divine awareness. 


Balance the elements within you and feel the light start to glow 
within your body while chanting YHI AYI EYQIE seven times: 
(pause, then look to the East and say,) 

METERTA PHOTH* (METEPTA ®26) (ME-TER-TA FAWTH) if 
it is your will, Give me an immortal rebirth which transforms 
my underlying nature so that I can unite with my Higher Genius 
IEREZATH (IEPEZAO) (EE-E-RE-ZATH). 


Enable me to gaze upon the immortal beginning with 
an immortal spirit, © ANCHREPHRENESOYPHIRIGCH 
(ANXPEDPENEXOYOIPIT X) (AN-CHRE-FRE-NE-SOO-FEE- 
REEGCH), 

With the immortal water, ERONOYI PARAKOYNETH (EPONOYI 
IIAPAKOYNHO) (E-RO-NOO-EE PA-RA-KOO-N'ETH), 

With the most steadfast air, EIOAE PSENABOTH (EÍOAH 
VENABOO) (E-EE-O-A-E PSE-NA-VAWTH); 

that I may be born again in thought, KRAOCHRAX R OIM 
ENARCHOMAI (KPAOXPAZ P OIM ENAPXOMAI) (KRA-O- 
CHRAKS R O-EEM E-NAR-CHO-ME), and the sacred spirit may 
breathe in me, 


NECHTHEN  APOTOY NECHTHIN ARPI ETH (NEXOEN 
ALLOTOY NEXOIN APII HO) 


NECH-THEN A-PO-TOO NECH-THEEN AR-PEE 'ETH) 

Let me wonder at the sacred fire, KYPHE (KY®E); 

Gaze upon the unfathomable, terrifying waters at the dawn of time, 
NYAW THESAW ECHAW OOCHEEECHAWA 

(NYQ OF YO PAO OYXIEXOA) 


And the life-giving, and encircling Aether may hear me, 
ARNOM'ETFHE (APNOMHO®); 


* The original manuscript uses Meterta Photh (Metepta o9) and gives 
alternative spelling Methartha Pherie (McüapBa Qepe) intead of npin. 
The second version of the words are similar and might be an attempt to 
provide a clearer pronunciation. In context Meterta Photh is likely to be a 
mayical name connected to Mithras-Helios. 


370 HELIOS UNBOUND 


For today I am about to see with immortal inner vision. 

I was born mortal from a mortal womb but improved by an 
exceedingly powerful and an eternal right hand and by the 
immortal spirit of the immortal Aion and Master of the fiery 
diadems. 

I, (your name) whose mother is (your mother's name) have 
been sanctified through holy consecrations through rituals and 
initiations and for a short time a holy power supports my psyche* 
after Ananke, the bitter and relentless Dæmon of material life, has 
pressed down upon me. 


According to the immutable decree of God, EYE YIA EEI AO 
EIAY IYA IEO it is out of the reach of a mortal, to ascend with the 
golden radiance of immortal brilliance. We are too weak to open 
our mind's eyes and look on that incorruptible beauty. OEY AEO 
EYA EOE YAE SIAE illuminates all my mind, kindles my whole 
soul and draws it upward, and this beauty transforms me into an 
essence*. 


For I am Mithras'son (or daughter). 
lam [insert the name you are known in magic] 


(Sit in the chair with your astrological chart on your lap and carry out the 
stage three version of the solar breath. Then relax and play the following 
pathworking on your recorder.) 


THE PATHWORKING 
Perform the Sun breath for ten minutes, or until you feel light and 
imagine yourself rising into the clouds on the dust of gold 

You rise into the darkness of space. You see before you the Sun 


* This statement about magic is important and often overlooked. All this 
work you have done will allow you to connect to your Higher Genius 
which will support you but after a while it will fade as life real life gets in 
the way. Connecting to your Higher Genius requires a continual recharge 
which is provided by a new consecration 

T This clarifies a passage in the original and is taken from Hermetica 31 
translation by Copenhaver. 

t I have provided a missing mystery name which has been left off the 
manuscript. It would be the magician's own divine parent which would 
be the god that they have the greatest connection. [his ritual worked 
fine for those who did not have that sort of connection by using Mithras- 
Helios. Betz said the magical words here are most likely to be a code tor 
the original magician's secret name. It would be better if you used your 
magical name or Motto. 


NICK FARRELL 371 


glowing bright and orange and the planets in their dance through 
the vacuum of space at this moment. 

Then before your eyes, the physical melts away, and you see the 
divine forms of the planets. Below you is Hera, the Farth goddess. 
Nearest to you is Hekate-Selene. In the distance, you see Aphrodite 
and Aries. In the far distance, you see Zeus with his father Kronos 
far into the icy void. Close to the Sun is Mercury and before him is 
the vast and radiant disk of the Sun being pulled through space by 
four horses. 

Below the Sun you will see a vortex of power which radiates 
a divine power, just as the Sun disk shines with light. The ancients 
called this vortex a pipe and believed it influenced the winds. 
However, it is the way that the Sun controls life in the whole solar 
system. 

Suddenly you feel like you are being watched. All the gods 
are staring at you. It is not right that a mortal should seek to be in 
the same spheres as the gods — Bellerophon who was the greatest 
hero before Hercules was struck down for trving to fly to Mount 
Olympus. The gods hate the noise of humanity. They start to turn 
towards vou. " 

Put your right finger on vour mouth* and say, "Harpokrates 
bring forth silence, Symbol of the living, imperishable god! Guard 
me in Silence Harpokrates. 

NECHTHEIR THANMELOY 
(NENOEIP OANMEAOY) 
(NECH-ITHEER THAN-ME-LOO)!" 


Then make a long, hissing sound. nest make a popping sound. 


The sav, PROPROPHEGGE MORIOS PROPHYR PROPHEGGE 
NEMETHIRE ARPSENTEN PITEIMI MEOY ENARTH 
PHYRKECHO PSYRIDARIO TYRE PHILBA." 


(HPOLHPOXCOETI H MOPIOX — IIPOcEITH — NEMEOIPE 
APWENTEN HITHIMI MEQY ENAPO eDYPKEXO WYPIAAPIO 
IYPH (IABA) 


(PROPROFEGG'E MOREEOS. PROSFEGG’E NEMETHEERE 
ARPSENTI N PEEI'EIMEE MEAWOO ENARTH FYRKECHAW 
PSYRELDAREEAW I'YR'E FEELVA) 


* Thus is the sign of the Ey ptian God of Science Harpokrates. Harpokrates was also a 
protective god. Ihesign is used by the Golden Dawn and its descendants. The original 
ritual did not name the god, but instead gave his titles. 


372 HELIOS UNBOUND 


With those words you sense yourself covered in a shroud of darkness 
and silence. The godform of Harpokrates settles around you and the 
gods no longer see you, but instead the god of silence. 

After a while, you see that the world above is transparent and circling 
and that none of the gods or angels is threatening you. 

You hear a great crash of thunder. It is as if nature is trying to shock you 
back into your body. However, you resist and say, 


As the God form of Harpokrates, you say, "Silence! Silence! I am a 
star, wandering about the heavens with the gods, and shining forth 
out of the deep, OXY O XERTHEYTH (OZY O SEPOEYO) (OKSY O 
KSERTHEFTH) 

You look at the Sun and notice it has become more significant. 
Pentagrams stream forth from the brightness. It is as if the universe 
is full of them. 

You make a hissing sound twice and a popping sound twice. 
Then say again: “Silence! Silence!” 

In the Sun's centre, you see a darker place, and vou head 
towards it. Closer and closer to the Sun you go. Fortunately, you 
have not got a psychical body because the heat would have turned 
you dust ages ago. 

In the centre of the Sun, the darker place is two fiery doors shut 
tight. Recite the following prayer. 


I invoke thee, mighty Aion 


“Hear me I(your name) | whose mother is (your mother's name), 
Oh Lord, you who have bound together the fiery bars of the four 
roots of the elements which lock the doors of the Sun, 


O Firewalker, PENTITEROYNI (HENTITEPOYNI) (PE-NTEE-TE- 
ROO-NEE), 


Light-Maker and Light Encloser, SEMESILAM (XEMEXIAAM) 
(SE-ME-SEE-LAM), 


Fire-Breather, PSYRINPHEY ('UYPINGEY) (PSY-REEN-FEF) 
Fire-Spirited, IAO (IAQ) ( EE-A-AW), 

Shining Spirit, OAI (QAI) (AW-A-EE) 

Rejoicing in fire, ELOYRE (EAOYPE) (E-LOO-RE), 
Beautiful Light, AZAI (AZAl) (A-ZA-EE), 


NICK FARRELL 373 


Aion, ACHBA (AXBA)* (ACH-VA), 
Ruler of Light, PEPPER PREPEMPIPI (IIELIIIEP TIPETIEMITITII) 
(PEP-PER PRE-PE-MPEE-PEE), 


Fire-Bodied, PHNOYENIOCH (®NOYHNIOX) (FNOO-ENEE- 
OCH), 


Light-Giver, Fire-Sower, AREI EIKITA (APEI EIKITA) (A-REE 
E-EE-KEE-TA), 


Fire-gatherer, GALLABALBA (TAAAABAABA) (GAL-LA-VAL- 
VA), 


Powerful Light, AIO (419) (A-EE-AW) 


Fire-Whirler, PYRICHIBOOSEIA (ITYPIXIBOOZHIA) (PY-REE- 
CHEE-VO-O-S’E-EE-A), 


Light-Mover, SANCHEROB (ZANNEPOB) (SAN-CHE-RAWV) 


Lightning-Shaker, IE OE IOEIO (IH QH IQHIQ) (EE-E O-E EE-O- 
E-EE-O), 


Life creator, BEEGENETE ( NHTE) (VE-E-GE-N'E-TE), 


Light-Increaser, SOYSINEPHIEN (XOYXINEGIEN) (SOO-SEE- 
NE-FEE-EN) 


lire-Light-Maintainer, soys 
MARMARENTEY (S 
MAPMAPENTEY) (SOO-SEE: 
MA-RI-NIT), 

Subduer of the stars, open for me 


PROPROPHEGGE FMI THEIRE ORIOMOTYREPHILBA, 
(TPOTLIPCSPETEL EMEOTIPE MOPIOMOTY PHOIABA) 


(PRO-PRO-EE-GGAE. 1-MIE-IHEE-RE. MO-REE-O-MO-TY-R'E- 
FEH -VA) 


SEPHI ARENBARAZEI 
e APENBAPAZEI 


NE-EEE A-REN-VA-RA-ZEE MAR- 


Open for me the closed doors of the Sun because of the pressing 
and bitter and inexorable necessity 1 face. I wish to reflect my 
spiritual self, my holy guardian genius so that I can fulfil my 
lite’s purpose. 


Linvoke the seven immortal names, of the seven gods living and 
honoured, which never pass into mortal nature and cannot be 


* The great PGM translator Karl Preisendanz reads this as AH-BA instead of 
ACHBA believing it to be a combination of the Egyptian Ah (shining)-Ba(soul) 


374 HELIOS UNBOUND 


named in the human tongue or mortal speech or mortal sound, 
but only through sacred vowels. Draw nigh, O Lord! 


Open your eyes and carefully and slowly read out the following vowel 
strings severn times, one for each of the seven immortal gods of the world. 


HEQ OHHO IQQ OH HEQ HEQ OH HQ IQQ OHHE QHE 
HEQ OHHQ IQQ. 
OH HEQ HE OH EQ IQQ OHHE QHE - 


QOH IH HQ OQ OH IEQ OH QOH IEQ OH IEEQ 
EH IQ OH IOH QHQ EOH OEOQ OIH OIH EQ 

OH III HOH QUH HQOHE EOHIA AHAEHA 
HEEH EEH EEH IEQ HEQ OHEEOH HEO 

EUQ OH EIQ HQ OH QH OH EE OOO UIOH 


Shut your eyes and return to the place you were before the Sun's 
gates. 


Open your mind's eye, and you will hear thundering and shaking 
in the surrounding realm, and you will likewise feel yourself being 
shaken. This is the last test before entering the heavens. You must 
let go all of your thoughts and feelings and allow your personality- 
free “I” to go forward. Take some time at this; cast everything off 
slowly. You will feel calm even if vou see the storm clouds of this 
test buffet you. When you are in the correct state, as the god form of 
Harpokrates you say, “Silence! Silence! I am a star, wandering about 
the heavens with the Gods, and shining forth out of the deep, 


OXY O XERTHEYTH (OZY O ZEPOEYO) (O-KSY O KSER- 
THEFTH)." 


The doors of the Sun open, and this reveals the world of the pods. 
There is a feeling of pleasure and joy of the sight. You step in and 
enter the spiritual world. 


Draw breath from the spiritual world into yourself several times 
You will feel refreshed and restored. Inside this Sun is another Sun 
This Sun is Helios-Mithras. 


Looktowardsitand say, "Come, Lord, ARCHANDARA PHOTAZA 
PYRIPHOTA ZABYTHIX ETIMENMERO PHORATHEN ERII 
PROTHRI PHORATHI." 

(APXANAAPA ®QTAZA IIYPKDOTA ZABYOIE ETIMENMEPO 
@OPAOHN EPIH MPO OPI «bOPAOI) 

(AR-CHAN-DA-RA FAW-TA-ZA PY-REE-FAW-TA | ZA-VY- 


NICK FARRELL 375 


THEEKS E-TEE-MEN-ME-RO FO-RA-TH'EN E-REE-E PRO 
THREE FO-RA-THEE) 


When you have said this, the rays of the Sun will turn toward you; 
look at the centre of them. For when you have done this, you will 
see a youthful god, beautiful in appearance, with fiery hair, and ina 
white tunic and a scarlet cloak, and wearing a fiery crown. 


Raise your two hands towards him touching your thumbs and index 
fingers together to form a fire triangle. 


“Hail, O Lord, Great Power, Great Might, King, Greatest of Gods, 
Mithras, the Lord of heaven and earth, God of gods: mighty is your 
breath; mighty is your strength, O Lord. If it is your will, announce 
me to the supreme god, the one who has begotten and made you.’ 


Help me (your name) who was born from the mortal womb of 
(your mother’s name) and the fluid of semen, and who, since he 
has been born again from you today, has become immortal out 
according to the wish of God the exceedingly good. 


I give you all my human power (place your hand on the horoscope) 
so that I will know you. 


power. Lookin 


and breathe hard out of your nose and 
um 


Kiss vour horoscope and say to your right hand: “Protect me, 
PROSY MERE.” 

(IOS MUP) 

(PRO-SY-NET-RET) 


Above and behind Mithras a door opens in the spiritual Sun. 


Seven women? come trom deep within the Sun disk, dressed in 


Those are a syneretic trom of the Seven Hathors, the fates, the Pleiades 
and the seven tied stars in the constellation of the Ursa Major. The Seven 
Hathors are the seven cows who follow the celestial bull Osiris-Apis, Bull 
ot the West (Ursa Minot), and have a calendar role. They were musical 
waudosses depicted with tambourines and sistra, sometimes they hold a 
nol led palm branch known as "the Year-staff” and were said to oversee 
a person s destiny. They were hugely important at the birth of a divine 
vill and they are depicted on the pylon in the Isis Temple at Philae at the 
entrance to the birth house, They can either suckle the Pharoah or give him 
lite by pressing the Ankh cross to his lips. The reason you are invoking 
these torces is to work out your destiny and co-operate with it. The names 
of the Seven Hathors are known from the tomb of Queen Nefertari; Lady of 


376 HELIOS UNBOUND 


linen garments, and with the faces of asps. They are the Fates of 
heaven and wield golden wands. When you see them, you say, 
"Hail, Oh seven fates of heaven, You who are noble and good, 
Oh sacred ones and companions of MINIMIRROPHOR* 
(MINIMIPPO®OP) (MEE-NEE-MEER-RO-FOR) Oh most holy 
guardians of the four pillars. 


Place your astrological chart on the altar and go to the left-hand column 
of unlit tealights. As you say the name of each of the fates you should light 
the tealight to her. 


Hail to you, the first, CHREPSENTHAES (XPEWENOAHX) 
(CHRE-PSEN-THA-'ES) You who are represented by the Moon 
in the terrestrial world. You are the feminine principle ruling the 
universe. 


Hail to you, the second, MENESCHEES (MENEXXEHX) (ME- 
NE-SCHE-'ES) You who are represented by the Mercury in the 
terrestrial world. You are the principle of connection ruling the 
universe, 


Hail to you, the third, MECHRAN (MEXPAN) (ME-CHRAN) You 


who are represented by the Venus in the terrestrial world. You are 
the principle of Love ruling the universe. 


Hail to you, the fourth, ARARMACHES (APAPMAXHX) (A-RAR- 
MA-CH'ES) You are represented by the Sun in the terrestrial world. 
You are the male principle ruling the universe. 


Hail to you, the fifth, ECHOMMIE (EXOMMIH) (E-CHOM-MEE- 
'E) You are represented by the Mars in the terrestrial world. You 


the universe, Sky-Storm, You from the land of silence; You from Khemmis 
Red-Hair, Bright Red and Your name flourishes through skill. The Fates of 
Heaven from PGM IV are the Macrocosmic presences of the seven planets 
they polarise with the Pole Lords who are invoked next. Sam Block, who 
has done considerable research on the Pole Lords and the Seven Fates, (see 
https:/ / digitalambler.com/2018/10/08/ pole-lords-and-northern-stars 
the-seven-pairs-of-divinities-from-the-mithras-liturgy / sees the Fates has 
having a planetary role. If this is the case it is more of à macro«cosmic 
planetary role rather than the conventional micro-cosmic, They are the 
planetary forces as experienced everywhere in the universe - the planets 
behind the planets, The Asps are Uraeus cobra which were symbols of 
divine authority in Ancient Egypt. 

* Possibly a secret name of Hat-hor 


NICK FARRELL 377 
are the principle of Chaos ruling the universe. 


Hail to you, the sixth, TICHNONDAES (IIXNONAAHZ) 
(TEECH-NON-DA-'ES) You are represented by the Jupiter in 
the terrestrial world. You are the principle of Order ruling the 
universe. 


Hail to you, the seventh, EROY ROMBRIES (EPOY POMBPIHE) 
(E-ROO ROM-VREE-E'S) You are represented by the Saturn in 
the physical world. You are the principle of Time and limitation 
ruling the universe. 


Stand on the northern side of the pole star and talk to these goddesses. 
When you have finished bow and go to the south. 

Shut vour eyes and see the arrival of seven other gods, who have 
the faces of black bulls, in linen loincloths, who possess seven 
golden diadems. 

These are the Pole-Lords 
same manner and lig) 


eaven.* You must greet them in the 
o each with his name: 


“Hail to you, oh guardians of the pivot. Sacred and brave 
youths, who turn the revolving axis of the vault of heaven at 
the command of the One. You send out thunder and lightning 
and jolts of earthquakes and thunderbolts against the nations of 
impious people, but to me, who am pious and god-fearing you 
send health and soundness of body, and acuteness of hearing 
and seeing and calmness in the present good hours of this day, 
Oh my Lords vou are the ruling Gods! 


ta cal 


Light each of the candles as before starting from the bottom. 


Hail to you, the first) AIERONTHI. (AÍEPONOI). (A-EE-E- 
RAWN-HLFIET) (Violet) vou are the star Kochab, Awaken to me. 


Hail to you, the second, MERCHEIMEROS (MEPXEIMEPOZ) 


ngs ot light that turn the cosmos and decide 
we live in and wield authority (their 
4 (hey create the structure of everything, 
an View. they are forms of the rays and appear 
vd auras [hese are the seven stars found in Ursa Minor which 
marks the location ot the north celestial pole, as it is home to Polaris, the 
North Star. which ts located at the end of the dipper's handle. In other 
words. the Pole Lords also show the way for the magician to link with 
the divine still point in the centre of the universe from which everything 
revolves, As rays they are partly Macrocosmic planetary force. 


wither 


378 HELIOS UNBOUND 


(MER-CHEE-ME-ROS) (Orange) you are the star Pherkad. Awaken 
to me. 


Hail to you, the third, ACHRICHIOYR (AXPIXIOYP) (ACH-REE- 
CHEE-OOR) (Green) you are the star Alasco. Awaken to me. 


Hail to you, the fourth, MESARGILTO (MEXAPIIATO) (ME- 
SAR-GEEL-TAW) (Yellow) you are the star Ahfa al Farkadain 
Awaken to me. 


Hail to you, the fifth, CHICHROALITHO (XIXPQAAIOQ) (CHEE- 
CHRAW-A-LEE-THAW) (Red) you are the star Urodelus Awaken 
to me. 


Hail to you, the sixth, ERMICHTHATHOPS (EPMIXOAOQW) 
(ER-MEECH-THA-THAWPS) (Blue) you are the star Yildun 
Awaken to me. 


Hail to you, the seventh, EORASICHE (EOPAXIXH) (E-O-RA- 
SEE-CH’E) (Indigo) you are the star Polaris. Awaken to me.. 


Commune with each of the Bull Lords as best as you can. Then sit down 
and visualise the following 


A storm rages around you. There are lightning-bolts and flashing 
lights. Everything around you is shaking. 


Look up, and you will see a god descending, a huge yod, having, a 
bright appearance youthful, yolden-haired, with a white tunic and 
golden crown and trousers and holding in his right hand a yolden 
shoulder of a young, bull. 


He is the Bear which moves and turns heaven around, moving 
upward and downward by the hour. It is Mithras the Sun behind 
the Sun who turns the universe. He is also an aspect of your divine 
self. 


You will see lightning-bolts leaping, from his eyes and stars trom his 


body — breathe out through your nose hard = pushing, the air out 
with your stomach. 


Then take a deep breath of divine air and say 

“MOKRIMO PHERIMOPHERERI (MOKPIMO oEPINCXDEPEPI) 
(MO-KREE-MO FE-REE-MO-FE-RE-REE), you are the life of (your 
name). Stay dwell in my soul. Do not abandon me, for one entreats 
you, ENTHO PHENEN THROPIOTH (ENOO PE NEN OPOLTGOG) 
(EN-THO FE-NEN THRO-PEE-AWTH).” 


Breathe out through your nose hard - pushing the air out with your 


NICK FARRELL 379 
Stomach while gazing at the god. 


Then take a deep breath and say, "Hail, Oh Lord, Oh Master of the 
water! Hail, Oh Founder of the earth! Hail, Oh Ruler of the wind! O 
Bright Lightener, 


PROPROPHEGGE EMETHIRI (IIPOIIPOGEITH . EMEGIPI) 
(PRO-PRO-FEG-G'E E-ME-THEE-REE) 


ARTENTEPI THETH MIMEO (APTENTEIII OHO MIMEQ) (AR- 
TE-NTE-PEE THEETH MEE-ME-O) 


YENARO PHYRCHECHO PSERI (YENAPQ ®YPXEXQ HPI) 
(Y-E-NA-RAW FYR-CHE-CHAW PS'E-REE) 

DARIO PHRE PHRELBA (AAPIO OPH 9PHABA) (DA-REE-AW 
FR'E FR'EL-VA) 


Oh Lord, while being born again, I am passing away; while 
growing and having grown, I am dying; while being born from 
a life-generating birth, I am passing on, released to death - as 
you have founded, as you have decreed, and have established the 
mystery. 


I am PHEROYRA MIOYRI (EPOYPA MIOYPI) (FE-ROO-RA 
MEE-OO-REE). 


Now is the time that vou talk to your Higher Self. What happens 
will be up to you and it. In my experience, he talks in visions 
and fragments which have a profound effect but do not provide 
intellectual" information as such... just transformation. When you 
have finished thank him and allow vourself to return to Earth. 


SUNDAY 
MORNING 


T'v@01 oeavtóv 
KNOW THYSELF 


Today is the last day of the process and is surprisingly less ritually 
involved as the other days. This is because the pressure has built up 
due to the last six months’ work and the last two days of focused 
isolation. Today will be intense but it is mostly waiting for the Holy 
Genius to make contact. The experience (if it happens) will not be 
what you expect but will open the way for future experiences. 


380 HELIOS UNBOUND 


The day's work is based on two small PGM rituals (PGMVII 
505-528 and PGM VII 428-539) which were placed alongside each 
other. The first had the title Meeting with your own Demon and the 
second was a Victory Charm to Helios. I have slightly expanded both 
rituals and added important lines from other PGM rituals PGM VIII 
40-49 and yesterday's Mithras liturgy. 

H Betz, in his paper The Delphic Maxim “Know Yourself” in the 
Greek Magical Papyri* points out that other than its title, PGM VII 505 
does not appear to mention the personal Demon at all, but it does 
reveal the procedure for a magician to approach one. Firstly there 
is a prayer to Tyche, followed by an invocation to Helios-Aion and 
then some form of purification. 

The answer to this problem can be found in Plato's myth of Er* 
which said after the souls had chosen their life stories, went before 
Lachesis who “sent with each, as the guardian of his life and the 
fulfiller of his choice, the genius that he had chosen.” 

“This divinity led the soul first to Clotho, under her hand and her 
turning of the spindle to ratify the destiny of his lot and choice; and 
after contact with her the genius again led the soul to the spinning of 
Atropos to make the web of its destiny irreversible, and then without 
a backward look it passed beneath the throne of Necessity.” 

lamblichus and Proculus both considered the Higher Genius 
the key to fulfilling destiny and that it acted as a guide to helping 
to archive it. Given the importance of fate and destiny when 
approaching your Higher Genius, it makes sense then to invoke the 
goddesses of fate to assist your awakening, Indeed, you saw these 
goddesses in their Egyptian forms yesterday. 

It is important that the person realise that the Higher Genius is 
their divine self and this divine being, is no greater or smaller than 
any other mortal. There was a cautionary tale mentioned in the 
Enneads, the philosopher Porphyry tells how his teacher Plotinus 
met his Higher Genius using the skills of an Egyptian priest. 

“An Egyptian priest who came to Rome and wanted to give a 

display of his wisdom asked Plotinus to see a visible manifestation 

of his holy Demon. Plotinus readily agreed, and the evocation 

took place in the temple of Isis which the Egyptian said it was 

the only pure spot he could find in Rome. When the spirit was 


* Betz, H. (1981). The Delphic Ma “Know Yourself” in the Greek 
Magical Papyri. History of Religions, 21(2), 156-171. Retrieved from http:// 
www jstor.org/stable/1062222 

1 Plato Resp. 10.616 


NICK FARRELL 381 


summoned to appear a god came and not a being of tlie spirit 
order, and the Egyptian said “Blessed are you who have a god for 
a spirit and not a companion of the subordinate order!" 


The priest might have been a good magician, but his philosophy was 
wrong, or at least different from Plotinus. A Higlier Genius is never 
a Dæmon , but always an example of the unity behind all Demons. 
That does not mean that Plotinus was a god, as some who have 
read this passage claim, or that all humans are gods as the New Age 
movement insists. It is just that a part of us is divine and we can 
communicate and co-operate with it. 
Take two eggs and write on them: 


ABPAXAZ IAQAI AEQ EQA QAH IAQ IHO EY AH EY IE IAQAI. 
(A-VRA-SAX EE-A-AW-A-EE A-E-AW E-AW-A AW-A-E EE-A- 
AW EE-'E-O E-Y A-'E E-Y EE-A-AW-A-EE) 
Place one egg on the left side of the altar next to a small bowl and the 
other on the right. 
In the morning awaken and perform your ritual ablutions. 
Perform the lesser invoking pentagram. Perform the entire 
morning, noon and evening Sun rite together. 
Perform your confessions 
Perform the third Sun breath process. 
Open the quarters, balance the elements and purify ar 
consecrate the space. 


E 
2. 


Your temple should be set up with your Holy Guardian Genius 
candle on the altar placed on top of your astrological chart. You 
should have plenty of incense ready. 


Face East and invoke Tyche: 


Hail, Tyche, I invite you into this place, oh bringer of rich abundance, 
Humanity has never conquered you, and endless praise is yours, 
While others complain that you never give them blessings. I 


invoke you to ask for your true gifts - the ability to understand 
my destiny. 


You are my Holy Genius’ companion I ask you this day to help 


lead me to it so that 1 might develop a close relationship to the 
spindle of Necessity. 


I offer you this spice that you may be my helper as I ascend to 
meet my True Self. 


Now invoke the Demon of the space. 


382 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Salva lar familiaris (salute). Salvete De Penates (Salute), Salve Gen 
Patris familias (salute), Salve Vesta Mater (salute), Salve Larunda 
(salute). 


I offer thee this incense in honour of thee and in recognition of 
your work as I have strived in your space. I ask that you continue 
to bea pillar for its growth that I may lean on. 


Rather than insisting that life is carried out in the old way, that 
you must accept that you need to help us establish the new. Give 
me the ancestral powers, not to recreate your past, which has gone, 
but to bring my future happiness and well-being. 


Quod Bonum Faustum Felix Fortunatum Salutareque Sit Mihi Ita 
Est. 


Now invoke the Demon of the space who rules the decan of the time 
that you are doing the ritual (see chapter ). 
Invoke Helios: 


Hail, Helios who has established himself in invisible light over 
the holy firmament ORKORETHARA (OPKOPOAPA) (OR-KOR- 
THA-RA) 

You are the father of the reborn Aion ZARACHTHO (ZAPAXOQ) 
(ZA-RACH-THAW). 


You are the father of awful Nature Thortchophano^ 'oopxoqatris 
Youare the one who has in yourself the mixture of universal nature 
and who begot the five wandering stars, which are the entrails 
of heaven, the guts of earth, the fountainhead of the waters, and 
the violence of fire AZAMACHAR ANAPHANDAO FREYA 
ANEREYA PHENPHENSO IGRAA 


(AZAMAXAP,ANA@AAAQ, EPENA, ANEPEYA, @PENENY®, 
IYPAA) 


(A-ZA-MA-CHAR, A-NA-FA-DA-AW, E-RE-NA, A-NI-REV-A, 
FE-NEN-SAW, EE-Y-RA-A) 


You are the youthful one, highborn, scion of the holy temple, 
kinsman of Abyss. You are the waters of Nun located between the 
two pedestals of the evening bark SKIATHI and the morning, bark 
MANTO, in the Temple which contains the whole world.: 


* This name was written in Coptic. 
t There are some similarities to this PGM spell and the 
Book of the Dead. Eleni Pachoumi in her Concept of the Di 


chapter ot the 
ine in the Greek 


NICK FARRELL 383 


The earth's four basements were shaken by the holy Scarab when 
you, the master of all were born. 


AO SATHREN ABRASAX IAOAI AEO EOA OAE IAOIEO EY AE 
EY IE IAOAI. 


AQ XZAGPEN ABPADA= IAQAI AEQ EQA QAH IAQ THO EY AH 
EY IEIAQAI 


(A-AW SATH-REN A-VRA-SAKS EE-A-AW-A-EE A-E-AW 
E-AW-A AW-A“E EE-A-AW EE~E-O E-Y A-E E-Y EE-E EE-A-AW- 
A-EE) 


Take the left-hand egg and rub it all over your body. As you do think 
about all the things in yourself which you need to get rid of. All the 
things that stop you expressing vour Higher Genius. Take your time. 


Take the egg and mentally absorb the divine letters into your Sphere 
of Sensation. Then Sav all the following: 


"This egg is the universe, which was created by my family, by m 
by all I have come into contact. This universe is no longer enov 
This universe must end so that my Higher Genius and Tyche 
build a new universe based on divine principles, where I am 
magician.” 

Crush the egg into a bowl. Lie back and sav, 


Oh Lord, while being born again, I am passing away; while 
growing and having grown, I am dying; while being born from 
a life-generating birth, 1 am passing on, released to death - as 
you have founded, as you have decreed, and have established the 
mystery. ` 


I am PHEROYRA MIOYRI (QEPOYPA MIOYPI) (FE-ROO-RA 
MEE-OO-REF). 


Wait à while. The feeling will be similar to death because you are 
starting, from scratch and making a sacrifice of yourself to allow 
your Higher Genus to take over. 

You will teel a little blank. Take the other egg in your right hand out 
into the Sun and hold it up so that it absorbs the Sun’s light. 


Magical Papyri suggests that has something to do with Kephri theology. 
The barks's names are taken from Me-Sektet which was the night-bark and 
Mane-djet which was the day-bark. 


384 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Say AO SATHREN ABRASAX IAOAI AEO EOA OAE IAOIEO EY 
AE EY IE IAOAI. 


AQ ZAOPEN ABPAZAE IAQAI AEQ EQA QAH IAQ THO EY AH 
EY IEIAQAI 


(A-AW SA-THREN A-VRA-SAKS EE-A-AW-A-EE A-E-AW AW- 


A-'E EE-A-AW EE-'E-O E-Y A-'E E-Y EE-E EE-A-AW-A-EE) Seven 
times. 


Take the egg into your temple. Enter the inner temple. And put 
incense on your burner. 


I have made an offering to you Oh Higher Genius. 
Ihave surrendered myself and this life to you. 

Now I ask that you come to me, 

As I emerged alive from my mother's womb. 

Come to me Higlier Genius, 

Awaken to me that I might be an effective tool for you 
And that might live the destiny that you require. 
Teach me Higher Genius. 


HARPONKNOUPHI, BRINTANTENOPHRI, 


BRISSKULMA, ARAOUAZARBA, MESENKRIPHI, NIPTOUML, 
KHMOUMAOPHI*. 


Icome then PSOI PNOUTHI NINTHER* 


AO SATHREN ABRASAX IAOAI AEO EOA OAL IAOILO LY AL 
EY IEIAOAI. 


(AQ ZAGPEN ABPAXAS IAQAI AEQ EQA QAH IAQ IHO EY AH 
EY IE IAQAI) 


(A-AW SA-THRE 
A-'E EE-A-AW EE 


A-VRA-SAKS EE-A-AW-A-EE. A-F-AW AW- 
F-O E-Y A-'E E-Y EE-E EE-A-AW-A-FE) 
Repeat below the line seven times. Then wait. You might find the Higher 


Genius appears in your inner temple but not physically. Practically it makes 
little difference. If nothing happens repeat below the line another seven 


*HARPONKNOUPHILis probably anepithetot Horus BRINI AN TI NE WHI 
could be the Egyptian meaning ‘good’, often used in titles of Osiris, such 
as Osoronnophris. NM KRIPHI may be Fgyptian for ‘Child in his 
chapel'found explanations for the other names. 


+ Egyptian for ‘Agathodaimon, God of the Gods’ 


NICK FARRELL 385 


times and pause. Repeat the sequence until you geta result or finally give 
up. It could take some time which is why I allocated all day to this. If you. 
take a break, then you should perform the Lesser Ritual of tle Pentagram, 
confess, open and balance the quarters etc again and then do the complete 
invocations (without the egg rituals) and continue to repeat the mantra. 
You can insert the following prayer to request victory* at any time: 


Rejoice with me, You who are set over the East Wind and the World, 
for whom all the gods serve as Body-Guards at Your Good Hour 
and on Your Good Day, You who are the Good Dæmon (God) of 
the World, the Crown of the Inhabited World, You who arise from 
the Abyss, You who Each Day rise a Young Man and set an Old 
Man. I beg You, Lord, do not allow me to be Over-Thrown, to be 
Plotted Against, to receive Dangerous Drugs, to go into Exile, to 
fall upon Hard Times. Rather, I ask to obtain a vision of my Holy 
Genius and be able to speak to it. 

Yes, Lord, awaken to me and give me victory over this divine 
process by means of Your Power, so that I know" 


WHAT SHOULD YOU EXPECT? 


This is a complicated question as after all vour efforts you should 
obtain some mystical experience connected to vour true spiritual 
t. How that happens will be unique to vou and your perspective 
he world. 


Some used te using native forms have a clear image of 

wir Genius in the form ot an Angel. or spirit or something similar. 
One person said that the image started with their Genius with his 
t to him, which slowly turned to face him. Another said that they 
thes ot pold tailing on the floor, Images are not that important 


ie experience as both reported intense feelings of emotion and 
power 


In my case, 1 had a vision which seemed initially totally 
disconnected trom the working. Indeed, the only reason I knew that 
at was not just a rand was that it came with heart-stopping 
emotion and a flood of certainty, Hound myself in tears at the vision 
and shaken tomy core [he state was repeatable and could be found 
each time | called upon it, Later the relationship between the image 
and the being behind it deepened. 

One person did not see anything but reported that after several 
hours, she telt like something was watching her. As the hours ticked 


* [PGM NNNVL211-30] 


386 HELIOS UNBOUND 


on, she felt that there was intense pressure in the room, which then 
"erupted." 

Another thought they had failed. When the chanting stopped, 
they found themselves in the middle of unnatural calm. It was as 
if time had stopped. That stillness returned in the coming weeks as 
they started to integrate the experience within their lives, or when 
conducting further magical rituals. 

What all these experiences have in common was not the 
"fireworks" but the fact that it was an important starting point 

for their future life. Invoking the Higher Genius is not the end of 
the procedure but the beginning. For the last six months to mean 
anything, you mustattempt to merge whatever feeling or experience 
you have into your life. Knowledge and conversation with vour 
Higher Genius is not a dialogue but surrender to an idea that you 
have a connection with the Universe. That surrender is giving up 
what you thought about yourself and building a new existence 
based around your destiny. A person who has faced their Higher 
Genius finds happiness in their destiny rather than running from it. 
Itis as if seeing the divine spirit behind our life creates a realisation 
that we don't have to waste time aspiring to things that we do not 
need to be. We can be ourselves knowing that we are fulfilling our 
correct role in the universe. Once we stop wasting time doing things 
that are not part of the plot (or stressing about those thinys which 
cannot be) or acting from fear, we can find happiness. As the stoic 
Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius said: “Death smiles at us all; all 
we can do is smile back.” 

From a magical point of view, the experience will fix one of the 
central problems of magic, not working or being blocked. You should 
reach a point of knowing if a ritual is going, to work or not betor: 
you do it. This is because the feeling you will have obtained through 
this experience will not only reveal to you if the universe is behind 
your actions but also provide you with the knowledye that the ritual 
will work. Many rituals fail because their success will intertere wath 
another's story and are blocked by the gods or the fates, The Higher 
Genius will tell you in advance if you are wasting, your time. Other 
rituals, for otherwise hopeless cases, will yet the ascent from the 
Higher Genius to proceed due to magical intervention. I beleve that 
resolving such hopeless cases using magical means often can be a 
turning point for another person by proving, that there is something, 
else in the universe than normal material existence 

Itis for this reason that magic systems always re squire a magician 
to have this vision of the Higher Genius before thev start doing 


NICK FARRELL 387 


serious work. They might not call it that, or require that person 
undergo a retreat, but the idea nevertheless empowers all the forms 
of magic I have seen. 


WHAT IF NOTHING HAPPENED? 

If you have worked solidly on the system for the last seven months, itis 
unlikely that you will walk away from your retreat without some form 
of experience of your Higher Genius. Often those who say they did not 
experience something from the process found it had; only it was not in 
the way that they thought. Having undergone six months working on it, 
they have experienced their Higher Genius working behind the entire 
operation, and in the weeks and months that followed, they found the 
Voice of the operation speaking to them. 

That said, failure is part of this system's story. Usually, this 
happens long before the retreat. Breaks during the six months cause 
the magical pressure to defuse, and the Lower Self will try everything 
itcan to cause us to relax our discipline. Often the reason you fail at 
the operation is that the flaws in your personality which have created 
your life conspire against vou, typically using real life to get in the 
way. Aleister Crowley, for example, failed to perform the Abramelin 
ritual when he rushed to the assistance of Samuel Mathers in what 
was to become the comedic farce known as the Battle of Blythe Roa 
While his diaries are full of real and imagined ghost stories whic 
took place when he was following the operation, Crowley faile. 
decided it was more important to help Mathers take over the Golden 
Dawn and take his “rightful role” as a magical leader. It wasa classic 
test which many will experience during the process and one that I 
do not believe Crowley ever really understood. 

However, itis possible that a person may diligently work their way 
through the six-month process and still not experience anything during 
the retreat. When it happens, it can be for several different reasons. 


YOU DO NOT RESPOND TO 
THE SYSTEM'S SPIRITUAL IMAGES. 


Earlier | explained how the classical Abramelin system did not work 
for me because | could not react to seeing the divine in the images 
that the system provided. I effectively shut myself down. It might 
be that that you do not respond to the spiritual forces described in 
this system and you must continue seeking your Higher Genius 
through other methods. It is one thing to call yourself a pagan or 
Hermetic, but sometimes it is a thin veneer for what you believe. 


388 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Since searching for the Higher Genius requires vou to be honest, it 
is unlikely you will get away with it. Abramelin himself mentioned 
that a person thought he would be better off converting to Judaism 
to do the operation but failed. His soul was Christian no matter what 
he intellectually thought. 


YOU DO NOT HAVE A BELIEF 
IN GOD OR GODS 


The magical path is developing a relationship with divinity and 
working with it. The name of that divinity is unimportant, as is 
how you work with it. What is important is that vou see it in a way 
that you can believe and can follow the concepts which are defined 
by it. One thing that a magician knows is that their religion is not 
exclusive, even if that is one of that religion's central premises. Nor 
can they act like that religion is the only one. 

Thereisa mistaken belief that the magical path can be conducted 
by atheists or those who do not believe anything. To pull this off 
they claim that everything is psychological, and spirits and gods 
are just manifestations of their complexes. Over the years, | have 
seen such people suffer because it is impossible to work with vour 
Divine Self if you do not believe such an entity exists. What such 
people usually do is take one of their complexes and make it divine. 
Religion provides a necessary face for occult teaching, to express 
itself. It tells you that this face is God, and you must see vourselt in 
the light of that being. Without an external face, it is human nature 
to see themselves as the God of their Universe. While there is some 
measure of truth behind this, the magician is no more the totality of 
God than the nail of my big toe is all of me, We are sparks ot that 
central fire, which is God. Religion correctly teaches, however, that 
there is a separation between that unity which needs to be overcome. 
Without religion, the central problem behind magic rears its ugly 
head - narcissism and megalomania. Contacting, the Higher Genius 
puts the ego in its place, and as a result, a belief which makes ego its 
central platform is going to take a kicking, 


YOU DID NOT DO IT LONG ENOUGH 


In magical matters, one size does not fit all. Six months of intense 
working is an arbitrary figure, and it will take some people much 
longer to get the desired results. The original Abramelin system 


NICK FARRELL 389 


had six, eight- and 18-month versions. The programme in this book 
could be easily increased by doing one month's work over two or 
three months. 


AFTERWARDS 


WHERE DO YOU GO FROM HERE? 


ne of my first teachers said that before you could do 

any magic properly, you needed to make some form of 

contact with your “Higher Self.” He admitted that such 

an experience was challenging, but after realising it, you 
could awaken magical abilities which were less limited. Once you 
had one Higher Self experience, it was possible to re-enter that state 
and effectively take it on as a Godform. Before every ritual, he would 
remember what his Higher Self felt like and open a communication 
channel with that memory. He would then perform the ceremony. 
Sometimes the nature of the ceremony caused him to lose the 
connection with the Higher Self. In one case, a disturbance in the 
ritual caused him to lose that connection, and it noticeably affected 
his ability to continue because he “lost his Higher Self.” 

Over the years I have come to see that, with some qualification, 
he was correct. Before each working, you remember the experience 
and images of your Higher Genius and how it felt. You contact it and 
explain how you see the rite going and what its goal is. That process 
starts like a prayer or invocation but rapidly becomes more intimate 
as it proceeds. Images from the process become increasingly crucial 
to key into your Higher Genius until the barriers between the two 
states of consciousness dissolve again. 

When this happens, you will become aware of the ritual as seen 
from the view of your divine self. You will instinctively know it it 
will work or not or if the gods are onside with it. There will be no 
point continuing with the rite if you have that feeling, that it would 
somehow be a bad idea. 

This process as part of the Stage Three Prima Materia exercise 
should not only become an automatic part of your pre-ritual 
preparation but carried out whenever you get a spare moment. This 
will enable your Higher Genius to have a more significant influence 

over your life. | have found that when I am considering, a problem 
in my life, attempting to contact that internal divine presence seems 
to result in solutions coming to mind. However, it does not act as a 
contact, or as a spirit guide giving adv 
perspective, or an idea, which allows 


or use words. It provides 
the Higher Intellect of the 


NICK FARRELL 391 


Lower Self to process its solution. Sometimes that Higher Intellect, 
due to a lack of study, or faulty philosophy, might get the message 
wrong, but over time, communications will improve. There have 

been moments where the intellect has interpreted communications 

as simple words (No, being the most common) and these I have 

heard audibly. However, it is essential to realise that the words are 

not coming from the Higher Self but interpreted through the Higher 

Intellect. It could equally have interpreted the response as a feeling 

of dread or joy. 

Once you have made that connection and feel that it is ok to 
proceed, it is not necessary or desirable to try and hang onto it 
throughout the ritual. Making the connection and obtaining that 
Higher Genius certainty will open the way for the ceremony to 
flow. Since most rites require you to take on different godforms 
or do other acts which might distract you from maintaining your 
Higher Genius, it seems unreasonable for you to expect to hold it 
like a godform throughout the rite. What I have found is that such 
a connection improves my ability to see the ritual from a more 
spiritual perspective. I tend to pick up more symbols and become 
aware of forces operating behind the scenes. Once a ritual I we 
doing for something mundane turned out to be used for somethiz 
different by the spiritual forces ] was invoking. I could see gods ar 
spirits which I had not called taking part. In hindsight, the mundane 
ritual was simply part of a series of more spiritually orientated work 
my Higher Genitis was doing. Linking to my Higher Genius enabled 
me to see the rite in terms of the “bigger picture.” 

There have been noted moments where | have been unable to 
make a Higher Genus link before a working, Sometimes this has 
been caused by stress or the fact that I desperately wanted the ritual 
to work and did not care what my Higher Genius thought about it. 
Other cases have been when the ritual was far removed from what I 
should have been doing: my Higher Genius was making a point. By 
this, I don't mean that the rite was wrong or immoral, just that it had 
nothiny to do with my destiny. 

Workiny in this way is a habit of a lifetime, and no mortal can do 
it all the time However, the door you will have opened with Helios 
Unbound serves as a start to adopting a more spiritually centred life. The 
discipline you have forged will be the start of your real magical life. 

You should be aware of a side effect of your Higher Genius 
experience. While it might initially feel liberating it could cause 
panic from your Lower Self, which shuts you down. 


392 HELIOS UNBOUND 


My first experience of my Higher Genius took place during 
my 5-6 initiation into the Hermetic Order of tlie Golden Dawn. For 
seven years, I hid from direct magical work for some time limiting 
my practice to carrying out initiations and writing. I was aware of 
the problem (which was why I forced myself to try the experiments 
mentioned at the start of this book) to try and re-connect. While my 
Higher Genius was still there, I found that my will to do the sort of 
magic I wanted was not. It took time for me to integrate the concept, 
and when | did, I made sudden and dramatic changes in my life 
that plugged me back into the mainstream current of magic. It might 
have helped if I had used some of the exercises such as the Stage 
Three Prima Materia, but equally, it could have just my destiny to 
take a long time to wake up to what I wanted. 

This book is based on a pagan eclectic Hermetic system which 
Ihave been working on for years. This will be published in a future 
volume and will cover some of the gaps in the explanations in this 
book. Space prevented me from going into too many details in some 
areas which did not necessarily need an explanation as part of the 
work to connect to your Higlier Genius. The future book explains the 
magician system in some detail so that vou can build on your seven 
months of work. 


NICK FARRELL 393 


APPENDIX ONE 
REQUIREMENTS FOR EACH MONTH 


General 

An altar (a small table will do) 

Box of incense charcoal 

A bowl for water 

A dagger 

Mineral water 

A big box of tealights (you will use three a day at least ) 

Tape recorder for pathworkings 

A picture (in a frame which stands up) or statue to represent your 
Higher Genius. 

A method of timing your sessions to make sure you carry out your 
work for the correct amount of time. 

Month One 

Frankincense or the Abramelin Incense, which is made by Aare 
Leitch. 

Month Two 

14 black candles marked with the sign of Taurus, Paramah, y. 
name, Hera and an Earth triangle. 

14 blue candles marked with the sign of Scorpio, Periton, your name, 
Persephone and a water triangle. 

14 yellow candles marked with the sign of Aquarius, Akramatha, 
your name, Zeus and an air triangle. 

14 red candles marked with the sign of Leo, Zorothion, your name, 
Hades and a fire triangle 

7 white candles marked with a spirit wheel, your name and aiðńp 
Month three 

28 white tea lights 

Month four 

Four Violet candles marked with the sign of Saturn, your name, and 
Barimas, Hus, Tamas, Darus, Darjus, Qajus, Harus and Tahitus 
Four indigo candles marked with the sign of Moon, your name, and 
Garnus, Hadis, Maranus, Maltas, Timas, Rabis Minalus and Dagajus. 


* This can be obtained from Doc Solomon's Occult Curios http:// 
docsolomons.com/ wp/ 


394 HELIOS UNBOUND 


Four Blue candles marked with the sign of Jupiter, your name, and 
Damahas, Darmas, Matis, Magis, Daris, Tamis, Farus and Dahidas. 
Four Green candles marked with the sign of Venus, your name, 
and Didas, Gilus, Hilus, Dahifas, Ablimas, Basalmus Arhus and 
Dahtaris. 

Four Yellow candles marked with the sign of Sun, your name, and 
Bandalus, Dahimas, Abadulas, Dahifas, Atiafas, Maganamus, Gadis 
and Tahimaris. 

Four Orange candles marked with the sign of Mercury, your name, 
and Barhujas, Amiras, Hitis, Sahis, Daris, Hilis, Dahdis and Mahudis. 
Four Red candles marked with the sign of Mars, your name, 
and Dagdijus, Hagidis, Gidijus, Magras, Ardagus, Handagijus, 
Mahandas and Dahidas. 

A set of Tarot cards 

Six copies of each of the seven king's seal 

Paper crown with one of the six seals on it 

Your astrological chart 

Frankincense (Sun), Myrrh (Moon), Storax (Saturn), Indian nerd 
(Venus) Cinnamon (Mercury) Saussurea costus (Mars) and 
Cinnamomum Tamala (Indian Bay leaf) Jupiter. 

A saucer and red wine 


Month Five 

Set of Tarot cards 

Myrrh incense 

a picture or statue of Hekate 

Your astrological chart 

A key. 

Red Wine 

White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Geriz 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Enedil 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Annuncia 
White Candle marked with Heka ur name and Assarez 
White Candle marked with Hekate, vour name and Cabil 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Nedevrahe 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Siely 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Annediex 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Raubel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Aredatir 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Necol 


NICK FARRELL 395 


White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Abdizu 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Azerut 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Erdegel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Achalich 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Azeruch 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Egrebel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Annucel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Queyhuc 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Bectue 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Geliel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, vour name and Zequebin 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Abrine 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Aziel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Tagriel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, your name and Abliemel 
White Candle marked with Hekate, vour name and Anuxi 


Month Seven 

A magical image of Psyche and Eros embracing one another and 
beneath Eros’s feet these letters: " S (£2822225),” and beneath 
Psyche's feet: “EEEEEEEE (HHHHHHHH). 


The Retreat 
A candle which can burn day and night for at least three full da. 
re it with the sigils and your name on it as described in the 


ted black vellow an 
tures Paramara ( 
enton (blue) (Peprros? 
vour own name on each one 

One white candle inscribed with your name, Michael MIXAHA, 
APHIOYQ.NYEPYand WAL 

One white candle inscribed with your name, RAPHAEL, EHIOYQA 
NYCHIEU and CHYBACHYCH 

One white candle inscribed with your name, GABRIEL, HIOYOAE, 
OCHE and BACHACHYCH 

One white candle inscribed with your name, SOURIEL, IOYOAEH, 
MECHEU and BAKANICHYCH 

One white candle inscribed with your name and ZAZIEL, OY OAEHI, 
TAO and BAZ ABACHYCH 

One white candle inscribed with your name BADAKIEL, YOAEHIO, 


iblu 


» candle. Write the names of the four holy 
(Pziéuégé) , Zorothion (red) (Zopoerow), 
\kramata (yellow) (Akpauata). Write 


396 HELIOS UNBOUND 


SABVAOTH and BADETOPTHOTH 

One white candle inscribed with your name SYLIEL, QAEHIOY. 
AAQNAI and BAINCHOOOCH 

Seven coloured cards with the appropriate Greek Vowels 


| Indigo | a — | 
| Bue [| > | 
[ Green | H | 


Inscribe a white candle with your name and AIIAOANATIEZMOX 
(Apathanatismos) 

14 white tealights 

Astrological Chart 

Timer 

Tape recorder 

Two eggs and write on them, your name and ABPAXAZ IAQAI AEQ 
EQA QAH IAQ IHO EY AH EY IE IAQAI. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Aeschylus. Podlecki, A. Aeschylus. and Aeschylus. (2005). 
Prometheus bound. Oxford: Aris & Phillips. 

Agrippa von Nettesheim, H. (1982). Three Books of Occult Philosophy 
or magic. New York: AMS Press. 

Assistant, A. (2019). Acquiring a Supernatural Assistant - Papyri 
Graecae Magicae - Hermetic Library. [online] Hermetic.com. Available 
at: https:/ / Hermetic.com/ pgm/ assistant [Accessed 16 May 2019]. 
Bailey, A. (1993). A treatise on the seven rays. New York: Lucis 
Publishing Co. 

Betz, H. (n.d.). Greek Magical Papyri in translation, including the 
demonic spells. 

Brennan, C. (n.d.). Hellenistic astrology. 

Cebes Thebanus and Parsons, R. (1892). Cebes’ Tablet. Boston: Ginn. 
Cline, R. (2011). Ancient angels. Leiden: Brill. 

Daniel, D. (2006). Paracelsus’ “Astronomia Magna” (1537/38). Ann 
Arbor, Mich: UMI. 
Diodorus (1985). Bibliothe 
Farrell, N. (2011). Mather: 


historica. Lipsiae: Teubner. 

cret revised - the rituals and teaching 
of the alpha et omega. [Place of publication not identified]: Rosicrucia 
Order of the Golden Dawn. 

Farrell, N. (2013). ligu 
London: SKYLIGHT. 
Galen. and Johnston, 1 (2011). Galen on diseases and symptoms. 
Cambridye: Cambridge University Press. 

Greer, J. and Warnock, C. (2010). The Picatrix. Place of publication 
not identified: Adocentyn Press. 

Hesiod, and Cooke, T. (1743). The works of Hesiod. London: Printed 
for T. Longman 

Hesiod. and Lattimore, R. (1991). Hesiod. [Michigan]: Ann Arbor 
Paperbacks 

Jackson, H. and Zoximos (1979). Zosimos of Panopolis on the letter 
omega. Claremont, Calif.: Claremont Graduate School. 
Journalpsy che.org. (2019). The Jungian Model of the Psyche | Journal 
Ps. [online] Available at: http://journalpsyche.org/jungian- 
model-psyche/ [Accessed 16 May 2019]. 

Julian and Taylor, T. (1932). Two orations of the Emperor Julian, one 
to the Sovereign Sun and the other to the Mother of the gods. Chicago: 


Imagination: The Keys to Magic, 2nd ed. 


Hermetic Publishing. 

Kingsley, P. (1995). Ancient philosophy, mystery, and magic. 1st ed. 
USA: Oxford University Press. 

Kingsley, P. (1995). Ancient philosophy, mystery, and magic. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Leitch, A. (2003). Secrets of tle magickal grimoires. St. Paul, Minn.: 
Llewellyn. 

Mathers, S. (2012). The Book of the Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage. 
Newburyport: Dover Publications. 

Paracelsus. and Blaser, R. (1960). Liber de nymphis, sylphis, pygmaeis et 
salamandris et de caeteris spiritibus.. Bern: Francke Verlag. 

Plato. and Frede, D. (1993). Philebus. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co. 
Plato., Emlyn-Jones, C. and Preddv, W. (2013). Republic. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Plotinus. (1989). Enneads. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University. 
Plutarch., Dryden, J. and Clough, A. (1952). The lives of the noble 
Grecians and Romans. Chicago: Encyclopdia Britannica. 

Pratchett, T. (2013). Witches abroad. London: Corgi. 

Riley, M. (2019). . 

Stratton-Kent, J. (2010). Geosophia. [Dover]: Scarlet Imprint/ 
Bibliotheque Rouge. 

Vaughan, R., Cross, T. and Ashmole, E. (1652). Theatrum hemi um 
Britannicum. London: printed by J. Grismond for Nath: Brooke, at 
the Angel in Cornhill. 

Yunis, H. and Plato. (2011). Phaedrus. Cambridge: Cambridye 
University Press. 

Weinfurter, K. (1932). Man’s Higher Purpose. Ist ed. Paternoster 
House, Paternoster Row London: RIDER & CO, 


BY THIS AUTHOR 


Non-Fiction 


Beyond the Sun: The History, Teachings and Rituals of the Last Golden 
Dawn Temple. 

King Over the Water: Samuel Mathers and the Golden Dawn. 

Mathers’ Last Secret: The Rituals and Teachings of the Alpha et Omega. 
Making Talismans: Creating Living Magical Tools for Change and 
Transformation. 

The Osiris Scroll: Pathworking into the Egyptian underworld 

Egyptian Shaman: The Primal Spiritual Path of Ancient Egypt 

The Shem Grimoire: Working with the Angels. 

The Hidden Path Behind Initiation: The Crata Repoa Decoded 

The Magical Machine: The Golden Dawn Vault in Colour 

The Druidic Order of Pendragon 

The Golden Dawn Temple Tarot (with Harry Wendrich) 

Fiction 

When a Tree Falls. 


You can read articles by Nick Farrell at his blog at www.nickfarrell.it 


