. “This is the way the world ends. Not with a bang but a whimper.” T.S. Eliot , The Hollow Men Throughout Western history, the idea of civilizational collapse has been bound up with visions of apocalyptic catastrophe caused by invasions, plagues, war, or natural disasters. But today, the greater danger may be a dark age of sterility and stagnation that lasts for centuries. In this dystopian scenario, nothing collapses outright, yet nothing vital is created. Civilization settles into a state of weariness and futility that is sustained by just enough material comfort to stifle the impetus for revolution or renaissance. In his book The Decadent Society, Ross Douthat calls this civilizational condition decadence, and he defines it as “economic stagnation, institutional decay, and cultural and intellectual exhaustion at a high level of material prosperity…It describes a situation in which repetition is more the norm than innovation; in which sclerosis afflicts public institutions and private enterprises alike; in which intellectual life seems to go in circles…” (Ross Douthat, The Decadent Society) In this video, we explore whether our civilization has entered a dark age of decadence. In his magnum opus, From Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life, the great 20th century historian Jacques Barzun wrote: “This sense of a [civilizational] ending need not mean stoppage or total ruin… All that is meant by Decadence is falling off… It implies in those who live in such a time no loss of energy or talent or moral sense. On the contrary, it is a very active time, full of deep concerns, but peculiarly restless, for it sees no clear lines of advance. The forms of art as of life seem exhausted; institutions function painfully. Repetition and frustration are the intolerable result. Boredom and fatigue are great historical forces…When people accept futility and the absurd as normal, the culture is decadent.” Jacques Barzun, Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life While apocalyptic visions of collapse capture the imagination, history suggests that civilizations more often decline through decadence than sudden catastrophe. Ancient Rome is a classic example. After the Crisis of the Third Century &#8211; when foreign invasions, economic turmoil, and the assassination of Emperor Severus Alexander nearly tore the empire apart &#8211; Rome endured for centuries in a state of decadence. The poet W.H. Auden remarked: “&#8230;the Roman Empire is like a mirror in which we see reflected the brutal, vulgar, powerful yet despairing image of our technological civilization&#8230;What fascinates and terrifies us about the Roman Empire is not that it finally went smash, but that it managed to last for four centuries without creativity, warmth, or hope.” W.H. Auden, Review of Rome and Villa Likewise, G.K. Chesterton observed: “There was nothing left that could conquer Rome, but there was also nothing left that could improve it… It was the end of the world, and the worst of it was that it need never end.” G.K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man At first glance, it may seem wrong to call our civilization decadent. After all, one of the characteristics of decadence is economic stagnation and a decline in innovation. Don’t we live in an era where rapid technological innovation is fueling economic growth and improving the quality of life? Douthat challenges this idea, for as he writes: “The question is whether our sense of continued [technological] acceleration is now to some extent an illusion created by the Internet—the one area of clear technological progress in our era, but also a distorting filter on the world beyond your screen.” Ross Douthat, The Decadent Society In the late 19th century, within a span of approximately 50 years, civilization was transformed by the invention of the electric lightbulb, indoor plumbing, automobiles, airplanes, the internal combustion engine, the camera, telephone, air conditioning, and refrigeration. The historian Perry Miller called this the era of the “technological sublime,” when inventions inspired an awe equal to that elicited by cathedrals or mountains. And as Ross Douthat observed: “From the early nineteenth century onward, the recurrence of such moments [of the technological sublime] in America and the West became almost liturgical, with each new technological breakthrough offering a kind of pilgrimage or festival.” ( Ross Douthat, The Decadent Society ) Since 1970, the most transformative innovations &#8211; the computer, the internet, and the smartphone &#8211; have revolutionized the way we work, communicate, and access information. Yet their influence has been concentrated in the digital sphere. Outside the digital realm, innovations that have radically changed our day-to-day existence are few and far between as most progress has consisted of improvements to already existing technologies. What is more, according to a 2022 study titled “Entrepreneurship and the Decline of American Growth” by the Joint Economic Committee, entrepreneurship in the U.S. has declined significantly since the late 1970s. New business formation has fallen by 44%, and startups as a share of all firms have dropped from around 16.5% to just 8%. We are, as a society, less creative and innovative than we used to be. And as Douthat writes: “…the basic stagnationist case: We used to travel faster, build bigger, live longer; now we communicate faster, chatter more, snap more selfies…Everyday life was, indeed, more radically transformed by earlier technological breakthroughs. And over the last two generations, the only truly radical change has taken place in the devices that we use for communication and entertainment, so that a single one of the nineteenth century’s great inventions still looms larger in our everyday existence than most of what we think of as technological breakthroughs nowadays.” Ross Douthat, The Decadent Society Just as revolutionary innovations have slowed to a halt in the last 50 years, so has economic progress. While wages, household income, and net worth have all risen over the past decades, much of these gains have been offset by taxes and money printing. In many countries when all taxes are combined, such as sales taxes, income taxes, capital gains taxes, property taxes, and tariffs and other duties, many of us pay more than 50% of our income to fund the rampant waste and corruption of statist governments. To make matters worse we are further looted through money printing, which acts as an invisible tax as the purchasing power of our savings decreases when central banks increase the money supply. The rampant expansion of the money supply, in other words, is papering over the stagnation that defines most economies across the globe. And as Douthat