Nietzsche’s doctrine of perspectivism claims that our view of the world and the statements we take to be true, depend on our perspective of the world. Thus, it gives rise to the epistemological thesis that our knowledge claims can never be true in an absolute or objective sense. Perspectivism lays the foundations of Nietzsche’s thought, philosophy is subjective, and no philosophy is ultimate – but helps as a base to allow others to see the world differently. Nietzsche did have an influence on postmodernist philosophers, especially with his critique of morality (genealogy of morals), the death of god, etc. However, he was certainly not a postmodernist himself, he was beyond that, as he tried to create objective values to live by that can advance humanity (postmodernism rejects objective values). His will to power is an affirmation of life that enhances it and creates objective values. He is thus a philosopher of the future, beyond postmodernism. He speaks of a new breed of philosophers approaching, of “free spirits¨. These are not ones who want to establish their truth as a truth for everyone (the secret wish of all dogmatic aspirations), they are outlaws, who are not in agreement with the majority, and whose judgments are their judgments alone. Inevitably they will be presented with bolted doors and shut windows, but for Nietzsche, these are free, very free spirits. “Greatest of all is the one who can be the most solitary, the most hidden, the most different, the person beyond good and evil, the master of his virtues, the one with an abundance of will. Only this should be called greatness: the ability to be just as multiple as whole, just as wide as full.” 📺Watch The Full Video!🧠 Greatest Philosophers In History | Friedrich Nietzsche Nietzsche's main concepts on living life revolve around self-overcoming , amor fati , perspectivism , human nobility , the will to power , the eternal recurrence , and the overman . Support Eternalised Ko-fi Patreon YouTube Buy Official Merch Redbubble Spring &#8220;A room without books is like a body without a soul.&#8221; — Cicero Great Books List Discord Community Join Discord Follow Eternalised on social media! YouTube Pinterest Facebook Instagram Twitter Liked it? Take a second to support Eternalised on Patreon! Related Related Posts: The Inner Work Archive Essays in Psychology, Spirituality & Philosophy Favourite Quotes (Patrons Only) Artwork in videos (Patrons Only)