Skip to main content
Texts
Video
Audio
Software
Images
    Sign up for free
    Log in
    About Blog Events Projects Help Donate 
    Contact Jobs Volunteer 
Full text of "Stephen Skinner - The Complete Magicians Tables - 2007"
See other formats
The Complete 
Tables 
Lhc mast complete tabular set of Magic, Kab balls tic, Angelic, 
Astro logic, Aid i e mi c, Demonic, Geomanlic, Grimnire. Genial via. 
I tliiuu. la rot, I’agan Print I icon. Plant, PciEinnc and Character 
Correspondences in more than 7/7 Tables 
Stephen Skinner 
The Complete 
Magician’s Tables 
The most complete set of Magic, Kabbalistic, Angelic, Astrologic , Alchemic, 
Demonic, Geomantic, Grimoire, Gematria, I Ching, Tarot, Pagan Pantheon, 
Plant, Perfume and Character Correspondences in more than 777 tables 
by 
Stephen Skinner 
Golden Hoard Press 
2006 
Acknowledgements 
I wish to acknowledge Adam McLean's edition of the Magical Calendar as my 
original inspiration for writing this volume, and David Rankine for re- 
awakening my old interest in the Kabbalah. I would also like to thank Suguna 
Rethinasamy and Er Choon Haw who both worked unflaggingly on the 
research, typing, design and formatting of countless tables, without whose 
work this book might never have seen the light of day. 
I would also like to thank Darcy Kuntz for permission to use the cover 
illustration of the Tree of Life from his book The Complete Golden Dawn Cipher 
Manuscript. Special thanks to Dianthus Kim for the illustration calligraphy on 
the three Trees of Life, to Valentina Kim for help, as always, with the cover, 
and to Helene Hodge for many helpful suggestions in the Natural Magic and 
Pantheons sections. 
The cover illustration is from Peter Apian's Astronomicum Caesareum, published in Ingolstadt in 
1540, which contains a series of beautiful cardboard discs forming a sophisticated circular 
tabular device. This work was the last standard astronomical work to be based entirely on the 
Ptolemaic and geocentric view of the universe. This circular disk with rotating pointer enables 
the user to determine the points of intersection of the moon's orbit and the ecliptic, or Cauda 
and Caput Draconis, the two 'dragon points' for any time of the year. These points play an 
important part in calendar calculations and the determination of the correct magical times for 
specific operations. 
Dedicated to Fra Volo Inteligere 
Gerald Yorke (1901 - 1983) 
friend and mentor 
who preserved and kept alive the work of Aleister Crowley 
The basis of Occultism can be summed up in a word correspondence. The 
theory of correspondence recognizes an implicit interdependence of all things 
with all other things, the existence of multiple relationships between various 
aspects of Nature's kaleidoscopic richness. 
-James Wasserman, Art and Symbols of the Occult 
CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements 5 
Figures 8 
Subject Listing of Tables 9 
INTRODUCTION 12 
History 14 
Aleister Crowley's Liber 777 17 
The Paths on the Tree of Life 18 
A New Row Order 20 
Tarot on the Tree 21 
How to Use these Tables 22 
Numbering Conventions 23 
The Nature of Correspondences 23 
Spelling and Transliteration 29 
Variant Attributions 30 
Tree of Life Formats 30 
THE TABLES 34 