3 1761 04952313 7

ERIK HORNUNG
translated from the German by
DAVID LORTON

Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2019 with funding from
The Arcadia Fund

https://archive.org/details/ancientegyptianbOOhorn

The
Ancient
Egyptian
Books of
the Afterlife

The
Ancient
Egyptian
Books of
the Afterlife
ERIK HORNUNG
Translated from the German by David Lorton

CORNELL UNIVERSITY PRESS
ITHACA AND LONDON

Copyright © 1999 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this book, or parts thereof,
must not be reproduced in any form without permission in writing from the publisher.
For information, address Cornell University Press, Sage House, 512 East State Street,
Ithaca, New York 14850.
First published 1999 by Cornell University Press
First printing, Cornell Paperbacks, 1999
Printed in the United States of America
Hornung, Erik.
[Altagyptische Jenseitsbiicher. English]
The ancient Egyptian books of the afterlife / Eric Hornung :
translated from the German by David Lorton.
p.

cm.

Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8014-3515-3 (cloth : alk. paper).—ISBN 0-8014-8515-0
(paper : alk. paper)
1. Incantations, Egyptian.
I. Title.
PJ1551.H67

2. Future life.

3. Egypt—Religion.

1999

299'.31—dc21

99-10888
CIP

Cornell University Press strives to use environmentally responsible suppliers and
materials to the fullest extent possible in the publishing of its books. Such materials
include vegetable-based, low-VOC inks and acid-free papers that are recycled, totally
chlorine-free, or partly composed of nonwood fibers.
Cloth printing
10

987654321

Paperback printing
10

987654321

<

ERRATA

The Ancient Egyptian Books of the Afterlife
Erik Hornung

translated from the German by David Lorton

The copyright lines should read as follows:

Altdgyptische jenseitsbiicher, © 1997 by Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,
Darmstadt.
English translation and additional material copyright© 1999 by Cornell
University.

Dedicated to the memory of
Friedrich Abitz (1924-1994) and
Abdel-Aziz Fahmy Sadek (2933-1995)

ENTS

Translator's Note

ix

Abbreviations

xi

English Translations

xiii

Preface

xvii

Chronology

xxi

The Pyramid Texts

1

The Coffin Texts

7

The Book of the Dead

13

The Books of Breathing

23

The New Kingdom Books of the Netherworld

26

General

26

The Amduat

27

The Spell of the Twelve Caves

34

The Book of Gates

33

The Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld

77

The Book of Caverns

83

The Book of the Earth

93

Miscellaneous Scenes

107

viii

CONTENTS

The Books of the Sky

112

The Book of Nut

113

The Book of the Day

116

The Book of the Night

122

Special Compositions

136

The Litany of Re

136

The Book of the Heavenly Cow

148

The Book of Traversing Eternity

151

Glossary

153

Bibliography

157

Index

183

TRANSLATOR’S NOTE

o single set of conventions exists for the English rendering of
ancient Egyptian and modern Arabic personal and place names. Most of
the names mentioned in this book occur in a standard reference work:
John Baines and Jaromir Malek, Atlas of Ancient Egypt (New York: Facts
on File, 1980), and the renderings here follow that volume. The only ex¬
ception is the omission of the typographical sign for ayin; this consonant
does not exist in English, and I felt that its inclusion would serve only as
a distraction.
Erik Hornung's summary of the Books of the Afterlife provides a
much-needed synopsis of this material for both scholars and general
readers, and I thank Cornell University Press for asking me to partici¬
pate in this project. I also thank Professor Hornung and Eckhard Eichler
for their help and encouragement while it was under way.
D. L.

ABBREVIATIONS

BD
BM

Book of the Dead
British Museum

Cat.

Catalogo (of the Turin Museum)

CG
KV

Catalogue general (of the Cairo Museum)

MMA

Valley of the Kings (or King's Valley)
Metropolitan Museum of Art

P.

Papyrus

QV

Valley of the Queens (or Queen's Valley)
Theban tomb

IT

Abbreviations of titles of journals and monograph series are found in
the bibliography at the end of this volume.

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

H early all the compositions discussed here have been trans¬
lated into English. The bibliography at the end of this volume will be
consulted primarily by Egyptologists; a list of relatively accessible trans¬
lations, in order of publication, is supplied here for the convenience of
nonspecialists. While I include some older sources here because of their
availability in reprint editions, readers should note that because of on¬
going advances in our knowledge and understandings, relatively recent
sources are generally more reliable than older ones.
D. L.

The Pyramid Texts
Samuel A. B. Mercer, The Pyramid Texts in Translation and Commentary, 4 vols. (New
York, 1942).
John A. Wilson, in James B. Pritchard, ed.. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the
Old Testament, 2d ed. (Princeton, 1955), pp. 3, 32-33 (selections).
Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 2 vols. (Oxford, 1969).
-, in Raymond O. Faulkner, Edward F. Wente, Jr., and William Kelly Simpson,
The Literature of Ancient Egypt: An Anthology of Stories, Instructions, and Poetry
(New Flaven, 1972), pp. 269^278 (selections).
Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1: The Old and
Middle Kingdoms (Berkeley, 1973), pp. 29-50 (selections).
Marshall Clagett, Ancient Egyptiafi Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
pp. 413-424 (selections).

xiv

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

The Coffin Texts
John A. Wilson, in James B. Pritchard, ed.. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Related to the
Old Testament, id ed. (Princeton, 1955), pp. 7-8,10,11-12, 33 (selections).
Leonard H. Lesko, The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Two Ways, UCBUCP 17 (Berke¬
ley, 1972).
Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Eiterature: A Book of Readings, vol. 1: The Old and
Middle Kingdoms (Berkeley, 1973), pp. 131-133 (selections).
Alexandre Piankoff, The Wandering of the Sold, Bollingen Series 40/6 (New York,
1974) (“Book of the Two Ways").
Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3 vols. (Warminster,
1973-1978; rpt. 1994).
Marshall Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
pp. 437-443 (selections).

The Book of the Dead
John A. Wilson, in James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts Related to the
Old Testament, id ed. (Princeton, 1955), pp. 3-4, 9-10, 34-36 (selections).
Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2: The New
Kingdom (Berkeley, 1976), pp. 119-132 (selections).
Raymond O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead, ed. Carol Andrews
(London, 1985).
Eva von Dassow, ed.. The Egyptian Book of the Dead: The Book of Going Forth by Day
(San Francisco, 1994).

The Amduat
E. A. Wallis Budge, The Egyptian Heaven and Hell (London, 1905), vols. 1 (long ver¬
sion) and 2, pp. 1-40 (short version).
Alexandre Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954).
-, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, Bollingen Series 40/2 (New York, 1955; rpt.
1962), pp. 79-83, 85-89 (selections).
Marshall Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
pp. 491-506 (introductions to the individual hours).

The Spell of the Twelve Caves
Alexandre Piankoff, The Wandering of the Sold, Bollingen Series 40/6 (Princeton,
1974), pp. 40-114 (see also above on "The Book of the Dead"; this composition is
spell 168).

The Book of Cates
E. A. Wallis Budge, The Egyptian Heaven and Hell, vol. 2 (London, 1905), pp. 43-306.
Alexandre Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York,
1954), pp. 137-224-

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

XV

The Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld
Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, Bollingen Series 40/2 (New
York, 1955; rpt. 1962), pp. 121-125, 127-131.

The Book of Caverns
Alexandre Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York,
1954), pp. 45-135.

The Book of the Earth
Alexandre Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York,
1954), pp. 327-376.

The Book of Nut
James P. Allen, Genesis in Egypt: The Philosophy of Ancient Egyptian Creation Accounts,
YES 2 (New Haven, 1988), pp. 1-7.
Marshall Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 2 (Philadelphia, 1995),
PP- 357-403.

The Book of the Day
Alexandre Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York,
1954), pp. 389-407.

The Book of the Night
Alexandre Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York,
1954), pp. 409-428.

The Litany of Re
Alexandre Piankoff, The Litany of Re, Bollingen Series 40/4 (New York, 1964).
Marshall Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
pp. 511-529.

The Book of the Heavenly Cow
John A. Wilson, in James B. Pritchard, ed.. Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the
Old Testament, 2d ed. (Princeton, 1955), pp. 8-9,10-11 (partial).
R. T. Rundle Clark, Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt (London, 1959), pp. 181-185
(partial).

xvi

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

Alexandre Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, Bollingen Series 40/2 (New
York, 1955; rpt. 1962), pp. 26-37.
Miriam Lichtheim, Ancient Egyptian Literature: A Book of Readings, vol. 2: The New
Kingdom (Berkeley, 1976), pp. 197-199 (partial).
Marshall Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
PP- 537~542 (partial).

PREFACE

^Early Egyptologists focused primarily on the collection of spells
that Lepsius designated the Book of the Dead, which is often viewed as
the "Bible of the ancient Egyptians." With the discovery of the Pyramid
Texts in 1880-1881, research interest turned to that collection of spells,
which is nearly a thousand years earlier. The Book of the Dead, how¬
ever, still remains at the center of all esoteric interest in ancient Egypt.
But the other large group of texts dealing with the afterlife, the Books
of the Netherworld (once also called Guides to the Afterlife) long led a
shadowy existence. Their actual discoverer was Jean-Fran<;ois Champollion, who saw these compositions when he visited the Valley of the
Kings in 1829 and immediately recognized their significance. In the thir¬
teenth of his letters from Egypt, dated May 26, 1829, he gives a detailed
account of the decoration of the royal tombs accessible in his day, espe¬
cially that of the tomb of Ramesses VI, where he completed a number of
copies and descriptions. He had prepared the first translation from the
Book of Gates and the Book of Caverns when his untimely death cut
short his work. Later in the nineteenth century, Gaston Maspero and Eu¬
gene Lefebure in particular devoted themselves to deciphering the
Books of the Afterlife. In time, however, a widespread, rather negative
attitude emerged toward these "abstruse" priestly fantasies, as they
were adjudged, and leading specialists no longer deemed it worthwhile
to become involved with them.

xviii

PREFACE

It is typical that the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun in 1922
aroused the world's interest in the material riches of the Valley of the
Kings while creating no momentum for the study of its spiritual trea¬
sures. In the mid-i930s, Alexandre Piankoff (1897-1966) was the first to
undertake a systematic study of the religious books in the royal tombs,
and he issued a steady stream of text editions, translations, and other
works. With his splendid edition of the tomb of Ramesses VI in 1954,
which was prepared under the auspices of the Bollingen Foundation, he
made practically all the relevant texts available in English translation.
Further study of the royal Books of the Afterlife could now be built on
these foundations.
Beginning in 1938,1 had the pleasure of working with Piankoff, after
Siegfried Schott had repeatedly called my attention to the Books of the
Netherworld. Meanwhile, they have been generally recognized as an
important source for the history of Egyptian religion, and especially for
beliefs regarding the afterlife, and they have even received attention
outside the field of Egyptology, especially from members of the Jungian
school of psychoanalysis.
The Books of the Netherworld are the focus of this book; I shall treat
such "classical" sources as the Pyramid Texts, the Coffin Texts, and the
Book of the Dead more summarily, since other aids to understanding
them are already available. Additionally, in all periods the Egyptian
mortuary cult employed numerous other texts, which have been desig¬
nated "mortuary liturgies" (in German, Verklarungen), to which Jan Assmann has devoted special attention.
It is an open question to what extent these compositions, which are so
distinct in form, reflect a monolithic conception of the afterlife. The New
Kingdom undoubtedly added fresh accents of its own: we can character¬
ize the difference between the Book of the Dead and the Books of the
Netherworld by noting that only the latter actually give detailed descrip¬
tions of the hereafter; the spells of the Book of the Dead are concerned
with practical assistance regarding the journey to the afterlife and the
deceased's stay there. There was also an effort to maintain a hierarchy of
compositions, so that some of them—the Pyramid Texts, the Books of
the Netherworld, and the Books of the Sky—were reserved for the ex¬
clusive use of Pharaoh, just as certain forms of architecture and meas¬
urement served only for use in the realm of royalty.
Most of the books and collections of spells treated here were still in
use in the Late Period. At that time, whole libraries of ancient writings
were collected on tomb walls and sarcophagi for use in the afterlife.

PREFACE

xix

though there was a preference for liturgical texts handed down in the
cult. All the conditions were thus at hand for an influence that contin¬
ued beyond the pharaonic period and into the new spiritual currents of
Hellenism and early Christianity. In the Books of the Netherworld, as in
classical esoterica, the "sun at midnight" stood at the center of the expe¬
rience of the afterlife, and along with the myth of Osiris the course of the
sun played an important role in the Hellenistic Isis mysteries. The dis¬
closure of such relationships represents a wide field for investigation,
though historians of religion are too little familiar with these texts.
On the whole, however, research into the texts and representations
has yielded rich results in recent years, so that it seems time to venture a
summary and orientation for nonspecialists, who are otherwise con¬
fronted by a growing body of literature. To facilitate the survey, I have
added drawings of the individual nocturnal hours or sections of the
Books of the Netherworld and the Sky. I thank Dr. Abdel Ghaffer Shedid for his kind permission to employ his views of the Books of the
Netherworld from the Komparative Untersuchungen zu vier Untenveltsbiichern of Winfried Barta (see figures 1-12, 14-25, 28-36, and 38) and
Dr. Gilles Roulin for the preparation of additional figures.

■

CHR

GY

Archaic Period

c. 3000-2700 b.c.e.

Dynasties 1 and 2

Old Kingdom
Dynasty 3 (Djoser); first pyramids
Dynasty 4 (Khufu, Khephren)
Dynasty 5 (Wenis); first Pyramid Texts
Dynasty 6 (Teti, Pepy I, Pepy II)
Dynasty 8 (Ibi)

First Intermediate Period

c. 2705-2180 b.c.e.
2705-2640 B.C.E.
2640-2520 B.C.E.
2520-2360 B.C.E.
2360-2195 B.C.E.
2195-2180 B.C.E.
c. 2180-1987 b.c.e.

Dynasties 9-10; capital at Herakleopolis
Dynasty 11; capital at Thebes; contemporaneous
with Dynasties 9-10

Middle Kingdom (Coffin Texts)
Dynasty 11 (Mentuhotpe)
Dynasty 12 (Amenemhet, Senwosret)
Dynasties 13-14

c. 1987-1640 b.c.e.
1987-1938 B.C.E.
1938-1759 B.C.E.
1759-i640 b.c.e.

xxii

CHRONOLOGY

Second Intermediate Period

c. 1640- 1530 b.c.e.

Dynasties 15-16 (Hyksos rulers)
Dynasty 17; capital at Thebes; contemporaneous
with Dynasties 15-16

New Kingdom (Book of the Dead)

c. 1540-1075 b.c.e.

Dynasty 18; Amduat, Litany of Re, Book
of Gates, etc.

1540-1292 B.C.E.

Dynasty 19 (Ramesside rulers); Book of Caverns,
Books of the Sky
Dynasty 20 (Ramesside rulers); Book of the Earth

Third Intermediate Period

1292-1190 B.C.E.
II9O-IO75 B.C.E.

c. 1075-664 b.c.e.

Dynasty 21; flowering of painted sarcophagi
and papyri at Thebes

l075~945 b.c.e.

Dynasties 22-24 (Libyan rulers)

945-712 B.C.E.

Dynasty 25 ("Ethiopian" rulers)

740-664 B.C.E.

Late Period

664-332 b.c.e.

Dynasty 26 ("Saite" rulers)

664-525 B.C.E.

Dynasty 27 (Persian rulers)

525-404 B.C.E.

Dynasties 28-30 (last native rulers)

404-342 B.C.E.

Macedonians

332-305 b.c.e.

Ptolemaic Period

305-30 b.c.e.

Roman and Byzantine Periods

30 b.c.e.-642 c.e.

The
Ancient
Egyptian
Books of
the Afterlife

Egypt

THE PYRAMID TEXTS

Sources
The Pyramid Texts represent the oldest collection of religious spells pre¬
served from ancient Egypt. Beginning with Wenis, the last king of Dy¬
nasty 5 (c. 2350 B.C.E.), varying selections of spells were carved in all the
royal pyramids of the Old Kingdom, especially in the sarcophagus
chambers and their antechambers. In the case of Teti, they also appeared
on the royal sarcophagus, and with Pepy I, the inscriptions began to ex¬
tend beyond the antechamber (figures 1 and 2). After 2200 b.c.e., under
Pepy II, they were also employed in the pyramids of queens, and after
the end of the Old Kingdom, they appeared on the tomb walls and
coffins of officials. In the Middle Kingdom, the pyramids were free of
texts, so that when Wenis's version appeared in the mastaba of Senwosretankh at Lisht, it was practically unaltered; many pyramid spells,
however, continued to be employed on coffins of this period. In the New
Kingdom, they occurred in the tombs of some officials and on royal sar¬
cophagi. Spells from this corpus were still in use in the Late Period, in
tombs and on sarcophagi.
In the Old Kingdom, spells were included in the pyramids of kings
Wenis, Teti, Pepy I, Merenre I, Pepy II, and Ibi and those of queens
Wedjebten, Neith, and Iput. In the pyramids of the queens and that of
Ibi, the spells were concentrated in a single room; the earlier pyramids
also included them in the antechamber and the end of the subterranean
corridor.

2

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

I. Hieroglyphs from the Pyramid Texts of the pyramid of Wenis. Photo copyright © Al
Berens, Suredesign Graphics.

Research
The spells were discovered when Gaston Maspero opened the pyra¬
mids, work he began in 1880 and concluded in May 1881 with the open¬
ing of the pyramid of Teti. As early as 1882, Maspero began an edition
and translation of the texts, starting with those from the pyramid of
Wenis, and his ongoing articles in the Receuil de travaux also appeared in
book form in 1894. In 1899, Kurt Sethe took up the Pyramid Texts for in¬
clusion in the Worterbuch der dgytischen Sprache (Dictionary of the Egyp¬
tian Language), and in 1908 he produced a text edition that still remains
definitive. The textual basis was substantially expanded by the investi¬
gations of Gustave Jequier in southern Saqqara from 1924 to 1936, in the
course of which he was able to secure considerably more spells in the
pyramid of Pepy II while also discovering the versions in the pyramids
of queens Wedjebten (1925-1926), Neith, and Iput (1931-1932) and in
the later tomb of Ibi. In March 1951, Jean-Philippe Lauer and Jean

THE PYRAMID TEXTS

3

2. The subterranean portion of the pyramid of Wenis: (a) entrance corridor, (b) three
portcullises, (c) three statue niches, (d) antechamber, (e) sarcophagus chamber, (f) sar¬
cophagus. Adapted from Kurt Sethe, Die altagyptischen Pyramidentexte, vol. 3 (Leipzig,
1922), p. 116. Drawing by David Lorton.

Sainte-Fare Garnot launched a systematic investigation of the pyramids
of Dynasty 6; after a rather long interruption, Lauer continued the work
with Jean Leclant, and they discovered many additional fragments in
the pyramids of Teti (more than 700), Pepy I (more than 2,000), and
Merenre.
After Maspero's provisional translation, a further rendering by Louis
Speleers, which relied on the preparatory work of Sethe, appeared in
French in 1924; the full English translation by Samuel A. B. Mercer that
appeared in 1952 has since been superseded by that of Raymond O.
Faulkner in 1969. The translation and extensive commentary prepared
and continually revised by Sethe was not published until after his death.
The volumes appeared from 1935 to 1962, with publication interrupted
by World War II.
Investigation of questions of detail began in 1914 with Pierre Lacau's
comprehensive work on the suppression and mutilation of signs and

4

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

continued with G. van der Leeuw's 1916 work on conceptions of the di¬
vine. James Henry Breasted drew on the Pyramid Texts for his influen¬
tial Development of Religion and Thought in Ancient Egypt, which appeared
in 1912. In the early days of research, the texts were dated as early as
possible; Sethe assumed that the majority of them stemmed from predynastic times. The result was a belief that with these spells, one could
trace the very beginnings of Egyptian culture and religion. Today, how¬
ever, scholars are inclined to date the texts' origin as close as possible to
the time they were recorded, though we still lack individual studies de¬
voted to dating them more exactly.

Structure and Language
The texts, which differ considerably in length and were not illustrated,
were carved in vertical columns on the walls of the pyramids' subter¬
ranean spaces. The outlines of the signs were painted green, indicating
the hoped-for regeneration of the deceased. With the exception of spell
355 ("Opening the Double Door of the Sky"), the spells lack titles, with
the result that in Dynasty 6, every column begins with the notation
"words to be spoken," a phrase that appears only at the beginnings of
spells in the pyramid of Wenis. The ends of the spells are marked by a
horizontal line in the case of Wenis and by a hieroglyph for "house" in
the later pyramids. In his edition Sethe distinguished 714 spells;
Faulkner increased the number to 739 in 1969, though some of these
spells are duplicates and should not have been included. Some of the
spells were originally composed in the first person singular for the royal
burial ritual but were transposed into the third person when they were
recorded in the pyramids.
The order in which the spells are to be read remains unclear. Maspero
and Sethe began with the north wall of the sarcophagus chamber,
whereas Siegfried Schott and Alexandre Piankoff regarded their incep¬
tion as lying at the entrance to the antechamber. Schott, Hartwig Altenmuller, and Joachim Spiegel have attempted to explain the sequence of
spells as the royal burial ritual; Schott and Altenmiiller included the
royal mortuary temple in the ritual performance, whereas Spiegel (who,
like Altenmiiller, confined his study to the pyramid of Wenis) set all its
events in the less spacious confines of the pyramid's interior. Jurgen
Osing, employing the example of Wenis, has pointed to a thematic divi¬
sion—for example, apotropaic spells at the entrance and offering texts in
the sarcophagus chamber—that speaks against the continuous text of a
ritual, as do the dramatic changes and differing division of the content

THE PYRAMID TEXTS

5

from pyramid to pyramid. Nevertheless, it is scarcely to be denied that
these are overwhelmingly ritual texts. On the analogy of the later cor¬
pora, we can suppose that the texts were selected from a larger collec¬
tion for very distinct purposes and arranged according to distinctive
points of view. There is no recognizable orientation to the four cardinal
points.
The language of the texts is Old Egyptian, though in a relatively anti¬
quated form displaying some phonological and grammatical differences
from the other texts of the Old Kingdom; the orthography was still in
the process of development and employed highly redundant writings.
This was the earliest use of retrograde writing, that is, the reversal of the
normal sequence of the columns. The avoidance of complete figures of
animals and people is striking, as is their deliberate mutilation. The fear
that such signs might spring to life and pose a danger played a role here,
along with, probably, the desire to protect the offerings of the deceased
king from other living beings.

Content
According to Sethe's count, the pyramid of Wenis contains 227 spells;
fresh spells were included in each of the subsequent pyramids, though
we still lack studies regarding changes in content and shifts in thematic
emphasis. Generally speaking, the texts were supposed to be of special
service to the deceased king in his ascent to the sky and his reception in
the divine realm. In this regard, every suitable means of assistance was
included: a ladder or ramp leading up to the sky, clouds, storms, hail,
incense, sunlight, and animal forms such as a bird, a beetle, or a locust.
The god Shu, who held up the sky, was an especially suitable helper.
Moreover, the spells communicate knowledge to Pharaoh regarding
the ways and places in the hereafter, as well as dangers he could en¬
counter there. Dialogues with guardians of gateways and with a ferry¬
man supply specific knowledge that would enable the deceased king to
name the correct names and answer all questions correctly in order to
prove his legitimacy and make his way through the regions of the here¬
after.
The topography of the hereafter remains somewhat indeterminate,
though the Field of Reeds, the Field of Offerings, the Fake of the Jackal,
and the Winding Waterway receive emphasis as important locales. The
sky was evidently traversed by water so that deities and deceased
crossed it by boat, and the dead were dependent on the services of the

6

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

ferryman. The Duat does not yet seem to have been fixed in the nether¬
world but rather appears to have included celestial regions. Neverthe¬
less, it was not a desirable place to stay, and even the sun god Re was
portrayed as being there "in fetters" from which only sunrise could free
him (spell 254, § 285). The violent arrival of the king in the sky is de¬
picted in an especially striking manner in the Cannibal Hymn of spells
273-274. Because the king is repeatedly identified with the creator god
Atum, we encounter many allusions to this deity's act of creation.
The provisioning of the deceased, their freedom of movement, and
the repelling of inimical beings also play prominent roles; the ritual
"smashing of the red pots" (spell 244) aims at the annihilation of all ene¬
mies. A considerable number of magical spells directed against serpents
(and also scorpions: 227) shows that spells from this life were trans¬
posed to the afterlife to deal with similar circumstances and thus with
dangers of all sorts.
There was also a desire to enter into the cyclical course of the cosmos
in order to overcome death, and the hope of accompanying the sun god in
his barque is already found here (spell 407, § 711 and spell 469, § 906);
in spell 267, the deceased king goes so far as to displace the sun god
from his seat in the barque, "so that this Wenis might sit in your place
and row across the sky, O Re." But the identification of the king with
Osiris—their identity is especially stressed in spell 219—and the many
allusions to the myth of Osiris take on even greater weight, and we have
here the earliest texts in which Osiris appears as ruler of the nether¬
world. Practically all the important motifs of the Osiris myth are found.
Along with his sisters Isis and Nephthys, his son Horus also participates
in the search for the murdered god (he finds him and revives him by
embracing him and lifting him up [spell 364, § 612 and spell 371, § 648]),
though the posthumous engendering of this son and heir is presumed in
spell 366, § 632 and spell 593, §§ 1635-1636. Osiris drifts in the water,
but the motif of his dismemberment by Seth is not yet attested. In spell
477, the fratricide is made subject to an accounting through a trial "be¬
fore the two Enneads"; although everything is denied, Horus neverthe¬
less wins the disputed inheritance, mourning for the murdered god
comes to an end, and joy and laughter return (spell 672, § 1989).
Even if the entire corpus is not to be interpreted as ritual, a number of
ritual texts nevertheless stand out, such as the Opening of the Mouth
and the offering and statue rituals. Ritual spells accompany the delivery
of offerings and the gifts of ointments, incense, clothing, and jewelry as
well as the components of the royal regalia, particularly the crowns.

THE COFFIN TEXTS

Sources
The Coffin Texts superseded the Pyramid Texts at the end of the Old
Kingdom, though some of the pyramid spells continued to be used on
coffins during the Middle Kingdom. Spells from the new redaction are
already found in the pyramid of King Ibi of Dynasty 8. The earliest ex¬
emplars are preserved in the necropolis of Balat in el-Kharga Oasis, if
their dating to the end of the Old Kingdom is accurate. The principal
sources are the later cemeteries of the nomarchs of Middle Egypt in Dy¬
nasty 12, especially Asyut, Beni Hasan, Deir el-Bersha, el-Lisht, and
Meir, though on the whole, finds range from the delta to Aswan. A
prominent center, yielding the largest number of spells, is Deir elBersha, the cemetery of Hermopolis, city of the god Thoth. The textual
tradition came to an end with the conclusion of the Middle Kingdom,
transforming into the new corpus of the Book of the Dead in Dynasty 17,
although there are also sporadic attestations of Coffin Text spells in the
New Kingdom, as in the burial chamber of Minnakhte (TT 87) and in
tombs of Dynasties 25-26, when spells 151, 607, and 625 were popular.
In the Middle Kingdom, the spells are encountered mainly on coffins of
officials and their subordinates, though they also appear on tomb walls,
stelae, canopic chests, mummy masks, and papyri.

8

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Research
The first copies were published by C. R. Lepsius in 1867, from coffins in
Berlin. After a few further publications of individual coffins, Pierre
Lacau published the Middle Kingdom coffins in the Cairo Museum as a
part of its Catalogue generate in 1904-1906, and on the basis of this mate¬
rial, he published individual spells in a series of articles entitled "Textes
religieux" in Receuil de travaux 26 (1904) to 37 (1913), with the texts re¬
produced in a hieroglyphic type font. After World War I, James Henry
Breasted and Alan H. Gardiner laid plans for a comprehensive publica¬
tion of the entire corpus of texts, and this was finally realized by Adriaan de Buck in a publication consisting of seven volumes dating from
1935 to 1961. The present-day division of the spells rests on his edition,
though the material has since been increased through new finds.
Early evaluations were made by James Henry Breasted (1912) and
Hermann Kees (1926), both on the basis of Lacau's "Textes religieux." A
French translation of the first two volumes of de Buck's edition by Louis
Speleers appeared in 1947. The first complete translation in English was
published by Raymond O. Faulkner (1973-1978), and there is also a
complete translation in French by Paul Barguet (1986); Faulkner fol¬
lowed de Buck's sequence of spells, whereas Barguet edited them into
thematic groups. There is as yet no translation into German.
The Book of the Two Ways, in particular, gained attention early on.
Hans Schack-Schackenburg published the floor of the coffin of Sen in
1903, and Kees included a detailed treatment of its contents in his 1926
volume; several complete translations have followed in more recent
times (see the bibliography; Edmund Hermsen gives a detailed survey
of the history of research in the work cited there.)

Structure and Language
The division of the corpus into 1,183 spells rests on the edition of de
Buck. Coffins found in a wide variety of places are collected in this edi¬
tion, though many of the spells are attested in only one locale. This local
element distinguishes the Coffin Texts from the other corpora. Though
the language is uniformly classical Middle Egyptian, with no signs of
local peculiarities, there is frequent imitation of Old Egyptian. The spells
are written in vertical columns, in cursive hieroglyphs or early hieratic;
they are sometimes provided with glosses or, sporadically, with what
the texts call "other versions." As a rule, the titles of spells are located at
their beginning, though they are also sometimes at the end. To save

THE COFFIN TEXTS

9

space, split columns are often employed for parallel expressions. Red
ink is used for emphasis and to indicate divisions, and certain important
spells, such as spell 1,087, are written entirely in red. The deceased is al¬
most always spoken of in the first person singular.
In contrast to the Pyramid Texts, the Coffin Texts employ vignettes,
though only rarely, and there are detailed plans in the Book of the Two
Ways (figure 3) and of the Field of Offerings. In certain cases, such as in
spells 81 and 100, there are descriptions of figures that were supposed to
strengthen the spells' magical effect. The most detailed composition is
the Book of the Two Ways, which Paul Barguet breaks up into four
parts, though Leonard H. Lesko and E. Hermsen divide it into nine sec¬
tions; section VII consists of a single spell (1,099) aRd belongs rather to
section VI, given its content, as Hermsen has noted. This book, whose
original title was perhaps Guide to the Ways of Rosetau and which was
said to have been discovered "under the flank of Thoth," can be divided
into a long version (spells 1,029-1,130) and a short version (spells
1,131-1,183, along with 313 and 377).

Content
The Coffin Texts eliminated the royal exclusivity of the Pyramid Texts,
putting the texts at the disposal of all deceased persons and thus making
the enjoyment of the afterlife something that all could attain; now, every
deceased person was an Osiris NN. But the principal group to make use
of the texts consisted of the nomarchs of the early second millennium
b.c.e. and their families. The essential content of the Pyramid Texts con¬

tinued, in particular the material bases for continued existence (this pur¬
pose was also served by the friezes of objects of burial goods pictured on
the coffins and by spell 472, the ushabti spell, whose intent was the
avoidance of compulsory labor in the afterlife), protection against inimi¬
cal beings and other dangers, and admission into the cyclical course of
the sun. In addition, transformation spells (inter alia, spells 268-293)
dealt with the deceased king's ascent to the sky in the desirable form of
a bird but also served to transform the deceased into various deities
(spell 290: "into every god into which one might desire to transform");
into fire, air, or grain; or into a child or crocodile. Indeed, in this period,
the most popular amulet was the scarab beetle, the hieroglyphic symbol
for "transformation."
Another new motif was the desired reunion with loved ones—encoun¬
tering one's own family in the afterlife. Also new was the figure of
Apophis, the enemy of the sun, a gigantic serpent that had to be combated

(Chicago, 1961), Plan I : Drawing of coffin BIC[AuQI], Courtesy of the Oriental Institute of The University of Chicago.

THE COFFIN TEXTS

I I

to prevent the sun's course from coming to a halt. Triumph over all ene¬
mies was now intensified into the concept of a Judgment of the Dead, to
which all were subjected and which was not conducted only on indict¬
ment. Concepts of creation play a role in a number of spells, for the de¬
ceased often appears as primeval god and creator; a series of spells re¬
volves around the constellation of the creator god and his "children,"
Shu and Tefnut, who carried on the work of creation. On the whole, the
afterlife is conceptualized more concretely than in the Pyramid Texts,
and its dangers are portrayed more dramatically. Osiris and his realm
also stand out more prominently, with the deceased appearing some¬
times as Osiris and sometimes as his helper and supporter, but often
also in the role of his devoted son Horus who rushes to his father's assis¬
tance, as in the dramatic spell 312.
Of special importance is the Book of the Two Ways, preserved in two
versions; it is the earliest example of a cosmography, though it still lacks
the clear arrangement of the later Books of the Netherworld. Hermann
Kees felt that it originated in "the witch's brew of magic" and the "su¬
perstitious fantasies of the people," but to the high functionaries of the
Hare nome, for whose coffins it was intended, the book represented the
results of government-funded research into the hereafter and was sup¬
posed to convey to the dead the knowledge necessary for them to make
their way there without going astray. Its texts are always addressed di¬
rectly to the deceased, warning them—or, positively, guiding them—
and the schematic plans that accompany the texts were supposed to fa¬
cilitate their orientation, making the book the first real guide to the
hereafter, even though it lacks the systematization of the New Kingdom
guides.
The Book of the Two Ways does not commence with sunset, as do the
later Books of the Netherworld, but rather with the eastern horizon and
sunrise, so that the journey through the hereafter takes place mainly in
the sky. Many obstacles and dangers stand in the way of the deceased,
such as the circle of fire (designated the "fiery court") around the sun
and the menacing guardians at the gates of the hereafter. Pitch-black
darkness or walls of flame also constantly block the way. In the middle
of this description of the hereafter is the region of Rosetau, which lies "at
the boundary of the sky" and contains the corpse of Osiris; according to
spell 1,080, it is "locked in darkness and surrounded by fire." The de¬
ceased wishes to reach this place, for whoever gazes on the deceased
Osiris cannot die (CT VII 302e). Another goal is the Field of Offerings
with its paradisiacal superabundance, but the route leading to it is

12

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

patently difficult, and near the end of the book, we encounter paths that
cross one another and lead nowhere. The Lake of Flames situated be¬
tween the Two Ways is an ambivalent place whose consuming fire also
serves the purpose of regeneration. The creation of a system of gateways
in the hereafter was attempted with the seven guardians in spells
1,100-1,110. In the center of the last section are three boats, all perhaps
intended to be the solar barque, from which the serpent Apophis is re¬
pelled. The Lord of All speaks his concluding monologue (spell 1,130)
from this barque, recounting his beneficent deeds when he created the
world and foretelling the end of this creation after "millions of years";
only he and Osiris will survive the end of time.
In general, the netherworld and its ruler, Osiris, gained greatly in im¬
portance, though the celestial afterlife of the Pyramid Texts survives, as
in the astronomical representations on the lids of coffins at Asyut, with
their decans and stars from the northern celestial regions, and in the per¬
son of the sky goddess. Nut. In the Book of the Two Ways as well, a plu¬
rality of skies appears as the goal of deceased persons, who are ever and
again supplied with the knowledge necessary to avoid dangers and
false paths. In dialogues with the guardians of the gateways, the de¬
ceased employ this knowledge to establish their legitimacy.

THE BOOK OF THE DEAD

i.

Sources
TheBogJ<of ^

designation of a group of. mortuary spells,

written mostly on papyrus, from the New Kingdom, the Third Interme¬
diate Period^and the Late Period. In the later versions of the Coffin
Texts, some spells already take the form of the corresponding spells in
the New Kingdom Book of the Dead. Early examples of spells from the
Book of the Dead are found on mummy cloths and coffins of the early
New Kingdom, and somewhat later, they appear on papyri and on the
walls of certain tomb chambers. Early examples, once ascribed to the
Middle Kingdom (the coffins of Mentuhotpe and Herunefer, and a pa¬
pyrus now in Brussels), are now dated to Dynasty 17. The collection cir¬
culated throughout Egypt, though Thebes was an especially important
center. Spells from the Book of the Dead began to be used rather com¬
monly by officials beginning with the reign of Tuthmosis III. The pro¬
duction of Books of the Dead was briefly interrupted by the Amarna Pe¬
riod, though a number of spells are found once again on the gilded
shrines of Tutankhamun and on other objects from his tomb, while
many important manuscripts stem from the period of transition to the
Ramesside era. The Book of the Dead started to appear on the walls of
royal tombs in the reign of Merneptah, beginning with spell 125, which
deals with the Judgment of the Dead; though it was supplemented by
other texts in the royal tombs of Dynasty 20, the spell nevertheless re¬
mained the most important one. Some spells occur on temple walls,

14

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

such as spell 148, and also spell 110 at Medinet Habu. The chapters re¬
garding the heart—spells 26-30, but especially spell 3oB, and occasion¬
ally spell 6 (there is an example in Dresden) and 126 (at Tanis)—were
employed on scarabs.
In Dynasty 21, and occasionally already in the Ramesside Period,
some Books of the Dead were written in hieratic, though papyri also
continued to be written with cursive hieroglyphs. They were now often
enclosed in a statuette of Osiris; when possible, a Book of the Dead and
an Amduat papyrus were employed together, while less often, mixed
forms combined elements from both compositions. In certain pictorial
versions called mythological papyri, Book of the Dead spells are repre¬
sented only by their vignettes. After Dynasty 22, Books of the Dead fell
into disuse for a time, but Dynasty 26 saw a revival of their employ¬
ment, along with new spells and a canonization of their order. The spells
also reappeared on tomb walls and coffins at this time and, beginning
with Dynasty 30, on mummy bandages. This new flowering continued
into the Roman Period, from which a version written in Demotic has
also been preserved. Spells 19, 140, 137, 138, and 162-163 are attested
only after the New Kingdom.
As a continuation of the Coffin Texts, this collection of spells was
available to everyone, and it was in widespread use among royal offi¬
cials and members of their families. Even after the development of a
new corpus of Books of the Afterlife for royal use, beginning with the
Amduat and the Litany of Re, certain spells were adopted for use on ele¬
ments of the royal tomb furnishings; an important example of this is the
shroud of Tuthmosis III, and the treasure of Tutankhamun offers a num¬
ber of others. With Merneptah begins the use of spells—at first 123, and
later others as well—on the walls of the royal tombs.

Illustrations
At first, only in certain cases and for special emphasis did spells in¬
clude a vignette, that is, a symbolic representation summarizing the in¬
tent or the content of a spell in concise pictorial form supplementing
what is stated in the texts. Thus, in the burial chamber of Minnakhte
(TT 87) from the reign of Tuthmosis III, only two of a total of thirty-five
spells are illustrated, but by the Ramesside Period, only a few spells re¬
main without a vignette. In Dynasty 21 and in the Late Period, the vi¬
gnettes are often used as abbreviations for entire spells, appearing with¬
out the accompanying texts. In many manuscripts, the vignettes
constitute a row of pictures, with the texts placed underneath them. The

THE BOOK OF THE DEAD

15

colophons of individual spells often make reference to accompanying il¬
lustrations that are supposed to be executed according to specific in¬
structions. From the New Kingdom to the Late Period, the vignettes
were brightly painted, whereas those of the Ptolemaic and Roman Peri¬
ods made no use of color.

Research
Some manuscripts were published as early as 1821, in volume 2 of the
/

Description de I'Egypte prepared by Napoleon Bonaparte's expedition,
and a Ptolemaic example had been reproduced even earlier, by Jean
Marcel Cadet in 1805. Jean-Fran<;ois Champollion concerned himself
with further Books of the Dead in Geneva and Turin, for which he em¬
ployed the designation rituel funeraire ("funerary ritual"). In 1842, Karl
Richard Lepsius published the Ptolemaic Period manuscript in Turin,
introducing the term Totenbuch ("Book of the Dead") and the numbering
of the chapters that remains in use to this day. In 1872, Theodule
Deveria published the papyrus of Nebqed in Paris, with a translation by
Paul Pierret, after Samuel Birch had already published the first English
translation, based on the papyrus in Turin, in 1867. The first German
translation by Heinrich Brugsch in ZAS 10 (1872) was only a partial one.
In 1874, the publication of a complete edition was decided on at the
Second Congress of Orientalists in London, and the project was placed
in the hands of Edouard Naville of Geneva. Because of the amount of
material, Naville was obliged to confine himself to manuscripts from the
New Kingdom, of which he included seventy-one. His three-volume
work appeared in 1886, and it remains the standard edition to this day.
In a parallel effort, W. Willem Pleyte published additional spells from
manuscripts of the Late Period in 1881, continuing, as did Naville, to use
the numbering of spells introduced by Lepsius, with the result that
spells 166 to 174 coincide. E. A. Wallis Budge concerned himself with
the manuscripts in the British Museum and published some of them, in¬
cluding the papyrus of Ani (for the first time in 1890), which Naville had
not dealt with; Budge's text edition of 1898, in hieroglyphic type, has
been continuously reprinted and is still widely used. A catalogue of
manuscripts of the New Kingdom and Third Intermediate Period in the
British Museum begun by Alan W. Shorter remains uncompleted, while
Thomas George Allen published a catalogue of all the manuscripts in
the Oriental Institute in Chicago.
Peter Le Page Renouf, whose work was continued by Naville, made
an early translation; they published a complete rendering into English in

16

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

PSBA 14-26 (1892-1904). Pierret had already published a French trans¬
lation in 1882, naturally without Naville's "new" spells. Budge's contin¬
uously reprinted English translation first appeared in 1901. A new stan¬
dard has been set by the more recent complete translations by Barguet,
Allen, Erik Hornung, and Raymond O. Faulkner, while fundamentals in
understanding the texts were established by Kurt Sethe and Hermann
Kees in their "Gottinger Totenbuchstudien." As early as 1887, Gaston
Maspero published a detailed survey of the contents of the entire com¬
position in RHR 15.
Once viewed as the Bible of the ancient Egyptians, the Book of the
Dead lost a great deal of its interest to scholars with the discovery of the
Pyramid Texts, though it continues to exercise great influence as witness
to an esoteric Egypt. Ongoing attempts to compare it with the Tibetan
Book of the Dead fail because of the entirely different objectives of the
two compositions.

Structure and Language
The spells are clearly set apart from one another by titles, and some¬
times also colophons, written with red ink, and they are separated in
some manuscripts by double lines. Lepsius divided the Turin manu¬
script he used as a prototype into 165 "chapters," though the designa¬
tion "spell" is undoubtedly more suitable for these ever-changing and
recombined sections, especially since the term chapter is never used in
connection with the older corpora. In contrast to the Coffin Texts, the
stock of spells is considerably reduced to a total of less than two hun¬
dred: 186 in Naville's edition, increased to 190 by Budge. To date, we
have no papyrus from the New Kingdom containing a collection of all
the spells. In Ramesside tombs there occur some spell titles and vi¬
gnettes that as yet have no parallels in the manuscripts (Mohamed
Saleh, Totenbuch, pp. 90-94; see the bibliography).
On the papyri, and in part on tomb walls, use is made of a cursive
form of hieroglyphs (Totenbuch-Kursiv) that stands somewhere between
hieratic and actual hieroglyphs. In the tomb of Khaemhet from the reign
of Amenophis III, a version of spell 85 appears in "enigmatic" writing.
The language continues to be classical Middle Egyptian.
The collection of spells was originally designated the Book (or Spells)
of Coming Out by Day. Before the Ptolemaic Period, no obligatory se¬
quence of spells prevailed, though there were certain preferences; thus,
in the New Kingdom, spell 1 or 17 was preferred at the beginning, and
149 and 150 at the end (this was also true in Dynasty 21, often combined

THE BOOK OF THE DEAD

17

with a representation of the course of the sun), though spells no and 186
were also popular at the end in the Ramesside Period. The canonical se¬
quence, in which certain spells were grouped together, was in large part
formed in Dynasty 26. Doublets of the same spell occur in many manu¬
scripts. The number of spells employed varies considerably: the papyrus
of Kha in Turin contains 33, Yuya's 41, Ani's 65, and that of Nu in Lon¬
don 137. The length of the spells also fluctuates, from a few verses to
nearly four hundred in the case of spell 17 and its glosses. Many spells
are provided with colophons containing concrete instructions on their
use or application, or notations concerning their desired usefulness.

Content
Like the two earlier text corpora, the Book of the Dead primarily served
the purposes of provisioning and protecting the deceased. In contrast to
the contemporary Books of the Netherworld, it is not concerned with
descriptions but rather with practical help and magical assistance for ihe_
hereafter. The idea of a general Judgment of the Dead to which every
deceased person is subject plays a central role. What clearly declines in
contrast to the Coffin Texts is the wish for a reunion with the members
of one's family. The most important spells are spell 1, which legitimizes
the deceased as the god_Thoth and further through knowledge of the
mysterious events surrounding Osiris; spell 6, the ushabti spell, which
activates this assistant to the deceased; spell 13, which contains a hymn
to the sun, selected from a large repertoire; spell 16, the vignette to spell
15 (figure 4); spell 17, which identifies the deceased with the creator god,
Atum, and offers a synopsis of the entire Book of the Dead, provided
with explanatory glosses, and which was especially richly illustrated
after the Amarna Period; spell 18, also provided with glosses, which al¬
lows the deceased to prevail over opponents before any divine tribunal;
spell 23, which prevents forgetting one's name; spells 26-30, dealing
with the heart, which must be in harmony with the deceased; spells 31
and 32, directed against crocodiles in the hereafter; spells 33-33, against
snakes; spell 38, which guarantees the breath of life, as do 34-36; spells
39 and 108, which deal with the battle against Apophis, the enemy of the
sun; spell 40, which wards off "him who swallowed an ass"; spell 42,
which contains a deification of the body parts of the dead, so that, mem¬
ber by member, the deceased becomes a god; spell 44, which prevents
"dying again in the necropolis"; spell 43, which prevents putrefaction;
spells 31-33, which prevent a reversal of the digestive process in the
afterlife, as do spells 82,102,124, and 189; spells 37-63, which guarantee

18

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

4. Vignette to Book of the Dead spell 16. After Edouard Naville, Dos Agyptische Todtenbuch
der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie, vol. I (Berlin, 1886), plate XXII.

THE BOOK OF THE DEAD

19

5. Vignette to Book of the Dead spell 89.
After Edouard Naville, Das Agyptische
Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie,
vol. I (Berlin, 1886), plate Cl.

air and water in the realm of the dead; spell 59, which addresses the
sycamore tree of the goddess Nut and accompanies a depiction of the
tree goddess; the barely comprehensible spell 64, which attempts to
summarize the entire book in a single spell; spell 71, which attempts to
release the deceased from the necropolis and requests continued life;
spell 72, especially popular on coffins, which was supposed to fulfill all
material needs, and the similar spell 106; spells 76-88, which serve to
transform the deceased into various forms, such as a falcon (77-78), the
god Atum (79) or the god Ptah (82), a lotus blossom (81), a benu-heron
(83), the ba (soul) of Re (83), a swallow (86), a serpent (87), and a croco¬
dile (88). Spell 89 serves to reunite the ba and the corpse in the afterlife
(figure 5); spells 91 and 92 permit free, unhindered movement; spell 94
provides the deceased with writing material; spells 98 and 99 assure a
ferryboat in the realm of the dead, and spell 99 contains a lengthy dia¬
logue with the ferryman and the parts of his boat. Spells 100-102 effect
the inclusion of the deceased in the journey of the sun god in his barque,
as do 130, 133, 134, and 136; spell 103 projects the deceased into the fol¬
lowing of Hathor; spell 104 allows the deceased to "dwell among the
great gods"; in spell 105, the deceased is presented with ka (life force).
Spells 107-109 and 111-116 serve to assure knowledge of the bau
(souls), while spell 108 is again concerned with the warding off of
Apophis by the god Seth. Spell 110 describes the Field of Offerings or
Field of Reeds as a paradise for the blessed dead; spells 117-119 deal
with free entry into Rosetau, the realm of Osiris; spell 124 prepares the
deceased for the descent to the "tribunal of Osiris"; and spell 125 is the
central spell of the Judgment of the Dead, with its denial of sin (the Neg¬
ative Confession) on the part of the dead (figure 6); the complementary
spell 126 again refers to the Lake of Fire and its guardians. Spells 127

. Vignette to Book of the Dead spell 125. After Edouard Naville, Das Agyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dyriastie, vol. I (Berlin, 1886), plate CXXXVI.

THE BOOK OF THE DEAD

21

7. Vignette to Book of the Dead spell 153.
After Edouard Naville, Dos Agyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie, vol. I (Berlin,
1886), plate CLXXVIII.

and 180 adopt portions of the royal Litany of Re. Spell 137 is concerned
with the illumination of the hereafter in the absence of sun and moon,
and in spell 138, the deceased as Horus greets the deities of Abydos.
Spells 141-143 contain an offering litany with a long list of deities and
forms of manifestations of Osiris, who are to take part in the offerings.
Spells 144-147 are concerned with the gateways of the hereafter, which
are seven or twenty-one in number, and their menacing guardians,
whom the deceased may pass only by knowing their names and reciting
the correct spells; spell 148, with its seven cows and four rudders of the
sky, assures the nourishment of the deceased, while spell 149 describes
the fourteen hills in the realm of the dead, which are again enumerated
in spell 130 in their characteristic form. Spell 151 displays the most im¬
portant elements of the funeral, with Anubis standing by the bier in the
center. Spell 132 assures the deceased a secure place among the "mil¬
lions" who dwell in the hereafter; spell 133 protects the dead from the
giant net spread out between sky and earth (figure 7); spell 134 helps to
overcome the perishing of the corpse. Spells 133-160 belong to certain
effective amulets; spell 161, very popular on coffins, assures the de¬
ceased the necessary breath of life; spell 162 belongs to a panel placed
under the head of the mummy, spell 166 to the headrest, and spell 167 to
the udjat-amulet. Spell 168 is discussed later in this volume under the
Books of the Netherworld as the Spell of the Twelve Caves. In spell 171,
all the gods and goddesses are supposed to give "pure clothing" to the
deceased, while spell 172 again deifies the entire body of the deceased.
In spell 173, the deceased as Horus greets Osiris; spell 173 contains the
well-known dialogue between Atum and Osiris concerning the here¬
after; chapter 176 affords protection against the dangerous east and its
"Place of Destruction," which brings a "second death"; and spells 177

22

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

8. Vignette to Book of the Dead spell 186. After Edouard Naville, Dos Agyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis XX. Dynastie, vol. I (Berlin, 1886), plate CCXII.

and 178 collect age-old Pyramid Text spells concerned with ascending to
the sky. Spell 179 is directed against enemies; spells 181 and 183-185 are
hymns to Osiris; spell 182 serves to protect and regenerate the deceased,
who reappears as Thoth here; and spell 186 contains an adoration of
Hathor in the form of a cow (figure 8).

THE BOOKS OF BREATHING

Sources
Nearly all the preserved copies of the Books of Breathing date to the
Greco-Roman Period; the earliest, P. Louvre N 3154, stems from the end
of Dynasty 30 (c. 330 b.c.e.). The Egyptians distinguished between a
First and a Second Book of Breathing, with the second preserved only
from the Roman Period. Both books make reference to divine origin—
the first was supposed to have been written by Isis for Osiris, and the
second to have been copied by Thoth, who was believed to have au¬
thored other works as well. In all instances, the earthly origin of these
texts was in Thebes, where they were composed and handed down by
the priesthood of Amun. Jean-Claude Goyon has pointed to certain par¬
allels to passages from the Books of Breathing in the texts of the Buchis
bull stelae from Armant, near Thebes.

Research
Vivant Denon published a manuscript in 1804; it served as the basis for
Heinrich Brugsch's 1851 treatment, which was written in Latin. Philippe
Jacques de Horrack, relying on several papyri in the Louvre, published
an edition of the first book in 1877. The litany of names from the fourth
text of the second book (see "Content" section of this chapter) was pub¬
lished as a separate composition by Jens D. C. Lieblein in 1893. In more
recent times, Goyon in particular has promoted the study of this text.

24

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Structure and Language
The original title is better translated as Document of Breathing, though
the designation "book" has become accepted on the analogy of the title
Book of the Dead. Goyon divided the first book into fifteen (perhaps
originally only twelve) sections. These yield a relatively unified compo¬
sition, whereas the second book consists of texts with highly varied con¬
tent. Additionally, there exist various abbreviated versions of the second
and fourth parts of this second book. All copies of both books known to
date are written in hieratic; only a few abbreviated versions are in the
Demotic script. P. Louvre N 3284 has vignettes as well.

Content
Both books stress the importance of breath for the deceased. They serve
to prolong the existence of the name of the deceased and to prevent the
"second death" of damnation. In contrast to the Book of the Dead,
Amun plays an important role here, especially, in one group of abbrevi¬
ated versions, as Amenemope, that is, Amun of Luxor. But it is Osiris
who assures the survival of the ba, and the texts are supposed to serve
the deceased as a sort of identity card in the realm of the dead, with the
result that they belong to the genre of divine decrees.
Purification, intactness of the body, and the vindication of the de¬
ceased are the focus of the first book, whose goal is the deceased's con¬
tinued existence. They breathe and see, the doors of the hereafter are
open to them, offerings are made to them, and so forth; every place
stands open to their bas. In section thirteen, we find a variant of the Neg¬
ative Confession, and the merits of the deceased are emphasized in a
positive manner in section fourteen.
According to Goyon, the second book consists of six very different
texts. The first has to do with the deceased's coffin and the materials of
which it is made; in the second, the doorkeepers and guardians of the
netherworld are addressed, so that the deceased might pass by them; to
that end, the deceased assumes the role of various deities. A rather long
address to Thoth is a variant on Book of the Dead spells 18-20 regard¬
ing the "wreath of vindication"; a "deification of the limbs" has to do
with the desired corporal integrity and the power to make use of all the
parts of the body. The third text contains addresses to the deities of the
hereafter and a request for the issuing of a "document of breathing,"
and the fourth is a litany for the protection of the deceased's name. The
fifth text is based on Book of the Dead spell 162, the spell regarding the

THE BOOKS OF BREATHING

25

plaque placed under the head, as well as spell 72, here much altered.
The sixth ends with an address to Nut as mother of the deceased, the lat¬
ter appearing in the role of Osiris.
Among texts with related content, a papyrus in Parma (number 107;
see pp. 314-317 of the work by Goyon cited in the bibliography) repre¬
sents itself as a Book of Admission into the Realm of the Dead and Ar¬
rival at the Hall of Maat, where the Judgment of the Dead takes place.

THE HEW KINGDOM BOOKS
OF THE NETHERWORLD

General
In the New Kingdom, parallel to the development of the Coffin Texts
into the Book of the Dead, a new, almost purely royal literary genre was
created: in Egyptian, it was designated (Books of) What Is in the Duat
(the Netherworld). In modern times, these works were at first referred
to as Guides to the Hereafter, but the name Books of the Netherworld
(or Underworld) is now generally accepted in English. The German
equivalent is Unterweltsbiicher, and in French, they are called Livres du

monde inferieur or the like. These are the first religious books that are not
ever-changing collections of spells, as the Book of the Dead still was; in¬
stead, these have permanent, unchanging content. Additionally, their
pictures are not separate vignettes but rather constitute, along with the
text, a solid unity. With few exceptions, these thoroughly illustrated
books were handed down only by royalty until Dynasty 21 and could
not even be used by queens, as shown by the tomb of Nofretari.
A clear formal distinction exists between the earlier Books of the
Netherworld—the Amduat and the Book of Gates—and the later ones.
The earlier compositions are arranged according to the twelve hours of
the night, with the barque conveying the sun god in his ram-headed,
nocturnal form placed in the center of each hour. In the later books, the
solar barque is almost entirely absent; instead, the presence of the god is
indicated by his red sun disk, which is absent, however, from scenes de-

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

27

picting the damned. In the Book of Caverns, the twelvefold division ac¬
cording to the hours is replaced by an arrangement into six sectors,
while the division in the Book of the Earth has yet to be explained.
Formally, compositions such as the Litany of Re and the Book of the
Heavenly Cow differ considerably from the Books of the Netherworld;
in particular, they are not thoroughly illustrated. Their content is quite
similar, however, especially that of the Litany of Re, with its nocturnal,
otherworldly forms of manifestation of the sun god, and their intended
effect in the netherworld.
The nightly journey of the sun is the focus of all the Books of the
Netherworld, and consistent with this, it also furnishes the ordering and
creative principle for the spaces in the hereafter. This nocturnal regenera¬
tion of the sun demonstrates, by way of example, what powers of re¬
newal are at work on the far side of death. At the same time, the journey
occurs in the spaces of the human soul, in which a renewal from the
depths becomes possible. That it is an odyssey of the soul is emphasized
by the Egyptians through the indication that the sun god descends into
the depths as a ba-sou\ (and thus is ram-headed, since ba is also the word
for ram); herein lie significant antecedents of modern psychotherapy.
The nocturnal journey leads through an inner region of the cosmos (what
the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke has referred to as Weltinnenraum)
that was regarded not only as the netherworld and the depths of the
earth, but also as water (the primeval water, called Nun), as darkness,
and as the interior of the sky. Connected to this are the symbolic repre¬
sentations, so popular from the Amarna Period on, that attempt to sum¬
marize the entire course of the sun in a single, complex picture.
We will discuss the books here in the chronological order in which
they were presumably composed.

The Amduat
Sources
It is possible that the oldest fragments of the Amduat, which are from
the tomb of Tuthmosis I, actually belong to the early years of Queen
Hatshepsut, for we must reckon with a reburial of the king by his
daughter. But earlier accounts, according to which a portion of these
fragments stem from the tomb of Hatshepsut (KV 20), are improbable;
they clearly constitute a unity and can scarcely be apportioned to two
tombs. Hartwig Altenmiiller assumes "various stages of composition"
before Tuthmosis I, leading back "perhaps to the Old Kingdom," but

28

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

such a detailed description of the netherworld, with its quantity of illus¬
trations, is entirely unimaginable for the Old Kingdom and highly un¬
likely even for the Middle Kingdom. Nevertheless, even at present, the
book continues to be dated to before the New Kingdom, despite the lack
of any thorough rationale for such an estimation.
Our earliest complete copies stem from the tomb of Tuthmosis III and
that of Useramun, the first of his viziers. Both take into account the text's
own notes regarding orientation and attempt to distribute the hours of
the night according to the four cardinal points (see "Content" in this sec¬
tion), with the beginning of the text in the west and its end in the east, al¬
though the relatively small wall surfaces of Useramun's tomb necessi¬
tated a modification of the distribution. Amenophis II did not take the
prescribed orientation into account but rather placed all the hours in a
purely sequential order, with the short version of the composition (see
"Content") at its end. Tuthmosis IV left his sarcophagus chamber un¬
decorated, whereas Amenophis III again had the Amduat as the stan¬
dard decoration on the walls of his sarcophagus chamber, with the
hours in sequential order and the abbreviated version at the end.
After the reign of Akhenaten, when provisions were made for the
burials of Tutankhamun and Aya, the Amduat was minimally repre¬
sented by selections from the first hour; in the tomb of Tutankhamun,
two additional (incomplete) hours were placed on one of his gilded
shrines. Haremhab, on the other hand, followed by Ramesses I, com¬
pletely abandoned the Amduat and chose the later version of the Book
of Gates for his sarcophagus chamber. Because the shrines from these
and the remaining royal tombs are lost to us, it remains uncertain
whether the Amduat continued to be used on their walls.
With Sethos I, the Amduat returned to the walls of the sarcophagus
chamber; the first three hours surround the sarcophagus while the con¬
tinuation is scattered throughout the tomb. From this time down
through the reign of Ramesses III, the fourth and fifth hours had a per¬
manent place in the third corridor and the location of the remaining
hours varied, and from Merneptah on, there was no longer an Amduat
in the sarcophagus chamber. The twelfth hour, which is lacking in
Sethos I's tomb, is represented by two versions in the tomb of
Ramesses II, one of them in the shaft (figure 9), which is otherwise with¬
out parallel. The short version, which Sethos had placed around his sar¬
cophagus, had a subsidiary chamber of its own reserved for it in the
tomb of Ramesses II; it was omitted in the tombs that followed, and only
in Dynasty 21 did it reappear on papyri. Because the material is lacking.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

9. Layout of a typical New Kingdom
royal tomb, as illustrated by a plan of
the tomb of Sethos I. A, first corridor;
B, second corridor; C, third corridor;
D, shaft; E, first pillared hall; F, side
chamber; G-H, lower corridors; I, an¬
techamber; J, sarcophagus chamber;
K, “crypt”; L-O, side chambers; P, end
room. After E. Hornung and E. Staehelin, Sethos—ein Pharaonengrab (Basel,
1991), p. 44.

29

30

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

we cannot say to what extent texts from the Amduat were represented
on the gilded shrines or on other portions of the tomb furnishings in the
royal tombs of the Ramesside Period; in the case of Sethos I in particular,
we could assume that the otherwise missing twelfth hour was repre¬
sented. No New Kingdom papyri contain the Amduat.
Down to Ramesses III, all the royal tombs display extensive excerpts
from the Amduat. Ramesses IV then took a new direction, contenting
himself with a few citations from the short and long versions.
Ramesses VI, however, had a relatively complete exemplar, for the first
time since Dynasty 18, in the fourth and fifth corridors of his tomb,
where the hours are once again in sequential order, though with trans¬
positions and abbreviations of the contents of the seventh through the
eleventh hours, while the twelfth hour is absent. Ramesses IX limited
himself to the second hour and a part of the third, as well as a citation
(the corpse of the sun from the sixth hour) in his sarcophagus chamber.
In the latter part of Dynasty 21, on the analogy of the Pyramid Texts, a
democratization of the book ensued; at Thebes, the priests of Amun
adopted it for their coffins and papyri, and in Dynasty 22, the high priest
Iuput used it in his cenotaph at Abydos. With very few exceptions, the
papyri from this period contain only the last four hours of the night and
the short version. Their layout varies considerably: the contents of the
individual hours are sometimes abbreviated and intermingled, or even
enriched by additional pictorial elements, and instead of the usual three
registers (i.e., rows of depictions; see "Content"), they are sometimes
arranged into two registers or only a single one. Usage decreased to only
a few motifs in Dynasty 22 but gained fresh dimensions in Dynasty 26,
at first on the walls of tombs of officials (Petamenophis, fragments from
Roda) and then on royal and nonroyal sarcophagi of Dynasty 30 and the
early Ptolemaic Period. Thus, the sarcophagus of Nectanebo II, which was
never used because of the king's flight from the Persians in 343 b.c.e., was
decorated with a selection of six hours from the Amduat; in the case of
Wereshnefer (MMA 14.7.1), only the eighth hour is lacking, and in that
of Berlin 49, only the twelfth hour.
Beyond this series of sarcophagi, parts of the Amduat can be tracked
down on wooden coffins from the early Ptolemaic Period. Examples are
the coffin from the tomb shaft of Basa (TT 389), with the first and eighth
hours, and some figures on the coffin of Harendotes (BM 6678), which is
dated to the reign of Ptolemy III. The contents of the texts and figures—
which were often copied more faithfully in the late exemplars than in

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

31

the Ramesside Period—were in and of themselves unchangeable,
though doors guarded by serpents were added to the individual hours
of the night on several late sarcophagi.

Research
Jean-Franqois Champollion mentioned the Amduat only in his descrip¬
tion of the tomb of Amenophis III, where he was struck by its cursive
version, in the thirteenth of his letters from Egypt; but he copied texts
and representations from this book in other tombs, thus laying the foun¬
dation for its study. In addition, in 1879 Ridolfo V. Lanzone published
the first Turin papyrus containing the Amduat. Pioneering though in¬
complete was the translation and analysis by Gaston Maspero in 1888,
which served as a foundation for Alfred Wiedemann, Edouard Naville,
E. A. Wallis Budge, and others; a fresh and complete French translation
was eventually prepared by Gilles Roulin. In 1894, Gustave Jequier
published and translated the short version, though he could take into
consideration only a single version from the New Kingdom—that of
Sethos I—for the tombs of Tuthmosis III and Amenophis II were not dis¬
covered until 1898. Eugene Lefebure's highly imperfect copy from the
tomb of Sethos I, published in 1886, served for many years as the basic
edition of the long version and was employed in the preparation of the

Worterbuch der dgyptischen Sprache (Dictionary of the Egyptian Lan¬
guage). Budge supplied detailed descriptions of individual hours of the
night in The Gods of the Egyptians (1904) and The Egyptian Heaven and Hell
(1905), with translations. Paul Bucher published the concluding texts of
the first three hours in 1931, though in hieroglyphic type and only ac¬
cording to the three versions of Tuthmosis III, Amenophis II, and
Sethos I; in the following year, he published the tombs of Tuthmosis III
and Amenophis II in MIFAO 60, with photographs and the texts in hi¬
eroglyphic type, thus broadening the textual basis.
Alexandre Piankoff's publication of the tomb of Ramesses VI in 1954
represented a further step, and the English translation he included has
yet to be superseded. In 1963 appeared Erik Hornung's edition of the
long version (and, in 1967, the short version), with the first translation
into German; these were replaced by a synoptic edition by the same au¬
thor, Texte zum Amduat (1987-1994). Since these editions include only
versions from the New Kingdom, A. F. Sadek's 1985 publication of pa¬
pyri with copies of the Amduat in the Cairo Museum represents an
important supplement. With regard to the meaning of the compositions.

32

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

A. Schweitzer published an interpretation from a psychoanalytic point
of view in 1994.

Structure and Language
As an individual Book of the Netherworld, the Amduat bears an origi¬
nal title, namely. Book of the Hidden Chamber; the modern designation
Amduat ("that which is in the Duat") stems from the Egyptian name for
all the Books of the Netherworld. Its division into twelve sections corre¬
sponds to the twelve hours of the night. Each hour except the first has a
heading, written horizontally, that summarily describes significant
events that occur in the hour, along with remarks concerning its useful¬
ness and its orientation (see "Content"). Additionally, a brief introduc¬
tion in vertical columns gives the names of the hour, its gateways, and
its region of the netherworld and serves as a clear division between one
hour and the next. Only the first three hours have lengthy concluding
texts as well. Special insertions such as those that would become cus¬
tomary beginning with the Book of Gates are absent, and the concluding
scene depicting the arms of Shu and the sun is not yet separated from
the twelfth hour.
The Amduat is the first completely illustrated book; the texts and pic¬
tures constitute a unity and the texts make constant reference to the il¬
lustrations. Unfinished portions in the tombs of Haremhab and Sethos II
show that first the scenes were copied onto the walls and then their ac¬
companying texts. The representations and their captions are arranged
in three registers, with the solar barque always appearing in the middle
one. This register also includes the central theme of the hour, while the
upper register is devoted to general phenomena in the netherworld and
the lower register treats further motifs specific to the region of the hour.
Exceptional features are offered in the first hour, with its doubling of the
middle register (a barque appears at the beginning of each half) and its
enumerations of deities in the other two registers, and in the fourth and
fifth hours, with their partially crossed registers. Only in the latter two
hours are there individual captions in enigmatic writing; in the other
hours, abbreviated writings that in most cases cannot be designated
enigmatic often accompany the normal writings. Retrograde writing is
preferred in the texts, and the representations are also mostly to be read
in reverse. Unlike the later Book of Gates, where the sun barque is de¬
picted being towed in each of the twelve hours of the night, the towing
of the barque occurs here in only four of them: the fourth, fifth, eighth,
and twelfth.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

33

Notations in the individual hours distribute them according to the
four cardinal directions, running along a rectangle with two hours on
each of the short sides and four on each of the long sides. The only
tombs that display at least an attempt to take this into account are those
of Tuthmosis III and Useramun, with the directions followed exactly
only in the sarcophagus chamber of the former, though in the catalogue
of deities, the hours are ordered sequentially, with the solar barque al¬
ways at the beginning, as was also done later in the sarcophagus cham¬
bers of Amenophis II and Amenophis III. Because of the narrowness of
his burial chamber, Useramun was obliged to make changes in the dis¬
tribution, in particular the displacement of two of the hours from the
east to the north wall. In the tomb of Tuthmosis III, the last hour of the
night lies precisely in the east, while the entrance to the sarcophagus
chamber corresponds to the sandy road of the Land of Sokar.
In addition to the long, illustrated version, a short (called "abridged"
by Maspero and Jequier) version is found in the tombs and on papyri; it
is appended to the book like a concluding chapter and contains no pic¬
tures. Like the long version, it is divided into twelve sections. It is a sort
of abstract (sehuy, "summary") containing special emphases, in particu¬
lar listing important names of the individual hours of the night and
adding further remarks regarding usefulness. It seems to be divided
metrically into 300 verses.
In the tomb of Tuthmosis III, references to the king are constantly in¬
serted into the text of the book, a practice entirely given up by
Amenophis II and Amenophis III. In the tomb of Sethos I, such refer¬
ences are inserted only in the concluding texts in the second corridor,
while in the tombs of Dynasty 20, they occur in just a few places. In the
tomb of Tuthmosis III, an exceptional instance is the catalogue of deities
in the upper pillared hall (the antechamber to the sarcophagus cham¬
ber); it arranges most of the beings (though none of the enemies) who
appear in the Amduat in the manner of a list but with their order occa¬
sionally modified, while the stars that are inserted in each case indicate
the desired ascent of the king's ba-sou\ into the heavens.

Content
The detailed opening section of the Amduat stresses knowledge; it
promises knowledge of netherworldly phenomena nine (which in Egyp¬
tian stands for "many, many") times, and in the process, it also affords a
summary of the content of the Amduat. The book describes the journey
of the sun god through the twelve hours of the night, from his setting to

34

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

his rising in the morning. In between, we are presented with the ac¬
tions and speeches of the sun god as well as with descriptions of the
entities in the netherworld and their functions. It is the first religious
treatise to insert the king consistently into the daily course of the sun.
While Osiris is mentioned again and again and is often depicted, he re¬
mains entirely passive; in the entire Amduat, he does not speak even
once. Direct reference to the deceased king is made only in the sixth
hour, at the crucial moment when the ba of the sun unites with his
corpse.
The book begins with the entry of the sun god, as a ram-headed ba
("soul"), into the interstitial realm of the first hour of the night, and it
ends with his rebirth in the morning, after uniting with his corpse in the
middle of his journey in the sixth hour and overcoming the menacing
serpent Apophis in the seventh hour.
With its arrangement into lists of the various important beings in the
afterlife, the first hour of the night (figure 14) lays the foundation for an
ordering and unfolding of the Unknown, into which the sun descends in
the evening. The solar baboons and the goddesses of the hours, along
with the other deities in the upper and lower registers, personify the gen¬
eral rejoicing evoked by the appearance of the sun, in which all the in¬
habitants of the afterlife except for the "enemies" participate. In the mid¬
dle register, the goddess Maat appears twice directly in front of the solar
barque; later, she will appear at the beginning of the second hour, stress¬
ing that justice and law rule even here in the afterlife. In a second
barque, the sun god is already present in his morning form of the scarab
beetle; he is being worshiped by Osiris, who was considered to be his
nocturnal form. The beginning of the journey thus already alludes to its
successful completion. Personified stelae, provided with human heads,
allude to the commanding power of the god, who communicates all that
is necessary for those in the afterlife through his directives. At the end is
the opening and the resealing of the netherworld, which is called the
Great City because of its large number of inhabitants. With its gateway
named Swallower of All, this posthumous world contains everything
that has ever existed.
The next two hours (figures 10, 15, and 16) begin the actual nether¬
world, which is depicted first as a realm of abundance dominated by
the watery expanse called Wernes in the second hour and by the Wa¬
ters of Osiris in the third. In both hours, the solar barque is accompa¬
nied by other boats that are not depicted again in the later hours. The

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

35

H Li *

r

IH"

10. Amduat, second and third hours, with short version above. From the tomb of Sethos I.
Photography by the Egyptian Expedition, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York,
Photo courtesy of The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

36

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

II. Amduat, third and fourth hours. From the tomb of Tuthmosis III. Photo by
U. Schweitzer.

god concerns himself with assigning land to the blessed dead, who carry
ears of grain in their hands or wear them in their hair in the lower regis¬
ter. These are the peasants of Wernes, and provision for their material
needs is the theme here. The presence of Osiris manifests itself a number
of times in the lower register of the third hour, and in the text that con¬
cludes the hour. Re is even said to turn and face him directly. We also
encounter avenging creatures with knives in hand to render all enemies
harmless.
This well-watered, abundant landscape ends at the fourth hour (fig¬
ures n and 17). Here lies the desert of Rosetau, the "Land of Sokar, who
is on his sand," a desolate, sandy realm teeming with snakes whose un¬
canny movement is emphasized by the legs and wings on their bodies.
A zigzag route filled with fire and repeatedly blocked by doors leads
through the region of this hour. For the first time, the solar barque needs
to be towed for it to make progress, and the barque itself turns into a ser¬
pent whose fiery breath pierces a pathway through the otherwise im-

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

37

penetrable gloom. In the very middle of this darkly menacing hour,
Horus and Sokar look after the solar Eye, protecting and renewing it,
while at the end we are afforded an unexpected and consoling glimpse
of the morning sky.
The structure of the fifth hour (figure 18) differs somewhat from the
usual, with stress placed on its center by means of an intersection of reg¬
isters. The region represented by this hour embodies the West, and it in¬
cludes all the essential elements of the realm of the dead, including
(though it is invisible) the primeval water containing those who have
drowned. The hillock with two birds, who are Isis and Nephthys in
mourning, is the tumulus over the grave of Osiris, out of which the sun
is emerging rejuvenated in the form of a scarab. The "slaughterers" on
the far side of the burial mound, along with the various menacing ser¬
pents, are entreated to allow the sun god to proceed in peace so that he
can get by the narrow pass in the middle of the hour. The four towmen
of the fourth hour no longer suffice; here, along with the solar beetle
reaching down from above, seven males and seven females pull the
towrope. The journey continues through an oval representing the cav¬
ern of Sokar, which is nestled between the two heads of the Aker-sphinx
(figure 12). This might be yet another representation of the entire nether¬
world, within which the mysterious nightly union of Osiris (here identi¬
fied with Sokar) and the sun god takes place. Deeper still, the Lake of
Fire is again indicated as a place of punishment.
Quitting the desert of the Land of Sokar, in the sixth hour (figure 19),
at the very depths of the netherworld, the sun reaches the water hole
filled with Nun, the primeval water. Here lies the corpse of the sun: as a

bci, the god will unite with it. The sun's corpse is depicted twice, simulta¬
neously, at the ends of the upper and lower registers. It is not depicted
as a mummy; rather, it is represented as the solar beetle—the scarab—
thus already connected with the god's rejuvenated morning form. The
corpse is also the image of Osiris, which is embodied by the leonine
"Bull-with-the-thunderous-voice" in the upper register. As ba and corpse.
Re and Osiris unite at the deepest point in the nocturnal journey, while
the notion of resurrection is underscored by the semi-upright position of
deities in the upper and lower registers. Only here, at this most critical
juncture, are the Kings of Upper and Lower Egypt emphasized, along
with the symbols of their might: their scepters, crowns, and uraei. They
are here to be present at the resurrection of the deceased pharaoh. Thoth
is seated in front of the barque, healing the Eye and thus helping to ig¬
nite the new light. The lower register is framed by Sobek and Nun, the

38

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

12. Amduat, realm of Sokar in the fifth hour. From the tomb of Tuthmosis III. Photo by
A. Brodbeck.

lords of the primeval waters, while Tatenen, lord of the depths of the
earth, is also mentioned in the texts.
At about midnight, the sun shines anew, but this self-engendering of
Light also represents a moment of grave danger. This is why we find, in
the foreground of the seventh hour (figures 13 and 20), the punishment
of enemies, above all the archfiend Apophis: in the form of a serpent, he
lies on his sand bank in front of the barque, trying to bring the course of
the renewed Light to a standstill. He cannot succeed in this, for he is ensorcelled by Isis and Seth, while Selket casts her fetters around his body,
which is dismembered by yet other assistants. Moreover, the sun is now
also protected by the Mehen-serpent. Analogously, in the upper register,
Osiris triumphs over his enemies, who have been bound and beheaded
by an avenging demon with a cat's head; Osiris, too, is in the coils of a
protective Mehen-serpent. At the end of the upper register, we also see
three divine frrt-birds with crowned human heads, along with Atum on a
serpent, while behind the sand bank in the middle register, we once
again observe the burial place of the sun's corpse, protected by knives.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

39

13. Amduat, seventh hour. From the tomb of Tuthmosis III. Photo by A. Brodbeck.

In the lower register, the sun god is enthroned as "Horus of the nether¬
world," providing for the course of the stars, whose personifications fill
the remainder of the register. The conclusion depicts a helpful crocodile
with the head of Osiris; it is assisting in the search for those parts of the
god's corpse that are drifting in the water.
The well-ordered format of the eighth hour (figure 21) is striking. The
upper and lower registers are each divided into five caverns or crypts
sealed by doors that open at the bidding of the sun god, as has already
taken place in the representation. Nearly all the beings in these crypts are
seated on hieroglyphs for cloth, which the caption designates as their
clothing. The theme of this hour is thus the supplying of clothes, which
from early times on represented a high priority among the things wished
for in the afterlife. The texts also describe how the ba-souls of the gods and
the dead joyfully respond to the sun god from these crypts, which stand
for all the crypts in the netherworld. Though the sound of this rejoicing is
intelligible speech to the god, human ears hear it only as the cries of ani¬
mals or other sounds in nature, such as banging on metal or splashing

40

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

water: such is the distortion even of sound in the afterlife! In the middle
register, the solar barque is again towed vigorously along, here by eight
males, toward its ultimate destination. Personified shemes hieroglyphs ap¬
pear next, designating both the jurisdiction and the "following" of the
god, as well as the four rams of Tatenen, which at the end of the New
Kingdom were condensed into the figure of a four-headed solar ram..
The crew of the solar barque is highlighted in the ninth hour (fig¬
ure 22); with their rudders in their hands, they are the dominating
theme of the middle register, where three divine figures concerned with
the material provisioning of the dead are also depicted. Additionally, the
upper and lower registers continue the eighth hour's theme of provid¬
ing clothes. At the top, the first group, with their hieroglyphs for cloth, is
described as a court of law that "fells the enemies of Osiris," while the
following group of goddesses care for Osiris, which includes the re¬
pelling of his enemies. The twelve uraei in the lower register also serve
as a deterrent to enemies, and the nine "field-gods" who follow, stalks
of grain in hand, again assure the provisioning of the deceased.
In the lower register of the tenth hour of the night (figure 23) is the
rectangle of water containing those who have drowned, which fills the
middle register of the ninth hour in the Book of Gates. Those shown in
various positions, drifting in the water like Osiris, are saved from decay
and decomposition by Horus, who leads them to a blessed posthumous
existence even though they have not been accorded a proper burial.
Here, the primeval water reveals itself to be a regenerating element, fill¬
ing this entire hour of the night, which is designated "(the one) with
deep water and high banks." Darkness rules here, moreover, and the
hour is lit by the four goddesses with serpents on their heads who are
standing behind the watery rectangle. The upper register is devoted to
the rescue and healing of the Eye, which appears as the solar Eye and
the Eye of Horus. Thoth (the seated baboon) is responsible for this,
along with the lion-headed Sakhmet, goddess of healing, who manifests
herself here in various forms, while the remaining deities lend extra pro¬
tection to the Eye. In the middle register, the ba-souls of Sokar (the fal¬
con in the serpent) and Osiris (the falcon-headed serpent) make an ap¬
pearance in front of the solar barque, along with the sun god's
bodyguards, who are armed with various weapons to protect him
against his enemies in the darkness.
The eleventh hour (figure 24) is filled with preparations for the com¬
ing sunrise, the sun's emergence from the eastern mountain of the sky.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

41

"World-encircler," the serpent within which the miracle of the sun's re¬
juvenation will occur in the next hour, is already present in front of the
barque. In the form of serpents, Isis and Nephthys transport the crowns
of the Two Lands to the eastern gate of Sais, where four forms of the
goddess Neith are standing. In the upper register, the concern is once
again with time and the birth of the hours: everything depends on not
missing the right moment for the new sunrise. At the end of the upper
register, next to the retinue of the sun god, four additional goddesses sit
on double serpents, each holding a hand in front of her face; from them
emanates the fiery breath that incinerates the enemies who are cast into
flame-filled pits in the lower register. The serpent "who burns millions,"
along with avenging goddesses holding knives, carry out this Last Judg¬
ment, averting any threat to the rising of the sun. Horus, who is watch¬
ing over the scene, condemns the enemies of his father.
The rebirth of the sun occurs in the twelfth hour (figure 25). Since it
entails a repetition of the original creation, the primeval gods are pres¬
ent; two pairs of them are represented at the beginning of the lower reg¬
ister. The sequence of events is situated inside "World-encircler," the
serpent that appeared in the eleventh hour, and the gravity of the event
is indicated by the unusually large number of figures, twelve males and
thirteen females, who are hauling the boat with its "millions" of blessed
dead through the body of the gigantic serpent. The backward direction,
from tail to mouth, indicates the necessary reversal of time: according to
the caption, all these beings enter the serpent's tail old and frail, weak¬
ened by age, and emerge from its mouth as newborn babes. At the end
of the hour, the solar beetle, which was already present in the bow of the
barque, flies into the outstretched arms of the god Shu, who will elevate
the sun into the daytime sky. The event is accompanied by general re¬
joicing on the part of the deities in the upper and lower registers, a re¬
joicing not only for the sun, but also for Osiris, to whom life is promised
though he must remain in the realm of the dead. Additionally, the god¬
desses in the upper register drive off Apoplus one last time by means of
fire-spitting snakes, with the support of the oarsmen in the lower regis¬
ter, who accompany the sun in safety to the sky. When the sun has left
the netherworld, the goddesses will continue to provide the dead with
the light from their living torches. For a moment, the netherworld lies
open, but Shu seals it again, and the nocturnal journey is over. Along
with Osiris, who is depicted mummiform at the end of the lower regis¬
ter, all the deceased sink back into the sleep of death.

42

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

14. Amduat, first hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

15. Amduat, second hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

43

16. Amduat, third hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

45

46

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

18. Amduat, fifth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

19. Amduat, sixth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

47

48

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

20. Amduat, seventh hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

.a a.

Gl

£) ^

. . J)
\

i

V;^;” ;v .:

m

•••'. '
•••■••.-

Z

21. Amduat, eighth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

-

•.

I

^V.v'*
..-il

49

50

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

22. Amduat, ninth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

23. Amduat, tenth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

51

52

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

l-^y.

:

24. Amduat, eleventh hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

53

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

i

—*-*-* *

...

-■.

25. Amduat, twelfth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

.vA-.■■•■

■•.

--.

■.

-*s.

■-

.

54

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

26. Spell of the Twelve Caves. After Edouard Naville, Das Agyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII.
bis XX. Dynastie, vol. I (Berlin, 1886), plate CLXXXVII.

The Spell of the Twelve Caves
The illustrated text of The Spell of the Twelve Caves (figure 26) is first
attested on a papyrus (Cairo CG 24742) from the tomb of Amenophis II.
Merneptah had a second royal version inserted in the southern chamber
of the Osireion at Abydos. Since the texts and representation also occur
in Books of the Dead from Dynasty 18 on, it has been considered spell
168 of this work since the edition of Naville; Alexandre Piankoff first
recognized it as a composition in and of itself. With its description of the
twelve caves (qereret in Egyptian) of the netherworld and their divine in¬
habitants, it is related to the Books of the Netherworld, especially the
older type in which the netherworld is divided into twelve sections rep¬
resenting hours. A title for the composition, "spell for allowing Osiris NN
to enter," is found only on Papyrus BM 10478. The textual tradition reaches
down to the threshold of the Ptolemaic Period; the tomb of Petosiris has
a scene from the ninth cavern, and traces are found in the early Ptole¬
maic Book of Hours edited by Raymond O. Faulkner.
Each cave contains a variable number of groups of deities; thus, the
eighth has seven and the ninth a maximum of twenty groups. The first
seven caves are included only in the Osireion, though the inhabitants
there are represented quite schematically—alternately as three mum¬
mies or three anthropomorphic deities, in each case two male and one
female. Thus, only the eighth through the twelfth caves are portrayed in
detail. It is striking that inimical beings and scenes of punishment are

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

55

completely absent. The division into caves does not occur in some man¬
uscripts, with the groups of deities instead represented sequentially.
While the Osireion depicts the deities of each group in their entirety,
the remaining versions show only a single male or female representative
and add the relevant number. In the case of Amenophis II, these numer¬
als, as in his offering lists, are written in a separate strip underneath the
figures, whereas on other papyri they are immediately next to them; on
some papyri, the numbers are lacking. The number four is predominant,
but the numbers one, two, eight, nine, thirteen, fourteen, and thirty-one
occur, while three seems to be entirely absent.
Under the strip containing the representations of the deities, their
names, and their number, a register of text contains a notation regarding
each group's offerings on earth, which is comparable to the Book of
Gates. In the Osireion, the king is shown kneeling in front of each group,
making offerings. Papyrus BM 10478 and later papyri frame the strips of
depictions in the middle with two registers of texts; the upper one indi¬
cates, next to the names of the deities, the beneficent deeds they perform
for the deceased. Additionally, the papyrus in the British Museum
places the entire composition within a shrine.
The deities grant various favors to the deceased. For instance, Re
grants the ability to see when he rises; free movement in the realm of the
dead and free passage through the gates of the netherworld; light in the
midst of its darkness; food, drink, and protection of all sorts; and vindi¬
cation against all enemies.

The Book of Gates
Sources
According to Hartwig Altenmiiller, the Book of Gates belongs to "the
period before the New Kingdom" because of its similarity to the Amduat, but the cosmopolitan spirit of the scene containing foreigners
speaks against this. Other indications point instead to the Amarna Pe¬
riod as its date of origin. In the tomb of Haremhab, the earliest, albeit in¬
complete, exemplar of the book was placed in the sarcophagus chamber,
where until then the Amduat had been customary. Ramesses I also em¬
ployed this book alone, while Sethos I decorated his sarcophagus cham¬
ber with the Amduat while reserving the Book of Gates for his two great
pillared halls (E and J); though he used only the first half of the book on
the walls of these halls, his alabaster sarcophagus is decorated with the
earliest complete and continuous version. Ramesses II and his successors

56

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

also employed the book in their upper pillared halls, sarcophagus cham¬
bers, and subsidiary rooms, while Merneptah decorated the right wall of
the corridor of the cenotaph of Sethos I at Abydos with a complete Book
of Gates, complemented by the Book of Caverns on the left wall. In his
tomb and in those of his successors down through Ramesses IV, it dom¬
inated the walls of the sarcophagus chamber; Ramesses VI was the first
king to choose a new solution, the Book of the Earth, though a complete
Book of Gates was included in the upper portion of his tomb.
Ramesses VII was the last pharaoh to use portions of the book (the first
and second hours) in the single corridor of his tomb; under Ramesses IX
it disappeared from the royal tomb, though the gates guarded by ser¬
pents represented at the beginnings of the corridors (as also in the tomb
of Prince Mentuhirkhopshef, KV 19) are a last echo of the composition.
The book also appears on royal sarcophagi, though only in selection;
thus, the sarcophagus of Ramesses III has only the first hour. Tjanefer, a
priest of Amun under Ramesses III, was allowed to use a selection of
scenes from the book in his tomb (TT 158).
Following the end of the New Kingdom, portions of the book were
used only sporadically, perhaps because it is oriented more thoroughly
than the Amduat to the person of the king. The Book of the Dead of
Anhai, which may date to Dynasty 20, and the mythological papyrus of
Khonsumes of Dynasty 21 contain the concluding representation from
the book, as does the Dynasty 26 tomb of Mutirdis; other extracts are
found in the tombs of Petamenophis at Thebes and Horiraa at Saqqara
from this same period. The first hour and the judgment hall occur often
on late sarcophagi, and, in one instance (CG 29306), the twenty-first
scene is depicted.

Research
The scene containing foreigners in the tomb of Sethos I and the Judg¬
ment of the Dead in that of Ramesses VI aroused the interest of visitors
at an early date, and they were often copied. Jean-Franqois Champollion
provided the first description, along with translations from the book, in
his thirteenth letter from Egypt, dated May 26,1829; relying for the most
part on the tomb of Ramesses VI, he supposed that the Book of Gates
described the daytime journey of the sun while the Book of Caverns on
the opposite wall described its nocturnal journey. From 1864 on, the
highly reliable publication of the alabaster sarcophagus of Sethos I by
Bonomi and Sharpe served as the basic text edition. Gaston Maspero
coined the designation Lime de Portes ("Book of Gates/' along with Lime

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

57

des Pylones, "Book of the Pylons"; Eugene Lefebure called it Lime de VEnfer, "Book of the Netherworld") and supplied a brief survey of its con¬
tents in an essay in 1888, after Lefebure had already published the first
translation of the text on the alabaster sarcophagus in 1878 and 1881.
Budge described and translated the version on the sarcophagus in 1905
and compared its hours of the night with those in the Amduat; but be¬
cause the lid had been destroyed from the sixth hour on, he arrived at a
false enumeration. The Osireion with its complete version had been dis¬
covered in 1902, and in 1908, the earliest, though incomplete, version
was found in the tomb of Haremhab; the latter was published as early as
1912. Next, Charles Maystre and Alexandre Piankoff created a broader
textual basis with their text edition of 1939-1962, which was replaced
by that of Erik Hornung in 1979. Piankoff's complete English translation
has been available since 1934 and Hornung's complete German transla¬
tion since 1972.

Structure and Language
An original title is not attested. Although the structure of the book is
quite similar to that of the Amduat, with twelve nocturnal hours each
divided into three registers, it differs from it by means of the gates de¬
picted at the end of each hour. Another clear difference is in the solar
barque, where only two other gods, Sia and Heka, are depicted along
with the sun god as opposed to the numerous crew in the Amduat.
Here, the cabin of the boat is surrounded in each hour by a protective
Mehen-serpent, and in each hour, four male figures are depicted like
hieroglyphs towing the barque; in the sarcophagus chambers of Harem¬
hab, Ramesses I, and Sethos I, their clothing and beards clearly mark
them as human rather than divine beings, and thus as deceased persons.
Long concluding texts are absent; instead, in the middle and at the end,
depictions of the Judgment of the Dead and the course of the sun are
emphasized by their not being divided into registers. The first hour of
the night occupies a special position, as in the Amduat, and its structure
differs from that of the other hours. The last three hours also display un¬
usual features in that they omit the main figure (Atum or Horus) in the
lower register and depict only deities and not the blessed dead. The
gates of these last three hours, as well as the one in front of the hall of
judgment, also display peculiarities.
In no other Book of the Netherworld do the gates of the hereafter ap¬
pear as visibly and systematically as here. It is most easily compared
with the gates of Book of the Dead spells 144 and 143 (with variants).

58

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

which Egyptians of the Ramesside Period considered a “substitute" for
the Book of Gates in nonroyal tombs such as that of Nefertari and others
in the Valley of the Queens, or in the case of Twosre in the Valley of the
Kings (in the front part of the tomb); the tomb of Tjanefer (TT 158) dis¬
plays a unique mixture in that the solar barque, rather than the de¬
ceased, appears in front of the gates. Some confusion still arises from the
designation of Book of the Dead spells that contain gates as the Book of
Gates, as in the bibliography of Porter and Moss; we must draw a clear
distinction, for gates in the afterlife are found as early as the Pyramid
Texts. The twelve gates of the netherworld are already presupposed in
the text of the Amduat, though they are not yet represented there. Their
designation sebekhet corresponds to that employed in BD 145, although
the latter amount to twenty-one. In BD 144, there are seven gates, called

areret. In the Book of Gates, each gate has a guardian in the form of a ser¬
pent on its door, as well as two further guardians with menacing names
and fire-spitting uraei.
Although more deities and deceased persons are depicted than in
the Amduat—more than a thousand, in fact—they are more regularly
combined into groups, and they bear fewer individual names, with the
result that their number is easier to keep track of. Many of these
groups are not intended as deities but rather as deceased persons. In
contrast to the Amduat, notations concerning the use of the Book are
absent. Instead, there are remarks about offerings, which as a rule are
located at the end of a scene, though such remarks are lacking in
scenes depicting enemies and in the final three hours. Of the total of
one hundred scenes, many fill an entire register, though the last two
hours contain a number of brief individual scenes. The Middle Egyp¬
tian of the texts displays scarcely any influences from Late Egyptian. In
his Komparative Untersuchungen zu vier Unterweltsbiichern, Winfried
Barta established that the Book of Gates has an especially rich vocabu¬
lary (see the bibliography under "New Kingdom Books of the Nether¬
world, General").
The judgment hall of Osiris occupies a special, central position. Pro¬
vided with texts in cryptographic writing, it is inserted into the fifth
gateway so that it is situated immediately before the union with the
sun's corpse in the sixth hour. Beginning with the tomb of Sethos I, it is
replaced by a scene depicting the king before the enthroned (later,
standing) Osiris, thus depicting no longer the judgment but rather the
identification of Pharaoh with the ruler of the dead. For the first time, a
separate concluding representation summarizes the entire course of the

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

59

sun in a single scene; at the same time, similar scenes appear as illustra¬
tions to the solar hymns of the Book of the Dead (spell 16).
On the sarcophagus of Sethos I, the hours are in a continuous se¬
quence, beginning with the outside of the foot end and ending with the
inside of the head end, so that the concluding scene occurs directly be¬
hind the head of the deceased. The Osireion and the tomb of Ramesses VI
also display a continuous arrangement, whereas in the remaining tombs,
the hours are distributed over various walls and rooms; from Sethos I to
Ramesses III, the upper pillared hall was preferred for the fifth and sixth
hours of the night.

Content
As in the case of the Amduat, the composition is concerned with the
nocturnal journey of the sun. In part, the contents of the hours are dis¬
placed just a bit from where they occur in the Amduat: thus, the
drowned appear in the ninth hour rather than in the tenth. Deities and
the blessed dead are more clearly distinguished from one another than
they are in the Amduat, and the dead seem bound to their respective re¬
gions in the hours of the night. The special status of Pharaoh is more ev¬
ident, for he accompanies the sun god to his rebirth in the morning, thus
reflecting the course of the sun in his journey through the netherworld.
In most versions, various additions to the texts and representations refer
directly to the king.
Upon his entry into the realm of the dead (figure 30), the sun god is
greeted not by individual deities but by the collective of the dead, who
are designated the "gods of the west" and located in the western moun¬
tain range. As in the Amduat, the first hour of the night is an interstitial
realm preceding the actual netherworld, which begins at the first gate.
Two stakes, one bearing a ram's head and the other a jackal's, embody
the commanding power of the god, which both rewards and punishes
those who dwell in the hereafter.
The second hour (figures 27 and 31) makes a clear distinction between
the blessed dead in the upper register, who have spoken Maat and now
live on Maat, and the damned in the lower register, who are repri¬
manded by Atum. In the middle register, the barque encounters the
"gods in the entrance," while in the lower register, the four Weary Ones
are represented along with the "enemies," indicating that here, even the
cardinal points are exhausted and need to be lifted up.
The third hour (figures 28 and 32) highlights certain central motifs of
the nightly journey, such as the mummies in the upper register, which

60

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

27. Book of Gates, second hour: Atum and the Weary Ones. From the tomb of Sethos I.
Photo by A. Brodbeck.

are awakened from the dead and animated in their shrines, and the am¬
bivalent Lake of Fire, from which the blessed dead are provisioned but
whose waters are flames for the damned. In the middle register, the sun
god is towed along in the "barque of the earth," a symbolic condensa¬
tion of his entire journey through the depths of the earth. Also symbolic
of renewal is the outfitting with sparkling white linen indicated at the
end of the register. In the lower register, Apophis makes his first appear¬
ance, here as a giant serpent in front of Atum, who is assisted by two Enneads in overcoming this archfiend.
Two bodies of water dominate the upper register of the fourth hour
(figure 33): the Lake of Life, which is guarded by jackals, and the Lake of
Uraei; both are perhaps variations on the Lake of Fire in the third hour.
In front of the barque in the middle register lie shrines containing mum¬
mies still in the sleep of death; the sun god effects their resurrection and
provisioning. Their renewed life in the hereafter occupies an entire hour
of the night. The passing of the hours is laid out in the following scene,
with its many-coiled serpent representing time and its twelve goddesses

~ Tf

:
1

k ■

1 ■*** 1
1I *** *

-pit

TM
*
p-

tL

■

:!

*****

i *y

i. I*' >

*

>J^!v€ 1 w»m|

i

L ■•

I
' i\
1T t
1* x££f **. '' iS
f
1 ^x*J°w» ^

1
iJ[4**
1 *
IW
I Tx «■ j
i* «J

28. Book of Gates, beginning of the third hour. From the tomb of Ramesses IV. Photo by
A. Brodbeck.

62

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

embodying the hours. In the lower register, the enshrined Osiris is sur¬
rounded protectively on all sides by the gods of his entourage. As a
loyal son, Horus cares for his deceased father, while the enemies of the
god are being punished in the fiery pits at the end of the register.
The contents of the fifth hour of the night (figure 34) are rather com¬
plex. Here, the deceased are allotted space (in the form of fields; therefore
the gods are depicted with a surveying cord in the upper register) and
time (the gods carrying the body of a serpent and the hieroglyphs mean¬
ing "lifetime" in the lower register). So that this can occur unhindered,
the archfiend Apophis, the "Retreater" in front of the barque, must once
again be fettered and held fast. Behind him, we see the ba-souls of the
blessed dead, and at the beginning of the lower register appear the four
"races" of humankind—Egyptians, Asiatics, Nubians, and Libyans—
each represented by four individuals; existence in the hereafter is assured
to all of them, and they are placed in the care of Horus and Sakhmet. Just
as in the Great Hymn of Akhenaten the Aten is said to care even for for¬
eign peoples, so here they are sheltered in the realm of the dead.
The portrayal of the judgment hall is emphasized by its insertion as a
special scene (figure 29) immediately before the sixth hour; it is the only
depiction of the Judgment of the Dead in the Books of the Netherworld,
and it is also distinguished by the use of cryptographic writing. As judge,
Osiris sits enthroned on a stepped dais while the personified scale in front
of him, unlike that in the Book of the Dead, displays empty pans. An Ennead of blessed, justified dead stand on the steps, and the enemies lying
invisibly under their feet are consigned to the Place of Annihilation. Yet
another inimical power is being driven off, this time in the form of a pig.
The Judgment of the Dead here is thus the prelude to the union of the

ba and the corpse of the sun god (like those of all the blessed deceased)
in the sixth hour of the night (figure 35), which lies at the deepest point
in the journey. As in the Amduat, the corpse of the sun is in the middle
register, though here it remains invisible; immediately in front of the
barque and its towmen, it is being carried by gods whose arms are
equally invisible, hidden because of their contact with the corpse. In the
register below, mummies of deceased persons are lying on a long,
serpent-shaped bed in order to participate in the union with the ba and
the resurrection effected by it. So that this critical event is not interfered
with, the archfiend Apophis must be kept at a distance, a feat being ac¬
complished by the gods holding forked poles in the upper register; from
the serpent's body rise the heads of people Apophis has swallowed and
is now obliged to set free again. In the immediate vicinity is a represen¬
tation of time as a twisted double rope that is being unwound from the

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

63

29. Book of Gates, judgment hall of Osiris. From the tomb of Haremhab. Photo by F. Teichmann.

pharynx of the god Aqen. The lower register ends with a depiction of
the Lake of Fire, which this time is circular and inhabited by a cobra that
serves as an effective deterrent to all enemies.
As in the Amduat, the central theme of the seventh hour (figure 36) is
the elimination of any and all inimical powers, so that the sun's renewal
will not be endangered. In front of the solar barque in the middle regis¬
ter appear the jackal-headed "stakes of Geb," with two enemies of the
god bound to each of them; punishing demons with ominous names see
to their torment, to which Re consents. In sharp contrast to this scene,
the upper register depicts two groups of blessed dead, one with baskets
filled with grain as a sign of their material provisioning and the other
with the feather of Maat as a symbol of their vindication in the Judg¬
ment of the Dead. They all have "existence until its end," sheltered in
Maat, while the condemned belong to the Place of Annihilation. In the
caption, Osiris welcomes his new followers. In the lower register, deities
or deceased people busy themselves with huge ears of grain intended
for their assured provisions, or are provided with sickles for harvesting
them; under the rays of the revived sun, even grain can grow in abun¬
dance here.

64

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

The eighth hour (figure 37) once again includes a depiction of time as
an endless rope spooled out hour by hour, as in the sixth hour, and also
as the towrope of the barque, which "produces mysteries." In front of
the barque in the middle register are the "lords of provision in the
west," whom Re commissions to allocate provisions to the blessed and
inflict evil on the enemies. The mummies in the lower register have
turned over on their biers and are thus in the process of resurrection.
Next to them, a council of judges provides protection.
In the ninth hour (figure 38), the central motif in front of the barque in
the middle register is the rectangle of water containing the drowned, a
scene borrowed from the Amduat, where it is depicted in the lower reg¬
ister of the tenth hour. Here, four groups of dead persons drift in various
positions in the primeval waters of Nun, profiting from its regenerative
capacities; for them, the water means refreshment. Their noses are to
breathe the air, and their ba-souls will not be destroyed, with the result
that they will share in the continued existence of the blessed. Re himself
is here the "one who is in Nun," and in the scene that concludes the
book, he will be raised up out of Nun. The aforementioned fra-souls ap¬
pear in the upper register, and next to them is a group of persons who
give them bread and vegetables. By way of contrast, the lower register is
reserved for punishment. The Fiery One, a giant serpent with the Chil¬
dren of Horus standing in his coils, spews his fiery breath at twelve ene¬
mies who are bound in three different ways. In his reprimand, Horus
condemns these enemies for the atrocities they have committed against
his father, Osiris, and he summons the Fiery One to set them ablaze.
In the tenth hour (figure 39), the entire middle register is filled with the
battle against Apophis. The fourteen deities holding nets are especially
striking. In their nets, which they hold above them, magical power is
contained as though in a force field, and it renders Apophis defenseless.
The Old One (perhaps the earth god, Geb) ties fetters around his body.
The upper and lower registers display special forms of manifestation of
the sun god. Above, he appears as a griffin, followed by two highly com¬
plex serpent entities who participate in the punishment of Apophis and
all other enemies. In the lower register, a continuous rope connects all the
figures; the sun god is depicted in the center as a falcon, though he is also
called Khepri ("scarab beetle"). The accompanying text mentions "emer¬
gence" and stresses that the journey is proceeding toward the sky.
Again in the eleventh hour (figure 40), this time in the upper register,
Apophis is bound, dismembered, and rendered harmless. The rope with
which he and his assistants are bound is held by a giant fist emerging

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

65

from the depths. In the middle register, the face of Re is making its way
in a barque, so that the dead can gaze upon the countenance of the god.
The reversed direction of the barque is striking; could this be an allusion
to the reversal of time, as in the twelfth hour of the Amduat (see page 41)?
The god is preceded by stars that herald his reappearance. In the lower
register, the oarsmen of the god make their appearance, together with
the goddesses of the hours; time and energy (rowing) collaborate to pro¬
pel the barque up into the eastern horizon. Several deities are already
performing the function of announcing the god in the horizon; their cry
is a presentiment of the din that will accompany the rising of the sun (as
at the beginning of Goethe's Faust, part II: "What an uproar the light
brings!").
The sun god arrives at the twelfth and last hour of the night (fig¬
ure 41), in which the miracle of his rebirth will occur, through the gate
"with the mysterious entrance." The mystery of sunrise, into which the
dead are here inducted, unfolds in several individual scenes, beginning
in the upper register with gods who "carry the blazing light," which is
represented concretely by the sun disks in their hands. Stars again pre¬
figure the appearance of the sun, while goddesses seated atop serpents
surround the solar child. Even here, his barque remains unchanged. In
front of it lies Apophis, already in fetters; the fiend is unable to impede
the sunrise, and he is held in check by gods wielding knives and shep¬
herds' crooks. Behind him, four baboons announce the sun god in the
eastern horizon, their hands in a gesture of jubilation. The lower register
is concerned with crowns as symbols of power that are to be worn while
leaving the netherworld, as well as with the upbringing of the already
newborn sun by his "nurses" and with mourning for Osiris, who is to
remain behind in the netherworld. In the form of uraei, Isis and Nephthys guard the final gate of the netherworld, through which the sun god
will make his entrance onto the horizon.
The concluding representation that follows lacks the usual division
into registers. Here, the entire course of the sun is condensed into a sin¬
gle picture, as was the case after the Amarna Period in innumerable il¬
lustrations accompanying solar hymns. Half hidden in its depths, the
god Nun raises the solar barque out of the primeval waters, which are
indicated by wavy lines. In the barque, the sun, in the form of a soaring
scarab beetle, is embraced by Isis and Nephthys, while the beetle pushes
the sun disk toward the sky goddess Nut, who receives the god Re. Her
upside-down position designates the inversion of the sun's course,
which will now once again run in the opposite direction from its course

66

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

through the netherworld, here embodied by Osiris, who surrounds the
netherworld with his curved body. All three of the interior spaces of the
cosmos are thus contained in this complex representation: the primeval
waters, the height of the heavens, and the depths of the earth (the
netherworld). From above and below, arms are stretched toward the
sun, arms that hold it and move it through these cosmic spaces, day
after day.

30. Book of Gates, first hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

31. Book of Gates, second hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

67

68

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

32. Book of Gates, third hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

33. Book of Gates, fourth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

69

34. Book of Gates, fifth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

n

35. Book of Gates, sixth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

36. Book of Gates, seventh hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid

37. Book of Gates, eighth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

74

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

38. Book of Gates, ninth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

40. Book of Gates, eleventh hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

77

41. Book of Gates, twelfth hour. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

The Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld
The second gilded shrine of Tutankhamun, counting from the outside,
displays two sections from a book that has no parallels, though they are
clearly analogous to the two scenes from the Amduat that are depicted
on the king's third shrine. It remains unclear whether these are complete
hours of the night, given that Tutankhamun's hours from the Amduat

78

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

are incomplete. In a caption, the book is designated as an "Amduat," the
term serving for the first time here as the designation of the genre. Like
the Amduat, it is divided into three registers, though the solar barque is
absent, and, as in the Book of Caverns, the presence of the sun god is in¬
dicated by sun disks in section B and by ram-headed frfl-birds in the sun
disks in section A.
The book is not provided with a title, and the modern designation
(Winfried Barta uses the term Kryptograph) rests on the fact that in both
sections, all the texts and names are in enigmatic writing, with no trans¬
lations into normal hieroglyphs. The normally written portions of text
scattered throughout all the registers stem from the Book of the Dead.
Such a combination of a Book of the Netherworld and the Book of the
Dead is unique to this instance; not until Dynasty 21 were elements from
the Amduat and the Book of the Dead occasionally combined, and it re¬
mains uncertain whether the spells here are in fact integral parts of the
composition. Section A (figure 42), which begins with two boundary
posts, presumably precedes the other section, for the boundary posts are
also found at the beginning of the Book of Gates, in the first hour. Addi¬
tionally, light plays a role in section B, whereas darkness and the Place
of Annihilation dominate section A. It remains an open question whether
the book had any sections beyond these two. Section B is dominated by
rays of light that emanate from disks, stars, or serpents and flow through
all the entities, while section A displays only two large disks containing
ram-headed bas. Piankoff explains this as the "refilling" of the sun disk
during the night. Section A is divided at its midpoint by the figure of a
huge god that spans the entire height of the three registers; John C. Darnell
sees in this a union of Re and Osiris. After the initial representation, with
its two posts (the ram-headed "head of Re" and the jackal-headed "neck of
Re") and the solar ba in its disk, the first two scenes in the upper and lower
register each display eight deities; the upper ones are in the "caverns of the
Duat (?)" and in darkness, while those below are located in the Place of
Annihilation, though their ^7-souls are able to accompany the sun god. The
head and the feet of the huge divine figure are each surrounded by an
ouroboros-serpent, which in each case is called Mehen; this is the earliest
known representation of the ouroboros, and the entire figure, with its cap¬
tions, refers to the genesis and the end of time. The motif of the solar ba in
its disk, which this time is tied to a towrope, is repeated on his body.
The second half of section A contains three scenes, arranged verti¬
cally. In the middle register, seven figures with their arms raised in a

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

79

gesture of praise turn to the solar ba and receive the rays of his disk.
Above them, turned in the opposite direction, are seven goddesses in
their coffins who behold the rays of the sun and follow the sun god with
their ba-souls, while their bodies remain in place. The lower register,
which is flanked by two guardian figures, again refers to the Place of
Annihilation, which Re lights up "with his voice," allowing its inhabi¬
tants to breathe. A human-headed serpent is coiled several times around
two sarcophagi containing the corpses of Osiris and Re; Darnell reads
the large oval containing hands as "coffer" (i.e., of Osiris, with the ram
once again referring to Re).
Section B (figure 43) has three registers, each with three scenes; the
presence of Re is indicated by means of sun disks belonging to each
scene and, in part, even to each figure. The disks are for the most part
connected to the figures by rays of light, a pictorial reference to state¬
ments in the text that the light of Re enters their bodies. The upper and
the lower registers each begin with a spitting cobra. Each of the six gods
in the first scene of the upper register has a ba-bird in front of him and
receives light from a star (though the first one receives it directly from
the cobra); according to the caption, it is the light of Re, which enters
them. The second scene in the upper register begins with a cat. The
seven figures who follow have no heads; instead, each has a face de¬
picted frontally before him, in each case inserted between a star and a
sun disk with rays. Above them, light pours directly into their bodies
from other sun disks with legs. This is evidently a matter of the separa¬
tion and rejoining of the head and the body. Each of the six gods of the
final scene stands on a Mehen-serpent, which helps with his regenera¬
tion, and receives life-giving light from a disk in front of him.
The middle register of section B begins with a mummy that has
turned itself over and now extends a hand to the ram-headed solar ba,
which the caption also mentions; from the mummy's feet rears a serpent
flooded by light. There follow four lion-headed beings whose arms are
hidden, perhaps because they are carrying the corpse of the sun, as in
the sixth hour of the Book of Gates. The next scene is nearly identical,
though there are now six lion-headed beings; in each scene, light from a
sun disk atop a pair of legs enters the mouths of all the beings repre¬
sented there.
In the first scene of the lower register, the cobra at the beginning spits
light that in each instance is received by a lion's head and emitted again
by a cobra next to it; it pours over six Osiris figures who, according to

80

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

the caption, are ''clothed" (Darnell's reading) with light by Re while their
ba-souls follow them. That they are also granted breath is shown by the
sail hieroglyphs—signifying "wind" or "breath"—in front of them. The
middle scene begins with a lion; like the cat in the upper register, it is
rising up out of the earth, in which a serpent is hidden. The next six
mummiform figures are ram-headed, and in normal writing, the caption
names the deceased king as the object of their regard. The last scene con¬
sists of six goddesses, each of whom receives light from a disk and lets it
pour from her hands onto the head of the serpent named Evil of Face;
their names designate them as punishing beings, though they also carry
the sun, depicted as a star and a disk, in their wombs. Throughout this
section, the intensity of the role played by light in the realm of the dead
is striking; ideas from King Akhenaten's religion of light seem to be still
at work here.
At the end of the section, the sun disk with its ram-headed ba appears
once again, now doubled. It is embedded in a symbolic summary of the
daily course of the sun, wherein it is kept in constant motion by four
pairs of arms. Serpents and the heads of four negau-cattle, along with
goddesses making the gesture of praise, an Osiris figure, and an "arm of
Re," positioned antithetically, complete the scene. I recognize it as a con¬
cluding scene, though Darnell prefers to see it as a beginning, because a
similar representation appears on the ceiling of corridor G in the tomb of
Ramesses VI.

42. Enigmatic Book of the Afterlife, section A. After A. Piankoff, Les chapelles de Tout-AnkhAmon (Cairo, 1951-1952), plate II.

ii

iiiiiiii ~iimin—mnrii -iTnin innii ~ rninii mini iiimii mimi TTnini " iiiiTiii imiiu "~irmni~aillllil UlUiii liiimi iimi'ii uiimi mum

mum

miiiii

43. Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld, section B. After A. Piankoff, Les chapelles de ToutAnkh-Amon (Cairo, 1951-1952), plate IV.

minn

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

83

The Book of Caverns
Sources
The earliest, nearly complete version of The Book of Caverns—its upper
register is now partially destroyed—appeared in the Osireion (the ceno¬
taph of Sethos I) at Abydos under Merneptah; it occupies the left wall of
the entrance corridor, directly opposite the Book of Gates. It did not
make an appearance in the Valley of the Kings in the reigns that fol¬
lowed, though it could have been on the gilded shrines around the sar¬
cophagi, which are now lost to us. In the tombs of Merneptah, Twosre,
and Ramesses III, a variant of the concluding representation assumed a
dominant position in the decoration of the sarcophagus chamber, on the
upper part of the narrow right wall. The representations from the first
and second sections were first employed by Ramesses IV in his third
corridor, in place of the former Amduat, as was a portion of the text of
the first section, which was also repeated twice in the room behind his
sarcophagus chamber. An almost complete exemplar appears in the
tomb of Ramesses VI, once again displayed in its entirety opposite the
Book of Gates in the front half of the tomb; space limitations necessi¬
tated using the sides of some pillars in the upper pillared hall as well.
The tomb of Ramesses VII displays the same arrangement on the right
wall, but only in the first corridor, with a small excerpt from the first sec¬
tion. Finally, Ramesses IX executed selections from the first four sections
on the right wall of his first and second corridors, complemented by
portions of the two remaining sections in the sarcophagus chamber.
The first section, parts of the fourth section, and the concluding repre¬
sentation are included on the papyrus of Nedjmet from Dynasty 21.
From the Late Period, the version in the tomb of Petamenophis is impor¬
tant and in fact indispensable, for several portions of the text are pre¬
served only there. Fragments of a further Late Period version containing
the first two sections stem from the Nilometer of Roda. The book was
used only seldom on late sarcophagi, for example, CG 29306 (from
Saqqara), where the first two sections are combined with the Amduat
and the Litany of Re.

Research
Jean-Franqois Champollion provided a description of the version in the
tomb of Ramesses VI, along with some translations, in his thirteenth let¬
ter from Egypt. The book attracted little interest in the century that fol¬
lowed; eventually, the discovery of a second complete version in the

84

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Osireion led Henri Frankfort to attempt a first translation, assisted by
Adriaan de Buck, in 1933. Not until 1941-1946 did Alexandre Piankoff
produce an edition of the text, drawn together from several versions,
along with a translation into French; in 1934, he supplied an English
translation in his edition of the tomb of Ramesses VI. The first German
translation, by Erik Hornung, appeared in 1972. A synoptic edition of
the text of the book has yet to be published.

Structure
An original title for the book is absent. There is no division into the re¬
gions of the night hours. An attempt is made to follow the principle of di¬
vision into three registers, but space limitations often compel a staggering
of the registers, and in all the versions, the first two sections have five reg¬
isters. Problems also ensue from the transposition of the book to the righthand wall in the tombs of Ramesses VI and Ramesses IX, for the original
was evidently designed for a left-hand wall. Two large representations of
the ram-headed sun god divide the book into two halves, each compris¬
ing three sections, making a total of six; the text of the book also alludes to
these two halves. In the first and second sections, the text portions are sep¬
arated from the representations, with the text placed second (the order is
reversed only in the case of Ramesses VII); in each case the text presents a
long monologue of the sun god in which he invokes the individual beings
or groups of deities in the representation. Sections three to six again com¬
bine representations and captions, and the descriptive formula ("they are
like this ...") of the earlier books also appears. In the second half of the
book, several litanies precede each of the sections; section five, with its
thirteen litanies, is especially comprehensive in this regard.
As in the Book of Gates, the Book of Caverns includes, aside from the
final representation, further pictures that interrupt the normal division
into registers; these are the representations of Nut and Osiris in section
five, with the figure of Nut alluding to the theme of the Books of the
Heavens, namely, the nightly journey of the sun through the body of the
sky goddess. The concluding representation contains the only indication
of the solar barque, which is otherwise not found; instead, the individ¬
ual scenes have a sun disk, though it is omitted from all those scenes in
which the damned and their punishment are depicted, and it is also ab¬
sent from the first two sections. The lower register is reserved for the
damned and their punishment. The modern designation of the book de¬
rives from the fact that the netherworld is here divided into "caves" or.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

85

better, "caverns" (qereret in Egyptian), as in the eighth hour of the night
in the Amduat. The beings who are represented in these caverns tend to
be enclosed in ovals that serve, on a superficial level, as a leitmotif of the
book. These are sarcophagi enclosing the corpses of gods and god¬
desses.
Ramesses VI enriched the text with about two hundred brief addi¬
tional remarks referring to the king.

Content
The theme is once again the nightly journey of the sun god through the
netherworld. Osiris is more prominent here than in the compositions
discussed thus far, but the distinction between him and Re remains un¬
clear, and both are in fact viewed as aspects of a single deity. The princi¬
pal motif is Re's encounter with the corpse of Osiris in its "coffer," as
laid out primarily in section three, after which the regeneration of the
god commences in section four. In contrast to the Amduat and the Book
of Gates, the motif of the battle with Apophis fades into the background.
At the beginning of the composition (figure 47), two vertical strips
contain the solar disk and the ram-headed sun god. "Re who is in the
sky" is entering into the primeval darkness with the avowed intention
of caring for Osiris and sending his enemies to the slaughter. In what
follows, the pictorial segment of section one is divided into five regis¬
ters, while the separate text portion consists of a monologue of Re di¬
rected to the various groups of entities. Three serpents in the first cavern
of the Duat guard the entrance to this realm. In the third register. Re
turns directly to Osiris and extends his hand to him. Osiris is repre¬
sented in a shrine that is surrounded protectively by a serpent; those in
his following are also protected by serpents inside their sarcophagi. The
bottom register is reserved for the enemies of Osiris, some of them al¬
ready beheaded, who are guarded by another three serpents. Their pun¬
ishment takes place in the depths of the Place of Annihilation, and Re
condemns these enemies to nonexistence.
In section two (figure 48), Re must once again pass by several
guardian serpents whose function is to restrict access, after which he
reaches the gods and goddesses in their sarcophagi. In the second regis¬
ter he encounters forms of Osiris; in the third, the coffer of Osiris con¬
taining his corpse (figure 44) and, next to it, the ram- and jackal-headed
posts of the sun god already familiar from the Book of Gates. The fourth
register contains still more forms of Osiris, and in the bottom register we

86

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

44. Book of Caverns, second section with “coffer” of Osiris. From the tomb of
Ramesses IV. Photo by A. Brodbeck.

once again encounter bound and decapitated enemies, some of them
upside-down with their hearts torn out. Re condemns them to nonexis¬
tence, dispatching them to the Place of Annihilation, where knifewielding guards carry out their punishment. Finally, Re tells Osiris that
he intends to enter the "cavern where Aker is."
He does this in section three (figure 49), in the center of which the
ithyphallic corpse of Osiris lies underneath the earth god Aker. The
upper register begins with a representation of the deceased king as
Osiris in his sarcophagus, guarded by two serpents. Following this are
figures with the heads of catfish, who are elsewhere encountered as as¬
sistants of Aker and representatives of the dark depths of the earth and
of water. Re once again encounters his own forms of manifestation.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

87

which are in sarcophagi. The end of the register is filled with divine sar¬
cophagi "in the cavern of Osiris-Khentamentiu." Re himself begins the
middle register as the Eldest One, leaning on a staff. He encounters four
forms of Osiris, the "lords of the Duat," and addresses them. Next is the
central scene with the earth god Aker as a double sphinx surrounded by
deities of the Ennead. Near the end of the register, the corpse of Osiris
once again appears in its sarcophagus, along with the ram's head and
the eye of Re in sarcophagi, all surrounded by an ouroboros and evi¬
dently stressing the unity of Re and Osiris; Osiris is depicted again, atop
a serpent, as "the one who has become two." The lower register again
presents enemies, all of them upside-down and some already decapi¬
tated. The first two groups plead for mercy, and for the first time, female
enemies are depicted. All the enemies are in the primeval darkness and
the Place of Annihilation, and at the end of the register, even their basouls are upside-down so as to be punished. In the midst of the enemies
rests the ithyphallic corpse of Osiris; even he is in the primeval dark¬
ness, though he has the sun disk above him and is surrounded by a pro¬
tective serpent.
The second half of the Duat begins with section four (figure 50),
whose beginning is somewhat altered from that of section one: between
the solar disk and the ram-headed sun god is inserted an erect serpent
named Great One on His Belly. The introductory text consists of three
litanies in which general rejoicing once again rings out to the sun god:
"How beautiful is Re, when he penetrates the darkness!" Re turns to
Osiris and his following with a series of promises. At the beginning of
the upper register, Isis and Nephthys lift the body of Osiris to initiate his
resurrection; in the next scene, he is cared for by his two "sons," Anubis
and Horus, while in the third, he appears as Bull of the West, with
Horus-Mekhentienirty, the mongoose, as his son. In the middle register,
the ram-headed sun god, leaning on a staff, turns to three forms of
Osiris. In the two scenes that follow, Horus and Anubis appear yet
again, standing in a pose symbolic of protection in front of the doubled
corpse of Osiris, and in front of Osiris and his ba, respectively. The lower
register presents the enemies as bound and standing on their heads,
which this time have not been cut off; between them appear the "annihilators in the Place of Annihilation," with whom the "cat-formed one,
from whose clutches there is no escape" is associated as a punishing
demon in the first scene. It is stated of the enemies that they neither see
nor hear Re, and that they have been robbed of their ba-sou\s.

88

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Section five (figure 51) begins with further litanies that mention,
inter alia, the rejuvenation of the sun by Tatenen, the god of the depths
of the earth. The pictorial section opens with a large figure of Nut, the
goddess of the sky, who lifts the ram-headed sun god and the solar
disk on her upraised palms. She is turned toward the three registers
and is framed by motifs of the course of the sun, those behind her
climbing up and those in front of her going down, while arms stretched
high receive the solar child. Two human-headed serpents rear up on
either side of the goddess, who is designated Mysterious One and "she
with the mysterious form." The upper register begins with Osiris,
whose hands are stretched out to Re, and four human-headed ser¬
pents. In the second scene, Tatenen is propped up by the corpse of
Atum and the corpse of Khepri. Two sarcophagi then follow, one of
them containing two forms of manifestation of Re as a child. The four
falcon-headed mummies at the beginning of the middle register are
forms of Horus, followed by Anubis as a guardian and a coffin con¬
taining the scepter of Atum, "which created the netherworld and
brought forth the realm of the dead" and thus embodies the creative
power of the sun god. The register ends with four anonymous god¬
desses in sarcophagi. The lower register again deals with punishment,
which is meted out by the female slaughterer carrying two stakes in
her hands; two bound prisoners kneel next to her. Next come two
scenes in which enemies are being punished in large cauldrons. The
first contains their heads and hearts, and the second the decapitated,
bound, upside-down enemies themselves. The "arms of the Place of
Annihilation" lift the cauldrons up out of the depths while uraei fan
the flames beneath them.
Behind all this, another large-scale figure interrupts the course of the
registers. It is Osiris, depicted as ithyphallic, together with his ba, the
bird atop his head; in front of him looms a protective serpent (figure 45).
In the continuation of the three registers behind him, the oval containing
the four "flesh" hieroglyphs again refers to the corpse of Osiris, which is
cared for by the light and the voice of Re, and which is at the same time
addressed as his own body and his "decay." Below, the goddess Tayt
greets the sun god and Osiris; next to this, the head of Re appears in
ram's form. In the lower register is another cauldron, which contains the
flesh, the ba-souls, and the shadows of the enemies of Re and Osiris and
is heated by two goddesses; we are once more in the Place of Annihila¬
tion, whose arms hold the cauldron.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

89

45. Book of Caverns, fifth section: figure of Osiris and cauldron in which the damned are
burned. From the tomb of Ramesses IV. Photo by A. Brodbeck.

The long text between sections five and six consists of thirteen litanies
that again refer to the representations in section five and in which Re ad¬
dresses the entities appearing there, even his enemies. Once more, the
goal of the sun god is to gaze on his corpse and effect the resurrection of
Osiris-Imenrenef, "he whose name is hidden." The first scene in the
upper register of section six (figure 52) depicts Anubis caring for corpses
in their sarcophagi. The next scene is also dominated by Anubis, who
tends to the sun god, represented as a ram and a falcon's head, in his
sarcophagus, along with two further sarcophagi. In the third scene, two
goddesses watch over forms of the sun god: the head of a ram, a scarab,
and "he of the netherworld." In the last scene, Osiris-Orion bends over a
mound containing a fettered and decapitated enemy, followed by a god

90

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

praying before a falcon. Here, Osiris is protecting his son Homs, and in
him the sun god as well. At the beginning of the middle register, a
scarab beetle pushes the sun disk in front of it out from “between the
two mysterious caverns of the West," which contain Osiris and Re, and
they are greeted by four standing gods. The text speaks of the rebirth of
the god, which is also heralded by the figure of the beetle. Even here, a
last threat must be overcome, represented in the next scene as the great
serpent encircling the solar beetle; the "two old and great gods in the
Duat," shown in the two ovals, see to it that the serpent is placed under
a spell and cut into pieces. By way of contrast, the serpent inside the
mound in the third scene seems to be a regenerating one, for Re emerges
from the mound in the form of a ram's head and tarries on the mound of
Tatenen, which contains the tomb of this god of the depths of the earth.
In the fourth scene. Re encounters two sarcophagi containing falcon¬
headed gods, and in the fifth scene, he meets gods with incomplete bod¬
ies; they are without their heads, which will be restored to them by the
creative word of the god. The lower register again consists of scenes of
punishment in the Place of Annihilation. In the first scene, goddesses
armed with knives "take care of" four supine beheaded figures whose
heads are set in front of their feet along with the hearts that have been
torn from their bodies; according to the caption, their bas and shadows
are also punished. The second scene contains four bound female ene¬
mies guarded by two goddesses with jackals' heads; Re has condemned
these enemies "to the Place of Annihilation, from which there is no es¬
cape." In the third scene, a god and a goddess guard four kneeling,
bound enemies whose heads have been cut off. In the last scene, ene¬
mies plunge headfirst into the depths, while Osiris, surrounded by the
great serpent, arises from these depths, which are again the Place of An¬
nihilation.
A concluding representation follows (figures 46 and 52). It depicts the
"two mounds" from which Re emerges, with a god bent protectively over
each of them. While seven gods rejoice on either side, the solar barque is
towed out of the netherworld by twelve gods; it is not yet entirely visi¬
ble, but the ba, the scarab beetle, and the ram-headed morning form of
the sun can be seen. In front of the barque, a ram-headed scarab beetle
and the sun as a child also appear. Leading to a huge sun disk are two
triangles composed half of black darkness and half of blue water, thus
schematically summarizing the route through the netherworld. At the
end of his journey. Re enters the eastern mountain, once again provid¬
ing light for the world of the living.

46. Book of Caverns, concluding representation. From the tomb of Merneptah. Photo by
A. Brodbeck.

47. Book of Caverns, first section. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

92

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

48. Book of Caverns, second section. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

49. Book of Caverns, third section. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

93

94

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

50. Book of Caverns, fourth section. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

51. Book of Caverns, fifth section. Drawing by A. G. Shedid

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

95

52. Book of Caverns, sixth section and concluding representation. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

The Book o# the Earth
Sources
Two scenes that would later belong to the Book of the Earth appear in
the tombs of Merneptah, Twosre, and Ramesses III, on the left wall of
the sarcophagus chamber, where they serve as a counterpart to the con¬
cluding representation of the Book of Caverns. Another scene, the solar
barque atop Aker as a double sphinx, also occurs as an individual scene
from Merneptah on, and in the tomb of Ramesses IV, it appears as the
concluding representation in the decoration of the tomb. In the tomb of

96

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Ramesses VI, all the decorated walls of the sarcophagus chamber are
covered with scenes from this book, while by contrast, in the tomb of
Ramesses VII only one register portrays scenes from parts D and C; fi¬
nally, Ramesses IX employed two scenes from part A. The book is thus
found exclusively in the sarcophagus chambers of the royal tombs; one
scene is also on the sarcophagus of Ramesses IV, and it reappears on
several sarcophagi of the Late Period. Individual scenes also appear in
the cenotaph of Sethos I at Abydos and in the tomb of Osorkon II at
Tanis. The section designated by Piankoff as the Book of Aker occurs on
papyri of Dynasty 21, along with variations on the resurrection scene in
A2, and in tombs of Dynasty 26 at Thebes (Petamenophis and Padineith,
TT 197) and Saqqara (Lepsius 23). Additionally, from the Late Period,
the representation of Nut from part D is attested in the tomb of Aba
(TT 36), while the scene of the birth of the stars occurs on a cartonnage
from the Ramesseum.

Research
Alexandre Piankoff laid the foundation for further study of the compo¬
sition with his edition of 1933, though Jean-Franqois Champollion had
already published the scenes and texts in the sarcophagus chamber of
/

Ramesses VI in his Monuments de I'Egypte: Notices descriptives (Paris,
1844, vol. 2, pp. 576-378), while part of the composition was also pub¬
lished by Lefebure in his Notices des hypogees (Cairo, 1889). In 1963
Bruno H. Strieker offered an explanation of the book in the sense of a
divine embryology, while Winfried Barta and Friedrich Abitz have
concerned themselves with the composition and the meaning of the
book.

Structure
As in the Book of Caverns, there is no division into the hours of the
night, the solar barque is largely absent as an aid to orientation, and
even the division into registers is uncertain (the original probably had
three registers, as usual); the overall impression is of a loose sequence of
scenes. It is highly uncertain whether the tomb of Ramesses VI gives a
complete exemplar; the incomplete condition of his sarcophagus cham¬
ber necessitated various transpositions of material, and as with the Book
of Caverns, portions appear on the sides of several pillars. Abitz as¬
sumed that this composition, like the Book of Caverns, consists of two
halves but differs, inter alia, in that only one half contains scenes of pun¬
ishment. Corresponding to the Book of Caverns is the use of the sun

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

97

disk as a leitmotif, with the solar barque occurring only rarely. With a
few exceptions, the scenes are all oriented to the right, thus yielding a
closed cycle; the sun's journey has no visible goal, nor is there an entry
into the netherworld. A concluding representation is absent as well, un¬
less we are to recognize the Aker scene on the right wall as one.
Piankoff distinguished four parts, A-D, with the division in the tomb
of Ramesses VI running from right to left, contrary to the usual se¬
quence. Abitz adds further scenes on three pillar sides as part E and
makes it probable that part D, with its praying king, represents the be¬
ginning of the book, as at the beginning of the corridor of the Osireion,
and that part B belongs to part A, and part C to part D. Barta, on the
other hand, designates sequences of scenes from the sarcophagus cham¬
bers of Ramesses VII and Ramesses IX as part E, with the last scenes, at
least, derived from a wide variety of books. In the case of Ramesses VI,
part A displays a clear central axis that has perhaps led to changes in the
arrangement of the scenes.
An original title is lacking for this book as well, and in this case, it has
not proved easy to find a modern designation. Piankoff chose La creation
du disque solaire ("The Creation of the Sun Disk"), Hartwig Altenmiiller
Buck des Aker ("Book of Aker"), Erik Hornung Buck von der Erde ("Book
of the Earth"), and Barta Erdbuch ("Earth-Book").
As was already the case in the Book of Caverns, Ramesses VI inserted
many references to the king into the text and employed lines containing
titles to structure it.

Content
As in the case of its external structure, the content of the book displays
many affinities with the Book of Caverns, though clear differences also
exist. Osiris and his coffer again play an important role, as does the
transformation of Re, accompanied by the bas of the blessed in his fol¬
lowing. A special motif is the journey of the sun through the earth god
Aker, which is actually an expanded version of the eleventh scene of the
Book of Gates, with its "barque of the earth."
The first part (D) (figures 53 and 57) begins with a schematic represen¬
tation of the entire realm of the dead, with Osiris at its center. Within a
tomb structure guarded by serpents, he stands between two mounds,
receiving acclamations from his ba and the "corpse of Geb" atop them.
Below him, Anubis and the Mysterious One stretch their arms protec¬
tively over the "mysterious coffer" that invisibly contains the corpse of
the god. The process of renewal taking place here is flanked by scenes of

98

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

53. Book of the Earth, part D. From the tomb of Ramesses VI. Photo by U. Schweitzer.

punishment. Cauldrons are held aloft by punishing gods whose names
allude to the devouring of the bodies and the ba-souls of the enemies;
the blood of decapitated enemies flows into the cauldrons from above,
where a god holding hieroglyphs symbolizing fire concludes the scene.
In the second scene, two pairs of arms rising from the depths of Nun
surround a huge sun disk, on which the mummy of the sun god is
standing between two fire-spitting uraei. A wreath of twelve stars and
twelve small disks, whose ends are held in the hands of two goddesses,
surrounds the scene and indicates the course of the hours. In the sar¬
cophagus chamber of Ramesses III, this scene occurs in modified form:
the pairs of arms are absent, and instead, the name of the king is placed
in the large disk, which is surrounded by a double ouroboros. The third
scene represents a modification of the figure of Nut in the fifth section of
the Book of Caverns, with the goddess here called the Mysterious One
and looking backward. The sun god is present on the palms of her
hands as a ram-headed ba-bird and a disk. She is flanked by two human¬
headed serpents, and by a crocodile and yet another serpent. The last
scene, which has no caption, also modifies a popular theme: the barque
of the sun is depicted on the back of Aker as a double sphinx, while in
the barque, which is supported by two uraei, Khepri and the ape¬
headed Thoth pray to the sun god. Below the barque, a winged scarab

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

99

and sun disk are held on high by two anonymous royal figures, as well
as by Isis and Nephthys.
The middle register begins with Horus, protected by Atum, rising up
out of a recumbent divine figure called the Western One. There follow
(perhaps as a separate scene) seven shrines or mounds containing gods,
"those with mysterious forms," who display their faces in frontal view.
The next scene repeats the motif of the miraculous, posthumous engen¬
dering of Horus. Here, falcon-headed, he emerges from the curved,
supine corpse of Osiris, which is being watched over by the corpses of
Isis and Nephthys. Next comes a scene with two ram-headed mummies
in burial mounds; between them, two anonymous gods elevate the ba of
Osiris, which is avian in form and adorned with the white crown. The
next scene begins with the arms of Nun, which hold the solar disk. Four
divine forms and two uraei flank a huge sun disk, out of which emerge a
Hathor head and a serpent, both perhaps indicating the regeneration of
the sun. This is also the theme of the next scene, in which a winged
scarab emerges from the disk. Two praying uraei and several burial
mounds containing mummies, among them that of Osiris as Bull of the
West, flank the birth of the sun. The analogous scene with a sun disk
and winged scarab flanked by mounds containing mummies probably
also belongs in this register.
The lower register is reserved for the punishment of enemies. It be¬
gins with a figure of the sun god and several sarcophagi, followed by
four enemies called the Burning Ones, who have hieroglyphs for fire in¬
stead of heads; they are watched over by four ram-headed gods. The
next scene depicts four gods, each of whom seizes an enemy who is de¬
capitated, upside-down, and painted red, perhaps meaning that he is
covered with blood. Four kneeling enemies follow, with hieroglyphs for
fire on their heads; they are being bound by four goddesses who "set the
corpses of the enemies on fire." In a further scene, pairs of arms raise
from the depths two cauldrons filled with the heads and pieces of the
flesh of enemies. A fire-spitting head kindles the flames under each caul¬
dron, while next to them, two knife-wielding gods stand by. Between
them, two goddesses hold their hands protectively over a large heart.
All this is occurring in the Place of Annihilation, whose "corpse" is lying
in a huge sarcophagus in the next scene, and which is addressed by Re
as the "corpse of Shetit," that is, of the entire realm of the dead. Above
her, three gods and three goddesses raise their hands in prayer; they are
in burial mounds or shrines, and their feet are hidden in the depths. In
the last scene, the Apophis-serpent is being seized by ram-headed gods.

100

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Under it, Osiris stands in a burial mound or shrine, framed by the
corpse of Geb and the corpse of Tatenen; all three are sunk up to their
knees in the depths.
The three registers of part C are in some way connected with part D,
though the exact sequence remains undetermined. In part C (figure 56),
the upper and middle registers each begin with a ram-headed sun god,
to whom two ba-birds are praying in the upper register; the first of these
is standing on a perchlike structure and the second on a scarab above
the Apophis-serpent, out of whose coils Khepri is emerging, according
to the caption. In front of Apophis stand Atum and Shu, whose bas are
perhaps intended here. In the middle register, the sun god is greeted in
prayer by a god; behind him, two gods, one ram-headed and one
serpent-headed, stretch out their hands protectively toward a sun disk,
out of which projects the falcon's head of "Horus of the netherworld." In
the lower register, four gods grasp human-headed posts; in front of
them, a praying god and a praying goddess begin the register. There are
four remaining scenes in part C. In the first, the corpse of Aker, depicted
as a god holding a scepter, bends down over his own ba, which is pray¬
ing to him in the form of a bird. This group is framed on either side by a
burial mound containing a sun disk, out of which a praying goddess is
emerging. Four Osiris figures follow, each with a sun disk behind him
and a pair of arms stretched out toward him; at the end, a head is in¬
cluded, along with the pair of arms and sun disk. The scene containing
three gods who are fettering kneeling enemies surely belongs in a lower
register, as perhaps also do the three ovals that follow (one of them now
destroyed), on top of which lie mummies that have turned themselves
over, each with a goddess turned toward it.
The right wall, which contains part A (figures 54 and 55), begins with
the sun god, "who protects the corpses," flanked by mummies in a bur¬
ial mound called the Mound of Darkness. The second scene depicts the
earth god Aker as a double sphinx, with the solar barque atop his
mound; the barque is depicted, its direction reversed, between personi¬
fications of the entrance and the exit of the realm of the dead: the stern of
the barque is facing the latter. Below is the resurrection of the corpse of
the sun, a scene that occurs in the royal sarcophagus chambers begin¬
ning with Merneptah, and often later on papyri of Dynasty 21. From a
falcon's head that projects out of the bottom of the sun disk, light falls on
the "mysterious corpse" lying on the ground, which contains Osiris and
Re in a single form; a wreath of twelve stars and twelve disks surrounds
the scene, which is also framed by two Osiris figures on either side. The

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

101

54. Book of the Earth, part A. From the tomb of Ramesses VI. Photo by U. Schweitzer.

third scene depicts twelve goddesses of the hours, each with the hiero¬
glyphs of a star and a shadow, and each with a beaming disk above her.
At the center of the fourth scene again stands a "guardian of the
corpses," flanked by the figures of mummies, some of whom are in four
large disks. In the fifth scene, the central god, who might be Osiris, re¬
mains anonymous; he is flanked by the corpses of Shu, Tefnut, Khepri,
and Nun, whose ba-souls are traversing the darkness. In the sixth scene,
a head and a pair of arms rise up from the depths. On the head stands a
goddess called Annihilator, with her arms stretched out to embrace the
solar disk, while on the palms of the hands of the pair of arms stand two
praying goddesses named West and East, again reversed. Three mum¬
mies asymmetrically frame the scene.
The upper register presumably ends at this point, with a line contain¬
ing a title. As in the Amduat and the Book of Gates, the middle register
begins with the solar barque, which is being towed by fourteen ram¬
headed gods, each accompanied by his ba. Below this scene, an ithyphallic god called "he who hides the hours" stands in his cave, surrounded
by twelve star goddesses who extend disks to him; there are also stars
and additional disks, and the figure of a child directly below the phallus
of the god. Around the scene winds a great coiled serpent. The follow¬
ing scene is apportioned into three places in the exemplar in the tomb of

102

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

Ramesses VI; it consists of five burial mounds, out of which stretch a
head and arms upraised in a gesture of praise, as well as two further
mounds without a head and arms. The third scene deals with the birth
of the sun and shows two erect mummies; the head of the first is a sun
disk with the head and forelegs of a scarab emerging from it, while the
second is topped by a praying goddess. In the fourth scene, a uraeus, a
head with arms, and an upright mummy are grouped on either side of a
mummiform god called "he who annihilates the hours." On the palms
of the hands of each pair of arms stands another god holding a small sun
disk in his hands. Expanded by yet other pictorial elements, this scene
also occurs on the sarcophagus of Ramesses IV, where the theme is the
birth and annihilation of the hours in the abyss of the Place of Annihila¬
tion. The top and the bottom of the fifth scene consist of ten heads each;
above, they are connected to hieroglyphs denoting shadow, and below,
to arms upraised in prayer. At the end, two goddesses adore the sun
disk, which is moving along between these heads of the followers of the
sun, accompanied by the ba-souls of the blessed. The lower register can
be called a kind of concluding representation that summarizes the entire
course of the sun. At the left, the solar barque, which contains a scarab
and the ram-headed sun god, is towed by seven ba-birds. In the center,
in changed form (raft attached to the prow, scarab adored by the bas of
Atum and Khepri), it passes above one head of the double sphinx Aker
and into the depths, where it is received by Tatenen, god of the depths
of the earth, and again released by Nun, the god of the primeval waters.
In the middle, between the three (which stand for "many") mummies on
either side, the arms of Nun raise the sun disk up from the depths. At
the end, fourteen uraei with human heads and arms haul the barque out
of the netherworld. Below the first representation of the boat, at the far
left, the arms of Geb embrace a mummy called the Mourned One atop a
mound containing a weeping eye and four hieroglyphs designating
flesh; the indicated mourning is continued by other figures at the left. As
at the end of the Amduat, the regeneration of Re is set in contrast to the
mourning for Osiris.
Part B (figure 56), which has no clear division into registers, quite
likely belongs to part A. First to appear are four ovals containing mum¬
mies, which breathe by means of the rays of the sun god, and four burial
mounds with mummies that have turned themselves over, all under the
protection of a serpent. The caption alludes to their decay, before which
even Re turns away. The following scene, which stretches up the entire
height of part B, is reminiscent of the representations of Nut and Osiris

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

103

in the Book of Caverns; from Siptah to Ramesses IV, a sculptured ver¬
sion of the scene was employed on the lids of the royal sarcophagi. At
the center stands the mummiform "corpse of the god/' with the sun disk
inside him. In front of him, a pair of arms, from which a serpent arises,
holds on its palms a god and a goddess giving praise. Behind the
mummy, a second pair of arms, called the "arms of the darkness," ele¬
vate the crocodile Penwenti; the hands also hold a jackal-headed and a
ram-headed scepter. The ensuing four ovals containing mummies have
an equal number of fo?-birds, as well as two hieroglyphs designating
shadow. Below are representations of barques containing the recumbent
mummies of Osiris and the falcon-headed "Horus of the netherworld,"
each tended by the goddess Isis or Nephthys, respectively. At the end,
the upper portion begins with a representation of a huge burial mound
containing the sun disk with a god praying to it, and next to it, a large
oval with two divine figures above hieroglyphic signs for flesh, framed
by two heads and two goddesses, all depicted giving praise. In the
lower portion are four praying gods; next to each one is a ba-bird and a
bent hieroglyph for shadow.
Part E consists of two sides of one pillar and one side of another one in
the front row of pillars; six gods in burial mounds are represented, and
twice, gods pray beneath a sun disk.

55. Book of the Earth, part A. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

56. Book of the Earth, parts B and C. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

105

57. Book of the Earth, part D. Drawing by A. G. Shedid.

107

cimv-

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

58. Ceiling of corridor G in the tomb of Ramesses VI. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of
Ramesses VI, ed. N. Rambova, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 139. Copyright
© 1968, renewed 1996 by Princeton University Press.

Miscellaneous Scenes
The tombs of Ramesses VI and his successors contain a number of scenes
that cannot be ascribed to any of the known Books of the Netherworld
but that clearly belong to the genre of descriptions of the hereafter.
In the tomb of Ramesses VI, there are in particular representations on
the ceilings, with enigmatic captions, in corridors F and G and in ante¬
room H preceding the sarcophagus chamber. The unusual representa¬
tion of the sun barque on the ceiling of F aroused the interest of Hermann Grapow and Heinrich Schafer, who copublished a study of it in
1937. The parallel on the ceiling of corridor C in the tomb of Ramesses IX
omits this representation, but it otherwise largely corresponds to the
version of Ramesses VI. In part, it seems to deal with the resurrection of
the deceased, which is carried out in various stages.
The ceiling of corridor G in the tomb of Ramesses VI (figure 38) is divided
into three registers, with a serpent-formed variation of the sun barque in
the middle register; it is venerated by deities who have disks for heads,
while the goddesses in the lower register have their disks in front of them.
On the lintel of the door to anteroom H is what Friedrich Abitz has called
a "protective representation" (figure 39), intended to guard against the in¬
advertent occurrence of a breakthrough into the neighboring tomb, KV 12.

108

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

59. “Protective representation” in the tomb of Ramesses VI. Above: photo by A. Brodbeck. Below: after A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, ed. N. Rambova, Bollingen Series
40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 141. Copyright© 1968, renewed 1996 by Princeton University
Press.

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

109

60. Scenes in the sarcophagus chamber of the tomb of Ramesses VII. Drawing by
A. G. Shedid.

The ceiling of anteroom H in the tomb of Ramesses VI displays a scene
of the resurrection of Osiris; parallels are found in the Osireion at Abydos and in the tomb of Petamenophis. The captions are written in part
with normal hieroglyphs and in part enigmatically.
On the two side walls of the sarcophagus chamber in the tomb of
Ramesses VII, two registers on each wall contain a total of seventeen
scenes (figure 60). They are in part without captions, and presumably they
do not belong to a single composition; the lower register on the right wall
is a collection of scenes from the Book of the Earth. An overall sequence is
recognizable, in so far as the left wall begins with a programmatic scene
showing two figures of the sun god in his disk, while at the end of the
right wall is a representation of the course of the sun. The eighth scene on
the left wall depicts the nightly journey of the sun through a crocodile, for
which there is a parallel on the right wall of the sarcophagus chamber of

I 10

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

61. “Enigmatic” wall in the tomb of Ramesses IX, right end. After F. Guilmant, Le tombeau
de Ramses IX (Cairo, 1907), plate 63.

Ramesses IX; here, the crocodile Penwenti might stand for the primeval
waters out of which the sun emerges as a newborn child in the morning.
The left wall of the third corridor in the tomb of Ramesses IX has ex¬
tracts from the Amduat. The right wall contains a series of scenes, begin¬
ning (or ending) with a scene in which the king offers a figurine depict¬
ing Maat to Ptah, along with a large diagonal figure of an ithyphallic
Osiris, which is equated with Re and with the deceased king (figure 6i).
Next, in three registers with the solar barque in the middle register, is a
composition whose organization and content connect it with the Books
of the Netherworld (figure 62). The upper register remains without text,
but the upside-down and spread-eagled figures depicted in its eight cir¬
cles, four of which are painted red and four yellow, have been read by
John C. Darnell as Lords of the Duat and explained as stars plunging
downward. In the middle register, the serpent-shaped sun barque trav¬
els over the back of Apophis, while the text speaks of its coming to a
standstill. Eleven serpents in front of the barque are hit by the fiery ar¬
rows of the sun's rays. The seven figures praying over the punishment

THE NEW KINGDOM BOOKS OF THE NETHERWORLD

I I I

62. “Enigmatic” wall in the tomb of Ramesses IX, left end. After F. Guilmant, Le tombeau de
Ramses IX (Cairo, 1907), plate 63.

pits are to be understood actively, with Darnell, as "those who cast
down." In the lower register appear first four goddesses subduing ser¬
pents, and then four half-upright, androgynous beings who are con¬
nected with the newborn sun as scarab and child, as well as other com¬
plex forms. The text is a variant of spell 106 of the Book of the Dead.
A sequence of scenes found on royal sarcophagi beginning with that of
Siptah and on nonroyal sarcophagi of the Late Period has connections
with the Book of the Earth, but it also contains scenes and texts that are
independent of it. These scenes deal with the protection of the nighttime
sun by the earth god, Aker, and his catfish-headed assistants; mourning;
and jubilation over the sun god. They also deal with the corpse of Osiris;
his union with his ba and the continued, posthumous effectiveness of
the sexual potency of the god of the dead; and with the birth and the an¬
nihilation of the hours, which fall into the abyss of the Place of Annihila¬
tion. Ramesses IV employed the sequence dealing with the sun god
twice on his sarcophagus, thereby omitting the sequence dealing with
Osiris.

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

i^^^fter the Amarna Period, a new group of Books of the Afterlife
took shape. These center on a representation of the sky goddess. Nut,
transposing the nightly journey of the sun into her body and thus into a
celestial hereafter. The goddess Nut gives birth to the sun god in the
morning. During the day, he passes visibly along her body and is "swal¬
lowed" by her mouth in the evening. From there, during the night, he
journeys invisibly back to the place where he will rise again. Yet the sun
god travels through the same landscape already familiar from the Books
of the Netherworld, and the same or similar motifs appear in both
realms; this celestial hereafter corresponds in every way to the netherworldly one.
From Ramesses IV on, two Books of the Sky tended to be placed next
to each other on the ceilings of the royal tombs; these are distinctive be¬
cause of the double representation of the sky goddess, depicted back-toback (figure 63). Although the focus is on the course of the sun, the other
heavenly bodies are also included, in particular the decans. On the
whole, the books emphasize cosmography and the topography of the
sky, which already had their beginnings in the Book of the Heavenly
Cow (see the next chapter, "Special Compositions"). The combination of
the Book of Nut and the Book of the Night, as they appear on the ceil¬
ings of the cenotaph of Sethos I at Abydos and the tomb of Ramesses IV,
was employed again in Dynasty 26 in the tomb of Mutirdis (TT 410). The

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

I 13

63. Book of the Day and Book of the Night. From the tomb of Ramesses VI. Photo by
U. Schweitzer.

"astronomical ceilings," as first found in the tomb of Senenmut and then
in those of Sethos I to Ramesses III, on the ceilings above the sarcopha¬
gus of the king, can be viewed as their precursors. In a further develop¬
ment after the New Kingdom, representations and texts were added to
the changing forms of the sun god in the individual hours of the day
and the night.

The Book of Hut
Sources
From the New Kingdom, the Book of Nut is attested only in the ceno¬
taph of Sethos I at Abydos and in the tomb of Ramesses IV; in the latter,
the version is abridged. In each case, the book is on the ceiling of the sar¬
cophagus chamber. From the Roman Period (mid-second century C.E.), a
commentary on the book is written in Demotic (P. Carlsberg 1 and la).
In the interval, only the tomb of Mutirdis (TT 410) from Dynasty 26
(c. 630-620 b.c.e.) offers even an incomplete version, one that is apparently
related to that of Ramesses IV. No further versions are known to date.

Research
Jean-Franqois Champollion and Hippolito Rosellini published early
drawings of the representation of the sky goddess, and Heinrich Brugsch

I 14

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

also offered a transcription in his Thesaurus; these were all copies of
Ramesses IV's version, for that in the Osireion was not discovered until
1914. The Demotic commentary was published in 1940 by H. O. Lange
and Otto Neugebauer. In i960, Neugebauer and Richard A. Parker in¬
cluded all the sources in volume 1 of their Egyptian Astronomical Texts.
More recently, discussion has centered on the astronomical aspects of
the representation and its table of decans.

Structure and Language
The book functions as a pictorial description, and in this, it resembles
the Book of the Heavenly Cow. Visually, the brief captions seem to re¬
cede beside the huge, dominating representation of the sky (figure 64).
The sky goddess Nut is depicted in the form of a woman supporting
herself on the ground, which does not yet appear as the earth god, Geb,
on her hands (which are correctly on the right, thus in the west, in the
cenotaph of Sethos I, though they are on the left in the tomb of
Ramesses IV) and her feet, while the god Shu holds her body aloft.
There are complementary pictorial motifs, such as several sun disks, a
winged scarab in front of the knees of the goddess, a vulture atop the
heraldic plant of Upper Egypt behind her legs, and nests of migratory
birds next to her arms. A longer appended text complements the brief
captions to the representation. Papyrus Carlsberg reproduces the origi¬
nal text (a representation either is lacking or was at the beginning and
has been lost) in hieratic script, along with a translation into Demotic
and a commentary that is also written in Demotic.

Content
The illustration and its captions are intended to supply both a topogra¬
phy of the sky and an understanding of the daily course of the sun. The
brief captions are distributed over the entire representation, describing
its details as well as the actions of the sun god, the decans, and other di¬
vine beings. Text L supplies an important definition of the "far regions
of this sky": they are in the primeval darkness and the primeval waters,
inaccessible to the sun, with unknown boundaries and the cardinal di¬
rections nullified. Texts S through X give a list of decans, which perhaps
goes back to a Middle Kingdom original, and speak of their "work" and
their periodic invisibility, while texts Dd to Ff treat the migratory birds
and their nests. With regard to the decan stars, consideration is given
not to their rising but rather to their transit through the meridian.

v£>

Book of Nut (Cenotaph of Sethos I). After O. Neugebauer and R. A. Parker, Egyptian Astronomical Texts, vol. I (Providence, I960), p. 40, fig. 21.

I 16

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

In the version from the cenotaph of Sethos I and in the late version,
the end of the text is a "dramatic text" reporting a quarrel between Geb
and Nut because she kept "swallowing" their children, the stars. Their
common father, Shu, settled the dispute by advising that the stars be
born again each time so that they might live. On each occasion, how¬
ever, they were to remain for seventy days in the House of Geb, and
thus invisible in the netherworld, in order to be regenerated there.

The Book of the Day
Sources
The only New Kingdom tomb in which the Book of the Day (figures
65-71) has been found to date is that of Ramesses VI. It reappears in the
royal necropolis at Tanis; there are selections in the tomb of Osorkon II,
and a nearly complete version exists in that of Shoshenq III. The latest
versions occur in the tomb of the scribe Ramose (TT 132) from the reign
of Taharqa of Dynasty 25, to which should be added the brief texts re¬
garding the hours of the day on certain sarcophagi and papyri of the
Late Period, which are perhaps from a related source, as well as the
hymns to the hours of the day in the pronaos of the temple of Edfu.

Research
The versions in the sarcophagus chamber and the preceding corridors in
the tomb of Ramesses VI were copied by Jean-Franqois Champollion,
but for a long time they attracted no interest. Only in 1942 did Alexan¬
dre Piankoff publish his edition, though it lacked the versions in the
tombs at Tanis discovered in 1939-1940. In the meantime, further atten¬
tion has been paid only to the hymn to the second hour, which was em¬
ployed in temples, and a thorough, fresh study is lacking.

Structure and Language
The representations and captions of the book are arranged under an ex¬
tended figure of the sky goddess Nut, whose arms and legs comprise
their outer limit. Nearly all the figures face the head of Nut and thus the
end of the book. In principle, the text follows the course of the twelve
hours; it is not split up vertically, however, but rather arranged horizon¬
tally into five registers, with the result that it remains unclear where one
hour ends and the next begins. This arrangement is not followed at the
beginning and the end, where a prologue and a concluding representa¬
tion, respectively, stand out from the main portion. An original title is

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

I 17

absent. It is possible that the Book of the Day and the Book of the Night
belong together, forming a unity, but they occur together only in the
tomb of Ramesses VI (see figure 61), on the ceiling of his sarcophagus
chamber and in the preceding portion (C to E) of the tomb.

Content
Unlike the other books, the Book of the Day describes the diurnal, not
the nocturnal, journey of the sun, which travels from the vulva of the
goddess, from which it is newly born each day (figure 65), to her head,
which swallows it again in the evening. Because the reference here is to
the daytime journey of the sun god, he appears with a falcon's head
rather than in his ram-headed nocturnal form; nevertheless, netherworldly motifs such as the repulsing of Apophis and the Field of Reeds
occur as focal points in the middle of the composition. The texts and rep¬
resentations consist mainly of an enumeration of deities, with few de¬
scriptive texts; additionally, the hymns to the hours can be explained as
the liturgical portion of the book.

I 18

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

65. Book of the Day, rebirth of the sun. From the tomb of Ramesses VI. Photo by
U. Schweitzer.

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

I 19

66. Book of the Day, beginning. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, ed. N. Rambova, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 130. Copyright© 1968, renewed 1996
by Princeton University Press.

I

^ ^

^

^

^r

l

k-k-kJr-k-k-k'k-k-k-k-k-

67. Book of the Day, extract. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb ofRamesses VI, ed. N. Rambova,
Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 130. Copyright © 1968, renewed 1996 by
Princeton University Press.

~ 55 A

5 55 5
-

je

I

5

5 ^

& & :fe &

&

^ ^

fflj

55

illIII
*r\rir

i±AAA ± ±.±_± k k k k k -k ~k k k k k k k k k k k_2
68. Book of the Day, extract depicting Apopis. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI,
ed. N. Rambova, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 131. Copyright© 1968, re¬
newed 1996 by Princeton University Press.

-*
? ^

*
y

x
±

*
•*

*
±

* '* *
*

* * *

± * * * * * Ss:

***-*****■-*

* X x :
X X X X

—:

—

£ A A A A A AAA AAA

A&&A A

A A A A A A

A
\

69. Book of the Day, extract depicting the Field of Reeds. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of
Ramesses VI, ed. N. Rambova, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 133. Copyright
© 1968, renewed 1996 by Princeton University Press.

x

x

^^—&—£

#

*

£

% Y

£

£

W~'^

&

^

3T"5T>TT ^

A ..A-.. *—&—2k:—A- h A A A A jr A A A

70. Book of the Day, last hour. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, ed. N. Rambova,
Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 133. Copyright © 1968, renewed 1996 by
Princeton University Press.

122

1

Y Y

i

'

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

*

it

-

's

* * A

ic * * * * *_£f ^

-Y- v rf f: T

VrV* * * Ajl A^
71. Book of the Day, conclusion. After A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, ed. N. Rambova, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), fig. 132. Copyright© 1968, renewed 1996
by Princeton University Press.

The Book of the Night
Sources
The earliest version of the Book of the Night (figures 72-84), that of
Sethos I on the ceiling of the sarcophagus chamber of the Osireion at
Abydos, reaches only the ninth hour; Merneptah had a second version
placed on the ceiling of the antechamber, but only a few traces remain.
Later, Ramesses IV placed this book next to the Book of Nut on the ceil¬
ing of his sarcophagus chamber, though for reasons of space, it breaks
off with the fourth hour. Only the tomb of Ramesses VI provides two
complete versions; one is on the west side of the ceiling of the sarcopha¬
gus chamber, while the other is spread out over the ceilings of C, D, and
E (the book up to the eighth hour is in E, the ninth and tenth hours are in
D, and the eleventh and twelfth hours are in C), and in both cases they
complement the Book of the Day. Additionally, representations from the
book are employed on the ceiling of F and in the tomb of Ramesses IX,
on the ceilings of the second and third corridors and the sarcophagus

I

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

123

chamber. On the whole, the book appears only on ceilings in the New
Kingdom (carved in relief in Sethos I's version and otherwise painted),
and its location did not shift to the walls until the royal tombs at Tanis.
Osorkon II again combined it with the Book of the Day, while
Shoshenq III followed Sethos I's version closely.
In the Late Period (Dynasties 25-26), extracts appear in some tombs at
Thebes (TT 33, 132, and 410) and on fragments from the Nilometer at
Roda. Later still, they appear on sarcophagi from Dynasty 30 and the
early Ptolemaic Period (Cairo CG 29305, J. 48446/47, and J. 48861;
Berlin 49; Louvre D 8 and D 9; Vienna 5), where they are combined with
hours from the Amduat.
The text from the second hour of the night also appears in the solar
sanctuaries of Deir el-Bahri and Medinet Habu and in the edifice of
Taharqa at Karnak.

Research
Jean-Franqois Champollion laid the initial foundation with his copies of
both versions in the tomb of Ramesses VI, and Eugene Lefebure added
Ramesses IV's version in 1889. The version in the cenotaph of Sethos I at
Abydos was discovered by Edouard Naville only in 1914, and it was
published by Henri Frankfort in 1933. Alexandre Piankoff's edition,
which appeared in 1942, took these foundations into account as well as
some versions from the Late Period, but not the tombs at Tanis, which
had been discovered only in 1939-1940. His edition has now been com¬
pletely replaced by that of Gilles Roulin. There is as yet no translation
into German.

Structure and Language
The book is divided into twelve sections separated from one another by
vertical lines of text designated as "gates"; in contrast to the Book of
Gates, these precede the hours of the night to which they belong. The
arms and the legs of the goddess represent the first and last gates; the
first hour is not represented. Each hour has an introductory text contain¬
ing the most important details, while the remaining texts are mostly just
brief captions. The vertical arrangement contains three registers (stag¬
gered into five to seven registers for reasons of space, though only two
appear in the tomb of Osorkon II), with the sun barque journeying
through the middle one. In the barque, the sun god is surrounded by the
many-coiled Mehen-serpent while another serpent protects him within
his shrine. The crew consists of Sia at the prow as spokesman of the god.

124

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

as in the Book of Gates; Hu at the stern; and Maat; in the version of
Sethos I at Abydos, the king also appears. The upper register depicts
deities of the hereafter both individually and collectively, while the
lower one displays various groups of deceased persons, both the blessed
and the damned. In each case, the solar barque is preceded by a rather
large group—as many as thirty and more—of towmen called the Un¬
wearying Ones; they are led by the king, who is here included in the
representation. Descriptive texts like those characteristic of the Books of
the Netherworld are lacking here, and as a rule, the registers are not di¬
vided into scenes. As in the Books of the Netherworld, at the end is a
summary of the entire course of the sun.

Content
Complementing the Book of the Day, the sun god's journey here ex¬
tends from the point where he is swallowed by the sky goddess in the
evening to his rebirth in the morning in the form of a scarab. During his
journey, the god has his ram-headed nocturnal form and, as in the Amduat, he is designated as flesh. The arrangement by means of gates al¬
ready represents an analogy with the Books of the Netherworld, and
motifs otherwise familiar from these compositions also occur. Even
Tatenen, the god of the depths of the earth, appears here in the celestial
hereafter. As in the Book of Gates, Sia plays an active role and appears
as the spokesman of the sun god. The latter also has his own escort in
the middle register of each hour (crocodile-headed in the last three) in
place of the hour goddesses who accompany him in the Amduat and the
Book of Gates.
The remnants of an introduction are preserved only in Sethos I's ver¬
sion, wherein the sun god furnishes a programmatic explanation of the
goal of his journey through the hereafter, which has to do with judging
the damned and caring for the blessed dead. As at the beginning of the
Amduat, the primeval darkness is mentioned as a border area. The first
hour of the night is not represented; as in the Amduat and the Book of
Gates, it was viewed as an interstitial area, to be thought of here as situ¬
ated between the arms of Nut. The actual beginning is the second hour,
where the upper register endeavors to include not only individual
deities but groups of them as well: the deities of the four cardinal points,
the has of Buto and Hierakonpolis, and the two Enneads, which stand
for the totality of all divine beings. In the upper register of the seventh
hour general figures also appear, representing existence and nonexis¬
tence. Opposite them are the totality of the deceased in the lower regis-

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

125

ter, who appear as the "transfigured ones" (akhu), mummies, and the
"dead," that is, the damned.
The motif of the union of Re and Osiris is absent, though the represen¬
tation of has and corpses in the lower register of the sixth hour serves to
indicate the longed-for union in the depths of the night, with which the
regeneration in the seventh hour is connected. This critical moment once
again requires the overcoming of enemies, here imaged concretely as
their incineration. The lower register of the seventh hour (figure 77) also
takes up a theme that made its appearance in the thirtieth scene of the
Book of Gates: Horns turns to both foreigners (depicted as Asiatics,
Libyans, Medja bedouins, and Nubians) and Egyptians (depicted as
dwellers in the fertile land and in the desert), though here the foreigners
do not have the same status as Egyptians but are again seen as bound
enemies. The speech of the god also includes motifs from the twentyfirst scene of the Book of Gates.
The lower register of the eighth hour (figure 78) is dominated by an
enthroned Osiris, with Horus and the other gods of his circle in atten¬
dance. Osiris is triumphing over a well-fettered enemy, here anony¬
mous but whom the versions of the Late Period address directly as Seth.
The various groups of deceased, both the blessed and the damned, are
turned in prayer toward this scene, and their representation continues
in the ninth hour (figure 79); there, they are addressed by Sia, who an¬
nounces their fates in the afterlife, stressing at the same time their at¬
tachment to Osiris. Only blessed dead appear in the lower register of the
tenth hour (figure 80).
In the twelfth and last hour (figures 82-83), the towmen in front of the
barque are augmented by four jackals designated "Western has,” as at
Medinet Habu. The deities in the lower register, among them Osiris, are
turned in prayer toward the concluding representation (figure 84),
which summarizes the entire course of the sun, as in the Books of the
Netherworld. Here, with the help of the primeval gods, the nocturnal
sun god is transformed into a scarab and a child; behind these are the
two barques of his daytime and nighttime journeys, along with Isis and
Nephthys, who were later placed in the prow of the barque, keeping the
sun in constant motion between them. The accompanying cosmographical text also refers to the totality of the course of the sun god, identifying
his three cosmic realms as the netherworld (Duat), the primeval waters
(Nun), and the sky (Nut).
Striking is the considerable prominence of the king—especially in the
version of Sethos I—who appears at the head of those towing the sun
(text continues p. 135)

126

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

72. Book of the Night, first and second hours. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate I.

A * A A
*'* *-■*■■*—*-** *****
A A A A A * ****** ** A * A A A A AAA A A *.* *
AAA A A A, A. AAA A AA A AA A A* *
A A A A A
A A A A A A A A A A A A AAAAAAAAAA A A A A A
A A A A A A A A A A A AAA A A A A A A A A A A A A
AAA A A A A A AAA A A A A A AAAA AAA A A A A
AAAAAAAAAA A A AA AA AA A A A. A A A A A

73. Book of the Night, third hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate III.

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

127

”7* S 5F A A A A A A
A S’ S A A A A , A
. * * A *
* 7k * A A
A A A A A A A

*. * * * A * *****AAA
* * A A A A A

A
A , A A A
A
A A A A
A
A A A AAAAAAAA A A A A A A
aaaaaaaaaa A A A A a A
A
AAAAAAAAAA A A A A A A
A

74. Book of the Night, fourth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate V.

128

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

*.* * * * *.*.**.*.
★ *******-«'
** 7*: * A * *.***.
* *
* * * ********
A A * * *** A
* ******
********
*^*a.*>*

******

4

***

*

*

A

*

*

A

*

* *

***********
* ******
**** * ***
********

75. Book of the Night, fifth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate VI.

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

129

A

A AAA A A AAA A A A A* AAA A .
a*aaaaaaaa*
rt A a A A A A
A A A AAA A A A A A A ;*v A A A A A
A .A A A A a A A A A' A A A A A A
. A
A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A ' ‘A
A -AAaAAAAaA AAaAAAA A
AAAAAAA A A A A A A A A A A A
I

I

3

4

S

6

7

I

t

10

II

II

13

76. Book of the Night, sixth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate VIII.

130

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

A A
* A * 7: A A * A A A * A -A: . *
A A A
* A
* ******* A A a A
AAA
A * A*A'AA*AAiA*'*A A
A: A: A -A A
A A * A A A- A A AA A A

£

*

*

A

A

a

*

>V AAA

A ,* * ** i***^*^*

.AAA A A A; ■*• A
A A A A a A- A A A
•Y A A A~ A: _A A: A
A A A A A A A a A A

10

II

13

f-.
frc;>?•<•■:
i 'i:-- • ••' !:

ViSS

77. Book of the Night, seventh hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate IX.

rJr A A * *£**.**£* *. * * * * ^ *■ ,M-M

78. Book of the Night, eighth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XII.

£—k

k -k k k k fr

79. Book of the Night, ninth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburgand Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XIV.

132

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

**£&A * & *

£

-ft

80. Book of the Night, tenth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XVI.

k k k—k k k k k k k k k k k
-LlA

S'"'.

LT A

uA

GtA

Cr A

Ci\

.

'

k kk ^ k k k k k

*

81. Book of the Night, eleventh hour. After G. Roulin, Le livre de la nuit, OBO 147
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XVII.

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

133

82. Book of the Night, twelfth hour. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit, OBO 147 (Freiburg
and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XVIII.

134

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

83. Book of the Night, twelfth hour, continuation. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit,
OBO 147 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XIX.

84. Book of the Night, concluding representation. After G. Roulin, Le Livre de la nuit,
OBO 147 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1996), pt. II, plate XX.

THE BOOKS OF THE SKY

I 35

barque in every hour of the night. In contrast to the Book of the Day, the
sun's enemy Apophis appears nowhere in this book; the repelling of the
inimical Seth is mentioned several times instead. At the end is a descrip¬
tion of the "Western bas," who tow the sun god into the sky, where his
birth from Nut is also viewed as his emergence from the netherworld
(Duat).

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

The Litany of Re
Sources
Portions of the Litany of Re occur in the tombs of Tuthmosis III and his
vizier, Useramun, with the excerpts evidently related to one another.
The series of figures to the "Great Litany" also appear in both tombs, but
there are no further illustrations. The entire text, with a few omissions,
first occurs on the shroud dedicated by Amenophis II to his father, Tuth¬
mosis III. The subsequent disappearance of the book is especially strik¬
ing in the case of Tutankhamun, for all the burial equipment in his tomb
has been preserved to us. The book is attested again under Sethos I, in
whose tomb the figure to the title first appears. From then on, the book
was the standard decoration in the first and second corridors of the
royal tombs; Ramesses VI was the first to give it up in its entirety,
though Ramesses IX and Ramesses X again included extracts. The fig¬
ures were always reserved for the second corridor, while the text filled
the first corridor with a little of it reaching into the second corridor. In
the tombs of Sethos I and Ramesses II, all the hieroglyphs face the inte¬
rior of the tomb, whereas from Merneptah on, they face uniformly to the
right so that all the columns of text are reversed. A portion of the figures
appears in Merneptah's decoration in the Osireion of Sethos I at Abydos, and the complete sequence occurs in the temple built at that site by

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

137

Ramesses II. In the Late Period, the figures were used in temples (the ed¬
ifice of Taharqa and the chapel of Hakoris at Karnak) and also in tombs
(Mentuemhet, Petamenophis, Ibi, and the fragments from the Nilometer
at Roda) and on papyri and sarcophagi. The textual tradition breaks off
with the sarcophagi from the early Ptolemaic Period.
Already in Dynasty i8, excerpts were adopted as spell 127 of the Book
of the Dead, beginning with the manuscript of Maiherperi, and as spell
180 in early Dynasty 19, starting with the sarcophagus of Sethos I. The
well-known representation of the ram-headed Re-Osiris in the tomb of
Nefertari and in other tombs of Dynasty 19 actually belongs to this spell
of the Book of the Dead and not to the Litany of Re.

Research
Richard Pococke published an early description of the version in the
tomb of Ramesses IV in his account of his travels. Text editions of the
Litany of Re were among the earliest in the field of Egyptology. In 1869,
Edouard Naville took up the texts of the Litany in the tombs of Sethos I
and Ramesses IV and published them with a translation into French in
1875; an English translation by him appeared in 1876. For a century, his
edition remained the basis for scholarly concern with the book. Alexan¬
dre Piankoff's edition of 1964 contains no hieroglyphic texts (his hand
copies seem to have been lost), but there are photographs from several
tombs, especially those of Sethos I and Sethos II, and of the shroud of
Tuthmosis III, along with a translation into English. Before that, Her¬
mann Grapow concerned himself with the text and figures in a paper in

ZAS 72 (1936). Erik Hornung then included all the New Kingdom ver¬
sions in a commentary volume in his edition of 1975.

Structure
In contrast to the Books of the Netherworld, this book bears an original
title, which already appears in the tomb of Useramun as “Book of Pray¬
ing to Re in the West, Praying to the United One in the West"; remarks
concerning the recitation and efficacy of the text are also included. The
text begins with the Great Litany, wherein the sun god is invoked
seventy-five times in various names and forms; the first verse of each in¬
vocation is “Praise to you, oh Re, great of power." Aside from this litany,
only the sixth (“Oh, Re, come to me, leader . ..“) is composed in verses,
while the text on the ceiling of the second corridor stands out, because of

138

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

its location, as a further, independent section; it already appears sepa¬
rately in the tomb of Tuthmosis III. The structure of the remainder of the
text is not as clear; only the litanies (which number nine in all) are dis¬
tinct because of their unique initial refrains.
The divine figures that illustrate each of the invocations in the Great
Litany belong to the early content of the book. From the very beginning,
these figures were split up so that they alternate in two series—for ex¬
ample, they face one another on the north and south walls of the tomb of
Useramun, while in the Ramesside tombs, they are on both walls of the
second corridor, with the left wall taking precedence (it is the other way
around in the case of Useramun). The figures follow a strict alternation
up to the fifty-first invocation, with the odd-numbered figures on the
left and the even-numbered figures on the right. The arrangement is
then interrupted by two successive figures (51 and 52) on the left and
two (53 and 54) on the right. A regular alternation then resumes, though
in reverse sequence, with the even-numbered figures on the left and the
odd-numbered figures on the right. Thus, as so often occurs, a strict reg¬
ularity is avoided.
Determining the exact number of figures is complicated. The text
speaks of seventy-four "forms" (kheperu), and that many are also de¬
picted (with numbers 23 and 67 as plurals, and thus tripled), with the
ram-headed ba of Re in its sun disk (the sixth figure on the left) not at¬
tached to an invocation and the only figure facing in the opposite direc¬
tion. But because each of the last two figures of the left-hand series has
two names ascribed to it, we can actually assume seventy-six figures,
which, with the additional ba of Re, belong to the seventy-five invoca¬
tions. Either way, the oft-noted parallel to the seventy-five serpents of
the Story of the Shipwrecked Sailor seems plausible, and the tomb of
Sethos I also seems to intimate a relationship with the seventy-five
scenes of the Opening of the Mouth ritual. The symbolism of this num¬
ber, however, remains uncertain.
The seventy-five invocations can be understood as three times
twenty-five, with special emphasis on the twenty-sixth and the fiftyfirst. There are also groups of ten, with the first ten differing in structure
from the rest, while the following group of ten is reserved for an ex¬
tended Ennead.
The two sequences are constantly divided between the gods Re and
Osiris, just as the union of these two gods receives special treatment in
the text. In fact, figures of Osiris are found only in the sequence on the

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

139

left, while on the right, the many scarab-beetles are striking. But also ap¬
pearing on the left are Atum, the ba of Re, and the Great Cat, though tra¬
ditionally the left side belongs to the sun god and the right to Osiris, es¬
pecially in the rows on the ceiling of the first corridor in the royal tombs
but also in the opposition of Re and Sokar in the tomb of Ramesses VII.
Since a union is of concern here, a transient merging of the two gods
with each other, a strict division would in any case make little sense and
would spring rather from an anachronistically modern attempt at a
schematic division. Instead, elements relating to Re and Osiris are inex¬
tricably intermingled in both sequences, though Re and Osiris them¬
selves do not appear as figures.
The names and the figures that illustrate them refer to the most im¬
portant forms and functions of the sun god in the netherworld. Thus,
there occur his morning form of Khepri (three times); his evening form
of Atum; the ba of Re (as an additional figure, also at the beginning of
the text on the ceiling, starting with Merneptah); his forms of ram, cat,
and child; the divine Eye; and the sun disk, as well as the accompanying
figure of a baboon. In addition to Atum, the remaining gods and god¬
desses of the Ennead make their appearance, though Seth is replaced by
Horus. Of the primeval gods, Nun and Tatenen—the watery depths and
the depths of the earth—are represented. Osiris appears only as Khentamentiu, though two names refer to the union of the two gods, which
represents a central theme of the entire litany.
Several names, incidentally, stress the god's close connection with the
netherworldly realm of the dead; thus, he is called "he of the nether¬
world," "he of the cave," "he who has command over his cave," "he
who renews the earth," and even directly, "the West." Further names
designate him as one who travels through this sphere, and in the con¬
cluding text of the Great Litany, he is even called "migratory bird." Re¬
joicing and mourning are both represented, for death and rebirth are the
concern here, and certain names make reference to the corpse of the god,
and even to its decay, which must precede his regeneration. The double
aspect of the nighttime sun is represented by the juxtaposition of light
and sunbeams on the one hand and covering and darkness on the other.
Finally, the god's beneficent deeds for the blessed dead are mentioned,
but so is his function as punisher of the damned.
Already in the tomb of Useramun, the divine figures are supple¬
mented by additional depictions. The vizier placed his own figure at the
end of both sequences, and his wife and other members of his family are

140

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

also at the end of the left-hand sequence. Tuthmosis III, who distributed
the two sequences over the two pillars of his sarcophagus chamber, had
himself and female members of his family represented on an adjoining
side of one of the pillars. In his temple at Abydos, Ramesses II expanded
the sequence of figures to include royal ancestors—his parents and his
grandfather, as well as the founder of the New Kingdom—but he him¬
self, like Merneptah in the Osireion, is represented only making offer¬
ings to them, while the figures taken together thereby become the object
of cult worship (even the inimical eighth figure), which also explains
their presence in the temple. Beginning with this version, the figures
also contain a small sun disk to indicate the presence of the sun god
within them.
Already under Ramesses IX, and then in Dynasty 21, sarcophagi were
decorated with a combination of divine figures from the litany and alto¬
gether different deities, thus creating a dense wall of protection around
the deceased; in an analogous manner, this also occurred on funerary
papyri. Thus over time, the figures, which began as mere illustrations to
the invocations, themselves became "gods who are in the West" (as they
are called in the monuments of Mentuemhet and Hakoris), and in the
chapel of Hakoris, their names all have divine determinatives.
Beginning with the version of Sethos I, a further representation, a
"title illustration" (figures 85 and 87), is inserted between the title of the
book and the Great Litany. It is programmatic in character, depicting a
scarab and a ram-headed god in a disk, before whom inimical theriomorphic powers—a serpent and an antelope above, and a crocodile and
an antelope below—are in flight on either side. In a recent interpreta¬
tion, John C. Darnell has proposed that the animals have been dis¬
patched by the sun god against his enemies and that they are therefore
accompanying him as bodyguards.
On an ad hoc basis, a representation of the united Re and Osiris was
added in the tomb of Nefertari (figure 86); as an illustration however, it
does not belong to the Litany of Re itself but rather to spell 180 of the
Book of the Dead; thus it also occurs in the tombs of some royal officials
of Dynasty 19 and, in QV 40, the tomb of an anonymous queen.
Two spells of the Book of the Dead, 127 and 180, adopted portions of
the Litany of Re. In contrast, nothing from the actual Books of the
Netherworld is to be found in the Book of the Dead, except for the spe¬
cial case of spell 168. In spell 127, the "gods in the caverns" are invoked
and associated with the guardians of the gates of the netherworld; there

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

85. Litany of Re, title illustration. From the tomb of Siptah. Photo by A. Wiese.

I

142

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

86. Re and Osiris united. From the tomb
of Queen Nefertari. Photo by A. Brack.

is a corresponding combination of the two groups in the temple of
Ramesses II at Abydos. In spell 127, we also find the sole mention of the
Place of Annihilation in the Book of the Dead. The spell is already at¬
tested in the Book of the Dead of Maiherperi, and thus in the reign of
Amenophis II, and later, on P. Busca and in the tombs of Ramesses IV
and Ramesses VI. Spell 180 begins with the central verse, "It is Re, who
rests in Osiris," and a part of its title is "Praying to Re in the West." This
spell is attested on the coffin of Sethos I, and in part in the Osireion, and
also in the tomb of an official (TT 3) and on papyri (Qenna, Neferrenpet,
Louvre 3073) from the end of Dynasty 18 and the beginning of
Dynasty 19.
The earlier distinction between a "greater" and a "lesser" litany (e.g.,
Hermann Grapow, ZAS 72, 1936: 15) is no longer regarded as accurate.

Content
The book begins the decoration of the royal tombs of the Ramesside Pe¬
riod, and its importance is also indicated by the fact that after his victory
over the usurper Amenmesse, Sethos II ordered the Litany of Re hacked

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

143

out of the tomb begun by Amenmesse so as to do harm to him in his
posthumous existence. This composition is a description and a praise of
that deity who descends into the netherworld at night, awakens the
dead to renewed life, cares for the blessed, and punishes the damned.
The multitude of figures and functions of the nocturnal sun god in the
Great Litany opens up the entire netherworld to the deceased. At the
same time there exists a desire to include the deceased king in the course
of the sun, thus assuring his daily regeneration. This connection with
the course of the sun also explains why the text accompanying the
united Re-Osiris is included in the illustration of Book of the Dead spell
109, in which the sun is called a newborn calf, in the tomb of Arinefer
(TT 290).
Re is viewed as a migratory bird that visits the netherworld each
night and there becomes, like all the dead, a cavern dweller, as he is
called in the concluding text of the Great Litany. Immediately after that,
the deceased speaks for the first time, stressing that he has a thorough
knowledge of Re's nocturnal forms of manifestation and their names; he
adds his hope that they will open the netherworld for him and his ba,
since he is indeed the image of the sun god and his ba. That the deceased
himself speaks here, or is referred to in the third person, distinguishes
this text from the Books of the Netherworld.
This concluding text is followed by the second litany, in which the in¬
habitants of the netherworld are commanded to prepare the way for the
deceased in the following of Re. Interrupted only by an invocation to the
nocturnal sun, "who shines among those in the netherworld," the third
litany adds, "May you lead me to the ways of the West." This formula¬
tion, which reflects an age-old mortuary wish, leads up to the first direct
equations of the deceased: first with Nun, and then with Re, his ba, and
his cycle. The fact that Nun, the god of the primeval waters, is placed at
the beginning corresponds to the high regard he also enjoys in the Book
of the Heavenly Cow and to his active role at the end of the Book of
Gates.
The ceiling text that follows invokes the United One and equates the
deceased with the ba and the corpse of this god; it thus represents a high
point of the book, not only because of the way it is inserted, but also be¬
cause of its content. A remark regarding recitation makes reference to
the forms of the gods and to the offerings due them. The ensuing speech
of the deceased king is addressed to them as the "gods who are in the
West"; "I am one of you," he emphasizes, after which he again identifies

144

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

himself with the sun god, with whom he shares the triumph "over all
his enemies in the sky and on earth," and thus in the afterlife as a whole.
There follows the brief fourth litany, "Jubilation to you," consisting of
three double verses, wherein Osiris is also addressed; Re and Osiris
greet and extend their hands to each other.
Through the power of his ba, Re dispels the darkness and allows the
netherworld to see; the deceased also hopes for the renewal of his eyes
and the return of his heart. With its eight double verses, the fifth litany,
"You have commanded for me, as (for) Akhty," is a general evocation of
the care of the god. A prayer follows for deliverance from the slaughter¬
ers in the netherworld, from their cauldrons, their traps, and their
ovens, "for I am Re." In its fifteen double verses, the sixth litany follows
a depiction of the majestic appearance of the god as ba with the request,
"Oh Re, come to me, oh guide" and further identifications and dialogues
with the "weary of heart" in the netherworld. An appearance of the
pelican-goddess is inserted here; she is also represented at Abydos and
is supposed to care for the deceased, who at the same time makes his ap¬
pearance in all the splendor of the sun god.
The seventh litany, which is composed of five double verses ("Truly,
you have caused me to ascend"), is followed by a deification of the
limbs, by means of which the deceased becomes "entirely a god." There
is an ensuing stress on an equation with Osiris, in which the deceased
king also appears as the god's son and assumes command from him. In
his double role as Re and Osiris, he turns to those who dwell in the here¬
after, those who are "provided with offerings," and this section ends
with the rejoicing of the eighth litany, "Hail, well led .. .." The text con¬
cludes with a prayer to the realm of the dead as the "West" in the ninth
litany and a final identification of the deceased king as Re; toward the end
appears the old formula according to which the ba belongs to the sky and
the corpse to the earth, with the additional phrase "among the gods."
The hours of the night play no role in this book, though the number
twelve seems to be significant throughout.

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

87. Litany of Re, title
Drawing by A. Brodbeck.

145

illustration.

146

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

88. Litany of Re, figures from the Great Litany, right-hand row. Photo by A. Brodbeck.

89. Litany of Re, figures from the Great Litany, right-hand row. Photo by A. Brodbeck.

90. Litany of Re, figures of the Great Litany, left-hand row. Drawing by A. Brodbeck.

91. Litany of Re, figures from the right-hand row. Drawing by A. Brodbeck.

148

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

The Book of the Heavenly Cow
Sources
The Book of the Heavenly Cow is first attested on the outermost of the
four gilded shrines (Shrine I) of Tutankhamun, though in incomplete
form. Three more or less complete versions occur in the tombs of
Sethos I, Ramesses II, and Ramesses III, each in a subsidiary room of the
sarcophagus chamber reserved exclusively for this book. Ramesses VI
included a brief excerpt in the left niche of the third corridor of his tomb,
which has no subsidiary rooms, and an even briefer excerpt exists on a
papyrus from the Ramesside Period now in Turin (Cat. 1982). The book
was not used after the New Kingdom, though it was integrated into the
Book of the Faiyum from the Roman Period and thus into the most im¬
portant late myth of that region.
The continuation of the text on Tutankhamun's shrine ("words to be
spoken by these deities who have gone off alive .. .") must also have
been in the tomb of Sethos I, for traces of columns of text, which we did
not include in our edition (see "Research" section), are still visible on the
badly damaged left jamb of the entrance to subsidiary room M. Because
of damage, it is no longer possible to determine where this excerpt
ended or whether it was also present in other tombs.

Research
The striking representation of the heavenly cow in the tomb of Sethos I
was copied by early visitors such as Henry Salt and Robert Hay.
Edouard Naville published Sethos Ts complete version in 1876, with a
translation into French, and the version in the tomb of Ramesses III in
1885. He also supplied a first translation into English in 1876, while the
first German translation was published by Heinrich Brugsch in 1881. Its
parallel to the biblical narrative of the Flood has inspired great interest
in the first part of the text, both within and outside Egyptology, and it
has been translated often.
The first synoptic edition was published in 1941 by Charles Maystre,
who was the first to take the version of Ramesses II into account, though
he omitted that of Tutankhamun; this version was published by Alexan¬
dre Piankoff only in 1955, three decades after its discovery. After again
checking and recording all the existing versions and securing once again
the version of Ramesses III, which had been lost after Maystre (and also
after A. Piankoff, ASAE 40, 1940: 289), Erik Hornung and colleagues

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

149

published an improved edition in 1983, which included a metrical translit¬
eration by Gerhard Fecht; a second edition, with four pages of supple¬
mental material and corrections, appeared in 1991.

Structure and Language
In Fecht's metrical structuring, the text has 330 verses, exactly half of
which are apportioned to the two parts of the text that occur before the
description of the representation. The language and orthography dis¬
play some Late Egyptian influences, so that the book cannot have been
written long before it was first recorded under Tutankhamun. Aside
from the representation of the cow, there are no obvious breaks to allow
a clear structuring of the composition. Nevertheless, remarks inserted
into the text and other criteria permit a rough division into four parts. In
addition to the dominating figure of the cow of heaven, two further il¬
lustrations are inserted into the third part; they depict Neheh and Djet,
who are personifications of time, and the king supporting the sky.

Content
The central motif of the book is the rebellion of humankind against the
aged sun god. Re, and its punishment by the fiery "eye" of the god, the
goddess Hathor. This "fall" occasioned a total reordering of the world,
which had previously been in a golden age and was still little differenti¬
ated: deities and humans alike were under the sovereignty of the sun
god, who had not yet begun his daily course through the sky and the
netherworld; the alternation of day and night was unknown, as were the
sky and the netherworld, for death did not yet exist. After Re consulted
with the primeval deities, and especially with Nun, Hathor was dis¬
patched to inflict punishment. A part of humanity was annihilated, but
a portion remained whom the sun god saved from the fury of the god¬
dess by causing her to become drunk on beer colored blood-red.
The reordering of the world consisted of Re's withdrawal to the sky
on the back of the celestial cow, which in the future would have to be
supported by Shu and the eight Heh-gods (figures 92 and 93), though
time (as Neheh and Djet; figure 94) and Pharaoh (figure 93) are also pre¬
sented as supports of the sky. From his new location. Re concerned him¬
self with establishing the netherworld, which was now necessary as a
realm for the dead; the third part of the book deals with this. The nether¬
world was populated with serpents, which were entrusted to the care of
the earth god Geb.

ISO

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

92. Book of the Heavenly Cow, the cow supported by Shu and the Heh-gods. From the
tomb of Sethos I. Photo by H. Hauser.

93. Book of the Heavenly Cow, the cow supported by Shu and the Heh-gods. After A. Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon (New York, 1955), p. 142, fig. 46.

SPECIAL COMPOSITIONS

151

94. Book of the Heavenly Cow,
Neneh (left) and Djet as supports of
the sky. After Ch. Maystre, BIFAO 40
(1941): I 14.

95. Book of the Heavenly Cow,
Pharaoh as support of the sky. After
Ch. Maystre, BIFAO 40 (1941): 113.

The fourth and last part of the book is devoted to the power of magic
and contains the well-known theology of ba, according to which various
deities and sacred animals are has of other divinities.
The first part places considerable emphasis on the royal role of the sun
god: he bears the royal title, there is a cartouche around the name Re, and
rulership over deities and humans is specifically attributed to him. This
accounts for the importance of the text for Pharaoh, who was the "son"
and successor of Re and who withdrew upon death to the sky, like Re on
the back of the heavenly cow. As stated by the primeval god Nun, he was
able to dwell in this afterlife in the sky "until the end of time."

The Book of Traversing Eternity
Sources
The preserved sources of the Book of Traversing Eternity stem over¬
whelmingly from the Roman Period, that is, the first and second cen¬
turies C.E. The origin of the book probably lay in the Ptolemaic Period,
however, for two papyri in the Louvre (N 3166 and N 3284), two stelae

152

THE ANCIENT EGYPTIAN BOOKS OF THE AFTERLIFE

(one in the Vatican and one in Cairo), and the sarcophagus lid of
Imhotep belong to this period. A papyrus in Chicago is supposed to
stem from Esna, but the other fifteen are probably all from Thebes, while
the two stelae are from the delta or the Faiyum and the sarcophagus lid
from Abydos. P. Leiden T 32, which is from the time of Nero (65 C.E.),
and P. Vatican 33 supply a long version, whereas the remaining sources
are more or less highly abridged.

Structure and Language
The modern designation of the texts follows the ancient title. The tra¬
versing (zebeb) is understood as the spending of a period of time—in this
case all available time and also, analogously, the annual cycle of religious
festivals. But since eternity (neheh) tends to be a synonym for afterlife, the
expression remains ambiguous. Unlike the Books of the Netherworld,
this guide to the afterlife (as many have considered it to be) is not thor¬
oughly illustrated, though some papyri have vignettes or an introduc¬
tory representation and a few depict the Judgment of the Dead from the
Book of the Dead. The text is sometimes combined with texts from the
Books of Breathing.
The book is composed in Middle Egyptian and written in hieratic,
though the excerpts on stelae and on the sarcophagus lid are written in
hieroglyphs. Formally, the text is arranged into couplets.

Content
As Assmann stresses in LA II (see the bibliography), the text has incor¬
rectly been described as a guide to the afterlife and a survey of the re¬
gions of the hereafter. In actuality it describes the return of the deceased
into the realm of the living, extensive visits to Egyptian sanctuaries, and
participation in their rites and the traditions of their festivals, especially
those of Osiris. Nevertheless, the book is intended for use after death, as
a topographically arranged "festival calendar for the dead," as Assmann
calls it. The deceased know that they are secure in an eternal community
of celebrants, their existence in the afterlife bound to sacred places and
times. They were also supposed to be able to move about freely in the
hereafter and to have access to Osiris. As Akhenaten had already at¬
tempted in vain, the realm of the dead was brought into this life, and the
this other-worldly Egypt became the "temple of the world," as it came
to be viewed in late classical antiquity. Whether the text was also in¬
tended for cultic use is uncertain but definitely plausible. In one variant
of the title, "Praying to the akh of NN," the text appears to be a hymn to
the dead in the blessed akh form of existence.

GLOSSARY

The purpose of this glossary is to assist readers who are not familiar with
Egyptian religion or the study of ancient Egypt more generally A great
deal more information about most of the deities mentioned in this vol¬
ume can be found in Byron E. Shafer, ed.. Religion in Ancient Egypt: Gods,

Myths, and Personal Practice (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991) and
Dimitri Meeks and Christine Favard-Meeks, Daily Life of the Egyptian

Gods, trans. G. M. Goshgarian (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996).
Aker A god of the earth; usually represented as a double sphinx.
Akh (pi. akhu) Transfigured one; a designation of the deceased.
Akhty "He of the horizon"; an epithet of Horus as a solar deity.
Amun A god of Thebes who eventually became the chief god of Egypt.
Anubis Jackal-headed god of mummification; sometimes depicted standing by
the bier tending to the mummy.
Apophis A god who, in the form of a serpent, tried each night to prevent the sun
from rising and thus had to be defeated.
Aqen An obscure god in the netherworld.
Astronomical ceiling A ceiling in a tomb chamber decorated with depictions of
the constellations of the nighttime sky.
Atum A creator god; also, the evening form of the sun god.
Ba (pi. bau) A sort of soul or manifestation of a deceased person or a deity.
Buchis bull The sacred bull of the city of Armant.
Canopic chest A chest fashioned to hold the jars containing the viscera of the
deceased, which were removed during the mummification process.
Children of Horus Gods who personified the four jars that contained the viscera
of the deceased.

154

GLOSSARY

Cryptographic writing A form of writing in which certain hieroglyphs are
substituted for others, creating writings of words that are quite different from
normal ones.
Decan A star or group of stars representing a ten-day period of the year, which
was divided into twelve months of thirty days each, plus five epagomenal
(extra) days.
Demotic A stage of the language and of the writing system that came into
general use in Dynasty 26.
Duat A designation of the netherworld.
Enigmatic writing See Cryptographic writing.
Ennead A group of nine deities; secondarily, a group of deities of any number.
Geb A god of the earth.
Hathor A goddess, sometimes represented as a cow, who could personify the sky.
Heka God of magic.
Horus Son of Osiris and Isis.
Hu A god; personification of "authoritative utterance."
Isis Sister/wife of Osiris and mother of Horus.
Ka Life force.
Khentamentiu "Foremost of the westerners"; a god of the dead at Abydos who
was eventually identified with Osiris.
Khepri A form of the sun, especially the rising sun; depicted as a scarab beetle.
Late Egyptian A stage of the Egyptian language used in writing texts during late
Dynasty 18 and the Ramesside Period.
Maat Goddess of truth and cosmic order.
Mehen A serpent; often depicted as a many-coiled serpent protecting the sun
god in the netherworld.
Mekhentienirty A god identified with Horus; could be depicted as a mongoose.
Middle Egyptian A stage of the Egyptian language that took form in the Middle
Kingdom and remained the classical language for the remainder of the history
of pharaonic civilization.
Neith Goddess of Sais. Also the name of a queen of Pepy II.
Nephthys Sister of Isis, Osiris, and Seth; often depicted together with Isis, either
mourning Osiris or keeping the sun disk in motion.
NN. Stands for the name of a person; see Osiris NN.
Nome One of the administrative/geographical districts, or provinces, into which
Egypt was divided.
Nun A god who personified the primeval water that preceded creation and was
believed to surround the created cosmos.
Nut Goddess of the sky.
Old Egyptian A stage of the Egyptian language in use during the Old Kingdom.
Orion A constellation identified by the Egyptians with the god Osiris.
Osireion The cenotaph (false tomb) of Sethos I at Abydos.
Osiris God of the dead and ruler of the netherworld.
Osiris NN The name of Osiris, used as an epithet, followed by the name of an
individual.
Ouroboros A serpent depicted biting its own tail.
Penwenti A crocodile in the netherworld that might represent the primeval
waters out of which the sun rises in the morning.

GLOSSARY

155

Ptah A creator god worshiped at Memphis.
Re The sun god.
Sakhmet A lion-headed goddess of healing.
Shetit A name of the realm of the dead.
Shu God of air and light.
Sia God of perception and spokesman of Re.
Sokar A god of the dead.
Tatenen God of the depths of the earth.
Tayt A goddess in the netherworld.
Tefnut A goddess; sister of Shu.
Thoth God of Hermopolis; sometimes represented as a baboon and sometimes as
an ibis.
Uraeus (pi. uraei) Cobra.
Vignette A symbolic representation summarizing the intent or content of a text.
Vizier The official who headed the royal administration.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Abbreviations
AAT

Agypten und Altes Testament

ADAIK

Abhandlungen des Deutschen Archaologischen Instituts Kairo

AgAbh

Agyptologische Abhandlungen

AH

Aegyptiaca Helvetica

AnAeg

Analecta Aegyptiaca

AnOr

Analecta Orientalia

ASAE

Annales du Service des Antiquit es de I'Egypte

ASAW

Abhandlungen der sachsischen Akademie der Wissenschaften
zu Leipzig, Philologisch-historische Klasse

ASP

American Studies in Papyrology

AVDAIK

Archaologische Veroffentlichungen des Deutschen
Archaologischen Instituts Kairo

BABA

Beitrage zur agyptischen Beuforschung und Altertumskunde

BACE

Bulletin of the Australian Centre for Egyptology

BAe

Bibliotheca Aegyptiaca

BE

Bibliotheque d'Etude

BES

Brown Egyptological Studies

BG

Bibliotheque Generale

BIFAO

Bulletin de Ylnstitut Franqais d'Archeologie Orientate au Caire

BO
BSEG
BSFE

Bibliotheca Orientalis
Bulletin de la Societe d'Egyptologie, Geneve

CdE

Chronique d'Egypte

Bulletin de la Societe Franqaise d'Egyptologie

158

BIBLIOGRAPHY

CRIPEL

Cahier de Recherches de Llnstitut de Papyrologie et
d'Egyptologie de Lille

DAWBIO

Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, Institut fur
Orientforschung, Verof f entlichung

DE

Discussions in Egyptology

DVS

Danske Videnskabernas Selskab, Historisk-filologiske Skrifter

EMAE

Etudes de Mythologie et d'Archeologie Egyptiennes

ET

Etudes et travaux
Egitto e Vicino Oriente

✓

/

EVO
GM

Gottinger Miszellen

GO

Gottinger Orientforschungen, IV. Reihe, Agypten

HAB

Hildesheimer agyptologische Beitrage

JARCE
JEA

Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt
Journal of Egyptian Archaeology

JEOL

Jaarbericht van het Vooraziatisch-Egyptisch Genootschap "Ex
Oriente Eux"
Journal of Near Eastern Studies

JNES
JSSEA

Journal of the Society for the Study of Egyptian Antiquities

LA

Liber Annuus, Studii Biblici Franciscani (Jerusalem)

EA

Wolfgang Helck and Eberhard Otto (eds.), Eexikon der

Agyptologie, 6 vols. (Wiesbaden, 1975-1992)
EAe

Lingua Aegyptia

MAIBL n.s.

Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions et BellesLettres, nouvelle serie

MAS

Miinchner Agyptologische Studien

MAU

Miinchner Agyptologische Untersuchungen

MDAIK

Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archdologischen Instituts, Abteilung
Kairo

MEES

Memoir of the Egypt Exploration Society

MIFAO

Memoires publies par les membres de l'Institut Frangais
d'Archeologie Orientale du Caire

MWEG

Mededelingen en verhandelingen van het VoorasiatischEgyptisch Genootschap "Ex Oriente Lux"

NAWG

Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen,
I. Philologisch-historische Klasse

OA

Oriens Antiquus

OBO

Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis

OCE

Oxfordshire Communications in Egyptology

OIP

Oriental Institute Publications

OLA

Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta

PSBA

Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology

PTA

Papyrologische Texte und Abhandlungen

RdE

Revue d'Egyptologie

BIBLIOGRAPHY

RHR

Revue de FHistoire des Religions

RT

Receuil de Travaux relatifs a la philologie et a Farcheologie

159

egyptiennes et assyriennes

SAGA

Studien zur Archaologie und Geschichte Altagyptens

SAK

Studien zur altagyptischen Kultur

SAOC
SHR
SSN

Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization
Studies in the History of Religions
Studia Semitica Neerlandica

TL

Theologische Literaturzeitung

TSBA

Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology

UCBUCP

University of California, Berkeley, University of California
Publications, Near Eastern Studies

UGAAe

Untersuchungen zur Geschichte und Altertumskunde
Aegyptens

VA

Varia Aegyptiaca

WZKM

Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes

YES

Yale Egyptological Studies

zAs

Zeitschrift fiir agyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde

ZDMG

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft

Introduction
For Jean-Franqois Champollion's letters from Egypt, see Lettres ecrites d'Egypte et de
Nubie en 1828 et 1829 (Paris, 1833). On the mortuary liturgies, see J. Assmann in
S. Israelit-Groll, ed.. Studies in Egyptology Presented to Miriam Lichtheim (Jerusalem,
1990), 1: 1-45, and LA, 6, cols. 998-1006, s.v. "Verklarung."

The Pyramid Texts
A first report regarding their discovery was published by H. Brugsch, ZAS 19
(1881): 1-15, and the first text edition by G. Maspero in several articles in RT; the
first article appeared in vol. 3 (1882), and the last in vol. 14 (1893). Shortly there¬
after, the series of articles was reprinted as G. Maspero, Les inscriptions des Pyramides de Saqqarah (Paris, 1894). Beginning in 1908, K. Sethe published his still defin¬
itive edition, Die altdgyptische Pyramidentexte (Leipzig, 1908-1922; rpt. Darmstadt,
i960), which is supplemented by G. Jequier's publications of the material found by
him at Saqqara South: Fouilles a Saqqarah: La pyramide d'Oudjebten (Cairo, 1928);
Fouilles a Saqaqarah: Les pyramides des reines Neit et Apouit (Cairo, 1933); La pyramide
d'Aba (Cairo, 1935); Fouilles a Saqqarah: Le monument funeraire de Pepi II, vol. 1
(Cairo, 1936). J. Leclant has supplied a whole series of preliminary notices of more
recent work; by way of an interim report, see his surveys in L'egyptologie en 1979,
vol. 2 (Paris, 1982), pp. 31-35, as well as at subsequent international congresses
and in the journal Orient alia, under the title "Fouilles et travaux en Egypte et au
Soudan."

160

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Only after K. Sethe's death did his six-volume Ubersetzung und Kommentar zu den
altagyptischen Pyramidentexten (Gliickstadt, 1935-1962) appear; this work covers
spells 213-582. Further translations were published by L. Speleers, Traduction,
index, et vocabulaire des textes des pyramides egyptiennes (Brussels, 1924; rev. ed. 1934);
S. A. B. Mercer, The Pyramid Texts in Translation and Commentary, 4 vols. (New York,
1952); and R. O. Faulkner, The Ancient Egyptian Pyramid Texts, 2 vols. (Oxford,
1969); Faulkner's second volume contains material supplementary to Sethe's text
edition, and see also the improvements by E. Edel, OLZ 69 (1974): 131-137 and ZAS
102 (1975): 31-36. A small selection of texts is to be found in M. Clagett, Ancient
Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989), pp. 413-424, and a larger
selection in S. Donadoni, Testi religiosi egizi (Turin, 1970), pp. 37-168. On Sethe's
edition, see also H. Grapow, ZDMG 91 (1937): 537-554/ with a French translation in
CdE 14 (1939) 218-231. An index of citations was first published in 1971 by C. CrozierBrelot as Textes des Pyramides: Index des citations (Paris, 1971), and since 1976, there
have been several revised editions. In his translation volume, Faulkner supplies
helpful indexes of deities and localities mentioned in the spells, though we still lack
a glossary of the Pyramid Texts.
For discussion of the burial ritual, see S. Schott, Bemerkungen zum dgyptischen
Pyramidenkult, Beitrage zur agyptischen Bauforschung und Altertumskunde 5/2
(Cairo, 1950) and the critique by H. Bonnet, JNES 12 (1953): 257-273; J. Spiegel, Das
Auferstehungsritual der Unas-Pyramide, AgAbh 23 (Wiesbaden, 1971); J. Spiegel,
ASAE 53 (1956): 339-439; H. Altenmiiller, Die Texte zum Begrdbnisritual in den Pyramiden des Alten Reiches, AgAbh 24 (Wiesbaden, 1972); idem, LA V, cols. 14-16;
W. Barta, Die Bedeutung der Pyramidentexte fiir den verstorbenen Konig, MAS 39
(Berlin, 1981); J. Osing, MDAIK 42 (1986): 131-144; J. P. Allen, in C. Berger, G. Clerc,
and N. Grimal, eds., Hommages a Jean Leclant, vol. 1 (Cairo, 1994), pp. 5-28; G. Englund, in ibid., pp. 169-180.
There are good photographs of Wenis's version in A. Piankoff, The Pyramid of
Unas, Bollingen Series 40/5 (Princeton, 1968); samples from Teti in Orientalia 35
(1966), plates VIII-X, BSFE 46 (1966), plates II—IV, and J. Leclant and C. Berger in
Etudes sur VAncien Empire et la necropole de Saqqara dediees a J.-Ph. Lauer (Montpellier,
11997), PP- 271-277; views of the sarcophagus chambers of Pepy I and Merenre in
C. Aldred et al., Le temps des Pyramides (Paris, 1978), pp. 98-99, and Pepy I also in
Orientalia 37 (1968): plates 22-24, 38 (1969), plates 22-25, and 39 (1970), plates
34-37; for Pepy II, see J. Leipoldt and S. Morenz, Heilige Schriften: Beobachtungen zur
Religionsgeschichte der antiken Mittelmeerwelt (Leipzig, 1953), fig. 2; for the versions
of Iput and Udjebten, see J. P. Allen, JARCE 23 (1986): 1-25.
The fundamental source for the later occurrences of the Pyramid Texts remains
T. G. Allen, Occurrences of Pyramid Texts with Cross Indexes of These and Other Egyp¬
tian Mortuary Texts, SAOC 27 (Chicago, 1950). For the textual tradition of some of
the spells, see J. Kahl, Steh auf, gib Horus deine Hand (Wiesbaden, 1996).
Middle Kingdom: W. C. Hayes, The Texts in the Mastaba of Se'n-wosret-'nkh at Lisht
(New York, 1937), and on the relationship of this version to the texts of Wenis on
the example of spells 302-312, see J. Kahl, SAK 22 (1995): 195-209; L. H. Lesko,
Index of the Spells on Egyptian Middle Kingdom Coffins and Related Documents (Berke¬
ley, 1979); W. Barta, ZAS 113 (1986): 1-8; and idem, GM 120 (1991): 7-12. On the

BIBLIOGRAPHY

161

Pyramid Texts on canopic chests of this period, see B. Liischer, Untersuchungen zu
dgyptischen Kanopenkdsten vom Alten Reich bis zum Ende der Zweiten Zwischenzeit,
HAB 31 (Hildesheim, 1990), pp. 66-71.
New Kingdom: W. C. Hayes, Royal Sarcophagi of the XVII. Dynasty (Princeton,
1935). Late Period: For Dynasty 26, a rather large work by P. de Smet is expected,
and see also M. Patane, BSEG 16 (1992): 65-67, on the most frequently attested
spells, and C. E. Sander-Hansen, Die religiosen Texte auf dem Sarg der Anchnesneferibre, neu herausgegeben and erkldrt (Copenhagen, 1937). For the tombs at Saqqara, see
E. Bresciani, S. Pernigotti, and M. P. Giangeri Silvis, Ea tomba di Ciennehebu (Pisa,
1977), pp. 25-40; for an early Ptolemaic version on papyrus, see G. Moller, Uber die
in einem spdthieratischen Papyrus des Berliner Museums erhaltenen Pyramidentexte
(Berlin, 1900). For an adoption in the Ptolemaic temple of Edfu, see A. Grimm, GM
31 (1979): 35-46. For the Roman Period, see A. Szczudlowska, ZAS 99 (1973):
25-29.
Orthography and grammar: On suppression and modification of signs, see
P. Lacau, ZAS 51 (1914): 1-64; on graphic dissimilations, see E. Drioton, ASAE 49
(1949): 57-68; O. Firchow, Grundziige der Stilistik in den altagyptischen Pyramidentexten, DAWBIO 21 (Berlin, 1953); C. E. Sander-Hansen, Studien zur Grammatik der
Pyramidentexte, AnAeg 6 (Copenhagen, 1956); E. Edel, Altdgyptische Grammatik, 2
vols., AnOr 34 and 39 (Rome, 1955 and 1964), §§ 12-14; J* P- Allen, The Inflection of
the Verb in the Pyramid Texts, BAe 2 (Malibu, 1984); J. Kahl, EAe 2 (1992): 99-116.
With regard to studies of the content of the texts, only a selection can be given
here. Various themes are treated in the Excurses in vol. 4 of Mercer, The Pyramid
Texts (see above). G. van der Leeuw, Godsvoorstellingen in de oudaegyptische Pyramidetexten (Leiden, 1916); Th. G. Allen, Horns in the Pyramid Texts (Chicago, 1916);
J. Sainte Fare Garnot, L'hommage aux dieux sous I'Ancien Empire egyptien d'apres les
Textes des Pyramides (Paris, 1954); On prayers, see L. J. Cazemier, JEOE 15 (1957/58):
47-65. On the solar eye, see R. Anthes, ZAS 86 (1961): 1-21. On the king and the
star religion, see R. O. Faulkner, JNES 25 (1966): 153-161. On the ascension myth,
see W. M. Davis, JNES 36 (1977): 161-179. On spiritual concepts, see K. Koch, SAK
11 (1984): 425-454; and Ch. Jacq, Le Voyage dans l'autre monde selon I'Egypte ancienne
(Monaco, 1986). On divine conflicts, see V. A. Tobin, JARCE 30 (1993): 93-110. On
themes and motifs, see H. Roeder, EAe 3 (i993):8i-ii9. On the Duat, see N. Beaux,
BIFAO 94 (1994): 1-6. O. Sirius and the young Horns, see idem, in C. Berger, G. Clerc,
and N. Grimal, eds., Hommages a Jean Eeclant (Cairo, 1994), vol. 1, pp. 61-72. Not yet
published is R. Krauss, Astronomische Konzepte und Jenseitsvorstellungen in den Pyramidentexten.
Treatments of individual spells: Spell 263 (the reed float), W. Barta, SAK 2 (1975):
39-48 and H. Altenmiiller, in Hommages a Franqois Daumas (Montpellier, 1986),
vol. 1, pp. 1-15; on the Cannibal Hymn, see H. Altenmiiller, in J. Assmann,
E. Feucht, and R. Grieshammer, eds., Fragen an die altdgyptische Literatur: Studien
zum Gedenken an E. Otto (Wiesbaden, 1977), pp. 19-39; on spell 23, J. Assmann, in
C. Berger, G. Clerc, and N. Grimal, eds., Hommages a Jean Eeclant, vol. 1 (Cairo,
1994), pp. 45-59; on spell 534, see J. Osing, ibid., pp. 279-284; on spell 659, see
M. Heerma van Voss, ibid., pp. 217-220; and Ch. Leitz, Orientalia 65 (1996):
381-427 (spells against serpents).

162

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Varia: On the discovery of the Pyramid Texts, see R. T. Ridley, ZAS no (1983):
74-80; various further contributions in vol. 1 of C. Berger, G. Clerc, and N. Grimal,
eds., Hommages a Jean Leclant (Cairo, 1994). In clear contrast to the Book of the Dead,
the Pyramid Texts have had scant influence beyond the boundaries of Egyptology,
notwithstanding the high regard in which scholars hold them. This is perhaps be¬
cause of the difficulty of the texts and of the lack of translations and commentaries
that could introduce their content to a wider public.

The Coffin Texts
The basic text publication is A. de Buck, The Egyptian Coffin Texts, 7 vols., OIP 34, 49,
64, 67, 73, 81, 87 (Chicago, 1935-1961). In his translation (see below), P. Barguet
draws attention (p. 12) to some coffins that de Buck did not take into account. Still
more material has been published by J. Vandier, "Deux textes religieux du Moyen
Empire," in W. Helck, ed.. Festschrift fur Siegfried Schott zu seinem 70. Geburtstag
(Wiesbaden, 1968), 121-124; A. Roccati, OA 13 (1974): 161-197 (Herakleopolis);
G. Lapp, Sdrge Des Mittleren Reiches aus der ehemaligen Sammlung Khashaba, AgAbh
43 (Wiesbaden, 1985; Asyut); idem, SAK 13 (i986):i35-i45 (Asyut?); D. P. Silverman, in S. Israelit-Groll, ed.. Studies in Egyptology Presented to Miriam Eichtheim,
vol. 2 (Jerusalem, 1990), pp. 853-876 (Kom el-Hisn).
For early evaluations of the material, see J. H. Breasted, Development of Religion
and Thought in Ancient Egypt (New York, 1912) and H. Kees, Totenglauben und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Agypter (Berlin, 1926; 2d ed., Berlin, 1956). On the floor of
the coffin of Sen, see H. Schack-Schackenburg, Das Buch von den zwei Wegen des seligen Toten (Leipzig, 1903).
On the textual tradition in the New Kingdom, see D. P. Silverman, E'Egyptologie
en 1979: Axes prioritaires de recherches, vol. 1 (Paris, 1982), pp. 67-70 (spell 902); on
the Late Period, see G. Soukiassian, ibid., vol. 2, pp. 55-61; L. Gestermann, SAK 19
(1992): 117-132; A. el-Sawi and F. Gomaa, Das Grab des Panehsi, Gottesvaters von He¬
liopolis in Matariya, AAT 23 (Wiesbaden, 1993); H. Guksch, Die Grdber des Nacht-Min
und des Men-cheper-Ra-seneb, Theben Nr. 8y und 79, AVAIK 34 (Mainz, 1995),
PP- 74-75Translations of the entire corpus have been published by R. O. Faulkner, The An¬
cient Egyptian Coffin Texts, 3 vols. (Warminster, 1973-1978; rpt. 1994) and P. Bar¬
guet, Les textes des sarcophages egyptiens du Moyen Empire (Paris, 1986), with bibliog¬
raphy. Small selections of texts are translated by S. Donadoni, Testi religiosi egizi
(Turin, 1970), pp. 195-212 and M. Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book,
vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989), pp. 437-443. On the distribution of the spells on the
coffins, see L. H. Lesko, Index of the Spells on Egyptian Middle Kingdom Coffins and Re¬
lated Documents (Berkeley, 1979). A survey of the secondary literature was pub¬
lished by R. Grieshammer, Die altdgptischen Sargtexte in der Forschung seit 1936,
AgAbh 28 (Wiesbaden, 1974); see further M. Crozier, Textes des sarcophages: Index
des citations (Paris, 1971). A dating of the coffins on the basis of typology was at¬
tempted by H. Willems, Chests of Fife: A Study of the Typology and Conceptual Devel¬
opment of Middle Kingdom Standard Class Coffins, MVVEG 25 (Leiden, 1988) and
G. Lapp, Typologie der Sdrge und Sargkammern von der 6. bis 13. Dynastie, SAGA 7
(Heidelberg, 1993); on a distribution by linguistic criteria, see already W. Schenkel,

BIBLIOGRAPHY

163

Friilnnittelagyptische Studien (Bonn, 1962). On the use of spells on canopic chests, see
B. Liischer, Untersuchungen zu dgyptischen Kanopenkdsten vom Alien Reich bis zum
Ende der Zweiten Zwischenzeit, HAB 31 (Hildesheim, 1990), pp. 71-76.
Publications of individual coffins: G. Maspero, Trois annees de fondles (Paris, 1885;
Harhotpe); S. Birch, Egyptian Texts of the Earliest Period from the Coffin of Amamu in
the British Museum (London, 1886; el-Bersha); G. Steindorff, Grabfunde des Mittleren
Reiches in den Koniglichen Museen zu Berlin, vol. 2 (Berlin, 1901; coffin of Sebk-o from
Gebelein); H. Schafer, Priestergrdber und andere Grabfunde vom Ende des Alten Reiches
bis zur griechischen Zeit vom Totentempel des Ne-user-re (Leipzig, 1908; Abusir);
E.L.B. Terrace, Egyptian Paintings of the Middle Kingdom: The Tomb of Djehuty-nekht
(New York, 1968; el-Bersha, incomplete); and H. Willems, The Coffin of Heqata (Leu¬
ven, 1996). On the coffins in Cairo, see the Catalogue generale volumes by P. Lacau,
Sarcophages anterieurs au Nouvel Empire, 2 vols. (Cairo, 1904 and 1906).
For a collection of vignettes, see P. Eschweiler, Bildzauber im alten Agypten: Die
Verwendung von Bildern und Gegenstanden in magischen Handlungen nach den Texten
des Mittleren und Neuen Reiches, OBO 137 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1994), p. 161, n.
2 (see also ibid., p. 187). For a concordance of one of the spells, see R. Gundlach
and W. Schenkel, Eexikalisch-grammatische Eiste zu Spruch 335a der altagypt. Sargtexte,
2 vols. (Darmstadt, 1970); on the continuation of this project, see W. Schenkel, Aus
der Arbeit an einer Konkordanz zu den altdgyptischen Sargtexten, GO 12 (Wiesbaden,
1983) and idem, ZAS 121 (1994): 142-153; further, P. Jurgens, GM 105 (1988): 27-34,
and idem, Grundlinien einer Uberlieferungsgeschichte der altdgyptischen Sargtexte: Stemmata und Archetypen der Spruchgruppen 30-32 + 33-37, 75(S3), 162 + 164, 225 + 226
und 343 + 345, GO 31 (Wiesbaden, 1995). Specific sequences of spells have been
worked out by G. Lapp, SAK 16 (1989): 171-202 and SAK 17 (1990): 221-234. There
is a complete lexical analysis of de Buck's edition in Leiden; this index is not yet
available in print, though it can be accessed via the Internet. P. Barguet appended
an index of divine names and place names, as well as some "notabilia," to his trans¬
lation. A grammar of Middle Egyptian based heavily on the Coffin Texts was writ¬
ten by D. Muller, A Concise Introduction to Middle Egyptian (Lethbridge, 1975; pri¬
vately distributed).
On the Book of the Two Ways, in each case with full translations, see A. Piankoff,
Wanderings of the Soul, Bollingen Series 40/6 (New York, 1974); L. H. Lesko, The An¬
cient Egyptian Book of Two Ways, UCBUCP 17 (Berkeley, 1972); and E. Hermsen, Die
zwei Wege des Jenseits, OBO 112 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1991), with a helpful re¬
view by W. Waitkus, BO 53 (1996): 666-674. Relationships between the Book of the
Two Ways and the Book of the Dead were pointed out by H. Grapow, ZAS 46
(1909): 77-81, and relationships with the Amduat by idem, ZAS 72 (1936): 12-39.
The regions of the hereafter are represented on a coffin from Gebelein, now in
Turin (de Buck, Coffin Texts 6, p. 271); on this and a possible connection with the last
tale of Papyrus Westcar, see E. Hornung, ZAS 100 (1973): 33-35. P. Barguet has at¬
tempted to explain the Book of the Two Ways as an initiatory text and to connect it
with the plan of a temple; see RdE 21 (1969): 7-17.
A first collection of coffin lids from Asyut with decans and other stars was made
by A. Pogo, Isis 17 (1932): 6-24, and a more complete one (twelve coffins) by
O. Neugebauer and R. A. Parker, Egyptian Astronomical Texts, vol. 1: The Early De¬
cans, BES 3 (Providence, i960); on other diagonal star clocks, see J. Kahl, SAK 20

164

BIBLIOGRAPHY

(1993): 95, with references, and for text criticism, see ibid., pp. 95-107. For an expla¬
nation of the astronomy, see M. Schramm, in E. Brunner-Traut and H. Brunner,
eds., Die Agyptische Sammlung der Universitdt Tubingen (Mainz, 1981), pp. 219-227
and Ch. Leitz, Altdgyptische Sternuhren, OLA 62 (Leuven, 1995).
On individual spells and sequences of spells: H. Kees, Gottinger Totenbuchstudien,
UGAAe 17 (Berlin, 1954; spell 227/228); R. O. Faulkner, JEA 48 (1962): 36-44 (spells
38-40); M. Heerma van Voss, De oudste versie van Dodenboek lya: Coffin Texts spreuk
335a (Leiden, 1963; spell 335); J. Zandee, ZAS 97 (1971) to 101 (1974; spells 75-81);
L. H. Lesko, JARCE 9 (1971/72): 89-110 (spells 464-466); R. O. Faulkner, JEA 58
(1972): 91-94 (spell 313); D. Muller, JEA 58 (1972): 99-125 (spell 404); R. Sayed, RdE
26 (1974L73-82 (spells 407-408); D. Bidoli, Die Spriiche der Tangnetze in den altagyptischen Sargtexten, ADAIK 9 (Gliickstadt, 1976; spells 473-480); J. Zandee, in J. Assmann, E. Feucht, and R. Grieshammer, eds., Fragen an die altdgyptische Eiteratur: Studien zum Gedenken an E. Otto (Wiesbaden, 1977), pp. 511-529 (spells 355, 362, and
others); A. Niccacci, LA 28 (1978): 5-23 (spell 76); G. E. Kadish, JSSEA 9 (1978/79):
203-217 (on the theme of eating excrement); V. A. Tobin, in S. Israelit-Groll, ed.. Pa¬
pers for Discussion, vol. 1 (Jerusalem, 1982), pp. 166-190 (spell 573); J. Zandee, BO 41
(1984): 5-33 (spell 173); J. Assmann, Agypten: Theologie und Frommigkeit einer friihen
Hochkultur (Stuttgart, 1984), pp. 204-221 (spells 1130 and 80); M. Heerma van Voss,
in L. H. Lesko, ed., Egyptological Studies in Honor of R. A. Parker Presented on the Oc¬
casion of His 78th Birthday, December 10,1983 (Hanover, 1986), pp. 49-52 (spell 106);
J. F. Borghouts, in J. H. Kamstra, H. Milde, and K. Wagtendonk, eds., Funerary Sym¬
bols and Religion: Essays Dedicated to Professor M. S. H. G. Heerma van Voss on the
Occasion of His Retirement from the Chair of the History of Ancient Religions at the
University of Amsterdam (Kampen, 1988), pp. 12-22 (spell 336); J. Zandee, ibid.,
pp. 165-182 (spells 363-366); H. Buchberger, Transformation und Transformat: Sargtextstudien I, AgAbh 52 (Wiesbaden, 1993; the transformation spells); S. Bickel, in
C. Berger, G. Clerc, and N. Grimal, eds., Hommages a Jean Leclant, vol. 1 (Cairo, 1994),
pp. 81-97 (spell 80); A. de Jong, SAK 21 (1994): 141-157 (spell 38).
The most extensive treatment of the content remains that of H. Kees, Totenglauben
und Jenseitsvorstellungen der alten Agypter, 2d ed. (Berlin, 1956), though there is as
yet no comprehensive account of beliefs regarding the afterlife in the Coffin Texts.
On individual topics: On the ba in spells 99-104, E. Otto, in Miscellanea Gregoriana
(Rome, 1941), pp. 151-160; on the Isle of Fire, H. Kees, ZAS 78 (1942): 41-53; on a
teaching about the world of nature, S. Morenz, WZKM 54 (1957): 119-129; on con¬
cepts of punishment, J. Zandee, Death as an Enemy According to Egyptian Conceptions,
SHR 5 (Leiden, i960); on the Judgment of the Dead, R. Grieshammer, Das Jenseitsgericht in den Sargtexten, AgAbh 20 (Wiesbaden, 1970); on the Field of Offerings,
L. H. Lesko, JARCE 9 (1971/72): 89-101; B. Altenmiiller, Synkretismus in den Sarg¬
texten, GO 7 (Wiesbaden, 1975); on the spells for having water at one's disposal,
J. Zandee, JEOL 24 (1976): 1-47; on the motif of eating excrement, idem, BO 41 (1984):
5-33 and G. E. Kadish, JSSEA 9 (1978/79): 203-217; on traveling through the here¬
after, Ch. Jacq, L. Voyage dans Vautre monde selon I'Egypte ancienne (Monaco, 1986);
on concepts regarding creation, S. Bickel, La cosmogonie egyptienne avant le Nouvel
Empire, OBO 134 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1994); on the Lake of Fire, E. Hermsen,
in T. DuQuesne, ed., Hermes Aegyptiacus: Egyptological Studies for B. H. Strieker (Ox¬
ford, 1995), pp. 73-86.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

165

The Book of the Dead
The basic publication is still E. Naville, Das Aegyptische Todtenbuch der XVIII. bis
XX. Dynastie aus verschiedenen Urkunden zusammengestellt (Berlin, 1886; rpt. Graz,
1971). It ends with spell 186; spells 187-190 were added by E. A. W. Budge in his
edition in hieroglyphic type. The Book of the Dead: The Chapters of Coming Forth by
Day (London, 1898 and many later editions). While Naville gives only spells from
the New Kingdom textual tradition. Budge aimed for comprehensiveness and in¬
cluded spells from a variety of periods. On the early attestations, see I. Franco,
BIFAO 88 (1988): 71-82 (mummy shrouds), as well as R. Parkinson and St. Quirke,
in A. B. Lloyd, ed.. Studies in Pharaonic Religion and Society in Honor of J. Gwyn Grif¬
fiths (London, 1992), pp. 37-51; on their employment on royal grave goods, see
H. Beinlich, GM 102 (1988): 7-18; on their use in the decoration of royal tombs, see
F. Abitz, Pharao als Gott in den Unterweltsbiichern des Neuen Reiches, OBO 146
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1995), pp. 174-199. On occurrences on tomb walls, see
M. Saleh, Das Totenbuch in den thebanischen Beamtengrdbern des Neuen Reiches: Texte
und Vignetten, AVDAIK 40 (Mainz, 1984); on ostraca, see M. Heerma van Voss,
Phoenix 14 (1968): 165-171; on scarabs, see M. Malaise, Les scarabees du coeur dans
I'Egypte ancienne (Brussels, 1978). Many Books of the Dead, with bibliographical in¬
formation, are listed in M. Bellion, Catalogue des manuscrits hieroglyphiques et hieratiques et des dessins, sur papyrus, cuir ou tissu, publies oil signales (Paris, 1987), with a
list of individual spells on pp. 410-481.
Editions of manuscripts in museums: Chicago: T. G. Allen, The Egyptian Book of
the Dead: Documents in The Oriental Institute Museum at The University of Chicago
(Chicago, i960). Cairo: I. Munro, Die Totenbuch-Handschriften der 18. Dynastie im
Agyptischen Museum Cairo (Wiesbaden, 1994). London: A. W. Shorter, Catalogue of
Egyptian Religious Papyri in the British Museum: Copies of the Book PR(T)-M-HRW from
the XVIIIth to the XXIInd Dynasty (London, 1938; partial, only to spell 17). Vatican:
A. Gasse, Ees papyrus hieratiques et hieroglyphiques du Museo Gregoriano Egizio (Vati¬
can City, 1993).

Editions of manuscripts, by period
Dynasty 18: General, taking into consideration eighty-five textual witnesses from
this dynasty, I. Munro, Untersuchungen zu den Toienbuch-Papyri der 18. Dynastie; Kriterien ihrer Datierung (London, 1988) (and see A. Niwiriski, JEA 77 [1991]: 212-215
and U. Luft, BO 48 [1991]: 90-93); idem, GM 116 (1990): 73-89 (Useramun); Pho¬
tographs of the Papyrus ofNebseni in the British Museum (London, 1876); C. Leemans,
Aegyptische hieroglyphische lijkpapyrus (T. 2) van het Nederlandsche Museum van Oudheden te Eeyden (Leiden, 1882; Qenna); E. Naville, The Funeral Papyrus oflouiya (Lon¬
don, 1908); E. Schiaparelli, Ea tomba intatta dell'architetto Cha nella necropoli di Tebe
(Turin, 1927); T. Andrzejewski, Ksiega umarlych piastunki Kai (Warsaw, 1951);
S. Ratie, E. Papyrus de Neferoubenef (Cairo, 1968); G. Thausing and T. KersztKratschmann, Das grosse dgyptische Totenbuch (Papyrus Reinisch) der Papyrussammlung der Osterreichischen Nationalbibliothek (Cairo, 1969); P. Ronsacco, Due Eibri dei
Morti del principio del Nuovo Regno (Turin, 1996); I. Munro, Das Totenbuch des lahMes (p Eouvre E. 11085)aus der friihen 18. Dyn. (Wiesbaden, 1995); I. Munro, Das Toten¬
buch des Bak-su (pKMiyyo.yy/pBrocklehurst) aus der Zeit Amenophis' II. (Wiesbaden,

166

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1995); G. Lapp, The Papyrus ofNu (BM EA 104yy) (London, 1997). The texts from the
tomb of Senenmut can now be found in P. F. Dorman, Tombs of Senenmut, (New
York, 1991).
Ramesside Period: Th. Deveria, Le Papyrus de Neb-Qed (Paris, 1872); the same pa¬
pyrus is also reproduced in the catalogue Naissance de Vecriture (Paris, 1982),
pp. 288-291, while according to I. Munro, it dates to Dynasty 18; E. A. W. Budge,
The Book of the Dead: Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Anhai, Kerasher and Netchemet
with Supplementary Text from the Papyrus of Nu (London, 1899); the papyri of Hune¬
fer and Anhai also published by E. Rossiter, Die dgyptischen Totenbiicher (Freiburg,
1984); L. Speleers, L. Papyrus de Nefer Renpet (Brussels, 1917; on the vignettes, see
also the cited work by H. Milde, 1991); F. Chiappa, II papiro Busca (Milan, 1972);
U. Luft, ZAS 104 (1977): 46-75 and M. H. van Es, ZAS 109 (1982): 97-121 (Ptahmose); E. Dondelinger, Papyrus Ani (Graz, 1978); E. von Dassow, ed., with a transla¬
tion by R. O. Faulkner and O. Goelet, The Egyptian Book of the Dead: The Book of Going
Forth by Day (San Francisco, 1994; Ani). A list of sixty-seven textual sources from
the Ramesside Period is given by I. Munro, Untersuchungen (see above, under Dy¬
nasty 18), pp. 296-308.
Third Intermediate Period: A systematic survey is found in A. Niwiriski, Stud¬
ies on the Illustrated Theban Funerary Papyri of the 11th and 10th Centuries B.C., OBO
86 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989); individual manuscripts, P. Guieysse and
E. Lefebure, Le papyrus funeraire de Soutimes (Paris, 1877); E. A. W. Budge, The
Greenfield Papyrus (London, 1912); E. Naville, Papyrus funerair es de la XXIe dynastie,
2 vols. (Paris, 1912 and 1914); M. Heerma van Voss, Zwischen Grab und Paradies
(Basel, 1971; Tajuherit, Leiden T 3); M. Valloggia, in Melanges Jacques Jean Clere,
CRIPEL 13 (Lille, 1991), pp. 129-136 (P. Bodmer); I. Munro, Der TotenbuchPapyrus des Hohenpriesters Pa-nedjem II. (pLondon BM ioyy^/pCampbell) (Wies¬
baden, 1996).
Late Period: F. M. H. Haekal, ASAE 63 (1979): 51-78 (Ankhefenkhons, Cairo):
U. Verhoeven, Das saitische Totenbuch der Iahtesnacht: P. Colon. Aeg. io2oy, PTA 41
(Bonn, 1993; includes references to other Saite Period manuscripts); F. Tiradritti and
G. Rosati, in Vicino Oriente IX—1993 (Rome, 1994; tomb of Shoshenq, TT 27).
Adding to the edition of Lepsius, further spells were published by W. Pleyte,
Chapitres supplementaires du Livre des Morts (Leiden, 1881) and provided with the
numbers 166-174 (not identical to the corresponding numbers in the editions of
Naville and Budge).
Ptolemaic and Roman Periods: F. Lexa, Das demotische Totenbuch der Pariser Nationalbibliothek (Leipzig, 1910); T. Andrzejewski, Rocznik Orientalistyczny 20 (1956):
83-109 (Pasherenmin, in Cracow and Louvre; cf. M. Barwik, RdF 46 (1995): 3-7);
B. de Rachewiltz, II Libro dei Morti degli antichi Egiziani (Milan, 1958; Iufankh, in
Turin); J. C. Guillevic and P. Ramond, L. Papyrus Varille (Toulouse, 1975); L. Limme,
in H. de Meulenaere and L. Limme, eds., Artibus Aegypti: Studia in honorem Bernardi
V. Bothmer (Brussels, 1983), pp. 81-96 (three papyri in Brussels); J. J. Clere, Le pa¬
pyrus de Nesmin: Un Livre des Morts hieroglyphique de Vepoque ptolemaique, BG 10
(Cairo, 1987); Ch. Sturtewagen, The Funerary Papyrus Palau Rib. Nr. Inv. 450
(Barcelona, 1991; improvements by Ch. Karcher and Ch. C. Van Siclen III, VA 7
(1991): 169-176); A. de Caluwe, Un Livre des Morts sur bandelette de momie (Brussels,
1991; Brussels E.6179).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

167

Recent text editions of individual spells from papyri of the New Kingdom:
B. Liischer, Totenbuch Spruch 1 nach Quellen des Neuen Reiches (Wiesbaden, 1986);
G. P. Laan, Niet ten dode opgeschreven (diss. Amsterdam University, 1995; spell 71);
see also the treatments of individual spells cited below.

Further studies
Third Intermediate Period: M. Heerma van Voss, in U. Verhoeven and E. Graefe,
eds.. Religion und Philosophie im alten Agypten: Festgabe fiir Philippe Derchain zu seinem
65. Geburtsdag am 24. Juli 2991, OLA 39 (Louvain, 1991), pp. 155-157 (Pinudjem I);
L. H. Lesko, in D. P. Silverman, ed.. For His Ka: Essays Offered in Memory of Klaus
Baer, SAOC 55 (Chicago, 1994), pp. 179-186 (Pinudjem I and Pinudjem II).
Late Period: M. Mosher, The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead in the Late Period
(diss. University of California at Berkeley, 1990; cf. idem, JARCE 29 (1992): 143-172.
G. Maspero's survey of the content in RHR 15 (1887): 266-316 was reprinted in
his Etudes de mythologie et d'archeologie egyptiennes, vol. 1 (Paris, 1893), pp. 325-387.
After the earliest translations by Birch and Pierret, P. Le Page Renouf published an
English translation relying on Naville's edition in PSBA 14-19 (1892-1897) up to
spell 139, which was continued by E. Naville, ibid. 24-26 (1902-1904), with addi¬
tional vignettes. This translation appeared as a separate volume under the title The
Egyptian Book of the Dead (London, 1904), but it never enjoyed the circulation at¬
tained by the English translation of E. A. W. Budge, which first appeared in 1901
under the title The Chapters of Coming Forth by Day, of which there have been innu¬
merable reprints. More recent comprehensive translations have been made by P. Barguet, Ee Eivre des Morts des anciens Egyptiens (Paris, 1967), with a rich bibliography;
T. G. Allen, ed. E. B. Hauser, The Book of the Dead or Going Forth by Day: Ideas of the
Ancient Egyptians Concerning the Hereafter as Expressed in Their Own Terms, SAOC 37
(Chicago, 1974); E. Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Agypter (Zurich, 1979; rpt. 1993),
and R. O. Faulkner, ed. C. Andrews, The Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead (London,
1985). See also U. Verhoeven, Das saitische Totenbuch der Iahtesnacht (Bonn, 1993),
vol. 1, pp. 73 ff., on the general problem of translation. A rich selection is given by
S. Donadoni, Testi religiosi egizi (Turin, 1970), pp. 255-328. On the problem of dat¬
ing, see M. Heerma van Voss, Phoenix 23 (1977): 84-89.
Detailed treatments of individual spells: W. Czermak, ZAS 76 (1940); 9-24 (spell
1); H. D. Schneider, Shabtis, vol. 1 (Leiden 1977), pp. 78-80. (spell 6); W. Westendorf, ed., Gottinger Totenbuchstudien: Beitrdge zum ly. Kapitel, GO 3 (Wiesbaden,
1975; spell 17); on the textual history of spell 17, U. Rossler-Kohler, Kapitel ly des
cigyptischen Totenbuches: Untersuchungen zur Textgeschichte und Funktion eines Textes
der altagyptischen Totenliteratur, GO 10 (Wiesbaden, 1979), and on the textual history
also eadem, in U. Verhoeven and E. Graefe, eds.. Religion und Philosophie im alten
Agypten, FS Ph. Derchain (Leuven, 1991), pp. 277-291; H. Kees, Gottinger Totenbuch¬
studien: Totenbuch Kapitel 69 und yo, UGAAe (Berlin, 1954; chapters 69 and 70);
G. P. Laan, Niet ten dode opgeschreven (diss. Amsterdam University, 1995; spell 71);
P. Vernus, Athribis (Cairo, 1978), pp. 270-277 (spell 88); H. Kees, in Miscellanea Berolinensia, vol. 2/2 (Berlin, 1950), pp. 77-96 (spell 99A); Ch. Kuentz, BIFAO 30 (1931):
823-880 (spell 106); K. Sethe et al.. Die Spriiche fur das Kennen der Seelen der heiligen
Orte (Leipzig, 1925), which is a collection of articles from ZAS 57 (i922)~59 (1924)

168

BIBLIOGRAPHY

dealing with spells 108-109 and 112-116); Ch. Maystre, Les Declarations d'innocence
(Cairo, 1937; spell 125); U. Verhoeven, RdE 43 (1992): 169-194 (spell 146, end; see
also F. Tiradritti, Vicino Oriente IX—1993 (Rome, 1994), pp. 71-106); R. El-Sayed,
MDAIK 36 (1980): 357-390 (spell 148); B. Liischer, Untersuchungen zu Totenbuch
Spruch 151 (diss. Basel University, as yet unpublished; spell 151); D. Bidoli, Die
Spriiche der Fangnetze in den altdgyptischen Sargtexten, ADAIK 9 (Gliickstadt, 1976;
spell 153); J. Yoyotte, RdE 29 (1977): 194-200 (spells 162-167); M. Mosher, JARCE 29
(1992) 158-169 (spell 163); J. Cerny, BIFAO 41 (1942): 118-133 (Pleyte 166);
G. Burkard, Spatzeitliche Osiris-Liturgien im Corpus der Asasif-Papyri (Wiesbaden,
1995), pp. 23-62 (Pleyte 168 and 169); H. Kees, ZAS 65 (1930): 65-83 (spell 175); C.
de Wit, BiOr 10 (1953): 90-94 (spell 181); T. G. Allen, JNES 11 (1952): 177-186
(spells 191-192, though according to J.-C. Goyon, Studia Aegyptiaca, Budapest, 1974,
vol. 1, pp. 117-127, these belong to an entirely different composition); M. Heerma
van Voss De spreuk om de kisten te kennen (Leiden, 1971; spell 193); T. DuQuesne, At
the Court of Osiris: Book of the Dead Spell 194, a Rare Egyptian Judgment Text, OCE 4
(London, 1994).
On vignettes: Ch. Beinlich-Seeber, Untersuchungen zur Darstellung des Totengerichts im Alten Agypten, MAS 35 (Berlin, 1976); H. Milde, The Vignettes in the Book
of the Dead of Neferrenpet (Leiden, 1991); P. Eschweiler, Bildzauber im alten Agypten,
OBO 137 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1994), pp. 161 ff.
On the meaning of the spells, see further: R. El-Sayed, BSEG 9/10 (1984/85):
245-274 (the role of light). More comprehensive studies of the content of the Book
of the Dead have yet to be made. On its use by Ezra Pound (after the edition of
Budge), see G. Schmidt, Arcadia 6 (1971): 297-301.
An esoteric literature is also connected with the Book of the Dead in which
names such as S. Mayassis, A. Champdor, and G. Kolpaktchy are prominent; their
free renderings have found a wide circulation in other disciplines. The interpreta¬
tion of the Book of the Dead as an initiatory text began already with the theosophist
H. P. Blavatsky, Isis Unveiled: A Master Key to the Mysteries of Ancient and Modern Sci¬
ence and Theology (New York, 1877), who relied on the first English translation by
S. Birch, and it has continued down to Mayassis.

The Books of Breathing
For the manuscript published by V. Denon, see the atlas of his Voyage dans la Basse
et la Haute-Egypte pendant les campagnes du general Bonaparte (Paris, 1804), plate 136;
this volume was translated into English by Arthur Aiken under the title Travels in
Upper and Lower Egypt during the Campaigns of General Bonaparte in that Country
(New York, 1803). This version was treated by H. Brugsch, S'ai en sinsin (Berlin,
1851).
As yet, no edition of all the texts is available. The best summary is that given by
J.-C. Goyon, Rituels funeraires de I'ancienne Egypte (Paris, 1972), with translation.
There are lists of manuscripts in Goyon, ibid., pp. 349-350 and M. Bellion, Cata¬
logue des manuscrits (1987; see above under Book of the Dead). There have since
been publications of further manuscripts: M. Coenen and J. Quaegebeur, De Pa¬
pyrus Denon in het Museum Meermanno-Westreenianum, Den Haag, of Het Boek van het

BIBLIOGRAPHY

169

Ademen van Isis (Leuven, 1995; manuscript in The Hague); Liebieghaus, Museum
Alter Plastik, Agyptische Bildwerke, vol. 3 (Melsungen, 1993), no. 63 (manuscript in
Frankfurt); M. Valloggia, in Hommages a la memoire de Serge Sauneron, 1927-1976,
vol. 1, BE 81 (Cairo, 1979), pp. 285-304 (manuscript in Lausanne); W. Brunch in Studien zu Sprache und Religion Agyptens zu Ehren von VJolfhart Westendorf (Gottingen,
1984), pp. 455-460 (Demotic manuscript in Munich); and A. Gasse, Les papyrus hieratiques et hieroglyphiques du Museo Gregoriano Egizio (Vatican City, 1993). Of the older
editions, we can cite here P. J. Horrack, Ee Eivre des Respirations d'apres les manuscrits
du Muse'e du Eouvre (Paris, 1877) and Jens D. C. Lieblein, Ee livre egi/ptien ... "que won
now fleurisse" (Leipzig, 1895). Both books were also printed in hieroglyphic type in
E. A. W. Budge, The Chapters of Coming Forth by Day or The Theban Recension of the
Book of the Dead, vol. 3 (London, 1910), pp. 133-150. A Demotic text combining the
Opening of the Mouth Ritual and the Books of Breathing has been published by
M. Smith, The Liturgy of the Opening of the Mouth for Breathing (Oxford, 1993).
On the meaning of the content and on the connection with divine decrees and
Hermetic writings, see also J. Quaegebeur, in T. DuQuesne (ed.), Hermes Aegyptiacus: Egyptological Studies for B. H. Strieker (Oxford, 1995), pp. 157-181.

The New Kingdom Books of the Netherworld
General

Most of the Books of the Netherworld are translated and provided with an intro¬
duction in E. Hornung, Agyptische Unterzveltsbucher, 3d ed. (Zurich, 1989), with an
index by L. Spycher; there is an unrevised reprint with the title Die Unterzveltsbucher
der Agypter (Zurich, 1992).
For general surveys of the genre, see A. Piankoff, ASAE 40 (1940): 283-289;
H. Altenmuller, in Handbuch der Orientalistik, vol. 1 (Agyptologie), sec. 2 (Literatur),
2d ed. (Leiden, 1970), pp. 69-81; W. Barta, Die Bedeutung der Jenseitsbiicher fiir den
verstorbenen Konig, MAS 42 (Munich, 1985); idem, IComparative Untersuchungen zu
vier Unterzveltsbuchern: Das altdgyptische Zzveizvegebuch und seine Topographie, MAU 1
(Frankfurt a. M., 1990); E. Hermsen, Die zzvei Wege des Jenseits: Das altdgyptische Zzvei¬
zvegebuch und seine Topographie, OBO 112 (Freiburgand Gottingen, 1991), pp. 32-47.
On the concluding scenes that summarize the course of the sun, see E. Hornung,
MDAIK 37 (1981): 217-226, and on the entire genre see also H. Brunner, SAK 8
(1980): 79-84 (with emphasis on the inclusion of the course of the sun in the royal
tombs) and idem, in G. Stephenson, ed., Leben und Tod in den Religionen: Symbol und
Wirklichkeit (Darmstadt, 1980), pp. 215-228. On the use of the books in the tomb of
Sethos I, see E. Hornung, Eranos Jahrbuch 50 (1981): 431-475. On the scenes of the
course of the sun, see idem, Eranos Jahrbuch 48 (1979): 183-237 and idem, in Sesto
Congresso internaz. di Egittologia, Atti, vol. 1 (Turin, 1992), pp. 317-323.
The Egyptian title of the genre is discussed by A. Piankoff, BIFAO 62 (1964):
147-149. In the same volume, pp. 207-218, he mentions possible connections with
the religion of Akhenaten; in this connection, see also E. Hornung, BSEG 13 (1989):
65-68, indicating fundamental differences. F. Abitz, Pharao als Gott in den Unterzveltsbiichern des Neuen Reiches, OBO 146 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1995), treats the
concrete references to the king and additional insertions in the individual books.

170

BIBLIOGRAPHY

On the explanation of the books as instructions proposed by S. Morenz, see E. Hor¬
nung, in E. Hornung and O. Keel, eds., Studien zur altdgyptischen Lebenslehren, OBO
28 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1979), pp. 217-224, where differences from the instruc¬
tion genre are emphasized. Anthropological questions concerning the Books of the
Netherworld are treated by A. Rupp, Vergehen und Bleiben: Religionsgeschichtliche
Studien zum Personenverstdndnis in Agypten und im Alten Testament (Saarbriicken,
1976); see also idem, ZAS 101 (1974): 35-49.
U. Rossler-Kohler, ASAE 70 (1985): 383-408, offers a fundamental study of the
unusual omissions of text, leaving empty spaces, that appear in many versions of
the Books of the Netherworld and succeeds in suggesting rather varied reasons for
them: in part, they simply serve the arrangement; additionally, they can indicate
symbolic spaces in which the indication of enemies is not written out. The many
punishment scenes in the Place of Annihilation are comprehensively treated by
E. Hornung, Altdgyptische Hollenvorstellungen, ASAW 59/3 (Berlin, 1968) and idem,
in T. Schabert and E. Hornung, eds., Strukturen des Chaos, Eranos NS 2 (Munich,
1994), pp. 227-262; there is an English version of the latter in Diogenes 165 (1994):
133-1.56, and a French version in Diogene 165 (1994): 121-143.

The Amduat

Maspero's first detailed survey and partial translation in RHR 17 (1888): 251-310
was reprinted in G. Maspero, Les hypogees royaux de Thebes, EMAE 2 (Paris, 1893),
pp. 1-181; Maspero employed the verion of Sethos I, along with certain papyri for
the last hour. His pupil G. Jequier published the first edition of the short version:
Le Lime de ce qu'il y a dans VHades: Version abregee (Paris, 1894), mainly from versions
on papyri of Dynasty 21; R. V. Lanzone had already published a papyrus in Turin,
Le domicile des esprits (Paris, 1879). A description and translation of both versions,
with the text in hieroglyphic type following Lefebure's copy of Sethos I and Lan¬
zone for the twelfth hour, was published by E. A. W. Budge, The Egyptian Heaven
arid Hell, 3 vols. (London, 1905; rpt., 1 vol., 1925); the long version fills vol. 1 while
the short version (from the tomb of Sethos I and Leiden T. 71) is dealt with in vol. 2,
pp. 1-40. He had already supplied descriptions of the hours in The Gods of the Egyp¬
tians, vol. 1 (London, 1904). Paul Bucher published the concluding texts of the first
three hours in BIT AO 30 (1931): 229-247. The text volume (pt. 1) of E. Hornung, Das
Amduat; Die Schrift des Verborgenen Raumes, AgAbh 7 (Wiesbaden, 1963) has now
been replaced by idem, Texte zum Amduat, 3 vols. with continuous pagination, AH
13-15 (Geneva, 1987-1994) and hand copies by L. Spycher and B. Liischer; both
editions take into account only the versions from the New Kingdom, down to
Ramesses IX. A revision of the commentary (pt. 2, 1963) is planned; pt. 3 (AgAbh
13, 1967) contains the short version, whose text appears again in a synoptic edition
in Texte zum Amduat, pp. 1-97. There is also a German translation in E. Hornung,
Agyptische Unterweltsbiicher, 3d ed. (Zurich, 1989), pp. 57-194, and an English trans¬
lation in A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York,
1954), pp. 227-318; the introductions to the individual hours have also been trans¬
lated in M. Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia,

BIBLIOGRAPHY

171

1989), pp. 491-506. Additional text fragments are expected from the work of
E. Brock on the royal sarcophagi of the Ramesside Period.
There is a survey of the New Kingdom versions in Hornung, Texte zum Amduat,
vol. 1, pp. x-xvi. The version from the tomb of Tuthmosis III is now published by
A. Fornari and M. Tosi, Nella sede della veritd: Deir el Medina e Vipogeo di Thutmosi III
(Milan, 1987), with color reproductions, though without the short version or the
catalogue of deities, for which there exist excellent, unpublished black-and-white
photographs by H. Burton. Samples of the fragments from the tomb of Tuthmosis I
are reproduced in G. Daressy, Fouilles de la Vallee des Rois (Cairo, 1902), plate LVII
and K. Mysliwiec, Studien zum Gott Atum, vol. 1, HAB 5 (Hildesheim, 1978), plates
XIX-XX. The preliminary report on the version of Useramun by E. Hornung, Die
Grabkammer des Vezirs User, NAWG 1961/5 has now been replaced by the contribu¬
tion in E. Dziobek, Die Grdber des Vezirs User-Amun: Theben Nr. 61 und 131 (Mainz,
1994), pp. 42-47. Individual hours from the tomb of Amenophis II are reproduced
in Hornung, Valley of the Kings: Horizon of Eternity, trans. David Warburton (New
York, 1990), pp. 81 (second hour), 102 (twelfth hour), 111 (seventh hour), and 144
(tenth hour) and in A. Champdor, Livre des Morts, pp. 116-117 (fourth hour); his
entire tomb has been published only by P. Bucher, Les textes des tombes de Thoutmosis III et d'Amenophis II, MIFAO 60 (Cairo, 1932). There are color details from the
version on the shrine of Tutankhamun in Kamal el-Mallakh and A. C. Brackman,
The Gold of Tutankhamen (New York, 1978), plates 20-24; facsimiles of both hours
are given by A. Piankoff, Les chapelles de Tout-Ankh-Amon, MIFAO 72 (Cairo, 1952),
plates VI and VIII, and see idem. The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amun, Bollingen Series
40/2 (New York, 1955), plates 30-36.
For Sethos I, see H. Burton and E. Hornung, The Tomb of Pharaoh Seti I / Das Grab
Sethos' I. (Zurich, 1991). For two extracts from the tomb of Ramesses IV, see E. Hor¬
nung, Zzvei ramessidische Konigsgrdber: Ramses IV. und Ramses VIE, Theben 11
(Mainz, 1990), pp. 84-85. For Ramesses VI, see A. Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI,
Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), plates 74-101, and on the order of the
hours in this tomb, see F. Abitz, Baugeschichte und Dekoration des Grabes Ramses' VI.,
OBO 89 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989), pp. 99-110. For Ramesses IX, see F. Guilmant, Le tombeau de Ramses IX, MIFAO 15 (Cairo, 1907), plates 38, 43-44, 63, 65-75,
and 92, supplemented by F. Abitz, SAK 17 (1990): 1-40. As a result of the most re¬
cent restoration work in the antechamber to the sarcophagus chamber in the tomb
of Siptah, traces of the sixth hour are now visible, though they are without texts.
The Dynasty 21 papyri in the Cairo Museum have been published by A. F. Sadek,
Contribution a Vetude de VAmdouat, OBO 65 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1985), with a
translation of the ninth through the twelfth hour, and the fragments from the ceno¬
taph of Iuput (portions of the first, tenth, and twelfth hours) have been published
by P. Vernus, BIT AO 75 (1975): 67-72. For further papyri, see E. Hornung, Das Am¬
duat, Part III (Berlin 3001); L. H. Lesko, in Studies in Honor of George R. Hughes: Janu¬
ary 12, 1977, SAOC 39 (Chicago, 1976), pp. 133-138; A. Abdelhamid Youssef,
BIFAO 82 (1982): 1-17 (Cairo J. 96638, short version); M. Heerma van Voss, in
M. Heerma van Voss, ed.. Studies in Egyptian Religion Dedicated to Professor Jan Zandee
(Leiden, 1982), pp. 56-60 (Houston); M. Valloggia, RdE 40 (1989): 131-144 (P. Bod¬
mer 107, combined with a solar hymn); A. F. Sadek, VA 7 (1991): 5-14 (Marseille,

172

BIBLIOGRAPHY

with figures from the third hour); M. Heerma van Voss, in L'Egitto fuori dell'Egitto
(Bologna, 1991), pp. 451-453 (Kansas City 33-1398, figures from the eleventh hour);
S. Quirke, JEA 80 (1994): 147-149 (Wellcome Institute, with figures from the first,
third, eleventh, and twelfth hours); M. Heerma van Voss, JEOL 33 (1995): 21-30
(papyrus in Antwerp, mixed with motifs from the Book of the Dead). A detailed
listing and classification of the papyri has been published by A. Niwiriski, Studies
on the Illustrated Theban Funerary Papyri of the 11th and 10th Centuries B.C., OBO 86
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989).
Most of the Late Period versions in tombs and on sarcophagi remain unpub¬
lished. For Petamenophis (TT 33), see F. W. von Bissing, ZAS 74 (1938): 21-22 and
A. Piankoff, "Le Livre de l'Am-Duat et les variantes tardives," in O. Firchow, ed.,
Agyptologische Studien, DAWBIO 29 (Berlin, 1955), pp. 244-247 (with a photograph
of the fifth hour); excerpts from the twelfth hour in the tomb of Mutirdis (TT
410) are published by J. Assmann, Das Grab der Mutirdis (Mainz, 1977),
pp. 75-77. For the sarcophagi, see H. Jenni, Das Dekorationsprogramm des Sarkophages
Nektanebos' II., AH 12 (Geneva, 1986). Two scenes with captions on the walls of a
burial chamber of Dynasty 26 date are published by E. el-Sawi and F. Gomaa, Das
Grab des Panehsi, Gottesvaters von Heliopolis in Matariya, AAT 23 (Wiesbaden, 1993).
Some hours (the seventh, tenth, and eleventh) are attested on blocks from the
nilometer at Roda; there are photographs in the Dossier Drioton in the Strasbourg
library. A remark regarding the copy of the book (with its exact title) on the sar¬
cophagus of Tjaihorpata from the reign of Nectanebo II is treated by J. Baines, JEA
78 (1992): 247. The citations on coffins of the early Ptolemaic Period are found in
O. Neugebauer and R. A. Parker, Egyptian Astronomical Texts, vol. 3, BES 6 (Provi¬
dence and London, 1969), p. 61 with plate 28, and J. Assmann, MDAIK 23 (1968): 22
with fig. 2.
The edition by G. Maspero first appeared in RHR 17 (1888): 251-310 and was
reprinted in his Etudes de mythologie et d'archeologie egyptienne, vol. 2 (Paris, 1893),
pp. 1-181 (esp. pp. 27-163); it was the basis for the surveys of the content of the book
in A. Wiedemann, Die Religion der alten Agypter (Munster i.W., 1890), pp. 47-55 and
E. Naville, La religion des anciens Egyptiens (Paris, 1906), pp. 77-87. E. A. W. Budge
gave a more detailed treatment of the individual hours in The Gods of the Egyptians
(London, 1904), vol. 1, pp. 204-260, and see also above in idem. The Egyptian Heaven
and Hell (1905). B. de Rachewiltz, II libro egizio degli inferi, 2d ed. (Rome, 1982) for the
most part translates only the introductions to the hours, while further passages are
given by S. Donadoni, Testi religiosi egizi (Turin, 1970), pp. 329-333. The survey by
H. Kees in H. Bonnet, Reallexikon der dgyptische Religionsgeschichte (Berlin, 1952),
pp. 17-20, reflects the negative evaluation of the book by A. Erman.
On questions of form and content, S. Schott, Die Schrift der verborgenen Kammer in
Konigsgrabern der 18. Dynastie, NAWG 1958/4 and H. Altenmiiller, JEOL 20 (1968):
27-42 (on the problem of the "gaps"), are still important. The formulae regarding
knowledge are treated by E. F. Wente, JNES 41 (1982): 162-167. A more recent sur¬
vey of the contents is given by K. Koch, Geschichte der dgyptischen Religion (Stuttgart,
1993), pp. 304-313, and S. Binder, BACE 6 (1995): 7-30. On the meaning of the fifth
hour of the night, see S. Schott, Zum Weltbild der Jenseitsfiihrer des neuen Reiches,
NAWG 1965/11, pp. 191-193.
/•

BIBLIOGRAPHY

173

In more recent times, a dating of the composition earlier than the New Kingdom,
for the most part to the Middle Kingdom, has been favored by, among others,
S. Morenz, Eranos Jahrbuch 34 (1965): 436, n. 28, and (with less certainty) idem, TL 90
(1965): 503; H. Altenmiiller, JEOL 20 (1968) 42, and idem, Handbuch der Orientalistik,
vol. 1 (Agyptologie), sec. 1, pt. 2 (Leiden, 1970), p. 72 (dating it to perhaps as early
as the Old Kingdom); E. F. Wente, JNES 41 (1982): 175-176, and idem, JNES 42
(1983): 156; and J. Baines, JEA 76 (1990): 63.
A first attempt to see the Amduat not only as a cosmography but also as an inter¬
nal journey was undertaken by B. George, GM 3 (1972): 15-20, and there is now a
fundamentally important elaboration by A. Schweizer, Seelenfiihrer durch den verborgenen Rantn: Das dgyptische Unterweltsbuch Amduat (Munich, 1994), while E. Hornung has highlighted the most important stages in the journey through the nether¬
world in the Amduat and the Book of Gates in Die Nachtfahrt der Sonne: Eine
altdgyptische Beschreibung des Jenseits (Zurich, 1991). A psychological interpretation
of the Amduat has also been attempted by G. Schoeller, Isis: Auf der Suche nach dem
gottlichen Geheimnis (Munich, 1991), pp. 131-214. On the relationship between pic¬
ture and text, see N. Hoffmann, ZAS 123 (1996): 26-40. The order of the hours is
treated by W. Barta, JEOE 21 (1970): 164-168 (tomb of Tuthmosis III), and idem, BO
31 (1974): 197-201 (Ramesside tombs). The explanation of the Amduat as a royal
burial ritual offered by P. Barguet, RdE 24 (1972): 7-11, is unconvincing; see the de¬
tailed remarks by W. Barta, Die Bedeutung der Jenseitsbiicher, MAS 42 (Munich,
1985), pp. 154-159. Ch. Leitz, Studien zur dgyptischen Astronomie, 2d ed., AgAbh 49
(Wiesbaden, 1991), pp. 101-104, sees in the statements regarding distances in the
first hour an indication that the Egyptians of that era had already recognized that
the world is a sphere and had determined its circumference more exactly than Er¬
atosthenes; see the critical remarks by K. Ferrari d'Occhieppo, R. Krauss, and Th.
Schmidt-Kaler, ZAS 123 (1996): 103-110.
The continuation of motifs from the Amduat down into Islamic times has been
treated by I. Grumach, ASP 7 (1970): 169-181.

The Spell of the Twelve Caverns

There was an early publication of the fragmentary version in the Osireion by
M. A. Murray, The Osireion at Abydos (London, 1904), plates II-V; most of the re¬
maining sources, with translation and commentary, are published in A. Piankoff,
The Wandering of the Soul, Bollingen Series 40/6 (Princeton, 1974), pp. 40-114 and
plates 10-42. A partial translation into German is found in E. Hornung, Das Totenbuch der Agypter (Zurich, 1979), pp. 341-343, and a more detailed description and
translation in Th. G. Allen, The Book of the Dead or Going Forth by Day (Chicago,
1974), pp. 162-175.

The Book of Gates

J. Bonomi and S. Sharpe, The Alabaster Sarcophagus of Oimeneptah I., King of Egypt
(London, 1864), is the first, and today still the authoritative, facsimile edition of the
version on the alabaster sarcophagus of Sethos I in Sir John Soane's Museum in

174

BIBLIOGRAPHY

London; it served as the basis for subsequent studies by E. Lefebure, Records of the
Past, vol. 10 (London, 1878), pp. 79-134, and vol. 12 (London, 1881), pp. 1-35;
G. Maspero, RHR 18 (1888); and E. A. W. Budge, The Egyptian Heaven and Hell (Lon¬
don, 1905). The first synoptic text edition, in hieroglyphic type, of all the versions of
the New Kingdom by Ch. Maystre and A. Piankoff, Le Livre des Portes, 3 vols,
MIFAO 74, 75, and 90 (Cairo 1939-1962), with portions also in ASAE 55 (1958) and
56 (1959) is now replaced by E. Hornung, Das Buch von den Pforten des Jenseits, 2
vols., AH 7 and 8 (Geneva, 1979-1984), with an autographed text by A. Brodbeck in
the first volume and a translation and commentary in the second volume. The frag¬
ments of the alabaster coffin of Siptah in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New
York that was inscribed on both the outside and the inside, like that of Sethos, re¬
main unstudied.
There are photographic reproductions of the version of Haremhab in E. Hornung
(with F. Teichmann), Das Grab des Haremhab im Tal der Konige (Bern, 1971); of that of
Ramesses I in A. Piankoff, Ea tombe de Ramses Ier, BIFAO 56 (1957), pp. 189-200 with
plates IV-VII; of that of Sethos I in H. Burton and E. Hornung, The Tomb of Pharaoh
Seti I / Das Grab Sethos' I. (Zurich, 1991); of that of Ramesses IV and Ramesses VII in
E. Hornung, Zwei ramessidische Konigsgraber: Ramses IV. und Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990),
plates 60-67 and 101-103; of that of Ramesses VI in Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI,
Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), plates 37-62. For Tjanefer, see the line draw¬
ings in K. C. Seele, The Tomb of Tjanefer at Thebes (Chicago, 1959), plates 30-38.
The concluding representation from the papyrus of Anhai was first reproduced
in E. A. W. Budge, Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Anhai, Kerasher and Netchemet
(London, 1899), plate 8, and since, in other publications as well. On the Papyrus of
Khonsumes, see A. Piankoff and N. Rambova, Mythological Papyri, Bollingen Series
40/3 (New York, 1957), no. 30, and on Mutirdis, see J. Assmann, Das Grab der Mutirdis (Mainz, 1977), p. 75 (with the concluding representation and the third gate).
G. Maspero dealt briefly with the contents in Etudes de mythologie et d'archeologie
egyptiens, vol. 2 (Paris, 1893), pp. 163-181, making reference to the English transla¬
tion by E. Lefebure in Records of the Past, vols. 10 and 12 (see above). H. Brugsch dis¬
cusses the concluding representation in detail in Religion und Mythologie der alten
Aegypter, 2d ed. (Leipzig, 1891), pp. 216-221, while A. Wiedemann offers a short
survey in Die Religion der alten Agypter (Munster i.W., 1890), pp. 55-58.
E. A. W. Budge, The Egyptian Heaven and Hell, 3 vols. (London, 1905; reprint ed.,
1925), gives a translation and description of the version on the sarcophagus of
Sethos I in vol. 2, and in vol. 3, pp. 103-199, a comparison of the hours of the night
with those in the Amduat, with a false count after the fifth hour, because he
arranged the fragments of the lid incorrectly. A brief survey is also offered by
H. Bonnet, Reallexikon der agyptischen Religionsgeschichte (Berlin, 1952), pp. 589-590.
More recent English translations are given in Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI,
Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), pp. 137-224, and J. Zandee, in Liber Amicorum: Studies in Honour of C. J. Bleeker (Leiden, 1969), pp. 282-324 (utilizing Pi¬
ankoff s division of the hours). There is a first translation into German by Hornung,
Die Unterweltsbiicher der Agypter (Zurich, 1992), pp. 195-308.
On the hall of judgment (scene 33), see M. Heerma van Voss, in Travels in the
World of the Old Testament: Studies Presented to M. A. Seek (Assen, 1974), pp. 80-90.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

175

The “posts of Geb" in scene 45 are discussed by F. T. Miosi, JSSEA 12 (1982): 77-80.
On the griffin in scene 61, see W. Barta, JEOL 23 (1975): 343-344. On scene 76, see
M. Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
p. 482. On the conlcuding representation, see A. Niwinski, GM 65 (1983): 79-85. On
the remarks regarding offerings, see E. F. Wente, JNES 41 (1982): 168-175. Against
the interpretation of the book as a ritual for transferring rule from the deceased
king to his successor, offered by P. Barguet, RdE 27 (1975): 30-36, see W. Barta, Die
Bedeutung der Jenseitsbiicher fiir den verstorbenen Konig, MAS 42 (1985), pp. 159-162.

The Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld

The two sections are published in facsimile by A. Piankoff, Les Chapelles de ToutAnkh-Amon, MIFAO 72 (Cairo, 1952), plates II (section B) and IV (section A), and
with photographs as well in idem. The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, Bollingen Series
40/2 (New York, 1955), plates 47-53 and in K. el-Mallakh and A. C. Brackman, The
Gold of Tutankhamen (New York, 1978), plates 29-36. On the enigmatic writing of
the texts in sec. A, see E. Drioton, JEA 35 (1949): 117-122, and also A. Piankoff,
ibid., pp. 113-116, on the figure of the large god. On the concluding representation,
see K. Mysliwiec, Bulletin du Centenaire, supplement to BIT AO 83 (Cairo, 1981), p.
94. There are descriptions and translations of both sections by E. Hornung, JSSEA
13 (1983): 29-34, and a summary by W. Barta, which includes the Book of the Dead
spells, in his Die Bedeutung der Jenseitsbiicher, MAS 42 (1985), pp. 67-68 and
128-130. New, improved readings and interpretations have now been supplied by
J. C. Darnell in his as yet unpublished dissertation, “The Enigmatic Netherworld
Books of the Solar-Osirian Unity: Cryptographic Compositions in the Tombs of Tutankhamun, Ramesses VI, and Ramesses IX" (University of Chicago, 1995).

The Book of Caverns

The only publication of the composition, with the text and a translation into French,
is by A. Piankoff, Le Eivre de Quererts (Cairo, 1946); this is a collection of articles that
had appeared in BIFAO 41 (1943), 42 (1944), 43 (1945), and 45 (1947). An English
translation is supplied by Piankoff in The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1
(New York, 1954), and a German translation by E. Hornung, Die Unterweltsbiicher
der Agypter, (Zurich, 1992), pp. 311-424. There is a translation of the first section by
S. Donadoni, Testi religiosi egizi (Turin, 1970), pp. 336-341. A summary is provided
in D. Meeks and Chr. Favard-Meeks, La vie quotidienne des dieux egyptiens (Paris,
i993), pp. 221-239, translated into English by G. M. Goshgarian under the title
Daily Life of the Egyptian Gods (Ithaca, 1997), pp. 151-162, and in W. Barta, Die Be¬
deutung der Jenseitstexte fiir den verstorbenen Konig, MAS 42 (Munich, 1985) pp. 60-65
and 110-123. G. Roulin is presently preparing a new edition of the book.
The version in the Osireion was published by H. Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I
at Abydos (London, 1933), vol. 2, plates 23-49; the first English translation appears
in ibid., vol. 1, pp. 36-65. There are color photographs of the figures of Nut and
Osiris from section five of the version in the tomb of Ramesses VI in E. Hornung,
Tal der Konige: Die Ruhestdtte der Pharaonen (Mainz, 1990), p. 131, fig. 101 and p. 159,

176

BIBLIOGRAPHY

fig. 129; the concluding representation is reproduced in ibid., p. 118, fig. 93, and for
the variants of the concluding representation from the tombs of Merneptah and
Twosre, see ibid., p. 65, fig. 45-46. For Ramesses IV and Ramesses VII, see E. Hornung, Zwei ramessidische Konigsgrciber: Rainses IV. und Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990),
pp. 86-87 aRd plates 44-50, 76-83, and 105-108. For Ramesses IX, see F. Guilmant,
Le tombeau de Ramses IX, MIFAO 15 (Cairo, 1907), plates 24, 28-33, and 49~6o; the
two large representations from section five in the sarcophagus chamber are on
plates 89 and 91.
On the arrangement of the book and on the texts added on behalf of the king, see
F. Abitz, Pharao als Gott in den Unterweltsbiichern des Neuen Reiches, OBO 146
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1995), pp. 102-134. P. Barguet draws attention to parallels
with the myth of Osiris, namely the reassembling of his dismembered body and his
resurrection, in RdE 28 (1976): 25-37.

The Book of the Earth

The basic edition of the text, with a translation into French, remains that of A. Piankoff. La creation du disque solaire (Cairo, 1953). The version of Ramesses VI was
published by Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New
York, 1954), plates 111-121, 127-137, and 140, with an English translation on
pp. 327-376; there are color reproductions in Hornung, Tal der Konige: Die Ruhestdtte der Pharaonen (Mainz, 1990), pp. 133-134,162, and 164. For Ramesses VII, see
E. Hornung, Zwei ramessidische Konigsgrciber: Ramses IV. und Ramses VII. (Mainz,
1990), p. 88 and plates 116-119. The individual scenes employed by Sethos I and
Osorkon II are published by H. Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, MEES 39
(London, 1933), plate 87, and P. Montet, Tanis: Douze annees de fouilles dans une capi¬
tate oubliee du delta egyptien (Paris, 1942), vol. 1, plate 37.
On the structure and content of the book, see W. Barta, Die Bedeutung der Jenseitsbiicher fiir den verstorbenen Konig, MAS 42 (Munich, 1985), pp. 65-67 and 123-128,
and idem, GM 98 (1987): 7-9; on the content, see also B. H. Strieker, De geboorte van
Horus, 5 vols. (Leiden, 1963-1989); on his "embryologic" explanation, cf. the com¬
ments by T. DuQuesne, DE 26 (1993): 97-105. Important observations on the struc¬
ture and meaning of the book are found in F. Abitz, Baugeschichte und Dekoration des
Grabes Ramses' VI., OBO 89 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989), pp. 118-133, and idem,
Pharao als Gott in den Unterweltsbiichern des Neuen Reiches, OBO 146 (Freiburg and
Gottingen, 1995), pp. 135-173. There is a translation into German, though with the
parts evidently in the wrong order, in Hornung, Die Unterweltsbiicher der Agypter
(Zurich, 1992), pp. 425-480.
On the scene with Aker, see S. Schott, Zum Weltbild der Jenseitsfiihrer des Neuen Re¬
iches, NAWG 1965/11, pp. 188-190. An explanation of the scene with the birth of
the stars as a water-clock was offered by P. Barguet, RdE 30 (1978): 51-56; see also
W. Westendorf, GM 134 (1993): 102.

Miscellaneous Scenes

Ceiling of corridor F in the tomb of Ramesses VI: On the barque, see H. Grapow and
H. Schafer, ZAS 73 (1937): 97-102, and the further remarks by Schafer, MDAIK 8

BIBLIOGRAPHY

177

(1939): 147-155, and Grapow, ZAS 81 (1956): 24-28. The entire ceiling, along with
the parallel in the tomb of Ramesses IX, is described by A. Piankoff and Ch. Maystre,
BIFAO 38 (1939): 65-70, with plates V-VI; on the ceiling of Ramesses VI, see fur¬
ther Piankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954),
pp. 433-434, with fig. 139 and plates 173-176 (F) and pp. 435-437, with plates
178-182 (G). On the ceiling of corridor F, see also F. Abitz, Zur Baugeschichte und Dekoration des Grabes Ramses' VI., OBO 89 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989), pp. 144-150. An
extract from the ceiling of the tomb of Ramesses IX, which is lacking in Guilmant's
publication of the tomb, is given by J.-F. Champollion, Monuments de I'Egypte et de la
Nubie (Paris, 1845), vol. 3, plate 270 = E. Hornung, Tal der Konige: Ruhestdtte der
Pharaonen (Mainz, 1990), p. 137 (ibid., p. 146: fig. 117 is not from the tomb of
Ramesses IX, but from that of Ramesses VI).
Ceiling of corridor G in the tomb of Ramesses VI: The protective representation is
treated by F. Abitz, Zur Baugeschichte und Dekoration des Grabes Ramses' VI., OBO 89
(Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989) pp. 157-158 (and see ibid., pp. 150-154, on the ceil¬
ing of G generally), and, with its enigmatic captions, by E. Hornung, in J. H. Kamstra, H. Milde, and K. Wagtendonk, eds.. Funerary Symbols and Religion: Essays Dedi¬
cated to Professor M. S. H. G. Heerma van Voss on the Occasion of His Retirement from
the Chair of the History of Ancient Religions at the University of Amsterdam (Kampen,
1988), pp. 45-51. Improvements, along with a first treatment of the representations
and texts in the decoration of the ceiling of G, are supplied by J. C. Darnell in "The
Enigmatic Netherworld Books of the Solar-Osirian Unity" (Ph.D. diss.. University
of Chicago, 1995).
Ceiling of anteroom H in the tomb of Ramesses VI: The material is published by A. Pi¬
ankoff, The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), pp. 439-441,
with fig. 142 and plates 183-185 (the ceiling of H) and plates 101-102 (the "protective
representation"). On H, see also F. Abitz, Zur Baugeschichte und Dekoration des Grabes
Ramses' VI., OBO 89 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1989), pp. 154-156.
Side walls of the sarcophagus chamber in the tomb of Ramesses VII: The material is
published by A. Piankoff, ASAE 55 (1958): 150-155, with plates IV-IX, and E. Hor¬
nung, Zwei ramessidische Konigsgraber: Ramses IV. und Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990),
pp. 63-71, with plates 11 and 116-119. On the scene with the crocodile, see
E. Brunner-Traut in W. Helck, ed.. Festschrift fiir Siegfried Schott zu seinem 70. Geburtstag (Wiesbaden, 1968), pp. 35-37. The parallel in the tomb of Ramses IX is repre¬
sented by F. Guilmant, Le tombeau de Ramses IX, MIFAO 15 (Cairo, 1907), plate 92,
and Hornung, Tal der Konige: Ruhestdtte der Pharaonen (Mainz, 1990), p. 116, fig. 88.
Right wall of the third corridor in the tomb of Ramesses IX: The entire wall is repro¬
duced in facsimile by F. Guilmant, Le tombeau de Ramses IX, MIFAO 15 (Cairo,
1907), plates 63 and 76-81. The figure of Osiris, with a parallel on a papyrus of Dy¬
nasty 21, was already treated by A. Piankoff, ASAE 49 (1949): 138-144, and on the
entire wall, see E. Hornung, in J. Osing and G. Dreyer, eds.. Form und Mass: Beitrdge
zur Literatur, Sprache und Kunst des alten Agypten, Festschrift fiir Gerhard Fecht zum 70.
Geburtstag am 6. Februar 1987, AAT 12 (Wiesbaden, 1987), pp. 226-237; F. Abitz,
SAK 17 (1990): 25-28; and J. C. Darnell, "The Enigmatic Netherworld Books of the
Solar-Osirian Unity" (Ph.D. diss.. University of Chicago, 1995). For a color detail of
the circles in the upper register, see E. Hornung, Tal der Konige: Ruhestdtte der
Pharaonen (Mainz, 1990), p. 148, fig. 126.

178

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Sequence of scenes on sarcophagi: On the sarcophagus in Vienna and parallels, see
E. von Bergmann, RT 6 (1885): 141-158. On the scene dealing with time, see
K. Mysliwiec, in Bulletin du Centenaire, supplement to BIFAO 81 (Cairo, 1981),
pp. 91-106; see also E. Hornung, Zwei ramessidische Kdnigsgrdber: Ramses IV. und
Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990), pp. 120-126, with plates 92-93.

The Books of the Sky
The Book of Nut

All the preserved texts are in O. Neugebauer and R. A. Parker, Egyptian Astronomi¬
cal Texts, vol. 1, BES 3 (Providence, i960), plates 44-51; the Demotic commentary
is also reconsidered there. The latter was first published by H. O. Lange and
O. Neugebauer, Papyrus Carlsberg No. I. Ein hieratisch-demotischer kosmologischer
Text, DVS 1/2 (Copenhagen, 1940). There is also the complementary fragment from
the burial chamber in the tomb of Mutirdis (TT 410), published by J. Assmann, Das
Grab der Mutirdis (Mainz, 1977), pp. 85-88, with plate 39.
There is a translation into German and a commentary by E. Hornung, Zwei rames¬
sidische Kdnigsgrdber: Ramses IV. und Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990), pp. 92-96. On cer¬
tain grammatical problems, see R. A. Parker, RdE 10 (1955): 49-59. On an astro¬
nomical explanation of the calendars of decans, see W. Barta, SAK 9 (1981): 85-103,
and Ch. Leitz, Studien zur agyptischen Astronomie, AgAbh 49, 2d ed. (1991), pp. 49-57.
A detailed treatment of the book, with a translation and an astronomical commen¬
tary, has been offered by M. Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science, vol. 2 (Philadelphia,
1995), PP- 357“4C>3- See also J. P. Allen, Genesis in Egypt: The Philosophy of Ancient
Egyptian Creation Accounts, YES 2 (New Haven, 1988), pp. 1-7.
The Book of the Day

The basic publications are by A. Piankoff, Le Livre du jour et de la nuit, BE 13 (Cairo,
1942), and idem, ASAE 41 (1941): 151-158 (tomb of Ramose); and P. Montet, Tanis:
Douze annees de fouilles dans une capitale oubliee du delta egyptien, vol. 1 (Paris, 1947),
plate 25, and Tanis, vol. 3 (Paris, i960), plates 29 and 31-32. Piankoff's edition offers
a French translation, and an English translation appears in his Tomb of Ramesses VI,
Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954), pp. 389-407; there is as yet no translation
into German. The cryptographically written hymn of the Eastern Souls, along with
parallels from Medinet Habu and the edifice of Taharqa at Karnak, have been
treated by M. C. Betro, EVO 12 (1989): 37-54, and the liturgical texts to the hours of
the day by S. K. Doll, in W. K. Simpson and W. M. Davis, eds.. Studies in Ancient
Egypt, the Aegean, and the Sudan: Essays in Honor of Dows Dunham on the Occasion of
His 90th Birthday, June 1,1980 (Boston, 1981), pp. 43-54, and idem, "Texts and Dec¬
oration on the Napatan Sarcophagi of Anlamani and Aspelta"(Ph.D. diss., Brandeis
University, 1978). References to further sources on papyri are furnished by J. Osing,
Aspects de la culture pharaonique: Quatre leqons au College de France (fevrier-mars 1989),
MAIBL NS 12 (Paris, 1992), p. 43, and parallels to protective divine beings at Edfu
are noted by J.-C. Goyon, Ees Dieux-gardiens et la genese des temples d'apres les textes
egyptiens de Vepoque greco-romaine: Ees soixante d'Edfou et les soixante-dix-sept dieux de

BIBLIOGRAPHY

179

Pharbaethos (Cairo, 1985), vol. 1, p. 130, n. 3. The texts of the hours at Edfu are to be
found in E. Chassinat, Le Temple d'Edfou, vol. 3 (Cairo, 1928), pp. 213-229; see also
J. Assmann, Liturgische Lieder an den Sonnengott, MAS 19 (Berlin, 1969), pp. 113-164.
On the hymns to the hours of the day, see also idem, Agyptische Hymnen und Gebete
(Zurich, 1975), no. 1-12, and on the first two hours of the day, see D. Kurth, Treffpunkt der Gotter: Inschriften aus dem Tempel des Horus von Edfu (Zurich, 1994),
pp. 133-136.
A related text praising the king as someone who, in the company of the "Eastern
Bas," knows the course of the sun and its arcana, has been treated by J. Assmann,
Der Konig als Sonnenpriester, AD AIK 7 (Gliickstadt, 1970), and many times since. It
occurs already in temples of Dynasty 18 (Deir el-Bahari and Luxor) and again in the
tomb of Petamenophis from Dynasty 26.

The Book of the Night

A. Piankoff supplies photographs from the sarcophagus chamber of Ramesses VI in
Ee Eivre du jour et de la nuit, BE 13 (Cairo, 1942); there is a translation into English by
the same scholar in The Tomb of Ramesses VI, Bollingen Series 40/1 (New York, 1954),
pp. 409-428. The selections translated by C. Lalouette, Textes sacrees et textes profanes
(Paris, 1984): pp. 155-158, correspond to Piankoff s plates V-VIII. E. Hornung com¬
ments on the second to the fourth hours in the tomb of Ramesses IV in Zzvei ramessidische Konigsgraber: Ramses IV. und Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990), pp. 96-100; the text
of the second hour and two further short samples can be found in idem. Die Unterweltsbiicher der Agypter (Zurich, 1992), pp. 489-493. For the versions from Tanis, see
P. Montet, Tanis: Douze annees de fouilles dans une capitale oubliee du delta egyptien,
vol. 1 (Paris, 1947), plate 25, and vol. 3 (Paris, i960), plates 29-32. The fragment from
the tomb of Mutirdis (TT 410) has been published by J. Assmann, Das Grab der Mutirdis (Mainz, 1977), pp. 88-89, with plate 39. For the versions of the texts in the tem¬
ples, see idem, Agyptische Hymnen und Gebete (Zurich, 1975), no. 13 and 14 (the con¬
cluding text of the book); J. Karkowski, ET 9 (1976): 69-70 (Deir el-Bahari);
A. Piankoff, ASAE 42 (1943): 351-353 (Medinet Habu, including the jackals desig¬
nated as the "Western bas,” now in Oriental Institute Epigraphic Survey, Medinet
Habu VI. OIP 84 (Chicago, 1963), plate 422); and R. A. Parker, J. Leclant, and J.-Cl.
Goyon, The Edifice of Taharqa by the Sacred Take of Karnak, BES 8 (Providence, 1979),
p. 41 with plate 19 (Karnak). On the late sarcophagi, see A. Piankoff, ASAE 40 (1940):
665-668. Finally, there is the edition by G. Roulin, Ee Eivre de la Nuit: Une composition
egyptienne de I'au-deld, OBO 147 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1996).

The Litany of Re

For R. Pococke's description of Ramesses IV's version, see A Description of the East,
and Some Other Countries (London, 1743), p. 98. The first edition, based on the ver¬
sions of Sethos I and Ramesses IV, with a translation into French, was published by
E. Naville, La Litanie du Soleil (Leipzig, 1875); his translation of the text into English
appeared in Records of the Past, vol. 8 (London, 1876), pp. 103-128. The edition now
used is that of E. Hornung, Das Buch der Anbetung des Re im Westen (Sonnenlitanei),

180

BIBLIOGRAPHY

vol. 1: Text (autographed by A. Brodbeck), AH 2 (Geneva, 1975), and vol. 2: Ubersetzung und Kommentar, AH 3 (Geneva, 1976). On the textual tradition, see also
W. Schenkel, Das Stemma der altdgyptischen Sonnenlitanei: Grundlegung der Textgeschichte
nach der Methode der Textkritik, GO 6 (Wiesbaden, 1978). A complete English transla¬
tion is furnished by A. Piankoff, The Litany of Re, Bollingen Series 40/4 (New York,
1964), pp. 22-43, aRd a detailed survey by W. J. de Jong, De Ibis 10 (1985): 2-20.
Photographs now exist of the earliest version, that of Useramun, in E. Dziobek,
Die Graber des Vezirs User-Amun, Theben Nr. 61 und 132, AVDAIK 84 (Mainz, 1994),
pp. 42-47 with plates 9-16 and 28-35 (note that there is already a complete title in
this version). Photographs of the version on the mummy shroud of Tuthmosis III
(now in Cairo and Boston) and a portion of the version of Sethos I (the right wall of
the first corridor) are published by Piankoff, The Litany of Re, and the mummy
shroud again by I. Munro, Die Totenbuch-Handschriften der 18. Dynastie im Agyptischen Museum Cairo (Wiesbaden, 1994). There is a complete publication of the ver¬
sion of Sethos I in H. Burton and E. Hornung, The Tomb of Seti I/Das Grab Sethos' I.
(Zurich, 1991), plates 2-21 and 23-31, with the ceiling text on plate 42b; Belzoni's
unpublished drawings, now in Bristol, permit some further restorations. The ver¬
sion of Ramesses II at Abydos was published, though the wrong way around, by
A. Mariette, Abydos, vol. 2, plates 14-17; for some of the figures in the Osireion, see
H. Frankfort, The Cenotaph of Seti I at Abydos, MEES 39, vol. 2, plates 71-72. For the
beginning of Merneptah's version of the book, see E. Hornung, Tal der Konige: Die
Ruhestdtte der Pharaonen (Zurich, 1983), p. 111, fig. 77, and for further material from
this tomb, see Piankoff, The Litany of Re, plates 8-9, and ASAE 6 (1905), plate IV
after p. 192; a further fragment, discovered by J. Romer in the tomb of Ramesses XI,
has not yet been published. The entire left wall from the version of Sethos II is
given in Piankoff, The Litany of Re, plates 3-7, and the beginning of Siptah's version
in Th. M. Davis, The Tomb of Siphtah (London, 1908). A fragment from the tomb of
Sethos II in the British Museum (EA 1378) completes lines 229-232 (advisement
from M. L. Bierbrier). All that is preserved of the version in the tomb of
Ramesses IV is found in E. Hornung, Zwei ramessidische Konigsgrdber: Ramses IV.
und Ramses VII. (Mainz, 1990), plates 18-25 and 31-41, and there is also a complete
hand copy by Naville, La Litanie du soleil, plates 34-49; for Ramesses IX, there re¬
mains the edition of F. Guilmant, Le Tombeau de Ramses IX (Cairo, 1907), plate 7 and
11-19, with the figures on plates 38-41.
A selection from the papyri is given in Piankoff, The Litany of Re, pp. 66-128. The
two versions in temples of the Late Period are published in R. A. Parker, J. Leclant,
and J.-Cl. Goyon, The Edifice of Taharqa by the Sacred Lake of Karnak, BES 8 (Provi¬
dence, 1979), pp. 30-35 with plates 12-15, and C. Traunecker, F. Le Saout, and
O. Masson, La Chapelle d'Achoris a Karnak (Paris, 1981), pp. 55-60 with plate XII. The
version in the tomb of Aba (TT 36) is published by K. P. Kuhlmann and
W. Schenkel, Das Grab des Ibi, Obergutsverwalters der Gottesgemahlin des Amun,
AVDAIK 15 (Mainz, 1983), vol. 1, pp. 254-256 with plates 146-147 and 150, while
selections from the tomb of Mentuemhet are published by J. Leclant, Montouemhat:
Quatrieme prophete d'Amon, prince de la ville, BE 35 (Cairo, 1961), plate 60, and Pi¬
ankoff, The Litany of Re, plate 2; for the sarcophagus of Nectanebo II, see H. Jenni,
Das Dekorationsprogramm des Sarkophages Nektanebos' II, AH 12 (Geneva, 1986).

BIBLIOGRAPHY

181

The distribution of the text in the Ramesside royal tombs has been treated by
W. Barta, GM 71 (1984): 7-10; he envisions a circular movement that comprehends
the cyclical course of the sun, and he also stresses the special position of the ceiling
text. On the Great Litany and its figures, see idem, ZAS 113 (1986): 83-88, and on
the concept kheperu, see idem, ZAS 109 (1982): 81-86. The development of the fig¬
ures of the kheperu of the sun god into independent deities is also treated by E. Hornung, in H.-J. Klimkeit, ed., Gotterbild in Kunst und Schrift (Bonn, 1984), pp. 37-60.
A brief introduction to the book, with a fresh translation of the title and the Great
Litany, is offered by M. Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science: A Source Book, vol. 1
(Philadelphia, 1989), pp. 511-529. On the appearance of portions of the litany in the
Book of the Dead, see E. Hornung, in Hommages a Franqois Daumas (Montpellier,
1986), pp. 427-428. On the structure and meaning of the book, see also F. Abitz,
Pharao als Gott in den Unterweltsbiichern des Neuen Reiches, OBO 146 (Freiburg and
Gottingen, 1995), pp. 51-72. The new explanation of the figure to the title is given
by J. C. Darnell in "The Enigmatic Netherworld Books of the Solar-Osirian Unity"
(Ph.D. diss. University of Chicago, 1995).

The Book of the Heavenly Cow

The first edition of the version in the tomb of Sethos I was published by E. Naville,
TSBA 4 (1876): 1-19, and of the version in the tomb of Ramesses III by idem, TSBA
8 (1885): 412-420. Ch. Maystre's edition in BIFAO 40 (1941): 53-115 rested on a
broader textual basis, though it contained no translation; Tutankhamun's version
was subsequently published by A. Piankoff in The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, Bollingen Series 40/2 (New York, 1955), pp. 26-37 with fig. 47, and in Les chapelles de
Tout-Ankh-Amon, MIFAO 72 (Cairo, 1952), pp. 17-18 and plate I. E. Hornung pro¬
vides an improved text edition and discussion, Der agyptische Mythos von der Himmelskuh: Eine Atiologie des Unvollkommenen, 2d ed., OBO 46 (Freiburg and Gottingen,
1991). N. Giulhou published a further edition offering scarcely any advances in
Le Vieillesse des dieux (Montpellier, 1989). A. Roccati makes reference to the papyrus
in Turin in BSFE 99 (1984): 23 with n. 35. A further, incomplete (to verse 246) trans¬
lation is offered by C. Lalouette, Textes sacres et textes profanes de Vancienne Egypte,
vol. 2 (Paris, 1987), pp. 46-52. For the rest, most translations are restricted to the
first part, which deals with the rebellion and punishment of humankind. On its in¬
clusion in the Book of the Faiyum, see H. Beinlich, Das Buch vom Fayum: Zum religiosen Eigenverstdndnis einer dgyptischen Landschaft, AgAbh 51 (Wiesbaden, 1991),
cols. 110-112 of the text.
The heavenly cow from Tutankhamun's shrine is represented in K. el-Mallakh
and A. C. Brackman, The Gold of Tutankhamen (New York, 1978), plate 39, and see
also Piankoff, The Shrines of Tut-Ankh-Amon, plate before p. 27. Besides the edition
by Hornung, the color copy of the heavenly cow in the tomb of Sethos I by R. Hay
also appears in E. Hornung, Tal der Konige: Die Ruhestdtte der Pharaonen (Zurich,
1983), p. 176, fig. 149, and another old copy by H. Salt is found in the catalog of the
exhibit Sethos—ein Pharaonengrab (Basel, 1991), p. 90; the present condition of
Sethos's version can be seen in H. Burton and E. Hornung, The Tomb of Pharaoh
Seti I/Das Grab Sethos' I. (Zurich, 1991), plates 154-159.

182

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Additions to the bibliography in Hornung, Mythos von der Himmelskuh,
pp. XI-XII: R. T. Rundle Clark, Myth and Symbol in Ancient Egypt (London, 1959),
pp. 181-185 (translation through verse 163), and E. Bresciani, Letteratura e poesia dell'
antico Egitto (Turin, 1969), pp. 227-229 (through verse 91). A partial English transla¬
tion appears in M. Clagett, Ancient Egyptian Science, vol. 1 (Philadelphia, 1989),
pp. 537-542. D. Lorton has commented on the date of the text in BO 40 (1983):
609-616, offering further arguments in favor of the Amarna Period. The meaning
of the composition has been treated by H. Beinlich, Das Buch vom Fayum,
pp. 316-317 and F. Abitz, Pharao als Gott in den Unterweltsbiichern des Neuen Reiches,
OBO 146 (Freiburg and Gottingen, 1995), pp. 98-101.

The Book of Traversing Eternity

The long version was first published by B. H. Strieker, De egyptische mysterien:
Pap. Leiden T 32, OMRO 31 (Leiden, 1950), pp. 45-63; OMRO 34 (Leiden, 1953),
pp. 13-31; and OMRO 37 (Leiden, 1956), pp. 49-67. A first edition of the short ver¬
sion was published by E. von Bergmann, Das Buch vom Durchwandeln der Ezvigkeit
(Vienna, 1877), and it was later published again, together with the stela in the Vati¬
can, by E. A. W. Budge, The Chapters of Coming Forth by Day, or the Theban Recension
of the Book of the Dead, vol. 3 (London, 1910), pp. 150-160. All the textual material,
with a translation into French and a thorough discussion, has now been published
by F. R. Herbin, L. Livre de parcourir Teternite, OLA 58 (Leuven, 1994), with a fore¬
word by Jan Assmann, who had already treated the book in LA II, cols. 54-55.

INDEX

Aba, 96
Abitz, Friedrich, 96, 97,107
Aker, and Books of the Netherworld
Book of Caverns, 86, 87
Book of the Earth, 95, 97, 98,100,102
miscellaneous scenes. 111
See also Book of Aker
Akhenaten, 28, 80,152. See also Great
Hymn of Akhenaten
Akhty, 144
Allen, Thomas George, 15,16
Altenmiiller, Hartwig, 4, 55, 97
Amduat, 26,110
content, 33-34, 36-41
illustrations, 35, 36, 38, 39, 42-54
research, 31-32
sources, 27-28, 30-31
structure and language, 32-33
Amenemope, 24
Amenmesse, 142^13
Amenophis II
and Amduat, 28, 31, 33
and Litany of Re, 136,142
and Spell of the Twelve Caves, 54, 55
Amenophis III, 16, 28, 33
Amun, 23, 24, 30
Anhai, 56
Ani, 15,17
Annihilator, 101
Anubis, 21, 87, 88, 89, 97

Apophis
and Amduat, 34, 38, 41
and Book of Caverns, 85
and Book of Gates, 60, 62, 64, 65
and Book of the Day, 117
and Book of the Dead, 17,19
and Book of the Earth, 99,100
and Book of the Night, 135
and Coffin Texts, 9,11,12
miscellaneous scenes, 110
Aqen, 63
Arinefer, 143
Arrival at the Hall of Maat, 25
Aten, 62
Atum
and Amduat, 38
and Book of Caverns, 88
and Book of Gates, 57, 59, 60
and Book of the Dead, 17,19, 21
and Book of the Earth, 99,100,102
and Litany of Re, 139
Aya, 28

Barguet, Paul, 8, 9,16
Barta, Winfried, 58, 96, 97
Basa, 30
Birch, Samuel, 15
Book of Admission, 25
Book of Aker, 96

184

INDEX

Book of Caverns, 27
content, 85-90
illustrations, 86, 89, 91-95
research, 83-84
sources, 83
structure, 84-85
Book of Coming Out by Day. See Book of
the Dead
Book of Gates, 26
content, 59-60, 62-66
illustrations, 60-61, 63, 66-77
research, 56-57
sources, 55-56
structure and language, 57-59
Book of Hours, 54
Book of Nut, 112,113-16
Book of the Day
content, 117
illustrations, 113,118-22
sources and research, 116
structure and language, 116-17
Book of the Dead
of Anhai, 56
content, 17,19, 21-22
illustrations, 14-15,18,19, 20, 21, 22
of Maiherperi, 142
research, 15-16
sources, 13-14
structure and language, 16-17
Book of the Earth, 27,109
content, 97-103
illustrations, 98,101,104-6
research, 96
sources, 95-96
structure, 96-97
Book of the Faiyum, 148
Book of the Heavenly Cow, 27,148-51
Book of the Hidden Chamber. See Amduat
Book of the Night, 112
content, 124-25,135
illustrations, 113,126-34
research,123
sources, 122-23
structure and language, 123-24
Book of the Two Ways, 8, 9,10,11-12
Book of Traversing Eternity, 151-52
Books of Breathing, 23-25
Books of the Netherworld, 26-27
miscellaneous scenes, 107-11
See also Amduat; Book of Caverns; Book
of Gates; Book of the Earth; Enigmatic
Book of the Netherworld; Spell of the
Twelve Caves
Books of the Sky, 112-13. See also Book of
Nut; Book of the Day; Book of the Night

Breasted, James Henry, 4, 8
Brugsch, Heinrich, 15,113-14,148
Bucher, Paul, 31
Budge, E. A. Wallis, 15,16, 23, 31, 57
Bull of the West, 87, 99
Burning Ones, 99
Buto, 124
Cadet, Jean Marcel, 15
Cannibal Hymn, 6
Catalogue generate (Cairo Museum), 8
Champollion, Jean-Frangois
and Book of the Dead, 15
and Books of the Netherworld, 31,56,83,96
and Books of the Sky, 113,116,123
Children of Horus, 64
Coffin Texts
content, 9,11-12
research, 8
sources, 7
structure and language, 8-9
Darnell, John C.
and Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld,
78, 79, 80
and Litany of Re, 140
and Lords of the Duat, 110, 111
de Buck, Adriaan, 8, 84
Deveria, Theodule, 15
Denon, Vivant, 23
Description de I'Egypte, 15
Development of Religion and Thought in
Ancient Egypt (Breasted), 4
Dictionary of the Egyptian Eanguage, 2
Djet, 149
Document of Breathing. See Books of
Breathing
Duat, 6,125,135. See also Books of the
Netherworld
East, 101
Egyptian Astronomical Texts (Neugebauer
and Parker), 114
Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld, 77-82
Esna, 152
Evil of face, 80
Eye, 37,139
Eye of Horus, 40
Faulkner, Raymond O., 3, 4, 8,16
Fecht, Gerhard, 149
Field of Offerings, 5, 9,11,19
Field of Reeds, 5,19,117
Fiery One, 64
Frankfort, Henri, 84,123

INDEX

Gardiner, Alan H., 8
Garnot, Jean Sainte-Fare, 2-3
Geb
and Book of Gates, 64
and Book of the Earth, 97,100,102
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 149
and Books of the Sky, 114,116
See also House of Geb
"Gottinger Totenbuchstudien" (Sethe and
Kees), 16
Goyon, Jean-Claude, 23, 24
Grapow, Hermann, 107,137
Great Cat, 139
Great City, 34
Great Hymn of Akhenaten, 62
Great Litany, 136,137,138,139,140,143
Great One on His Belly, 87
Guides to the Hereafter. See Books of the
Netherworld
Guide to the Ways of Rosetau. See Book of
the Two Ways
Hakoris, 137,140
Haremhab, 28, 55, 57
Harendotes, 30
Hare nome, 11
Hathor, 22, 99,149
Hatshepsut, 27
Hay, Robert, 148
Heh-gods, 149
Heka, 57
Hermson, E., 9
Herunefer, 13
Hierakonpolis, 124
Horiraa, 56
Hornung, Erik, 16, 31, 57, 84, 97,137,
148-49
Horrack, Philippe Jacques de, 23
Horus
and Amduat, 37, 39, 40
and Book of Caverns, 87, 88, 90
and Book of Gates, 57, 62
and Book of the Dead, 21
and Book of the Earth, 99,100,103
and Book of the Night, 125
and Litany of Re, 139
and Pyramid Texts, 6
See also Children of Horus; Eye of Horus
Horus-Mekhentienirty, 87
House of Geb, 116
Hu, 124
Ibi, 1, 2, 7,137
Imhotep, 152
Iput, 1, 2

185

Isis
and Amduat, 37, 38, 41
and Book of Caverns, 87, 99,103
and Book of Gates, 65
and Book of the Night, 125
and Books of Breathing, 23
and Pyramid Texts, 6
Iuput, 30
Jequier, Gustave, 2, 31
Judgment of the Dead
and Book of Gates, 56, 57, 62, 63
and Book of the Dead, 13,17,19
and Book of Traversing Eternity, 152
and Books of Breathing, 25
and Coffin Texts, 11
Kees, Hermann, 8,16
Kha, 17
Khaemhet, 16
Khentamentiu, 139
Khepri
and Book of Caverns, 88
and Book of Gates, 64
and Book of the Earth, 98,100,

101,102
and Litany of Re, 139
Khonsumes, 56

Komparative Untersuchungen zu vier
Unterzveltsbiichern (Barta), 58
Lacau, Pierre, 3-4, 8
Lake of Fire, 19, 37, 60, 63
Lake of Flames, 12
Lake of Life, 60
Lake of the Jackal, 5
Lake of Uraei, 60
Land of Sokar, 33, 36, 37
Lange, H. O., 114
Lanzone, Ridolfo V., 31
Last Judgment, 41
Lauer, Jean-Philippe, 2-3
Leclant, Jean, 3
Lefebure, Eugene, 31, 57, 96,123
Lepsius, Carl Richard, 8,15,16
Lesko, Leonard H., 9
Light, 38
Litany of Re, 27
content, 142-44
illustrations, 141,145^47
research,137
sources, 136-37
structure, 137-^40,142
Lord of All, 12
Lords of the Duat, 110

186

INDEX

Maat, 34, 59, 63,110,124
Maiherperi, 137,142
Maspero, Gaston, 2, 4,16, 31, 56
Maystre, Charles, 57,148
Mehen-serpent, 38, 57, 78, 79,123
Mentuemhet, 137,140
Mentuhirkhopshef, 56
Mentuhotpe, 13
Mercer, Samuel A. B., 3
Merenre 1,1, 3
Merneptah
and Amduat, 28
and Book of Caverns, 83
and Book of Gates, 56
and Book of the Dead, 13,14
and Book of the Earth, 95,100
and Book of the Night, 122
and Litany of Re, 136,139,140
and Spell of the Twelve Caves, 54
Minnakhte, 7,14

Monuments de I'Egypte: Notices descriptives
(Champollion), 96
Mound of Darkness, 100
Mourned One, 102
Mutirdis, 56,112,113
Mysterious One, 88, 97, 98
Naville, Edouard, 15,16, 31,123,137,148
Nebqed, 15
Nectanebo II, 30
Nefertari, 58,140
Negative Confession, 19, 24
Neheh, 149
Neith, 1, 2
Nephthys
and Amduat, 37, 41
and Book of Caverns, 87
and Book of Gates, 65
and Book of the Earth, 99,103
and Book of the Night, 125
and Pyramid Texts, 6
Neugebauer, Otto, 114
Nilometer, 83,123,137
Notices des hypogees (Lefebure), 96
Nu, 17
Nun
and Amduat, 37-38
and Book of Gates, 64, 65
and Book of the Earth, 98, 99,101,102
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 149,151
and Book of the Night, 125
and Litany of Re, 139,143
Nut, 112
and Book of Caverns, 84, 88
and Book of Gates, 65

and Book of the Day, 116
and Book of the Dead, 19
and Book of the Earth, 96, 98
and Book of the Night, 124,125,135
and Coffin Texts, 12
See also Book of Nut
Old One, 64
Opening of the Mouth, 6,138
Osing, Jurgen, 4
Osireion
and Book of Caverns, 83, 84
and Book of Gates, 57, 59
and Book of the Earth, 97
and Books of the Sky, 114,122
and Litany of Re, 136,140,142
miscellaneous scenes, 109
and Spell of the Twelve Caves, 54, 55
Osiris
and Amduat, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41
and Book of Caverns, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90
and Book of Gates, 58, 62, 63, 65, 66
and Book of the Dead, 14,17, 21, 22
and Book of the Earth, 97, 99,100,101,
102,103
and Book of the Night, 125
and Book of Traversing Eternity, 152
and Books of Breathing, 23, 24
and Coffin Texts, 11,12
and Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld,
78, 79, 80
and Litany of Re, 138-39,140,142,144
miscellaneous scenes, 109,110, 111
and Pyramid Texts, 6
See also Re-Osiris
Osiris-Imenrenef, 89
Osiris-Khentamentiu, 87,139
Osiris-Orion, 89
Osorkon II, 116,123
ouroboros-serpent, 78
Padineith, 96
Papyrus BM 10478, 54, 55
Papyrus Carlsberg, 114
Parker, Richard A., 114
Penwenti, 103,109
Pepy 1,1, 3
Pepy II, 1, 2
Petamenophis, 30, 56, 83, 96,109,137
Petosiris, 54
Piankoff, Alexandre
and Amduat, 31
and Book of Caverns, 84
and Book of Gates, 57
and Book of the Earth, 96, 97

INDEX

and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 148
and Books of the Sky, 116,123
and Enigmatic Book of the
Netherworld, 78
and Litany of Re, 137
and Pyramid Texts, 4
Pierret, Paul, 15,16
Place of Annihilation
and Book of Caverns, 85, 86, 87, 88, 90
and Book of Gates, 62, 63
and Book of the Earth, 99,102
and Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld,
78,79
and Litany of Re, 142
miscellaneous scenes. 111
Place of Destruction, 21
Pleyte, W. William, 15
Pococke, Richard, 137
Ptah, 19,110
Ptolemaic Book of Hours, 54
Ptolemy III, 30
Pyramid Texts
content, 5-6
research, 2-4
sources, 1
structure and language, 4-5
Ramesses I, 28, 55, 57
Ramesses II
and Amduat, 28
and Book of Gates, 55-56
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 148
and Litany of Re, 136,137,140,142
Ramesses III
and Amduat, 28
and Book of Caverns, 83
and Book of Gates, 56, 59
and Book of Nut, 113
and Book of the Earth, 95, 98
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 148
Ramesses IV
and Amduat, 30
and Book of Caverns, 83
and Book of Gates, 56
and Book of Nut, 112,113,114
and Book of the Earth, 95, 96,102,103
and Book of the Night, 112,122,123
and Litany of Re, 137,142
miscellaneous scenes, 111
Ramesses VI
and Amduat, 30, 31
and Book of Caverns, 83, 84, 85
and Book of Gates, 56, 59
and Book of the Day, 116,117
and Book of the Earth, 96, 97,102

187

and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 148
and Book of the Night, 122, 123
and Enigmatic Book of the
Netherworld, 80
and Litany of Re, 136
miscellaneous scenes, 107
Ramesses VII
and Book of Caverns, 83, 84
and Book of Gates, 56
and Book of the Earth, 96, 97
and Litany of Re, 139
miscellaneous scenes, 109
Ramesses IX
and Amduat, 30
and Book of Caverns, 83, 84
and Book of Gates, 56
and Book of the Earth, 96, 97
and Book of the Night, 122
and Litany of Re, 136,140
miscellaneous scenes, 107,109
Ramesses X, 136
Ramose, 116
Re
and Amduat, 36, 37
and Book of Caverns, 85, 86, 87, 88,
89, 90
and Book of Gates, 63, 64, 65
and Book of the Dead, 19
and Book of the Earth, 97,100,102
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 149,151
and Book of the Night, 125
and Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld,
78, 79, 80
miscellaneous scenes, 110
and Pyramid Texts, 6
and Spell of the Twelve Caves, 55
See also Litany of Re
Realm of the Dead, 25
Receuil de travaux, 2, 8
Renouf, Peter Le Page, 15
Re-Osiris, 143-44
Rosellini, Hippolito, 113
Rosetau, 11,19, 36
Roulin, Gilles, 31,123
Sadek, A. F., 31
Sakhmet, 40, 62
Salt, Henry, 148
Schack-Schackenburg, Hans, 8
Schafer, Heinrich, 107
Schott, Siegfried, 4
Schweitzer, A., 32
Second Congress of Orientalists, 15
Selket, 38
Sen, 8

188

INDEX

Senenmut, 113
Seth, 6,19, 38,125,135,139
Sethe, Kurt, 2, 3, 4,16
Sethos I
and Amduat, 28, 30, 31, 33
and Book of Caverns, 83
and Book of Gates, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59
and Book of Nut, 112,113,114,116
and Book of the Earth, 96
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 148
and Book of the Night, 112,122, 123,
124,125
and Litany of Re, 136,137,138,140,142
Sethos II, 137,142-43
Shetit, 99
Shorter, Alan W., 15
Shoshenq III, 116,123
Shu
and Amduat, 41
and Book of Nut, 114,116
and Book of the Earth, 100,101
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 149
and Coffin Texts, 11
and Pyramid Texts, 5
Sia, 57,123,124,125
Siptah, 103, 111
Sobek, 37-38
Sokar, 37, 40,139. See also Land of Sokar
solar Eye, 37, 40
Speleers, Louis, 3, 8
Spell of the Twelve Caves, 54-55
Spells of Coming Out by Day. See Book of
the Dead
Spiegel, Joachim, 4
Strieker, Bruno H., 96
Swallower of All, 34
Taharqa, 116
Tatenen
and Amduat, 38, 40
and Book of Caverns, 88, 90
and Book of the Earth, 100,102
and Litany of Re, 139
Tayt, 88
Tefnut, 101
Teti, 1, 2, 3
"Textes religieux" (Lacau), 8

Thesaurus (Brugsch), 114
Thoth
and Amduat, 40
and Book of the Dead, 17, 22
and Book of the Earth, 98
and Books of Breathing, 23, 24
and Coffin Texts, 7
Tjanefer, 56, 58
transformation spells, 9
tribunal of Osiris, 19
Tutankhamun
and Amduat, 28
and Book of the Dead, 13,14
and Book of the Heavenly Cow, 148,149
and Enigmatic Book of the Dead, 77
and Litany of Re, 136
Tuthmosis I, 27
Tuthmosis III
and Amduat, 28, 31, 33
and Book of the Dead, 13,14
and Litany of Re, 136,137,138,140
Tuthmosis IV, 28
Two Lands, 41
Twosre, 58, 83, 95
United One, 143
Unknown, 34
Useramun
and Amduat, 28, 33
and Litany of Re, 136,137,138,139
ushabti spell, 9,17
van der Leeuw, G., 4
Waters of Osiris, 34
Weary Ones, 59
Wedjebten, 1, 2
Wiedemann, Alfred, 31
Wenis, 1, 5
Wereshnefer, 30
Wernes, 34, 36
West, 101
Western One, 99
Winding Waterway, 5

Worterbuch der dgytischen Sprache, 2
Yuya, 17

Egyptology Religion/Ancient History
A main selection of The Natural Science Book Club
An alternate selection of The Readers’ Subscription

A

ncient Egyptians held a rich and complex vision of the afterlife and
l codified their beliefs in books that were to be discovered more than two

millennia later in royal tombs. Erik Hornung, the wdrld’s leading authority on
these religious texts, surveys what is known about them today.
The contents of the texts range from the collection of spells in the Book of
the Dead, which was intended to offer practical assistance on the journey to
the afterlife, to the detailed accounts of the hereafter provided in the Books of
*

the Netherworld. Hornung looks closely at these latter works, while summa¬
rizing the contents of the Book of the Dead and other widely studied exam¬
ples of the genre. For each composition, he discusses the history of its ancient
transmission and its decipherment in modern times, supplying bibliographic
information for any text editions. He also seeks to determine whether this lit¬
erature as a whole presents a monolithic conception of the afterlife. The vol¬
ume features many drawings from the books themselves — drawings that illus¬
trate the nocturnal course of the sun god through the realm of the dead.
Originally published in German and now available in a fluid English transla¬
tion, this volume offers an accessible and enlightening introduction to a cen¬
tral element of ancient Egyptian religion.

ERIK HORNUNG is Professor Emeritus of Egyptology at the University of
Basel. He is the author of History of Ancient Egypt: An Introduction and Concep¬
tions oj God in Ancient Egypt, both from Cornell. An American Egyptologist,

DAVID L ORTON translated History of Ancient Egypt: An Introduction as well
as Egypt in the Age of the Pyramids, by Guillemette Andreu, also from Cornell.
✓

He lives in Baltimore, Maryland.

Cover illustration: Re and Osiris united. From the tomb of Queen Nefertari.
Photograph by A. Brack.
Cover design by Chris Crochetiere,
B. Williams & Associates

ISBN

0-8014-8515-0

90000

Cornell Paperbacks
Cornell University Press

780801 485152

