. When considering how to improve modern day society many people gravitate toward political solutions. Others suggest that we need a sort of revolution of consciousness in which people move to a more enlightened state of being. But there is another path that could lead to social progress that is more practical than either politics or enlightenment, and this involves a fundamental shift in the Western worldview away from the materialist dogma that now sits at its core. In this video, we explore the nature of philosophical materialism and how this paradigm dictates the way we perceive reality and our place within it. We then look at the flaws of this paradigm and how relinquishing it will expand the horizon of human potential, transform our perspective on death, reshape the practice of medicine, alter our views on morality, and make life more meaningful. A worldview is the lens through which we interpret reality and our place within it. It is composed of a set of ideas and beliefs that dictate how we navigate the challenges of existence and how we relate to ourselves, other people and the world around us. Our worldview sets the bounds on what we believe is possible and it provides answers to fundamental questions such as “What does it mean to be human?”, “What is the ultimate nature of reality”, “Where did we come from?” and “What happens when we die?” And as the philosopher Bernard Kastrup writes: “One’s worldview is probably the most important aspect of one’s life. After all, our worldviews largely determine, given the circumstances of our lives, whether we are happy or depressed; whether our lives are rich in meaning or desperately vacuous; and whether there is reason for hope.&#8221; Bernardo Kastrup, Why Materialism is Baloney One of the primary elements of the Western worldview is philosophical materialism. This metaphysical theory holds that reality, at its most fundamental level, is composed of inert and lifeless particles of matter. It is from the mechanical interactions of these particles that every phenomenon in the universe – including life and consciousness itself – arises. Or as Chris Carter writes in Science and Psychic Phenomenon : “Materialism [is] the idea that everything in the universe can ultimately be explained in terms of the fundamental particles and the four forces of physics.” Chris Carter, Science and Psychic Phenomenon : The vast majority of us implicitly accept the basic tenets of materialism and the conclusions that follow from them. For example, most people believe that life and consciousness are by-products of exclusively biological processes and that when the physical body stops functioning life ends and our subjective experience stops. “Many of us absorb materialist beliefs from the culture without even being aware of it. . .Materialism suffuses the core of our being by a kind of involuntary osmosis. Like a virus, it spreads unnoticed until it’s too late and the infection has already taken a firm hold.” Bernardo Kastrup, Why Materialism is Baloney While most of us look at the world through the lens of the materialist paradigm, materialism is a deeply flawed theory. In fact, while materialism reached its peak of influence among scientists and philosophers in the mid-20 th century it has since experienced a precipitous decline. Or as Robert Koons and George Bealer write: “It is of course commonly thought that over the course of the last 60 or so years materialism achieved hegemony in academic philosophy. . . It is therefore surprising that an examination of the major philosophers active in this period reveals that a majority, or something approaching a majority, either reject materialism or had serious and specific doubts about its ultimate viability.” Robert Koons and George Bealer, The Waning of Materialism What are the flaws that make materialism an untenable account of reality? Why have more scientists and philosophers rejected the theory in favor of alternatives? Simply put, materialism cannot account for two of the most important elements of reality – namely consciousness and life itself. The attempt to account for the emergence of consciousness has proved to be such a challenge within the materialist paradigm that it is known as the hard problem of consciousness. Materialists contend that consciousness is an emergent property, or an epiphenomenon, of brain activity. Or as Kastrup explains, according to materialists: “There is supposedly nothing to consciousness but the movements and interactions of material particles inside a brain, so that consciousness is material brain processes at work.” This assertion, however, is merely a hypothesis and a weak one at that, something Carl Jung recognized nearly a century ago: “Despite the materialistic tendency to understand the psyche as a mere reflection or imprint of physical and chemical processes, there is not a single proof of this hypothesis.” Carl Jung, The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious The materialist’s hypothesis that consciousness is an emergent property of the physical brain violates our understanding of the idea of emergence in complex systems. For a property to be considered an emergent possibility of a complex system, it must be deducible from the properties of the lower-level components of the system. However, there is nothing about neurons, or any other physical components of the brain that allow us to deduce the conscious experience that supposedly emerges from their interactions. Or as Kastrup explains: “…unless one is prepared to accept magic, the emergent properties of a complex system must be deducible from the properties of the lower-level components of the system. For instance, we can deduce – and even predict – the shape of sand ripples from the properties of grains of sand and wind. We can put it all in a computer program and watch simulated sand ripples form in the computer screen that look exactly like the real thing. But when it comes to consciousness, nothing allows us to deduce the properties of subjective experience – the redness of red, the bitterness of regret, the warmth of fire – from the mass, momentum, spin, charge, or any other property of subatomic particles bouncing around in the brain. This is the hard problem of consciousness.” Bernardo Kastrup, Why Materialism is Baloney Another problem with materialism is that it cannot account for the origins of life. How can certain configurations of inert, lifeless matter give rise to living and conscious beings? What leads to the shift from dead matter, to living, breathing and thinking matter? Again, materialism fails to offer a coherent answer, or as Kastrup writes: “Nobody knows today how life could emerge from dead matter. There are dozens of theories and even more loose avenues of speculation, but no one has ever managed to re-create life from dead matter – a process called ‘abiogenesis’ – in a laboratory. Therefore, there is just no proof that life could ever have arisen from nonlife through purely mechanistic means. Yet mechanistic abiogenesis is indispensable for materialism. Without it, materialism would fall apart, for it would fail to explain that which conceived materialism in the first place: human life.” Bernardo Kastrup, Brief Peeks Beyond Due to the failures of materialism many philosophers and scientists are gravitating towards metaphysical theories that hold consciousness as a primary component of reality. Some philosophers argue that consciousness, or some form of experience, is inherent in all physical entities, a position known as panpsychism or panexperientialism. Others suggest that all of reality is a mental phenomenon, and that what we interpret as matter is a manifestation of mind. This position is known as idealism. “We are in the midst of a sea change. Receding from view is materialism, whereby physical phenomena are assumed to be primary and consciousness is regarded as secondary. Approaching our sights is a complete reversal of perspective. According to this alternative view, consciousness is primary and the physical is secondary. In other words, materialism is receding and giving way to ideas about reality in which consciousness plays a key role.” I. Baruss and J. Mossbridge, Transcendent Mind: Rethinking the Science of Consciousness While materialism is declining in influence among those who study the ultimate nature of reality, it remains a core component of the Western worldview. The metaphysical theories which grant consciousness a primary role have not yet infiltrated the cultural zeitgeist. When they do, however, the changes will be radical and re-orient human life in many important ways. Firstly, this paradigmatic shift will change our view of death. The materialist doctrine has us believe that consciousness is an emergent property of the physical brain and so when the brain stops working, our experience ends, and we cease to exist. However, if we believe that consciousness, or mind, is primary, the possibility of some form of life after death, or at least a continuation of our subjective experience, is no longer out of the realm of possibility. Reports of near-death experiences, which have been studied for decades, offer anecdotal evidence of some form of conscious experience continuing after physical death. Or as Kastrup writes: “If all reality is in consciousness, then your consciousness is not generated by your body. Therefore, there is no reason to believe that your consciousness will end when your body dies. Your body is simply the outside image of a particular configuration of consciousness that you experience when you are alive. When you die, that configuration – or state – of consciousness will change, perhaps dramatically. . .Now, would we live life differently – perhaps in a less anxious, more present and grounded manner – if we knew that death isn’t the end of consciousness? If the fear of death were no longer viable as an instrument of social control or economic gain, what would be the practical consequences for our culture, economy and society at large?” Bernardo Kastrup, Brief Peeks Beyond A second change that would accompany the abandonment of materialism relates to the innate capacities of man. Currently, due to materialism’s influence, it is assumed that man’s powers are limited by the laws of Newtonian physics. Action at a distance, which is called psychokinesis, perception without the use of sense organs, or what is called clairvoyance, or the direct communication between minds unaided by the sense organs, which is called telepathy, are viewed as impossible under the materialist paradigm. But if materialism is rejected we are not bound by the physical laws that tell us these phenomena are impossible. Instead, if consciousness is viewed as primary, these so-called paranormal phenomena can no longer be dismissed out of hand, and as Kastrup writes: “If the a priori basis against parapsychology were to disappear, so that critical resources and people could be committed to it in scales much greater than ever before, what could science discover in this field?” (Bernardo Kastrup, Brief Peeks Beyond) A third way the world would change if the materialist dogma was abandoned involves the field of medicine, which is currently dominated by the materialist paradigm. Most doctors view the body as a machine and believe that curing a disease requires interventions that fix its broken parts – be it through surgery or drugs. Many doctors are so tied to the materialist paradigm they even consider mental illnesses, such as depression or anxiety, to arise primarily from problems with the chemical composition of the brain. “Today’s healthcare systems treat us as biological robots because the materialist metaphysics defines us as such. Consequently, doctors often behave as mechanics, instead of healers.” Bernardo Kastrup, Brief Peeks Beyond If consciousness is considered fundamental to the nature of reality, rather than a mere epiphenomenon of the brain, our approach to healing would dramatically change. It would no longer be logical to focus exclusively on fixing the physical symptoms of an ailment. Instead, the psyche, or consciousness, would be recognized as a primary force in both the cause and cure of disease and healing would involve changes at the level of the psyche. This idea is already supported by phenomenon such as the nocebo and placebo effects but would be taken even more seriously if panpsychism, panexperientialism, or idealism entered the cultural zeitgeist. An abandonment of materialism, in other words, would likely give rise to a more integrative approach to medicine, or as Kastrup explains: “Integrative medicine encompasses a variety of approaches to healthcare focusing on mind-body interaction. Unlike mainstream materialist medicine, which treats a patient’s body as a biological mechanism, integrative medicine seeks to heal the whole being, including – and often starting from – one’s psychic, emotional functions. It is a more holistic approach to healing that, because of the metaphysical bias carried by our culture’s mainstream materialist worldview, has largely been neglected over the past several decades.” Bernardo Kastrup, Brief Peeks Beyond But perhaps the most profound consequence of transcending materialism would be a resurgence in meaning and a new moral weight placed upon the shoulders of man. Under the materialist doctrine, we are merely transient configurations of matter, and our subjective experience completely vanishes with the end of our physical life – a belief that easily leads to nihilism. If consciousness is fundamental, the meaning of our life changes. If our subjective experience can somehow continue beyond our physical death, then how we live in the here and now may be far more important than we realize. This possibility adds a cosmic significance to our existence and can motivate us to live in a more virtuous manner in the recognition that our actions, thoughts, and behaviors may have consequences that echo for eternity. This idea is embodied in many of the great religious traditions – for example in the idea of Karma in the Eastern religions or in the Abrahamic concept of divine judgement and the immortality of the soul. We will conclude with some words from the Nobel prize winning German physicist Max Planck. Planck was one of the originators of quantum mechanics and one of the founders of modern physics. After decades of studying the ultimate nature of reality and probing deeply into the properties of matter, he came to the conclusion that spirit, not matter lies at the foundation of reality. “As a physicist, and therefore as a man who has spent his whole life in the service of the most down-to-earth science, namely the exploration of matter, no one is going to take me for a starry-eyed dreamer. After all my exploration of the atom, then, let me tell you this: there is no matter as such. All matter arises and exists only by virtue of a force which sets the atomic particles oscillating, and holds them together in that tiniest of solar systems … we must suppose, behind this force, a conscious, intelligent spirit. This spirit is the ultimate origin of matter.” Max Planck, The Nature of Matter