The Law Of One: Book I
  THE RA MATERIAL
         By Ra,
An Humble Messenger Of
    The Law Of One
Copyright © 1984 by James Allen McCarty, Don Elkins, and Carla
Rueckert
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or used in any
forms or by any means—graphic, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying or information storage and retrieval systems—without written
permission from the copyright holder.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Ra (Spirit)
The Ra material.
1. Spirit writings. 2. Occult sciences—Miscellanea. I. McCarty, James Allen.
II. Elkins, Don. III. Rueckert, Carla. IV. Title.
BF1301.R2 1984 133.9’3 82-12967
ISBN: 0-945007-01-9
L/L Research
P.O. Box 5195
Louisville, KY 40255-0195
                     Table of Contents
Introduction                                 4
Photographs                                 52
The Law of One, Book I, Session 1          70
The Law of One, Book I, Session 2           75
The Law of One, Book I, Session 3           81
The Law of One, Book I, Session 4          87
The Law of One, Book I, Session 5          94
The Law of One, Book I, Session 6          97
The Law of One, Book I, Session 7        104
The Law of One, Book I, Session 8         110
The Law of One, Book I, Session 9          113
The Law of One, Book I, Session 10        118
The Law of One, Book I, Session 11        125
The Law of One, Book I, Session 12        132
The Law of One, Book I, Session 13        137
The Law of One, Book I, Session 14        143
The Law of One, Book I, Session 15        150
The Law of One, Book I, Session 16        157
The Law of One, Book I, Session 17        168
The Law of One, Book I, Session 18        178
The Law of One, Book I, Session 19        184
The Law of One, Book I, Session 20        191
The Law of One, Book I, Session 21       200
The Law of One, Book I, Session 22       205
The Law of One, Book I, Session 23        211
The Law of One, Book I, Session 24       217
The Law of One, Book I, Session 25        221
The Law of One, Book I, Session 26       224




                                iii
                             Introduction
Don Elkins: This book is an exact transcript from tape recordings of twenty-
six sessions of an experiment designed to communicate with an extraterrestrial
being. We started the experiment in 1962 and refined the process for nineteen
years. In 1981 the experimental results of our efforts changed profoundly in
quality and precision. This book is simply a report of the beginning of this
latter phase of our work.
Since our experimental work began, and even before we officially formed a
research group, there was considerable confusion about the nature of our
research. I would like to state that I consider my point of view to be purely
scientific. Many readers of this material have used as a basis for its
evaluation a previously assumed philosophical bias which has ranged from
what I would call objectively scientific to subjectively theological. It is not
the purpose of our research group to attempt to do anything other than
make experimental data available. Each reader will undoubtedly reach his
own unique conclusion about the meaning of this body of data.
In recent years there has been much controversy about phenomena that
were apparently incompatible with accepted methods of scientific research.
This included such things as UFOs, mental metal-bending, psychic surgery,
and many other seemingly miraculous happenings.
To prove or disprove any of these alleged phenomena is certainly not
properly the task of the casual observer. However, most of the public
opinion that has been generated with respect to these events seems to be the
product of quick and superficial investigation. After almost thirty years of
research and experimentation in the area of so-called paranormal
phenomena, I must recommend extreme caution in reaching a conclusion.
If it is possible to make money, gain notoriety, or have fun from
perpetrating a hoax, then someone usually does it. Consequently,
paranormal or psychic areas are prime targets for the trickster, and the
careful researcher usually has to observe copious amounts of “garbage” data
in order to find a possible imbedded gem of truth. This is especially true of
Philippine psychic surgery and the large area of spirit communication in
general.
It seems to me that the presently accepted scientific paradigm is less than
adequate. It is my opinion that our present natural philosophy is a very
special case of a much more general case yet to be unveiled. It is my hope
that our research is in the direction of this discovery. After assimilating
several million words of alleged extraterrestrial communication, it is also my
opinion that this book and the subsequent volumes of the Ra material

                                       4
                              Introduction

contain the most useful information that I have discovered. As a result of all
of this delving into the rather confusing subjects of UFOlogy and
parapsychology, I, of course, have formed my current opinion of how things
“really are.” This opinion may change at any time as I become aware of
future information. This book is not intended to be a treatise of my
opinion, so I will not attempt to defend its validity. The following is the
best guess I can make about what we think we are doing. Only time will tell
as to the accuracy of this guess.
Our research group uses what I prefer to call “tuned trance telepathy” to
communicate with an extraterrestrial race called Ra. We use the English
language because it is known by Ra. In fact, Ra knows more of it than I do.
Ra landed on Earth about 11,000 years ago as a sort of extraterrestrial
missionary with the objective of helping Earthman with his mental
evolution. Failing in this attempt, Ra retreated from the Earth’s surface but
continued to monitor activities closely on this planet. For this reason Ra is
highly informed about our history, languages, etc.
Probably the most difficult thing to understand about Ra is its nature. Ra is
a sixth-density social memory complex. Since Earth is near the end of the
third-density cycle of evolution, this means that Ra is three evolutionary
cycles ahead of us. In other words, Ra’s present state of evolution is millions
of years in advance of Earthman’s. It is not surprising that Ra had difficulty
communicating with Earthman 11,000 years ago. The same problem still
exists in our present “enlightened” time.
At this writing we have completed over 100 sessions of experimental
communications with Ra. This approximate 300,000 words of information
has suggested to me a possibly more adequate scientific paradigm. Only
time and future will serve to validate and expand this paradigm.
UFOlogy is a large subject. A reasonable amount of background material
would swell this introduction to book length. Therefore, the remainder of
this introduction does not attempt to cover every portion of this diverse and
growing field of study but is instead an accounting of some of the pertinent
parts of our research from our beginnings to the present day and the Ra
contact. I’ve asked my long-time research associate, Carla L. Rueckert, to
tell our story.
Carla L. Rueckert: I first met Don Elkins in 1962. To me he was a
fascinating character, an unusual combination of a college professor and
psychic researcher. He had done well over 200 hypnotic age regressions,
probing past the birth experience and investigating the possibility that
reincarnation might not be just possible but the way things really are.

                                    5
                              Introduction

In 1962 I joined an experiment that Don had created in order to start to test
a hypothesis which he had developed with the help of Harold Price, an
engineer for Ford Motor Company. Price had acquainted Don with some
information which Don found quite interesting. Its source was allegedly
extraterrestrial. Its content was largely metaphysical and seemed to be in line
with all that Don had learned up to that point. Within this material
instructions were given for creating the means whereby to generate further
material from this same source without the necessity of actual physical
contact with extraterrestrials.
Don’s hypothesis was that this phenomenon might be reproducible; so, he
invited a dozen of his engineering students to join in an experiment with
the objective of achieving some sort of telepathic contact with a source
similar to that of the Detroit group’s. I was the thirteenth member, having
become interested in the project through a friend of mine. In those early
days of contact attempts, with Don attempting strenuously to keep the
situation controlled, months went by with what seemed to be remarkable
but puzzling results. As we sat “meditating,” according to the instructions,
everyone in the group except me began to make strange noises with their
mouths. For my part, my main difficulty during those first six months was
keeping a straight face and not laughing as the sessions gradually became a
raucous symphony of guttural clicks, slurps, and tongue flops.
The nature of the experiment changed drastically when the group was
visited by a contactee from Detroit. The contactee sat down with the group
and almost immediately was contacted apparently by telepathic impression
saying: “Why don’t you speak the thoughts that are on your minds? We are
attempting to use you as instruments of communication, but you are all
blocked through fear that you will not be speaking the proper words.”
Through this instrument, Walter Rogers of Detroit, Michigan, the group
was instructed to refrain from analysis, to speak the thoughts and to analyze
the communication only after it had been completed.
After that night a month had not gone by before half the group had begun
to produce information. By the time a year had passed, all in the group
except me were able to receive transmissions. The speech was slow and
difficult at first because each individual wanted a precise impression of each
and every word, and, in many cases, wanted to be completely controlled for
fear of making an error in transmission. Nevertheless, this was an exciting
time for the original group of students who began this strange experiment.
In January of 1970 I left my position as school librarian of a thirteen-grade
private school here in Louisville and went to work for Don full time. By this
time he was convinced that the great mystery of being could best be

                                    6
                              Introduction

investigated by research into techniques for contacting extraterrestrial
intelligences and was determined to intensify his efforts in this area.
During this period, Don worked on many peripheral areas of UFO
research, always trying to “put the puzzle pieces together.” One of the great
puzzle pieces for us was the question of how UFOs could materialize and
dematerialize. The phenomenon seemed to posit a physics which we had
not yet grasped and a being capable of using this physics. Don had gone to
many seances by himself before I joined him in his research and had very
systematically crossed each name off his list. He was looking for a
materialization manifestation, not one he could prove to anyone else, but
one which he, himself, could believe. It was his feeling that the
materializations which seances manifest were perhaps of the same or similar
nature as the materializations of UFOs. Therefore, his reasoning went,
viewing personally the mechanism of a materialization and a
dematerialization in a seance would enable him to hypothesize more
accurately concerning UFOs.
In 1971, after I had been on several fruitless materialization medium searches
with Don, we went to a seance held by the Reverend James Tingley of
Toledo, a minister of the Spiritualist church.
We went to see Reverend Tingley’s demonstrations four times. Before the
first time, Don had casually examined Reverend Tingley’s modest meeting
place inside and out. It was built of concrete blocks, like a garage. There
were no gadgets either inside or outside the building. I did not know that
Don was doing this. I merely sat and waited for the demonstration to begin.
This last point is an important one when talking about psychic research of
any kind. Don has always said that one of my assets as a research associate is
my great gullibility. Almost anyone can play a joke on me because I do not
catch on quickly. I have a way of taking things as they come and accepting
them at face value and only afterwards analyzing what has occurred. This
gullibility is a vital factor in obtaining good results in paranormal research.
A desire for proof will inevitably lead to null results and voided
experiments. An open mind, one willing to be gullible, leads its possessor to
a kind of subjective and personal certainty which does not equal proof as it
cannot be systematically reproduced in others. However, this subjective
knowing is a central part of the spiritual evolution to which Ra speaks so
compellingly in this volume and which we have researched for many years
now.
The seance began, as do all the seances I have attended, with the repetition
of the Lord’s Prayer and the singing of hymns such as “Rock of Ages” and
“I Walked in the Garden.” There were approximately twenty-six people in
                                    7
                               Introduction

this bare room, sitting on straight chairs in an oval circle. Reverend Tingley
had retired behind a simple curtain and was also seated on a folding chair.
Of the occurrences of the first seance, perhaps the most interesting to me
was the appearance of a rather solid ghost known as “Sister.” She wished to
speak to me and to thank me for helping Don. Since I had never had a close
friend that was a nun, I was quite puzzled. It was not until much later,
when Don was flying us home, that he jogged my memory, and I realized
that his mother, who had died before I met her, was known in the family as
“Sister.”
Both in that seance, and in the following seance, when Don and I were
called up, we could see the ghost-like figures of the materialized spirits quite
clearly. I, with impaired night vision, could still make out features, but Don
could see even the strands of hair on each entity.
During the second seance an especially inspiring “Master” appeared
suddenly and the room grew very cold. He gave us an inspirational message
and then told us that he would touch us so that we would know that he was
real. He did so, with enough force to bruise my arm. Then he told us that
he would walk through us so that we would know that he was not of this
density. This he did, and it is certainly an interesting sensation to watch this
occur. Lifting his arms, he blessed all those in the room, walked back
through us, and pooled down in a small pool on the floor and was gone.
In 1974 Don decided that it was time for me to become a more serious
student of the art of channeling. He argued that twelve years of sitting and
listening to inspirational messages were enough, and that it was time for me
to take some responsibility for those “cosmic sermonettes,” as Brad Steiger
has called them, that I so enjoyed. We began a series of daily meetings
designed to work intensively on my mental tuning. Many of those who
were coming to our meditations on Sunday nights heard about the daily
meetings and also came, and within three months we generated about a
dozen new telepathic receivers.
During the process of these intensive meditations we instituted our long-
standing habit of keeping the tape recorder going whenever we started a
session. Using some of the large body of material that our own group had
collected, I put together an unpublished manuscript, Voices of the Gods,
which systematically offered the extraterrestrial viewpoint as recorded by
our group meetings. In 1976, when Don and I began to write Secrets of the
UFO, (published by a private printing and available by mail) this
unpublished manuscript was of great help.
During this period one other thing occurred that was synchronistic. Don
and I, who had officially gone into partnership as L/L Research in 1970, had
                                     8
                              Introduction

written an unpublished book titled The Crucifixion of Esmeralda Sweetwater
in 1968.
In 1974, Andrija Puharich published a book with Doubleday titled URI.
The book is the narrative of Dr. Puharich’s investigation of Uri Geller and
their unexpected communication with extraterrestrial intelligences. The
form of contact was quite novel in that first some object like an ashtray
would levitate, signaling Dr. Puharich to load his cassette tape recorder. The
recorder’s buttons would then be depressed by some invisible force and the
machine would record. On playback, a message from an extraterrestrial
source would be present. Don was impressed by the large number of
correlations between these messages and our own research.
The book is fascinating in its own right but it was especially fascinating to
us because of the incredible number of distinct and compelling similarities
between the characters in the real-life journal of Dr. Puharich’s work with
Uri and the supposedly fictional characters in our book. We went to New
York to meet Andrija after phoning him, sharing our long-standing research
with him and comparing notes. As our genial host came out onto his front
verandah to welcome us, I stopped, amazed, to look at the house. Even the
house in which he lived in the country north of New York City was a dead
ringer for the house his fictional counterpart had owned in our book. The
identity was so close that I could not help but ask, “Andrija, what happened
to your peonies? When I wrote about your house I saw your driveway
circled with peony bushes.” Puharich laughed, “Oh, those. I had those cut
down three years ago.”
In 1976 we determined to attempt an introduction to the whole spectrum of
paranormal phenomena which are involved in the so-called UFO contactee
phenomenon. This phenomenon is not a simple one. Rather, it demands a
fairly comprehensive understanding and awareness of several different fields
of inquiry. Since The Ra Material is a direct outgrowth of our continuous
research with “alleged” extraterrestrial entities, it seems appropriate here to
review some of the concepts put forward in that book in order that the
reader may have the proper introduction to the “mindset,” which is most
helpful for an understanding of this work.
The first thing to say about the UFO phenomenon is that it is
extraordinarily strange. The serious researcher, as he reads more and more
and does more and more field research, finds himself less and less able to
talk about the UFO phenomenon in a sensible and “down to Earth” way.
Well over half the people in the United States have said in nationwide polls
that they believe that UFOs are real, and television series and motion
pictures reflect the widespread interest in this subject. Yet, there are few

                                    9
                              Introduction

researchers who would pretend to be able to understand the phenomenon
completely. Dr. J. Allen Hynek has called this quality of the research the
“high strangeness” factor and has linked the amount of high strangeness
with the probable validity of the case.
Some of the people who see UFOs have the experience of being unable to
account for a period of time after the encounter. The UFO is seen and then
the witness continues on with his or her daily routine. At some point, it is
noticed that a certain amount of time has been lost that cannot be
explained. Very often these same people report a type of eye irritation, or
conjunctivitis, and sometimes skin problems. In extreme cases, a person
who has lost time and seen a UFO will develop a change of personality and
find it necessary to contact the aid of a psychologist or a psychiatrist for
counseling. Dr. R. Leo Sprinkle, professor of psychology at the University
of Wyoming, has been conducting yearly meetings of people who have
experienced this type and other types of “Close Encounters.”
It was in psychiatric therapy that one of the more famous of the UFO
contact cases, that of Betty and Barney Hill, was researched. The Hills had
seen a UFO and had lost some time but managed to reduce the significance
of these events in their minds enough to get on with their daily lives.
However both of them, over a period of months, began experiencing
nightmares and attacks of anxiety.
The psychiatrist to whom they went for help was one who often used
regressive hypnosis for therapeutic work. He worked with each of the
couple separately and found, to his amazement, that, when asked to go back
to the source of their distress, both Mr. and Mrs. Hill related the story of
being taken on board a UFO while on a drive, medically examined, and
returned to their car.
Don and I have, through the years, investigated quite a few interesting
cases; but, perhaps a description of one will suffice to show some of the
more outstanding strangenesses which are quite commonly associated with
what Dr. Hynek calls “Close Encounters of the Third Kind.” In January
1977, merely eighteen or so hours after our witness’s UFO experience, we
were called by a friend of ours, hypnotist Lawrence Allison. Lawrence had
been contacted by the witness’s mother, who was extraordinarily concerned
about her boy. We made an appointment with the witness, a nineteen-year-
old high school graduate employed as a truck driver.
He had seen a craft about forty feet long and ten feet tall, which was the
color of the setting sun, at very low altitude, approximately 100 to 150 feet.
The craft was so bright that it hurt his eyes, yet he could not remove his
gaze from it. He experienced a good deal of fear and lost all sense of actually
                                    10
                               Introduction

driving his car. When he was directly underneath the UFO it suddenly sped
away and disappeared. When the boy arrived home, his mother was alarmed
because his eyes were entirely bloodshot. He was able to pinpoint his time
loss since he had left precisely when a television program ended and since he
noticed the time of his arrival home. He had lost thirty-eight minutes of his
life.
The young man wished to try regressive hypnosis to “find” his lost time.
We agreed; and, after a fairly lengthy hypnotic induction, the proper state
of concentration was achieved and the witness was moved back to the point
at which he was directly underneath the UFO. Suddenly he was inside the
ship in a circular room which seemed at least twice as high as the entire ship
had seemed from the outside. He saw three objects, none of which looked
human. One was black; one was red; and one was white. All looked like
some sort of machine. Each entity seemed to have a personality, although
none spoke to the boy, and he endured a kind of physical examination.
After the examination was finished the machines merged into one and then
disappeared. The ship bounced and rocked briefly, and then the witness was
back in his car.
If you are interested in reading a full account of this case, it was published
in the Apro Bulletin, in Flying Saucer Review, in the International UFO
Reporter, and in the Mufon UFO News.
One of the most familiar aspects of close encounters is the experience that
our witness had of seemingly understanding what aliens were thinking and
feeling without any speech having taken place. Telepathic communication
has long been the subject of much experimentation and, although there is
much interesting research, there has never been a definitive study proving
good telepathic communication. Consequently, the field of research into
telepathy is still definitely a fringe area of psychic research. However,
anyone who has ever known that the phone was going to ring, or has
experienced the knowledge of what someone was going to say before it was
said, has experienced at least a mild example of telepathy. Don states that
telepathic experiments between himself and Uri Geller have been totally
successful. However, since they were deliberately not performed under
rigorous scientific control, they could not be included in any orthodox
report. It is, in fact, our opinion that the rigorous controls have a
dampening effect on the outcome of any experiment of this type.
L/L Research, which, since 1980, has been a subsidiary of the Rock Creek
Research and Development Labs, to this day holds weekly meetings open to
anyone who has read our books. We still tend to insert the word “alleged”
before the words “telepathic communications from extraterrestrials” because

                                     11
                               Introduction

we know full well that there is no way of proving this basic concept.
However, the phenomenon certainly exists—millions of words in our own
files and many millions of words in other groups’ files attest to this fact.
Regardless of the more than occasional frustrations involved in paranormal
research, the serious researcher of the UFO phenomenon needs to be
persistent in his investigation of related phenomena, such as mental metal-
bending. The physics which Ra discusses, having to do with the true nature
of reality, posits the possibility of action at a distance as a function of mind,
specifically the will. Uri Geller has been tested in several places around the
world, including the Stanford Research Laboratories, and an impressive list
of publications concerning the results of those tests exists, most notably The
Geller Papers and, as an offshoot of this metal-bending phenomenon, The
Iceland Papers.
One example which shows the close connection between UFOs and mental
metal-bending happened to us in July of 1977, after our book, Secrets of the
UFO, was published. We had been interviewed on a local program and a
woman in a nearby town had heard the broadcast and was very interested in
what we had to say since her son, a normal fourteen-year-old boy, had had a
UFO encounter. He had been awakened by a whistling sound, went to the
door, and saw a light so bright that it temporarily blinded him. Again, as is
often the case, it was the same night that people nearby also saw lights in
the sky. The woman wrote us a letter, and Don immediately called and
asked her permission to speak to her son. After questioning the young man
to Don’s satisfaction, Don asked him to take a piece of silverware and tell it
to bend without touching it in any firm or forceful way. The fourteen-year-
old picked up a fork, did as Don suggested, and the fork immediately bent
nearly double.
The boy was so startled that he would not come back to the phone, and his
mother was unable to convince him that there was any value in going
further with the experiments. She had enough foresight to realize that in the
small town in which he lived any publicity that might come to him on the
subject of metal-bending would be to his detriment, since the people of his
small town would react in a most predictable way.
Nevertheless, the link is there quite plainly. John Taylor, professor of
mathematics at King's College, London, offered his book, Superminds, to
make his careful experimentations on metal-bending available to the world.
Taylor used only children, about fifty of them, and for a great portion of his
experiment he used metal and plastic objects sealed in glass cylinders which
had been closed by a glass blower, so that the children could not actually
touch the objects without breaking the glass.

                                     12
                               Introduction

Under this controlled circumstance the children were still able to bend and
break multitudinous objects. As you read The Ra Material you will begin to
discover why it is mostly children that are able to do these things, and what
the ability to do this has to do with the rest of the UFO message.
Since I am not a scientist, at this point I will turn the narrative back to
Don, whose background is more suited to this discussion.
Don: A persistent question when considering psychic demonstrations is:
how does the paranormal event happen? The answer may well lie in the area
of occult theory, which is concerned with the existence of various “planes.”
After death an individual finds himself at one of these levels of existence
spoken of in connection with occult philosophy, the level of being
dependent on the spiritual nature or development of the person at the time
of his death. The cliché that covers this theory is a heavenly “birds of a
feather flock together.” When a ghost materializes into our reality, it is from
one of these levels that he usually comes for his Earthly visit. In general, it is
theorized that a planet is a sort of spiritual distillery, with reincarnation
taking place into the physical world until the individual is sufficiently
developed in the spiritual sense that he can reach the higher planes of
existence, and is no longer in need of this planet’s developmental lessons.
Most of this theory was developed as a result of reported contact and
communication with the inhabitants of these supposedly separate realities. I
have come to believe that these levels interpenetrate with our physical space
and mutually coexist, though with very little awareness of each other. A
simple analogy, to which I’ve referred before, is to consider the actors in two
different TV shows, both receivable on the same set, but each show being
exclusive of the other. This seems to be what we experience in our daily
lives: one channel or density of existence, being totally unaware of the
myriad entities occupying other frequencies of our physical space. The
point of all this is that our reality is not ultimate or singular; it is, in fact,
our reality only at the present.
Many of the UFO reports display ample evidence that the object sighted
has its origin in one of these other realities or densities, just as do the
materialized ghosts. I would like to emphasize that this does not in any way
imply their unreality; rather, it displaces the UFOs’ reality from ours. I’m
saying the equivalent of: Channel 4 on the TV is equivalent to but displaced
from Channel 3 on the same TV.
If you were told to build a scale model of any atom using something the size
of a pea for the nucleus, it would be necessary to have an area the size of a
football stadium to contain even the innermost orbital electrons. If the pea

                                     13
                               Introduction

were placed at the center of the fifty-yard line, a small cotton ball on the
uppermost seat in the stands could represent an electron of the atom. There
is very little actual matter in physical matter. When you look at the stars in
the night sky, you would probably see something quite similar to what you
would see if you could stand on the nucleus of any atom of “solid” material
and look outward toward our environment. To demonstrate an electron to
you, a physicist will probably show you a curved trace of one on a
photographic plate. What he probably does not tell you is that this is
secondhand evidence. The electron itself has never been seen; only its effect
on a dense medium can be recorded. It is possible, of course, to make
accurate mathematical calculations about what we call an electron. For such
work we must know some data on magnetic field strength, electron charge,
and velocity. But since a magnetic field is caused by moving charges, which
in turn are empirically observed phenomena, we find that the entire
mathematical camouflage obscures the fact that all we really know is that
charged particles have effects on each other. We still don’t know what
charged particles are, or why they create an action-at-a-distance effect.
Senior scientists would be the first to agree that there is no such thing as an
absolute scientific explanation of anything. Science is, rather, a method or
tool of prediction, relating one or more observations to each other. In
physics, this is usually done through the language of mathematics. Our
scientific learning is a learning by observation and analysis of this
observation. In the sense of penetrating the fundamental essences of things,
we really do not understand anything at all.
A magnetic field is nothing but a mathematical method of expressing the
relative motion between electrical fields. Electrical fields are complex
mathematical interpretations of a totally empirical observation stated as
Coulomb’s Law. In other words, our forest of scientific knowledge and
explanations is made up of trees about which we understand nothing except
their effect, their existence.
To a person unfamiliar with the inner workings of modern science, it may
seem that modern man has his environment nicely under control and totally
figured out. Nothing could be further from the truth. The leaders of science
who are researching the frontiers of modern theory argue among themselves
continually. As soon as a theory begins to receive wide acceptance as being a
valid representation of physical laws, someone finds a discrepancy, and the
theory has to be either modified or abandoned entirely. Perhaps the most
well-known example of this is Newton’s “F=MA.” This attained the status
of a physical law before being found to be in error. It is not that this
equation has not proven extremely useful: we have used it to design
everything from a moon rocket to the television picture tube; but its
                                    14
                               Introduction

accuracy fails when applied to atomic particle accelerators like the cyclotron.
To make accurate predictions of particle trajectories it is necessary to make
the relativistic correction formulated by Einstein. It is interesting to note
that this correction is based on the fact that the speed of light is totally
independent of the speed of its source.
If Newton had penetrated more deeply into the laws of motion he might
have made this relativistic correction himself, and then stated that the
velocity correction would always be of no consequence, since the velocity of
light was so much greater than any speed attainable by man. This was very
true in Newton’s day, but is definitely not the case now. We still tend to
think of the velocity of light as a fantastic and unattainable speed, but with
the advent of space flight, a new order of velocities has arrived. We have to
change our thinking from our normal terrestrial concepts of velocities.
Instead of thinking of the speed of light in terms of miles per second, think
of it in terms of Earth diameters per second. The almost unimaginable
186,000 miles per second becomes an entirely thinkable twenty-three Earth
diameters per second; or, we could think of the speed of light in terms of
our solar systems’ diameter and say that light would speed at about two
diameters per day.
Einstein’s assertion that everything is relative is so apt that it has become a
cliché of our culture. Let us continue being relativistic in considering the
size of natural phenomena by considering the size of our galaxy. If you look
up at the sky on a clear night, nearly all of the visible stars are in our own
galaxy. Each of these stars is a sun like our own. A calculation of the ratio of
the number of suns in our galaxy to the number of people on planet Earth
discovers that there are sixty suns for each living person on Earth today. It
takes light over four years to get from Earth to even the nearest of these
stars. To reach the most distant star in our own galaxy would take 100,000
light years.
These calculations are made using the assumption that light has a speed.
This may be an erroneous assumption in the face of new theory, but its
apparent speed is a useful measuring tool, so we use it anyway.
So we have a creation in which we find ourselves which is so big that at a
speed of twenty-three Earth diameters a second we must travel 100,000
years to cross our immediate backyard. That is a big backyard, and it would
seem ample for even the most ambitious of celestial architects, but in truth
this entire galaxy of over 200 billion stars is just one grain of sand on a very
big beach. There are uncounted trillions of galaxies like ours, each with its
own billions of stars, spread throughout what seems to be infinite space.


                                     15
                              Introduction

When you think of the mind-boggling expanse of our creation and the
infantile state of our knowledge in relation to it, you begin to see the
necessity for considering the strong probability that our present scientific
approach to investigating these expanses is as primitive as the dugout canoe.
The most perplexing problem of science has always been finding a
satisfactory explanation of what is called action at a distance. In other
words, everyone knows that if you drop something it will fall, but no one
knows precisely why. Many people know that electric charges push or pull
on each other even if separated in a vacuum, but again no one knows why.
Although the phenomena are quite different, the equations which describe
the force of interaction are quite similar:
                                2
    For gravitation: F=Gmm'r
    For electrostatic interaction: F=Kqq'r2
The attractive force between our planet and our sun is described by the
gravitational equation. The attractive force between orbiting electrons and the
atomic nucleus is described by the electrostatic interaction equation. Now
each of these equations was determined experimentally. They are not
apparently related in any way, and yet they both describe a situation in which
attractive force falls off with the square of the distance of separation.
A mathematical representation of an action at a distance effect is called a
field, such as a gravitational or electric field. It was Albert Einstein’s
foremost hope to find a single relation which would express the effect of
both electric and gravitational phenomena; in fact, a theory which would
unify the whole of physics, a unified field theory. Einstein believed that this
was a creation of total order and that all physical phenomena were evolved
from a single source.
This unified field theory, describing matter as pure field, has been
accomplished now. It seems that the entire situation was analogous to the
solution of a ponderously complex Chinese puzzle. If you can find that the
right key turns among so many wrong ones, the puzzle easily falls apart.
Dewey B. Larson found the solution to this problem, and the puzzle not
only fell apart, but revealed an elegantly adequate unified field theory rich
in practical results; and, like a good Chinese puzzle, the solution was not
complex, just unexpected. Instead of assuming five dimensions, Larson
assumed six, and properly labeled them as the three dimensions of space and
the three dimensions of time. He assumed that there is a three-dimensional
coordinate time analogous to our observed three-dimensional space.
The result of this approach is that one can now calculate from the basic
postulate of Larson’s theory any physical value within our physical universe,
                                    16
                              Introduction

from sub-atomic to stellar. This long-sought-after unified field theory is
different because we are accustomed to thinking of time as one-
dimensional, as a stream moving in one direction. Yet once you get the
hang of it, coordinate time is mathematically a more comfortable concept
with which to deal. Professor Frank Meyer of the Department of Physics at
the University of Wisconsin presently distributes a quarterly newsletter to
scientists interested in Larson’s new theory which explores perplexing
questions in physical theory using Larson’s approach. I was interested in
testing Larson’s theory and made extensive calculations using his postulate.
I became convinced that his theory is indeed a workable unified field
theory.
I had been pondering several interesting statements communicated through
contactees by the alleged UFO source prior to discovering Larson’s work in
the early sixties. Although the people who had received these
communications knew nothing of the problems of modern physics, they
were getting information which apparently was quite central to physical
theory: first, they suggested that the problem with our science was that it
did not recognize enough dimensions. Second, they stated that light does
not move; light is. Larson’s theory posits six dimensions instead of the
customary four, and finds the pure field, which Einstein believed would
represent matter, to move outward from all points in space at unit velocity,
or the velocity of light. Photons are created due to a vibratory displacement
in space-time, the fabric of the field. Furthermore, the contactees were
saying that consciousness creates vibration, this vibration being light. The
vibratory displacements of space-time in Larson’s theory are the first
physical manifestation, which is the photon or light. According to the UFO
contactees, the UFOs lower their vibrations in order to enter our skies. The
entire physical universe postulated by Larson is dependent on the rate of
vibration and quantized rotations of the pure field of space-time.
The contactees were suggesting that time was not what we think it is.
Larson suggests the same thing. The UFOs were said to move in time as we
move in space. This would be entirely normal in Larson’s time-space
portion of the universe.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, the contactees were receiving the
message that the creation is simple, all one thing. Larson’s theory is a
mathematical statement of this unity.
For more information about Larsonian physics, contact the International
Society of Unified Science, a group of scientists and philosophers currently
promoting Larson’s theory. Their address is: International Society of


                                   17
                               Introduction

Unified Science, Frank H. Meyer, President, 1103 15th Ave., S.E.,
Minneapolis, MN 55414.
What physicists have never before considered worth investigating is now
increasing at a very rapid rate. Action at a distance, apparently as a result of
some type of mental activity, seems repeatedly the observed effect. When
Uri Geller performs on TV, mentally bending metal and fixing clocks, there
are often many kids who try to duplicate Uri’s “tricks.” Sometimes the kids
succeed. The number of children that can cause bends and breaks in metal
and other materials just by wanting the break or bend to occur is increasing
daily. As previously mentioned, John Taylor, professor of mathematics at
King's College, reports in his excellent book, Superminds, on the extensive
tests run in England on several of these gifted children. If the Gellerizing
children continue to increase in numbers and ability, the 1980s will see such
fantasies of TV as “My Favorite Martian,” “I Dream of Jeannie,” and
“Bewitched” becoming a part of reality.
With controlled, repeatable experiments like those conducted by Taylor and
by the Stanford Research Institute in the United States, we begin to have
good solid data available for study. Gradually we are moving into a position
from which we can begin to create a science of “magic,” for that which has
been called magic through the ages is now being performed at an ever-
increasing rate, primarily by children. In the future, we may even find this
“magic” added to the curriculum of the sciences at universities. In point of
fact, the present disciplines of chemistry, physics, etc., are still basically
“magic” to us, since we are still in the position of having no ultimate
explanation of causality.
Carla: One of the concepts most central to the system of study which comes
out of research into the contactee messages offered by alleged UFO contact
is the concept of the immortality of our individual consciousness. There is a
long mystical tradition extending back far beyond Biblical times, which
posits a type of immortal soul. St. Paul in his Epistles has distinguished
between the human body and the spiritual body. Long before St. Paul’s
century, Egyptian priests had the concept of the ka and posited that this ka,
or spiritual personality, existed after death and was the true repository of the
essence of consciousness of the person who had lived the life. Egyptians, of
course, made very elaborate arrangements for life after death.
If life after death is posited as a probability, one may also posit life before
birth. Any mother who has more than one child will testify to the
undoubted fact that each child comes into his life or incarnation already
equipped with a personality which cannot be explained by environment or
heredity. After all the factors of both have been accounted for, there remains

                                    18
                               Introduction

a unique personality with which the child seems to have been born. Each
child has certain fears which are not explainable in terms of the fears of the
parents. A child, for instance, may be terrified of a thunderstorm. The rest
of the family may be perfectly comfortable during such a storm. Another
child may be extraordinarily gifted at the playing of an instrument when
neither parent nor any relative as far back as the parents can remember had
musical ability.
This brings us back to the serious consideration of reincarnation. According
to the alleged UFO contact messages, reincarnation is one of the most
important concepts to be grasped, for through it the universe functions in
order to advance the evolution of mankind. This evolution is seen to be not
only physical but also metaphysical, not only of the body but also of the
spirit, and incarnations are seen in this system of philosophy to be
opportunities for an individual to continue his evolution through numerous
and varied experiences.
Although perhaps two-thirds of the world’s population embraces, or is
familiar with a religious system which posits reincarnation, those of us of
the Judeo-Christian culture are not as familiar with this concept.
Nevertheless, Don’s early investigations seemed to indicate that
reincarnation was a probability and that incarnations contained situations,
relationships, and lessons which were far more easily understood in the light
of knowledge of previous incarnations.
One succinct example of this relationship, which some are fond of calling
karma, is that of a young boy (who requests that his name not be used) who
in this life had experienced such intense allergies to all living things that he
could not cut the grass, smell the flowers, or, during the blooming season,
spend much time at all outside. Under hypnotic regression he experienced
in detail a long life in England. He had been a solitary man whose nature
was such as to avoid contact with any human being. He had inherited a
fairly large estate and he spent his life upon it. His one pleasure was the very
extensive garden that he maintained. In it he had his gardeners plant all
manner of flowers, fruits, and vegetables.
After the life had been discussed, and while the lad was still in trance,
hypnotist Lawrence Allison asked the boy, as he often did, to contact what
is loosely referred to as his Higher Self. He had the boy ask his Higher Self
if the lesson of putting people first and other things second had been
learned. The Higher Self said that indeed the lesson had been learned. The
hypnotist then had the boy ask the Higher Self if this allergy could be
healed, since the lesson had been learned and the allergy was no longer
necessary. The Higher Self agreed. The hypnotist then carefully brought the

                                    19
                              Introduction

boy out of the hypnotic state and walked over to his piano on which was
placed a magnolia. As magnolia blossoms will do, it had dropped its pollen
on the polished surface of the piano, and the hypnotist scraped the pollen
onto his hand, took it over to the boy, and deliberately blew the pollen
directly at the boy’s nose. “How could you do that to me!” exclaimed the
boy. “You know how allergic I am.” “Oh, really?” asked the hypnotist. “I
don’t hear you sneezing.” The boy remained cured of his allergy.
When we attempt to consider our relationship with the universe, we begin
to see that there is a great deal more in heaven and earth than has been
dreamt of in most philosophies. It is an unbelievably gigantic universe, and
if we have a true relationship to it we must, ourselves, be more than, or
other than, our daily lives seem to encompass. In The Ra Material a good
deal of information is discussed concerning our true relationship with the
universe, but it is good to realize that we do have a long tradition of work
upon what may perhaps most simply be called the magical personality.
Magic is, of course, a much misused term and is mostly understood as being
the art of prestidigitation, or illusion. When one sees a magician, one
accepts the fact that one is seeing very skillfully performed illusions.
However, there is a study of the so-called magical personality which suggests
that there is a thread which runs through our daily lives which we can grasp;
and, using that thread, remove ourselves from time to time into a
framework of reference points in which we see reality as being that of the
spiritual body, that personality which exists from incarnation to incarnation
and indeed “since before the world was.” By working upon this magical
personality, by interiorizing experience, by accepting responsibility for all
that occurs, by carefully analyzing our reactions to all that occurs, and by
eventually coming to balance our reactions to all that occurs so that our
actions in our environment are generated within the self and are no longer
simple reactions to outward stimulus, we strengthen the so-called magical
personality until we are able to have some small claim to “the art of causing
changes in consciousness at will.” This is the classic definition of magic.
Each time that a person sustains an unfortunate situation and reacts to it by
not giving anger for anger or sadness for sadness but instead offering
compassion and comfort where none was expected, we strengthen that
thread of inner strength within us and we become more and more
associated with a life that is closely related to the organic evolution of the
universe.
It is some sense of the wholeness or organic nature of the universe which
best informs the student of the UFOs’ purposes in being here. They have
been here, by many accounts, for thousands of years; at least UFOs have

                                   20
                              Introduction

been mentioned, along with many other strange sights, in the annals of all
early histories including the Bible.
Modern-day interest in UFOs can probably be fairly accurately dated from
Kenneth Arnold’s historic sighting over Mt. Rainier in Washington.
Another early and historic sighting, also by an extremely reliable witness, is
coincidentally connected with Don Elkins and so I would choose the
Mantell case of January 7, 1948, instead of the Kenneth Arnold case of June
24, 1947, for discussion.
Thomas Mantell had trained as a pilot and had flown missions in Africa,
Europe, and, most notably, D-Day. In 1947 he was out of the Air Corps
and had started the Elkins-Mantell Flying School on Bowman Field in
Louisville, Kentucky. In 1947 Don Elkins was a youthful student in this
school.
At about two o’clock in the afternoon on January 7, 1948, the Kentucky
State Police called Fort Knox and reported to the MPs there that they had
sighted a circular flying object moving rather quickly in their area. The MPs
called the commanding officer at Godman Field at Fort Knox and through
due process the flight service checked with Wright Field in Ohio to see if
there were any experimental aircraft which could explain the sighting.
Wright Field had none flying.
Meanwhile, the tower at Godman Field, Fort Knox, had already sighted this
disc-shaped object, both visually and on radar, and had made a report
which was relayed quickly to the commanding officer.
As it happened, four F-51s were in the area en route from Marietta, Georgia,
near Atlanta, to Louisville, Kentucky. Since they were already airborne the
commanding officer at Godman Field decided to contact the lead pilot and
request that he investigate the UFO. The lead pilot was Captain Thomas
Mantell.
Mantell was given a radar vector from Godman tower and moved towards
the UFO. He sighted the object and stated that it was traveling slower than
he was and that he would close to take a look. Then Mantell informed the
tower that the object was now above him, that it appeared to be metallic,
and that it was tremendous in size.
None of the F-51s, including Mantell’s, was equipped with oxygen. The
other pilots leveled off at 15,000 feet. Mantell kept climbing. That was the
last transmission from Captain Mantell. Minutes later there was a telephone
call stating that a plane had crashed. It was Captain Mantell’s. His body lay
near the wreckage.

                                    21
                               Introduction

I could spend the length of the book attempting to give you a sketchy
introduction to the thousands and thousands of sightings like Captain
Mantell’s that involve irrefutably puzzling and concrete evidence of
something highly strange occurring. There are many radar sightings of
UFOs. There is one volume, published by the Center for UFO Studies in
Evanston, Illinois, which deals solely with the numerous physical traces that
UFOs have left behind, either by irradiating the soil, causing other changes
in soil composition, or leaving impressions in the ground. A computer set
up by this same organization to carry a program of information regarding
UFOs contains well over 80,000 reports; and some things become
startlingly clear by the use of “UFOCAT,” the computer. For instance, it is
now possible, if one measures a landing trace from a UFO sighting, to find
out from the computer what the probable description of the UFO itself will
be. Thus, in a way, the witness is merely confirming what the computer
already knows.
However, this is an introduction to a book which consists of transcripts of
messages of a very precise nature having to do with metaphysics,
philosophy, and the plan of evolution, both physical and spiritual, of man
on Earth. Consequently, what I propose to do is share with you some of the
research material which our group has collected through the years. Since all
of these examples come from the same group we never describe who the
receiver may be as we feel that it is the information that is important rather
than the person who is transmitting.
According to an entity called Hatonn who has spoken with our group and
several others for many years, the purpose in being here of at least some of
the UFOs that are seen in our skies at this time is much like the purpose
that we might have in sending aid to a disaster-stricken or extremely
impoverished country. It is a desire to be of service.
    We have been contacting people of planet Earth for many, many of
    your years. We have been contacting at intervals of thousands of years
    those who sought our aid. It is time for many of the people of this
    planet to be contacted, for many now have the understanding and the
    desire to seek something outside the physical illusion that has for so
    many years involved the thinking of those of this planet. The process
    we are stimulating is one which is self-generating. As more and more of
    those who desire our contact receive it and pass it on to others, then
    those who receive this passed-on information will then themselves be
    able to reach a state of thinking and understanding sufficiently in tune,
    shall I say, with our vibrations in order to receive our contact. For this,
    my friends, is how contacts work. It is first necessary, if the entity is to
    be able to receive our contact, for him to become of a certain vibration
                                    22
                               Introduction

    as a result of his thinking. This is greatly speeded by involvement in
    groups such as this. And then it is finally done through meditation. In
    other words, the verbal communications given to the entity by the
    channels such as this one create a system of thought and a desire for
    spiritual awareness that raises his vibration.
    We of the Confederation of Planets in the Service of the Infinite
    Creator are very sorry that we cannot step upon your soil and teach
    those of your people who desire our service. But, my friends, as we have
    said before, this would be a very great disservice to those who do not
    desire our service at this time, and we are afraid we would have little
    effect in bringing understanding even to those who desire it, for
    understanding, my friends, comes from within. We can only guide. We
    can only suggest. We are attempting to do this in such a way that the
    seeking of the individual will be stimulated to turning his thinking
    inward, inward to that single source of love and understanding, the
    Creator, that is part of us all, part of everything that exists, for
    everything that exists, my friends, is the Creator.
    We are very privileged to have you join with us in this great service at
    this time in the history of your planet. For this is a very great time, a
    great transitional period, in which many of the Earth’s people will be
    raised from their state of confusion to a simple understanding: the love
    of their Creator.
Hatonn speaks of our desire to seek something outside the physical illusion.
What he talks about so persuasively is something that is often referred to by
members of what Ra calls the Confederation of Planets in the Service of the
Infinite Creator as “the original thought.” This is another term for our word,
“love,” but implies a great deal more. It implies a unity that is so great that we
do not see each other simply as close friends, or brothers and sisters, but,
ideally, as the Creator; and, as we see each other and ourselves as the Creator,
we see one being. This concept is at the very heart of telepathy and Hatonn
talks about this concept and the original thought in general:
    At this time I am in a craft far above your place of dwelling. I am at this
    time able to monitor your thoughts. This, my friends, might seem to
    some of your peoples to be an infringement, but I can assure you that it
    is not. Our capabilities of knowing the thinking of the peoples of this
    planet Earth are not designed in any way to infringe upon either their
    thinking or their activities. We do not consider the knowledge of the
    thoughts of others to be an infringement for we see these thoughts as
    our own. We see these thoughts as the thoughts of the Creator.


                                     23
                              Introduction

    My friends, it may seem to you that a thought of a nature other than
    one of love and brotherhood might be a thought generated not of our
    Creator. This is not possible, my friends. All thought that is generated
    is generated by the Creator. All things that are generated are generated
    by the Creator. He is all things and is in all places, and all of the
    consciousness and all of the thought that exists is the thought of our
    Creator. His infinite number of parts all have free will, and all may
    generate in any way they choose. All of His parts communicate with all
    of the creation, in His entire and infinite sense.
    We are not attempting to change the thinking of our Creator. We are
    only attempting to bring His ideas to some of the more isolated parts
    for their inspection and appraisal. Isolated parts, I say, my friends, and
    why should we consider these parts to be isolated? We consider them
    isolated because from our point of view they have chosen to wander far
    from the concept that we have found to permeate most of the parts of
    the creation with which we are familiar. We find, my friends, that man
    upon planet Earth in his experiences and experiments has become
    isolated in his thinking and has divorced it from that to which we are
    accustomed in the vast reaches of creation which we have experienced.
    I urge you, my friends, to remember what we have brought to you. The
    next time that you are, shall we say, backed into a corner by the
    circumstances which prevail within the illusion of your physical
    existence, remember what you have learned and do not forget what you
    have worked so hard to obtain. You will choose at any time to alter
    your needs and desires from within the physical illusion to your being
    within the creation of the Father. As long as your objectives lie within
    this physical illusion it will be necessary for you to be subject to the
    laws which prevail within this illusion. If your desires can be altered by
    the application of what you are learning and are lifted in the creation of
    the Infinite One, then, my friends, you may have a great deal more
    ability to remove yourself from the corners into which the illusion
    seems to back you.
To some who may read these words the concepts may seem to be a less than
practical and certainly overly idealistic method of discussing what many
have called the new age or the Age of Aquarius. It certainly seems unlikely
that an entire planet could go so wrong philosophically and that beings
supposedly more advanced than we would care enough about us to attempt
to help us.
However as we look for the heart of the “cosmic” system of philosophy, we
find much that is clear and simple without being simplistic in the least, much

                                   24
                               Introduction

that is ethical without being dogmatic—in short, much that is informative.
Here Hatonn speaks of the nature of reality, which, in the main, seems to
have escaped the notice of Earth man:
    My friends, man on Earth has become very shortsighted in appreciation
    of the creation. He does not understand the true meaning of the simple
    and beautiful life that surrounds him. He does not appreciate its
    generation and regeneration. He learns that the very atmosphere that he
    breathes is cycled through the plant life to be regenerated to support
    him and his fellow beings and creatures, and yet this seems to the vast
    majority of those who dwell upon this planet to be an exercise in
    technology rather than one in theology. There is no awareness of the
    Creator’s plan to provide for His children, to provide for their every
    desire and to provide a state of perfection. Man on Earth has lost the
    awareness that is rightfully his. And why, my friends, has he lost this
    awareness? He has lost this because he has focused his attention upon
    devices and inventions of his own. He has become hypnotized by his
    playthings and his ideas. He is but a child in his mind.
    All of this may be very simply remedied, and man can once more return
    to an appreciation of reality rather than an appreciation of the illusion
    created by his mind. All that is necessary, my friends, is that he
    individually avail himself to this appreciation of reality through the
    process of meditation, for this process stills his active conscious mind
    which is continually seeking stimulus within the illusion developed over
    so many centuries of time upon planet Earth. Very rapidly, then, he can
    return to an appreciation of the reality in the functioning of the real
    creation.
    This, my friends, is what man of Earth must return to if he is to know
    reality: this simple thought of absolute love, a thought of total unity
    with all his brothers regardless of how they might express themselves or
    whom they might be, for this is the original thought of your Creator.
The creation of the Father, then, as Hatonn calls it, has a very simple nature,
a nature in which love is the essence of all things and of all their functions.
Yet this “real” creation obviously is not uppermost in most of our minds
because we live in a day-to-day atmosphere to which the Confederation has
referred quite often as an illusion.
    We of the Confederation of Planets in the Service of the Infinite
    Creator have been, for many of your years, aware of many principles of
    reality. We are aware of these principles because we have availed
    ourselves to them just as the people of your planet may do.

                                    25
                          Introduction

It is possible through meditation to totally reduce the illusion that you
now experience that creates the separation—an illusory separation—to
what it actually is, a total illusion. We have been continuing to speak to
you about meditation. We have spoken to you many times about reality
and about love and about understanding, and yet you do not seem to
be able to overcome the illusion.
The reason for the illusion, my friends, is one that man on Earth has
generated. He has generated it out of desire. This illusion is useful. It is
very useful for those who would wish to evolve at a very rapid rate by
experiencing it and by using it while within it. Many of us who are now
circling your planet would desire to have the opportunity that you have,
the opportunity to be within the illusion and then, through the
generation of understanding, use the potentials of the illusion. This is a
way of gaining progress spiritually and has been sought out by many of
our brothers.
I cannot over-emphasize the necessity of becoming able to understand
the nature of the potentials within your illusion and then, by self-
analysis and meditation, reacting to that in a way that will express the
thought that generated us: the thought of our Creator. This was done
by the teacher whom you know as Jesus. This man recognized his
position. He recognized the illusion. He understood the reason for the
potentials within the illusion, and his reaction to these potentials and
activities within the illusion was a reaction which was expressing the
thought of the Creator, a thought of love.
Keep uppermost in your mind that the illusion that you experience is
an illusion, that it is surrounding you for the purpose of teaching you.
It can only teach you if you become aware of its teachings. It is said that
“He worked His wonders in mysterious ways.” This way may seem
mysterious; however, it is the way of spiritual evolvement. There are
many souls experiencing the illusion in which you find yourself;
however, there are few using this illusion to grow. They are not doing
this other than at a subliminal level because they have not availed
themselves through their seeking to a knowledge of the possibility of
doing this.
Once an individual has become aware of the possibility of using the
illusion in which he finds himself in your physical world for the
progression of spiritual growth, it is necessary that he take the next step
and use his knowledge to express, regardless of the potentials which
affect him, the love and understanding of his Creator.


                                26
                               Introduction

As you have by now become aware, meditation is always suggested as the best
means of attaining understanding, of progressing spiritually, and of
understanding the nature of the illusion and the purpose for which you are
experiencing it. Each person is involved in an illusion or game in which we
may, if we wish, use our consciousness in meditation in such a way as to
create a more rapid growth in personal evolution. But how do we bring
ourselves to the point at which this process, which often seems very difficult,
is grasped and begun?
    Desire, my friends, is the key to what you receive. If you desire it, you
    shall receive it. This was the Creator’s plan, a plan in which all of His
    parts would receive exactly what they desire. My friends, often in the
    illusion which you now experience it seems that you do not acquire
    what you desire. In fact, the opposite seems to be the case in many,
    many instances. It is a paradox, it seems, that such a statement should
    be made and that such apparent results of desire are manifested, and yet
    we state, without exception, that man receives exactly what he desires.
    Perhaps, my friends, you do not understand desire. Perhaps this
    understanding is not within the intellectual mind. Perhaps it will be
    necessary to spend time in meditation to become aware of your real
    desire. For, my friends, there is much, much more of you and of the
    creation than you presently appreciate with your intellectual abilities in
    your present illusion.
    It is very difficult for the peoples of this planet to give up their illusion,
    to give up the preconceived knowledge of what they believe to be cause
    and effect. However, this is not reality. This is illusion, born of illusion.
    It is a simple product of the complexity that man upon this planet has
    generated. Join with us in divorcing your thinking from such
    complexities and become aware of what has created you, everything that
    you experience, and everything that is thought. Become aware of your
    Creator. Become aware of His desire, and when you know this desire
    you will know your own, for you and your Creator are one, and you are
    one with all of His parts and, therefore, all of your fellow beings
    throughout all of the creation. When you know His desire you will feel
    it. There will be no more confusion. There will be no more questions.
    You will have found what you have sought. You will have found Love,
    for this is the desire of your Creator: that all of His parts express and
    experience the Love that created you. This may be found simply, in
    meditation. No amount of seeking within the intellectual concepts of
    your people, no amount of careful planning or careful interpretation of
    the written or spoken word will lead you to the simple truth.


                                     27
                               Introduction

The Confederation messages concentrate a great deal upon the concept of
seeking and of desire, feeling that the will of each entity is absolutely central
to each entity’s quest for evolution. In fact, they say, free will is at the
foundation of the universe. Each entity is conceived not only as being part of
one unity but also as being a totally unique part of that unity. Each person’s
free will is quite paramount and the Confederation’s concern is always to
avoid infringement upon the free will of any person. Their method of
contacting man on Earth takes its form from a deep concern for this free will:
    We do not wish to impose our understanding of truth upon your
    peoples, and this would be something that we would do if we contacted
    them directly. We could not help it, for our very utterance of truth
    would be accepted by many of your peoples as being valid. We do not
    wish to be thought of as the ultimate representatives of the Creator’s
    truth. We wish to give this to your peoples in such a way so that they
    may accept or reject this at their own will. This, as we understand it, is
    a necessary provision in the spiritual evolvement of all mankind: that he
    be, at some state of his evolution, in a position to accept or reject what
    is necessary for his evolution. In this way, and only in this way, can he
    know the truth, the truth of the Creator, that single truth that is the
    creation, the truth of the love of the creation.
    It must be realized from within. It cannot be impressed from without.
    We are attempting to stimulate those of your peoples who would be
    stimulated to seeking this truth that is within them. We have been
    required by our understanding of our Creator’s principle to remain in
    hiding, for we cannot serve one individual and at the same time do a
    disservice to his neighbor by proving within his own mind that we exist,
    for many of those of planet Earth at this time do not desire to believe in
    or have proof of our existence. For this reason we find it necessary to
    speak to those who seek through channels such as this one. We find it
    necessary to give to those who seek that which they seek in such a way
    that they, for themselves, may appraise its value and accept or reject, on
    their own terms, those thoughts that we bring, and understand the
    reality of the creation in which all of us exist.
Once the desire to receive this message has been developed the messages are
indeed available, not just from our group but from many so-called contactee
or channeling groups around the world. Indeed, you will find little new in the
“cosmic” system of philosophy. Those concepts are basic, profound, and
simple. The Confederation has a name for one of the great goals of this
system of meditation and study—understanding:



                                     28
                              Introduction

    Many of your peoples are at this time seeking outside their illusion. To
    those who seek, we offer our understanding. We do not attempt to say
    that we have ultimate wisdom. We only suggest that that which we
    have to offer may be of value, for we have found, in our experience, as
    we have passed through the same experiences as those of Earth, that
    there is a most beneficial direction in seeking to serve. We are acting
    through instruments such as those here tonight to give to those who
    seek, an understanding. Our presence is meant to stimulate seeking.
    Through this process, we hope to contact as many of the peoples of
    your planet as would desire our contact. We hope in the very near
    future to be able to contact many more of the peoples of your planet,
    the peoples who would desire understanding. It is difficult to contact
    those people of your planet because of this, shall I say, mixture of types,
    but it is well worth our effort if we are able to contact but one.
    We will continue to act as we do now, speaking through instruments
    such as this one, until a sufficient number of the peoples of your planet
    have become aware of truth. We are constantly striving to bring,
    through many channels of communication, the simple message to the
    peoples of Earth: the simple message that will leave them with a simple
    understanding of all that there is, and that is love.
But understanding, that understanding which shows us the love of an Infinite
Creator, is again and again described as being possible far more easily through
the processes of meditation than by any other method:
    There are pieces of information that are of importance and there are
    pieces of information that are not. Wisdom is a rather lonely matter,
    my friends. You must accept this truth as you acquire the burden of
    wisdom. That which you know, you are to be careful of, for what you
    know in the real creation has power, and that which you desire is all of
    the direction which that power will be aimed at; but have faith, my
    friends, in what you know and what you are learning. Feed your faith
    and your understanding through meditation. The further that you go
    along this path, my friends, the more meaningful you will find this
    simple statement: meditate. It begins as a simple process and, little by
    little, it becomes a way in which you live. Observe it as you progress
    along your own spiritual path.
It is frequently suggested in contactee messages that the state of mind of the
seeker has the opportunity of being continuously in a far more pleasant
configuration than is the mind of one who is not actively engaged in pursuing
a path of self-knowledge and seeking. However, there are other fruits of the


                                    29
                                 Introduction

path of meditation and seeking which are predictable and which engage the
attention of those who channel these messages.
     It is to be remembered, my friends, that service to others is service to
     one’s self. Notice that we do not say that service is like unto service to
     one’s self. There is no similarity between others and ourselves. There is
     identity. There is completion and unity. Therefore, that which is felt of
     a negative nature towards a sheep of the flock is felt towards one’s self
     and is felt toward the Creator. This enters the service which you
     attempt to give to yourself and to the Creator through service to
     another and causes a blot or a stain upon the perfect service you would
     have performed. It must be remembered that each person is a
     completely free entity whose independence must in no way be shaken
     and yet whose identity remains one with you.
                                        1
     There is only one thing of great importance for you to consider at this
     time. That is your personal preparation for service. You are to serve
     your fellow man, and, therefore, it is necessary that you prepare
     yourselves for this service. This of course, my friends, is done in
     meditation. We cannot overemphasize the importance of meditation.
     Through this technique you will receive answers to all of your
     questions. It is difficult to realize this, but this is true. All of your
     questions can be reduced to an extremely simple concept. This you can
     become aware of in meditation. Once this has been done you will be
     ready to serve, just as others have served and are now serving upon your
     planet. Follow their example; spend time in meditation. Qualify
     yourself to reach out to your fellow man and lead him from the
     darkness of confusion that he is experiencing back into the light that he
     desires.
One service which the Confederation sources greatly appreciate is that
provided by vocal channels which are trained in groups such as the one which
we have had in Louisville since 1962. They never suggest in any way that their
message is unique or that “salvation” can only be gained by listening to that
message. However, they are aware that there are many who seek that message
through sources other than orthodox religion and classical philosophy.
Consequently, they are here to provide a service of making information
available and can only perform their service through vocal channels:


1
    This symbol () indicates the separation between a quotation from one
    transcript and a quotation upon the same subject from another transcript.

                                      30
                              Introduction

    There are more people upon this planet seeking than there have been in
    the past. However, many are quite confused in their attempts to seek
    and there is a need at this time for many more channels such as this one
    who can receive directly the thoughts that so many of the people of this
    planet are seeking. We are attempting at this time to generate greater
    numbers of proficient vocal channels who can receive our thoughts
    quite readily. This requires daily meditation. This is all that is required:
    daily meditation. It is assumed, of course, that as this daily meditation
    is performed there is a desire for our contact.
As one who has participated in meditation groups for many years, may I
suggest that individual meditations not include the attempt to contact
Confederation sources. It is best to pursue this attempt only in a group
situation, preferably a group which contains at least one experienced receiver.
And always, whether meditating alone or in a group, I strongly recommend
some means of “tuning” so that the meditation which follows will be at the
highest spiritual level possible. This “tuning” can be accomplished in any way
preferable to the meditator. The Lord’s Prayer, “Aum-ing” or other singing or
chanting, the reading of some inspirational writing, or a careful visualization
of the “white light” of the Creator, are all useful “tuning” methods.
Reincarnation is very basic to the Confederation message. One of the most
highly regarded fruits of the meditation and seeking process is the ability of
the seeker to penetrate what Ra calls the “forgetting process” which occurs
at the time of our birth into this incarnation so that we might become
aware of the lessons which we have to learn during this incarnation. These
lessons are always along the lines of how to love better, more fully, more
deeply, or with more kindness and understanding. However, each entity has
unique lessons:
    At the time at which each of you incarnated, my friends, each of you
    was aware that certain lessons, hitherto unlearned, were to be the goals
    for achievement in this incarnation. If it seems to you that your entire
    incarnation within this illusion has been a series of difficulties of one
    particular type, then you are almost certainly aware in some manner of
    one of your lessons. As you can see, these lessons are not to be avoided.
    They are to be learned.
    Further, we must point out to you that when a confrontation in such a
    lesson has been achieved, that which separates you from understanding
    is most often your own thinking. Your conscious thinking processes are
    quite capable of being self-destructive in the sense that they may aid
    you to avoid the lesson that you wish in reality to learn. Therefore, as
    you approach a lesson, we suggest that if it is possible to achieve a

                                    31
                               Introduction

    temporary abeyance of the conscious, analytical processes, then you
    may return to the problem with a much clearer mentality, ready to
    learn what you came to this experience to learn, rather than only to
    avoid what you came to learn.
    We know how difficult it is to achieve the meditative state at all times,
    for we have been where you are and we are aware of that particular type
    of illusion that you call physical. We urge you, therefore, to depend on
    meditation of a formal kind, then to attempt a semi-meditative state at
    all times, and, by this, we mean simply to achieve a state of attention so
    that your destructive impulses are not free to clog your mind
    completely and keep you from learning the lessons you came to learn.
Undergirding all of the lessons that we have to learn about love is the basic
concept that all things are one:
    Meditate upon the complete unity of yourself and all that you see. Do
    this not once, and not simply in present circumstances, but at all times,
    and especially in difficult circumstances. For insofar as you love and feel
    at one with those things which are difficult for you, to that extent will
    those circumstances be alleviated. This is not due to any laws within
    our physical illusion, but is due to the Law of Love, for that body which
    is of spirit, which is interpenetrated with the physical body, is higher
    than your physical body, and those changes which you make by love
    upon your spiritual body will, of necessity, reflect themselves within the
    physical illusion.
    All is one, my friends. My voice is now the voice of this instrument; my
    thoughts are her thoughts. Please believe that the vibration we offer to
    you is not a vibration of personality, but is a vibration of the Creator.
    We are also channels. There is only one voice. Within this vibration, we
    are self-consciously aware that this voice is the voice of the Creator. It is
    simply a matter of lifting vibrations which are not so self-aware of the
    Creator. All things will eventually come into harmony in relation to
    your understanding.
    Even if the universe for those around you remains disharmonious and
    difficult, if your mind is stayed upon the unity of the Creator, your
    own universe will become harmonious, and this is not by your doing
    but by the simple love of the Creator.
From many sources we have heard that we are in the last days of a particular
era of evolution. Popular writers of the Christian faith have taken the writings
of the Book of Revelations and analyzed them in such a way that it is
suggested that the days of Armageddon are near at hand. Scientists have

                                    32
                              Introduction

written many books exploring the possibility that unusual planetary
configurations such as the Jupiter Effect will occur now and in the year 2,000,
thus enlarging the possibility for Earth changes. Other scientists have
examined much evidence indicating that a polar shift by the year 2,000 is
probable. Prophets such as Edgar Cayce have channeled information having
to do with such drastic changes occurring and in addition, of course, there are
our many concerns having strictly to do with the man-made potential for
planetary devastation. We also have gathered information in our meetings on
the subject of Earth changes:
    There is a season upon your planet which shall be highly traumatic
    within your physical illusion. The physical reasons for this are varied.
    Your scientists will spend a great deal of time, while they can, in
    attempting to catalog and describe each of the conditions which will
    produce disaster on this physical plane of your planet. That which your
    scientists speak of is quite so, and will be part of the program which has
    been predicted by all of those holy works which you have upon the face
    of the Earth.
    It is not either permissible or possible for us to tell you precisely what
    events will occur, or when they will occur, due to the fact that the
    vibration within the mind and heart of the peoples upon your planet is
    determining and will determine the precise events. There is within the
    planet Earth a great deal of karma which must be adjusted as the cycle
    changes, and these things will manifest. Precisely when, and how, we
    cannot say, nor would we wish to, my friends. For the rain, and the
    wind, and fire, will destroy only those things which are in what you call
    the third density of vibration. You may value those things because you
    cannot imagine what a fourth-density existence will be like. We suggest
    to you that you spend no time concerning yourselves with the effort of
    maintaining your third density existence after the vibration change to
    fourth density has been completed.
    If, within your spirit, your graduation day has come, those things
    necessary for your emergence into fourth density will be done for you.
    All will be accomplished by helpers which you must be aware that you
    have.
    It is extremely possible that damage will occur to those things which
    you identify with yourself in the third density. If we may speak plainly,
    you will observe the valley of the shadow of death. These very words,
    my friends, have been spoken to you before, and yet you cling to that
    physical body and those physical surroundings as though your spirit
    were attached quite permanently to them.

                                    33
                              Introduction

    May we suggest to you that you can find your spirit neither in your
    head, nor in your hands, nor in your chest, nor in your legs, nor in your
    feet, that nowhere can you find your spirit; nowhere can you operate to
    remove it, nor to aid it. Your spirit resides within a shell. The shell may
    be removed, but that is no matter. The spirit does not perish.
What is the metaphysical meaning of this suggested physical trauma of our
planet? The Confederation suggests that the planet itself is moving into a new
vibration, a new portion of space and time, which many have called the New
Age, but into which we shall not be able to enter unless we have indeed
learned the lessons of love which it has been our choice to learn or not to
learn for many incarnations. Therefore the Confederation suggests that it is
very important to choose to follow the positive path or not to follow it:
    There is a choice to be made very shortly, and it would be preferable if
    all of the people of this planet understand the choice that is to be made.
    It will be difficult for many of the people of this planet to understand
    what this choice is, because it is a choice that they have not considered.
    They have been much too involved in their daily activities and their
    confusion and their desires of a very trivial nature to be concerned with
    an understanding of the choice that they are very shortly to make.
    Whether they wish to or not, whether they understand it or not,
    regardless of any influence, each and every one of the people who dwell
    upon planet Earth will shortly make a choice. There will be no middle
    area. There will be those who choose to follow the path of love and
    light and those who choose otherwise.
    This choice will not be made by saying, “I choose the path of love and
    light,” or “l do not choose it.” The verbal choice will mean nothing.
    This choice will be measured by the individual’s demonstration of his
    choice. This demonstration will be very easy for us of the
    Confederation of Planets in His Service to interpret. This choice is
    measured by what we term the vibratory rate of the individual. It is
    necessary, if an individual is to join those who make the choice of love
    and understanding, for his rate of vibration to be above a certain
    minimal level. There are many now that are close to this minimum
    level, but due to continuing conditions of erroneous thought that
    prevail upon your surface, they are either fluctuating around this point
    or are even in some cases drifting away from the path of love and
    understanding. There are many whose vibratory rate at this time is
    sufficiently high for them to travel with no difficulty into the density of
    vibration that this planet is shortly to experience.



                                    34
                               Introduction

At some time in the future, then, something that the Confederation has called
the harvest will take place. This concept of the Judgment Day differs from the
eschatological one in that the one who judges us is not a God apart from us
but the God within us. As a result of this harvest some will go on to a new age
of love and light and will learn new lessons in a very positive and beautiful
density, as the Confederation calls it. Others will have to repeat this particular
grade of lessons and relearn the lessons of love. Here the Confederation
entity, Hatonn, speaks once again of the harvest and of the Confederation’s
purpose in speaking through contactee groups:
    There is going to be a Harvest, as you might call it, a harvest of souls
    that will shortly occur upon your planet. We are attempting to extract
    the greatest possible harvest from this planet. This is our mission, for
    we are the Harvesters.
    In order to be most efficient, we are attempting to create first a state of
    seeking among the people of this planet who desire to seek. This would
    be those who are close to the acceptable level of vibration. Those above
    this level are of course not of as great an interest to us since they have,
    you might say, already made the grade. Those far below this level,
    unfortunately, cannot be helped by us at this time. We are attempting
    at this time to increase by a relatively small percentage the number who
    will be harvested into the path of love and understanding.
    Even a small percentage of those who dwell upon your planet is a vast
    number, and this is our mission, to act through groups such as this one
    in order to disseminate information in such a fashion that it may be
    accepted or rejected, that it may be in a state lacking what the people of
    your planet choose to call proof.
    We offer them no concrete proof, as they have a way of expressing it.
    We offer them Truth. This is an important function of our mission—to
    offer Truth without proof. In this way, the motivation will, in each and
    every case, come from within the individual. In this way, the individual
    vibratory rate will be increased. An offering of proof or an impressing of
    this Truth upon an individual in such a way that he would be forced to
    accept it would have no usable effect upon his vibratory rate.
    This, then, my friends, is the mystery of our way of approaching your
    peoples.
Another concept that has come out of the many communications from
alleged UFO entities is that of “Wanderers.” They are usually service-oriented
people, and, as would be predictable, they often have a great deal of difficulty
fitting into the planetary vibrations of Earth. Often they have the feeling that

                                     35
                               Introduction

they do not fit in or do not belong but at the same time, very often, these
people are possessed of many gifts, in the arts, in teaching, or in the simple
sharing of a cheerful and happy vibration, which certainly does not suggest
the normal attitude of a simple malcontent.
This concept is particularly interesting to many people who will be drawn
to The Ra Material because, according to that material, much of it will be
most easily recognized as being useful by Wanderers. There are not just a
few Wanderers on Earth today; Ra suggests a figure of approximately sixty-
five million. They have left other densities in harmonious environments to
take on a kind of job that is most difficult and dangerous, for if a Wanderer
cannot at least begin to pierce the forgetting process that occurs at birth into
this density during his or her lifetime on planet Earth, and remember the
love and the light that the person was intended to share, the Wanderer can
conceivably become caught in the third-density illusion, collecting what
may loosely be termed as karma, and be delayed in arriving again at the
home planet until all that is unbalanced in third density in this lifetime has
been balanced.
When Don Elkins and I wrote Secrets of the UFO in 1976, we devoted a
chapter to the concept of Wanderers and used material gathered in hypnotic
regressions of three women who are friends in this lifetime and who, when
separately regressed, gave independent and dovetailing stories of their lives
on another planet.
After that book went to press we were able to work with a man whom the
women had named as being a part of that experience on another planet.
This man, who was then a student working towards his master’s degree in
chemical engineering, was aware of no detail of our research except that we
were involved in doing some hypnosis. On May 10, 1975, Don, along with
Lawrence Allison, an accomplished hypnotist with whom we had worked
often when he lived in Louisville, sat down with our fourth volunteer and
proceeded to explore that other world for a fourth time. The information
was especially interesting, since all three previous regressions had been
poetic, and beautiful, but scarcely technical. Our fourth subject had a far
different background and was able to see things in a far more accurate and
explicit manner. This fourth regression fitted perfectly into the story told by
the first three subjects.
One of the first things that Don and Larry (the questioning went back and
forth) asked about was the clothing.
      Q. How are you dressed?
      A. In white.

                                     36
                                Introduction

       Q. White what?
       A. Loose white clothes.
       Q. OK. What’s above the waist now? Above the pants?
       A. Well, it’s just like a robe; it’s not really a robe but a loose clothing
          with a sash, like for a belt.
       Q. And what about on the shoulders?
       A. Well, it’s just short-sleeved. It’s warm.
This type of robe suggests a monastic or religious order and questions were
asked to attempt to discover some orthodox religious connection on this
planet. No connection was found, so the questioners moved on to the name
of this other world since the surroundings were not those of Earth, but the
young man, normally incisive in his answers, seemed totally unaware of the
concept of naming.
       Q. The name of your planet?
       A. It’s just a … we live there, and … I don’t see any mountains, but
          I see … the name?
                                        2
       A. I have a child.
       Q. One child?
       A. Yeah. Little boy.
       Q. His name is?
       A. I just don’t have a feeling for names. I have, like, you know when
          you want somebody, and they know when you want them, sort of.
          I mean, I just don’t have a feeling for names.
Not only did their planet seem to lack a proper name but speech itself seemed
to be a far different process, one which we would probably call telepathy.
       Q. All right, if someone calls to you, what do they call you?
       A. I just haven’t heard anybody speak. I don’t know if you have to
          speak.


2
    This symbol () separates two quotations from the same regressive hypnosis
    session.

                                      37
                               Introduction

                                      
     A. It seems, like, kind of a simple life. But there’s obviously, well,
        there was light at my books, so it’s obviously mechanized, or
        perhaps much more than that even. I don’t, I … don’t recall
        people speaking to each other, though. I mean, they seem to, you
        know, everybody knows each question … you know what’s going
        on, but I don’t really see. It was singing; there was singing, but
        there wasn’t actually people conversing with each other. You just
        sort of knew, I guess.
                                      
     A. I’d be sitting on a stone or a bench and they’d be sitting down,
        and I’m explaining, but I don’t really see myself talking to them.
The subject, with his engineer’s eye, was able to put together the architecture
of the place in the way the women had not. All four agreed that the center of
the community and its purpose was something that may conveniently be
called the temple.
     A. … think it’s a stone … I guess limestone, but it’s whiter, I guess.
        That’s what it’s made of.
     Q. What about the perimeter?
     A. Well, there’s, from supports from the side are arches up to the
        ceiling, but … it’s not a regular dome, it’s … well, I haven’t seen
        that kind of dome before.
     Q. Take a good guess. How far across is that dome?
     A. Oh, goodness. It looks like it’s 200 feet the long way, and maybe
        more than that, maybe 250. And, oh, maybe 150 feet wide. It’s a
        huge room, very …
     Q. OK. Now, how is it lighted?
     A. Just, (laughs a little incredulously) … really, it’s just a glow from
        the ceiling. I mean, you know, like the, well, there’s, like the area
        that’s light, and then there’s darker, like it’s been painted, but the
        paint, that’s light. It seems like it’s, well, it just doesn’t need any
        light. The room’s bright. Maybe it’s coming from the windows,
        but … there doesn’t seem to be any shadow in the room.
     Q. What you’re saying is that it seems as if the atmosphere in the room is
        glowing there?

                                    38
                               Introduction

     A. Well, yeah, just like it’s bright. I don’t see any shadows, like if
        there was a light source.
     Q. Uh huh. Now I want you to listen inside that big room. What kind
        of sounds do you hear?
     A. Nothing in that room, but they’re singing someplace.
     Q. Very quietly, singing off in the distance?
     A. Um hmm.
     Q. All right. It is, ah, some kind of …
     A. It’s more like, a kind of choir, a little choir, like.
That music, reported by all four subjects, is not like any music we have ever
heard. Two of the subjects actually saw the music sparkling in the air and
none could accurately describe it.
     A. I just … I can’t … place the words. It’s just, you know, like a sort
        of praise, a sort of, you know, something like you’d hear in a
        choir.
     Q. Praise to whom?
     A. Well, uh …
     Q. To God?
     A. I’m sure that’s who it is, you know, that’s … it’s sort of a happy
        thing to do, when people get together and sing …
The subject spoke of growing up studying in large books.
     A. I see myself sitting over … over a book and just reading.
     Q. History?
     A. Well, I don’t know.
     Q. Practical work? Science? What do you study? Art? The arts?
     A. Just great books, big books.
     Q. Um hum. Do you have supervised study in classes or…
     A. Well, in the morning there’s a teacher, and in the afternoon or in
        late evening, I study.
     Q. Is there an examination?



                                    39
                               Introduction

      A. No exams. You just want to learn; you want to learn. You, uh, it’s
         like you can’t learn enough.
Who were these people? Did they represent an entire planetary population or
were they a portion only of that population? If they were a portion how were
they chosen to do this work? After looking at this material Don and I
generated a term by which to call this particular group of people: the “clan.”
Here is one of the questioners on this subject.
      Q. Nobody has individual homes?
      A. Well, no; this big place is their home. This is, this is home.
                                       
      A. Well, this is one purpose. Like, it’s like a school, or a teaching
         place to teach those that want to learn it in depth, and those that
         come when they can.
                                       
      A. But this isn’t like a ruling-type people, by any means. Like, you
         know, this isn’t … like the people have to come here. It’s not a
         class system or anything.
Meditation played a very large part in the lives of the inhabitants of this other
world, or at least those in this clan. There were meditations alone and there
were daily group meditations with the entire clan.
      A. Well, let’s see. I don’t see myself there, in different states of
         consciousness. There are prayerful times, in the morning and at
         night. You have them in your room, and then you have others
         before meals, before the morning meal, and then, not, well, briefly
         before the evening meal, but, when, it was like when the food was
         brought, but then afterwards there’s, it’s a … in a room, like a
         private sort of devotional, except that you’re not—like in
         meditation. And there are times when the whole group gets
         together other than meals, just …like the whole place is like a
         family I would guess. Because, like I said, you don’t feel that
         attached, necessarily, to one person. You feel attached to
         everybody. They’re all, like, in your family.
Another function of the clan was to open their great temple from time to
time to all of those of the planet who wished to come for spiritual inspiration.
The questioners, in attempting to determine just how these large crowds
came to fill the temple, happened upon the description of what seemed to be

                                     40
                               Introduction

a very large heliport. We discovered later that the vehicle was not a helicopter.
However, that is the term that the questioner used here.
      Q. OK. Now, the people that leave at that heliport—you have no idea
         where they go?
      A. When I say these ships come, it’s not like hordes of people just
         rushing off and rushing back on or anything, it’s just … it’s, oh,
         how should I … you know, it lands there, and the doors open,
         and the people come out, and people come in. They’re allowed to
         go on the grounds, you know. In other words, this is their place
         too. But they come as a visitor, sort of, to it.
      Q. How long do they stay there?
      A. A day.
The description of the heliport:
      A. There’s a place, a flat place, a flat place, like, that’s stone, out in
         front, but I don’t see roads coming to it, for … it … I see … uh,
         like, sort of, like, uh, like, well, a huge helicopter pad, for
         instance, but …
The questioners had to find out what was landing on that large stone area and
so the subject was asked to describe the type of transport that used it.
      Q. All right. I want you to describe that ship, and what makes it go.
      A. I don’t … um … it’s … well, it’s like … it seems it’s probably a
         space ship. But I don’t see it coming from space. It sort of,
         suddenly almost being there, I don’t see it like zipping off or
         coming in, you know, across the horizon or anything.
      Q. Just describe what it looks like.
      A. Yeah, well, it’s a, it’s longer than it is wide, and it’s not real thick
         compared to the length dimensions and the width dimension. It’s
         a—it’s not like, it’s not spinning when it comes down, because it’s
         a little sort of, like oblong or … it just sort of appears and sets
         down, you know; I mean, I don’t see it actually coming into view
         from small and getting larger.
It is interesting to note the apparent description of materialization and
dematerialization implicit in the subject’s answer to that question.
And so the young man grew in wisdom and in years and told a story of
teaching, growing somewhat gray-haired, beginning to teach fewer and
more advanced students, and in time preparing to end the incarnation. As
                                     41
                              Introduction

the questioners brought the subject back through the death experience in
the previous incarnation and forward in time to the experience in which he
was at that moment living, they paused with the subject in between
incarnations to ask about the purpose this particular Wanderer came to
Earth to fulfill. The answer that he gave is both provocative and all too
scanty. Many of us seek to help this planet of ours in one way or another,
and the question is always: how shall we accomplish it?
     Q. Why are you on Earth? What is the purpose of this life? What do you
        intend to do here? What were you assigned to do here?
     A. It seems like, to help.
     Q. Helping with what? Something in particular?
     A. Something…
     Q. Have you already helped in this field? Or is the problem yet to come
        that you are to help with?
     A. It hasn’t happened yet.
     Q. What do you anticipate?
     A. Just … just great needs.
     Q. What would happen, to require so much help from you that you know
        about? (pause) Spiritual growth? Spiritual development? Physical
        needs?
     A. Well, not … the … I get the feeling of some people that are lost,
        you know?
     Q. Can you help them? This is your mission?
     A. I feel like that’s what I need to do. This … Help those people.
     Q. Um hum. Which people?
     A. The ones that are lost.
     Q. Is this a particular group?
     A. No.
     Q. Just in general.
     A. Just people.
The work I did in early 1976 was to be my last. I had had a condition called
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with several complications, one being SLE,
commonly known as lupus, since I was thirteen when my kidneys had failed.
                                      42
                               Introduction

In 1956, the advanced techniques that are available now to those whose
kidneys fail were not available. In fact, it was considered a miracle that I
survived, but survive I did with the loss of approximately half of each kidney.
I consider myself very fortunate to have been able to have had a productive
and active physical life for so long with the odds going so far against me.
Even now, with the help of exercise, diet, friends, and faith, I feel most
blessed. But my activities are limited.
The research that Don and I had done up to that point brought us across
the knowledge of a highly unusual type of healing, and it was in part my
disability which caused us to put ourselves so wholeheartedly into an
examination of that type of healing. Psychic surgery bears only a tangential
relationship to orthodox surgery and no relationship to orthodox medicine.
It is, like all brands of “faith healing,” impossible to prove, and the natural
and standard response, not only from scientists but from any person who
has not done any research into the subject, is an automatic “turn-off” and
utter disbelief.
This is to be expected. Were it not for many years of research, this would
perhaps be our reaction also. However, we, like most who investigate
psychic surgery, knew that we had nothing to lose by investigating this
possibility. No psychic surgery patient has ever been lost because nothing
actually happens to the patient’s physical body. It is truly a psychic form of
healing. Consequently, we spent some time both in the Philippines and in
Mexico taking part in an examination of the possibilities of psychic surgery.
This is an example of what the psychic surgeon creates as a manifestation
for the eye: it is a Philippine bedroom; the patient is undressed, retaining
those garments which may be needed for personal modesty, and lies down
on the bed, which may in some cases be covered with a simple shower
curtain, usually that one borrowed from the motel bathroom. The healer, a
religious man, and one who has often spent ten or twelve years of his life
praying to become a healer “walking in the wilderness” of the volcanic
mountains of Luzon in solitude, enters the room. He carries nothing except
perhaps a Bible. Often the healer is accompanied by an assistant who
functions as interpreter and, to use a term familiar to our culture, surgical
assistant; to use a more accurate term, clean-up man.
The healer normally knows very little English. He or she begins by taking
the hands and moving them over the body, palms down. We are informed
that this is a method of scanning the body just as an X-ray machine would.
A site for “surgery” is then selected and if the healer is right-handed the left
hand is pressed firmly against the skin. The skin seems to separate and the
interior of the body is seen. This manifestation is very real looking and
                                     43
                              Introduction

anyone who has seen a genuine psychic surgeon at work and has not studied
the phenomenon carefully will swear that the body has been opened with
the bare hands. The right hand then enters this open site and manipulates
within the body.
In the most interesting case in which I took part, the healer was told that I
had arthritis. He scanned my body with the help of his assistant. Then he
opened the abdominal cavity and with a very liquid sounding action pulled
gently, but firmly, at what seemed to be organs rather than joints. It was not
unpleasant but, to me, the patient, it was puzzling, as I had no arthritis in
my organs. He then removed what seemed to be three rather small, long
pieces of bloody material at the center of which was a small piece of hard
material. This done, he removed his left hand. The “incision” vanished
without a scar or trace of any kind. The two men, in this case, mopped up
what had become a fairly considerable amount of blood, rinsed their hands,
and then took baby oil and worked it over the abdominal skin, massaging in
silence.
When I asked what the healer was doing working in the abdominal area the
interpreter relayed my request, and relayed back the information that the
scanning had produced the knowledge of three cysts upon my right ovary,
and the misplacement or dropping of both ovaries which had occurred
through years of very active life. The pulling had been to reposition the
ovaries so that I would not be in discomfort during menstruation. The
removal of the cysts had had the same purpose.
Although my gynecologist had diagnosed these three small cysts when I was
a very young woman, I had never spoken of them to Don Elkins and,
indeed, to no one, since such conversation is not fascinating. One other
person knew of these cysts, my mother, but she was 12,000 miles away.
Upon returning to the United States I had my gynecologist examine the
area and he confirmed that the three cysts were no longer palpable. They
have remained gone, and the comfort level of my menstrual cycle is
correspondingly far better.
The massage with baby oil is a very simplified and unostentatious form of
magnetic healing in which prayers are offered and a protective light is
visualized around the affected area so that healing will be aided.
It is Don’s and my belief that the opening of the body for the removal of
parts, the closing of the body, and the manifestation of the blood and all
other materials are materializations of the same type as the materializations
of ghosts and the materialization of UFOs. Therefore, we have never made
any attempt to preserve specimens of this psychic surgery. We are aware

                                   44
                                Introduction

that this does not fulfill the rigors of the scientific method that exists today,
but it is our belief that we would find out nothing by looking at the results
of such analysis of manifestation.
It would seem that a person, no matter how great his desire to be healed,
would be nervous and apprehensive, since the opening of the body itself,
physical or psychic, seems very traumatic. Once the healer’s hands are upon
you, a distinct emotional and mental attitude change occurs within every
individual with whom I have spoken who has experienced this
phenomenon. The psychic surgeons call it the presence of the Holy Spirit.
It should be considered part of the phenomenon.
In late 1977 and early 1978 we accompanied Dr. Andrija Puharich and his
research associates to Mexico City to investigate a Mexican psychic surgeon,
a seventy-eight-year-old woman called Pachita, who had been practicing for
a great many years. The gift had come to her on the battlefield with Pancho
Villa’s army, and, as in the Philippines, more of her patients were native
than were American. The one difference in her technique was the culture
from which she came. In the Philippines psychic healing came from an
extremely literal belief in Christianity as taught by Spanish missionaries for
three hundred years. Christianity was the center of almost every Filipino
peasant’s life. A large percentage went to mass daily, and, as Don and I were
there during Holy Week of 1975, we were able to watch evidence of the
ruthlessly literal type of Christianity that was practiced there. On Good
Friday, for instance, there was a great Catholic parade of the cross through
the streets of Manila. What was different about this parade was that there
was a human being nailed to that cross. Many had vied for that position.
The one who had achieved it, when asked for comment, simply replied that
he felt very exalted and hoped that they would choose him again the
following year.
In Mexico, if Christianity is present at all, and it often is, it is an overlay to
an extremely strong Indian belief which is harsh and brooding. One brings
to mind the memories of the Mayan slaughter of innocents on the steep
steps of the Mexican pyramids.
Consequently, Pachita used a very dull knife with a five inch blade. She
passed it around amongst the entire research group watching to see our
reactions, especially mine, since I was the guinea pig. Since her “operations”
took place with me lying on my stomach I cannot give a first-hand account
of what occurred, but Don informs me that the knife seemed to disappear
four inches into my back and was then moved rapidly across the spine. This
was repeated several times. Pachita was, she said, working on my kidneys.
Again we made no attempt to conserve “evidence” as we knew that it would

                                      45
                              Introduction

come to nothing. Many have attempted to research psychic surgery by
analysis of its products and have found either inconclusive results or null
results indicting that psychic surgery is a fraud.
In the book, Arigo, by John Fuller, Dr. Puharich’s early work with the
South American healer of that nickname, psychic surgery is carefully
examined, and for those interested in this unusual subject that book is a
good place to begin. I have never had any success in getting any orthodox
doctor to test the possible results of this Mexican experience. This is due to
the fact that the procedure used to test the kidneys can, if the kidneys are
badly enough damaged already, cause the kidneys to go into failure once
again, and no orthodox doctor could be expected to take that risk. Dr.
Puharich himself was unwilling for me to go through this procedure.
With all of its frustrations, investigation into areas in the very fringe of
psychic phenomena are most interesting, informative, and rewarding to the
researcher who is patient and whose approach to the subject is simply to
gather data rather than attempting to prove, step by step, hypotheses about
that which he is doing research. In The Ra Material manifestations of this
type of materialization are discussed and the information is quite
interesting.
Back in the United States, although I could no longer work at the
typewriter, I was still able to offer the continuing weekly meditations and to
take on advanced students for individual work. In 1978 James Allen
McCarty heard about our group, first from a number of people who had
meditated at our Sunday night meetings and had gone on to form a “light
center” and nature preserve in Marion County, Kentucky, and then from a
two-hour, call-in radio show that Don and I had done in Lexington,
Kentucky. He came up with many people from the Marion County
meditation group to experience our meditations. After two meditations the
group as a whole stopped coming, but Jim made the 140-mile round trip
almost weekly, beginning in the spring of 1980. Jim had, for many years,
been searching for some method of aiding humanity. Born in 1947, and
equipped with degrees in business and education, he had studied, in
addition, alternative methods for teaching consciousness expansion. Some
of this time was spent working with inner-city children, but he began to
find a very strong desire to discover a clearer idea of what it was he was
seeking.
In 1972 he booked a course of study in consciousness expansion called
“brain self-control” with a gruff old mountainman who lived in a log cabin
at 10,000 feet in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado. During this course he
learned, for the first time, of the possibility of communication with

                                    46
                              Introduction

advanced civilization from outer space, not through any man-made means
like radios, telegraphs, or electronic gadgetry but through the use of the
frontal lobes of the human brain.
Since this very central experience was in wilderness country, rocks, pine,
and juniper, he decided to search for an equally remote piece of land upon
which he could then offer these brain self-control experiences to others. On
132 acres in central Kentucky, with a running creek for an access road, he
formed the Rock Creek Research and Development Laboratories and began
to work on the subject closest to his heart: the evolution of mankind. He
gave several workshops on this subject but found little interest in that area
and so returned to a life of homesteading and solitude for the next six and
one-half years, growing his own food, meditating, and studying. He was still
curious as to what it would be like to be in a clear, two-way communication
with advanced intelligent beings, and, thus, he very much enjoyed the
meditations with the Louisville group, but he also had previously become
interested in work being done in a group in Oregon. In the fall of 1980, he
traveled from Kentucky to Oregon to work with this group which was
supposedly channeling the same source that Edgar Cayce had channeled in
deep trance.
However, the learning that he had received from the Sunday night meetings
and from the advanced study that he had with me had spoken to his inner-
seeking, and, seemingly of its own accord, his mind made itself up for him
after only two months in Oregon. He found that he needed to return to
Louisville and work with Don and me. On December 23, 1980, he arrived
in Louisville, having traveled 5,000 miles from the woods of central
Kentucky to Oregon and back to Louisville.
Don and I were endlessly grateful for McCarty’s aid. His abilities were
extraordinary. He had a grasp of the metaphysical material going back to his
college days and he had read extensively through all the intervening years, so
he came to this work very informed of our areas of study. He was able to
take up the physical part of the research, filing, making notes, transcribing
tapes, and carrying on the correspondence that had sorely lapsed since my
disability. Jim, always thorough, sold his land. L/L Research merged with
the Rock Creek Research and Development Laboratories, keeping our old
partnership name for our publishing arm, purchased a new typewriter—
Jim’s fingers, strengthened by six and one-half years of homesteading,
overmatched my old electric typewriter—and we settled down to do …
what? We didn’t know.
We discussed doing a new book, updating what we had learned in Secrets of
the UFO and had blank paper ready to be filled. Jim had begun to do back

                                   47
                               Introduction

research in our voluminous files. Three weeks after he came, the Ra contact
began.
During all the years that I had been channeling I had always channeled
consciously, using my free will to clothe telepathic concepts in my own
language. In 1980 a longtime friend and meditation group member, Elaine
Flaherty, died a tragically young death. She had had juvenile diabetes and
had died in her thirties. I had sat with her for many days in the hospital
before she finally left her body, and she had told me several times that she
wanted to make sure that her husband, Tom, was made aware that she was
all right after her death, for she knew that she was likely to die. She had told
Tom, also a longtime meditation group member as well.
After her funeral Tom came to me and asked if I would attempt to get in
touch with Elaine. Having been through all too many seances and not
having a great deal of personal commitment to the type of communication
that one was likely to get from one’s physically dead relatives, I was at first
reluctant to attempt such “mediumship.” However, these were my good
friends and I could not say no. Tom, Don, and Elaine’s and Tom’s son,
Mike, gathered with me for the first attempt. After some moments of
consciously offering myself for the contact with Elaine, I became unaware of
the passing of time, and when I awakened Tom had what sounded like
Elaine’s voice on tape speaking through me. That was my first experience
with trance. I did not know, and to this day do not know, how it occurred.
Tom asked once more if I would do this and again I went into what seemed
to be a very deep trance, remembering nothing and hearing what sounded
like Elaine’s voice on tape after the session. Don stated that if he had heard
me from the next room without seeing me he would have been certain it
was Elaine.
This work was extremely draining to me and I asked Tom to accept the fact
that I really did not wish to continue being this type of medium. Tom
agreed, saying that he had what Elaine had promised and was satisfied.
However only a few days later, while working with an advanced meditation
student, Leonard Cecil, I received a new contact, one which I had never had
before. As I do in all cases I challenged this entity in the name of Christ,
demanding that it leave if it did not come as a messenger of Christ-
consciousness. It remained, so I opened myself to its channel. Again I went
almost immediately into trance and the entity, which called itself Ra, began
its series of contacts with us. This contact is ongoing, fascinating, and, to
me, a source of some disquiet.
The person who decides to become a vocal channel in the first place has
already taken a step which is, to some people, quite difficult; that is, the

                                    48
                              Introduction

willingness to speak the words of one which is not controlled by the self. In
free will channeling, it is possible to choose to stop channeling. However, it
is also possible to utter complete nonsense because the channel never knows
in advance what the next concept will be. I hasten to add that this nonsense
has never occurred in my experience and that the channelings have always
made a reasonable amount of sense, and, in many cases, have been quite
inspirational. Nevertheless in a society where you are taught to measure
your words with some care, it seems an irresponsible act to simply blurt out
that which comes into your mind.
When, in order for the contact to occur, trance has to be obtained, the
disquiet grows into something close to a near panic on my part. I do not
know how the procedure for a trance works, and I am always afraid that in
this session nothing will happen; I will remain conscious; and I will receive
no contact. Again, this has never happened. Since neither I nor either of the
others in our group has any real idea of how to aid me beyond a certain
point in achieving a state of “trance,” there is nothing to be done but simply
to move ahead. Don states that, although my state of trance is similar to
others he has observed, it is what he would call “telepathic reception in the
trance state.”
Although I studied literature in my undergraduate days and was a librarian
for many years, reading the material almost always offers me the
opportunity to learn a new word or two and has certainly stretched my
mind in the area of science, which in my education was woefully lacking.
What concerns me perhaps more than anything else is that someone who
reads this material will consider this human being that I am to have some
sort of wisdom that Ra certainly has but that I certainly do not. If this work
impresses you, I can only ask that you please make a sharp differentiation in
your mind between the words and the “medium” through which the words
come. You would not, for instance, expect the water pipe to be responsible
for the quality of the water which runs through it. Certainly all of us in the
research group try, through meditation and daily life, to prepare ourselves as
best we can for these sessions. Nevertheless, what comes through our group
stands on its own and cannot be said to reflect on the wisdom or so-called
spiritual advancement of any of its members. As our popular philosophy has
it, “We are all bozos on this bus.”
If you have any questions as you read, please feel free to write the Rock
Creek group. Its correspondent, Jim, will never ignore a letter, and since he
has his own experiences of the sessions themselves to share, he will finish
this introduction.


                                   49
                               Introduction

Jim McCarty: We are beginners when it comes to knowing how the Ra
contact occurs, and it has only been through a process of trial and error,
session by session, that we have learned more about how to support our
instrument, Carla, in the mental, physical, and spiritual senses. We were so
excited about the Ra contact when it first began that we had two sessions
per day for days at a time; but, we have since learned that this procedure
was much too wearing on Carla. We average about one session every week
to ten days now, which allows us to prepare for each session with the greater
degree of care that seems to be required as sessions accumulate.
A great deal of thought goes into the questions which Don asks during each
session. Each of us contributes ideas, but the great bulk of the line of
questioning is accomplished by Don, since he has the years of experience in
investigating the UFO contactee phenomenon necessary to develop the
intellectual foundation required in any attempt to fit the diverse pieces of
this puzzle together. He also has the intuitive sense that is vital in following
the unexpected and profoundly revealing answers that Ra so often gives
with further questions, developed on the spur of the moment, to take
advantage of the new insights.
With the decision made to hold a session the night before the session is to
occur, we arise the morning of the session, have a light breakfast, and begin
the series of steps which will best aid us in successfully completing the
session. I give Carla a half-hour back massage to loosen her muscles and
joints before each session because she will have to remain absolutely
motionless for between an hour and an hour and forty-five minutes. Then
we meditate so that the harmony we try to produce in our daily lives is
intensified, and so that our desires are unified into the single desire to see
contact with Ra. We then perform our ritual of protection and cleansing of
the room in which the contact will be made and situate Carla in a prone
position on the bed, covering her body with a white blanket, her eyes with a
white cloth, and hook up the three tape recorder microphones just below
her chin so that we don’t miss any of the session if one or two tape recorders
malfunction.
By this time, all that is visible of Carla is her hair flowing down both of her
shoulders and her nose poking out of the sea of cloth white surrounding it.
As she mentally recites the Prayer of St. Francis, Don is aligning the table
which holds the Bible, candle, incense, and chalice of water in a straight line
with her head, as recommended by Ra. After Don lights the candle and
incense, he and I walk the Circle of One around Carla and repeat the words
which begin each contact.



                                    50
                              Introduction

At some point after that, Carla departs her physical body and Ra then uses
it to make the words which form the responses to Don’s questions. I
meditate and send light to Carla for the duration of the session, only taking
time out to flip the tapes over as they finish each side. When the session is
over, Don waits a few moments for Carla to return to her usually quite stiff
body, calls her name a few times until she responds, helps her to sit up, rubs
her neck a bit, and gives her the chalice full of water to drink after he and I
have filled it as full of our love vibrations as we can.
Since Carla has no idea of what has occurred during the session, she is
always most curious to know how it went. She has to settle for secondhand
bits and pieces of information until I can get the session transcribed from
the tapes, which is usually very easy since Ra speaks quite slowly and forms
each syllable with precise enunciation.
Participating in this communication with Ra has been most inspiring for
each of us because of the blend of eloquence and simplicity which
characterizes Ra’s responses. The information contained in The Ra Material
has been most helpful to us in increasing our knowledge of the mystery of
the creation and our evolution through it. We hope that it might also be
useful to you.
L/L Research
Don Elkins
Carla L. Rueckert
Jim McCarty
Louisville, Kentucky
July 7, 1983




                                    51
                            Photographs
From The Ra Material, Session No. 88, May 29, 1982:
    Firstly, if pictures be taken of a working the visual image must needs be
    that which is; that is, it is well for you to photograph only an actual
    working and no sham nor substitution of any material. There shall be
    no distortions which this group can avoid any more than we would
    wish distortions in our words.
    Secondly, it is inadvisable to photograph the instrument or any portion
    of the working room while the instrument is in trance. This is a narrow
    band contact, and we wish to keep electrical and electromagnetic
    energies constant when their presence is necessary and not present at all
    otherwise.
    Thirdly, once the instrument is aware of the picture-taking, whether
    before or after the working, the instrument shall be required to
    continuously respond to speech thus assuring that no trance is
    imminent.
                                     
    We ask that any photographs tell the truth, that they be dated and
    shine with a clarity so that there is no shadow of any but genuine
    expression which may be offered to those who seek truth.
    We come as humble messengers of the Law of One, desiring to decrease
    distortions. We ask that you, who have been our friends, work with any
    considerations such as above discussed, not with the thought of quickly
    removing an unimportant detail, but, as in all ways, regard such as
    another opportunity to, as the adept must, be yourselves and offer that
    which is in and with you without pretense of any kind.




                                     52
                               Photographs




   RA, Session No. 2, January 20,1981: “Place at the entity’s head a virgin
 chalice of water. Place to the center the book most closely aligned with the
instrument’s mental distortions, which are allied most closely with the Law
   of One—that being the Bible that she touches most frequently. To the
other side of the Bible, place a small amount of cense, or incense, in a virgin
 censer. To the rear of the book symbolizing One, opened to the Gospel of
                  John, Chapter One, place a white candle.”
                           (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                      53
                             Photographs




 RA, Session No. 69, August 29, 1981: “At this particular working there is
some slight interference with the contact due to the hair of the instrument.
  We may suggest the combing of this antenna-like material into a more
  orderly configuration prior to the working.” (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)

                                    54
                            Photographs




“We hook up three tape recorder microphones just below her chin so that
we don’t miss any of the session if tape recorder one or two malfunctions,
   which has happened.” From the Introduction to The Ra Material.
                       (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)

                                   55
                            Photographs




RA, Session No. 2, January 20, 1981: “The proper alignment is with the
 head pointed 20 degrees north-by-northeast. This is the direction from
  which the newer or New Age distortions of love/light, which are less
distorted, are emanating, and this instrument will find comfort therein.”
                       (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)

                                   56
                         Photographs




   RA, Session No. 2, January 20, 1981: “The instrument would be
strengthened by the wearing of a white robe. The instrument shall be
   covered and prone, the eyes covered.” (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                57
                             Photographs




 From the Introduction to The Ra Material: “Each of us contributes ideas,
but the great bulk of the line of questioning is accomplished by Don, who is
 the questioner, since he has years of experience in investigating the UFO
  contactee phenomenon necessary to develop the intellectual foundation
   which is required in any attempt to fit the diverse pieces of this puzzle
                    together.” (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                    58
                             Photographs




 From the Introduction to The Ra Material: “We average about one session
  every week or ten days now, which allows us to prepare for each session
    with the greater degree of care that seems to be required as sessions
accumulate. A great deal of thought goes into the questions which Don asks
              during each session.” (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                   59
                              Photographs




 From the Introduction to The Ra Material: “After Don lights the candle
and incense, he and I walk the Circle of One around Carla and repeat the
words which begin each contact. At some point after that Carla departs her
   physical body and Ra then uses it to make the words which form the
  responses to Don’s questions. I meditate and send light to Carla for the
 duration of the session, only taking time out to flip the tapes over as they
                              finish each side.”
In this picture Carla is not channeling Ra but is singing “Amazing Grace” as
per Ra’s instructions for the instrument to be constantly speaking if her eyes
                are covered during the picture-taking session.
                           (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                     60
                            Photographs




This picture was taken immediately after Carla responded to her name and
 the eye-covering was removed from her face, somewhat mussing her hair.
                        (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                  61
                               Photographs




From the Introduction to The Ra Material: “When the session is over, Don
 waits a few moments for Carla to return to her usually quite stiff body; he
 calls her name a few times until she responds, helps her to sit up, rubs her
neck a bit, and gives her the chalice full of water to drink after he and I have
 filled it as full of our love vibrations as we can.” (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                       62
                            Photographs




Jim is transcribing Session No. 89 on the afternoon of June 9, 1982, while
               Chocolate Bar, one of our four cats, observes.
                         (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                   63
                             Photographs




 The exterior of the Ra room: the door and corner windows are part of the
outside of the room in which the Ra sessions have taken place since January
                                    1981.
                         (Photo taken June 9, 1982.)




                                    64
                      Photographs




Carla holding our longtime friend, thirteen-year-old Gandalf.
                (Photo taken June 26, 1982.)




                             65
                            Photographs




Don, in the office, talking to picture-taker, Jim, and attracting a feline
                            audience as well.
                       (Photo taken June 26, 1982.)




                                   66
                             Photographs




Jim and Carla prepare for the meditation that always precedes a Ra session.
                       (Photo taken June 26, 1982.)




                                    67
                Photographs




                      Carla
(Photo taken after Ra session No. 92, July 8, 1982)




                        68
On January 15, 1981, our research group began receiving a communication
from the social memory complex, Ra. From this communication
precipitated the Law of One and some of the distortions of the Law of One.
The pages of this book contain an exact transcript, edited only to remove
some personal material, of the communications received in the first twenty-
six sessions with Ra.




                                    69
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 1
                           January 15, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I have not spoken through this instrument before. We had to
wait until she was precisely tuned, as we send a narrow band vibration. We
greet you in the love and in the light of our infinite Creator.
We have watched your group. We have been called to your group, for you
have a need for the diversity of experiences in channeling which go with a
more intensive, or as you might call it, advanced approach to the system of
studying the pattern of the illusions of your body, your mind, and your
spirit, which you call seeking the truth. We hope to offer you a somewhat
different slant upon the information which is always and ever the same.
At this time we would be glad to attempt to speak to any subject or
question which those entities in the room may have potential use in the
requesting.
Questioner: Do you have a specific purpose, and if so, could you tell us
something of what your purpose is?
Ra: I am Ra. We communicate now. We are those who are of the Law of
One. In our vibration the polarities are harmonized; the complexities are
simplified; the paradoxes have a solution. We are one. That is our nature
and our purpose.
We are old upon your planet and have served with varying degrees of
success in transmitting the Law of One, of Unity, of Singleness to your
peoples. We have walked your planet. We have seen the faces of your
peoples. However, we now feel the great responsibility of staying in the
capacity of removing the distortions and powers that have been given to the
Law of One. We will continue in this, until, shall we say, your cycle is
appropriately ended. If not this one, then the next. We are not a part of
time and, thus, are able to be with you in any of your times.
Does this give you enough information from which to extract our purpose,
my brother?
Questioner: Yes. Thank you.
Ra: I am Ra. We appreciate your vibrations. Is there another query?
Questioner: I’ve heard of the name “Ra” in connection with the Egyptians.
Are you connected with that Ra in any way?



                                     70
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 1

Ra: I am Ra. Yes, the connection is congruency. May we elucidate? What
do you not understand?
Questioner: Could you give me a little more detail about your role with the
Egyptians?
Ra: I am Ra. The identity of the vibration Ra is our identity. We as a group,
or what you would call a social memory complex, made contact with a race
of your planetary kind which you call Egyptians. Others from our density
made contact at the same time in South America, and the so-called “lost
cities” were their attempts to contribute to the Law of One.
We spoke to one who heard and understood and was in a position to decree
the Law of One. However, the priests and peoples of that era quickly
distorted our message, robbing it of the, shall we say, compassion with
which unity is informed by its very nature. Since it contains all, it cannot
abhor any.
When we were no longer able to have appropriate channels through which
to enunciate the Law of One, we removed ourselves from the now
hypocritical position which we had allowed ourselves to be placed in. Other
myths, shall we say, having more to do with polarity and the things of your
vibration that are complex, again took over in that particular
society/complex.
Does this form a sufficient amount of information, or could we speak
further?
Is there another query?
Questioner: (The question was lost because the questioner was sitting too far
from the tape recorder to be recorded.)
Ra: I am Ra. Consider, if you will, that the universe is infinite. This has yet
to be proven or disproven, but we can assure you that there is no end to
your selves, your understanding, what you would call your journey of
seeking, or your perceptions of the creation.
That which is infinite cannot be many, for many-ness is a finite concept. To
have infinity you must identify or define the infinity as unity; otherwise, the
term does not have any referent or meaning. In an infinite Creator there is
only unity. You have seen simple examples of unity. You have seen the
prism which shows all colors stemming from the sunlight. This is a
simplistic example of unity.
In truth there is no right or wrong. There is no polarity for all will be, as
you would say, reconciled at some point in your dance through the

                                     71
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 1

mind/body/spirit complex which you amuse yourself by distorting in
various ways at this time. This distortion is not in any case necessary. It is
chosen by each of you as an alternative to understanding the complete unity
of thought which binds all things. You are not speaking of similar or
somewhat like entities or things. You are every thing, every being, every
emotion, every event, every situation. You are unity. You are infinity. You
are love/light, light/love. You are. This is the Law of One.
May we enunciate in more detail?
Questioner: No.
Ra: I am Ra. Is there another query at this time?
Questioner: Can you comment on the coming planetary changes in our
physical reality?
Ra: I am Ra. I preferred to wait till this instrument had again reached a
proper state of depth of singleness or one-pointedness before we spoke.
The changes are very, very trivial. We do not concern ourselves with the
conditions which bring about harvest.
Questioner: If an individual makes efforts to act as a catalyst in general to
increase the awareness of planetary consciousness, is he of any aid in that
direction, or is he doing nothing but acting upon himself?
Ra: I am Ra. We shall answer your question in two parts, both of which are
important equally.
Firstly, you must understand that the distinction between yourself and
others is not visible to us. We do not consider that a separation exists
between the consciousness-raising efforts of the distortion which you
project as a personality and the distortion that you project as another
personality. Thus, to learn is the same as to teach unless you are not
teaching what you are learning; in which case you have done you/them little
good. This understanding should be pondered by your mind/body/spirit
complex as it is a distortion which plays a part in your experiences at this
nexus.
To turn to the second part of our response may we state our understanding,
limited though it is.
Group-individuated consciousness is that state of sharing understanding
with the other distortions of mind/body/spirit complexes, which are within
the evident reach of the mind/body/spirit complex individual or group.
Thus, we are speaking to you and accepting both our distortions and your
own in order to enunciate the laws of creation, more especially the Law of
                                    72
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 1

One. We are not available to many of your peoples, for this is not an easily
understood way of communication or type of philosophy. However, our
very being is hopefully a poignant example of both the necessity and the
near-hopelessness of attempting to teach.
Each of those in this group is striving to use, digest, and diversify the
information which we are sending this instrument into the channels of the
mind/body/spirit complex without distortion. The few whom you will
illuminate by sharing your light are far more than enough reason for the
greatest possible effort. To serve one is to serve all. Therefore, we offer the
question back to you to state that indeed it is the only activity worth doing:
to learn/teach or teach/learn. There is nothing else which is of aid in
demonstrating the original thought except your very being, and the
distortions that come from the unexplained, inarticulate, or mystery-clad
being are many. Thus, to attempt to discern and weave your way through as
many group mind/body/spirit distortions as possible among your peoples in
the course of your teaching is a very good effort to make. We can speak no
more valiantly of your desire to serve.
May we speak in any other capacity upon this subject?
Questioner: Will you be available for communication? Can we call on you
in the future?
Ra: I am Ra. We have good contact with this instrument because of her
recent experiences with trance. She is to be able to communicate our
thoughts in your future. However, we advise care in disturbing the channel
for a few moments and then the proper procedure for aiding an instrument
who has, to some extent, the need of re-entering the mind/body/spirit
complex which the instrument has chosen for the life experience of this
time/space. Do you understand how to nurture this instrument?
Questioner: No. Could you explain it?
Ra: We suggest first a brief period of silence. Then the repetition of the
instrument’s vibratory complex of sound in your density which you call
name. Repeat until an answer is obtained. Then the laying on of the hands
at the neck region for a brief period so that the instrument may recharge
batteries which are not, shall we say, full of the essence of this particular
field at this time. And finally, a gift of water into which the love of all
present has been given. This will restore this entity, for her distortions
contain great sensitivity towards the vibrations of love and the charged
water will effect comfort. Do you now understand?
Questioner: Not completely.

                                    73
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 1

Ra: I am Ra. We search your mind to find the vibration (nickname). It is
this vibration from you which contains the largest amount of what you
would call love. Others would call this entity (first name). The charging of
the water is done by those present placing their hands over the glass and
visualizing the power of love entering the water. This will charge that very
effective medium with those vibrations.
This instrument is, at this time, quite fatigued. However, her heart is such
that she continues to remain open to us and useful as a channel. This is why
we have spent the time/space explaining how the distortions of what you
may call fatigue may be ameliorated.
Under no circumstances should this instrument be touched until she has
responded to her name. I do not wish to take this instrument beyond her
capacity for physical energy. It grows low. Therefore, I must leave this
instrument. I leave you in the glory and peace of unity. Go forth in peace,
rejoicing in the power of the one Creator. I am Ra.




                                   74
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 2
                            January 20, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of our infinite Creator. I
am with this mind/body/spirit complex which has offered itself for a
channel. I communicate with you.
Queries are in order in your projections of mind distortion at this
time/space. Thusly would I assure this group that my own social memory
complex has one particular method of communicating with those few who
may be able to harmonize their distortions with ours, and that is to respond
to queries for information. We are comfortable with this format. May the
queries now begin.
Questioner: I’m guessing that there are enough people who would
understand what you are saying, who would be interested enough in it, for
us to make a book of your communications and I wondered if you would
agree to this?
If so, I was thinking that possibly a bit of historical background of yourself
might be in order.
Ra: I am Ra. The possibility of communication, as you would call it, from
the One to the One, through distortion, acceptable for meaning is the
reason we contacted this group. There are few who will grasp, without
significant distortion, that which we communicate through this connection
with this mind/body/spirit complex. However, if it be your desire to share
our communications with others we have the distortion towards a
perception that this would be most helpful in regularizing and crystallizing
your own patterns of vibration upon the levels of experience which you call
the life. If one is illuminated, are not all illuminated? Therefore, we are
oriented towards speaking for you in whatever supply of speakingness you
may desire. To teach/learn is the Law of One in one of its most elementary
distortions.
Questioner: Could you tell us something of your historical background and
your contact with earlier races on this planet? Then we would have
something to start with.
Ra: I am Ra. We are aware that your mind/body is calculating the proper
method of performing the task of creating a teach/learning instrument. We
are aware that you find our incarnate, as you call it, state of interest. We
waited for a second query so as to emphasize that the time/space of several
thousand of your years creates a spurious type of interest. Thus in giving

                                      75
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 2

this information, we ask the proper lack of stress be placed upon our
experiences in your local space/time. The teach/learning which is our
responsibility is philosophical rather than historical. We shall proceed with
your request which is harmless if properly evaluated.
We are those of the Confederation who eleven thousand of your years ago
came to two of your planetary cultures which were at that time closely in
touch with the creation of the one Creator. It was our naive belief that we
could teach/learn by direct contact and that the free will distortions of
individual feeling or personality were in no danger. We had no thought of
their being disturbed, as these cultures were already closely aligned with an
all-embracing belief in the live-ness or consciousness of all. We came and
were welcomed by the peoples whom we wished to serve. We attempted to
aid them in technical ways having to do with the healing of
mind/body/spirit complex distortions through the use of the crystal,
appropriate to the distortion, placed within a certain appropriate series of
ratios of time/space material. Thus were the pyramids created.
We found that the technology was reserved largely for those with the
effectual mind/body distortion of power. This was not intended by the Law
of One. We left your peoples. The group that was to work with those in the
area of South America, as you call that portion of your sphere, gave up not
so easily. They returned. We did not. However, we have never left your
vibration due to our responsibility for the changes in consciousness we had
first caused and then found distorted in ways not relegated to the Law of
One. We attempted to contact the rulers of the land to which we had come,
that land which you call Egypt, or in some areas, the Holy Land.
In the Eighteenth Dynasty, as it is known in your records of space/time
distortions, we were able to contact a pharaoh, as you would call him. The
man was small in life-experience on your plane and was a … what this
instrument would call, Wanderer. Thus, this mind/body/spirit complex
received our communication distortions and was able to blend his
distortions with our own. This young entity had been given a vibratory
complex of sound which vibrated in honor of a prosperous god, as this
mind/body complex, which we call instrument for convenience, would call
“Ammon.” The entity decided that this name, being in honor of one among
many gods, was not acceptable for inclusion in his vibratory sound complex.
Thus, he changed his name to one which honored the sun disc. This
distortion, called “Aten,” was a close distortion to our reality as we
understand our own nature of mind/body/spirit complex distortion.
However, it does not come totally into alignment with the intended
teach/learning which was sent. This entity, Ikhnaton, became convinced

                                   76
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 2

that the vibration of One was the true spiritual vibration and thus decreed
the Law of One.
However, this entity’s beliefs were accepted by very few. His priests gave lip
service only, without the spiritual distortion towards seeking. The peoples
continued in their beliefs. When this entity was no longer in this density,
again the polarized beliefs in the many gods came into their own and
continued so until the one known as Mohammed delivered the peoples into
a more intelligible distortion of mind/body/spirit relationships.
Do you have a more detailed interest at this time?
Questioner: We are very interested in the entire story that you have to tell
and getting in to the Law of One in quite some detail. There will be several
questions that I’ll ask as we go along that may or may not be related directly
to understanding the Law of One. However, I believe that the proper way
of presenting this as a teach/learning vehicle is to investigate different facets
of what you tell us. You spoke of crystal healing. (One other thing I want to
mention is that when the instrument becomes fatigued we want to cut off
communication and continue questions at a later time when the instrument
is recharged.) If the instrument is suitable at this time we would like a little
information about the crystal healing that you mentioned.
Ra: I am Ra. The principle of crystal healing is based upon an
understanding of the hierarchical nature of the structure of the illusion
which is the physical body, as you would call it. There are crystals which
work upon the energies coming into the spiritual body; there are crystals
which work upon the distortions from spirit to mind; there are crystals
which balance the distortions between the mind and the body. All of these
crystal healings are charged through purified channels. Without the relative
crystallization of the healer working with the crystal, the crystal will not be
properly charged. The other ingredient is the proper alignment with the
energy fields of the planet upon which you dwell and the holistic or cosmic
distortions or streamings which enter the planetary aura in such a manner
that an appropriate ratio of shapes and placement within these shapes is of
indicated aid in the untangling or balancing process.
To go through the various crystals to be used would be exhaustive to this
instrument, although you may ask us if you wish in another session. The
delicacy, shall we say, of the choosing of the crystal is very critical and, in
truth, a crystalline structure such as a diamond or ruby can be used by a
purified channel who is filled with the love/light of One, in almost any
application.



                                     77
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 2

This, of course, takes initiation, and there never have been many to
persevere to the extent of progressing through the various distortion leavings
which initiation causes.
May we further inform you in any fairly brief way upon this or another
subject?
Questioner: Yes. You mentioned that the pyramids were an outgrowth of
this. Could you expand a little on that? Were you responsible for the
building of the pyramid, and what was the purpose of the pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. The larger pyramids were built by our ability using the forces
of One. The stones are alive. It has not been so understood by the
mind/body/spirit distortions of your culture. The purposes of the pyramids
were two:
Firstly, to have a properly oriented place of initiation for those who wished
to become purified or initiated channels for the Law of One.
Two, we wished then to carefully guide the initiates in developing a healing
of the people whom they sought to aid, and of the planet itself. Pyramid
after pyramid charged by the crystal and Initiate were designed to balance
the incoming energy of the One Creation with the many and multiple
distortions of the planetary mind/body/spirit. In this effort we were able to
continue work that brothers within the Confederation had effected through
building of other crystal-bearing structures and thus complete a ring, if you
will, of these about the Earth’s, as this instrument would have us vibrate it,
surface.
This instrument begins to lose energy. We ask for one more query or
subject and then we shall take our leave for this time/space.
Questioner: You might mention that originally there was a capstone on the
pyramid at the top, what was it made of and how you moved the heavy
blocks to build the pyramid. What technique was used for that?
Ra: I am Ra. I request that we be asked this question in our next worktime,
as you would term the distortion/sharing that our energies produce.
If you have any questions about the proper use of this mind/body/spirit, we
would appreciate your asking them now.
Questioner: Consider them asked. I don’t have anything to go on. What is
the proper use of this instrument? What should we do? What should we do
to maximize her ability and her comfort?
Ra: I am Ra. We are pleased that you have asked this question for it is not
our understanding that we have the right/duty to share our perceptions on
                                   78
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 2

any subject but philosophy without direct question. However, this
mind/body/spirit is not being correctly used and therefore is experiencing
unnecessary distortions of body in the area of fatigue.
The vibrations may well be purified by a simple turning to the circle of One
and the verbal vibration while doing so of the following dialogue:
Question: “What is the Law?”
Answer: “The Law is One.”
Question: “Why are we here?”
Answer: “We seek the Law of One.”
Question: “Why do we seek Ra?”
Answer: “Ra is an humble messenger of the Law of One.”
Both Together: “Rejoice then and purify this place in the Law of One. Let
no thought-form enter the circle we have walked about this instrument, for
the Law is One.”
The instrument at this time should be in trance. The proper alignment is
the head pointed twenty degrees north-by-northeast. This is the direction
from which the newer or New Age distortions of love/light, which are less
distorted, are emanating, and this instrument will find comfort therein.
This is a sensitive instrument, by which we mean the distortions which
enter her mind/body/spirit complex come from any of her senses. Thus, it is
well to do the following:
Place at the entity’s head a virgin chalice of water.
To the center, the book most closely aligned with the instrument’s mental
distortions which are allied most closely with the Law of One, that being
the Bible that she touches most frequently.
To the other side of the Bible, a small amount of cense, or incense, in a
virgin censer.
To the rear of the book symbolizing One, opened to the Gospel of John,
Chapter One, a white candle.
The instrument would be strengthened by the wearing of a white robe. The
instrument shall be covered and prone, the eyes covered.
We feel that, though this is a complex of activity/circumstance and may
seem very distorted from a purposeful teach/learning experience, these
elaborations on the technique of trance will ease the mind distortions of
those about the instrument as they perceive improvement in the
                                     79
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 2

instrument’s distortions with regard to fatigue. We add only that if these
teach/learning sessions are held during time/space during which your sun-
body does not light your room that it is best to call the instrument before
the lighting of the illuminatory mechanism.
I am Ra. I leave you in the glory and the peace of the one Creator. Rejoice
in the love/light, and go forth in the power of the one Creator. In joy, we
leave you. Adonai.




                                   80
              The Law of One, Book I, Session 3
                            January 21, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in love and the light of the one infinite Creator. I
communicate with you now.
Questioner: My first question is, did we correctly perform the ritual for
starting the communication?
Ra: I am Ra. The placement of the artifacts designated to balance the
instrument should be placed at the instrument’s head for the least distortion
of effect. The remainder of the beginning account of purpose is quite
acceptable, for those speaking desire to serve. Otherwise, the attendant
emphasis in mind complexities would not have been affected properly. We
caution you to guard against those who are not wishing to serve others
above all else, from taking part in the beginning or in lending their
distortions of mind/body/spirit complex to any session as we should then be
unable to properly blend our distortions with those of this instrument.
Questioner: Should I move the Bible, candle, and incense at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. This would be appropriate.
Questioner: (After moving the items.) Is this the proper position?
Ra: I am Ra. Please correct the angle of the incense so that it is
perpendicular to the plane of twenty degrees north-by-northeast.
Questioner: (After making the correction.) Is this satisfactory?
Ra: I am Ra. Please check by eye to make fine correction. We will explain
the process by which this becomes a significant distortion balancer. The
incense acts as energizer to the physical body of this instrument, signifying
its humanity. This is, therefore, a necessity that the wafted smoke is
perceived from the same relative angle as the instrument perceives the
opened Bible balanced by the lighted candle signifying love/light and
light/love and, therefore, give the mental and emotional, shall we call it,
distortion complex of this instrument the sight of paradise and peace which
it seeks. Thus energized from the lower to the higher, the instrument
becomes balanced and does not grow fatigued.
We appreciate your concern, for this will enable our teach/learning to
proceed more easily.
Questioner: Does everything appear correctly aligned now?
Ra: I am Ra. I judge it within limits of acceptability.
                                       81
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 3

Questioner: At the last session we had two questions that we were saving for
this session: one having to do with the possible capstone on top of the Great
Pyramid at Giza; the other having to do with how you moved the heavy
blocks that make up the pyramid. I know these questions are of no
importance with respect to the Law of One, but it was my judgment—and
please correct me if I am wrong, and make the necessary suggestions—that
this would provide an easy entry for those who would read the material that
will eventually become a book. We are very grateful for your contact and
will certainly take any suggestions as to how we should receive this
information.
Ra: I am Ra. I will not suggest the proper series of questions. This is your
prerogative as free agent of the Law of One having learned/understood that
our social memory complex cannot effectually discern the distortions of the
societal mind/body/spirit complex of your peoples. We wish now to fulfill
our teach/learning honor/responsibility by answering what is asked. This
only will suffice for we cannot plumb the depths of the distortion
complexes which infect your peoples.
The first question, therefore, is the capstone. We iterate the unimportance
of this type of data.
The so-called Great Pyramid had two capstones. One was of our design and
was of smaller and carefully contrived pieces of the material upon your
planet which you call “granite.” This was contrived for crystalline properties
and for the proper flow of your atmosphere via a type of what you would
call “chimney.”
At a time when we as a people had left your density, the original was taken
away and a more precious one substituted. It consisted, in part, of a golden
material. This did not change the properties of the pyramid, as you call it, at
all, and was a distortion due to the desire of a few to mandate the use of the
structure as a royal place only.
Do you wish to query further upon this first question?
Questioner: What did you mean by chimney? What was its specific
purpose?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a proper flow of your atmosphere which, though
small, freshens the whole of the structure. This was designed by having air-
flow ducts, as this instrument might call them, situated so that there was a
freshness of atmosphere without any disturbance or draft.
Questioner: How were the blocks moved?


                                    82
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 3

Ra: I am Ra. You must picture the activity within all that is created. The
energy is, though finite, quite large compared to the
understanding/distortion by your peoples. This is an obvious point well
known to your people, but little considered.
This energy is intelligent. It is hierarchical. Much as your mind/body/spirit
complex dwells within a hierarchy of vehicles and retains, therefore, the
shell or shape or field, and the intelligence of each ascendingly intelligent or
balanced body, so does each atom of such a material as rock. When one can
speak to that intelligence, the finite energy of the physical, or chemical
rock/body is put into contact with that infinite power which is resident in
the more well-tuned bodies, be they human or rock.
With this connection made, a request may be given. The intelligence of
infinite rock-ness communicates to its physical vehicle and that splitting
and moving which is desired is then carried out through the displacement of
the energy field of rock-ness from finity to a dimension which we may
conveniently call, simply, infinity.
In this way, that which is required is accomplished due to a cooperation of
the infinite understanding of the Creator indwelling in the living rock. This
is, of course, the mechanism by which many things are accomplished, which
are not subject to your present means of physical analysis of action at a
distance.
Questioner: I am reminded of the statement—approximately—that if you
had faith to move a mountain, the mountain would move. This seems to be
approximately what you were saying. That if you are fully aware of the Law
of One, you would be able to do these things. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The vibratory distortion of sound, faith, is perhaps one of the
stumbling blocks between those of what we may call the infinite path and
those of the finite proving/understanding.
You are precisely correct in your understanding of the congruency of faith
and intelligent infinity; however, one is a spiritual term, the other more
acceptable perhaps to the conceptual framework distortions of those who
seek with measure and pen.
Questioner: Then if an individual is totally informed with respect to the
Law of One and lives the Law of One, then such things as the building of
the pyramids by direct mental effort would be commonplace. Is that what I
am to understand?




                                    83
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 3

Ra: I am Ra. You are incorrect in that there is a distinction between the
individual power through the Law of One and the combined, or societal
memory complex mind/body/spirit understanding of the Law of One.
In the first case only the one individual, purified of all flaws, could move a
mountain. In the case of mass understanding of unity, each individual may
contain an acceptable amount of distortion and yet the mass mind could
move mountains. The progress is normally from the understanding which
you now seek to a dimension of understanding which is governed by the
laws of love, and which seeks the laws of light. Those who are vibrating with
the Law of Light seek the Law of One. Those who vibrate with the Law of
One seek the Law of Foreverness.
We cannot say what is beyond this dissolution of the unified self with all
that there is, for we still seek to become all that there is, and still are we Ra.
Thus our paths go onward.
Questioner: Was the pyramid then built by the mutual action of many?
Ra: I am Ra. The pyramids which we thought/built were constructed
thought-forms created by our social memory complex.
Questioner: Then the rock was created in place rather than moved from
some place else? Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. We built with everlasting rock the Great Pyramid, as you call
it. Other of the pyramids were built with stone moved from one place to
another.
Questioner: What is everlasting rock?
Ra: I am Ra. If you can understand the concept of thought-forms you will
realize that the thought-form is more regular in its distortion than the
energy fields created by the materials in the rock which has been created
through thought form from thought to finite energy and being-ness in your,
shall we say, distorted reflection of the level of the thought-form.
May we answer you in any more helpful way?
Questioner: This is rather trivial, but I was wondering why the pyramid was
built with many blocks rather than creating the whole thing as one form
created at once?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a law which we believe to be one of the more
significant primal distortions of the Law of One. That is the Law of
Confusion. You have called this the Law of Free Will. We wished to make
an healing machine, or time/space ratio complex which was as efficacious as
possible. However, we did not desire to allow the mystery to be penetrated
                                     84
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 3

by the peoples in such a way that we became worshipped as builders of a
miraculous pyramid. Thus it appears to be made, not thought.
Questioner: Well, then you speak of the pyramid, the Great Pyramid, I
assume, as primarily a healing machine, and also you spoke of it as a device
for initiation. Are these one and the same concept?
Ra: I am Ra. They are part of one complex of love/light intent/sharing. To
use the healing properly it was important to have a purified and dedicated
channel, or energizer, for the love/light of the infinite Creator to flow
through; thus the initiatory method was necessary to prepare the mind, the
body, and the spirit for service in the Creator’s work. The two are integral.
Questioner: Does the shape of the pyramid have a function in the initiation
process?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a large question. We feel that we shall begin and ask
you to re-evaluate and ask further at a later session, this somewhat, shall we
say, informative point.
To begin. There are two main functions of the pyramid in relation to the
initiatory procedures. One has to do with the body. Before the body can be
initiated, the mind must be initiated. This is the point at which most adepts
of your present cycle find their mind/body/spirit complexes distorted from.
When the character and personality that is the true identity of the mind has
been discovered, the body then must be known in each and every way.
Thus, the various functions of the body need understanding and control
with detachment. The first use of the pyramid, then, is the going down into
the pyramid for purposes of deprivation of sensory input so that the body
may, in a sense, be dead and another life begin.
We advise, at this time, any necessary questions and a fairly rapid ending of
this session. Have you any query at this time/space?
Questioner: The only question is, is there anything that we have done
wrong, or that we could do to make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. We scan this instrument.
This instrument has been much aided by these precautions. We suggest
only some attention to the neck which seems in this body/distortion to be
distorted in the area of strength/weakness. More support, therefore, to the
neck area may be an aid.
Questioner: Should we have the instrument drink the water from the
chalice behind her head, or should we have her drink from another glass
after we charge it with love?

                                    85
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 3

Ra: I am Ra. That and only that chalice shall be the most beneficial as the
virgin material living in the chalice accepts, retains, and responds to the love
vibration activated by your being-ness.
I am Ra. I will now leave this group rejoicing in the power and peace of the
one Creator. Adonai.




                                    86
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 4
                            January 22, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate with you now.
Questioner: When we finished the last session, I had asked a question that
was too long to answer. It had to do with the shape of the pyramid, its
relationship to the initiation. Is this the appropriate time to ask this
question?
Ra: I am Ra. Yes, this is an appropriate time/space to ask that question.
Questioner: Does the shape of the pyramid have an effect upon the
initiation?
Ra: I am Ra. As we began the last session question, you have already
recorded in your individual memory complex the first use of the shape
having to do with the body complex initiation. The initiation of spirit was a
more carefully designed type of initiation as regards the time/space ratios
about which the entity to be initiated found itself.
If you will picture with me the side of the so-called pyramid shape and
mentally imagine this triangle cut into four equal triangles, you will find the
intersection of the triangle, which is at the first level on each of the four
sides, forms a diamond in a plane which is horizontal. The middle of this
plane is the appropriate place for the intersection of the energies streaming
from the infinite dimensions and the mind/body/spirit complexes of various
interwoven energy fields. Thus it was designed that the one to be initiated
would, by mind, be able to perceive and then channel this, shall we say,
gateway to intelligent infinity. This, then, was the second point of designing
this specific shape.
May we provide a further description of any kind to your query?
Questioner: Yes. As I understand it then, the initiate was to be on the
center line of that pyramid, but at an altitude above the base as defined by
the intersection of the four triangles made by dividing each side. Is that
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then at this point there is a focusing of energy that is extra-
dimensional in respect to our dimensions. Am I right?



                                      87
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 4

Ra: I am Ra. You may use that vibratory sound complex. However, it is not
totally and specifically correct. There are no “extra” dimensions. We would
prefer the use of the term multi-dimensional.
Questioner: Is the size of the pyramid a function of the effectiveness of the
initiation?
Ra: I am Ra. Each size pyramid has its own point of streaming in of
intelligent infinity. Thus, a tiny pyramid that can be placed below a body or
above a body will have specific and various effects depending upon the
placement of the body in relationship to the entrance point of intelligent
infinity.
For the purposes of initiation, the size needed to be large enough to create
the impression of towering size so that the entrance point of multi-
dimensional intelligent infinity would completely pervade and fill the
channel, the entire body being able to rest in this focused area.
Furthermore, it was necessary for healing purposes that both channel and
the one to be healed be able to rest within that focused point.
Questioner: Is the large pyramid at Giza still usable for this purpose, or is it
no longer functional?
Ra: I am Ra. That, like many other pyramid structures, is like the piano out
of tune. It, as this instrument would express it, plays the tune but, oh, so
poorly. The disharmony jangles the sensitivity. Only the ghost of the
streaming still remains due to the shifting of the streaming points which is
in turn due to the shifting electromagnetic field of your planet; due also to
the discordant vibratory complexes of those who have used the initiatory
and healing place for less compassionate purposes.
Questioner: Would it be possible to build a pyramid and properly align it
and use it today from the materials that we have available?
Ra: I am Ra. It is quite possible for you to build a pyramid structure. The
material used is not critical, merely the ratios of time/space complexes.
However, the use of the structure for initiation and healing depends
completely upon the inner disciplines of the channels attempting such
work.
Questioner: My question then would be, are there individuals incarnate
upon the planet today who would have the inner disciplines to, using your
instructions, construct and initiate in a pyramid they built? Is this within
the limits of what any one on the planet today can do? Or is there no one
available for this?


                                    88
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 4

Ra: I am Ra. There are people, as you call them, who are able to take this
calling at this nexus. However, we wish to point out once again that the
time of the pyramids, as you would call it, is past. It is indeed a timeless
structure. However, the streamings from the universe were, at the time we
attempted to aid this planet, those which required a certain understanding
of purity. This understanding has, as the streamings revolved and all things
evolve, changed to a more enlightened view of purity. Thus, there are those
among your people at this time whose purity is already one with intelligent
infinity. Without the use of structures, healer/patient can gain healing.
May we further speak to some specific point?
Questioner: Is it possible for you to instruct in these healing techniques if
we could make available an individual who had the native ability?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible. We must add that many systems of
teach/learning the healing/patient nexus are proper given the various
mind/body/spirit complexes. We ask your imagination to consider the
relative simplicity of the mind in the earlier cycle and the less distorted, but
often overly complex, views and thought/spirit processes of the same
mind/body/spirit complexes after many incarnations. We also ask your
imagination to conceive of those who have chosen the distortion of service
and have removed their mind/body/spirit complexes from one dimension to
another, thus bringing with them in totally latent form many skills and
understandings which more closely match the distortions of the
healing/patient processes.
Questioner: I would very much like to continue investigation into the
possibility of this healing process, but I’m a little lost as to where to begin.
Can you tell me where my first step would be?
Ra: I am Ra. I cannot tell you what to ask. I may suggest that you consider
the somewhat complex information just given and thus discover several
avenues of inquiry. There is one “health,” as you call it, in your polarized
environment, but there are several significantly various distortions of types
of mind/body/spirit complexes. Each type must pursue its own
learn/teaching in this area.
Questioner: Would you say, then, that the first step would be to find an
individual with ability brought with him into this incarnation? Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Once I have selected an individual to perform the healing, it
would be helpful to receive instruction from you. Is this possible?

                                     89
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 4

Ra: I am Ra. This is possible given the distortions of vibratory sound
complexes.
Questioner: I’m assuming, then, that the selected individual would be one
who was very much in harmony with the Law of One. Even though he may
not have any intellectual understanding of it, he should be living the Law of
One?
Ra: I am Ra. This is both correct and incorrect. The first case, that being
correctness, would apply to one such as the questioner himself who has the
distortions towards healing, as you call it.
The incorrectness which shall be observed is the healing of those whose
activities in your space/time illusion do not reflect the Law of One, but
whose ability has found its pathway to intelligent infinity regardless of the
plane of existence from which this distortion is found.
Questioner: I’m a little confused. I partially understand you, but I’m not
sure that I fully understand you. Could you restate that in another way?
Ra: I am Ra. I can restate that in many ways, given this instrument’s
knowledge of your vibratory sound complexes. I will strive for a shorter
distortion at this time.
Two kinds there are who can heal: those such as yourself who, having the
innate distortion towards knowledge-giving of the Law of One, can heal but
do not; and those who, having the same knowledge, but showing no
significant distortions toward the Law of One in mind, body, or spirit, yet,
and nevertheless, have opened a channel to the same ability.
The point being that there are those who, without proper training, shall we
say, nevertheless, heal. It is a further item of interest that those whose life
does not equal their work may find some difficulty in absorbing the energy
of intelligent infinity and thus become quite distorted in such a way as to
cause disharmony in themselves and others and perhaps even find it
necessary to cease the healing activity. Therefore, those of the first type,
those who seek to serve and are willing to be trained in thought, word, and
action are those who will be able to comfortably maintain the distortion
toward service in the area of healing.
Questioner: Then would it be possible for you to train us in healing
awareness?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible.
Questioner: Will you train us?
Ra: I am Ra. We will.
                                    90
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 4

Questioner: I have no idea how long this would take. Is it possible for you
to give a synopsis of the program of training required? I have no knowledge
of what questions to ask at this point.
Ra: I am Ra. We consider your request for information, for as you noted,
there are a significant number of vibratory sound complexes which can be
used in sequence to train the healer.
The synopsis is a very appropriate entry that you might understand what is
involved.
Firstly, the mind must be known to itself. This is perhaps the most
demanding part of healing work. If the mind knows itself then the most
important aspect of healing has occurred. Consciousness is the microcosm
of the Law of One.
The second part has to do with the disciplines of the body complexes. In
the streamings reaching your planet at this time, these understandings and
disciplines have to do with the balance between love and wisdom in the use
of the body in its natural functions.
The third area is the spiritual, and in this area the first two disciplines are
connected through the attainment of contact with intelligent infinity.
Questioner: I believe I have a little idea of the accomplishment of the first
step. Can you elaborate a little bit on the other two steps which I am not at
all familiar with.
Ra: I am Ra. Imagine the body. Imagine the more dense aspects of the
body. Proceed therefrom to the very finest knowledge of energy pathways
which revolve and cause the body to be energized. Understand that all
natural functions of the body have all aspects from dense to fine, and can be
transmuted to what you may call sacramental. This is a brief investigation of
the second area.
To speak to the third, if you will, imagine the function of the magnet. The
magnet has two poles. One reaches up. The other goes down. The function
of the spirit is to integrate the upreaching yearning of the mind/body energy
with the downpouring and streaming of infinite intelligence. This is a brief
explication of the third area.
Questioner: Then would this training program involve specific things to
do, specific instructions and exercises?
Ra: I am Ra. We are not at this time incarnate among your peoples; thus,
we can guide and attempt to specify, but we cannot, by example, show.
This is an handicap. However, there should indeed be fairly specific

                                     91
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 4

exercises of mind, body, and spirit during the teach/learning process we
offer. It is to be once more iterated that healing is but one distortion of the
Law of One. To reach an undistorted understanding of that law, it is not
necessary to heal or to show any manifestation but only to exercise the
discipline of understanding.
We would ask that one or two more questions be the ending of this session.
Questioner: My objective is primarily to discover more of the Law of One,
and it would be very helpful to discover the techniques of healing. I am
aware of your problem with respect to free will. Can you state the Law of
One and the laws of healing to me?
Ra: I am Ra. The Law of One, though beyond the limitation of name, as
you call vibratory sound complexes, may be approximated by stating that all
things are one, that there is no polarity, no right or wrong, no disharmony,
but only identity. All is one, and that one is love/light, light/love, the
infinite Creator.
One of the primal distortions of the Law of One is that of healing. Healing
occurs when a mind/body/spirit complex realizes, deep within itself, the
Law of One; that is, that there is no disharmony, no imperfection; that all is
complete and whole and perfect. Thus, the intelligent infinity within this
mind/body/spirit complex re-forms the illusion of body, mind, or spirit to a
form congruent with the Law of One. The healer acts as energizer or
catalyst for this completely individual process.
One item which may be of interest is that a healer asking to learn must take
the distortion understood as responsibility for that ask/receiving. This is an
honor/duty which must be carefully considered in free will before the
asking.
Questioner: I assume that we should continue tomorrow.
Ra: I am Ra. Your assumption is correct unless you feel a certain question is
necessary. This instrument is nurtured by approximately this length of
work.
Questioner: I have one more short question. Is this instrument capable of
two of these sessions per day, or should we remain with one?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is capable of two sessions a day. However, she
must be encouraged to keep her bodily complex strong by the ingestion of
your foodstuffs to an extent which exceeds this instrument’s normal intake
of your foodstuffs, this due to the physical material which we use to speak.



                                    92
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 4

Further, this instrument’s activities must be monitored to prevent
overactivity, for this activity is equivalent to a strenuous working day on the
physical level.
If these admonishments are considered, the two sessions would be possible.
We do not wish to deplete this instrument.
Questioner: Thank you, Ra.
Ra: I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one Infinite
Intelligence which is the Creator. Go forth rejoicing in the power and the
peace of the One. Adonai.




                                    93
              The Law of One, Book I, Session 5
                              January 23, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: The last time that we communicated we were speaking of the
learning of healing. It is my impression from what you gave to us in the
earlier session that it is necessary to first purify the self by certain disciplines
and exercises. Then in order to heal a patient, it is necessary, by example,
and possibly certain exercises, to create the mental configuration in the
patient that allows him to heal himself. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Although your learn/understanding distortion is essentially
correct, your choice of vibratory/sound complex is not entirely as accurate
as this language allows.
It is not by example that the healer does the working. The working exists in
and of itself. The healer is only the catalyst, much as this instrument has the
catalysis necessary to provide the channel for our words, yet by example or
exercise of any kind can take no thought for this working.
The healing/working is congruent in that it is a form of channeling some
distortion of the intelligent infinity.
Questioner: We have decided to accept, if offered, the honor/duty of
learning/teaching the healing process. I would ask as to the first step which
we should accomplish in becoming effective healers.
Ra: I am Ra. We shall begin with the first of the three teachings/learnings.
We begin with the mental learn/teaching necessary for contact with
intelligent infinity. The prerequisite of mental work is the ability to retain
silence of self at a steady state when required by the self. The mind must be
opened like a door. The key is silence.
Within the door lies an hierarchical construction you may liken unto
geography and in some ways geometry, for the hierarchy is quite regular,
bearing inner relationships.
To begin to master the concept of mental disciplines it is necessary to
examine the self. The polarity of your dimension must be internalized.
Where you find patience within your mind you must consciously find the
corresponding impatience and vice versa. Each thought a being has, has in
its turn an antithesis. The disciplines of the mind involve, first of all,
identifying both those things of which you approve and those things of
                                         94
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 5

which you disapprove within yourself, and then balancing each and every
positive and negative charge with its equal. The mind contains all things.
Therefore, you must discover this completeness within yourself.
The second mental discipline is acceptance of the completeness within your
consciousness. It is not for a being of polarity in the physical consciousness
to pick and choose among attributes, thus building the roles that cause
blockages and confusions in the already distorted mind complex. Each
acceptance smoothes part of the many distortions that the faculty you call
judgment engenders.
The third discipline of the mind is a repetition of the first but with the gaze
outward toward the fellow entities that it meets. In each entity there exists
completeness. Thus, the ability to understand each balance is necessary.
When you view patience, you are responsible for mirroring in your mental
understandings, patience/impatience. When you view impatience, it is
necessary for your mental configuration of understanding to be
impatience/patience. We use this as a simple example. Most configurations
of mind have many facets, and understanding of either self polarities, or
what you would call other-self polarities, can and must be understood as
subtle work.
The next step is the acceptance of the other-self polarities, which mirrors
the second step. These are the first four steps of learning mental disciplines.
The fifth step involves observing the geographical and geometrical
relationships and ratios of the mind, the other mind, the mass mind, and
the infinite mind.
The second area of learn/teaching is the study/understanding of the body
complexes. It is necessary to know your body well. This is a matter of using
the mind to examine how the feelings, the biases, what you would call the
emotions, affect various portions of the body complex. It shall be necessary
to both understand the bodily polarity and to accept them, repeating in a
chemical/physical manifestation the work you have done upon the mind
bethinking the consciousness.
The body is a creature of the mind’s creation. It has its biases. The
biological bias must be first completely understood and then the opposite
bias allowed to find full expression in understanding. Again, the process of
acceptance of the body as a balanced, as well as polarized, individual may
then be accomplished. It is then the task to extend this understanding to the
bodies of the other-selves whom you will meet.
The simplest example of this is the understanding that each biological male
is female; each biological female is male. This is a simple example. However,

                                      95
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 5

in almost every case wherein you are attempting the understanding of the
body of self or other-self, you will again find that the most subtle
discernment is necessary in order to fully grasp the polarity complexes
involved.
At this time we would suggest closing the description until the next time of
work so that we may devote time to the third area commensurate with its
importance.
We can answer a query if it is a short one before we leave this instrument.
Questioner: Is the instrument comfortable? Is there anything that we can
do to increase the comfort of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. The candle could be rotated clockwise approximately 10º each
session to improve the flow of spiraled energy through the being’s receiving
mechanisms. This particular configuration is well otherwise. But we ask that
the objects described and used be centered with geometric care and checked
from time to time. Also that they not be exposed to that space/time in
which work is not of importance.
I am Ra. I leave this instrument in the love and in the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
Creator. Adonai.




                                     96
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 6
                            January 24, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: We would like to continue the material from yesterday.
Ra: I am Ra. This is well with us.
We proceed now with the third part of the teach/learning concerning the
development of the energy powers of healing.
The third area is the spiritual complex which embodies the fields of force
and consciousness which are the least distorted of your mind/body/spirit
complex. The exploration and balancing of the spirit complex is indeed the
longest and most subtle part of your learn/teaching. We have considered the
mind as a tree. The mind controls the body. With the mind single-pointed,
balanced, and aware, the body comfortable in whatever biases and
distortions make it appropriately balanced for that instrument, the
instrument is then ready to proceed with the greater work.
That is the work of wind and fire. The spiritual body energy field is a
pathway, or channel. When body and mind are receptive and open, then
the spirit can become a functioning shuttle or communicator from the
entity’s individual energy/will upwards, and from the streamings of the
creative fire and wind downwards.
The healing ability, like all other, what this instrument would call,
paranormal abilities, is affected by the opening of a pathway or shuttle into
intelligent infinity. There are many upon your plane who have a random
hole or gateway in their spirit energy field, sometimes created by the
ingestion of chemicals such as, what this instrument would call LSD, who
are able, randomly and without control, to tap into energy sources. They
may or may not be entities who wish to serve. The purpose of carefully and
consciously opening this channel is to serve in a more dependable way, in a
more commonplace or usual way, as seen by the distortion complex of the
healer. To others there may appear to be miracles. To the one who has
carefully opened the door to intelligent infinity this is ordinary; this is
commonplace; this is as it should be. The life experience becomes somewhat
transformed. The great work goes on.
At this time we feel these exercises suffice for your beginning. We will, at a
future time, when you feel you have accomplished that which is set before

                                      97
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 6

you, begin to guide you into a more precise understanding of the functions
and uses of this gateway in the experience of healing.
Questioner: I think this might be an appropriate time to include a little
more background on yourself, possibly information having to do with
where you came from prior to your involvement with planet Earth, if this is
possible.
Ra: I am Ra. I am, with the social memory complex of which I am a part,
one of those who voyaged outward from another planet within your own
solar system, as this entity would call it. The planetary influence was that
you call Venus. We are a race old in your measures. When we were at the
sixth dimension our physical beings were what you would call golden. We
were tall and somewhat delicate. Our physical body complex covering,
which you call the integument, had a golden luster.
In this form we decided to come among your peoples. Your peoples at that
time were much unlike us in physical appearance, as you might call it. We,
thus, did not mix well with the population and were obviously other than
they. Thus, our visit was relatively short, for we found ourselves in the
hypocritical position of being acclaimed as other than your other-selves.
This was the time during which we built the structures in which you show
interest.
Questioner: How did you journey from Venus to this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. We used thought.
Questioner: Would it have been possible to have taken one of the people of
this planet at that time and placed him on Venus? Would he have survived?
Were conditions on Venus hospitable?
Ra: I am Ra. The third-density conditions are not hospitable to the life-
forms of your peoples. The fifth and sixth dimensions of that planetary
sphere are quite conducive to growing/learning/teaching.
Questioner: How were you able to make the transition from Venus? Did
you have to change your dimension to walk upon the Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. You will remember the exercise of the wind. The dissolution
into nothingness is the dissolution into unity, for there is no nothingness.
From the sixth dimension, we are capable of manipulating, by thought, the
intelligent infinity present in each particle of light or distorted light so that
we were able to clothe ourselves in a replica visible in the third density of
our mind/body/spirit complexes in the sixth density. We were allowed this
experiment by the Council which guards this planet.

                                       98
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 6

Questioner: Where is this Council located?
Ra: I am Ra. This Council is located in the octave, or eighth dimension, of
the planet Saturn, taking its place in an area which you understand in third-
dimension terms as the rings.
Questioner: Are there any people such as you find on Earth on any of the
other planets in our solar system?
Ra: I am Ra. Do you request space/time present information or space/time
continuum information?
Questioner: Both.
Ra: I am Ra. At one time/space, in what is your past, there was a population
of third-density beings upon a planet which dwelt within your solar system.
There are various names by which this planet has been named. The
vibratory sound complex most usually used by your peoples is Maldek.
These entities, destroying their planetary sphere, thus were forced to find
room for themselves upon this third density which is the only one in your
solar system at their time/space present which was hospitable and capable of
offering the lessons necessary to decrease their mind/body/spirit distortions
with respect to the Law of One.
Questioner: How did they come here?
Ra: I am Ra. They came through the process of harvest and were incarnated
through the processes of incarnation from your higher spheres within this
density.
Questioner: How long ago did this happen?
Ra: I am Ra. I am having difficulty communicating with this instrument.
We must deepen her state.
This occurred approximately 500,000 of your years ago.
Questioner: Is all of the Earth’s human population then originally from
Maldek?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a new line of questioning, and deserves a place of its
own. The ones who were harvested to your sphere from the sphere known
before its dissolution as other names, but to your peoples as Maldek,
incarnated, many within your Earth’s surface rather than upon it. The
population of your planet contains many various groups harvested from
other second-dimension and cycled third-dimension spheres. You are not all
one race or background of beginning. The experience you share is unique to
this time/space continuum.

                                     99
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 6

Questioner: I think that it would be appropriate to discover how the Law of
One acts in this transfer of beings to our planet and the action of harvest?
Ra: I am Ra. The Law of One states simply that all things are one, that all
beings are one. There are certain behaviors and thought-forms consonant
with the understanding and practice of this law. Those who, finishing a
cycle of experience, demonstrate grades of distortion of that understanding
of thought and action will be separated by their own choice into the
vibratory distortion most comfortable to their mind/body/spirit complexes.
This process is guarded or watched by those nurturing beings who, being
very close to the Law of One in their distortions, nevertheless, move
towards active service.
Thus, the illusion is created of light, or more properly but less
understandably, light/love. This is in varying degrees of intensity. The spirit
complex of each harvested entity moves along the line of light until the light
grows too glaring, at which time the entity stops. This entity may have
barely reached third density or may be very, very close to the ending of the
third-density light/love distortion vibratory complex. Nevertheless, those
who fall within this octave of intensifying light/love then experience a major
cycle during which there are opportunities for the discovery of the
distortions which are inherent in each entity and, therefore, the lessening of
these distortions.
Questioner: What is the length, in our years, of one of these cycles?
Ra: I am Ra. One major cycle is approximately 25,000 of your years. There
are three cycles of this nature during which those who have progressed may
be harvested at the end of three major cycles. That is, approximately
between 75 and 76,000 of your years. All are harvested regardless of their
progress, for during that time the planet itself has moved through the useful
part of that dimension and begins to cease being useful for the lower levels
of vibration within that density.
Questioner: What is the position of this planet with respect to the
progression of cycles at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. This sphere is at this time in fourth-dimension vibration. Its
material is quite confused due to the society memory complexes embedded
in its consciousness. It has not made an easy transition to the vibrations
which beckon. Therefore, it will be fetched with some inconvenience.
Questioner: Is this inconvenience imminent within a few years?




                                     100
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 6

Ra: I am Ra. This inconvenience, or disharmonious vibratory complex, has
begun several of your years in your past. It shall continue unabated for a
period of approximately thirty of your years.
Questioner: After this period of thirty years I am assuming that this will be
a fourth-density planet. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is so.
Questioner: Is it possible to estimate what percent of the present population
will inhabit the fourth-density planet?
Ra: I am Ra. The harvesting is not yet, thus, estimation is meaningless.
Questioner: Does the fact that we are in this transition period now have
anything to do with the reason that you have made your information
available to the population?
Ra: I am Ra. We have walked among your people. We remember. We
remember sorrow: have seen much. We have searched for an instrument of
the proper parameters of distortion in mind/body/spirit complex and
supporting and understanding of mind/body/spirit complexes to accept this
information with minimal distortion and maximal desire to serve for some
of your years. The answer, in short, is yes. However, we wished you to
know that in our memory we thank you.
Questioner: The disc-shaped craft that we call UFOs—some have been said
to have come from the planet Venus. Would any of these be your craft?
Ra: I am Ra. We have used crystals for many purposes. The craft of which
you speak have not been used by us in your space/time present memory
complex. However, we have used crystals and the bell-shape in the past of
your illusion.
Questioner: How many years in the past did you use the bell-shaped craft
to come to earth?
Ra: I am Ra. We visited your peoples 18,000 of your years ago and did not
land; again, 11,000 years ago.
Questioner: Photographs of bell-shaped craft and reports of contact of such
from Venus exist from less than thirty years ago. Do you have any
knowledge of these reports?
Ra: I am Ra. We have knowledge of Oneness with these forays of your
time/space present. We are no longer of Venus. However, there are
thought-forms created among your peoples from our time of walking
among you. The memory and thought-forms created, therefore, are a part

                                     101
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 6

of your society-memory complex. This mass consciousness, as you may call
it, creates the experience once more for those who request such experience.
The present Venus population is no longer sixth-density.
Questioner: Do any of the UFOs presently reported at this time come from
other planets, or do you have this knowledge?
Ra: I am Ra. I am one of the members of the Confederation of Planets in
the Service of the Infinite Creator. There are approximately fifty-three
civilizations, comprising approximately five hundred planetary
consciousness complexes in this Confederation. This Confederation
contains those from your own planet who have attained dimensions beyond
your third. It contains planetary entities within your solar system, and it
contains planetary entities from other galaxies.1 It is a true Confederation in
that its members are not alike, but allied in service according to the Law of
One.
Questioner: Do any of them come here at this time in spacecraft? In the
past, say, thirty years?
Ra: I am Ra. We must state that this information is unimportant. If you
will understand this, we feel that the information may be acceptably offered.
The Law of One is what we are here to express. However, we will speak
upon this subject.
Each planetary entity which wishes to appear within your third dimension
of space/time distortion requests permission to break quarantine, as you
may call it, and appear to your peoples. The reason and purpose for this
appearance is understood and either accepted or rejected. There have been
as many as fifteen of the Confederation entities in your skies at any one
time. The others are available to you through thought.
At present there are seven which are operating with craft in your density.
Their purposes are very simple: to allow those entities of your planet to
become aware of infinity which is often best expressed to the uninformed as
the mysterious or unknown.
Questioner: I am fully aware that you are primarily interested in
disseminating information concerning the Law of One. However, it is my
judgment, and I could be wrong, that in order to disseminate this material
it will be necessary to include questions such as the one I have just asked. If
this is not the objective, then I could limit my questions to the application
of the Law of One. But I understand that at this time it is the objective to
widely disseminate this material. Is this correct?



                                      102
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 6

Ra: I am Ra. This perception is only slightly distorted in your
understand/learning. We wish you to proceed as you deem proper. That is
your place. We, in giving this information, find our distortion of
understanding of our purpose to be that not only of the offering of
information, but the weighting of it according to our distorted perceptions
of its relative importance. Thus, you will find our statements, at times, to be
those which imply that a question is unimportant. This is due to our
perception that the given question is unimportant. Nevertheless, unless the
question contains the potential for answer-giving which may infringe upon
free will, we offer our answers.
Questioner: Thank you very much. We do not want to overtire the
instrument. We have gone considerably over our normal working time.
Could you tell me what condition the instrument is in?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument is balanced due to your care. However, her
physical vehicle is growing stiff.
Questioner: In that case perhaps we should continue at a later time.
Ra: I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                     103
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 7
                            January 25, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of our infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: You mentioned that there were a number of members of the
Confederation of Planets. What avenues of service, or types of service, are
available to the members of the Confederation?
Ra: I am Ra. I am assuming that you intend the service which we of the
Confederation can offer, rather than the service which is available to our
use.
The service available for our offering to those who call us is equivalent to
the square of the distortion/need of that calling divided by, or integrated
with, the basic Law of One in its distortion indicating the free will of those
who are not aware of the unity of creation.
Questioner: From this, I am assuming that the difficulty that you have in
contacting this planet at this time is the mixture of people here, some being
aware of the unity, and some not, and for this reason you cannot come
openly or give proof of your contact. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. As we just repeated through this instrument, we must integrate
all of the portions of your social memory complex in its illusory
disintegration form. Then the product of this can be seen as the limit of our
ability to serve. We are fortunate that the Law of Service squares the desires
of those who call. Otherwise, we would have no beingness in this time/space
at this present continuum of the illusion. In short, you are basically correct.
The thought of not being able is not a part of our basic thought-form
complex towards your peoples, but rather it is a maximal consideration of
what is possible.
Questioner: By squared, do you mean that if ten people call you can count
that, when comparing it to the planetary ratio, as 100 people, squaring ten
and getting 100?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The square is sequential-one, two, three,
four, each squared by the next number.
Questioner: If only ten entities on earth required your services how would
you compute their calling by using this square method?
Ra: I am Ra. We would square one ten sequential times, raising the number
to the tenth square.
                                     104
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 7

Questioner: What would be the result of this calculation?
Ra: I am Ra. The result is difficult to transmit. It is 1,012, approximately.
The entities who call are sometimes not totally unified in their calling and,
thus, the squaring slightly less. Thus, there is a statistical loss over a period
of call. However, perhaps you may see by this statistically corrected
information the squaring mechanism.
Questioner: About how many entities at present on planet Earth are calling
for your services?
Ra: I am Ra. I am called personally by 352,000. The Confederation, in its
entire spectrum of entity-complexes, is called by 632,000,000 of your
mind/body/spirit complexes. These numbers have been simplified.
Questioner: Can you tell me what the result of the application of the Law
of Squares is to those figures?
Ra: I am Ra. The number is approximately meaningless in the finite sense
as there are many, many digits. It, however, constitutes a great calling which
we of all creation feel and hear as if our own entities were distorted towards
a great and overwhelming sorrow. It demands our service.
Questioner: At what point would this calling be great enough for you to
come openly among the people on Earth? How many entities on Earth
would have to call the Confederation?
Ra: I am Ra. We do not calculate the possibility of coming among your
peoples by the numbers of calling, but by a consensus among an entire
societal-memory complex which has become aware of the infinite
consciousness of all things. This has been possible among your peoples only
in isolated instances.
In the case wherein a social memory complex which is a servant of the
Creator sees this situation and has an idea for the appropriate aid which can
only be done among your peoples, the social memory complex desiring this
project lays it before the Council of Saturn. If it is approved, quarantine is
lifted.
Questioner: I have a question about that Council. Who are the members,
and how does the Council function?
Ra: I am Ra. The members of the Council are representatives from the
Confederation and from those vibratory levels of your inner planes bearing
responsibility for your third density. The names are not important because
there are no names. Your mind/body/spirit complexes request names and
so, in many cases, the vibratory sound complexes which are consonant with

                                       105
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 7

the vibratory distortions of each entity are used. However, the name
concept is not part of the Council. If names are requested, we will attempt
them. However, not all have chosen names.
In number, the Council that sits in constant session, though varying in its
members by means of balancing, which takes place, what you would call
irregularly, is nine. That is the Session Council. To back up this Council,
there are twenty-four entities which offer their services as requested. These
entities faithfully watch and have been called Guardians.
The Council operates by means of, what you would call, telepathic contact
with the oneness or unity of the nine, the distortions blending
harmoniously so that the Law of One prevails with ease. When a need for
thought is present, the Council retains the distortion-complex of this need,
balancing it as described, and then recommends what it considers as
appropriate action. This includes: One, the duty of admitting social
memory complexes to the Confederation; Two, offering aid to those who
are unsure how to aid the social memory complex requesting aid in a way
consonant with both the call, the Law, and the number of those calling
(that is to say, sometimes the resistance of the call); Three, internal
questions in the Council are determined.
These are the prominent duties of the Council. They are, if in any doubt,
able to contact the twenty-four who then offer
consensus/judgment/thinking to the Council. The Council then may
reconsider any question.
Questioner: You mentioned the nine who sit on the Council. Is this “nine”
the same nine as those mentioned in this book? (Questioner gestures to Uri.)
Ra: I am Ra. The Council of Nine has been retained in semi-undistorted
form by two main sources, that known in your naming, as Mark and that
known in your naming as Henry. In one case, the channel became the
scribe. In the other, the channel was not the scribe. However, without the
aid of the scribe, the energy would not have come to the channel.
Questioner: The names that you spoke of. Were they Mark Probert and
Henry Puharich?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: I am interested in the application of the Law of One as it
pertains to free will with respect to what I would call the advertising done
by UFO contacts with the planet Earth. The Council seems to have allowed
the quarantine to be lifted many times over the past thirty years. This seems


                                     106
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 7

to me to be a form of advertising for what we are doing right now, so that
more people will be awakened. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. It will take a certain amount of untangling of
conceptualization of your mental complex to reform your query into an
appropriate response. Please bear with us.
The Council of Saturn has not allowed the breaking of quarantine in the
time/space continuum you mentioned. There is a certain amount of landing
taking place. Some are of the entities known to you as the group of Orion.
Secondly, there is permission granted, not to break quarantine by dwelling
among you, but to appear in thought form capacity for those who have eyes
to see.
Thirdly, you are correct in assuming that permission was granted at the
time/space in which your first nuclear device was developed and used for
Confederation members to minister to your peoples in such a way as to
cause mystery to occur. This is what you mean by advertising and is correct.
The mystery and unknown quality of the occurrences we are allowed to
offer have the hoped-for intention of making your peoples aware of infinite
possibility. When your peoples grasp infinity, then and only then, can the
gateway be opened to the Law of One.
Questioner: You said that Orion was the source of some of these contacts
with UFOs. Can you tell me something of that contact, its purpose?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider, if you will, a simple example of intentions which are
bad/good. This example is Adolf. This is your vibratory sound complex.
The intention is to presumably unify by choosing the distortion complex
called elite from a social memory complex and then enslaving, by various
effects, those who are seen by the distortion as not-elite. There is then the
concept of taking the social memory complex thus weeded and adding it to
a distortion thought of by the so-called Orion group as an empire. The
problem facing them is that they face a great deal of random energy released
by the concept of separation. This causes them to be vulnerable as the
distortions amongst their own members are not harmonized.
Questioner: What is the density of the Orion group?
Ra: I am Ra. Like the Confederation, the densities of the mass
consciousnesses which comprise that group are varied. There are a very few
third density, a larger number of fourth density, a similarly large number of
fifth density, and very few sixth-density entities comprising this
organization. Their numbers are perhaps one-tenth ours at any point in the
space/time continuum as the problem of spiritual entropy causes them to

                                     107
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 7

experience constant disintegration of their social memory complexes. Their
power is the same as ours. The Law of One blinks neither at the light nor
the darkness, but is available for service to others and service to self.
However, service to others results in service to self, thus preserving and
further harmonizing the distortions of those entities seeking intelligent
infinity through these disciplines.
Those seeking intelligent infinity through the use of service to self create the
same amount of power but, as we said, have constant difficulty because of
the concept of separation which is implicit in the manifestations of the
service to self which involve power over others. This weakens and eventually
disintegrates the energy collected by such mind/body/spirit complexes who
call the Orion group and the social memory complexes which comprise the
Orion group.
It should be noted, carefully pondered, and accepted, that the Law of One
is available to any social memory complex which has decided to strive
together for any seeking of purpose, be it service to others or service to self.
The laws, which are the primal distortions of the Law of One, then are
placed into operation and the illusion of space/time is used as a medium for
the development of the results of those choices freely made. Thus all entities
learn, no matter what they seek. All learn the same, some rapidly, some
slowly.
Questioner: Using as an example the fifth density concerning the social
memory complex of the Orion group, what was their previous density
before they became fifth density?
Ra: I am Ra. The progress through densities is sequential. A fifth-density
social memory complex would be comprised of mind/body/spirit complexes
harvested from fourth density. Then the conglomerate or mass
mind/body/spirit complex does its melding and the results are due to the
infinitely various possibilities of combinations of distortions.
Questioner: I’m trying to understand how a group such as the Orion group
would progress. How it would be possible, if you were in the Orion group,
and pointed toward self-service, to progress from our third density to the
fourth. What learning would be necessary for that?
Ra: I am Ra. This is the last question of length for this instrument at this
time.
You will recall that we went into some detail as to how those not oriented
towards seeking service for others yet, nevertheless, found and could use the
gateway to intelligent infinity. This is true at all densities in our octave. We
cannot speak for those above us, as you would say, in the next quantum or
                                      108
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 7

octave of beingness. This is, however, true of this octave of density. The
beings are harvested because they can see and enjoy the light/love of the
appropriate density. Those who have found this light/love, love/light
without benefit of a desire for service to others nevertheless, by the Law of
Free Will, have the right to the use of that light/love for whatever purpose.
Also, it may be inserted that there are systems of study which enable the
seeker of separation to gain these gateways.
This study is as difficult as the one which we have described to you, but
there are those with the perseverance to pursue the study just as you desire
to pursue the difficult path of seeking to know in order to serve. The
distortion lies in the effect that those who seek to serve the self are seen by
the Law of One as precisely the same as those who seek to serve others, for
are all not one? To serve yourself and to serve others is a dual method of
saying the same thing, if you can understand the essence of the Law of One.
At this time we would answer any brief questions you may have.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. There are small adjustments you may make. However, we are
now able to use this instrument with minimal distortion and without
depleting the instrument to any significant extent.
Do you wish to ask further?
Questioner: We do not wish to tire the instrument. Thank you very much.
That was very helpful and we would like to continue in the next session
from this point.
Ra: I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth then rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
Creator. Adonai.




                                     109
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 8
                            January 26, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: I have a question regarding what I call the advertising of the
Confederation. It has to do with free will. There have been certain contacts
allowed, as I understand, by the Confederation, but this is limited because
of free will of those who are not oriented in such a way as to want contact.
Many people on our planet want this material, but even though we
disseminate it many will not be aware that it is available. Is there any
possibility of creating some effect which I would call advertising, or is this
against the principle of free will?
Ra: I am Ra. Consider, if you will, the path your life-experience complex
has taken. Consider the coincidences and odd circumstances by which one
thing flowed to the next. Consider this well.
Each entity will receive the opportunity that each needs. This information
source-beingness does not have uses in the life-experience complex of each
of those among your peoples who seek. Thus the advertisement is general
and not designed to indicate the searching out of any particular material,
but only to suggest the noumenal aspect of the illusion.
Questioner: You said that some of the landings at this time were of the
Orion group. Why did the Orion group land here? What is their purpose?
Ra: I am Ra. Their purpose is conquest, unlike those of the Confederation
who wait for the calling. The so-called Orion group calls itself to conquest.
As we have said previously, their objective is to locate certain
mind/body/spirit complexes which vibrate in resonance with their own
vibrational complex, then to enslave the un-elite, as you may call those who
are not of the Orion vibration.
Questioner: Was the landing at Pascagoula in 1973 when Charlie Hixson
was taken aboard this type of landing?
Ra: I am Ra. The landing of which you speak was what you would call an
anomaly. It was neither the Orion influence nor our peoples in thought-
form, but rather a planetary entity of your own vibration which came
through quarantine in all innocence in a random landing.
Questioner: What did they do to Charlie Hixson when they took him on
board?

                                      110
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 8

Ra: I am Ra. They used his mind/body/spirit complex’s life experience,
concentrating upon the experience of the complexes of what you call war.
Questioner: How did they use them?
Ra: I am Ra. The use of experience is to learn. Consider a race who watches
a movie. It experiences a story and identifies with the feelings, perceptions,
and experiences of the hero.
Questioner: Was Charlie Hixson originally of the same social memory
complex of the ones who picked him up?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity of vibratory sound complex did not have a
connection with those who used him.
Questioner: Did those who used him use his war experiences to learn more
of the Law of One?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Did the entities who picked him up have the normal
configuration? His description of them was rather unusual.
Ra: I am Ra. The configuration of their beings is their normal
configuration. The unusualness is not remarkable. We ourselves, when we
chose a mission among your peoples, needed to study your peoples for had
we arrived in no other form than our own, we would have been perceived as
light.
Questioner: What density were the entities who picked up Charlie Hixson
from?
Ra: I am Ra. The entities in whom you show such interest are third-density
beings of a fairly advanced order. We should express the understanding to
you that these entities would not have used the mind/body/spirit complex,
Charlie, except for the resolve of this entity before incarnation to be of
service.
Questioner: What was the home or origin of the entities who picked up
Charlie?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities are of the Sirius galaxy.
Questioner: Would it be possible for any of us to have contact with the
Confederation in a more direct way?
Ra: I am Ra. In observing the distortions of those who underwent this
experiential sequence we decided to gradually back off, shall I say, from
direct contact in thought-form. The least distortion seems to be available in

                                      111
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 8

mind-to-mind communication. Therefore, the request to be taken aboard is
not one we care to comply with. You are most valuable in your present
orientation.
May we ask at this time if you have a needed short query before we end this
session?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument is well balanced. It is possible to make small
corrections in the configuration of the spine of the instrument that it be
straighter. Continue also to continually monitor the placement and
orientation of the symbols used. This particular session, the censer is slightly
off and, therefore, this instrument will experience a slight discomfort.
Questioner: Is the censer off in respect to angle or in respect to lateral
displacement?
Ra: I am Ra. There is an approximate three degrees’ displacement from
proper perpendicularity.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                       112
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 9
                           January 27, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of our infinite Creator.
We communicate now.
Questioner: The healing exercises that you gave us are of such a nature that
it is best to concentrate on a particular exercise at a certain time. I would
like to ask what exercise that I should concentrate on tonight?
Ra: I am Ra. Again, to direct your judgment is an intrusion upon your
space/time continuum distortion called future. To speak of past or present
within our distortion/judgment limits is acceptable. To guide rather than
teach/learn is not acceptable to our distortion in regards to teach/learning.
We, instead, can suggest a process whereby each chooses the first of the
exercises given in the order in which we gave them, which you, in your
discernment, feel is not fully appreciated by your mind/body/spirit
complex.
This is the proper choice, building from the foundation, making sure the
ground is good for the building. We have assessed for you the intensity of
this effort in terms of energy expended. You will take this in mind and be
patient for we have not given a short or easy program of consciousness
learn/teaching.
Questioner: The way that I understand the process of evolution is that our
planetary population has a certain amount of time to progress. This is
generally divided into three 25,000-year cycles. At the end of 75,000 years
the planet progresses itself. What caused this situation to come about with
the preciseness of the years in each cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. Visualize, if you will, the particular energy which, outward
flowing and inward coagulating, formed the tiny realm of the creation
governed by your Council of Saturn. Continue seeing the rhythm of this
process. The living flow creates a rhythm which is as inevitable as one of
your timepieces. Each of your planetary entities began the first cycle when
the energy nexus was able in that environment to support such mind/body
experiences. Thus, each of your planetary entities is on a different cyclical
schedule as you might call it. The timing of these cycles is a measurement
equal to a portion of intelligent energy.
This intelligent energy offers a type of clock. The cycles move as precisely as
a clock strikes your hour. Thus, the gateway from intelligent energy to


                                      113
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 9

intelligent infinity opens regardless of circumstance on the striking of the
hour.
Questioner: The original, first entities on this planet—what was their
origin? Where were they before they were on this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. The first entities upon this planet were water, fire, air and
earth.
Questioner: Where did the people who are like us who were the first ones
here, where did they come from? From where did they evolve?
Ra: I am Ra. You speak of third-density experience. The first of those to
come here were brought from another planet in your solar system called by
you the Red Planet, Mars. This planet’s environment became inhospitable
to third-density beings. The first entities, therefore, were of this race, as you
may call it, manipulated somewhat by those who were guardians at that
time.
Questioner: What race is that, and how did they get from Mars to here?
Ra: I am Ra. The race is a combination of the mind/body/spirit complexes
of those of your so-called Red Planet and a careful series of genetical
adjustments made by the guardians of that time. These entities arrived, or
were preserved, for the experience upon your sphere by a type of birthing
which is non-reproductive, but consists of preparing genetic material for the
incarnation of the mind/body/spirit complexes of those entities from the
Red Planet.
Questioner: I assume from what you are saying that the guardians
transferred the race here after the race had died from the physical as we
know it on Mars. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: The guardians were obviously acting within an understanding
of the Law of One in doing this. Can you explain the application of the
Law of One in this process?
Ra: I am Ra. The Law of One was named by these guardians as the bringing
of the wisdom of the guardians in contact with the entities from the Red
Planet, thus melding the social memory complex of the guardian race and
the Red Planet race. It, however, took an increasing amount of distortion
into the application of the Law of One from the viewpoint of other
guardians and it is from this beginning action that the quarantine of this
planet was instituted, for it was felt that the free will of those of the Red
Planet had been abridged.

                                       114
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 9

Questioner: Were the entities of the Red Planet following the Law of One
prior to leaving the Red Planet?
Ra: I am Ra. The entities of the Red Planet were attempting to learn the
Laws of Love which form one of the primal distortions of the Law of One.
However, the tendencies of these people towards bellicose actions caused
such difficulties in the atmospheric environment of their planet that it
became inhospitable for third-density experience before the end of its cycle.
Thus, the Red Planet entities were unharvested and continued in your
illusion to attempt to learn the Law of Love.
Questioner: How long ago did this transfer occur from the Red Planet to
Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. In your time this transfer occurred approximately 75,000 years
ago.
Questioner: 75,000 years ago?
Ra: I am Ra. This is approximately correct.
Questioner: Were there any entities of the form that I am now—two arms,
two legs—on this planet before this transfer occurred?
Ra: I am Ra. There have been visitors to your sphere at various times for the
last four million of your years, speaking approximately. These visitors do
not affect the cycling of the planetary sphere. It was not third-density in its
environment until the time previously mentioned.
Questioner: Then there were second-density entities here prior to
approximately 75,000 years ago. What type of entities were these?
Ra: I am Ra. The second density is the density of the higher plant life and
animal life which exists without the upward drive towards the infinite.
These second-density beings are of an octave of consciousness just as you
find various orientations of consciousness among the conscious entities of
your vibration.
Questioner: Did any of these second-density entities have shapes like
ours—two arms, two legs, head, and walk upright on two feet?
Ra: I am Ra. The two higher of the sub-vibrational levels of second-density
beings had the configuration of the biped, as you mentioned. However, the
erectile movement which you experience was not totally effected in these
beings who were tending towards the leaning forward, barely leaving the
quadrupedal position.


                                      115
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 9

Questioner: Where did these beings come from? Were they a product of
evolution as understood by our scientists? Were they evolved from the
original material of the earth that you spoke of?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Do these beings then evolve from second density to third
density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, although no guarantee can be made of the
number of cycles it will take an entity to learn the lessons of consciousness
of self which are the prerequisite for transition to third density.
Questioner: Is there any particular race of people on our planet now who
were incarnated here from second density?
Ra: I am Ra. There are no second-density consciousness complexes here on
your sphere at this time. However, there are two races which use the
second-density form. One is the entities from the planetary sphere you call
Maldek. These entities are working their understanding complexes through
a series of what you would call karmic restitutions. They dwell within your
deeper underground passageways and are known to you as “Bigfoot.”
The other race is that being offered a dwelling in this density by guardians
who wish to give the mind/body/spirit complexes of those who are of this
density at this time appropriately engineered physical vehicles, as you would
call these chemical complexes, in the event that there is what you call
nuclear war.
Questioner: I didn’t understand what these vehicles or beings were for that
were appropriate in the event of nuclear war.
Ra: I am Ra. These are beings which exist as instinctual second-density
beings which are being held in reserve to form what you would call a gene
pool in case these body complexes are needed. These body complexes are
greatly able to withstand the rigors of radiation which the body complexes
you now inhabit could not do.
Questioner: Where are these body complexes located?
Ra: I am Ra. These body complexes of the second race dwell in uninhabited
deep forest. There are many in various places over the surface of your
planet.
Questioner: Are they Bigfoot-type creatures?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct although we would not call these Bigfoot, as
they are scarce and are very able to escape detection. The first race is less

                                      116
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 9

able to be aware of proximity of other mind/body/spirit complexes, but
these beings are very able to escape due to their technological
understandings before their incarnations here. These entities of the glowing
eyes are those most familiar to your peoples.
Questioner: Then there are two different types of Bigfoot. Correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final question.
There are three types of Bigfoot, if you will accept that vibratory sound
complex used for three such different races of mind/body/spirit complexes.
The first two we have described.
The third is a thought-form.
Questioner: I would like to ask if there is anything that we can do to aid the
instrument’s comfort.
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument will require some adjustment of the tender
portions of her body complex. The distortions are due to the energy center
blockage you would call pineal.
I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth,
therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                     117
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 10
                            January 27, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: I think that it would clarify things for us if we went back to the
time just before the transfer of souls from Maldek to see how the Law of
One operated with respect to this transfer and why this transfer was
necessary. What happened to the people of Maldek that caused them to lose
their planet? How long ago did this event occur?
Ra: I am Ra. The peoples of Maldek had a civilization somewhat similar to
that of the societal complex known to you as Atlantis in that it gained much
technological information and used it without care for the preservation of
their sphere following to a majority extent the complex of thought, ideas,
and actions which you may associate with your so-called negative polarity or
the service to self. This was, however, for the most part, couched in a
sincere belief/thought structure which seemed to the perception of the
mind/body complexes of this sphere to be positive and of service to others.
The devastation that wracked their biosphere and caused its disintegration
resulted from what you call war.
The escalation went to the furthest extent of the technology this social
complex had at its disposal in the space/time present of the then time. This
time was approximately 705,000 of your years ago. The cycles had begun
much, much earlier upon this sphere due to its relative ability to support
the first-dimensional life forms at an earlier point in the space/time
continuum of your solar system. These entities were so traumatized by this
occurrence that they were in what you may call a social complex knot or
tangle of fear. Some of your time passed. No one could reach them. No
beings could aid them.
Approximately 600,000 of your years ago the then-existing members of the
Confederation were able to deploy a social memory complex and untie the
knot of fear. The entities were then able to recall that they were conscious.
This awareness brought them to the point upon what you would call the
lower astral planes where they could be nurtured until each
mind/body/spirit complex was able to finally be healed of this trauma to the
extent that each entity was able to examine the distortions it had
experienced in the previous life/illusion complex.
After this experience of learn/teaching, the group decision was to place
upon itself a type of what you may call karma alleviation. For this purpose
                                      118
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 10

they came into incarnation within your planetary sphere in what were not
acceptable human forms. This then they have been experiencing until the
distortions of destruction are replaced by distortions towards the desire for a
less distorted vision of service to others. Since this was the conscious
decision of the great majority of those beings in the Maldek experience, the
transition to this planet began approximately 500,000 of your years ago and
the type of body complex available at that time was used.
Questioner: Was the body complex available at that time what we refer to
as the ape body?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct.
Questioner: Have any of the Maldek entities transformed since then? Are
they still second-density now or are some of them third-density?
Ra: I am Ra. The consciousness of these entities has always been third-
density. The alleviation mechanism was designed by the placement of this
consciousness in second-dimensional physical chemical complexes which are
not able to be dextrous or manipulative to the extent which is appropriate
to the working of the third-density distortions of the mind complex.
Questioner: Have any of the entities moved on now, made a graduation at
the end of a cycle and made the transition from second-density bodies to
third-density bodies?
Ra: I am Ra. Many of these entities were able to remove the accumulation
of what you call karma, thus being able to accept a third-density cycle
within a third-density body. Most of those beings so succeeding have
incarnated elsewhere in the creation for the succeeding cycle in third
density. As this planet reached third density some few of these entities
became able to join the vibration of this sphere in third-density form. There
remain a few who have not yet alleviated through the mind/body/spirit
coordination of distortions the previous action taken by them. Therefore,
they remain.
Questioner: Are these the Bigfoot that you spoke of?
Ra: I am Ra. These are one type of Bigfoot.
Questioner: Then our human race is formed of a few who originally came
from Maldek and quite a few who came from Mars. Are there entities here
from other places?
Ra: I am Ra. There are entities experiencing your time/space continuum
who have originated from many, many places, as you would call them, in
the creation, for when there is a cycle change, those who must repeat then

                                      119
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 10

find a planetary sphere appropriate for this repetition. It is somewhat
unusual for a planetary mind/body/spirit complex to contain those from
many, many various loci, but this explains much, for, you see, you are
experiencing the third-dimension occurrence with a large number of those
who must repeat the cycle. The orientation, thus, has been difficult to unify
even with the aid of many of your teach/learners.
Questioner: When Maldek was destroyed, did all the people of Maldek
have the fear problem or were some advanced enough to transfer to other
planets?
Ra: I am Ra. In the occurrence of planetary dissolution none escaped, for
this is an action which redounds to the social complex of the planetary
complex itself. None escaped the knot or tangle.
Questioner: Is there any danger of this happening to Earth at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. We feel this evaluation of your planetary mind/body/spirit
complexes’ so-called future may be less than harmless. We say only the
conditions of mind exist for such development of technology and such
deployment. It is the distortion of our vision/understanding that the mind
and spirit complexes of those of your people need orientation rather than
the “toys” needing dismantlement, for are not all things that exist part of
the Creator? Therefore, freely to choose is your own duty.
Questioner: When graduation occurs at the end of a cycle, and entities are
moved from one planet to another, by what means do they go to a new
planet?
Ra: I am Ra. In the scheme of the Creator, the first step of the
mind/body/spirit/totality/beingness is to place its mind/body/spirit complex
distortion in the proper place of love/light. This is done to ensure proper
healing of the complex and eventual attunement with the totality/beingness
complex. This takes a very variable length of your time/space. After this is
accomplished the experience of the cycle is dissolved and filtered until only
the distillation of distortions in its pure form remains. At this time, the
harvested mind/body/spirit/totality/beingness evaluates the density needs of
its beingness and chooses the more appropriate new environment for either
a repetition of the cycle or a moving forward into the next cycle. This is the
manner of the harvesting, guarded and watched over by many.
Questioner: When the entity is moved from one planet to the next, is he
moved in thought or by a vehicle?




                                     120
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 10

Ra: I am Ra. The mind/body/spirit/totality/beingness is one with the
Creator. There is no time/space distortion. Therefore, it is a matter of
thinking the proper locus in the infinite array of time/spaces.
Questioner: While an entity is incarnate in this third density at this time he
may either learn unconsciously without knowing what he is learning, or he
may learn after he is consciously aware that he is learning in the ways of the
Law of One. By the second way of learning consciously, it is possible for the
entity to greatly accelerate his growth. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then although many entities are not consciously aware of it,
what they really desire is to accelerate their growth, and it is their job to
discover this while they are incarnate. Is it correct that they can accelerate
their growth much more while in the third density than in between
incarnations of this density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We shall attempt to speak upon this concept.
The Law of One has as one of its primal distortions the free will distortion,
thus each entity is free to accept, reject, or ignore the mind/body/spirit
complexes about it and ignore the creation itself. There are many among
your social memory complex distortion who, at this time/space, engage
daily, as you would put it, in the working upon the Law of One in one of
its primal distortions; that is, the ways of love. However, if this same entity,
being biased from the depths of its mind/body/spirit complex towards
love/light, were then to accept the responsibility for each moment of the
time/space accumulation of present moments available to it, such an entity
can empower its progress in much the same way as we described the
empowering of the call of your social complex distortion to the
Confederation.
Questioner: Could you state this in a little different way … how you
empower this call?
Ra: I am Ra. We understand you to speak now of our previous information.
The call begins with one. This call is equal to infinity and is not, as you
would say, counted. It is the cornerstone. The second call is added. The
third call empowers or doubles the second, and so forth, each additional
calling doubling or granting power to all the preceding calls. Thus, the call
of many of your peoples is many, many-powered and overwhelmingly heard
to the infinite reaches of the One Creation.




                                       121
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 10

Questioner: For the general development of the reader of this book, could
you state some of the practices or exercises to perform to produce an
acceleration toward the Law of One?
Ra: I am Ra.
Exercise One. This is the most nearly centered and useable within your
illusion complex. The moment contains love. That is the lesson/goal of this
illusion or density. The exercise is to consciously see that love in awareness
and understanding distortions. The first attempt is the cornerstone. Upon
this choosing rests the remainder of the life-experience of an entity. The
second seeking of love within the moment begins the addition. The third
seeking empowers the second, the fourth powering or doubling the third.
As with the previous type of empowerment, there will be some loss of power
due to flaws within the seeking in the distortion of insincerity. However,
the conscious statement of self to self of the desire to seek love is so central
an act of will that, as before, the loss of power due to this friction is
inconsequential.
Exercise Two. The universe is one being. When a mind/body/spirit
complex views another mind/body/spirit complex, see the Creator. This is
an helpful exercise.
Exercise Three. Gaze within a mirror. See the Creator.
Exercise Four. Gaze at the creation which lies about the mind/body/spirit
complex of each entity. See the Creator.
The foundation or prerequisite of these exercises is a predilection towards
what may be called meditation, contemplation, or prayer. With this
attitude, these exercises can be processed. Without it, the data will not sink
down into the roots of the tree of mind, thus enabling and ennobling the
body and touching the spirit.
Questioner: I was wondering about the advent of the civilizations of
Atlantis and Lemuria, when these civilizations occurred, and where did they
come from?
Ra: I am Ra. This is the last question of this working. The civilizations of
Atlantis and Lemuria were not one but two. Let us look first at the Mu
entities.
They were beings of a somewhat primitive nature, but those who had very
advanced spiritual distortions. The civilization was part of this cycle,
experienced early within the cycle at a time of approximately 53,000 of your
years ago. It was an helpful and harmless place which was washed beneath
the ocean during a readjustment of your sphere’s tectonic plates through no
                                      122
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 10

action of their own. They sent out those who survived and reached many
places in what you call Russia, North America, and South America. The
Indians of whom you come to feel some sympathy in your social complex
distortions are the descendants of these entities. Like the other incarnates of
this cycle, they came from elsewhere. However, these particular entities were
largely from a second-density planet which had some difficulty, due to the
age of its sun, in achieving third-density life conditions. This planet was
from the galaxy Deneb.
The Atlantean race was a very conglomerate social complex which began to
form approximately 31,000 years in the past of your space/time continuum
illusion. It was a slow growing and very agrarian one until approximately
15,000 of your years ago. It reached quickly a high technological
understanding which caused it to be able to use intelligent infinity in an
informative manner. We may add that they used intelligent energy as well,
manipulating greatly the natural influxes of the indigo or pineal ray from
divine or infinite energy. Thus, they were able to create life forms. This they
began to do instead of healing and perfecting their own mind/body/spirit
complexes, turning their distortions towards what you may call negative.
Approximately 11,000 of your years ago, the first of the, what you call, wars,
caused approximately forty percent of this population to leave the density
by means of disintegration of the body. The second and most devastating of
the conflicts occurred approximately 10,821 years in the past according to
your illusion. This created an earth-changing configuration and the large
part of Atlantis was no more, having been inundated. Three of the
positively-oriented of the Atlantean groups left this geographical locus
before that devastation, placing themselves in the mountain areas of what
you call Tibet, what you call Peru, and what you call Turkey.
Do you have any brief questions before we close this meeting?
Questioner: Only one, other than what we can do to make the instrument
more comfortable. I would like to have your definition of galaxy, the word
“galaxy” as you have used it.
Ra: I am Ra. We use the term known to your people by the sound vibration
“galaxy.” We accept that some galaxies contain one system of planetary and
solar groups. Others contain several. However, the importance of the locus
in infinite time/space dimensionality is so little that we accept the distortion
implicit in such an ambiguous term.
Questioner: Then the nine planets and sun which we have here in our
system, would you refer to that as a galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. We would not.
                                      123
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 10

Questioner: How many stars would be—approximately—in a galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. It depends upon the galactic system. Your own, as you know,
contains many, many, millions of planetary entities and star bodies.
Questioner: I was just trying to get to the definition that you were using for
galaxy. You mentioned a couple of times the term galaxy in reference to
what we call a planetary system and it was causing some confusion. Is there
any way that we can make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument could be made somewhat more comfortable if
more support were given the body complex. Other than this, we can only
repeat the request to carefully align the symbols used to facilitate this
instrument’s balance. Our contact is narrow-banded and thus the influx
brought in with us must be precise.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                     124
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 11
                            January 28, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: Should we include the ritual that you have suggested that we
use to call you in the book that will result from these sessions?
Ra: I am Ra. This matter is of small importance for our suggestion was
made for the purpose of establishing contact through this instrument with
this group.
Questioner: Is it of any assistance to the instrument to have (name) and
(name) present during these sessions? Does the number in the group make
any difference in these sessions?
Ra: I am Ra. The most important of the entities are the questioner and the
vibratory sound complex, (name). The two entities additional aid the
instrument’s comfort by energizing the instrument with their abilities to
share the physical energy complex which is a portion of your love vibration.
Questioner: You said yesterday that Maldek was destroyed due to warfare.
If Maldek hadn’t destroyed itself due to warfare would it have become a
planet that evolved in self-service and would the entities involved have
increased in density, and gone on to say the fourth density in the negative
sense or the sense of self-service?
Ra: I am Ra. The planetary social memory complex, Maldek, had in
common with your own sphere the situation of a mixture of energy
direction. Thus it, though unknown, would most probably have been a
mixed harvest—a few moving to fourth density, a few moving towards
fourth density in service to self, the great majority repeating third density.
This is approximate due to the fact that parallel possibility/probability
vortices cease when action occurs and new probability/possibility vortices
are begun.
Questioner: Is there a planet opposite our sun, in relation to us, that we do
not know about?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a sphere in the area opposite your sun of a very, very
cold nature, but large enough to skew certain statistical figures. This sphere
should not properly be called a planet as it is locked in first density.
Questioner: You say that entities from Maldek might go to fourth density
negative. Are there people who go out of our present third density to places
                                      125
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 11

in the universe and serve, which are fourth-density self-service negative type
of planets?
Ra: I am Ra. Your question is unclear. Please restate.
Questioner: As our cycle ends and graduation occurs, is it possible for
anyone to go from our third density to a fourth-density planet that is of a
self-service or negative type?
Ra: I am Ra. We grasp now the specificity of your query. In this harvest the
probability/possibility vortex is an harvest, though small, of this type. That
is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell us what happened to Adolf (Hitler)?
Ra: I am Ra. The mind/body/spirit complex known as Adolf is at this time
in an healing process in the middle astral planes of your spherical force field.
This entity was greatly confused and, although aware of the circumstance of
change in vibratory level associated with the cessation of the chemical body
complex, nevertheless, needed a great deal of care.
Questioner: Is there anyone in our history who is commonly known who
went to a fourth-density self-service or negative type of planet or any who
will go there?
Ra: I am Ra. The number of entities thus harvested is small. However, a few
have penetrated the eighth level which is only available from the opening up
of the seventh through the sixth. Penetration into the eighth or intelligent
infinity level allows a mind/body/spirit complex to be harvested if it wishes
at any time/space during the cycle.
Questioner: Are any of these people known in the history of our planet by
name?
Ra: I am Ra. We will mention a few. The one known as Taras Bulba, the
one known as Genghis Khan, the one known as Rasputin.
Questioner: How did they accomplish this? What was necessary for them to
accomplish this?
Ra: I am Ra. All of the aforementioned entities were aware, through
memory, of Atlantean understandings having to do with the use of the
various centers of mind/body/spirit complex energy influx in attaining the
gateway to intelligent infinity.
Questioner: Did this enable them to do what we refer to as magic? Could
they do paranormal things while they were incarnate?


                                      126
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 11

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The first two entities mentioned made little
use of these abilities consciously. However, they were bent single-mindedly
upon service to self, sparing no efforts in personal discipline to double, re-
double and so empower this gateway. The third was a conscious adept and
also spared no effort in the pursuit of service to self.
Questioner: Where are these three entities now?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities are in the dimension known to you as fourth.
Therefore the space/time continua are not compatible. An approximation of
the space/time locus of each would net no actual understanding. Each chose
a fourth-density planet which was dedicated to the pursuit of the
understanding of the Law of One through service to self, one in what you
know as the Orion group, one in what you know as Cassiopeia, one in what
you know as Southern Cross; however, these loci are not satisfactory. We do
not have vocabulary for the geometric calculations necessary for transfer of
this understanding to you.
Questioner: Who went to the Orion group?
Ra: I am Ra. The one known as Genghis Khan.
Questioner: What does he presently do there? What is his job or
occupation?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity serves the Creator in its own way.
Questioner: Is it impossible for you to tell us precisely how he does this
service?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible for us to speak to this query. However, we use
any chance we may have to reiterate the basic understanding/learning that
all beings serve the Creator.
The one you speak of as Genghis Khan, at present, is incarnate in a physical
light body which has the work of disseminating material of thought control
to those who are what you may call crusaders. He is, as you would term this
entity, a shipping clerk.
Questioner: What do the crusaders do?
Ra: I am Ra. The crusaders move in their chariots to conquer planetary
mind/body/spirit social complexes before they reach the stage of achieving
social memory.
Questioner: At what stage does a planet achieve social memory?
Ra: I am Ra. A mind/body/spirit social complex becomes a social memory
complex when its entire group of entities are of one orientation or seeking.
                                      127
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 11

The group memory lost to the individuals in the roots of the tree of mind
then becomes known to the social complex, thus creating a social memory
complex. The advantages of this complex are the relative lack of distortion
in understanding the social beingness and the relative lack of distortion in
pursuing the direction of seeking, for all understanding/distortions are
available to the entities of the society.
Questioner: Then we have crusaders from Orion coming to this planet for
mind control purposes. How do they do this?
Ra: I am Ra. As all, they follow the Law of One observing free will. Contact
is made with those who call. Those then upon the planetary sphere act
much as do you to disseminate the attitudes and philosophy of their
particular understanding of the Law of One which is service to self. These
become the elite. Through these, the attempt begins to create a condition
whereby the remainder of the planetary entities are enslaved by their free
will.
Questioner: Can you name any names that may be known on the planet
that are recipients of the crusaders’ efforts?
Ra: I am Ra. I am desirous of being in nonviolation of the free will
distortion. To name those involved in the future of your space/time is to
infringe; thus, we withhold this information. We request your
contemplation of the fruits of the actions of those entities whom you may
observe enjoying the distortion towards power. In this way you may discern
for yourself this information. We shall not interfere with the, shall we say,
planetary game. It is not central to the harvest.
Questioner: How do the crusaders pass on their concepts to the individuals
on Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. There are two main ways, just as there are two main ways of,
shall we say, polarizing towards service to others. There are those
mind/body/spirit complexes upon your plane who do exercises and perform
disciplines in order to seek contact with sources of information and power
leading to the opening of the gate to intelligent infinity. There are others
whose vibratory complex is such that this gateway is opened and contact
with total service to self with its primal distortion of manipulation of others
is then afforded with little or no difficulty, no training, and no control.
Questioner: What type of information is passed on from the crusaders to
these people?
Ra: I am Ra. The Orion group passes on information concerning the Law
of One with the orientation of service to self. The information can become

                                      128
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 11

technical just as some in the Confederation, in attempts to aid this planet in
service to others, have provided what you would call technical information.
The technology provided by this group is in the form of various means of
control or manipulation of others to serve the self.
Questioner: Do you mean to say then that some scientists receive technical
information, shall we say, telepathically that comes out then as useable
gadgetry?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct. However, very positively, as you would call
this distortion, oriented scientists have received information intended to
unlock peaceful means of progress which redounded unto the last echoes of
potential destruction due to further reception of other scientists of a
negative orientation/distortion.
Questioner: Is this how we learned of nuclear energy? Was it mixed with
both positive and negative orientation?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct. The entities responsible for the gathering of
the scientists were of a mixed orientation. The scientists were
overwhelmingly positive in their orientation. The scientists who followed
their work were of mixed orientation including one extremely negative
entity, as you would term it.
Questioner: Is this extremely negative entity still incarnate on Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Then I would assume that you can’t name him. So I will ask
you where Nikola Tesla got his information?
Ra: I am Ra. The one known as Nikola received information from
Confederation sources desirous of aiding this extremely, shall we say,
angelically positive entity in bettering the existence of its fellow
mind/body/spirit complexes. It is unfortunate, shall we say, that like many
Wanderers the vibratory distortions of third-density illusion caused this
entity to become extremely distorted in its perceptions of its fellow
mind/body/spirit complexes so that its mission was hindered and in the
result, perverted from its purposes.
Questioner: How was Tesla’s work supposed to benefit man on Earth, and
what were its purposes?
Ra: I am Ra. The most desired purpose of the mind/body/spirit complex,
Nikola, was the freeing of all planetary entities from the darkness. Thus, it
attempted to give to the planet the infinite energy of the planetary sphere
for use in lighting and power.

                                     129
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 11

Questioner: By freeing the planetary entities from darkness, precisely what
do you mean?
Ra: I am Ra. (Most of the following answer was lost due to tape recorder
malfunction. The core of the response was as follows.) We spoke of freeing
people from darkness in a literal sense.
Questioner: Would this freeing from darkness be commensurate with the
Law of One or does this have any real product?
Ra: I am Ra. The product of such a freeing would create two experiences.
Firstly, the experience of no need to find the necessary emolument for
payment, in your money, for energy.
Secondly, the leisure afforded, thereby exemplifying the possibility and
enhancing the probability of the freedom to then search the self, the
beginning of seeking the Law of One.
Few there are working physically from daybreak to darkness, as you name
them, upon your plane who can contemplate the Law of One in a conscious
fashion.
Questioner: What about the Industrial Revolution in general. Was this
planned in any way?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final question of this session.
That is correct. Wanderers incarnated in several waves, as you may call
them, in order to bring into existence the gradual freeing from the demands
of the diurnal cycles and lack of freedom of leisure.
Questioner: That was the last question, so I will do as usual and ask if there
is anything that we can do to make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. You are doing well. The most important thing is to carefully
align the symbols. The adjustment made this particular time/space present
will aid this instrument’s physical complex in the distortion towards
comfort.
May we ask if you have any short questions which we may resolve before
closing the session?
Questioner: I don’t know if this is a short question or not, so we can save it
till next time, but my question is, why do the crusaders from Orion do this?
What is their ultimate objective? This is probably too long to answer.
Ra: I am Ra. This is not too long to answer. To serve the self is to serve all.
The service of the self, when seen in this perspective, requires an ever-

                                      130
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 11

expanding use of the energies of others for manipulation to the benefit of
the self with distortion towards power.
If there are further queries to further explicate this subject we shall be with
you again.
Questioner: There was one thing that I forgot. Is it possible to have another
session later on today?
Ra: I am Ra. It is well.
Questioner: Thank you.
Ra: I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one
Creator. Adonai.




                                       131
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 12
                            January 28, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: In the last session you mentioned that the Orion crusaders
came here in chariots. Could you describe the chariots?
Ra: I am Ra. The term chariot is a term used in warfare among your
peoples. That is its significance. The shape of the Orion craft is one of the
following: firstly, the elongated, ovoid shape which is of a darker nature
than silver but which has a metallic appearance if seen in the light. In the
absence of light, it appears to be red or fiery in some manner.
Other craft include disc-shaped objects of a small nature approximately
twelve feet in your measurement in diameter, the box-like shape
approximately forty feet to a side in your measurement. Other craft can take
on a desired shape through the use of thought control mechanisms. There
are various civilization complexes which work within this group. Some are
more able to use intelligent infinity than others. The information is very
seldom shared; therefore, the chariots vary greatly in shape and appearance.
Questioner: Is there any effort on the part of the Confederation to stop the
Orion chariots from arriving here?
Ra: I am Ra. Every effort is made to quarantine this planet. However, the
network of guardians, much like any other pattern of patrols on whatever
level, does not hinder each and every entity from penetrating quarantine,
for if request is made in light/love, the Law of One will be met with
acquiescence. If the request is not made, due to the slipping through the
net, then there is penetration of this net.
Questioner: Who makes this request?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is unclear. Please restate.
Questioner: I don’t understand how the Confederation stops the Orion
chariots from coming through the quarantine?
Ra: I am Ra. There is contact at the level of light-form or lightbody-being
depending upon the vibratory level of the guardian. These guardians sweep
reaches of your Earth’s energy fields to be aware of any entities approaching.
An entity which is approaching is hailed in the name of the one Creator.
Any entity thus hailed is bathed in love/light and will of free will obey the
quarantine due to the power of the Law of One.
                                      132
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 12

Questioner: What would happen to the entity if he did not obey the
quarantine after being hailed?
Ra: I am Ra. To not obey quarantine after being hailed on the level of
which we speak would be equivalent to your not stopping upon walking
into a solid brick wall.
Questioner: What would happen to the entity if he did this? What would
happen to his chariot?
Ra: I am Ra. The Creator is one being. The vibratory level of those able to
breach the quarantine boundaries is such that upon seeing the love/light net
it is impossible to break this Law. Therefore, nothing happens. No attempt
is made. There is no confrontation. The only beings who are able to
penetrate the quarantine are those who discover windows or distortions in
the space/time continua surrounding your planet’s energy fields. Through
these windows they come. These windows are rare and unpredictable.
Questioner: Does this account for what we call “UFO Flaps” where a large
number of UFOs show up like in 1973?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Are most of the UFOs which are seen in our skies from the
Orion group?
Ra: I am Ra. Many of those seen in your skies are of the Orion group. They
send out messages. Some are received by those who are oriented toward
service to others. These messages then are altered to be acceptable to those
entities while warning of difficulties ahead. This is the most that self-serving
entities can do when faced with those whose wish is to serve others. The
contacts which the group finds most helpful to their cause are those
contacts made with entities whose orientation is towards service to self.
There are many thought-form entities in your skies which are of a positive
nature and are the projections of the Confederation.
Questioner: You mentioned that the Orion crusaders, when they get
through the net, give both technical and non-technical information. I think
I know what you mean by technical information, but what type of non-
technical information do they give? And am I right in assuming that this is
done by telepathic contact?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Through telepathy the philosophy of the Law
of One with the distortion of service to self is promulgated. In advanced
groups there are rituals and exercises given and these have been written
down just as the service-to-others oriented entities have written down the
promulgated philosophy of their teachers. The philosophy concerns the
                                      133
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 12

service of manipulating others that they may experience service towards the
other self, thus through this experience becoming able to appreciate service
to self. These entities would become oriented towards service to self and in
turn manipulate yet others so that they in turn might experience the service
towards the other self.
Questioner: Would this be the origin of what we call black magic?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct in one sense, incorrect in another. The Orion
group has aided the so-called negatively oriented among your
mind/body/spirit complexes. These same entities would be concerning
themselves with service to self in any case and there are many upon your so-
called inner planes which are negatively oriented and thus available as inner
teachers or guides and so-called possessors of certain souls who seek this
distortion of service to self.
Questioner: Is it possible for an entity here on Earth to be so confused as to
call both the Confederation and the Orion group in an alternating way, first
one, then the other, and then back to the first again?
Ra: I am Ra. It is entirely possible for the untuned channel, as you call that
service, to receive both positive and negative communications. If the entity
at the base of its confusion is oriented toward service to others, the entity
will begin to receive messages of doom. If the entity at the base of the
complex of beingness is oriented towards service to self, the crusaders, who
in this case, do not find it necessary to lie, will simply begin to give the
philosophy they are here to give. Many of your so-called contacts among
your people have been confused and self-destructive because the channels
were oriented towards service to others but, in the desire for proof, were
open to the lying information of the crusaders who then were able to
neutralize the effectiveness of the channel.
Questioner: Are most of these crusaders fourth-density?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a majority of fourth-density. That is correct.
Questioner: Is an entity in the fourth density normally invisible to us?
Ra: I am Ra. The use of the word “normal” is one which befuddles the
meaning of the question. Let us rephrase for clarity. The fourth density is,
by choice, not visible to third density. It is possible for fourth density to be
visible. However, it is not the choice of the fourth-density entity to be
visible due to the necessity for concentration upon a rather difficult
vibrational complex which is the third density you experience.
Questioner: Are there any Confederation or Orion entities living upon the
Earth and operating visibly among us in our society at this time?
                                       134
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 12

Ra: I am Ra. There are no entities of either group walking among you at
this time. However, the crusaders of Orion use two types of entities to do
their bidding, shall we say. The first type is the thought-form; the second, a
kind of robot.
Questioner: Could you describe the robot?
Ra: I am Ra. The robot may look like any other being. It is a construct.
Questioner: Is the robot what is normally called the “Men in Black”?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Who are the Men in Black?
Ra: I am Ra. The Men in Black are a thought-form type of entity which
have some beingness to their make-up. They have certain physical
characteristics given them. However, their true vibrational nature is without
third-density vibrational characteristics and, therefore, they are able to
materialize and dematerialize when necessary.
Questioner: Are all of these Men in Black then used by the Orion
crusaders?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: You spoke of Wanderers. Who are Wanderers? Where do they
come from?
Ra: I am Ra. Imagine, if you will, the sands of your shores. As countless as
the grains of sand are the sources of intelligent infinity. When a social
memory complex has achieved its complete understanding of its desire, it
may conclude that its desire is service to others with the distortion towards
reaching their hand, figuratively, to any entities who call for aid. These
entities whom you may call the Brothers and Sisters of Sorrow move toward
this calling of sorrow. These entities are from all reaches of the infinite
creation and are bound together by the desire to serve in this distortion.
Questioner: How many of them are incarnate on Earth now?
Ra: I am Ra. The number is approximate due to an heavy influx of those
birthed at this time due to an intensive need to lighten the planetary
vibration and thus aid in harvest. The number approaches sixty-five million.
Questioner: Are most of these from the fourth density? Or what density do
they come from?
Ra: I am Ra. Few there are of fourth density. The largest number of
Wanderers, as you call them, are of the sixth density. The desire to serve

                                     135
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 12

must be distorted towards a great deal of purity of mind and what you may
call foolhardiness or bravery, depending upon your distortion complex
judgment. The challenge/danger of the Wanderer is that it will forget its
mission, become karmically involved, and thus be swept into the maelstrom
of which it had incarnated to avert the destruction.
Questioner: What could one of these entities do to become karmically
involved? Could you give an example of that?
Ra: I am Ra. An entity which acts in a consciously unloving manner in
action with other beings can become karmically involved.
Questioner: Do many of these Wanderers have physical ailments in this
third-density situation?
Ra: I am Ra. Due to the extreme variance between the vibratory distortions
of third density and those of the more dense densities, if you will,
Wanderers have as a general rule some form of handicap, difficulty, or
feeling of alienation which is severe. The most common of these difficulties
are alienation, the reaction against the planetary vibration by personality
disorders, as you would call them, and body complex ailments indicating
difficulty in adjustment to the planetary vibrations such as allergies, as you
would call them.
Questioner: Thank you. Is there anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask you to realign the object upon which the symbols sit.
It is not a significant distortion for only one session, but you will find upon
measuring the entire assemblage that the resting place is 1.4º from the
correct alignment, the resting place an additional .5º away from proper
orientation. Do not concern yourselves with this in the space/time nexus
present, but do not allow these distortions to remain over a long period or
the contact will be gradually impaired.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                      136
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 13
                            January 29, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: First of all I would like to apologize for asking so many stupid
questions while searching for what we should do. I consider what we are
doing to be a great honor and privilege to also be humble messengers of the
Law of One. I now believe that the way to prepare this book is to start at
the beginning of creation and follow through the evolution of man on
Earth, investigating at all times how the Law of One was used. I would also
like to make as the title of the book, The Law of One, and I would like to
state as the author, Ra. Would you agree to this?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query is unclear. Would you please state as separate
queries each area of agreement?
Questioner: First, I would like to start at the beginning of creation, as far
back as we can go and follow the development of man to the present time.
Is this agreeable?
Ra: I am Ra. This is completely your discernment/understanding/decision.
Questioner: Secondly, I would like to title the book, The Law of One, by
Ra. Is this agreeable?
Ra: I am Ra. The title of the book is acceptable. The authorship by
vibratory sound complex Ra is, in our distortion of understanding,
incomplete. We are messengers.
Questioner: Can you state who then should author the book?
Ra: I am Ra. I can only request that if your discernment/understanding
suggests the use of this vibratory sound complex, Ra, the phrase “An
humble messenger of the Law of One” be appended.
Questioner: Thank you. Can you tell me of the first known thing in the
creation?
Ra: I am Ra. The first known thing in the creation is infinity. The infinity
is creation.
Questioner: From this infinity then must come what we experience as
creation. What was the next step or the next evolvement?
Ra: I am Ra. Infinity became aware. This was the next step.

                                      137
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 13

Questioner: After this, what came next?
Ra: I am Ra. Awareness led to the focus of infinity into infinite energy. You
have called this by various vibrational sound complexes, the most common
to your ears being “Logos” or “Love.” The Creator is the focusing of infinity
as an aware or conscious principle called by us as closely as we can create
understanding/learning in your language, intelligent infinity.
Questioner: Can you state the next step?
Ra: I am Ra. The next step is still at this space/time nexus in your illusion
achieving its progression as you may see it in your illusion. The next step is
an infinite reaction to the creative principle following the Law of One in
one of its primal distortions, freedom of will. Thus many, many
dimensions, infinite in number, are possible. The energy moves from the
intelligent infinity due first to the outpouring of randomized creative force,
this then creating patterns which in holographic style appear as the entire
creation no matter which direction or energy is explored. These patterns of
energy begin then to regularize their own local, shall we say, rhythms and
fields of energy, thus creating dimensions and universes.
Questioner: Then can you tell me how the galaxy and planetary systems
were formed?
Ra: I am Ra. You must imagine a great leap of thought in this query, for at
the last query the physical, as you call, it, universes were not yet born.
The energies moved in increasingly intelligent patterns until the
individualization of various energies emanating from the creative principle
of intelligent infinity became such as to be co-Creators. Thus the so-called
physical matter began. The concept of light is instrumental in grasping this
great leap of thought as this vibrational distortion of infinity is the building
block of that which is known as matter, the light being intelligent and full
of energy, thus being the first distortion of intelligent infinity which was
called by the creative principle.
This light of love was made to have in its occurrences of being certain
characteristics, among them the infinite whole paradoxically described by
the straight line, as you would call it. This paradox is responsible for the
shape of the various physical illusion entities you call solar systems, galaxies,
and planets of revolving and tending towards the lenticular.
Questioner: I think I made an error in getting ahead of the process you
were describing. Would it be helpful to fill in that great leap due to the
mistake I made?


                                       138
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 13

Ra: I am Ra. I attempted to bridge the gap. However, you may question me
in any manner you deem appropriate.
Questioner: Taking the question just before the one I asked about the
galaxies and planets and tell me what the next step was from there?
Ra: I am Ra. The steps, as you call them, are, at the point of question,
simultaneous and infinite.
Questioner: Can you tell me how intelligent infinity became, shall we say
(I’m having difficulty with the language), how intelligent infinity became
individualized from itself.
Ra: I am Ra. This is an appropriate question.
The intelligent infinity discerned a concept. This concept was discerned to
be freedom of will of awareness. This concept was finity. This was the first
and primal paradox or distortion of the Law of One. Thus the one
intelligent infinity invested itself in an exploration of many-ness. Due to the
infinite possibilities of intelligent infinity there is no ending to many-ness.
The exploration, thus, is free to continue infinitely in an eternal present.
Questioner: Was the galaxy that we are in created by the infinite
intelligence or was it created by a portion of the infinite intelligence?
Ra: I am Ra. The galaxy and all other things of material of which you are
aware are products of individualized portions of intelligent infinity. As each
exploration began, it, in turn, found its focus and became co-Creator. Using
intelligent infinity each portion created an universe and allowing the
rhythms of free choice to flow, playing with the infinite spectrum of
possibilities, each individualized portion channeled the love/light into what
you might call intelligent energy, thus creating the so-called Natural Laws
of any particular universe.
Each universe, in turn, individualized to a focus becoming, in turn, co-
Creator and allowing further diversity, thus creating further intelligent
energies regularizing or causing Natural Laws to appear in the vibrational
patterns of what you would call a solar system. Thus, each solar system has
its own, shall we say, local coordinate system of illusory Natural Laws. It
shall be understood that any portion, no matter how small, of any density
or illusory pattern contains, as in an holographic picture, the one Creator
which is infinity. Thus all begins and ends in mystery.
Questioner: Can you tell me how the individualized infinity created our
galaxy and if the same portion created our planetary system and, if so, how
this came about?

                                       139
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 13

Ra: I am Ra. We may have misperceived your query. We were under the
distortion/impression that we had responded to this particular query.
Would you restate the query?
Questioner: I am wondering if the planetary system that we are in now was
all created at once or if our sun was created first and the planets later?
Ra: I am Ra. The process is from the larger, in your illusion, to the smaller.
Thus the co-Creator, individualizing the galaxy, created energy patterns
which then focused in multitudinous focuses of further conscious awareness
of intelligent infinity. Thus, the solar system of which you experience
inhabitation is of its own patterns, rhythms, and so-called natural laws
which are unique to itself. However, the progression is from the galaxy
spiraling energy to the solar spiraling energy, to the planetary spiraling
energy, to the experiential circumstances of spiraling energy which begin the
first density of awareness of consciousness of planetary entities.
Questioner: Could you tell me about this first density of planetary entities?
Ra: I am Ra. Each step recapitulates intelligent infinity in its discovery of
awareness. In a planetary environment all begins in what you would call
chaos, energy undirected and random in its infinity. Slowly, in your terms
of understanding, there forms a focus of self-awareness. Thus the Logos
moves. Light comes to form the darkness, according to the co-Creator’s
patterns and vibratory rhythms, so constructing a certain type of experience.
This begins with first density which is the density of consciousness, the
mineral and water life upon the planet learning from fire and wind the
awareness of being. This is the first density.
Questioner: How does this first density then progress to greater awareness?
Ra: I am Ra. The spiraling energy, which is the characteristic of what you
call “light,” moves in a straight line spiral thus giving spirals an inevitable
vector upwards to a more comprehensive beingness with regards to
intelligent infinity. Thus, first dimensional beingness strives towards the
second-density lessons of a type of awareness which includes growth rather
than dissolution or random change.
Questioner: Could you define what you mean by growth?
Ra: I am Ra. Picture, if you will, the difference between first-vibrational
mineral or water life and the lower second-density beings which begin to
move about within and upon its being. This movement is the characteristic
of second density, the striving towards light and growth.
Questioner: By striving towards light, what do you mean?

                                      140
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 13

Ra: I am Ra. A very simplistic example of second-density growth striving
towards light is that of the leaf striving towards the source of light.
Questioner: Is there any physical difference between first and second
density? For instance if I could see both a first and second-density planet
side by side, in my present condition, could I see both of them? Would they
both be physical to me?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. All of the octave of your densities would be
clearly visible were not the fourth through the seventh freely choosing not
to be visible.
Questioner: Then how does the second density progress to the third?
Ra: I am Ra. The second density strives towards the third density which is
the density of self-consciousness or self-awareness. The striving takes place
through the higher second-density forms who are invested by third-density
beings with an identity to the extent that they become self-aware
mind/body complexes, thus becoming mind/body/spirit complexes and
entering third density, the first density of consciousness of spirit.
Questioner: What is the density level of our planet Earth at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. The sphere upon which you dwell is third density in its
beingness of mind/body/spirit complexes. It is now in a space/time
continuum, fourth density. This is causing a somewhat difficult harvest.
Questioner: How does a third-density planet become a fourth density
planet?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question.
The fourth density is, as we have said, as regularized in its approach as the
striking of a clock upon the hour. The space/time of your solar system has
enabled this planetary sphere to spiral into space/time of a different
vibrational configuration. This causes the planetary sphere to be able to be
molded by these new distortions. However, the thought-forms of your
people during this transition period are such that the mind/body/spirit
complexes of both individual and societies are scattered throughout the
spectrum instead of becoming able to grasp the needle, shall we say, and
point the compass in one direction.
Thus, the entry into the vibration of love, sometimes called by your people
the vibration of understanding, is not effective with your present societal
complex. Thus, the harvest shall be such that many will repeat the third-
density cycle. The energies of your Wanderers, your teachers, and your


                                      141
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 13

adepts at this time are all bent upon increasing the harvest. However, there
are few to harvest.
Questioner: I would like to apologize for sometimes asking inappropriate
questions. It’s difficult sometimes to ask precisely the right question. I don’t
wish to go over any ground that we’ve already covered. I notice that this
period is slightly shorter than previous work sessions. Is there a reason for
this?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s vital energy is somewhat low.
Questioner: I am assuming from this that it would be a good idea not to
have another session today. Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. It is well to have a session later if it is acceptable that we
monitor this instrument and cease using it when it becomes low in the
material which we take from it. We do not wish to deplete this instrument.
Questioner: This is always acceptable in any session. I will ask my final
question. Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or aid in this communication?
Ra: I am Ra. It is well. Each is most conscientious. Continue in the same.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                      142
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 14
                            January 29, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. We
communicate now.
Questioner: After going over this morning’s work, I thought it might be
helpful to fill in a few things. You said that the second density strives
towards the third density which is the density of self-consciousness, or self-
awareness. The striving takes place through higher second-density forms
being invested by third-density beings. Could you explain what you mean
by this?
Ra: I am Ra. Much as you would put on a vestment, so do your third-
density beings invest or clothe some second-density beings with self-
awareness. This is often done through the opportunity of what you call pets.
It has also been done by various other means of investiture. These include
many so-called religious practice complexes which personify and send love
to various natural second-density beings in their group form.
Questioner: When this Earth was second-density, how did the second-
density beings on it become so invested?
Ra: I am Ra. There was not this type of investment as spoken but the
simple third-density investment which is the line of spiraling light calling
distortion upward from density to density. The process takes longer when
there is no investment made by incarnate third-density beings.
Questioner: Then what was the second-density form—what did it look
like—that became Earth-man in the third density? What did he look like in
the second density?
Ra: I am Ra. The difference between second- and third-density bodily
forms would in many cases have been more like one to the other. In the case
of your planetary sphere the process was interrupted by those who
incarnated here from the planetary sphere you call Mars. They were
adjusted by genetic changing and, therefore, there was some difference
which was of a very noticeable variety rather than the gradual raising of the
bipedal forms upon your second-density level to third-density level. This
has nothing to do with the so-called placement of the soul. This has only to
do with the circumstances of the influx of those from that culture.
Questioner: I understand from previous material that this occurred 75,000
years ago. It was then that our third-density process of evolution began. Can
you tell me the history, hitting only the points of development, shall I say,
                                      143
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 14

that occurred within this 75,000 years, any point when contact was made to
aid this development?
Ra: I am Ra. The first attempt to aid your peoples was at the time 75,000.
This attempt 75,000 of your years ago has been previously described by us.
The next attempt was approximately 58,000 of your years ago, continuing
for a long period in your measurement, with those of Mu as you call this
race or mind/body/spirit social complex. The next attempt was long in
coming and occurred approximately 13,000 of your years ago when some
intelligent information was offered to those of Atlantis, this being of the
same type of healing and crystal working of which we have spoken
previously. The next attempt was 11,000 of your years ago. These are
approximations as we are not totally able to process your space/time
continuum measurement system. This was in what you call Egypt and of
this we have also spoken. The same beings who came with us returned
approximately 3,500 years later in order to attempt to aid the South
American mind/body/spirit social complex once again. However, the
pyramids of those so-called cities were not to be used in the appropriate
fashion.
Therefore, this was not pursued further. There was a landing approximately
3,000 of your years ago also in your South America, as you call it. There
were a few attempts to aid your peoples approximately 2,300 years ago, this
in the area of Egypt. The remaining part of the cycle, we have never been
gone from your fifth dimension and have been working in this last minor
cycle to prepare for harvest.
Questioner: Was the Egyptian visit of 11,000 years ago the only one where
you actually walked the Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. I understand your question distorted in the direction of selves
rather than other-selves. We of the vibratory sound complex, Ra, have
walked among you only at that time.
Questioner: I understood you to say in an earlier session that pyramids were
built to ring the Earth. How many pyramids were built?
Ra: l am Ra. There are six balancing pyramids and fifty-two others built for
additional healing and initiatory work among your mind/body/spirit social
complexes.
Questioner: What is a balancing pyramid?
Ra: I am Ra. Imagine, if you will, the many force fields of the Earth in their
geometrically precise web. Energies stream into the Earth planes, as you
would call them, from magnetically determined points. Due to growing

                                     144
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 14

thought-form distortions in understanding of the Law of One, the planet
itself was seen to have the potential for imbalance. The balancing pyramidal
structures were charged with crystals which drew the appropriate balance
from the energy forces streaming into the various geometrical centers of
electromagnetic energy which surround and shape the planetary sphere.
Questioner: Let me make a synopsis and you tell me if I am correct. All of
these visits for the last 75,000 years were for the purpose of giving to the
people of Earth an understanding of the Law of One, and in this way
allowing them to progress upward through the fourth, fifth, and sixth
densities. This was to be a service to Earth. The pyramids were used also in
giving the Law of One in their own way. The balancing pyramids, I’m not
quite sure of. Am I right so far?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct to the limits of the precision allowed by
language.
Questioner: Did the balancing pyramid prevent the Earth from changing its
axis?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is not clear. Please restate.
Questioner: Does the balancing refer to the individual who is initiated in
the pyramid or does it refer to the physical balancing of the Earth on its axis
in space?
Ra: I am Ra. The balancing pyramidal structures could be and were used for
individual initiation. However, the use of these pyramids was also designed
for the balancing of the planetary energy web. The other pyramids are not
placed correctly for Earth healing but for healing of mind/body/spirit
complexes. It came to our attention that your density was distorted towards,
what is called by our distortion/understanding of third density on your
planetary sphere, more of a time/space continuum in one incarnation
pattern in order to have a fuller opportunity to learn/teach the Laws or
Ways of the primal distortion of the Law of One which is Love.
Questioner: I want to make this statement and you tell me if I am correct.
The balancing pyramids were to do what we call increase the life span of
entities here so that they would gain more wisdom of the Law of One while
they were in the physical at one time. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. However, the pyramids not called by us by the
vibrational sound complex, balancing pyramids, were more numerous and
were used exclusively for the above purpose and the teach/learning of
healers to charge and enable these processes.


                                      145
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 14

Questioner: George Van Tassel built a machine in our western desert called
an integratron. Will this machine work for that purpose, of increasing the
life span?
Ra: I am Ra. The machine is incomplete and will not function for the
above-mentioned purpose.
Questioner: Who gave George the information on how to build it?
Ra: I am Ra. There were two contacts which gave the entity with the
vibratory sound complex, George, this information. One was of the
Confederation. The second was of the Orion group. The Confederation was
caused to find the distortion towards non-contact due to the alteration of
the vibrational mind complex patterns of the one called George. Thus, the
Orion group used this instrument; however, this instrument, though
confused, was a mind/body/spirit complex devoted at the heart to service to
others, so the, shall we say, worst that could be done was to discredit this
source.
Questioner: Would there be any value to the people of this planet now to
complete this machine?
Ra: I am Ra. The harvest is now. There is not at this time any reason to
include efforts along these distortions toward longevity, but rather to
encourage distortions toward seeking the heart of self, for this which resides
clearly in the violet-ray energy field will determine the harvesting of each
mind/body/spirit complex.
Questioner: Going back to when we started this 75,000 year period, there
was a harvest 25,000 years after the start which would make it 50,000 years
ago. Can you tell me how many were harvested at that time?
Ra: I am Ra. The harvest was none.
Questioner: There was no harvest? What about 25,000 years ago?
Ra: I am Ra. A harvesting began taking place in the latter portion, as you
measure time/space, of the second cycle, with individuals finding the
gateway to intelligent infinity. The harvest of that time, though extremely
small, was those entities of extreme distortion towards service to the entities
who were now to repeat the major cycle. These entities, therefore, remained
in third density although they could, at any moment/present nexus, leave
this density through use of intelligent infinity.
Questioner: Then in the harvest 25,000 years ago, the entities who could
have been harvested into the fourth density chose to remain here in service
to this planetary population. Is this correct?

                                      146
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 14

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Thus, there was no harvest, but there were
harvestable entities who shall choose the manner of their entrance into
fourth dimension.
Questioner: Then for the last 2,300 years you have been working to create
as large a harvest as possible at the end of the total 75,000 year cycle. Can
you state with respect to the Law of One why you do this?
Ra: I am Ra. I speak for the social memory complex termed Ra. We came
among you to aid you. Our efforts in service were perverted. Our desire
then is to eliminate as far as possible the distortions caused by those
misreading our information and guidance. The general cause of service such
as the Confederation offers is that of the primal distortion of the Law of
One, which is service. The one Being of the creation is like unto a body, if
you will accept this third-density analogy. Would we ignore a pain in the
leg? A bruise upon the skin? A cut which is festering. No. There is no
ignoring a call. We, the entities of sorrow, chose as our service the attempt
to heal the sorrow which we are calling analogous to the pains of a physical
body complex/distortion.
Questioner: Of what density level is Ra?
Ra: I am Ra. I am sixth density with a strong seeking towards seventh
density. The harvest for us will be in only approximately two and one-half
million of your years and it is our desire to be ready for harvest as it
approaches in our space/time continuum.
Questioner: And you ready yourselves for this harvest through the service
you can provide. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We offer the Law of One, the solving of
paradoxes, the balancing of love/light and light/love.
Questioner: How long is one of your cycles?
Ra: I am Ra. One of our cycles computes to 75 million of your years.
Questioner: 75 million years?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct.
Questioner: In your service in giving the Law of One, do you work with
any other planets than Earth at this time, or just Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. We work only with this planetary sphere at this time.
Questioner: You stated that you were called by 352,000 Earth entities. Does
this mean that it is this number that will understand and accept the Law of
One?
                                     147
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 14

Ra: I am Ra. We cannot estimate the correctness of your statement for
those who call are not in every case able to understand the answer to their
calling. Moreover, those who were not calling previously may, with great
trauma, discover the answers to the call nearly simultaneously with their late
call. There is no time/space in call. Therefore, we cannot estimate the
number of your mind/body/spirit complexes which will, in your space/time
continuum/distortion, hear and understand.
Questioner: How do you normally perform your service of giving the Law
of One? How have you done this over the last 2,300 years? How have you
normally given this to Earth people?
Ra: I am Ra. We have used channels such as this one, but in most cases the
channels feel inspired by dreams and visions without being aware,
consciously, of our identity or existence. This particular group has been
accentuatedly trained to recognize such contact. This makes this group able
to be aware of a focal or vibrational source of information.
Questioner: When you contact the entities in their dreams and otherwise,
these entities first have to be seeking in the direction of the Law of One. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. For example, the entities of the nation Egypt
were in a state of pantheism, as you may call the distortion toward separate
worship of various portions of the Creator. We were able to contact one
whose orientation was toward the One.
Questioner: I assume that as the cycle ends and inconveniences occur, there
will be some entities who start seeking or be catalyzed into seeking because
of the trauma and will then hear your words telepathically or in written
form such as this book. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct except in understanding that the
inconveniences have begun.
Questioner: Can you tell me who was responsible for transmitting the book
Oahspe?
Ra: I am Ra. This was transmitted by one of Confederation social memory
complex status whose idea, as offered to the Council, was to use some of the
known physical history of the so-called religions or religious distortions of
your cycle in order to veil and partially unveil aspects or primal distortions
of the Law of One. All names can be taken to be created for their
vibrational characteristics. The information buried within has to do with a
deeper understanding of love and light, and the attempts of infinite


                                      148
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 14

intelligence through many messengers to teach/learn those entities of your
sphere.
Questioner: Have there been any other books that you can name that are
available for this purpose that have been given by the Confederation?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot share this information, for it would distort your
discernment patterns in your future. You may ask about a particular
volume.
Questioner: Who transmitted the Urantia Book?
Ra: I am Ra. This was given by a series of discarnate entities of your own
Earth planes, the so-called inner planes. This material is not passed by the
Council.
Questioner: Who spoke through Edgar Cayce?
Ra: I am Ra. No entity spoke through Edgar Cayce.
Questioner: Where did the information come from that Edgar Cayce
channeled?
Ra: I am Ra. We have explained before that the intelligent infinity is
brought into intelligent energy from eighth density or octave. The one
sound vibratory complex called Edgar used this gateway to view the present,
which is not the continuum you experience but the potential social memory
complex of this planetary sphere. The term your peoples have used for this
is the “Akashic Record” or the “Hall of Records.” This is the last question
which you may now ask.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable or to help during the transmission?
Ra: I am Ra. We only reiterate the importance of alignment . This
instrument is placed .2º away from the direction of the resting place, which
is correct. This may be “eyed,” shall we say, by sight and the instrument
reminded. You are being conscientious. Is there any brief question we may
answer before this session is closed?
Questioner: Can you tell me if we are accomplishing our effort reasonably
well?
Ra: I am Ra. The Law is One. There are no mistakes.
I am Ra. I leave this instrument in the love and the light of the one infinite
Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the
one Creator. Adonai.

                                      149
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 15
                            January 30, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: I would like to apologize for any past and future stupid
questions. They are due to the fact that I am searching for the proper entry
into the investigation of the Law of One.
I would like to ask about the use of the instrument, if it is a function of the
time we use the instrument or the amount of words or information the
instrument gives? In other words, do I have to hurry and ask questions, or
can I take my time to ask questions?
Ra: I am Ra. There are two portions to your query. Firstly, this instrument’s
reserve of vital energy which is a product of body, mind, and spirit
distortions in the various complexes, is the key to the length of time which
we may expend using this instrument. We searched your group and we
contacted you for each in your group possesses significantly more vital
energy of the body complex. However, this instrument was tuned most
appropriately by the mind/body/spirit complex distortions of its beingness
in this illusion. Therefore, we remained with this instrument.
Secondly, we communicate at a set rate which is dependent upon our
careful manipulation of this instrument. We cannot be more, as you would
say, quick. Therefore, you may ask questions speedily but the answers we
have to offer are at a set pace given.
Questioner: This isn’t exactly what I meant. If it takes me, say forty-five
minutes to ask my questions, does that give the instrument only fifteen
minutes to answer, or could the instrument go over an hour, all totaled,
with her answers?
Ra: I am Ra. The energy required for this contact is entered into this
instrument by a function of time. Therefore, the time is the factor, as we
understand your query.
Questioner: Then I should ask my questions rapidly so that I do not reduce
the time. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You shall do as you deem fit. However, we may suggest that to
obtain the answers you require may mean that you invest some of what you
experience as time. Although you lose the answer-time, you gain thereby in


                                      150
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 15

the specificity of the answer. At many times in the past, we have needed
clarification of hastily phrased questions.
Questioner: Thank you. The first question is this: Why does rapid aging
occur on this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. Rapid aging occurs upon this third-density planet due to an
ongoing imbalance of receptor web complex in the etheric portion of the
energy field of this planet. The thought-form distortions of your peoples
have caused the energy streamings to enter the planetary magnetic
atmosphere, if you would so term this web of energy patterns, in such a way
that the proper streamings are not correctly imbued with balanced vibratory
light/love from the, shall we say, cosmic level of this octave of existence.
Questioner: Do I assume correctly that one of your attempts in service to
this planet was to help the population more fully understand and practice
the Law of One so that this rapid aging could be changed to normal aging?
Ra: I am Ra. You assume correctly to a great degree.
Questioner: What is the greatest service that our population on this planet
could perform individually?
Ra: I am Ra. There is but one service. The Law is One. The offering of self
to Creator is the greatest service, the unity, the fountainhead. The entity
who seeks the one Creator is with infinite intelligence. From this seeking,
from this offering, a great multiplicity of opportunities will evolve
depending upon the mind/body/spirit complexes’ distortions with regard to
the various illusory aspects or energy centers of the various complexes of
your illusion.
Thus, some become healers, some workers, some teachers, and so forth.
Questioner: If an entity were perfectly balanced with respect to the Law of
One on this planet would he undergo the aging process?
Ra: I am Ra. A perfectly balanced entity would become tired rather than
visibly aged. The lessons being learned, the entity would depart. However,
this is appropriate and is a form of aging which your peoples do not
experience. The understanding comes slowly, the body complex
decomposing more rapidly.
Questioner: Can you tell me a little more about the word, “balancing,” as
we are using it?
Ra: I am Ra. Picture, if you will, the One Infinite. You have no picture.
Thus, the process begins. Love creating light, becoming love/light, streams
into the planetary sphere according to the electromagnetic web of points or
                                     151
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 15

nexi of entrance. These streamings are then available to the individual who,
like the planet, is a web of electromagnetic energy fields with points or nexi
of entrance.
In a balanced individual each energy center is balanced and functioning
brightly and fully. The blockages of your planetary sphere cause some
distortion of intelligent energy. The blockages of the mind/body/spirit
complex further distort or unbalance this energy. There is one energy. It
may be understood as love/light or light/love or intelligent energy.
Questioner: Am I correct to assume that one of the blockages of the
mind/body/spirit complex might be, shall we say, ego, and this could be
balanced using a worthiness/unworthiness balance. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect.
Questioner: Can you tell me how you balance the ego?
Ra: I am Ra. We cannot work with this concept as it is misapplied and
understanding cannot come from it.
Questioner: How does an individual go about balancing himself? What is
the first step?
Ra: I am Ra. The steps are only one; that is, an understanding of the energy
centers which make up the mind/body/spirit complex. This understanding
may be briefly summarized as follows. The first balancing is of the Malkuth,
or Earth, vibratory energy complex, called the red-ray complex. An
understanding and acceptance of this energy is fundamental. The next
energy complex, which may be blocked is the emotional, or personal
complex, also known as the orange-ray complex. This blockage will often
demonstrate itself as personal eccentricities or distortions with regard to self-
conscious understanding or acceptance of self.
The third blockage resembles most closely that which you have called ego.
It is the yellow-ray or solar plexus center. Blockages in this center will often
manifest as distortions toward power manipulation and other social
behaviors concerning those close and those associated with the
mind/body/spirit complex. Those with blockages in these first three energy
centers, or nexi, will have continuing difficulties in ability to further their
seeking of the Law of One.
The center of heart, or green-ray, is the center from which third-density
beings may springboard, shall we say, to infinite intelligence. Blockages in
this area may manifest as difficulties in expressing what you may call
universal love or compassion.

                                       152
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 15

The blue-ray center of energy streaming is the center which, for the first
time, is outgoing as well as inpouring. Those blocked in this area may have
difficulty in grasping the spirit/mind complexes of its own entity and
further difficulty in expressing such understandings of self. Entities blocked
in this area may have difficulties in accepting communication from other
mind/body/spirit complexes.
The next center is the pineal or indigo-ray center. Those blocked in this
center may experience a lessening of the influx of intelligent energy due to
manifestations which appear as unworthiness. This is that of which you
spoke. As you can see, this is but one of many distortions due to the several
points of energy influx into the mind/body/spirit complex. The indigo-ray
balancing is quite central to the type of work which revolves about the spirit
complex, which has its influx then into the transformation or transmutation
of third density to fourth density, it being the energy center receiving the
least distorted outpourings of love/light from intelligent energy and also the
potential for the key to the gateway of intelligent infinity.
The remaining center of energy influx is simply the total expression of the
entity’s vibratory complex of mind, body, and spirit. It is as it will be,
“balanced” or “imbalanced” has no meaning at this energy level, for it gives
and takes in its own balance. Whatever the distortion may be, it cannot be
manipulated as can the others and, therefore, has no particular importance
in viewing the balancing of an entity.
Questioner: You previously gave us information on what we should do in
balancing. Is there any publishable information you can give us now about
particular exercises or methods of balancing these energy centers?
Ra: I am Ra. The exercises given for publication seen in comparison with
the material now given are in total a good beginning. It is important to
allow each seeker to enlighten itself rather than for any messenger to
attempt in language to teach/learn for the entity, thus being teach/learner
and learn/teacher. This is not in balance with your third density. We learn
from you. We teach to you. Thus, we teach/learn. If we learned for you, this
would cause imbalance in the direction of the distortion of free will. There
are other items of information allowable. However, you have not yet
reached these items in your line of questioning and it is our belief/feeling
complex that the questioner shall shape this material in such a way that your
mind/body/spirit complexes shall have entry to it, thus we answer your
queries as they arise in your mind complex.
Questioner: Yesterday you stated that “the harvest is now. There is not at
this time any reason to include efforts along this line of longevity, but rather
to encourage efforts to seek the heart of self. This which resides clearly in
                                      153
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 15

the violet-ray energy field will determine the harvest of the mind/body/spirit
complex.” Could you tell us the best way to seek the heart of self?
Ra: I am Ra. We have given you this information in several wordings.
However, we can only say the material for your understanding is the self:
the mind/body/spirit complex. You have been given information upon
healing, as you call this distortion. This information may be seen in a more
general context as ways to understand the self. The understanding,
experiencing, accepting, and merging of self with self and other-self, and
finally with the Creator, is the path to the heart of self. In each infinitesimal
part of your self resides the One in all of Its power. Therefore, we can only
encourage these lines of contemplation or prayer as a means of
subjectively/objectively using or combining various understandings to
enhance the seeking process. Without such a method of reversing the
analytical process, one could not integrate into unity the many
understandings gained in such seeking.
Questioner: I don’t mean to ask the same question twice, but there are
some areas that I consider so important that possibly a greater
understanding may be obtained if the answer is restated a number of times
in other words. I thank you for your patience. Yesterday, you also
mentioned that when there was no harvest at the end of the last 25,000 year
period, “there were harvestable entities who shall choose the manner of their
entrance into the fourth density.” Could you tell me what you mean by
“they shall choose the manner of their entry into the fourth density”?
Ra: I am Ra. These shepherds, or, as some have called them, the “Elder
Race,” shall choose the time/space of their leaving. They are unlikely to
leave until their other-selves are harvestable also.
Questioner: What do you mean by their “other-selves” being harvestable?
Ra: I am Ra. The other-selves with whom these beings are concerned are
those which did not attain harvest during the second major cycle.
Questioner: Could you tell me just a small amount of the history of what
you call the Elder Race?
Ra: I am Ra. The question is unclear. Please restate.
Questioner: I ask this question because I have heard of the Elder Race
before in a book, Road in the Sky, by George Hunt Williamson, and I was
wondering if this Elder Race was the same that he talked about?
Ra: I am Ra. The question now resolves itself, for we have spoken
previously of the manner of decision-making which caused these entities to
remain here upon the closing of the second major cycle of your current
                                       154
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 15

master cycle. There are some distortions in the descriptions of the one
known as Michel; however, these distortions have to do primarily with the
fact that these entities are not a social memory complex, but rather a group
of mind/body/spirit complexes dedicated to service. These entities work
together, but are not completely unified; thus, they do not completely see
each the other’s thoughts, feelings, and motives. However, their desire to
serve is the fourth-dimensional type of desire, thus melding them into what
you may call a brotherhood.
Questioner: Why do you call them the Elder Race?
Ra: I am Ra. We called them thusly to acquaint you, the questioner, with
their identity as is understood by your mind complex distortion.
Questioner: Are there any Wanderers with this Elder Race?
Ra: I am Ra. These are planetary entities harvested—Wanderers only in the
sense that they chose, in fourth-density love, to immediately reincarnate in
third density rather than proceeding towards fourth density. This causes
them to be Wanderers of a type, Wanderers who have never left the Earth
plane because of their free will rather than because of their vibrational level.
Questioner: In yesterday’s material you mentioned that the first distortion
was the distortion of free will. Is there a sequence, a first, second, and third
distortion of the Law of One?
Ra: I am Ra. Only up to a very short point. After this point, the many-ness
of distortions are equal one to another. The first distortion, free will, finds
focus. This is the second distortion known to you as Logos, the Creative
Principle or Love. This intelligent energy thus creates a distortion known as
Light. From these three distortions come many, many hierarchies of
distortions, each having its own paradoxes to be synthesized, no one being
more important than another.
Questioner: You also said that you offered the Law of One which is the
balancing of love/light with light/love. Is there any difference between
light/love and love/light?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final question of this time/space. There is the
same difference between love/light and light/love as there is between
teach/learning and learn/teaching. Love/light is the enabler, the power, the
energy giver. Light/love is the manifestation which occurs when light has
been impressed with love.
Questioner: Is there anything we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable? Can we have two sessions today?

                                       155
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 15

Ra: I am Ra. This instrument requires a certain amount of manipulation of
the physical or body complex due to a stiffness. Other than this, all is well,
the energies being balanced. There is a slight distortion in the mental energy
of this instrument due to concern for a loved one, as you call it. This is only
slightly lowering the vital energies of the instrument. Given a manipulation,
this instrument will be well for another working.
Questioner: By manipulation, do you mean that she should go for a walk or
that we should rub her back?
Ra: I am Ra. We meant the latter. The understanding must be added that
this manipulation be done by one in harmony with the entity.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. Go
forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                     156
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 16
                            January 31, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. We
communicate now.
Questioner: I would like to ask, considering the free will distortion of the
Law of One, how can the Guardians quarantine the Earth? Is this
quarantine within free will?
Ra: I am Ra. The Guardians guard the free will distortion of the
mind/body/spirit complexes of third density on this planetary sphere. The
events which required activation of quarantine were interfering with the free
will distortion of mind/body/spirit complexes.
Questioner: I may be wrong, but it seems to me that it would be the free
will of, say the Orion group, to interfere. How is this balanced with the
information which you just gave?
Ra: I am Ra. The balancing is from dimension to dimension. The attempts
of the so-called Crusaders to interfere with free will are acceptable upon the
dimension of their understanding. However, the mind/body/spirit
complexes of this dimension you call third form a dimension of free will
which is not able to, shall we say, recognize in full, the distortions towards
manipulation. Thus, in order to balance the dimensional variances in
vibration, a quarantine, this being a balancing situation whereby the free
will of the Orion group is not stopped but given a challenge. Meanwhile,
the third group is not hindered from free choice.
Questioner: Could these “windows” that occur to let the Orion group come
through once in a while have anything to do with this free will balancing?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Could you tell me how that works?
Ra: I am Ra. The closest analogy would be a random number generator
within certain limits.
Questioner: What is the source of this random number generator? Is it
created by the Guardians to balance their guarding? Or is it a source other
than the Guardians?
Ra: I am Ra. All sources are one. However, we understand your query. The
window phenomenon is an other-self phenomenon from the Guardians. It
operates from the dimensions beyond space/time in what you may call the

                                     157
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

area of intelligent energy. Like your cycles, such balancing, such rhythms
are as a clock striking. In the case of the windows, no entities have the
clock. Therefore, it seems random. It is not random in the dimension which
produces this balance. That is why we stated the analogy was within certain
limits.
Questioner: Then this window balancing prevents the Guardians from
reducing their positive polarization by totally eliminating the Orion contact
through shielding. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. In effect, the balancing allows an
equal amount of positive and negative influx, this balanced by the
mind/body/spirit distortions of the social complex. Thus in your particular
planetary sphere, less negative, as you would call it, information or stimulus
is necessary than positive due to the somewhat negative orientation of your
social complex distortion.
Questioner: In this way, total free will is balanced so that individuals may
have an equal opportunity to choose service to others or service to self. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: This is a profound revelation, I believe, in the Law of Free
Will. Thank you.
This is a minor question further to make an example of this principle, but if
the Confederation landed on Earth, they would be taken as gods, breaking
the Law of Free Will and thus reducing their polarization of service to all. I
assume that the same thing would happen if the Orion group landed. How
would this affect their polarization of service to self if they were able to land
and became known as gods?
Ra: I am Ra. In the event of mass landing of the Orion group, the effect of
polarization would be strongly toward an increase in the service to self,
precisely the opposite of the former opportunity which you mentioned.
Questioner: If the Orion group was able to land, would this increase their
polarization? What I am trying to get at is, is it better for them to work
behind the scenes to get recruits, shall we say, from our planet, the person
from our planet going strictly on his own using free will, or is it just as good
for the Orion group to land on our planet and demonstrate remarkable
powers and get people like that?
Ra: I am Ra. This first instance is, in the long run, shall we put it, more
salubrious for the Orion group in that it does not infringe upon the Law of
One by landing and, thus, does its work through those of this planet. In the
                                       158
                   The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

second circumstance, a mass landing would create a loss of polarization due
to the infringement upon the free will of the planet. However, it would be a
gamble. If the planet were then conquered and became part of the Empire,
the free will would then be re-established. This is restrained in action due to
the desire of the Orion group to progress towards the one Creator. This
desire to progress inhibits the group from breaking the Law of Confusion.
Questioner: You mentioned the word “Empire” in relation to the Orion
group. I have thought for some time that the movie Star Wars was somehow
an allegory for what is actually happening. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct in the same way that a simple children’s story is
an allegory for physical/philosophical/social complex
distortion/understanding.
Questioner: Is there a harvest of entities oriented toward service to self like
there is a harvest of those oriented toward service to others?
Ra: I am Ra. There is one harvest. Those able to enter fourth density
through vibrational complex levels may choose the manner of their further
seeking of the one Creator.
Questioner: Then as we enter the fourth density there will be a split, shall
we say, and part of the individuals who go into the fourth density will go
into planets or places where there is service to others and part will go into
places where there is service to self.
Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me the origin of the Ten Commandments?
Ra: I am Ra. The origin of these commandments follows the law of negative
entities impressing information upon positively oriented mind/body/spirit
complexes. The information attempted to copy or ape positivity while
retaining negative characteristics.
Questioner: Was this done by the Orion group?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What was their purpose in doing this?
Ra: I am Ra. The purpose of the Orion group, as mentioned before, is
conquest and enslavement. This is done by finding and establishing an elite
and causing others to serve the elite through various devices such as the laws
you mentioned and others given by this entity.

                                      159
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

Questioner: Was the recipient of the commandments positively or
negatively oriented?
Ra: I am Ra. The recipient was one of extreme positivity, thus accounting
for some of the pseudo-positive characteristics of the information received.
As with contacts which are not successful, this entity, vibratory complex,
Moishe, did not remain a credible influence among those who had first
heard the philosophy of One and this entity was removed from this third-
density vibratory level in a lessened or saddened state, having lost, what you
may call, the honor and faith with which he had begun the
conceptualization of the Law of One and the freeing of those who were of
his tribes, as they were called at that time/space.
Questioner: If this entity was positively oriented, how was the Orion group
able to contact him?
Ra: I am Ra. This was an intensive, shall we say, battleground between
positively oriented forces of Confederation origin and negatively oriented
sources. The one called Moishe was open to impression and received the
Law of One in its most simple form. However, the information became
negatively oriented due to his people’s pressure to do specific physical things
in the third-density planes. This left the entity open for the type of
information and philosophy of a self-service nature.
Questioner: It would be wholly unlike an entity fully aware of the
knowledge of the Law of One to ever say “Thou shalt not.” Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you give me some kind of history of your social memory
complex and how you became aware of the Law of One?
Ra: I am Ra. The path of our learning is graven in the present moment.
There is no history, as we understand your concept. Picture, if you will, a
circle of being. We know the alpha and omega as infinite intelligence. The
circle never ceases. It is present. The densities we have traversed at various
points in the circle correspond to the characteristics of cycles: first, the cycle
of awareness; second, the cycle of growth; third, the cycle of self-awareness;
fourth, the cycle of love or understanding; fifth, the cycle of light or
wisdom; sixth, the cycle of light/love, love/light or unity; seventh, the
gateway cycle; eighth, the octave which moves into a mystery we do not
plumb.
Questioner: Thank you very much. In previous material, before we
communicated with you, it was stated by the Confederation that there is


                                       160
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

actually no past or future … that all is present. Would this be a good
analogy?
Ra: I am Ra. There is past, present, and future in third density. In an
overview such as an entity may have, removed from the space/time
continuum, it may be seen that in the cycle of completion there exists only
the present. We, ourselves, seek to learn this understanding. At the seventh
level or dimension, we shall, if our humble efforts are sufficient, become
one with all, thus having no memory, no identity, no past or future, but
existing in the all.
Questioner: Does this mean that you would have awareness of all that is?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. It is our understanding that it would
not be our awareness, but simply awareness of the Creator. In the Creator is
all that there is. Therefore, this knowledge would be available.
Questioner: I was wondering how many inhabited planets there are in our
galaxy and if they all reach higher density by the Law of One? It doesn’t
seem that there would be any other way to reach higher density? Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Please restate your query.
Questioner: How many inhabited planets are there in our galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. We are assuming that you intend all dimensions of
consciousness or densities of awareness in this question. Approximately one-
fifth of all planetary entities contain awareness of one or more densities.
Some planets are hospitable only for certain densities. Your planet, for
instance, is at this time hospitable for densities one, two, three, and four.
Questioner: Roughly how many total planets in this galaxy of stars that we
are in are aware regardless of density?
Ra: I am Ra. Approximately 67 million.
Questioner: Can you tell me what percentage of those are third, fourth,
fifth, sixth etc., density?
Ra: I am Ra. A percentage seventeen for first density, a percentage twenty
for second density, a percentage twenty-seven for third density, a percentage
sixteen for fourth density, a percentage six for fifth density. The other
information must be withheld.
Questioner: Of these first five densities, have all of the planets progressed
from the third density by knowledge and application of the Law of One?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
                                      161
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

Questioner: Then the only way for a planet to get out of the situation that
we are in is for the population to become aware of and start practicing the
Law of One. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me what percentage of the third-, fourth-, and
fifth-density planets which you have spoken of here are polarized negatively
towards service to self?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not a query to which we may speak given the Law of
Confusion.
We may say only that the negatively or self-service oriented planetary
spheres are much fewer. To give you exact numbers would not be
appropriate.
Questioner: I would like to make an analogy as to why there are fewer
negatively oriented, and then ask you if the analogy is good.
In a positively oriented society with service to others, it would be simple to
move a large boulder by getting everyone to help move it. In a society
oriented towards service to self, it would be much more difficult to get
everyone to work for the good of all to move the boulder; therefore, it is
much easier to get things done to create the service to others principle and
to grow in positively oriented communities than in negatively oriented
communities. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Thank you very much.
Can you tell me how the Confederation of Planets was formed and why?
Ra: I am Ra. The desire to serve begins, in the dimension of love or
understanding, to be an overwhelming goal of the social memory complex.
Thus, those percentiles of planetary entities, plus approximately four
percent more of whose identity we cannot speak, found themselves long,
long ago in your time seeking the same thing: service to others. The
relationship between these entities as they entered an understanding of
other beings, other planetary entities, and other concepts of service was to
share and continue together these commonly held goals of service. Thus,
each voluntarily placed the social memory complex data in what you may
consider a central thought complex available to all. This then created a
structure whereby each entity could work in its own service while calling
upon any other understanding needed to enhance the service. This is the


                                      162
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

cause of the formation and the manner of the working of the
Confederation.
Questioner: With such a large number of planets in this galaxy you say that
there are approximately five hundred planets in the Confederation. There
seems to be a relatively small number of Confederation planets around. Is
there a reason for it?
Ra: I am Ra. There are many Confederations. This Confederation works
with the planetary spheres of seven of your galaxies, if you will, and is
responsible for the callings of the densities of these galaxies.
Questioner: Would you define the word galaxy as you just used it?
Ra: I am Ra. We use that term in this sense as you would use star systems.
Questioner: I’m a little bit confused as to how many total planets the
Confederation that you are in serves?
Ra: I am Ra. I see the confusion. We have difficulty with your language.
The galaxy term must be split. We call galaxy that vibrational complex that
is local. Thus, your sun is what we would call the center of a galaxy. We see
you have another meaning for this term.
Questioner: Yes. In our science the term galaxy refers to the lenticular star
system that contains millions and millions of stars. There was a confusion
about this in one of our earlier communications, and I’m glad to get it
cleared up.
Using the term galaxy in the sense that I just stated, using the lenticular star
system that contains millions of stars, do you know of evolution in other
galaxies besides this one?
Ra: I am Ra. We are aware of life in infinite capacity. You are correct in this
assumption.
Questioner: Can you tell me if the progression of life in other galaxies is
similar to the progression of life in our galaxy?
Ra: I am Ra. The progression is somewhat close to the same, asymptotically
approaching congruency throughout infinity. The free choosing of what
you would call galactic systems causes variations of an extremely minor
nature from one of your galaxies to another.
Questioner: Then the Law of One is truly universal in creating a
progression towards the eighth density in all galaxies. Is this correct?



                                      163
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. There are infinite forms, infinite
understandings, but the progression is one.
Questioner: I am assuming that it is not necessary for an individual to
understand the Law of One to go from the third to the fourth density. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. It is absolutely necessary that an entity consciously realize it
does not understand in order for it to be harvestable. Understanding is not
of this density.
Questioner: That is a very important point. I used the wrong word. What I
meant to say was that I believed that it was not necessary for an entity to be
consciously aware of the Law of One to go from the third to the fourth
density.
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: At what point in the densities is it necessary for an entity to be
consciously aware of the Law of One in order to progress?
Ra: I am Ra. The fifth density harvest is of those whose vibratory
distortions consciously accept the honor/duty of the Law of One. This
responsibility/honor is the foundation of this vibration.
Questioner: Can you tell me a little more about this honor/responsibility
concept?
Ra: I am Ra. Each responsibility is an honor; each honor, a responsibility.
Questioner: Thank you. Is it possible for you to give a short description of
the conditions in the fourth density?
Ra: I am Ra. We ask you to consider as we speak that there are not words
for positively describing fourth density. We can only explain what is not
and approximate what is. Beyond fourth density our ability grows more
limited until we become without words.
That which fourth density is not: it is not of words, unless chosen. It is not
of heavy chemical vehicles for body complex activities. It is not of
disharmony within self. It is not of disharmony within peoples. It is not
within limits of possibility to cause disharmony in any way.
Approximations of positive statements: it is a plane of type of bipedal
vehicle which is much denser and more full of life; it is a plane wherein one
is aware of the thought of other-selves; it is a plane wherein one is aware of
vibrations of other-selves; it is a plane of compassion and understanding of
the sorrows of third density; it is a plane striving towards wisdom or light; it

                                      164
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

is a plane wherein individual differences are pronounced although
automatically harmonized by group consensus.
Questioner: Could you define the word density as we have been using it?
Ra: I am Ra. The term density is a, what you call, mathematical one. The
closest analogy is that of music, whereby after seven notes on your western
type of scale, if you will, the eighth note begins a new octave. Within your
great octave of existence which we share with you, there are seven octaves or
densities. Within each density there are seven sub-densities. Within each
sub-density, are seven sub-sub-densities. Within each sub-sub-density, seven
sub-sub-sub-densities and so on infinitely.
Questioner: I noticed that the time of this session has gone slightly over an
hour. I would like to ask at this time if we should go on? What is the
condition of the instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is in balance. It is well to continue if you
desire.
Questioner: I understand that each density has seven sub-densities which
again have seven sub-densities and so on. This is expanding at a really large
rate as each is increased by powers of seven. Does this mean that in any
density level anything that you can think of is happening?
Ra: I am Ra. From your confusion we select the concept with which you
struggle, that being infinity/opportunity. You may consider any
possibility/probability complex as having an existence.
Questioner: Do things like daydreams become real in other densities?
Ra: I am Ra. This depends upon the nature of the daydream. This is a large
subject. Perhaps the simplest thing we can say is, if the daydream, as you
call it, is one which attracts to self, this then becomes reality to self. If it is a
contemplative general daydream, this may enter the infinity of
possibility/probability complexes and occur elsewhere, having no particular
attachment to the energy fields of the creator.
Questioner: To make this a little more clear, if I were to daydream strongly
about building a ship, would this occur in one of these other densities?
Ra: I am Ra. This would/would have/or shall occur.
Questioner: Then if an entity daydreams strongly about battling an entity,
would this occur?
Ra: I am Ra. In this case the entity’s fantasy concerns the self and other-self,
this binding the thought-form to the possibility/probability complex

                                         165
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

connected with the self which is the creator of this thought-form. This then
would increase the possibility/probability of bringing this into third-density
occurrence.
Questioner: Does the Orion group use this principle to create conditions
favorable to suit their purpose?
Ra: I am Ra. We will answer more specifically than the question. The
Orion group uses daydreams of hostile or other negative natures to feed
back or strengthen these thought-forms.
Questioner: Are the many Wanderers who have and are coming to our
planet subject to the Orion thoughts?
Ra: I am Ra. As we have said before, Wanderers become completely the
creature of third density in mind/body complex. There is just as much
chance of such influence to a Wanderer entity as to a mind/body/spirit
complex of this planetary sphere. The only difference occurs in the spirit
complex which, if it wishes, has an armor of light, if you will, which enables
it to recognize more clearly that which is not as it would appropriately be
desired by the mind/body/spirit complex. This is not more than bias and
cannot be called an understanding.
Furthermore, the Wanderer is, in its own mind/body/spirit, less distorted
toward the, shall we say, deviousness of third density positive/negative
confusions. Thus, it often does not recognize as easily as a more negative
individual the negative nature of thoughts or beings.
Questioner: Then would the Wanderers, as they incarnate here, be high-
priority targets of the Orion group?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: If a Wanderer should be successfully infringed upon, shall I
say, by the Orion group, what would happen to this Wanderer when
harvest came?
Ra: I am Ra. If the Wanderer entity demonstrated through action a negative
orientation towards other-selves it would be as we have said before, caught
into the planetary vibration and, when harvested, possibly repeat again the
master cycle of third density as a planetary entity. This shall be the last full
question of this session.
Is there a short question we may answer before we close this session?
Questioner: Can the instrument be made more comfortable?



                                      166
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 16

Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is as comfortable as it is possible for you to
make it given the weakness distortions of its body complex. You are
conscientious.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace. Adonai.




                                     167
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 17
                            February 3, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the infinite Creator.
Before we communicate by answer we shall correct an error which we have
discovered in the transmission of our information to you. We have
difficulty dealing with your time/space. There may again be errors of this
type. Feel free to question us that we may recalculate in your time/space
measurements.
The error we have discovered concerns one of the arrivals of both the Orion
group into your planetary sphere of influence and the corresponding arrival
of emissaries of the Confederation. We gave dates of 2,600 years for the
Orion entry, 2,300 for Confederation entry. This is incorrect. The
recalculation indicates numbers 3,600 for Orion entry, 3,300 for
Confederation entry.
We communicate now.
Questioner: Thank you very much. I would like to say again that we
consider it a great honor, privilege, and duty to be able to do this particular
work. I would like to reiterate that some of my questions may seem
irrelevant at times, but I am trying to ask them in a manner so as to gain a
foothold into the application of the Law of One.
We are now in the fourth density. Will the effects of the fourth density
increase in the next thirty years? Will we see more changes in our
environment and our effect upon our environment?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth density is a vibrational spectrum. Your time/space
continuum has spiraled your planetary sphere and your, what we would call
galaxy, what you call star, into this vibration. This will cause the planetary
sphere itself to electromagnetically realign its vortices of reception of the in-
streaming of cosmic forces expressing themselves as vibrational webs so that
the Earth thus be fourth-density magnetized, as you may call it.
This is going to occur with some inconvenience, as we have said before, due
to the energies of the thought-forms of your peoples which disturb the
orderly constructs of energy patterns within your Earth spirals of energy
which increases entropy and unusable heat. This will cause your planetary
sphere to have some ruptures in its outer garment while making itself
appropriately magnetized for fourth density. This is the planetary
adjustment.

                                       168
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

You will find a sharp increase in the number of people, as you call
mind/body/spirit complexes, whose vibrational potentials include the
potential for fourth-vibrational distortions. Thus, there will seem to be,
shall we say, a new breed. These are those incarnating for fourth-density
work.
There will also be a sharp increase in the short run of negatively oriented or
polarized mind/body/spirit complexes and social complexes, due to the
polarizing conditions of the sharp delineation between fourth-density
characteristics and third-density self-service orientation.
Those who remain in fourth density upon this plane will be of the so-called
positive orientation. Many will come from elsewhere, for it would appear
that with all the best efforts of the Confederation, which includes those
from your peoples’ inner planes, inner civilizations, and those from other
dimensions, the harvest will still be much less than this planetary sphere is
capable of comfortably supporting in service.
Questioner: Is it possible by the use of some technique or other to help an
entity to reach fourth-density level in these last days?
Ra: I am Ra. It is impossible to help another being directly. It is only
possible to make catalyst available in whatever form, the most important
being the radiation of realization of oneness with the Creator from the self,
less important being information such as we share with you.
We, ourselves, do not feel an urgency for this information to be widely
disseminated. It is enough that we have made it available to three, four, or
five. This is extremely ample reward, for if one of these obtains fourth-
density understanding due to this catalyst then we shall have fulfilled the
Law of One in the distortion of service.
We encourage a dispassionate attempt to share information without
concern for numbers or quick growth among others. That you attempt to
make this information available is, in your terms, your service. The attempt,
if it reaches one, reaches all.
We cannot offer shortcuts to enlightenment. Enlightenment is, of the
moment, an opening to intelligent infinity. It can only be accomplished by
the self, for the self. Another self cannot teach/learn enlightenment, but
only teach/learn information, inspiration, or a sharing of love, of mystery,
of the unknown that makes the other-self reach out and begin the seeking
process that ends in a moment, but who can know when an entity will open
the gate to the present?



                                     169
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

Questioner: Thank you. Can you tell me who was the entity, before his
incarnation on Earth, known as Jesus of Nazareth?
Ra: I am Ra. I have difficulty with this question as it is phrased. Can you
discover another form for this query?
Questioner: What I meant to say was can you tell me if Jesus of Nazareth
came from the Confederation before incarnation here?
Ra: I am Ra. The one known to you as Jesus of Nazareth did not have a
name. This entity was a member of fifth density of the highest level of that
sub-octave. This entity was desirous of entering this planetary sphere in
order to share the love vibration in as pure a manner as possible. Thus, this
entity received permission to perform this mission. This entity was then a
Wanderer of no name, of Confederation origins, of fifth density,
representing the fifth-density understanding of the vibration of
understanding or love.
Questioner: Did you say the fifth vibration was that of love?
Ra: I am Ra. I have made an error. The fourth-density being is that which
we intended to say, the highest level of fourth density going into the fifth.
This entity could have gone on to the fifth but chose instead to return to
third for this particular mission. This entity was of the highest sub-octave of
the vibration of love. This is fourth density.
Questioner: When I am communicating with you as Ra, are you at times
individualized as an entity or am I speaking to an entire social memory
complex?
Ra: I am Ra. You speak with Ra. There is no separation. You would call it
social memory complex thus indicating many-ness. To our understanding,
you are speaking to an individualized portion of consciousness.
Questioner: Am I always speaking to the same individualized portion of
consciousness in each of the sessions?
Ra: I am Ra. You speak to the same entity through a channel or instrument.
This instrument is at times lower in vital energy. This will sometimes
hamper our proceedings. However, this instrument has a great deal of
faithfulness to the task and gives whatever it has to this task. Therefore, we
may continue even when energy is low. This is why we usually speak to the
ending of the session due to our estimation of the instrument’s levels of vital
energy.
Questioner: I would like to make a point clear now that I am sure of
myself. The people of this planet, following any religion or no religion at

                                     170
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

all, or having no intellectual knowledge at all of the Law of One, can still be
harvested into the fourth density if they are of that vibration. Is that not
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. However, you will find few who are
harvestable whose radiance does not cause others to be aware of their, what
you may call, spirituality, the quality of the mind/body/spirit complex
distortion. Thus, it is not particularly probable that an entity would be
completely unknown to his immediate acquaintances as an unusually
radiant personality, even were this individual not caught up in any of the
distortions of your so-called religious systems.
Questioner: When Jesus of Nazareth incarnated was there an attempt by
the Orion group to discredit him in some way?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me what the Orion group did in order to try to
cause his downfall?
Ra: I am Ra. We may describe in general what occurred. The technique was
that of building upon other negatively oriented information. This
information had been given by the one whom your peoples called
“Yahweh.” This information involved many strictures upon behavior and
promised power of the third-density, service-to-self nature. These two types
of distortions were impressed upon those already oriented to think these
thought-forms.
This eventually led to many challenges of the entity known as Jesus. It
eventually led to one, sound vibration complex “Judas,” as you call this
entity, who believed that it was doing the appropriate thing in bringing
about or forcing upon the one you call Jesus the necessity for bringing in
the third-density planetary power distortion of third-density rule over
others.
This entity, Judas, felt that, if pushed into a corner, the entity you call Jesus
would then be able to see the wisdom of using the power of intelligent
infinity in order to rule others. The one you call Judas was mistaken in this
estimation of the reaction of the entity, Jesus, whose teach/learning was not
oriented towards this distortion. This resulted in the destruction of the
bodily complex of the one known as Jesus.
Questioner: Then if the entity Jesus was fourth density and there are
Wanderers on the planet today who came from fifth and sixth density, what
was it that Jesus did that enabled him to be such a good healer and could
these fifth- and sixth-density beings here now do the same?

                                       171
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

Ra: I am Ra. Those who heal may be of any density which has the
consciousness of the spirit. This includes third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh. The third density can be one in which healing takes place just as
the others. However, there is more illusory material to understand, to
balance, to accept, and to move forward from.
The gate to intelligent infinity can only be opened when an understanding
of the in-streamings of intelligent energy are opened unto the healer. These
are the so-called Natural Laws of your local space/time continuum and its
web of electromagnetic sources or nexi of in-streaming energy.
Know then, first, the mind and the body. Then as the spirit is integrated
and synthesized, these are harmonized into a mind/body/spirit complex
which can move among the dimensions and can open the gateway to
intelligent infinity, thus healing self by light and sharing that light with
others.
True healing is simply the radiance of the self causing an environment in
which a catalyst may occur which initiates the recognition of self, by self, of
the self -healing properties of the self.
Questioner: How did Jesus learn this during his incarnation?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity learned the ability by a natural kind of
remembering at a very young age. Unfortunately, this entity first discovered
his ability to penetrate intelligent infinity by becoming the distortion you
call “angry” at a playmate. This entity was touched by the entity known as
Jesus and was fatally wounded.
Thus the one known as Jesus became aware that there dwelt in him a
terrible potential. This entity determined to discover how to use this energy
for the good, not for the negative. This entity was extremely positively
polarized and remembered more than most Wanderers do.
Questioner: How did this aggressive action against a playmate affect Jesus
in his spiritual growth? Where did he go after his physical death?
Ra: I am Ra. The entity you call Jesus was galvanized by this experience and
began a lifetime of seeking and searching. This entity studied first day and
night in its own religious constructs which you call Judaism and was learned
enough to be a rabbi, as you call teach/learners of this particular rhythm or
distortion of understanding, at a very young age.
At the age of approximately thirteen and one-half of your years, this entity
left the dwelling place of its earthly family, as you would call it, and walked
into many other places seeking further information. This went on
sporadically until the entity was approximately twenty-five, at which time it
                                      172
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

returned to its family dwelling, and learned and practiced the art of its
earthly father.
When the entity had become able to integrate or synthesize all experiences,
the entity began to speak to other-selves and teach/learn what it had felt
during the preceding years to be of a worthwhile nature. The entity was
absolved karmically of the destruction of an other-self when it was in the
last portion of lifetime and spoke upon what you would call a cross saying,
“Father, forgive them for they know not what they do.” In forgiveness lies
the stoppage of the wheel of action, or what you call karma.
Questioner: What density is the entity known as Jesus in now?
Ra: I am Ra. This information is harmless though unimportant. This entity
studies now the lessons of the wisdom vibration, the fifth-density, also
called the light vibration.
Questioner: In our culture there is a saying that he will return. Can you tell
me if this is planned?
Ra: I am Ra. I will attempt to sort out this question. It is difficult. This
entity became aware that it was not an entity of itself but operated as a
messenger of the one Creator whom this entity saw as love. This entity was
aware that this cycle was in its last portion and spoke to the effect that those
of its consciousness would return at the harvest.
The particular mind/body/spirit complex you call Jesus is, as what you
would call an entity, not to return except as a member of the Confederation
speaking through a channel. However, there are others of the identical
congruency of consciousness that will welcome those to the fourth-density.
This is the meaning of the returning.
Questioner: Can you tell me why you say that the Earth will be fourth
density positive instead of fourth density negative since there seems to be
much negativity here now?
Ra: I am Ra. The Earth seems to be negative. That is due to the quiet, shall
we say, horror which is the common distortion which those good or
positively oriented entities have towards the occurrences which are of your
time/space present. However, those oriented and harvestable in the ways of
service to others greatly outnumber those whose orientation towards service
to self has become that of harvestable quality.
Questioner: In other words there will be fewer negative entities than
positive entities harvested into the fourth density. Is this correct?



                                      173
                  The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. The great majority of your peoples will repeat
third density.
Questioner: How did Taras Bulba, Genghis Khan, and Rasputin get
harvested prior to the harvest?
Ra: I am Ra. It is the right/privilege/duty of those opening consciously the
gate to intelligent infinity to choose the manner of their leaving of third
density. Those of negative orientation who so achieve this right/duty most
often choose to move forward in their learn/teaching of service to self.
Questioner: Am I to understand that the harvest is to occur in the year
2,011, or will it be spread out?
Ra: I am Ra. This is an approximation. We have stated we have difficulty
with your time/space. This is an appropriate probable/possible time/space
nexus for harvest. Those who are not in incarnation at this time will be
included in the harvest.
Questioner: If an entity wants to be of service to others rather than service
to self while he is in this third density, are there “best ways” of being of
service to others, or is any way just as good as any other way?
Ra: I am Ra. The best way to be of service to others has been explicitly
covered in previous material. We will iterate briefly.
The best way of service to others is the constant attempt to seek to share the
love of the Creator as it is known to the inner self. This involves self
knowledge and the ability to open the self to the other-self without
hesitation. This involves, shall we say, radiating that which is the essence or
the heart of the mind/body/spirit complex.
Speaking to the intention of your question, the best way for each seeker in
third density to be of service to others is unique to that mind/body/spirit
complex. This means that the mind/body/spirit complex must then seek
within itself the intelligence of its own discernment as to the way it may
best serve other-selves. This will be different for each. There is no best.
There is no generalization. Nothing is known.
Questioner: I don’t wish to take up extra time asking questions over again.
Some areas I consider important enough in relation to the Law of One to
ask questions in a different way in order to get another perspective in the
answer.
In the book Oahspe it states that if an entity goes over fifty one percent
service to others and is less than fifty percent service to self, then that entity
is harvestable. Is this correct?

                                       174
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

Ra: I am Ra. This is correct if the harvesting is to be for the positive fourth
dimensional level.
Questioner: What is to be the entity’s percentage if he is to be harvested for
the negative?
Ra: I am Ra. The entity who wishes to pursue the path of service to self
must attain a grade of five, that is five percent service to others, ninety-five
percent service to self. It must approach totality. The negative path is quite
difficult to attain harvestability upon and requires great dedication.
Questioner: Why is the negative path so much more difficult to attain
harvestability upon than the positive?
Ra: I am Ra. This is due to a distortion of the Law of One which indicates
that the gateway to intelligent infinity be a gateway at the end of a straight
and narrow path as you may call it. To attain fifty-one percent dedication to
the welfare of other-selves is as difficult as attaining a grade of five percent
dedication to otherselves. The, shall we say, sinkhole of indifference is
between those two.
Questioner: Then if an entity is harvested into the fourth density with a
grade of fifty-one percent for others and forty-nine percent for self, what
level of the fourth density would he go into? I am assuming that there are
different levels of the fourth density.
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Each enters that sub-density which vibrates in
accordance with the entity’s understanding.
Questioner: How many levels do we have here in the third density at this
time?
Ra: I am Ra. The third density has an infinite number of levels.
Questioner: I’ve heard that there are seven astral and seven devachanic
levels. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You speak of some of the more large distinctions in levels in
your inner planes. That is correct.
Questioner: Who inhabits the astral and devachanic planes?
Ra: I am Ra. Entities inhabit the various planes due to their
vibration/nature. The astral plane varies from thought-forms in the lower
extremities to enlightened beings who become dedicated to teach/learning
in the higher astral planes.
In the devachanic planes, as you call them, are those whose vibrations are
even more close to the primal distortions of love/light.
                                       175
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

Beyond these planes there are others.
Questioner: Are there seven sub-planes to what we call our physical plane
here?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct. This is difficult to understand. There are an
infinite number of planes. In your particular space/time continuum
distortion there are seven sub-planes of mind/body/spirit complexes. You
will discover the vibrational nature of these seven planes as you pass through
your experiential distortions, meeting other-selves of the various levels
which correspond to the energy influx centers of the physical vehicle.
The invisible, or inner, third-density planes are inhabited by those who are
not of body complex natures such as yours; that is, they do not collect about
their spirit/mind complexes a chemical body. Nevertheless these entities are
divided in what you may call an artificial dream within a dream into various
levels. In the upper levels, desire to communicate knowledge back down to
the outer planes of existence becomes less, due to the intensive
learn/teaching which occurs upon these levels.
Questioner: Is it necessary to penetrate one level at a time as we move
through these planes?
Ra: I am Ra. It has been our experience that some penetrate several planes
at one time. Others penetrate them slowly. Some in eagerness attempt to
penetrate the higher planes before penetrating the energies of the so-called
more fundamental planes. This causes energy imbalance.
You will find ill health, as you call this distortion, to frequently be the result
of a subtle mismatch of energies in which some of the higher energy levels
are being activated by the conscious attempts of the entity while the entity
has not penetrated the lower energy centers or sub-densities of this density.
Questioner: Is there a “best way” to meditate?
Ra: I am Ra. No.
Questioner: At this time, near the end of the cycle, how are reincarnations
into the physical allocated, shall we say, on this planet?
Ra: I am Ra. Entities wishing to obtain critically needed experience in order
to become harvestable are incarnated with priority over those who will,
without too much probable/possible doubt, need to re-experience this
density.
Questioner: How long has this type of allocation been going on?



                                       176
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 17

Ra: I am Ra. This has been going on since the first individual entity became
conscious of its need to learn the lessons of this density. This was the
beginning of what you may call a seniority by vibration.
Questioner: Can you explain what you mean by a seniority by vibration?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final question of this session of working.
The seniority by vibration is the preferential treatment, shall we say, which
follows the ways of the Law of One which encourages harvestable
individuals, each individual becoming aware of the time of harvest and the
need on a self-level to bend mind/body/spirit towards the learn/teaching of
these lessons, by giving them priority in order that an entity may have the
best possible chance, shall we say, in succeeding in this attempt.
May we ask at this time if there are any brief questions?
Questioner: My only question is what can we do to make the instrument
more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is not wearing the appropriate apparel for this
work. As inpourings occur in the regions of the, what you may call, seventh
chakra as you speak of these energy centers, filtering through the sixth and
so forth, the entity’s other or base chakras become somewhat de-energized.
Thus, this entity should be more careful in its selection of warm apparel for
the part of the body complex you call the feet.
May we answer any other brief questions?
Questioner: Then we want to put heavier clothing on the feet. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
I will leave this instrument now, I leave you in the love and the light of the
one infinite Creator. Adonai.




                                      177
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 18
                           February 4, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. We
communicate now.
Questioner: I was thinking last night that if I were in the place of Ra right
now, the first distortion of the Law of One might cause me to mix some
erroneous data with the true information that I was transmitting to this
group. Do you do this?
Ra: I am Ra. We do not intentionally do this. However there will be
confusion. It is not our intent in this particular project to create erroneous
information, but to express in this confining ambiance of your language
system the feeling of the Infinite Mystery of the One Creation in its infinite
and intelligent unity.
Questioner: Thank you. I have a question here that I will read: “Much of
the mystic tradition of seeking on Earth holds the belief that the individual
self must be erased or obliterated and the material world ignored for the
individual to reach ‘nirvana,’ as it is called, or enlightenment. What is the
proper role of the individual self and its worldly activities to aid an
individual to grow more into the Law of One?”
Ra: I am Ra. The proper role of the entity is in this density to experience all
things desired, to then analyze, understand, and accept these experiences,
distilling from them the love/light within them. Nothing shall be overcome.
That which is not needed falls away.
The orientation develops due to analysis of desire. These desires become
more and more distorted towards conscious application of love/light as the
entity furnishes itself with distilled experience. We have found it to be
inappropriate in the extreme to encourage the overcoming of any desires,
except to suggest the imagination rather than the carrying out in the
physical plane, as you call it, of those desires not consonant with the Law of
One, thus preserving the primal distortion of free will.
The reason it is unwise to overcome is that overcoming is an unbalanced
action creating difficulties in balancing in the time/space continuum.
Overcoming, thus, creates the further environment for holding on to that
which apparently has been overcome.
All things are acceptable in the proper time for each entity, and in
experiencing, in understanding, in accepting, in then sharing with other-
selves, the appropriate distortion shall be moving away from distortions of
                                     178
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 18

one kind to distortions of another which may be more consonant with the
Law of One.
It is, shall we say, a shortcut to simply ignore or overcome any desire. It
must instead be understood and accepted. This takes patience and
experience which can be analyzed with care, with compassion for self and
for other-self.
Questioner: Basically I would say that to infringe upon the free will of
another entity would be the basic thing never to do under the Law of One.
Can you state any other breaking of the Law of One than this basic rule?
Ra: I am Ra. As one proceeds from the primal distortion of free will, one
proceeds to the understanding of the focal points of intelligent energy
which have created the intelligences or the ways of a particular
mind/body/spirit complex in its environment, both what you would call
natural and what you would call man-made. Thus, the distortions to be
avoided are those which do not take into consideration the distortions of
the focus of energy of love/light, or shall we say, the Logos of this particular
sphere or density. These include the lack of understanding of the needs of
the natural environment, the needs of other-selves’ mind/body/spirit
complexes. These are many due to the various distortions of man-made
complexes in which the intelligence and awareness of entities themselves
have chosen a way of using the energies available.
Thus, what would be an improper distortion with one entity is proper with
another. We can suggest an attempt to become aware of the other-self as self
and thus do that action which is needed by other-self, understanding from
the other-self’s intelligence and awareness. In many cases this does not
involve the breaking of the distortion of free will into a distortion or
fragmentation called infringement. However, it is a delicate matter to be of
service, and compassion, sensitivity, and an ability to empathize are helpful
in avoiding the distortions of man-made intelligence and awareness.
The area or arena called the societal complex is an arena in which there are
no particular needs for care for it is the prerogative/honor/duty of those in
the particular planetary sphere to act according to their free will for the
attempted aid of the social complex.
Thus, you have two simple directives: awareness of the intelligent energy
expressed in nature, awareness of the intelligent energy expressed in self to
be shared when it seems appropriate by the entity with the social complex,
and you have one infinitely subtle and various set of distortions of which
you may be aware; that is, distortions with respect to self and other-selves


                                      179
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 18

not concerning free will but concerning harmonious relationships and
service to others as other-selves would most benefit.
Questioner: As an entity in this density grows from childhood, he becomes
more aware of his responsibilities. Is there an age below which an entity is
not responsible for his actions, or is he responsible from the time of his
birth?
Ra: I am Ra. An entity incarnating upon the Earth plane becomes conscious
of self at a varying point in its time/space progress through the continuum.
This may have a median, shall we say, of approximately fifteen of your
months. Some entities become conscious of self at a period closer to
incarnation, some at a period farther from this event. In all cases
responsibility becomes retroactive from that point backward in the
continuum so that distortions are to be understood by the entity and
dissolved as the entity learns.
Questioner: Then an entity four years old would be totally responsible for
any actions that were against or inharmonious with the Law of One. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. It may be noted that it has been arranged by
your social complex structures that the newer entities to incarnation are to
be provided with guides of a physical mind/body/spirit complex, thus being
able to learn quickly what is consonant with the Law of One.
Questioner: Who are these guides?
Ra: I am Ra. These guides are what you call parents, teachers, and friends.
Questioner: You stated yesterday that forgiveness is the eradicator of karma.
I am assuming that balanced forgiveness for the full eradication of karma
would require forgiveness not only of other-selves but also the forgiveness of
self. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct. We will briefly expand upon this
understanding in order to clarify.
Forgiveness of other-self is forgiveness of self. An understanding of this
insists upon full forgiveness upon the conscious level of self and other-self,
for they are one. A full forgiveness is thus impossible without the inclusion
of self.
Questioner: Thank you—a most important point.
You mentioned that there were a number of Confederations. Do all serve
the infinite Creator in basically the same way, or do some specialize in some
particular types of service?
                                      180
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 18

Ra: I am Ra. All serve the one Creator. There is nothing else to serve, for
the Creator is all that there is. It is impossible not to serve the Creator.
There are simply various distortions of this service.
As in the Confederation which works with your peoples, each
Confederation is a group of specialized individual social memory complexes,
each doing that which it expresses to bring into manifestation.
Questioner: Can you tell me how Yahweh communicated to Earth’s
people?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a somewhat complex question.
The first communication was what you would call genetic. The second
communication was the walking among your peoples to produce further
genetic changes in consciousness. The third was a series of dialogues with
chosen channels.
Questioner: Can you tell me what these genetic changes were and how they
were brought about?
Ra: I am Ra. Some of these genetic changes were in a form similar to what
you call the cloning process. Thus, entities incarnated in the image of the
Yahweh entities. The second was a contact of the nature you know as
sexual, changing the mind/body/spirit complex through the natural means
of the patterns of reproduction devised by the intelligent energy of your
physical complex.
Questioner: Can you tell me specifically what they did in this case?
Ra: I am Ra. We have answered this question. Please restate for further
information.
Questioner: Can you tell me the difference between the sexual
programming prior to Yahweh’s intervention and after intervention?
Ra: I am Ra. This is a question which we can only answer by stating that
intervention by genetic means is the same no matter what the source of this
change.
Questioner: Can you tell me Yahweh’s purpose in making the genetic
sexual changes?
Ra: I am Ra. The purpose 75,000 years ago, as you measure time, was of
one purpose only: that to express in the mind/body complex those
characteristics which would lead to further and more speedy development of
the spiritual complex.


                                      181
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 18

Questioner: How did these characteristics go about leading to the more
spiritual development?
Ra: I am Ra. The characteristics which were encouraged included sensitivity
of all the physical senses to sharpen the experiences, and the strengthening
of the mind complex in order to promote the ability to analyze these
experiences.
Questioner: When did Yahweh act to perform the genetic changes?
Ra: I am Ra. The Yahweh group worked with those of the planet you call
Mars 75,000 years ago in what you would call the cloning process. There are
differences, but they lie in the future of your time/space continuum and we
cannot break the free will Law of Confusion.
The 2,600, approximately, time was the second time—we correct ourselves:
3,600—approximately, the time of attempts by those of the Orion group
during this cultural complex; this was a series of encounters in which the
ones called Anak were impregnated with the new genetic coding by your
physical complex means so that the organisms would be larger and stronger.
Questioner: Why did they want larger and stronger organisms?
Ra: I am Ra. The ones of Yahweh were attempting to create an
understanding of the Law of One by creating mind/body complexes capable
of grasping the Law of One. The experiment was a decided failure from the
view of the desired distortions due to the fact that rather than assimilating
the Law of One, it was a great temptation to consider the so-called social
complex or subcomplex elite or different and better than other-selves, this
one of the techniques of service to self.
Questioner: Then the Orion group produced this larger body complex to
create an elite so that the Law of One could be applied in what we call the
negative sense?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The entities of Yahweh were responsible for
this procedure in isolated cases as experiments in combating the Orion
group.
However, the Orion group were able to use this distortion of mind/body
complex to inculcate the thoughts of the elite rather than concentrations
upon the learning/teaching of oneness.
Questioner: Was Yahweh then of the Confederation?
Ra: I am Ra. Yahweh was of the Confederation but was mistaken in its
attempts to aid.

                                     182
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 18

Questioner: Then Yahweh’s communications did not help or create what
Yahweh wished for them to create. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The results of this interaction were quite mixed. Where the
entities were of a vibrational sum characteristic which embraced oneness,
the manipulations of Yahweh were very useful. Wherein the entities of free
will had chosen a less positively oriented configuration of sum total
vibratory complex, those of the Orion group were able for the first time to
make serious inroads upon the consciousness of the planetary complex.
Questioner: Can you tell me specifically what allowed the most serious of
these inroads to be made by the Orion group?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final full question.
Specifically those who are strong, intelligent, etc., have a temptation to feel
different from those who are less intelligent and less strong. This is a
distorted perception of oneness with otherselves. It allowed the Orion group
to form the concept of the holy war, as you may call it. This is a seriously
distorted perception. There were many of these wars of a destructive nature.
Questioner: Thank you very much. As you probably know I will be
working for the next three days, so we will possibly have another session
tonight if you think it is possible. The next session after that would not be
until four days from now. Do you believe another session tonight is
possible?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is somewhat weak. This is a distortion caused
by lack of vital energy. Thus, nurturing the instrument in physical
balancing will allow another session. Do you understand?
Questioner: Not completely. What specifically shall we do for physical
balancing?
Ra: I am Ra. One—take care with the foodstuffs. Two—manipulate the
physical complex to alleviate the distortion toward pain. Three—encourage
a certain amount of what you would call your exercise. The final injunction:
to take special care with the alignments this second session so that the entity
may gain as much aid as possible from the various symbols. We suggest you
check these symbols most carefully. This entity is slightly misplaced from
the proper configuration. Not important at this time. More important
when a second session is to be scheduled.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.

                                      183
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 19
                           February 8, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. We
communicate now.
Questioner: We are concerned in this communication with the evolution of
mind, body, and spirit. It seems to me that a good place to start would be
the transition from the second to the third density, then to investigate in
detail the evolution of third-density entities of Earth, paying particular
attention to the mechanisms which help or hinder that evolution.
Do all entities make a transition from second to third density, or are there
some entities who have never gone through this transition?
Ra: I am Ra. Your question presumes the space/time continuum
understandings of the intelligent energy which animates your illusion.
Within the context of this illusion we may say that there are some that do
not transfer from one particular density to another, for the continuum is
finite.
In the understanding which we have of the universe or creation as one
infinite being, its heart beating as alive in its own intelligent energy, it
merely is one beat of the heart of this intelligence from creation to creation.
In this context each and every entity of consciousness has/is/will
experienced/experiencing/experience each and every density.
Questioner: Let’s take the point at which an individualized entity of second
density is ready for transition to third. Is this second-density being what we
would call animal?
Ra: I am Ra. There are three types of second-density entities which become,
shall we say, enspirited. The first is the animal. This is the most
predominant. The second is the vegetable, most especially that which you
call, sound vibration complex, “tree.” These entities are capable of giving
and receiving enough love to become individualized. The third is mineral.
Occasionally a certain location/place, as you may call it, becomes energized
to individuality through the love it receives and gives in relationship to a
third-density entity which is in relationship to it. This is the least common
transition.
Questioner: When this transition from second to third density takes place,
how does the entity, whether it be animal, [vegetable] tree, or mineral,
become enspirited?

                                      184
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 19

Ra: I am Ra. Entities do not become enspirited. They become aware of the
intelligent energy within each portion, cell, or atom, as you may call it, of
its beingness.
This awareness is that which is awareness of that already given. From the
infinite come all densities. The self-awareness comes from within given the
catalyst of certain experiences understanding, as we may call this particular
energy, the upward spiraling of the cell or atom or consciousness.
You may then see that there is an inevitable pull toward the, what you may
call, eventual realization of self.
Questioner: Then after the transition into the third density, am I correct in
assuming—we’ll take Earth as an example—the entities would then look
like us? They would be in human form? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, taking your planetary sphere as an example.
Questioner: When the first second-density entities became third-density on
this planet, was this with the help of the transfer of beings from Mars, or
were there second-density beings who transferred into third density with no
outside influence?
Ra: I am Ra. There were some second-density entities which made the
graduation into third density with no outside stimulus but only the efficient
use of experience.
Others of your planetary second density joined the third-density cycle due
to harvesting efforts by the same sort of sending of vibratory aid as those of
the Confederation send you now. This communication was, however,
telepathic rather than telepathic/vocal or telepathic/written due to the
nature of second-density beings.
Questioner: Who sent the aid to the second-density beings?
Ra: I am Ra. We call ourselves the Confederation of Planets in the Service
of the Infinite Creator. This is a simplification in order to ease the difficulty
of understanding among your people. We hesitate to use the term, sound
vibration, understanding, but it is closest to our meaning.
Questioner: Then did this second-density to third-density transition take
place 75,000 years ago? Approximately?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Where did the second-density beings get physical vehicles of
third-density type to incarnate into?


                                       185
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 19

Ra: I am Ra. There were among those upon this second-density plane those
forms which when exposed to third-density vibrations became the third-
density, as you would call the sound vibration, human entities.
That is, there was loss of body hair, as you would call it, the clothing of the
body to protect it, the changing of the structure of the neck, jaw, and
forehead in order to allow the easier vocalization, and the larger cranial
development characteristic of third-density needs. This was a normal
transfiguration.
Questioner: Over how long a period of time was this transfiguration? It
must have been very short.
Ra: I am Ra. The assumption is correct, in our terms at least—within a
generation and one-half, as you know these things. Those who had been
harvested of this planet were able to use the newly created physical complex
of chemical elements suitable for third-density lessons.
Questioner: Can you tell me how this newly created physical complex was
suited to third-density lessons and what those lessons were?
Ra: I am Ra. There is one necessity for third density. That necessity is self-
awareness, or self-consciousness. In order to be capable of such, this
chemical complex of body must be capable of abstract thought. Thus, the
fundamental necessity is the combination of rational and intuitive thinking.
This was transitory in the second-density forms operating largely upon
intuition which proved through practice to yield results.
The third-density mind was capable of processing information in such a
way as to think abstractly and in what could be termed “useless” ways, in
the sense of survival. This is the primary requisite.
There are other important ingredients: the necessity for a weaker physical
vehicle to encourage the use of the mind, the development of the already
present awareness of the social complex. These also being necessary: the
further development of physical dexterity in the sense of the hand, as you
call this portion of your body complex.
Questioner: This seems to be a carefully planned or engineered stage of
development. Can you tell me anything of the origin of this plan or its
development?
Ra: I am Ra. We go back to previous information. Consider and remember
the discussion of the Logos. With the primal distortion of free will, each
galaxy developed its own Logos. This Logos has complete free will in
determining the paths of intelligent energy which promote the lessons of

                                      186
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 19

each of the densities given the conditions of the planetary spheres and the
sun bodies.
Questioner: I will make a statement then of my understanding and ask you
if I am correct. There is a, what I would call, physical catalyst operating at
all times upon the entities in third density. I assume this operates
approximately the same way in second density. It is a catalyst which acts
through what we call pain and emotion. Is the primary reason for the
weakening of the physical body and the elimination of body hair, etc. so
that this catalyst would act more strongly upon the mind and therefore
create the evolutionary process?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not entirely correct, although closely associated with
the distortions of our understanding.
Consider, if you will, the tree for instance. It is self-sufficient. Consider, if
you will, the third-density entity. It is self-sufficient only through difficulty
and deprivation. It is difficult to learn alone for there is a built-in handicap,
at once the great virtue and the great handicap of third density. That is the
rational/intuitive mind.
Thus, the weakening of the physical vehicle, as you call it, was designed to
distort entities towards a predisposition to deal with each other. Thus, the
lessons which approach a knowing of love can be begun.
This catalyst then is shared between peoples as an important part of each
self’s development as well as the experiences of the self in solitude and the
synthesis of all experience through meditation. The quickest way to learn is
to deal with other-selves. This is a much greater catalyst than dealing with
the self. Dealing with the self without other-selves is akin to living without
what you would call mirrors. Thus, the self cannot see the fruits of its
being-ness. Thus, each may aid each by reflection. This is also a primary
reason for the weakening of the physical vehicle, as you call the physical
complex.
Questioner: Then we have second-density beings who have primarily
motivation towards self and possibly a little motivation towards service to
others with respect to their immediate family going into third density and
carrying this bias with them but being in a position now where this bias will
slowly be modified to one which is aimed toward a social complex and
ultimately towards union with the all. Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. You are correct.
Questioner: Then the newest third-density beings who have just made the
transition from second are still strongly biased towards self-service. There

                                       187
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 19

must be many other mechanisms to create an awareness of the possibility of
service to others.
I am wondering, first about the mechanism and I am wondering when the
split takes place where the entity is able to continue on the road to service to
self that will eventually take him on to fourth density.
I’m assuming that an entity can start, say, in second density with service to
self and continue right on through and just stay on what we would call the
path of service to self and never be pulled over. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The second-density concept of serving self
includes the serving of those associated with tribe or pack. This is not seen
in second density as separation of self and other-self. All is seen as self since
in some forms of second-density entities, if the tribe or pack becomes
weakened, so does the entity within the tribe or pack.
The new or initial third density has this innocent, shall we say, bias or
distortion towards viewing those in the family, the society, as you would
call, perhaps, country, as self. Thus though a distortion not helpful for
progress in third density, it is without polarity.
The break becomes apparent when the entity perceives otherselves as other-
selves and consciously determines to manipulate other-selves for the benefit
of the self. This is the beginning of the road of which you speak.
Questioner: Then, through free will, some time within the third density
experience, the path splits and the entity consciously chooses—or he
probably doesn’t consciously choose. Does the entity consciously choose
this path of the initial splitting point?
Ra: I am Ra. We speak in generalities which is dangerous for always
inaccurate. However, we realize you look for the overview; so we will
eliminate anomalies and speak of majorities.
The majority of third density beings is far along the chosen path before
realization of that path is conscious.
Questioner: Can you tell me what bias creates the momentum towards the
chosen path of service to self?
Ra: I am Ra. We can speak only in metaphor. Some love the light. Some
love the darkness. It is a matter of the unique and infinitely various Creator
choosing and playing among its experiences as a child upon a picnic. Some
enjoy the picnic and find the sun beautiful, the food delicious, the games
refreshing, and glow with the joy of creation. Some find the night delicious,


                                       188
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 19

their picnic being pain, difficulty, sufferings of others, and the examination
of the perversities of nature. These enjoy a different picnic.
All these experiences are available. It is the free will of each entity which
chooses the form of play, the form of pleasure.
Questioner: I assume that an entity on either path can decide to change
paths at any time and possibly retrace steps, the path changing being more
difficult the farther along the path the change is made. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. The further an entity has, what you would
call, polarized, the more easily this entity may change polarity, for the more
power and awareness the entity will have.
Those truly helpless are those who have not consciously chosen but who
repeat patterns without knowledge of the repetition or the meaning of the
pattern.
Questioner: I believe we have a very important point here. It then seems
that there is an extreme potential in this polarization the same as there is in
electricity. We have a positive and negative pole. The more you build the
charge on either of these, the more the potential difference and the greater
the ability to do work, as we call it in the physical.
This would seem to me to be the same analogy that we have in
consciousness. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is precisely correct.
Questioner: Then it would seem that there is a relationship between what
we perceive as a physical phenomenon, say the electrical phenomenon, and
the phenomenon of consciousness in that they, having stemmed from the
one Creator, are practically identical but have different actions. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Again we oversimplify to answer your query.
The physical complex alone is created of many, many energy or
electromagnetic fields interacting due to intelligent energy, the mental
configurations or distortions of each complex further adding fields of
electromagnetic energy and distorting the physical complex patterns of
energy, the spiritual aspect serving as a further complexity of fields which is
of itself perfect but which can be realized in many distorted and
unintegrated ways by the mind and body complexes of energy fields.
Thus, instead of one, shall we say, magnet with one polarity you have in the
body/mind/spirit complex one basic polarity expressed in what you would
call violet-ray energy, the sum of the energy fields, but which is affected by
                                       189
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 19

thought of all kinds generated by the mind complex, by distortions of the
body complex, and by the numerous relationships between the microcosm
which is the entity and the macrocosm in many forms which you may
represent by viewing the stars, as you call them, each with a contributing
energy ray which enters the electromagnetic web of the entity due to its
individual distortions.
Questioner: Is this then the root of what we call astrology?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this session.
The root of astrology, as you speak it, is one way of perceiving the primal
distortions which may be predicted along probability/possibility lines given,
shall we say, cosmic orientations and configurations at the time of the
entrance into the physical/mental complex of the spirit and at the time of
the physical/mental/spiritual complex into the illusion.
This then has the possibility of suggesting basic areas of distortion. There is
no more than this. The part astrology plays is likened unto that of one root
among many.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument is well aligned. You are being very
conscientious. We request you take more care in being assured that this
instrument is wearing footwear of what you would call, vibratory sound
complex, shoes.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                      190
            The Law of One, Book I, Session 20
                           February 9, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: To go back a bit, what happened to the second-density entities
who were unharvestable when the third density began? I assume that there
were some that did not make it into third density.
Ra: I am Ra. The second density is able to repeat during third density a
portion of its cycle.
Questioner: Then the second-density entities who did not get harvested at
the beginning of this 75,000 year period, some are still on this planet. Were
any of these second-density entities harvested into the third density within
the past 75,000 years?
Ra: I am Ra. This has been increasingly true.
Questioner: So more and more second-density entities are making it into
third density. Can you give me an example of a second-density entity
coming into the third density in the recent past?
Ra: I am Ra. Perhaps the most common occurrence of second-density
graduation during third-density cycle is the so-called pet.
For the animal which is exposed to the individualizing influences of the
bond between animal and third-density entity, this individuation causes a
sharp rise in the potential of the second density entity so that upon the
cessation of physical complex the mind/body complex does not return into
the undifferentiated consciousness of that species, if you will.
Questioner: Then can you give me an example of an entity in third density
that was just previously a second-density entity? What type of entity do they
become here?
Ra: I am Ra. As a second-density entity returns as third-density for the
beginning of this process of learning, the entity is equipped with the lowest,
if you will so call these vibrational distortions, forms of third-density
consciousness; that is, equipped with self-consciousness.
Questioner: This would be a human in our form then who would be
beginning the understandings of third density. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.

                                      191
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

Questioner: Speaking of the rapid change that occurred in the physical
vehicle from second to third density: this occurred, you said, in
approximately a generation and a half. Body hair was lost and there were
structural changes.
I am aware of the physics of Dewey B. Larson, who states that all is motion
or vibration. Am I correct in assuming that the basic vibration that makes
up the physical world changes, thus creating a different set of parameters,
shall I say, in this short period of time between density changes allowing for
the new type of being? Am I correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Is the physics of Dewey Larson correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The physics of sound vibrational complex, Dewey, is a correct
system as far as it is able to go. There are those things which are not
included in this system. However, those coming after this particular entity,
using the basic concepts of vibration and the study of vibrational
distortions, will begin to understand that which you know as gravity and
those things you consider as “n” dimensions. These things are necessary to
be included in a more universal, shall we say, physical theory.
Questioner: Did this entity, Dewey, then bring this material through for
use primarily in the fourth density?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Yesterday we were talking about the split that occurs when an
entity either consciously or unconsciously chooses the path that leads to
either service to others or service to self. The philosophical question of why
such a split even exists came up. It was my impression that just as it is in
electricity, if we have no polarity in electricity we have no electricity; we
have no action. Therefore, I am assuming that it is the same in
consciousness. If we have no polarity in consciousness we also have no
action or experience. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. You may use the general term “work.”
Questioner: Then the concept of service to self and service to others is
mandatory if we wish to have work, whether it be work in consciousness or
work of a mechanical nature in the Newtonian concept in the physical. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct with one addendum. The coil, as you may
understand this term, is wound, is potential, is ready. The thing that is
missing without polarizing is the charge.

                                     192
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

Questioner: Then the charge is provided by individualized consciousness. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. The charge is provided by the individualized entity using the
in-pourings and in-streamings of energy by the choices of free will.
Questioner: Thank you. As soon as the third-density started 75,000 years
ago and we have incarnate third-density entities, what was the average
human life span at that time?
Ra: I am Ra. At the beginning of this particular portion of your space/time
continuum the average life span was approximately nine hundred of your
years.
Questioner: Did the average life span grow longer or shorter as we
progressed into third-density experience?
Ra: I am Ra. There is a particular use for the span of life in this density and,
given the harmonious development of the learning/teachings of this density,
the life span of the physical complex would remain the same throughout the
cycle. However, your particular planetary sphere developed vibrations by
the second major cycle which shortened the life span dramatically.
Questioner: Assuming a major cycle is 25,000 years, at the end of the first
major cycle, what was the life span?
Ra: I am Ra. The life span at the end of the first cycle which you call major
was approximately seven hundred of your years.
Questioner: Then in 25,000 years we lost two hundred years of life span. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me the reason for this shortening of life span?
Ra: I am Ra. The causes of this shortening are always an ineuphonious or
inharmonious relational vibration between otherselves. In the first cycle this
was not severe due to the dispersion of peoples, but there was the growing
feeling complex/distortion towards separateness from other-selves.
Questioner: I am assuming that at the start of one of these cycles there
could have been either a positive polarization that would generally occur
over the 25,000 years or a negative polarization. Is the reason for the
negative polarization and the shortening of the life span the influx of
entities from Mars who had already polarized somewhat negatively?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. There was not a strong negative polarization
due to this influx. The lessening of the life span was due primarily to the
                                      193
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

lack of the building of positive orientation. When there is no progress those
conditions which grant progress are gradually lost. This is one of the
difficulties of remaining unpolarized. The chances, shall we say, of progress
become steadily less.
Questioner: The way I understand it, at the beginning of this 75,000 year
cycle, then, we had a mixture of entities—those who had graduated from
second density on Earth to become third-density and then a group of
entities transferred from the planet Mars to continue third density here. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. You must remember that those transferred to
this sphere were in the middle of their third density so that this third
density was an adaptation rather than a beginning.
Questioner: What percentage of the entities who were here in third density
at that time were Martian and what percentage were harvested from Earth’s
second density?
Ra: I am Ra. There were perhaps one-half of the third-density population
being entities from the Red Planet, Mars, as you call it. Perhaps one-quarter
from second density of your planetary sphere. Approximately one-quarter
from other sources, other planetary spheres whose entities chose this
planetary sphere for third-density work.
Questioner: When they incarnated here did all three of these types mix
together in societies or groups or were they separated by groups and society?
Ra: I am Ra. They remained largely unmixed.
Questioner: Then did this unmixing lend to a possibility of warlike energy
between groups?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Did this help to reduce the life span?
Ra: I am Ra. This did reduce the life span, as you call it.
Questioner: Can you tell me why nine hundred years is the optimum life
span?
Ra: I am Ra. The mind/body/spirit complex of third density has perhaps
one hundred times as intensive a program of catalytic action from which to
distill distortions and learn/teachings than any other of the densities. Thus
the learn/teachings are most confusing to the mind/body/spirit complex
which is, shall we say, inundated by the ocean of experience.


                                      194
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

During the first, shall we say, perhaps 150 to 200 of your years as you
measure time, a mind/body/spirit complex is going through the process of a
spiritual childhood. The mind and the body are not enough in a disciplined
configuration to lend clarity to the spiritual influxes. Thus, the remaining
time span is given to optimize the understandings which result from
experience itself.
Questioner: Then at present it would seem that our current life span is
much too short for those who are new to third-density lessons. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Those entities which have, in some way,
learned/taught themselves the appropriate distortions for rapid growth can
now work within the confines of the shorter life span. However, the greater
preponderance of your entities find themselves in what may be considered a
perpetual childhood.
Questioner: Back in the first 25,000 year period, or major cycle, what type
of aid was given by the Confederation to the entities who were in this
25,000 year period so that they would have the opportunity to grow?
Ra: I am Ra. The Confederation members which dwell in inner-plane
existence within the planetary complex of vibratory densities worked with
these entities. There was also the aid of one of the Confederation which
worked with those of Mars in making the transition.
For the most part, the participation was limited, as it was appropriate to
allow the full travel of the workings of the confusion mechanism to operate
in order for the planetary entities to develop that which they wished in,
shall we say, freedom within their own thinking.
It is often the case that a third-density planetary cycle will take place in such
a way that there need be no outside, shall we say, or other-self aid in the
form of information. Rather, the entities themselves are able to work
themselves towards the appropriate polarizations and goals of third-density
learn/teachings.
Questioner: I make the assumption that if maximum efficiency had been
achieved in this 25,000 year period the entities would have polarized either
toward service to self or toward service to others, one or the other. This
would have made them harvestable at the end of that 25,000 year period in
which case they would have had to move to another planet because this one
would have been third density for 50,000 more years. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. Let us untangle your assumption which is complex and correct
in part.

                                       195
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

The original desire is that entities seek and become one. If entities can do
this in a moment, they may go forward in a moment, and, thus, were this to
occur in a major cycle, indeed, the third-density planet would be vacated at
the end of that cycle.
It is, however, more towards the median or mean, shall we say, of third-
density developments throughout the one infinite universe that there be a
small harvest after the first cycle; the remainder having significantly
polarized, the second cycle having a much larger harvest; the remainder
being even more significantly polarized, the third cycle culminating the
process and the harvest being completed.
Questioner: Was the Confederation watching to see and expecting to see a
harvest at the end of the 25,000 year period in which a percentage would be
harvestable fourth-density positive and a percentage harvestable fourth-
density negative?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct. You may see our role in the first major cycle as
that of the gardener who, knowing the season, is content to wait for the
spring. When the springtime does not occur, the seeds do not sprout; then
it is that the gardener must work in the garden.
Questioner: Am I to understand, then, that there was neither a harvest of
positive or negative entities at the end of that 25,000 years?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Those whom you call the Orion group made
one attempt to offer information to those of third density during that cycle.
However, the information did not fall upon the ears of any who were
concerned to follow this path to polarity.
Questioner: What technique did the Orion group use to give this
information?
Ra: I am Ra. The technique used was of two kinds: one, the thought
transfer or what you may call “telepathy”; Two, the arrangement of certain
stones in order to suggest strong influences of power, this being those of
statues and of rock formations in your Pacific areas, as you now call them,
and to an extent in your Central American regions, as you now understand
them.
Questioner: Were you speaking in part of the stone heads of Easter Island?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: How would such stone heads influence the people to take the
path of service to self?


                                     196
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

Ra: I am Ra. Picture, if you will, the entities living in such a way that their
mind/body/spirit complexes are at what seems to be the mercy of forces
which they cannot control. Given a charged entity such as a statue or a rock
formation charged with nothing but power, it is possible for the free will of
those viewing this particular structure or formation to ascribe to this power,
power over those things which cannot be controlled. This, then, has the
potential for the further distortion to power over others.
Questioner: How were these stone heads constructed?
Ra: I am Ra. These were constructed by thought after a scanning of the
deep mind, the trunk of mind tree, looking at the images most likely to
cause the experience of awe in the viewer.
Questioner: Did the Orion entities do this themselves? Did they do this in
the physical? Did they land, or did they do it from mental planes?
Ra: I am Ra. Nearly all of these structures and formations were constructed
at a distance by thought. A very few were created in later times in imitation
of original constructs by entities upon your Earth plane/density.
Questioner: What density Orion entity did the construction of these heads?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth density, the density of love or understanding, was
the density of the particular entity which offered this possibility to those of
your first major cycle.
Questioner: You use the same nomenclature for the fourth-density negative
as for the fourth-density positive. Both are called the dimension of love or
of understanding. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Love and understanding, whether it be of self
or of self toward other-self, is one.
Questioner: What was the approximate date in years past of the
construction of these heads?
Ra: I am Ra. This approximately was 60,000 of your years in the past
time/space of your continuum.
Questioner: What structures were built in South America?
Ra: I am Ra. In this location were fashioned some characteristic statues,
some formations of what you call rock and some formations involving rock
and earth.
Questioner: Were the lines at Nazca included in this?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.

                                      197
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

Questioner: Since these can only be seen from an altitude, of what benefit
were they?
Ra: I am Ra. The formations were of benefit because charged with energy of
power.
Questioner: I’m a little confused. These lines at Nazca are hardly
understandable for an entity walking on the surface. He cannot see anything
but disruption of the surface. However, if you go up to a high altitude you
can see the patterns. How was it of benefit to the entities walking on the
surface?
Ra: I am Ra. At the remove of the amount of time/space which is now your
present it is difficult to perceive that at the time/space 60,000 years ago the
earth was formed in such a way as to be visibly arranged in powerful
structural designs, from the vantage point of distant hills.
Questioner: In other words at that time there were hills overlooking these
lines?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question of this session.
The entire smoothness, as you see this area now, was built up in many
places in hills. The time/space continuum has proceeded with wind and
weather, as you would say, to erode to a great extent both the somewhat
formidable structures of earth designed at that time and the nature of the
surrounding countryside.
Questioner: I think I understand then that these lines are just the faint
traces of what used to be there?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Thank you. We need to know whether or not it is possible to
continue with another session today and whether there is anything that we
can do to make the instrument more comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. It is possible. We ask that you observe carefully the alignment
of the instrument. Otherwise, you are conscientious.
Is there any short query before we close?
Questioner: I intend in the next session to focus upon the development of
the positively oriented entities in the first 25,000 years. I know you can’t
make suggestions. Can you give me any comment on this at all?
Ra: I am Ra. The choices are yours according to your discernment.



                                      198
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 20

I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator.
Adonai.




                                     199
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 21
                           February 10, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: I have a couple of questions that I don’t want to forget to ask
in this period, so I will ask them first.
The first question is: Would the future content of this book be affected in
any way if the instrument reads the material that we have already obtained?
Ra: I am Ra. The future, as you measure in time/space, communications
which we offer through this instrument have no connection with the
instrument’s mind complex. This is due to two things: first, the fidelity of
the instrument in dedicating its will to the service of the infinite Creator;
secondly, the distortion/understanding of our social memory complex that
the most efficient way to communicate material with as little distortion as
possible, given the necessity of the use of sound vibration complexes, is to
remove the conscious mind complex from the spirit/mind/body complex so
that we may communicate without reference to any instrument’s
orientation.
Questioner: Do you use the instrument’s vocabulary or your own
vocabulary to communicate with us?
Ra: I am Ra. We use the vocabulary of the language with which you are
familiar. This is not the instrument’s vocabulary. However, this particular
mind/body/spirit complex retains the use of a sufficiently large number of
sound vibration complexes that the distinction is often without any
importance.
Questioner: So at the start of this 75,000 year cycle we know that the
quarantine was fully set up. I am assuming then that the Guardians were
aware of the infringements on the free will that would occur if they didn’t
set this up at that time and therefore did it. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially incorrect. The incorrectness is as follows:
those entities whose third-density experience upon your Red Planet was
brought to a close prematurely were aided genetically while being
transferred to this third density. This, although done in a desire to aid, was
seen as infringement upon free will. The light quarantine which consists of
the Guardians, or gardeners as you may call them, which would have been
in effect was intensified.

                                     200
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 21

Questioner: When the 75,000 year cycle started, the life span was
approximately nine hundred years, average. What was the process and
scheduling mechanism, shall I say, of reincarnation at that time, and how
did the time in between incarnations into third-density physical apply to
the growth of the mind/body/spirit complex?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is more complex than most. We shall begin. The
incarnation pattern of the beginning third-density mind/body/spirit
complex begins in darkness, for you may think or consider of your density
as one of, as you may say, a sleep and a forgetting. This is the only plane of
forgetting. It is necessary for the third-density entity to forget so that the
mechanisms of confusion or free will may operate upon the newly
individuated consciousness complex.
Thus, the beginning entity is one in all innocence oriented towards
animalistic behavior using other-selves only as extensions of self for the
preservation of the all-self. The entity becomes slowly aware that it has
needs, shall we say, that are not animalistic; that is, that are useless for
survival. These needs include: the need for companionship, the need for
laughter, the need for beauty, the need to know the universe about it. These
are the beginning needs.
As the incarnations begin to accumulate, other needs are discovered: the
need to trade, the need to love, the need to be loved, the need to elevate
animalistic behaviors to a more universal perspective.
During the first portion of third-density cycles, incarnations are automatic
and occur rapidly upon the cessation of energy complex of the physical
vehicle. There is small need to review or to heal the experiences of the
incarnation. As, what you would call, the energy centers begin to be
activated to a higher extent, more of the content of experience during
incarnation deals with the lessons of love.
Thus the time, as you may understand it, between incarnations is
lengthened to give appropriate attention to the review and the healing of
experiences of the previous incarnation. At some point in third density, the
green-ray energy center becomes activated and at that point incarnation
ceases to be automatic.
Questioner: When incarnation ceases to be automatic I am assuming that
the entity can decide when he needs to incarnate for the benefit of his own
learning. Does he also select his parents?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.



                                      201
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 21

Questioner: At this time in our cycle, near the end, what percentage of the
entities incarnating are making their own choices?
Ra: I am Ra. The approximate percentage is fifty-four percent.
Questioner: Thank you. During this first 25,000 year cycle was there any
industrial development at all, any machinery available to the people?
Ra: I am Ra. Using the term “machine” to the meaning which you ascribe,
the answer is no. However, there were, shall we say, various implements of
wood and rock which were used in order to obtain food and for use in
aggression.
Questioner: At the end of this first 25,000 year cycle was there any physical
change that occurred rapidly like that which occurs at the end of a 75,000
year cycle or is this just an indexing time for harvesting period?
Ra: I am Ra. There was no change except that which according to
intelligent energy, or what you may term physical evolution, suited physical
complexes to their environment, this being of the color of the skin due to
the area of the sphere upon which entities lived; the gradual growth of
peoples due to improved intake of foodstuffs.
Questioner: Then, at the end of the first 25,000 year period, I am guessing
that the Guardians discovered that there was no harvest of either positively
or negatively oriented entities. Tell me then what happened? What action
was taken?
Ra: I am Ra. There was no action taken except to remain aware of the
possibility of a calling for help or understanding among the entities of this
density. The Confederation is concerned with the preservation of the
conditions conducive to learning. This for the most part, revolves about the
primal distortion of free will.
Questioner: Then the Confederation gardeners did nothing until some of
the plants in their garden called them for help. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: When did the first call occur, and how did it occur?
Ra: I am Ra. The first calling was approximately 46,000 of your years ago.
This calling was of those of Maldek. These entities were aware of their need
for rectifying the consequences of their action and were in some confusion
in an incarnate state as to the circumstances of their incarnation; the
unconscious being aware, the conscious being quite confused. This created a
calling. The Confederation sent love and light to these entities.

                                     202
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 21

Questioner: How did the Confederation send this love and light? What did
they do?
Ra: I am Ra. There dwell within the Confederation planetary entities who
from their planetary spheres do nothing but send love and light as pure
streamings to those who call. This is not in the form of conceptual thought
but of pure and undifferentiated love.
Questioner: Did the first distortion of the Law of One then require that
equal time, shall I say, be given to the self-service oriented group?
Ra: I am Ra. In this case this was not necessary for some of your time due to
the orientation of the entities.
Questioner: What was their orientation?
Ra: I am Ra. The orientation of these entities was such that the aid of the
Confederation was not perceived.
Questioner: Since it was not perceived it was not necessary to balance this.
Is that correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. What is necessary to balance is opportunity.
When there is ignorance, there is no opportunity. When there exists a
potential, then each opportunity shall be balanced, this balancing caused by
not only the positive and negative orientations of those offering aid but also
the orientation of those requesting aid.
Questioner: Thank you very much. I apologize in being so stupid in stating
my questions but this has cleared up my understanding nicely.
Then in the second 25,000 year major cycle was there any great civilization
that developed?
Ra: I am Ra. In the sense of greatness of technology there were no great
societies during this cycle. There was some advancement among those of
Deneb who had chosen to incarnate as a body in what you would call
China.
There were appropriately positive steps in activating the green-ray energy
complex in many portions of your planetary sphere including the Americas,
the continent which you call Africa, the island which you call Australia, and
that which you know as India, as well as various scattered peoples.
None of these became what you would name great as the greatness of
Lemuria or Atlantis is known to you due to the formation of strong social
complexes and in the case of Atlantis, very great technological
understandings.

                                     203
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 21

However, in the South American area of your planetary sphere as you know
it, there grew to be a great vibratory distortion towards love. These entities
were harvestable at the end of the second major cycle without ever having
formed strong social or technological complexes.
This will be the final question in completion of this session. Is there a query
we may answer quickly before we close, as this instrument is somewhat
depleted?
Questioner: I would just like to apologize for the confusion on my part in
carrying on to this second 25,000 years.
I would like to ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable? We would like to have a second session
today.
Ra: I am Ra. You may observe a slight misalignment between book, candle,
and perpendicularity of censer. This is not significant, but as we have said
the cumulative effects upon this instrument are not well. You are
conscientious. It is well to have a second session given the appropriate
exercising and manipulation of this instrument’s physical complex.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and the light of the one infinite Creator. Go
forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                     204
            The Law of One, Book I, Session 22
                           February 10, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the one infinite
Creator. I communicate now.
Questioner: I will ask a couple of questions to clear up the end of the
second major cycle. Then we will go on to the third and last of the major
cycles.
Can you tell me what was the average life span at the end of the second
major cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. By the end of the second major cycle the life span was as you
know it, with certain variations among geographically isolated peoples more
in harmony with intelligent energy and less bellicose.
Questioner: Can you tell me the length of the average life span in years at
the end of the second major cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. The average is perhaps misleading. To be precise, many spent
approximately thirty-five to forty of your years in one incarnation with the
possibility not considered abnormal of a life span approaching one hundred
of your years.
Questioner: Can I assume then that this drastic drop in average life span
from seven hundred years to less than one hundred years in length during
this second 25,000 years was caused by an intensification of a lack of service
to others?
Ra: I am Ra. This is in part correct. By the end of the second cycle, the Law
of Responsibility had begun to be effectuated by the increasing ability of
entities to grasp those lessons which there are to be learned in this density.
Thus, entities had discovered many ways to indicate a bellicose nature, not
only as tribes or what you call nations but in personal relationships, each
with the other, the concept of barter having given way to the concept of
money; also, the concept of ownership having won ascendancy over the
concept of nonownership on an individual or group basis.
Each entity then was offered many more subtle ways of demonstrating
either service toward others or service to self with the distortion of the
manipulation of others. As each lesson was understood, those lessons of
sharing, of giving, of receiving in free gratitude—each lesson could be
rejected in practice.


                                     205
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 22

Without demonstrating the fruits of such learn/teaching the life span
became greatly reduced, for the ways of honor/duty were not being
accepted.
Questioner: Would this shortened life span help the entity in any way in
that he would have more time in between incarnations to review his
mistakes, or would this shortened life span hinder him?
Ra: I am Ra. Both are correct. The shortening of the life span is a distortion
of the Law of One which suggests that an entity not receive more experience
in more intensity than it may bear. This is only in effect upon an individual
level and does not hold sway over planetary or social complexes.
Thus the shortened life span is due to the necessity for removing an entity
from the intensity of experience which ensues when wisdom and love are,
having been rejected, reflected back into the consciousness of the Creator
without being accepted as part of the self, this then causing the entity to
have the need for healing and for much evaluation of the incarnation.
The incorrectness lies in the truth that, given appropriate circumstances, a
much longer incarnation in your space/time continuum is very helpful for
continuing this intensive work until conclusions have been reached through
the catalytic process.
Questioner: You spoke of the South American group which was harvestable
at the end of the second cycle. How long was their average life span at the
end of the second cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. This isolated group had achieved life spans stretching upwards
towards the nine hundred year life span appropriate to this density.
Questioner: I am assuming that the planetary action that we are
experiencing now, which it seems shortens all life spans here, was not strong
enough then to affect them and shorten their life span. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. It is well to remember that at that nexus in
space/time great isolation was possible.
Questioner: How many people populated the Earth totally at that time;
that is, were incarnate in the physical at any one time?
Ra: I am Ra. I am assuming that you intend to query regarding the number
of incarnate mind/body/spirit complexes at the end of the second major
cycle, this number being approximately 345,000 entities.
Questioner: Approximately how many were harvestable out of that total
number at the end of the cycle?

                                     206
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 22

Ra: I am Ra. There were approximately 150 entities harvestable.
Questioner: Then as the next cycle started were these the entities who
stayed to work on the planet?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities were visited by the Confederation and became
desirous of remaining in order to aid the planetary consciousness. This is
correct.
Questioner: What type of visit did the Confederation make to this group of
150 entities?
Ra: I am Ra. A light being appeared bearing that which may be called a
shield of light. It spoke of the oneness and infinity of all creation and of
those things which await those ready for harvest. It described in golden
words the beauties of love as lived. It then allowed a telepathic linkage to
progressively show those who were interested the plight of third density
when seen as a planetary complex. It then left.
Questioner: Did all of these entities then decide to stay and help during the
next 25,000 year cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. As a group they stayed. There were those
peripherally associated with this culture which did not stay. However, they
were not able to be harvested either and so, beginning at the very highest,
shall we say, of the sub-octaves of third density, repeated this density. Many
of those who have been of the loving nature are not Wanderers but those of
this particular origin of second cycle.
Questioner: Are all of these entities still with us in this cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. The entities repeating the third-density major cycle have, in
some few cases, been able to leave. These entities have chosen to join their
brothers and sisters, as you would call these entities.
Questioner: Are any of these entities names that we would know from our
historical past?
Ra: I am Ra. The one known as sound vibration complex, Saint Augustine,
is of such a nature. The one known as Saint Teresa of such a nature. The
one known as Saint Francis of Assisi of such nature. These entities, being of
monastic background, as you would call it, found incarnation in the same
type of ambiance appropriate for further learning.
Questioner: As the cycle terminated 25,000 years ago, what was the reaction
of the Confederation to the lack of harvest?
Ra: I am Ra. We became concerned.

                                       207
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 22

Questioner: Was any action taken immediately, or did you wait for a call?
Ra: I am Ra. The Council of Saturn acted only in allowing the entry into
third density of other mind/body/spirit complexes of third-density, not
Wanderers, but those who sought further third-density experience. This was
done randomly so that free will would not be violated for there was not yet
a call.
Questioner: Was the next action taken by the Confederation when a call
occurred?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Who or what group produced this call, and what action was
taken by the Confederation?
Ra: I am Ra. The calling was that of Atlanteans. This calling was for what
you would call understanding with the distortion towards helping other-
selves. The action taken is that which you take part in at this time: the
impression of information through channels, as you would call them.
Questioner: Was this first calling then at a time before Atlantis became
technologically advanced?
Ra: I am Ra. This is basically correct.
Questioner: Then did the technological advancement of Atlantis come
because of this call? I am assuming that the call was answered to bring them
the Law of One and the Law of Love as a distortion of the Law of One, but
did they also then get technological information that caused them to grow
into such a highly advanced technological society?
Ra: I am Ra. Not at first. At about the same time as we first appeared in the
skies over Egypt and continuing thereafter, other entities of the
Confederation appeared unto Atlanteans who had reached a level of
philosophical understanding, shall we misuse this word, which was
consonant with communication, to encourage and inspire studies in the
mystery of unity.
However, requests being made for healing and other understanding,
information was passed having to do with crystals and the building of
pyramids as well as temples, as you would call them, which were associated
with training.
Questioner: Was this training the same sort of initiatory training that was
done with Egyptians?



                                      208
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 22

Ra: I am Ra. This training was different in that the social complex was
more, shall we say, sophisticated and less contradictory and barbarous in its
ways of thinking. Therefore the temples were temples of learning rather
than the attempt being made to totally separate and put upon a pedestal the
healers.
Questioner: Then were there what we call priests trained in these temples?
Ra: I am Ra. You would not call them priests in the sense of celibacy, of
obedience, and of poverty. They were priests in the sense of those devoted
to learning.
The difficulties became apparent as those trained in this learning began to
attempt to use crystal powers for those things other than healing, as they
were involved not only with learning but became involved with what you
would call the governmental structure.
Questioner: Was all of their information given to them in the same way
that we are getting our information now, through an instrument such as
this instrument?
Ra: I am Ra. There were visitations from time to time but none of
importance in the, shall we say, historical passage of events in your
space/time continuum.
Questioner: Was it necessary for them to have an unified social complex for
these visitations to occur? What conditions were necessary for these
visitations to occur?
Ra: I am Ra. The conditions were two: the calling of a group of people
whose square overcame the integrated resistance of those unwilling to search
or learn; the second requirement, the relative naiveté of those members of
the Confederation who felt that direct transfer of information would
necessarily be as helpful for Atlanteans as it had been for the Confederation
entity.
Questioner: I see then. What you are saying is that these naive
Confederation entities had had the same thing happen to them in the past
so they were doing the same thing for the Atlantean entities. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. We remind you that we are one of the naive
members of that Confederation and are still attempting to recoup the
damage for which we feel responsibility. It is our duty as well as honor to
continue with your peoples, therefore, until all traces of the distortions of
our teach/learnings have been embraced by their opposite distortions, and
balance achieved.

                                     209
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 22

Questioner: I see. Then I will state the picture I have of Atlantis and you
tell me if I am correct.
We have a condition where a large enough percentage of the people of
Atlantis had started at least going in the direction of the Law of One and
living the Law of One for their call to be heard by the Confederation. This
call was heard because, using the Law of Squares, it overrode the opposition
of the Atlantean entities who were not calling. The Confederation then used
channels such as we use now in communication and also made contact
directly, but this turned out to be a mistake because it was perverted by the
entities of Atlantis. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct with one exception. There is only one law. That
is the Law of One. Other so-called laws are distortions of this law, some of
them primal and most important for progress to be understood. However, it
is well that each so-called law, which we also call “way,” be understood as a
distortion rather than a law. There is no multiplicity to the Law of One.
This will be the final question in length of this working. Please ask it now.
Questioner: Can you give me the average life span of the Atlantean
population?
Ra: I am Ra. The average life span, as we have said, is misleading. The
Atlanteans were, in the early part of their cultural experience, used to life
spans from 70 to 140 years, this being, of course, approximate. Due to
increasing desire for power, the lifetime decreased rapidly in the later stages
of the civilization and, thus, the healing and rejuvenating information was
requested.
Do you have any brief queries before we close?
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable? Is there anything that we can do for her?
Ra: I am Ra. The instrument is well. It is somewhat less easy to maintain
clear contact during a time when some or one of the entities in the circle of
working is or are not fully conscious. We request that entities in the circle
be aware that their energy is helpful for increasing the vitality of this
contact. We thank you for being conscientious in the asking.
I am Ra. It is a great joy to leave you in the love and the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power and the peace of
the one Creator. Adonai.




                                      210
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 23
                           February 11, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. We
communicate now.
Questioner: You were speaking yesterday of the first contact made by the
Confederation which occurred during our third major cycle. You stated that
you appeared in the skies over Egypt at approximately the same time that
aid was given to Atlantis. Can you tell me why you went to Egypt and your
orientation of attitude and thinking when you first went to Egypt?
Ra: I am Ra. At the time of which you speak there were those who chose to
worship the hawk-headed sun god which you know as vibrational sound
complex, “Horus.” This vibrational sound complex has taken other
vibrational sound complexes, the object of worship being the sun disc
represented in some distortion.
We were drawn to spend some time, as you would call it, scanning the
peoples for a serious interest amounting to a seeking with which we might
help without infringement. We found that at that time the social complex
was quite self-contradictory in its so-called religious beliefs and, therefore,
there was not an appropriate calling for our vibration. Thus, at that time,
which you know of as approximately 18,000 of your years in the past, we
departed without taking action.
Questioner: You stated yesterday that you appeared in the skies over Egypt
at that time. Were the Egyptian entities able to see you in their skies?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: What did they see, and how did this affect their attitudes?
Ra: I am Ra. They saw what you would speak of as crystal powered bell-
shaped craft.
This did not affect them due to their firm conviction that many wondrous
things occurred as a normal part of a world, as you would call it, in which
many, many deities had powerful control over supernatural events.
Questioner: Did you have a reason for being visible to them rather than
being invisible?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me your reason for being visible to them?

                                       211
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 23

Ra: I am Ra. We allowed visibility because it did not make any difference.
Questioner: Then at this time you did not contact them. Can you answer
the same question that I just asked with respect to your next attempt to
contact the Egyptians?
Ra: I am Ra. The next attempt was prolonged. It occurred over a period of
time. The nexus, or center, of our efforts was a decision upon our parts that
there was a sufficient calling to attempt to walk among your peoples as
brothers.
We laid this plan before the Council of Saturn, offering ourselves as service-
oriented Wanderers of the type which land directly upon the inner planes
without incarnative processes. Thus we emerged, or materialized, in
physical-chemical complexes representing as closely as possible our natures,
this effort being to appear as brothers and spend a limited amount of time
as teachers of the Law of One, for there was an ever-stronger interest in the
sun body, and this vibrates in concordance with our particular distortions.
We discovered that for each word we could utter, there were thirty
impressions we gave by our very being, which confused those entities we
had come to serve. After a short period we removed ourselves from these
entities and spent much time attempting to understand how best to serve
those to whom we had offered ourselves in love/light.
The ones who were in contact with that geographical entity, which you
know of as Atlantis, had conceived of the potentials for healing by use of the
pyramid-shape entities. In considering this and making adjustments for the
difference as in the distortion complexes of the two geographical cultures, as
you would call them, we went before the Council again, offering this plan
to the Council as an aid to the healing and the longevity of those in the area
you know of as Egypt. In this way we hoped to facilitate the learning
process as well as offer philosophy articulating the Law of One. Again the
Council approved.
Approximately 11,000 of your years ago we entered, by thought-form,
your—we correct this instrument. We sometimes have difficulty due to low
vitality. Approximately 8,500 years ago, having considered these concepts
carefully, we returned, never having left in thought, to the thought-form
areas of your vibrational planetary complex and considered for some of your
years, as you measure time, how to appropriately build these structures.
The first, the Great Pyramid, was formed approximately 6,000 of your years
ago. Then, in sequence, after this performing by thought of the building or
architecture of the Great Pyramid using the more, shall we say, local or

                                     212
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 23

earthly material rather than thought-form material to build other pyramidal
structures. This continued for approximately 1,500 of your years.
Meanwhile, the information concerning initiation and healing by crystal
was being given. The one known as “Ikhnaton” was able to perceive this
information without significant distortion and for a time, moved, shall we
say, heaven and earth in order to invoke the Law of One and to order the
priesthood of these structures in accordance with the distortions of
initiation and true compassionate healing. This was not to be long-lasting.
At this entity’s physical dissolution from your third-density physical plane,
as we have said before, our teachings became quickly perverted, our
structures once again went to the use of the so-called “royal” or those with
distortions towards power.
Questioner: When you spoke of pyramid healing, I am assuming that the
primary healing was for the mind. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. The healing, if it is to be effectuated,
must be a funneling without significant distortion of the in-streamings
through the spiritual complex into the tree of mind. There are parts of this
mind which block energies flowing to the body complex. In each case, in
each entity, the blockage may well differ.
However, it is necessary to activate the sense of the spiritual channel or
shuttle. Then whether the blockage is from spiritual to mental or from
mental to physical, or whether it may simply be a random and purely
physical trauma, healing may then be carried out.
Questioner: When you started building the pyramid at Giza using thought,
were you at that time in contact with incarnate Egyptians and did they
observe this building?
Ra: I am Ra. At that time we were not in close contact with incarnate
entities upon your plane. We were responding to a general calling of
sufficient energy in that particular location to merit action. We sent
thoughts to all who were seeking our information.
The appearance of the pyramid was a matter of tremendous surprise.
However, it was carefully designed to coincide with the incarnation of one
known as a great architect. This entity was later made into a deity, in part
due to this occurrence.
Questioner: What name did they give this deity?
Ra: I am Ra. This deity had the sound vibration complex, “Imhotep.”


                                       213
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 23

Questioner: What can you tell me about the overall success of the pyramid?
I understand that the pyramids were not successful in producing a rise in
consciousness that was hoped for, but there must have been some success
that came from them.
Ra: I am Ra. We ask you to remember that we are of the Brothers and
Sisters of Sorrow. When one has been rescued from that sorrow to a vision
of the one Creator, then there is no concept of failure.
Our difficulty lay in the honor/responsibility of correcting the distortions of
the Law of One which occurred during our attempts to aid these entities.
The distortions are seen as responsibilities rather than failures; the few who
were inspired to seek, our only reason for the attempt.
Thus, we would perhaps be in the position of paradox in that as one saw an
illumination, we were what you call successful, and as others became more
sorrowful and confused, we were failures. These are your terms. We persist
in seeking to serve.
Questioner: Can you tell me what happened to Ikhnaton after his physical
death?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity was then put through the series of healing and
review of incarnational experiences which is appropriate for third-density
experience. This entity had been somewhat in the distortions of power
ameliorated by the great devotion to the Law of One. This entity thus
resolved to enter a series of incarnations in which it had no distortions
towards power.
Questioner: Can you tell me what the average life span was for the
Egyptians at the time of Ikhnaton?
Ra: I am Ra. The average life span of these people was approximately thirty-
five to fifty of your years. There was much, what you would call, disease of a
physical complex nature.
Questioner: Can you tell me of the reasons for the disease? I think I already
know, but I think it might be good for the book to state this at this time.
Ra: I am Ra. This is, as we have mentioned before, not particularly
informative with regard to the Law of One. However, the land you know of
as Egypt at that time was highly barbarous in its living conditions, as you
would call them. The river which you call Nile was allowed to flood and to
recede, thus providing the fertile grounds for the breeding of diseases which
may be carried by insects. Also, the preparation of foodstuffs allowed
diseases to form. Also, there was difficulty in many cases with sources of

                                      214
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 23

water and water which was taken caused disease due to the organisms
therein.
Questioner: I was really questioning about the more basic cause of disease
rather than the mechanism of its transmission. I was going back to the root
of thought that created the possibility of disease. Could you briefly tell me if
I am correct in assuming the general reduction of thought over the long
time on planet Earth with respect to the Law of One created a condition
whereby what we call disease could develop? Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct and perceptive. You, as questioner, begin now
to penetrate the outer teachings.
The root cause in this particular society was not so much a bellicose action
although there were, shall we say, tendencies, but rather the formation of a
money system and a very active trading and development of those
tendencies towards greed and power; thus, the enslaving of entities by other
entities and the misapprehension of the Creator within each entity.
Questioner: I understand, if I am correct, that a South American contact
was also made. Can you tell me of the nature of your contact with respect to
the attitude about the contact, its ramifications, the plan for the contact,
and why the people were contacted in South America?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the final full question of this session. The entities
who walked among those in your South American continent were called by
a similar desire upon the part of the entities therein to learn of the
manifestations of the sun. They worshipped this source of light and life.
Thus, these entities were visited by light beings not unlike ourselves.
Instructions were given and they were more accepted and less distorted than
ours. The entities themselves began to construct a series of underground
and hidden cities including pyramid structures.
These pyramids were somewhat at variance from the design that we had
promulgated. However, the original ideas were the same with the addition
of a desire or intention of creating places of meditation and rest, a feeling of
the presence of the one Creator; these pyramids then being for all people,
not only initiates and those to be healed.
They left this density when it was discovered that their plans were solidly in
motion and, in fact, had been recorded. During the next approximately
3,500 years these plans became, though somewhat distorted, in a state of
near-completion in many aspects.
Therefore, as is the case of the breakings of the quarantine, the entity who
was helping the South American entities along the South American ways
                                      215
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 23

you call in part the Amazon River went before the Council of Saturn to
request a second attempt to correct in person the distortions which had
occurred in their plans. This having been granted, this entity or social
memory complex returned and the entity chosen as messenger came among
the peoples once more to correct the errors.
Again, all was recorded and the entity rejoined its social memory complex
and left your skies.
As in our experience the teachings were, for the most part, greatly and
grossly perverted to the extent in later times of actual human sacrifice rather
than healing of humans. Thus, this social memory complex is also given the
honor/duty of remaining until those distortions are worked out of the
distortion complexes of your peoples.
May we ask if there are any questions of a brief nature before we close?
Questioner: Is there anything we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable? Since you stated that she seems to be low on energy, is it
possible to have another session later on today?
Ra: I am Ra. All is well with alignments. However, this instrument would
benefit from rest from the trance state for this diurnal period.
I am Ra. I leave this instrument now. I leave each of you in the love and the
light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the power
and the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                      216
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 24
                           February 15, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and in the light of the infinite Creator.
We communicate now.
Questioner: We are a little concerned about the physical condition of the
instrument. She has a slight congestion. If you can tell me of the advisability
of the session, I would appreciate it.
Ra: I am Ra. This instrument’s vital energies of the physical complex are
low. The session will be appropriately shortened.
Questioner: In the last session you mentioned that in this last 25,000 year
cycle the Atlanteans, Egyptians, and those in South America were contacted
and then the Confederation departed. I understand that the Confederation
did not come back for some time. Could you tell me of the reasons,
consequences, and attitudes with respect to the next contact with those here
on planet Earth?
Ra: I am Ra. In the case of the Atlanteans, enlargements upon the
information given resulted in those activities distorted towards bellicosity
which resulted in the final second Atlantean catastrophe 10,821 of your years
in the past, as you measure time.
Many, many were displaced due to societal actions both upon Atlantis and
upon those areas of what you would call North African deserts to which
some Atlanteans had gone after the first conflict. Earth changes continued
due to these, what you would call, nuclear bombs and other crystal
weapons, sinking the last great land masses approximately 9,600 of your
years ago.
In the Egyptian and the South American experiments results, though not as
widely devastating, were as far from the original intention of the
Confederation. It was clear to not only us but also to the Council and the
Guardians that our methods were not appropriate for this particular sphere.
Our attitude thus was one of caution, observation, and continuing attempts
to creatively discover methods whereby contact from our entities could be
of service with the least distortion and above all with the least possibility of
becoming perversions or antitheses of our intention in sharing information.
Questioner: Thank you. Then I assume that the Confederation stayed away
from Earth for a period of time. What condition created the next contact
that the Confederation made?

                                      217
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 24

Ra: I am Ra. In approximately 3,600 of your years in the past, as you
measure time, there was an influx of those of the Orion group, as you call
them. Due to the increasing negative influences upon thinking and acting
distortions, they were able to begin working with those whose impression
from olden times, as you may say, was that they were special and different.
An entity of the Confederation, many, many thousands of your years in the
past, the one you may call “Yahweh,” had, by genetic cloning, set up these
particular biases among these peoples who had come gradually to dwell in
the vicinity of Egypt, as well as in many, many other places, by dispersion
after the down-sinking of the land mass Mu. Here the Orion group found
fertile soil in which to plant the seeds of negativity, these seeds, as always,
being those of the elite, the different, those who manipulate or enslave
others.
The one known as Yahweh felt a great responsibility to these entities.
However, the Orion group had been able to impress upon the peoples the
name Yahweh as the one responsible for this elitism. Yahweh then was able
to take what you would call stock of its vibratory patterns and became, in
effect, a more eloquently effective sound vibration complex.
In this complex the old Yahweh, now unnamed, but meaning “He comes,”
began to send positively oriented philosophy. This was approximately, in
your past, of 3,300 years. Thus, the intense portion of what has become
known as Armageddon was joined.
Questioner: How did the Orion group get through the quarantine 3,600
years ago? The random window effect?
Ra: I am Ra. At that time this was not entirely so, as there was a proper
calling for this information. When there is a mixed calling the window
effect is much more put into motion by the ways of the densities.
The quarantine in this case was, shall we say, not patrolled so closely, due to
the lack of strong polarity, the windows thus needing to be very weak in
order for penetration. As your harvest approaches, those forces of what you
would call light work according to their call. The ones of Orion have the
working only according to their call. This calling is in actuality not nearly as
great.
Thus, due to the way of empowering or squares there is much resistance to
penetration. Yet free will must be maintained and those desiring negatively
oriented information, as you would call it, must then be satisfied by those
moving through by the window effect.



                                      218
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 24

Questioner: Then Yahweh, in an attempt to correct what I might call a
mistake (I know you don’t want to call it that), started 3,300 years ago a
positive philosophy. Were the Orion and Yahweh philosophies impressed
telepathically, or were there other techniques used?
Ra: I am Ra. There were two other techniques used: one by the entity no
longer called Yahweh, who still felt that if it could raise up entities which
were superior to the negative forces, that these superior entities could spread
the Law of One. Thus this entity, “Yod-Heh-Shin-Vau-Heh,” came among
your people in form according to incarnate being and mated in the normal
reproductive manner of your physical complexes, thus birthing a generation
of much larger beings, these beings called “Anak.”
The other method used to greater effect later in the scenario, as you would
call it, was the thought-form such as we often use among your peoples to
suggest the mysterious or the sublime. You may be familiar with some of
these appearances.
Questioner: Could you state some of those?
Ra: I am Ra. This is information which you may discover. However, we will
briefly point the way by indicating the so-called wheel within a wheel and
the cherubim with sleepless eye.
Questioner: Did the Orion group use similar methods for their impression
3,600 years ago?
Ra: I am Ra. The group or empire had an emissary in your skies at that
time.
Questioner: Can you describe that emissary?
Ra: I am Ra. This emissary was of your fiery nature which was hidden by
the nature of cloud in the day. This was to obliterate the questions of those
seeing such a vehicle and to make it consonant with these entities’ concept
of what you may call the Creator.
Questioner: And then how was the information passed on to the entities
after they saw this fiery cloud?
Ra: I am Ra. By thought transfer and by the causing of fiery phenomena
and other events to appear as being miraculous through the use of thought-
forms.
Questioner: Then are there any prophets that sprang from this era or soon
after it that are recorded?



                                     219
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 24

Ra: I am Ra. Those of the empire were not successful in maintaining their
presence for long after the approximate three zero, zero, zero date in your
history and were, perforce, left with the decision to physically leave the
skies. The so-called prophets were often given mixed information, but the
worst that the Orion group could do was to cause these prophets to speak of
doom, as prophecy in those days was the occupation of those who love their
fellow beings and wish only to be of service to them and to the Creator.
Questioner: Are you saying that the Orion group was successful in
polluting some of the positively oriented prophets’ messages with
prophecies of doom?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. Your next query shall be the last full query for
this session.
Questioner: Could you tell me why the Orion group had to leave after what
figures to be a six hundred year period?
Ra: I am Ra. Although the impression that they had given to those who
called them was that these entities were an elite group, that which you know
as “Diaspora” occurred, causing much dispersion of these peoples so that
they became an humbler and more honorable breed, less bellicose and more
aware of the loving-kindness of the one Creator.
The creation about them tended towards being somewhat bellicose,
somewhat oriented towards the enslavement of others, but they themselves,
the target of the Orion group by means of their genetic
superiority/weakness, became what you may call the underdogs, thereby
letting the feelings of gratitude for their neighbors, their family, and their
one Creator begin to heal the feelings of elitism which led to the distortions
of power over others which had caused their own bellicosity.
Any short queries may be asked now.
Questioner: Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. You are conscientious. Be careful to adjust this instrument’s
upper appendages if its upper body is elevated.
I am Ra. All is well. It is our joy to speak with you. We leave in the love and
the light of the one infinite Creator. Go forth, therefore, rejoicing in the
power and the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                     220
             The Law of One, Book I, Session 25
                           February 16, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. We
communicate now.
Questioner: We shall now continue with the material from yesterday. You
stated that about 3,000 years ago the Orion group left due to Diaspora. Was
the Confederation then able to make any progress after the Orion group
left?
Ra: I am Ra. For many of your centuries, both the Confederation and the
Orion Confederation busied themselves with each other upon planes above
your own, shall we say, planes in time/space whereby machinations were
conceived and the armor of light girded. Battles have been and are
continuing to be fought upon these levels.
Upon the Earth plane, energies had been set in motion which did not cause
a great deal of call. There were isolated instances of callings, one such taking
place beginning approximately 2,600 of your years in the past in what you
would call Greece (at this time) and resulting in writings and
understandings of some facets of the Law of One. We especially note the
one known as Thales and the one known as Heraclitus, those being of the
philosopher career, as you may call it, teaching their students. We also point
out the understandings of the one known as Pericles.
At this time there was a limited amount of visionary information which the
Confederation was allowed to telepathically impress. However, for the most
part, during this time empires died and rose according to the attitudes and
energies set in motion long ago, not resulting in strong polarization but
rather in that mixture of the positive and the warlike or negative which has
been characteristic of this final minor cycle of your beingness.
Questioner: You spoke of an Orion Confederation and of a battle being
fought between the Confederation and the Orion Confederation. Is it
possible to convey any concept of how this battle is fought?
Ra: I am Ra. Picture, if you will, your mind. Picture it then in total unity
with all other minds of your society. You are then single-minded and that
which is a weak electrical charge in your physical illusion is now an
enormously powerful machine whereby thoughts may be projected as
things.
In this endeavor the Orion group charges or attacks the Confederation
armed with light. The result, a stand-off, as you would call it, both energies
                                      221
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 25

being somewhat depleted by this and needing to regroup; the negative
depleted through failure to manipulate, the positive depleted through
failure to accept that which is given.
Questioner: Could you amplify the meaning of what you mean by the
“failure to accept that which is given”?
Ra: I am Ra. At the level of time/space at which this takes place in the form
of what you may call thought-war, the most accepting and loving energy
would be to so love those who wished to manipulate that those entities were
surrounded and engulfed, transformed by positive energies.
This, however, being a battle of equals, the Confederation is aware that it
cannot, on equal footing, allow itself to be manipulated in order to remain
purely positive, for then though pure it would not be of any consequence,
having been placed by the so-called powers of darkness under the heel, as
you may say.
It is thus that those who deal with this thought-war must be defensive
rather than accepting in order to preserve their usefulness in service to
others. Thusly, they cannot accept fully what the Orion Confederation
wishes to give, that being enslavement. Thusly, some polarity is lost due to
this friction and both sides, if you will, must then regroup.
It has not been fruitful for either side. The only consequence which has
been helpful is a balancing of the energies available to this planet so that
these energies have less necessity to be balanced in this space/time, thus
lessening the chances of planetary annihilation.
Questioner: Does a portion of the Confederation then engage in this
thought-battle? What percent engages?
Ra: I am Ra. This is the most difficult work of the Confederation. Only
four planetary entities at any one time are asked to partake in this conflict.
Questioner: What density are these four planetary entities?
Ra: I am Ra. These entities are of the density of love, numbering four.
Questioner: Would an entity of this density be more effective for this work
than an entity of density five or six?
Ra: I am Ra. The fourth density is the only density besides your own which,
lacking the wisdom to refrain from battle, sees the necessity of the battle.
Thus it is necessary that fourth-density social memory complexes be used.




                                      222
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 25

Questioner: Am I correct in assuming that both the Confederation and the
Orion group utilize only their fourth densities in this battle, and that the
fifth and sixth densities of the Orion group do not engage in this?
Ra: I am Ra. This will be the last full question as this entity’s energies are
low.
It is partially correct. Fifth- and sixth-density entities positive would not
take part in this battle. Fifth-density negative would not take part in this
battle. Thus, the fourth density of both orientations join in this conflict.
May we ask for a few short questions before we close?
Questioner: I will first ask if there is anything that we can do to make the
instrument more comfortable. I would also really like to know the
orientation of the fifth-density negative for not participating in this battle?
Ra: I am Ra. The fifth density is the density of light or wisdom. The so-
called negative service-to-self entity in this density is at a high level of
awareness and wisdom and has ceased activity except by thought. The fifth-
density negative is extraordinarily compacted and separated from all else.
Questioner: Thank you very much. We do not wish to deplete the
instrument. Is there anything that we can do to make the instrument more
comfortable?
Ra: I am Ra. You are very conscientious. As we requested previously it
would be well to observe the angles taken by the more upright posture of
the entity. It is causing some nerve blockage in the portion of the body
complex called the elbows.
I am Ra. I leave you in the love and in the light of the one infinite Creator.
Go forth, then, rejoicing in the power and the peace of the one Creator.
Adonai.




                                      223
            The Law of One, Book I, Session 26
                           February 17, 1981
Ra: I am Ra. I greet you in the love and the light of the infinite Creator. I
communicate now.
Questioner: Is any of the changing that we have done here going to affect
communication with the instrument in any way? Is what we’ve set up here
all right?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Do you mean that everything is satisfactory for continued
communication?
Ra: I am Ra. We meant that the changes affect this communication.
Questioner: Should we discontinue communication because of these
changes, or should we continue?
Ra: I am Ra. You may do as you wish. However, we would be unable to use
this instrument at this space/time nexus without these modifications.
Questioner: Assuming that it is all right to continue, we’re down to the last
3,000 years of this present cycle, and I was wondering if the Law of One in
its written or spoken form has been made available within this last 3,000
years in any complete way such as we are doing now? Is it available in any
other source?
Ra: I am Ra. There is no possibility of a complete source of information of
the Law of One in this density. However, certain of your writings passed on
to you as your so-called holy works have portions of this law.
Questioner: Does the Bible that we know have portions of this law in it?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Can you tell me if any of the Old Testament has any of the
Law of One?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Which has more of the Law of One in it, the Old Testament
or the New Testament?
Ra: I am Ra. Withdrawing from each of the collections of which you speak
the portions having to do with the Law of One, the content is


                                      224
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

approximately equal. However, the so-called Old Testament has a larger
amount of negatively influenced material, as you would call it.
Questioner: Can you tell me about what percentage is of Orion influence in
both the Old and New Testaments?
Ra: I am Ra. We prefer that this be left to the discretion of those who seek
the Law of One. We are not speaking in order to judge. Such statements
would be construed by some of those who may read this material as
judgmental. We can only suggest a careful reading and inward digestion of
the contents. The understandings will become obvious.
Questioner: Thank you. Have you communicated with any of our
population in the third-density incarnate state in recent times?
Ra: I am Ra. Please restate, specifying “recent times” and the pronoun,
“you.”
Questioner: Has Ra communicated with any of our population in this
century, in the last, say, eighty years?
Ra: I am Ra. We have not.
Questioner: Has the Law of One been communicated in the last eighty
years by any other source to an entity in our population?
Ra: I am Ra. The ways of One have seldom been communicated, although
there are rare instances in the previous eighty of your years, as you measure
time.
There have been many communications from fourth density due to the
drawing towards the harvest to fourth density. These are the ways of
universal love and understanding. The other teachings are reserved for those
whose depth of understanding, if you will excuse this misnomer,
recommend and attract such further communication.
Questioner: Then did the Confederation step up its program of helping
planet Earth some time late in this last major cycle? It seems that they did
from previous data, especially with the Industrial Revolution. Can you tell
me the attitudes and the reasonings behind this? is there any reason other
than they just wanted to produce more leisure time in the last, say, one
hundred years of the cycle? Is this the total reason?
Ra: I am Ra. This is not the total reason. Approximately two hundred of
your years in the past, as you measure time, there began to be a significant
amount of entities who by seniority were incarnating for learn/teaching
purposes rather than for the lesser of the learn/teachings of those less aware
of the process. This was our signal to enable communication to take place.
                                      225
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

The Wanderers which came among you began to make themselves felt at
approximately this time, firstly offering ideas or thoughts containing the
distortion of free will. This was the prerequisite for further Wanderers
which had information of a more specific nature to offer. The thought must
precede the action.
Questioner: I was wondering if the one, Abraham Lincoln, could have been
a Wanderer?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. This entity was a normal, shall we say, Earth
being which chose to leave the vehicle and allow an entity to use it on a
permanent basis. This is relatively rare compared to the phenomenon of
Wanderers.
You would do better, considering the incarnations of Wanderers such as the
one known as “Thomas,” the one known as “Benjamin.”
Questioner: I am assuming that you mean Thomas Edison and Benjamin
Franklin?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. We were intending to convey the sound
vibration complex, Thomas Jefferson. The other, correct.
Questioner: Thank you. Can you tell me where the entity who used
Abraham Lincoln’s body—what density he came from and where?
Ra: I am Ra. This entity was fourth-vibration.
Questioner: I assume positive?
Ra: I am Ra. That is correct.
Questioner: Was his assassination in any way influenced by Orion or any
other negative force?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.
Questioner: Thank you. In the recent past of the last thirty to forty years
the UFO phenomena have become known to our population. What was the
original reason for the increase in what we call UFO activity in the past
forty years?
Ra: I am Ra. Information which Confederation sources had offered to your
entity, Albert [Einstein], became perverted, and instruments of destruction
began to be created, examples of this being the Manhattan Project and its
product.




                                     226
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

Information offered through Wanderer, sound vibration, Nikola, also was
experimented with for potential destruction: example, your so-called
Philadelphia Experiment.
Thus, we felt a strong need to involve our thought-forms in whatever way
we of the Confederation could be of service in order to balance these
distortions of information meant to aid your planetary sphere.
Questioner: Then what you did, I am assuming, is to create an air of
mystery with the UFO phenomenon, as we call it, and then by telepathy
send many messages which could be accepted or rejected under the Law of
One so that the population would start thinking seriously about the
consequences of what it was doing. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is partially correct. There are other services we may
perform. Firstly, the integration of souls or spirits, if you will, in the event
of use of these nuclear devices in your space/time continuum. This the
Confederation has already done.
Questioner: I don’t fully understand what you mean by that. Could you
expand on that a little bit?
Ra: I am Ra. The use of intelligent energy transforming matter into energy
is of such a nature among these weapons that the transition from space/time
third density to time/space third density or what you may call your heaven
worlds is interrupted in many cases.
Therefore, we are offering ourselves as those who continue the integration
of soul or spirit complex during transition from space/time to time/space.
Questioner: Could you give us an example from Hiroshima or Nagasaki of
how this is done?
Ra: I am Ra. Those who were destroyed, not by radiation, but by the
trauma of the energy release, found not only the body/mind/spirit complex
made unviable, but also a disarrangement of that unique vibratory complex
you have called the spirit complex, which we understand as a
mind/body/spirit complex, to be completely disarranged without possibility
of re-integration. This would be the loss to the Creator of part of the
Creator and thus we were given permission, not to stop the events, but to
ensure the survival of the, shall we say, disembodied mind/body/spirit
complex. This we did in those events which you mention, losing no spirit or
portion or holograph or microcosm of the macrocosmic Infinite One.
Questioner: Could you tell me just vaguely how you accomplished this?



                                       227
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

Ra: I am Ra. This is accomplished through our understanding of
dimensional fields of energy. The higher or more dense energy field will
control the less dense.
Questioner: Then you are saying that, in general, you will allow the
population of this planet to have a nuclear war and many deaths from that
war, but you will be able to create a condition where these deaths will be no
more traumatic than entrance to what we call the heaven worlds or the
astral world due to death by a bullet or by the normal means of dying by
old age. Is this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. It would be more traumatic. However, the
entity would remain an entity.
Questioner: Can you tell me the condition of the entities who were killed
in Nagasaki and Hiroshima at this time?
Ra: I am Ra. They of this trauma have not yet fully begun the healing
process. They are being helped as much as is possible.
Questioner: When the healing process is complete with these entities, will
this experience of death due to nuclear bomb cause them to be regressed in
their climb towards fourth density?
Ra: I am Ra. Such actions as nuclear destruction affect the entire planet.
There are no differences at this level of destruction, and the planet will need
to be healed.
Questioner: I was thinking specifically if an entity was in Hiroshima or
Nagasaki at that time and he was reaching harvestability at the end of our
cycle, would this death by nuclear bomb create such trauma that he would
not be harvestable at the end of the cycle?
Ra: I am Ra. This is incorrect. Once the healing has taken place the harvest
may go forth unimpeded. However, the entire planet will undergo healing
for this action, no distinction being made betwixt victim and aggressor, this
due to damage done to the planet.
Questioner: Can you describe the mechanism of the planetary healing?
Ra: I am Ra. Healing is a process of acceptance, forgiveness, and, if possible,
restitution. The restitution not being available in time/space, there are many
among your peoples now attempting restitution while in the physical.
Questioner: How do these people attempt this restitution in the physical?
Ra: I am Ra. These attempt feelings of love towards the planetary sphere
and comfort and healing of the scars and the imbalances of these actions.

                                     228
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

Questioner: Then as the UFO phenomenon was made obvious to many of
the population, many groups of people were reporting contact and
telepathic contact with UFO entities and recorded the results of what they
considered telepathic communication. Was the Confederation oriented to
impressing telepathic communication on groups that were interested in
UFOs?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct although some of our members have removed
themselves from the time/space using thought-form projections into your
space/time, and have chosen, from time to time, with permission of the
Council, to appear in your skies without landing.
Questioner: Then are all of the landings that have occurred with the
exception of the landing that occurred when (name) was contacted of the
Orion group or similar groups?
Ra: I am Ra. Except for isolated instances of those of, shall we say, no
affiliation, this is correct.
Questioner: Is it necessary in each case of these landings for the entities
involved to be calling the Orion group, or do some of these entities come in
contact with the Orion group even though they are not calling that group?
Ra: I am Ra. You must plumb the depths of fourth-density negative
understanding. This is difficult for you. Once having reached third-density
space/time continuum through your so-called windows, these crusaders may
plunder as they will, the results completely a function of the polarity of the,
shall we say, witness/subject or victim.
This is due to the sincere belief of fourth-density negative that to love self is
to love all. Each other-self which is thus either taught or enslaved thus has a
teacher which teaches love of self. Exposed to this teaching, it is intended
there be brought to fruition an harvest of fourth-density negative or self-
serving mind/body/spirit complexes.
(The following material, from Session 53, May 25, 1981, was added for
clarity.)
Questioner: Can you tell me of the various techniques used by the service-
to-others positively oriented Confederation contacts with the people of this
planet, the various forms and techniques of making contact?
Ra: I am Ra. We could.
Questioner: Would you do this, please?
Ra: I am Ra. The most efficient mode of contact is that which you
experience at this space/time. The infringement upon free will is greatly
                                       229
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

undesired. Therefore, those entities which are Wanderers upon your plane
of illusion will be the only subjects for the thought projections which make
up the so-called “Close Encounters” and meetings between positively
oriented social memory complexes and Wanderers.
Questioner: Could you give me an example of one of these meetings
between a social memory complex and a Wanderer as to what the Wanderer
would experience?
Ra: I am Ra. One such example of which you are familiar is that of the one
                    3
known as Morris . In this case the previous contact which other entities in
this entity’s circle of friends experienced was negatively oriented. However,
you will recall that the entity, Morris, was impervious to this contact and
could not see with the physical optical apparatus, this contact.
However, the inner voice alerted the one known as Morris to go by itself to
another place and there an entity with the thought-form shape and
appearance of the other contact appeared and gazed at this entity, thus
awakening in it the desire to seek the truth of this occurrence and of the
experiences of its incarnation in general.
The feeling of being awakened or activated is the goal of this type of
contact. The duration and imagery used varies depending upon the
subconscious expectations of the Wanderer which is experiencing this
opportunity for activation.
Questioner: In a “Close Encounter” by a Confederation type of craft I am
assuming that this “Close Encounter” is with a thought-form type of craft.
Do Wanderers within the past few years have “Close Encounters” with
landed thought-form type of craft?
Ra: I am Ra. This has occurred although it is much less common than the
Orion type of so-called “Close Encounter.”
We may note that in a universe of unending unity the concept of a “Close
Encounter” is humorous, for are not all encounters of a nature of self with
self? Therefore, how can any encounter be less than very, very close?
Questioner: Well, talking about this type of encounter of self to self, do any
Wanderers of a positive polarization ever have a so-called “Close
Encounter” with the Orion or negatively oriented polarization?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct.


3 This refers to CASE #1 in Secrets of the UFO by D. T. Elkins with Carla L.
  Rueckert, Louisville, L/L Research, 1976, pp 10-11.

                                       230
                The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

Questioner: Why does this occur?
Ra: I am Ra. When it occurs it is quite rare and occurs either due to the
Orion entities’ lack of perception of the depth of positivity to be
encountered or due to the Orion entities’ desire to, shall we say, attempt to
remove this positivity from this plane of existence. Orion tactics normally
are those which choose the simple distortions of mind which indicate less
mental and spiritual complex activity.
Questioner: I have become aware of a very large variation in the contact
with individuals. Could you give me general examples of the methods used
by the Confederation to awaken or partially awaken the Wanderers they
contact?
Ra: I am Ra. The methods used to awaken Wanderers are varied. The
center of each approach is the entrance into the conscious and subconscious
in such a way as to avoid causing fear and to maximize the potential for an
understandable subjective experience which has meaning for the entity.
Many such occur in sleep, others in the midst of many activities during the
waking hours. The approach is flexible and does not necessarily include the
“Close Encounter” syndrome, as you are aware.
Questioner: What about the physical examination syndrome? How does
that relate to Wanderers and Confederation and Orion contacts?
Ra: I am Ra. The subconscious expectations of entities cause the nature and
detail of thought-form experience offered by Confederation thought-form
entities. Thus, if a Wanderer expects a physical examination, it will,
perforce, be experienced with as little distortion towards alarm or
discomfort as is allowable by the nature of the expectations of the
subconscious distortions of the Wanderer.
Questioner: Well, are those who are taken on both Confederation and
Orion craft then experiencing a seeming physical examination?
Ra: I am Ra. Your query indicates incorrect thinking. The Orion group uses
the physical examination as a means of terrifying the individual and causing
it to feel the feelings of an advanced second-density being such as a
laboratory animal. The sexual experiences of some are a sub-type of this
experience. The intent is to demonstrate the control of the Orion entities
over the Terran inhabitant.
The thought-form experiences are subjective and, for the most part, do not
occur in this density.
Questioner: Then both Confederation and Orion contacts are being made
and “Close Encounters” are of a dual nature as I understand it. They can
                                     231
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

either be of the Confederation or of the Orion type of contact. Is this
correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct, although the preponderance of contacts is
Orion-oriented.
Questioner: Well, we have a large spectrum of entities on Earth with
respect to harvestability, both positively oriented and negatively oriented.
Would the Orion group target in on the ends of this spectrum, both
positively and negatively oriented, for contact with Earth entities?
Ra: I am Ra. This query is somewhat difficult to accurately answer.
However, we shall attempt to do so.
The most typical approach of Orion entities is to choose what you might
call the weaker-minded entity that it might suggest a greater amount of
Orion philosophy to be disseminated.
Some few Orion entities are called by more highly polarized negative
entities of your space/time nexus. In this case they share information just as
we are now doing. However, this is a risk for the Orion entities due to the
frequency with which the harvestable negative planetary entities then
attempt to bid and order the Orion contact just as these entities bid
planetary negative contacts. The resulting struggle for mastery, if lost, is
damaging to the polarity of the Orion group.
Similarly, a mistaken Orion contact with highly polarized positive entities
can wreak havoc with Orion troops unless these crusaders are able to de-
polarize the entity mistakenly contacted. This occurrence is almost unheard-
of. Therefore, the Orion group prefers to make physical contact only with
the weaker-minded entity.
Questioner: Then in general we could say that if an individual has a “Close
Encounter” with a UFO or any other type of experience that seems to be
UFO-related, he must look to the heart of the encounter and the effect
upon him to determine whether it was Orion or Confederation contact. Is
this correct?
Ra: I am Ra. This is correct. If there is fear and doom, the contact was quite
likely of a negative nature. If the result is hope, friendly feelings, and the
awakening of a positive feeling of purposeful service to others, the marks of
Confederation contact are evident.
(End of material from Session 53, May 25, 1981.)
Questioner: Then I am assuming all of the groups getting telepathic contact
from the Confederation are high-priority targets for the Orion crusaders,

                                     232
                 The Law of One, Book I, Session 26

and I would assume that a large percentage of them are having their
messages polluted by the Orion group. Can you tell me what percentage of
them had their information polluted by the Orion group and if any of them
were able to remain purely a Confederation channel?
Ra: I am Ra. To give you this information would be to infringe upon the
free will or confusion of some living. We can only ask each group to
consider the relative effect of philosophy and your so-called specific
information. It is not the specificity of the information which attracts
negative influences. It is the importance placed upon it.
This is why we iterate quite often, when asked for specific information, that
it pales to insignificance, just as the grass withers and dies while the love and
the light of the one infinite Creator redounds to the very infinite realms of
creation forever and ever, creating and creating itself in perpetuity.
Why then be concerned with the grass that blooms, withers and dies in its
season only to grow once again due to the infinite love and light of the one
Creator? This is the message we bring. Each entity is only superficially that
which blooms and dies. In the deeper sense there is no end to being-ness.
Questioner: As you have stated, it is a straight and narrow path. There are
many distractions.
We have created an introduction to the Law of One, traveling through and
hitting the high points of this 75,000 year cycle. After this introduction I
would like to get directly to the main work, which is an investigation of
evolution. I am very appreciative and feel a great honor and privilege to be
doing this and hope that we can accomplish this next phase.
Ra: I am Ra. I leave you, my friends, in the love and the light of the one
infinite Creator. Go forth, then, merry and glad and rejoicing in the power
and the peace of the one Creator. Adonai.




                                      233
